GERMANY
THE IMPERIAL HISTORY.

From the first foundation of the Roman Mo^archy to this present time.

By Ed: Grymestone, Sariant at Arms.

LONDON Printed by Matthew Lownes 1623



THE IMPERIAL HISTORY: OR THE LIVES OF THE EMPEROVRS, FROM JULIUS CAESAR, THE
FIRST FOVNDER OF THE ROMAN MONARCHY, UNTO THIS PRESENT YEAR: Containing their
Lives and Actions, with the Rising and Declining of that Empire; the Original,
and Success, of all those barbarous Nations that have invaded it, and ruined
it by peece-meale: With an ample Relation of all the memorable Accidents that
have happened during these last Combustions.

First written in Spanish by PEDRO MEXIA: And since continued by some others,
to the death of MAXIMILIAN the Second; Translated into English by W. T. (...)
And now Corrected, amplified and continued to these times by EDWARD GRIMESTON
Sergeant at Arms.



LONDON, Printed by H. L. for MATTHEW LOVVNES, dwelling at the sign of the
Bishops head in PAVLES Churchyard. 1623.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, LIONEL LORD CRANFIELD, EARL OF MIDDLESEX, Lord High
Treasurer of England, and Master of his Majesty's Court of Wards and Liueries.
THE treasures of Emperors themselves in their stil-preserued Actions,
Counsels and Lives (transcending far their transitory treasures) In all
Humility I present to your Lordshippes preservation and protection; as proper,
and peculiarly due to the Honors of your Office and Title, for the most apt
correspondency of your Judicial habilities, to husband and dispose as well the
Treasures of Counsels and Actions, as of Offices and Revenues. Of all these
Imperial Lives (my truly honored Lord) most of the first Edition I have only
weeded, ordered, and amplified: The last six are the fruits of mine own
Labors. Three of the first I have cast into new Mouldes: And the later I have
faithfully collected according to the most Authentical and Impartiall-reputed
Authors now extant, together with the confident relations of such as have been
eyewitnesses of some of the late Accidents, here offered as a Sacrifice to
Immortal Memory. Notwithstanding which sufficient acquitall (and discharge
from blame) of my well-intended Industries, I can no more assure nor promise
their Approbations, then all other ingenuous and laborious Treasurers of
example and virtue; though therein they cannot but be commended for cordial
restoratiues, to redouble Lives, if not to eternize them. But, in these modern
times, Endeavors that profit not, receive acceptances that please not. Yet such
was the Bounty and Nobility of all our ancient Presidents of Times, that
whosoever committed, to the Monuments of writings, either the praises of Cities
or singular Men, were ever adorned with Crowns, or Honors. But in these
degenerate years of ours; As many other excellent and ornamentall Merits: so
these, especially, are left utterly prayselesse and exolete. For s^e men cease
to do praiseworthy deeds; To be praised, likewise they think thriftlesse and
idle. Notwithstanding, what Presents more precious can possibly be given to
Men, then Praise, Glory, and Eternity? All which I intentionally and
effectually present and ascribe, with all Worthiness, to your Lordshippe, in
entitling them to you, in these supreamest Personages. For, Whosoever protects
and maintains Virtue and Nobility, must necessarily be himself both Virtuous
and Noble. To the Protection therefore of all the Virtue and Nobility herein
made sacred to Eternity, Ionly select and inuoke your Honor, in these my
humble Dedications; Abiding ever

Your good Lordshippes most humbly vowed, in all true Duty and Service, ED.
GRIMESTON.

A Table of the Names of all the ROMAN EMPERORS.
A
ADrian. 115 Albert the First. 349 Albert the Second. 602 Adulph. 546 Alexander
Seuerus. 161 Antoninus Pius. 121 Anastatius the First. 302 Anastatius the
Second. 363 Arcadius and Honorius. 261 Arnolphus. 405 Aurelianus. 199 Augustus
Octauianus Caesar. 20
B
BAssianus Caracalla. 147
C
CAligula. 48 Carus, Carinus and Numerianus. 213 Charles the Great. 383 Charles
the Second. 399 Charles the Third. 403 Charles the Fourth. 571 Charles the
Fifth. 634 Claudius the First. 53 Claudius the Second. 195 Clodius Balbinus, and
Maximus Pupienus. 173 Commodus Antonius 129 Constantius Clorus. 222 Constantine
the Great. 225 Constantinus, Constantius and Constance, the sons of Constantine
the Great. 235 Constantine the Third. 346 Constance the Second. 347 Constantine
the Fourth. 351 Constantine the Fifth. 369 Constantine the Sixth. 377 Conrade the
First. 411 Conrade the Second. 439 Conrade the Third. 472 Conrade the Fourth.
532
D
DEcius. 180 Didius Iulianus. 137 Domitianus. 100 Dioclesian. 216
E
EMilianus. 183
F
FErdinand the First. 660 Ferdinand the Second. 755 Florianus. 206 Frederick
Barbarossa. 479 Frederick the Second. 516 Frederick the Third. 605
G
GAlba. 76 Gallus. 182 Galienus. 187 Gordianus. 175 Gratianus. 252
H
HEliogabalus. 156 Henry the First. 414 Henry the Second. 435 Henry the Third.
441 Henry the Fourth. 448 Henry the Fifth. 461 Henry the Sixth. 500 Henry the
Seventh. 553 Heraclius. 339
I
IVlius Caesar. 9 Iulianus Apostata. 241 Iouianus. 245 Justinius the First. 305
Justinius the Second. 322 Justinian the First. 308 Justinian the Second. 355
L
LEo the First. 292 Leo the Second. 297 Leo the Third. 366 Leo the Fourth. 376
Jews the First, called Ludouicus Pius. 387 Jews the Second. 397 Jews the
Third. 401 Jews the Fourth. 408 Jews the Fifth. 595 Lotharius the First. 393
Lotharius the Second. 498
M
MAcrinus. 151 Marcus Aurelius. 125 Martianus. 290 Mathias. 737 Mauritius. 328
Maximinus. 167 Maximilian the First. 620 Maximilian the Second. 686
N
NEro. 62 Nerua. 105
O
OTho the First. 81 Otho the Second. 419 Otho the Third. 428 Otho the Fourth.
431 Otho the Fifth. 511
P
PErtinax. 133 Philip the First. 178 Philip the Second. 505 Philippicus. 362
Phocas. 336 Probus. 207
Q
QVintilius. 198
R
RObert. 583 Rodulph the First. 540 Rodulph the Second. 696
S
SEuerus. 1^1 Sigismund. 590
T
TAcitus. 205 Theodosius the First. 256 Theodosius the Second. 274 Theodosius
the Third. 365 Tiberius the First. 39 Tiberius the Second. 326 Titus. 97
Traianus. 108
V
VAlentinianus the First. 247 Valentinianus the Second. 283 Valerianus. 185
Vespasianus. 91 Vitellius. 85
W
WEnceslavs. 576
Z
ZEno. 297
THE LIFE OF JULIUS CAESAR, FOVNDER OF THE EMPIRE AND MONARCHY OF ROME.
THE ARGUMENT.
IVlius Caesar was of a Noble Family; and, returning to Rome from the
Pretorship in Spain with great renown, entered into friendship with Marcus
Crassus and Gneius Pompey, who were the mightiest Citizens in Rome: and,
pacifying the controversy between them, he obtained the Consulship: which he
executed with such gravity and reputation, that his fellow-Consul would not
endure to be with him, but lived retired. Afterward, giving his daughter Iulia
in marriage to Pompey, he went into France; which he subdued, and overcame the
Germains. He went afterward also into Britannie, and by force subdued it to
the Roman Empire. Iulia afterward dying, and Marcus Crassus being slain by the
Parthians, mortal discord grew between Caesar and Pompey: the occasion whereof
was, for that the second five years of Caesar's government of France being
expired, it was propounded by Pompeyes faction, that a successor should be sent
him: and Caesar desired, that his command in the French Wars might be
prolonged, and that in his absence he might demand the Consulship: which being
denied him, he made another proposition, that he would give over his army in
France, upon condition that Pompey should do the like by his in Spain. Which
being also denied, and being enjoined to leave his army, he passed the River
Rubicon (limits assigned him which he was not to pass) and, taking the city of
Ariminum, he went with such fury directly to Rome, as Pompey abandoned Italy;
and he, following him, in the end overthrew him in Pharsalia. Whereupon Pompey,
for refuge repairing to Ptolomey King of Egypt, was in a small Bark, by that
Kings direction, slain by the hands of Septimius and Achila: whose head being
(by Ptolomy's command) presented to Caesar, he wept. Afterward, bending his
force against Ptolomy, and ouercoming him, he passed into Egypt, and tamed the
pride of the Egyptians. Thence he went into Africa, pursuing the remainder of
Pompeyes faction; all which he overcame: and Cato being in Utica, unwilling to
fall into Caesar's hands, slew himself. Caesar, returning to Rome, triumphed:
and afterward going into Spain (after a most cruel battle, wherein he was in
danger to have been lost) he overthrew Sextus Pompeius, eldest son of the
great Pompey: and, returning to Rome, he took upon him the Dictatorship.
Where, finally, Decius, Marcus Brutus, Gaius Cassius, Gaius Casca, Attilius
Cimber, Quintus Ligarius, Marcus Spurius, Cornelius Cinna, with many other
principal Romans, conspiring against him, he was slain in the Senate, being of
the age of 56 years, upon the fifteenth day of March, with 23 wounds; many
prodigious signs of his death appearing both before and afterward: which
hindered his passage against the Parthians, and many other high deseigns, which
he resolved to have undertaken.

BEing to write the lives of the Roman Emperors, which held the Monarchy of
the world; or, to speak more properly, to reduce them into a brief Compendium
(a work in truth of weight and troublesome, requiring an active spirit, and a
more eloquent pen than mine) I hold it no small difficulty to begin with
JULIUS CAESAR, of whom I am first to treat. Who although he were but Dictator,
and not styled Emperor, in that sense of Lord and Soueraign, as his Successors
afterward held it; yet he was the forerunner, and made the way to this
Monarchy: and all succeeding Emperors have held it a glory to be called All
Emperors took the surname of Caesar.
CAESAR'S after his name. His exploits were such and so many, and Histories are
so fraught with them, that I hold it as great a difficulty to relate them
briefly, as to write them confusedly. Wherefore, out of so large and copious a
field, I will only collect that which I shall hold fittest for the Subject of
this Work; yet handling it with convenient breuity: notwithstanding (he being
the basis and foundation of this stately Building) it will be needful I should
extend my self much more in this, than in the rest which shall follow. As for
his other brave atchieuements, I will refer the Reader to those many books
which make honorable mention of CAESAR, and to the content which is generally
conceived of his virtues and worthy endeauours.

Among all the glorious actions of JULIUS CAESAR, the greatest in my opinion,
and which breeds most admiration, is, how he durst project, then put it in
practice, and lastly bring it to effect, His greatest exploit.
to make himself Lord of the Roman State (the which was Lady and Mistress of
the greatest and most habitable part of the world) and of all that she had
subdued during the space of 700 years: for, so long it was from the first
foundation of Rome, until that JULIUS CAESAR seized upon the government of the
Commonweal: whereof there were 240 years under the The time from Romes
foundation to Caesar's usurpation.
absolute command of Kings, and the rest under the government of Consuls, who
were chosen by the people; except some few years, in which the Tribunes and
Decemuiri bare the sway. Doubtless, a short time to raise and get so great an
Empire as the Romans had obtained; whenas CAESAR, of a free State, made it
subject to the command of One; whose Empire without doubt exceeded all others
both for continuance, extent and power: the which is confirmed by many approved
Writers. Wherefore, omitting all other Kingdoms and Common-weals, which Dio.
Halicar. c. 1. Strabo c. 6 Appian in the first of his triumphs.
are not to be paralleld with this, I will make mention only of the greatest
and most famous which at the first were called Monarchies; namely, the
Assyrians, Persians and Macedonians: all which the Roman Empire did far exceed.
As for the Assyrians and Babylonians, which is the most ancient of all
Monarchies, during the space of 1240 years (for, so long it continued,
according to the computation of Saint AUGUSTINE) it never extended it self out
of the bounds of Asia, nor had any footing in Afric or Europe. Neither were
the Medes more S. Aug. de ciui. Dei. Tit. Liuius, Pliny, Solynus in their com
parisons of Monarchies.
powerful: of which Kingdom ARBATVS was the first Founder; by the ruin and
death of SARDANAPALVS King of the Assyrians, overthrowing the first Monarchy.
Then the Persians extinguished the Medes by the powerful hand of CYRUS; and
this shall be accounted the second Monarchy: who although they made some
irruption into Europe (as that of XERXES and others) and in Asia grew more
powerful than those which had gone before, yet it continued not above 200 and
odd years; and they were ruined, with DARIUS their King, by ALEXANDER, the
Great, King of Macedon. We cannot deny, but that his Empire was of a greater
extent than any of the aboue-named: for, he had under his obedience a great
part of Europe, and he subdued in a manner all Asia: and this is held for the
third Monarchy; but it was like a flash of lightning, burning all it
encounters, and is soon extinct: for, with the death of ALEXANDER, his power
decayed. Then grew factions, and diverse Kingdoms were erected; so as it is
apparent, that the Roman Empire exceeded them all both in time, greatness and
power. The Monarchy of the Macedonians decayed with the death of Alexander.
In time, being not much less than 2300 years since Rome was built, and yet
the name of the Roman Empire continues unto this day. For the space of 1300
years it still increased, and has ever since been held the most predominant
power of all others. In extent of dominions and power; for, it is most certain,
that, uniting whatsoever the others held, it will scarce equal the one half of
the Roman Empire. For, laying aside whatsoever the Emperors did add unto it,
before that JULIUS CAESAR did seize upon the State, they had subdued the best
part of the world. In Europe they were Masters of all Italy, and Gallia
Cisalpina or Lombardie, Austria and Illiricum, The greatness of the Roman Empire.
now called Sclauonia; and they extended themselves as far as the river of
Danubius: they had subdued all Greece (some yielding voluntarily; others, by
force) the States of Athens, Lacedemon, Thebes, Corinth, and all Peloponesus,
now called Morea, with their Territories; the Kingdoms of Macedon, and Epirus
now Albania, and in like manner Thracia. They held the Islands of Sicilie,
Sardynia, Crete or Candie, Cypres, Rhodes, Euboea, now Negropont, with many
other Islands in the Mediterranean Sea. They also subdued Spain (but with more
difficulty and opposition than any of the rest) and in like manner all France,
with that part of Germany which lies on this side the Rhine, called the Lower,
or Gallia Belgica, which was the work of CAESAR himself; and in like manner that
of Britannie, under which are comprehended England and Scotland. They were
Masters of all Afric (which is the third part of the world) that is to say,
of the fruitfullest and most habitable parts, having ruined proud Carthage. In
Asia they had subdued the greatest and best Provinces, and made them their
Subjects and Tributaries: among the which were Syria called Soria, Phenicia,
Palestina, Iudaea, Phrygia, Caria, Cilicia, and Bithinia by the last will and
testament of King NICOMED^S. The Kings of Egypt and Cappadocia were their
friends and confederates; and they had a commanding power in Armenia, Colchos,
and other Provinces. Albania, Iberia, and some other Countries, did them
homage, and paid them tribute: which Countries had been vanquished by them,
and many Kings and valiant Captains slain. Finally, they were Lords of so many
Cities and Provinces, as it were an endless labor to set them down in
particular; and their power was so great, as no forces but their own were able
to annoy them. But afterward, discord and ambition creeping into this State
which was so free and powerful, what The Roman vanquished themselves.
foreign force could not effect, they wrought with their own Arms, and
triumphed over themselves. The cause of all this grew through the discord
between POMPEY and JULIUS CAESAR, which two were at that time the most eminent
and powerful men in Rome; and yet at the same Instant there were other
Citizens of great esteem. But, the root of this hatred grew from a further
cause, that is, from the factions and civil war between SCILLA and MARIUS: in
which, MARIUS being slain, SCILLA made himself Dictator, and seized upon Rome;
yet before his death he gave it over, and left the City at liberty. POMPEY had
followed SCILLAS faction, and done brave exploits for him: but CAESAR had sided
with MARIUS, being his kinfman, and at that time very young. This was the seed
from whence sprung the civil war between them. But, it shall be needful to
relate some former matters, for the better understanding of the occasions which
went before, and the success which followed; the which we will describe
briefly after this manner: The war and power of SCILLA being ended,
Competency betwixt Pompey and Crassus.
GNEIVS POMPEIVS and MARCUS CRASSVS (who had also followed that party)
remaining in great reputation, the one sought to supplant the other, so as
there grew some jarrs between them, which began during the life of SCILLA.
CRASSVS grew very powerful: The reasons of their greatness.
for, besides his Wisdom, Nobility and Eloquence, he was very rich beyond all
the other Citizens of his time. POMPEY also became famous and much esteemed,
besides the succession he had by SCILLA, for his great victories and valiant
exploits in Arms performed in SCILLAS time and since, both by sea and land, in
Afric, Spain and Asia; the which are so many and so great, as I dare not
relate them. The deeds of these two eminent Persons being grown to this
height, and their quarrels increasing daily as the heads of factions (and yet
at the same time there were others of great note within the City, as CATO,
CICERO, LENTVLVS, and others) during these alterations, JULIUS CAESAR returned
to Rome from his Pretorship in Spain with great reputation, yet his ambitious
thoughts aimed at greater matters, both in regard of the greatness of his house
(for, by the fathers side, he was of a Noble and very ancient Caesar's family
and virtues.
Family; and by the mother he descended from the Kings of Rome, who were
extracted from AENEAS of Troy) and for his many allies and friends; being also
very witty and eloquent. He had also purchased great credit and authority in
the managing of those charges which had been committed unto him. He had bin
Questor in Spain, Tribune of the soldiers, Aedile, high priest and Praetor;
having gotten victories in Spain against the Inhabitants of Galitia and
Portugal; adding to all this, his merits and virtues, being bountiful, wise
and learned in all good Arts, most active in the managing of Arms both on foot
and horseback; very valiant and strong, whereof he made great proofs before he
had any command in the wars of Asia, under the Praetor MARCUS TERMO, and
SERVILIVS the Proconsul; where he obtained a Ciuicall Crown. He was,
moreover, of a good constitution of body, tall of stature, fair, strong of his
members, and very patient of labor. For all which considerations and many
others, he was in great esteem; but neither by his authority nor place able to
equal MARCUS CRASSVS or POMPEY, for that the roots of their greatness had been
of long continuance.

CAESAR being comn to Rome, with a secret intent to make himself greater than
either of Caesar's policy and practice.
them; CRASSVS and POMPEY affected his friendship, by whose help they might
supplant one another. But CAESAR, being discreet and wise, would not follow any
party, nor tie himself to defend their actions; but, carrying himself
indifferently, he labored to reconcile them; having a conceit, that, if he
carried himself as a Neuter, they would both yield unto his will: and this his
cunning practice (as PLVTARCH reports) was only discovered by M. CATO. In the
end, by his endeauours a peace was concluded between them, being both bound
unto A league betwixt Caesar, Crassus and Pompey.
him: yet, being still jealous one of another, and fearing to lose CAESAR, they
both sought to gratify him: and in this sort he made himself equal to either
of them; and that power which two had formerly usurped, was now divided between
three; and in the end we shall see who got the sole command. This league and
atonement being made, CAESAR demanded, the Caesar made consul.
Consulship, which is the greatest ordinary dignity. He carried himself in this
charge with such reputation, as his fellow Consul BIBVLVS never accompanied
him, but kept himself retired during his Consulship. CAESAR, the better to
maintain the credit and authority which he had got, and to attain to the greatness
whereunto he aspired, he himself took to wife CALPHVRNIA, the daughter of
LUCIUS PISO, who was to succeed him in the Consulate; and he gave Caesar's and
Pompey's marriage.
IVLIA his daughter in marriage to POMPEY, rejecting her former spouse SERVILIVS
CEPIO, by whose help he had a little before crossed his Colleague BIBVLVS. CAESAR'S
consulship being ended, these three Confederates being equally greedy of
honor, they easily made a match to invade the Commonweal. CAESAR made choice
of Gaul or France for his Province; CRASSVS, of Asia; and POMPEY, of Spain:
whither they went with three puissant Caesar goes with an army into France.
Armies. And thus the whole world was to be held by three Princes in
partnership. The exploits of CAESAR in his Province, what battles he fought,
what victories he won, what cities and people he subdued, what stratagems,
policy and valor he used (this war continuing little less than ten years) I
cannot relate, my meaning being to observe breuity. He left excellent
Commentaries of his own deeds, and full of truth; the which were approved by
his very enemies, and much commended by CICERO. Yet ASINIVS POLLIO (envying
CAESAR'S virtues) does in some things tax him. They are also written by
PLVTARCH, SVETONIVS, APPIANVS, ALEXANDRINVS, LVCAN, PAVLVS OROSIVS, LUCIUS
FLORVS, EVTROPIVS, and many other: to whom I refer the Reader. CAESAR got such
reputation in this war, as he was held the greatest Captain of his time, yea,
or of those that were in former Ages. He subdued all France, from the Pyrene
Mountains unto the Alps, and all the remainder Caesar's conquests.
unto the river of Rhine. He first vanquished the Suissers and Tigurins, who
(as PLVTARCH affirms) were 300000 men, whereof 190000 were well trained up in
Arms. He conquered the Germains, with ARIOVISTVS their Leader, who had invaded
France, from whence he expelled them. He subdued the Belgij, the Ambiani and
Neruij, with other warlike people of France, and he spilt more blood than ever
was in any wars in the world. Then, passing the Rhine upon a bridge of wood
which he built, he subdued the Germains to the Roman Empire; and, finding no
more opposition there, he past with his Army into Brittanie, which was
inhabited by a fierce Nation, not till that time known by any traffic or
commerce: these he forced to subject themselves to the Roman State. During the
continuance of these wars, in which CAESAR got great spoils and wealth, he
never left to purchase to himself friends, both in Rome and in all other
places, both by letters and gifts, and in like manner with the Kings and Cities
of Asia, Greece, and other Countries; sending them aids of men, without any
leave or authority from the Senate: the which he might safely do, as long as
the league continued betwixt The boldness and policy of Caesar
him, POMPEY and CRASSVS. He won men unto him, and was much beloved of his
soldiers, giving these double pay, and bestowing honors upon others: by which
means (POMPEY not foreseeing it) he grew to such power and reputation, as he
began to fear him when he was not able to suppress him. But now that strict
league of friendship, which had been betwixt Pompey grows ielous of Caesar
these two, began to dissolve, for that the pawn which maintained it was taken
away; so as there grew a mutual fear and jealousy betwixt them; first, by the
death of IVLIA, CAESAR'S daughter, who marrying to POMPEY entertained concord
between the son and the father-in-law, by the league of nuptial love;
secondly, by the death of MARCUS CRASSVS, the third man in this company, who
was slain by the Parthians in Asia, whither he went to make war (as some write)
more to heap up riches, than to win honor; whose reputation notwithstanding
was a support to their good agreement. So as the chief causes, whereupon their
friendship was grounded, being taken away, their emulation presently brake
forth. POMPEY was jealous of CAESAR'S greatness; and CAESAR hardly endured
POMPEY'S supereminency: the one brookt no equal; the other, no superior.
Whereupon they fell to war, which was the greatest and Their forces in the
civil war.
most general that ever was: for, in it there were engaged the Senate, all the
Roman Legions, all their friends and subjects, Kings and Cities, for the one or
the other party. On the one side were eleven Legions, on the other eighteen;
all Roman and Italian soldiers, with all the forces of Rome, besides the aids
of their confederates. This war was managed in Italy, France, Spain, Epirus,
Thessalie, Egypt, Asia and Afric, by themselves or their Lieutenants; and in
the end, after five years, it died in Spain. Some Authors set down the causes
of this civil war, although they vary in some points: but the truth is, the
chief reasons were envy, ambition, and desire of command, The causes of the
civil war.
wherewith they were both infected: and the one jealous of the others greatness
(as if the Roman Empire had not been sufficient for them two) the one sought to
ruin the other. That POMPEY had any intent to vsurp the State, and become a
Tyrant, it does not appear: but it is apparent, he would not have CAESAR attain
to that dignity wherein he was. Of CAESAR some write, that being forced through
fear he came to Arms, lest he should see himself called in question, and
condemned: for, CATO had threatened to accuse him whenever he should
giue-ouer his Province. Others object, that he had always a desire to vsurp
the State; and therefore, balancing his power with POMPEY'S, he thought it
behoouefull to entertain friendship and contract an alliance with him. CICERO
says, that he had always in his mouth that verse of EVRIPIDES, that If it
were lawful to infringe the laws, it was for a Kingdom; and that CAESAR,
being greedy of command, could not endure to be without an Army: but, in my
opinion, the reasons were such as have been related; and these, the occasions.

This being the last of the second five years of CAESAR'S government in France,
LENTVLVS and MARCELLVS being Consuls, and of POMPEY'S faction; it was
propounded in the Senate, to send a Successor to CAESAR, and that he should
giue-ouer his government and the Army; and if he would (as he had written)
demand the Consulship, he should com to Rome in person. CAESAR demanded, that
his command in the war might be prolonged, and the government which he had, and
that he might demand the Consulate being absent, before he gaueouer Laws for
demanding the consulship.
his Army; which honor ten Tribunes had formerly granted him, with POMPEY'S
good liking. But now POMPEY would not yield unto it, as being against the
laws, which did not allow any man to demand the Consulship but present;
forgetting, that he had been made Consul before he came to lawful age, and had
attained to other dignities, contrary to the ordinary course of law. But it is
the common condition of men, To blame that in another which they allow in
themselves.

This being denied to CAESAR, he made another proposition; that he would leave
his Army, and come to Rome as a private man, so as POMPEY would giue-ouer his
which he held in Spain. This was put to the question, and did cause a great
distraction in the Senate. CICERO Cicero seeks to reconcile Caesar and Pompey
interposed himself, laboring to reconcile them, and to conclude their jars
with peace. POMPEY would have been tractable, had not those of his faction,
being of the prime men of Rome, stood proudly upon terms; who (notwithstanding
any just and reasonable conditions propounded by CAESAR) were inflexible. It
was therefore decreed in Senate, that CAESAR, by a A decree of the Senate
against Caesar.
certain time prefixed, should leave his Army, and that he should not pass it
over the river of Rubicon, which did bound-in his Province; declaring him an
enemy to the Roman State if he did otherwise. LUCIUS ANTONIUS and QVINTVS
CVRIO, Tribunes of the people, favoring CAESAR, opposed themselves to this
decree: but they were disgraced, ill-intreated, and thrust out of the Senate.
Whereupon, they fled out of Rome, and went to CAESAR: the which was a great
help to him to win the hearts of his soldiers, for that the office of the
Tribunes was held sacred and inviolable.

CAESAR hearing how matters had past, seeing himself deprived of all future
hope of peace, he marched speedily from Rauenna, only with 5000 foot, and 300
horse, commanding his Legions to follow presently after, and to join with him.
Coming afterward to Rubicon (which if he should pass, there would be no hope
of peace remaining) some say that he staid there a good space; considering with
himself, of what importance this passage was, and what miseries would ensue.
PLVTARCH writes, that he discoursed thereof with ASINIVS POLLIO, and other his
friends which did accompany him. APPIANVS ALEXANDRINVS reports, that he used
these words, Doubtless, if I forbear to pass this river, it will be the
beginning of my ruin; Caesar's words when he past Rubicon.
if I pass it, the ruin will be general. And SVETONIVS writes, that turning
toward the river, he said, It is yet in our power to turn back; but, passing
the river, we must make our way with our weapons. He writes, moreover, that
CAESAR standing thus doubtful and irresolute, he was animated by the
apparition of a man of an extraordinary stature and shape, sitting near unto
his Army, piping upon a reed. Besides the shepherds and heardsmen, many
soldiers left their guards, and went down to hear him, and with them some
Trumpetters; so as he caught hold of one of their trumpets, and leapt forth
to the river, beginning with a mighty blast to sound the battle, and so went
on his pase to the bank on the other side. Then, with a furious resolution,
CAESAR cried out, Let us go whither the gods, and the injurious dealings of our
enemies, do call us: The dice are cast. I have set up my Rest, come what will
of it. After which words, he set spurs to his horse, and past the river, the
whole Army following him. In this manner he resolved: which was the beginning of
the civil wars, and of Romes servitude, and the first step to a Monarchy and
the sovereign command of one, as I will briefly set it down.

Whosoever desires to have a full view of this History, let him read APPIANVS
ALEXANDRINVS, SVETONIVS, PLVTARCH in the lives of CAESAR, CATO, and CICERO;
Saint AUGUSTINE lib. 3. de ciuit. Dei, JULIUS CAESAR himself in his
Commentaries, LUCIUS FLORVS, hist. 4. TITUS LIVIVS his Abbreuiats, PAVLVS
OROSIVS, EVTROPIVS, 6. hist. LVCAN, PLINY de viris illustribus, VALERIVS
MAXIMUS, with diverse others.

CAESAR having past the river, and drawn his whole Army together, where (as
SVETONIVS writes) the Tribunes of the Commons came unto him, in base and
dishonorable garments, with the which they had fled from Rome; there he
made an excellent Oration to his fouldiers; shedding some tears, and tearing
his garment down the breast, laying before them the equity of his cause, and
craving their helps and assistance. To whom having with a general applause and
consent made answer, that they were ready to obey his will, he parted
presently, and the next day came to Ariminum, whereon he seized: the like he
did to all the Towns and Castles The beginning of the civil war.
where he past. DOMITIVS, who in a factious tumult had been nominated his
Successor in Gaul, held Corfinium with a garrison of 30 Cohorts: which being
taken, he pardoned the soldiers and inhabitants, and entreated DOMITIVS
kindly, giving him leave to depart (who went presently to POMPEY) which was an
act of a Noble and generous mind: the which, CAESAR observed in all his
victories during the civil war; by which clemency he purchased to himself as
great honor, as by his victories.

CAESAR'S resolution being known at Rome, it troubled POMPEY, amazed the Senate,
and terrified the common people; and it would be tedious to relate what
provisions they made. POMPEY was much deceived, for that he could not believe
that CAESAR would thrust Pompey's error, presuming too much of him self.
himself into so great a danger, or that he should be able to raise
sufficient forces to resist him: but the success proved otherwise. For,
notwithstanding that he had authority from the Consuls and Senate to levy
soldiers, to call home the legions, and to send Captains for the defense of
diverse cities of Italy whereas CAESAR should pass, yet all this was not
sufficient to resist CAESAR'S fury, and the power he brought with him. The fame
of his coming increasing daily, POMPEY with the whole Senate abandoned Rome,
going to Capua, and from thence to Brundusium, a sea-town upon the confines of
Italy, seated at the mouth of the gulf of Venice: where he gave order, the
Consuls should pass to Dirrachium, now called Durrazzo, a sea-town of
Macedonie (whereof a great part is now called Albania) to unite all their
forces; being out of hope to be able to resist CAESAR in Italy, who had
already taken Corfinium, as I have formerly said: where, having drawn DOMITIVS
Cohorts to serve him, he marched on; and, hearing that POMPEY and the Consuls
were together at Brundusium, he went toward them with his Legions with all the
speed he could. But POMPEY had fortified himself sufficiently to make defense;
yet upon CAESAR'S approach, beginning to inuest the Town, he imbarkt himself in
the night time, and so past over to Dirrachium, where the Consuls attended him.
And thus CAESAR remained in Italy without resistance; being very doubtful
what to resolve: for, although he would gladly have followed POMPEY, yet he had
no provision of ships: and, by reason that it was winter, shipping could not
come so soon as was requisite; and considering withal, how much it imported,
not to leave any enemy behind him, which might cause any alteration in France
or Italy by his absence, he resolved to defer the pursuit of POMPEY, and to
take his way toward Spain, which held for POMPEY: where he had his best
legions, and two captains, PETREIVS and AFRANIVS. SVETONIVS TRANQVILLVS says,
that when he had thus resolved, he said to his friends, Let us first go
against an Army which is without a Captain; and afterward let us return
against the Captain that has never an Army: for, the soldiers that POMPEY had
in Spain were valiant, and had been long trained up in Arms; but their
Commanders, PETREIVS and AFRANIVS, were not held for politic or expert in the
wars. And, on the contrary, POMPEY was most wise, and a very valiant Captain:
but the soldiers which he had with him were newly levied, and of small
experience.

Returning from Brundusium, in sixty days, without bloodshed or battle,
CAESAR becam Caesar seized on Rome and all Italy.
Lord of all Italy; and coming to Rome, they were in very great fear,
remembering the cruelties committed in the time of SYLLA: But CAESAR, using his
accustomed clemency, did hurt no man of any degree, high or low; but called to
the Senate those Senators which remained, and which came with him, comforting
every one with mild and good words, and laying the whole fault upon POMPEY, in
accusing him of all things which had happened, and of this discord. He sought by
all means to justify his own cause, and declared how much he did then and
ever had desired peace, and therewith requested that Ambassadors might be sent
to POMPEY to procure the same; and, causing himself to be presently chosen
Consul, he opened the Roman Caesar, Consul by force.
Treasury, notwithstanding that METELLVS, one of the Tribunes of the people,
was desirous and went about to hinder the same. The treasure which he took from
thence he divided among his soldiers: which, as PLINY in his three and
thirtith Book reports, was very great; the which LVCAN also affirms. These
things being ended, and CAESAR desirous to go from Rome into Spain (like a wise
and discreet Captain) first took order as well for the civil government, as for
the wars; and, making choice of the legions which were to go with him, he left
part of his troops in Brundusium and Otranto, and in other strong places upon
the Sea side, to keep POMPEY from landing if he sought to return into Italy.
He also nominated HORTENSIVS and DOLABELLA for his Captains, to make provision
of shipping to be brought to the port of Brundusium, there to be in a
readiness against his return from his journey. QVINTTVS VALERIVS he sent with
a legion to Sardinia against MARGVS COTTA, which held the same for POMPEY. To
Sicilia he sent CVRIVS against MARCUS CATO, with direction, that having taken
the same, he should pass over into Africa. LEPIDVS he left in Rome, as
Prefect thereof; and MARCUS ANTONIUS, for Governor of all Italy: and,
determining to leave LICINIVS CRASSVS in France, with his accustomed celerity
he went on his journey, and found no resistance, neither in Italy, nor in
France, but only at Marselles, which held for POMPEY: who (in my opinion) more
like bold and aduenturous friends, than wise men, would not receive nor lodge
him in their city, but put themselves in Arms against him for their defense.
CAESAR coming thither besieged the City; and, to avoid loss of time, left
DECIVS BRUTUS and CAIUS TREBONIVS with sufficient forces, who continued the
siege, and endured much: he himself followed his way into Spain, where his
coming was already Caesar's going into Spain against Petreius and Afranius.
known; and AFRANIVS and PETREIVS attended him, with the aid of their friends,
and four Roman legions; between which and CAESAR the wars continued many
days, and chiefly near the city of Lerida. In the beginning, CAESAR was in
great danger and much distressed, as well through want of victuals, as by reason
of the winter being com, which annoyed him with the swelling of rivers: before
and after which, there passed many great skirmishes and conflicts between the
two Armies, and other accidents and adventures too long to be recounted.
Finally, CAESAR knew how to make war in such sort, as, without giving them
opportunity to come to a battle, he brought his adversaries to such extremity
and distress, as perishing with hunger they came to a composition; which was,
that to the legions (who now were able neither to offend nor defend) should be
granted liberty to depart and to go whither they would: which was performed
accordingly; and PETREIVS and AFRANIVS went to POMPEY: and part of the legions,
which would not abide with CAESAR, had leave to do as they listed; CAESAR still
perseuering in his clemency and mildnes.

This war being ended, and the spring come (not to leave any thing in Spain to
be subdued) he passed forwards, and came into the province of Betica, now
called Andaluzia, with part of his forces, leaving commandment with the Army
to march whither he had appointed, and there to stay for him, because that
MARCUS VARRO, being POMPEY'S Lieutenant in that province, held it for him, with
one legion of good soldiers: but not daring to oppose himself against CAESAR,
he peaceably yielded up unto him both the country and the legion; and so
Caesar subdued all Spain.
all was pacified, and at his command. Thence he went to Cordoua, where he
called a parliament, and an assembly of all the estates of that province:
wherein, among other things which there were treated of, he highly commending
the Cordoueses and Seuillians which had taken his part (as himself writes)
marched forwards, and visiting the province he came to the Isle and city of
Cales; and, providing there certain necessaries, he took the ships and
galleys which MARCUS VARRO had there in a readiness, and such other as he
could get, and embarked himself. And, leaving QVINTVS CASSIVS with four
legions in that province, he took his passage by sea to Taragona, sending
commandment by land to his legions to march thither: where having in few days
taken order for that province, he departed with his Army toward Narbona, and
from thence to Marselles: which yielded unto him, having in the siege and
assaults The taking of Marselles, and Caesar's return to Rome.
endured many calamities. CAESAR, nothing respecting the small regard and
ingratitude of that city, but the antiquity and fame thereof, would not permit
any violence to be offered to the citizens and inhabitants; but, leaving a
sufficient garrison to guard the same, he commanded his legions by appointed
journies to march toward Italy: himself, with a necessary guard for his
person, and others in his company, took passage for Rome; all things succeeding
prosperously with him, although that some of his Captains had ill success.
For, CAIUS ANTONIUS, whom (we said) he left with DOLABELLA for Captain of his
Navy, was overthrown and taken prisoner in the gulf of Venice by OCTAVIUS,
POMPEY'S Lieutenant. At this overthrow there was an Act don worthy to be
recommended with honor to posterity. ANTHONTE was constrained to ship his
soldiers in long boats for want of serviceable ships; the which were taken by
a stratagem as in a toil, by the Pompeians, who tied ropes under the water. One
of them, which carried almost a thousand Opitergins, young men and valiant, was
entangled in this snare, and was assaulted by the power of the whole Army,
they making resistance from morning until night: but, in the end being oppressed
by the multitudes of their enemies, and seeing no means to escape by their
valor, by the encouragement of VVLTHIVS their Colonel they slew one another.
And DOLABELLA was likewise overcome near to the I Will of Cocyra, now called
Corfu; and CVRIVS, who (according to CAESAR'S commandment) went into Africa
with two legions, having in the beginning good success, was afterward
ouerthrown, and the most part of his people slain by POMPEY'S friend, IVBA King
of Mauritania, which is now the Kingdom of Fez: he might have fled away, but
shame persuaded him to die with that Army which his rashness had cast away.

CAESAR being comn to Rome, and made Dictator (as PLVTARCH and APPIANVS
testify) new Consuls were chosen; and he, being one of them, deposed himself
from his Dictatorship, and so, changing and providing Pretors for the provinces
at his pleasure, sending MARCUS LEPIDVS into Spain, and AVLVS ALBINVS into
Sicilia, SEXTVS PEDVCEIVS into Sardinia, and DECIVS BRUTUS into France, and
taking such further order as he thought good, he departed from Rome in the
month of December toward Brundusium: whither he commanded all his Forces to
march, there to take passage for Macedonia, the greatest part whereof (as I
said) is now called Albania; where he knew that POMPEY staid with his Army.
Who, all one whole year, which CAESAR spent in his journey into Spain, busied
himself in providing a Navy to return into Italy, and in gathering treasure,
and in leuying soldiers for that purpose, and had made ready a wonderful
great provision of all things. For, there came unto him ships, money and men,
from many kingdoms, provinces and cities of Asia and Graecia, from Syria,
Pompey's people and provision.
Pontus, Bithynia, Cilicia, Phoenicia, Cappadocia, Pamphilia, Armenia the
less, Egypt, Graecia, Thessalia, Boetia, Achaia, Epire, Athens, Lacedemonia,
and the Isles of Creta, Rhodes, and many other parts and countries: there came
also to his aid, in person, the Kings, DEIOTARVS and ARIOBARZANES. Of which
people, and of those which he brought with him from Italy, POMPEY had drawn
together a great Army by land, and an exceeding great number of ships and
galleys by sea; which I do not set down, by reason of the diversity of opinions
between Authors touching the number of his soldiers and of CAESAR'S: for
certain, they were very mighty Armies, but the greatest number were of POMPEY'S
side. Who imagining (because that it was in the heart of winter) that CAESAR
should not be able, nor have time, commodiously to pass the seas; and having
(as indeed he had) advertisement that CAESAR was in Rome, he divided and lodged
his people in Macedonia and Thessalia, retiring himself from the sea,
commanding and charging his Captains by sea (of which, MARCUS BIBVLVS was
chief) that they should guard and defend the coast. But CAESAR knowing, that
in the speedy execution consisted the principal point of his victory, and that
occasion once let slip is seldom recovered; being departed Opportunity lost is
seldom recovered.
from Rome, and arrived at Brundusium (as we have before said) notwithstanding
that all his legions were not yet come, yet he embarked aboard those ships
which he had there in readiness, so many as they could contain, which were
seven legions of his choice men (as he himself records) and sent commandment
to those which were coming, to make haste, to the end they should join with
the rest which there remained, whom he would speedily send for. And so he
departed from Brundusium, now called Brindez, in the beginning of January:
and, crossing the seas with prosperous weather, the third day after, he arrived
upon the coast of Macedonia, before Caesar's passage to Gracia against Pompey
that POMPEY, had any intelligence of his embarking; and, setting his people on
shore in the despite of POMPEY'S Captains, he commanded the ships and galleys
presently to return to Brundusium to fetch the rest of his Army which he had
there left and commanded to come. And the wars beginning, he presently seized
upon the cities of Apollonia, which is now called Bellona, and Erico; driving
from thence LUCIUS TORQVATVS and LUCIUS STRABERIVS, which held the same for
POMPEY: who as soon as he was advertised of CAESAR'S landing, with the greatest
speed possible sending for his troops (such as were nearest hand) he marched
toward Dirrachium, where lay all his victual, munition, and provision for the
wars, doubting that CAESAR would come to surprise the same, as in truth he
did; but in vain: for, the situation thereof made it inexpugnable.

POMPEY being come, their Camps were lodged within few forlongs one of the
other, a river Caesar and^ Pompey lodge
running between them: there passed many adventures, skirmishes, and also some
treaties of peace which CAESAR offered; the which were not accepted by POMPEY,
so much he assured near unto Dyrrachium.
himself of his power: and CAESAR daily expecting the coming of his other
legions, who stayed longer than he thought they ought to have done, without the
which he thought it no wisdom to come to a battle; being much grieved, and
very careful for the same, he resolved in person, with three confident
servants only, secretly to embark himself in a Brigandine, and to pass that
straight of the sea to fetch them, thinking to be able to perform the same
without the knowledge of any. And, putting it in execution accordingly, he
passed down the river to the sea, which he found so troubled and tempestuous,
as the Master of the Brigandine (not knowing whom he carried) nor daring to
pass any further, would have returned. Then CAESAR, discovering his face, as
it is reported, said, Be not afraid, Friend: for, thou carriest with thee
CAESAR and all his fortune. The Master, heerwith encouraged, striued to
hould-on his voyage: but, at length, the force of the tempest was so great, and
the wind so contrary, that (notwithstanding The rash adventure of Caesar.
CAESAR'S courageous words) they were constrained to return, unable to pass
any further forwards. Which being understood in his Army, they much wondered,
grieved, and murmured thereat; praising him more for a valiant Knight, than a
wise Captain: and so VALERIVS MAXIMUS recounts it for a rash adventure; which,
in my opinion, was the occasion why JULIUS CAESAR records it not in his
Commentaries.

This being past, within few days after, ANTONIUS arrived with four of those
legions which were left behind in Italy, presently returning the ships back
again for the rest: and (after some adventures which happened) joining with
CAESAR'S Army, and all things set in good order (and the like being done on
POMPEY'S side) there passed some things between them, which for breuity I omit,
until that near to the city of Dyrrachium (whither CAESAR went, with a
determination to have surprised the same, and POMPEY to relieve it) the two
Armies lodged themselves the one so near the other, as there were daily
skirmishes and slaughters of men of either party; and that one day the
skirmish waxing hot, and rescues coming from either Army, i^ came to a
battle: wherein the success was such, that CAESAR'S troops began to A battle
betwixt Caesar and Pompey, near to Dyrrachium.
flee, and could not be made to stand by any entreaties or threats, till they
came to their camp which they had fortified; and yet some abandoned the same,
and durst not defend it. But POMPEY, either for that (as some think) he
imagined their flight to be fained, and that there was some deceit or ambush,
or that he supposed there was no more to be done, and that CAESAR had been
overthrown with small toil, so as he should be no more able to recover
himself, did not prosecute the victory, neither followed the charge, but
rather caused a retreit to be sounded, without assailing his enemies camp.
Whither when CAESAR came, he took such order as was most convenient, being no
less courageous and politic in time of adversity, than of prosperity: and it
is reported that he said to his friends, Truly, this day had ended our wars,
if our enemies had had a Captain which had known how to have overcome. This
day, JULIUS CAESAR lost a great number of his soldiers, amongst which were
four hundred Roman Knights, ten Tribunes, and two and thirty Centurions; and
his enemies took from him two and thirty Ensigns. This battle ended, POMPEY
sent the news thereof to diverse parts of the Pompey's vanity.
world, houlding himself for absolutely victorious: And JULIUS CAESAR having
blamed some of his Captains and Ensigne-bearers (notwithstanding that his whole
Army grieved, and were ashamed of their late loss) again desired the battle;
yet he would not then fight, his Army being timorous, against those which were
in-heart and victorious, but rather took a new course: and, sending his sick
and hurt men to the city of Apollonia, he departed by night, with the greatest
silence that could be, from the place where he was, and took his way toward
Thessalia, with intent to refresh and encourage his Army, and to draw his
enemy further from the seacoast, where his chief force lay, and where his
camp was fortified and victualled; or, at the least, to go to meet and
overthrow SCIPIO, who (as he was advertised) came to join with POMPEY.

POMPEY, seeing CAESAR'S departure, after that he had followed him some few
days, took counsel, and (as APPIANVS testifies) was determined (leaving so
sufficient a Navy at sea, as CAESAR should not be able to make any benefit
thereof) to pass into Italy, and to recover the same, with France and Spain,
and then afterward to return against CAESAR: but, beeimportuned and ouer-ruled
by the Roman Lords which came with him, he altered his determination, and
presently departed to pursue CAESAR, who made a stay in the fields of
Pharsalia, which are in Thessalia (making his retreit with such discretion and
in so good order, as in all occasions that were offered he had ever the better)
until that at length, seeing his men full of resolution, force and courage, he
resolved no longer to forbear the Fight; and therefore cared not any more to
refuse the battle, but rather daily presented the same to POMPEY. Who knowing
(as indeed it was true) that CAESAR began to want victuals, and that his Army
began to weaken and diminish, he deferred the same, and would not fight; and,
as a wise and well-experimented Captain, would have prolonged the war,
defeating his enemy without putting his own Army in hazard: and although that
POMPEY had thus resolved; yet the opinions, murmurings, and importunity of
those which were with him prevailed so much (as LVCAN, PLVTARCH, and CAESAR
himself, report) that they made him yield to give battle, even contrary to his
own opinion and will: wherein joined, of the one side and the other, all the
flower Pompey fought contrary to his own opinion.
and force of Rome. And although that CAESAR'S Forces were fewer in number (for,
all Writers affirm, that POMPEY'S Army was twice as great) yet his men were
more active, and better trained. How many there were of the one side and the
other, I cannot certify; the Authors do so much differ among themselves
therein. APPIANVS sets down the diverse opinions which are held thereof.
Some raise the number to three hundred thousand men, whereof LUCIUS FLORVS was
one; others, to threescore and ten thousand: and some set down somewhat less,
among which is PLVTARCH; who says, that POMPEY brought to this battle 45000
men, whereof 7000 were on horseback; and JULIUS CAESAR, two and twenty thousand
Foot, and of horse few more than one thousand. But APPIANVS understands,
that this lesser number of these Armies was to be understood of Romans only,
who were the force and hope of both these Generals: for, it is not likely, that
of all nations there should be so small a number in a war so long prepensed,
and of such importance: and, in my opinion, this is most likely to be true.
But, howsoever it was, this battle was between the best captains and best
soldiers, as well for experience, as for force and valor, that ever were in
the world; and yet being so, it was not much fought, neither did it long
continue. So strange and variable are the adventures which happen in wars and
battles: for, where there seems to be the greatest force and assurance,
oftentimes is found the greatest weakness; and that which is least feared, does
sometimes annoy most. Before the battle there were many signs of an eminent
downfall; The running away of beasts appointed for the sacrifice, swarms of
Bees, the sky darkened in the day time, Ominous signs before the battle
POMPEY'S fearful dream over night of mourning in his Theater at Rome; and in
the morning early he was seen in the head of his main battle in a black Robe.

Either of these two great Commanders, having resolved to give battle, ordered
his battalions and squadrons as to him seemed most expedient, making speeches
and orations to animate their soldiers; and, the accustomed sign being given,
the battle presently began on either side: In the beginning whereof,
POMPEY'S horsemen (wherein he reposed his greatest hope) who were all of the
Roman Nobility, and of the Order of Knighthood, and who always had the better;
began to come where CAESAR'S Cauallery was, and forced them to forsake the
Field. Which, CAESAR perceiving (losing nothing by oversight) he made a sign
to a battalion, which for that purpose he had left apart from the other
squadrons, to charge POMPEY'S The battle of Pharsalia, where in Pompey was
ouercomn by Caesar.
Cauallery: who charged them with such fury, wounding them (according to
CAESAR'S direction) no where but in the face; that POMPEY'S horsemen either
unable or unwilling to endure it, began to retire, in such sort, as from that
part whence POMPEY thought to have obtained the victory, from thence sprang the
beginning of his overthrow. For, notwithstanding that they had broken the
first squadron, and were entered into the second, and the other battalious
continued still fighting, and that they maintained the same with great
resolution; yet, seeing that POMPEY'S Cauallery fled, and that CAESAR'S came to
charge them afresh, they all did the like; in such manner, as in short space
the victory plainly appeared for CAESAR: and POMPEY, having lost all hope to
preuail, fled to his camp, leaving the field and victory to his enemy. Happy
had POMPEY been in this misery, if he had run the same fortune with his
slaughtered Army: but he out-liued his own glory, that with dishonor he
might flee for life through Thessalie, be chased from Larissa, and upon a
forlorn rock of Cilicia study whether to flee; to Parthia, Afric, or Egypt:
Finally, that upon the Pelusian shore, by the command of a most unworthy
treacherous King, by the council of gelded men, he should be murdered by the
sword of SEPTIMIVS his Fugitive, in the view of his sorrowful wife and
children. CAESAR, letting slip no occasion, seeing that he found no resistance
in the field, assembled his Forces to assail POMPEY'S camp, which with small
difficulty he entered: which POMPEY perceiving, leaving his ensigns and robes
of General, and putting on other apparall, upon the first horse that he could
get, with four on horseback only that accompanied him, which (as VELLEIVS
PATERCVLVS says) were his son SEXTVS POMPEIVS, and the two LENTVLI, and
FAVONIVS of the Pretorian order: he fled so fast as he could, as you have
heard, and never Pompey's slight.
stayed until he came to the city of Larissa; where joining with some thirty
other horse, which had fled, without any stay he continued his slight, until
he came unto the shore-side of the Egean sea; where, finding a certain
Merchants ship of Rome, he embarked himself therein, and sailed to the Isle of
Lesbos, which is in that sea which now is called Archipelago, to the city of
Mytilene in that Island: For, in that city were his wife and family, which he
took with him: and, gathering together such ships and men as he was able, he
departed from thence very doubtful, and not able to resolve whither to go.
Some counseled him to sail into Africa, for that King IVBA was his friend, and
very mighty. Others were of opinion, that he should retire himself to the
Parthians. Finally, he resolved to go into Egypt, for the friendship which he
held with King PTOLOMY, father of that PTOLOMY then reigning; and did so.
Having first touched in the province of Cilicia in Asia, and in the I Will of
Cyprus, sailing into Egypt, and arriving at the city of Alexandria, he had such
an end as we will presently declare.

JULIUS CAESAR having obtained so great a victory, as is aforesaid, used
therein his accustomed The clemency of Caesar.
clemency, not suffering any Roman to be either slain or hurt after the
battle was ended, and pardoning all those which were taken therein, or
found in the Camp; among which was MARCUS TVLLIVS CICERO. And although that in
the battle were slain of POMPEIES side fifteen thousand men, and of the
Conquerors less then two thousand, as CAESAR himself writes: yet
understanding which way POMPEY fled, to the end to give him no place or means
to return and repair himself; without losing any time, he pursued him with
the lightest and svviftest of his Army. And coming to the Sea side, bringing
to his obedience in his way all the Cities whereby he passed, and gathering
together such Ships and Galleys as he then could, together with those which
CASSIVS had, who was at this time received to his grace and service, he therein
shipped such troops as he was able, and passed into Asia the less; where
being advertised that POMPEY had been in Cyprus, he presumed that he took his
way toward Egypt. For which cause he took the same course, taking with him
two whole legions Caesar pursued Pompey.
of old soldiers only; and arriving in safety at Alexandria in Egypt (where we
said that POMPEY had lately taken port) he understood that POMPEY was arrived
there: who presuming of the benefits and good entertainment which this King
PTOLOMIES father had received in his house, he sent to request PTOLOMY to
harbor and assist him. But as with men which are fallen from a high fortune,
few men hold faith and friendship; and in their adversities, the benefits and
good turns received are commonly forgotten: so this King sent him his promise
to perform what he required: and coming upon safe conduct, in a small boat
toward the shore, he was murdered before he came to land by the Kings
commandment, by the hands of one The death of Pompey.
called SEPTIMIVS, and another ACHILA; thinking by means hereof to win
CAESAR'S friendship. This was done by the persuasion and counsel of FOTINVS an
Eunuch, who was of great authority in the Court, and by whom the King was
much ruled. He understood also that CORNELIA, POMPEIES wife, and his son
SEXTVS POMPEIVS were fled from that port in the same ship, wherein they came.
CAESAR being landed and received into the City, they presently brought him for
a present, the great POMPEIES head; which he would not see: and his ring and
seal of Arms being presented unto him, he wept for pity, Caesar wept for the
death of Pompey.
considering the end and success of the great adventures and prosperities of
POMPEY, who with such honor and fame had three times triumphed, and bin so
many times Consul in Rome, and had governed the same, and had been the most
eminent man there for so many years, and had in like sort obtained many
victories and dignities.

When JULIUS CAESAR landed in Egypt, he found the country infested with civil
wars, and great discord between young King PTOLOMY and his sister, the fair
CLEOPATRA, about the division and inheritance of that Kingdom: wherein JULIUS
CAESAR (as a Roman Consul) took upon him to intermeddle. For which cause (as
CAESAR himself writes) or because that their guilty conscience, for the
treacherous murder of POMPEY, made them to fear, as PLVTARCH affirms; the
before named FOTINVS which had been the practiser of this murder, and ACHILA
who had been the actor thereof (both which were in great authority in Court and
with the King) imagining that CAESAR inclined to favor CLEOPATRA'S faction,
sent for the Army which the King had near the city, consisting of 20000 good
men, purposing to do by JULIUS CAESAR as they had done by POMPEY: and so within
few days there began between CAESAR and the small forces which he brought
with him, Caesar's war in Egypt.
both within the city and in the harbor, between the ships and galleys, the
most cruel war and incounters that he ever had; which I cannot distinctly set
down, for the many adventures that passed. But let this suffice, that JULIUS
CAESAR fought therein many times in his own person, both within the city
(whereof his enemies held the greatest part) and also in the harbor with his
ships; and was sometimes in such peril and danger, as he was driven to leap
out of the boat wherein he was, into the water, and by swimming to flee into
one of his galleys: and, as SVETONIVS writes, he carried his Commentaries in
the one hand out of the water, lest they should be wet; and his Robe in his
teeth, to the end it should not fall into his enemies hands. But at length his
forces and aid being comn from Asia and other parts, he at the end of nine
months (for, so long lasted these wars) remained victorious, as in all others
he had been; and the young King PTOLOMY was slain in Fight. In this war
CAESAR did such exploits, and The death of Ptolomy King of Egypt.
showed such valor and wisdom, that for the same only he did well deserve
the fame and renowm of a most excellent Captain.

CAESAR having tamed the pride of the Egyptians, and put to death the
murderers of POMPEY, and established CLEOPATRA for Queen and Gouernesse in
that Kingdom, Cleopatra, queen of Egypt, had a son by Caesar.
whom during his stay there he entertained for his friend, and she conceived
and had a son by him, called CAESARIO; all things being quietly settled, he
departed from Egypt toward Asia, traveling through Syria, now Soria, by
reason that he was given to understand, that while he was busied in the wars
of Egypt, King PHARNACES, son of the mighty King MITHRIDATES, thought it now
a fit time (seeing the civil discord between the Romans) to recover that which
his father had lost: and having overthrown DOMITIVS, whom CAESAR had sent to
govern those parts, and also having taken by force of Arms the provinces of
Bithynia and Cappadocia, expelling thence King ARIOBARZANES, a friend and
subject to Rome, and beginning to do the like in Armenia the less, which King
DEIOTARVS had made subject to the Romans: JULIUS CAESAR coming with his Army
sooner than King PHARNACES imagined, although he had expected him, and had
intelligence of his approach; within few days they came to a battle: in
which (without any great resistance) the King was overthrown and put to
flight, with great slaughter of his people, from which he escaped by flight.
Great Caesar's victory against Pharnaces King of Pontus.
was the joy CAESAR conceived of this victory, for the desire he had to return
to Rome, where he knew that many scandals and insolences were committed, by
reason of his absence: he knew also, that POMPEY'S eldest son had seized on a
great part of Spain, and had raised great forces of those which M. VARRO had
there left, and of his fathers troops. He also understood, that in Africa many
principal Romans, which had escaped from the battle at Pharsalia, were
gathered together, whereof M. CATO (called VTICENSIS, because that in Vtica he
slew himself) was the chief, and SCIPIO, POMPEY'S father-in-law; and that these
went thither with a great part of the galleys and ships of POMPEY'S Navy, and
with the greatest power they were able to levy; joining with IVBA King of
Mauritania, they had subdued all that country, and had a great Army in
readiness against CAESAR, having chosen SCIPIO for their General, because
that CATO would not take that charge upon him, and for that the name of SCIPIO
was very fortunate in Africa. CAESAR, having intelligence of all these things,
within few days, with great celerity and diligence, recovered all that which
PHARNACES had usurped: and, chasing him out of Pontus, he recovered all those
countries: and leaving CELIVS MINVCIVS for General, with two legions to guard
that province, pacifying the contentions and controversies in the rest,
rewarding the Kings and Tetrarchs which had continued firm in league and amity
with Rome; without any longer abode he departed from Asia, and in short space
passing into Italy, came to Rome: within little more than a year after that,
he departed from thence, a short time in truth, for the performance of so great
matters and so long a journey.

Within few days after his coming to Rome, he made himself to be chosen the
third time Consul, and reforming (the best that he could in so short a time)
all disorders in Rome, being grieved and not able to endure that his enemies
should possess Africa, with great expedition he prepared all things necessary,
and from Rome took his way thitherward, commanding his forces to follow him.
First he went into Sicilia, and there shipped himself, and thence passed into
Africa: and notwithstanding that neither his Navy nor Army arrived with him;
trusting in the valor and goodness of his soldiers, and his own good
fortune, he took land with those small forces which he brought with him, near
unto the city of Adrumentum in Africa; and from thence marched to another
city called Leptis, where he was received: and after some conflicts which
passed, his legions being come, and certain troops both on foot and
horseback; Caesar's war in Africa against Scipio.
he began the war, which lasted four months, viz. from the beginning of
January till the end of April, beginning first against PETREIVS and LABIENVS:
afterward it was continued against SCIPIO and King IVBA, which assisted the
contrary faction with 8000, men, the one half whereof were horsemen, whereof
the province of Africa did then, and to this day does abound; among all which
were levied against CAESAR eight legions of footmen and 20000. horse: In this
war were many encounters, skirmishes and battles, which HYR^IVS in his
Commentaries, PLVTARCH, LVCAN, LUCIUS FLORVS and others write of at large, in
which CAESAR was in great danger: but at the last with his force and good
Hyrcius lib. 3. Appian lib 2. Lucan lib. 3. Lucius Florus lib. 4. Titus Liuius
lib. 114. Plutarch in his lives. The strange death of King Iuba and Afranius.
fortune, he overcame them all in a great battle; wherein, of the enemies,
were slain 10000. men, and CAESAR remained master of the field, and in few
days after of all the Country. SCIPIO and all the principal Captains which
were his adversaries, died sundry deaths within few days; and king IVBA by
flight escaping from the battle, and finding no place of refuge, in despair,
he and AFRANIVS determined to die fighting; the one against the other, till
they were both slain, in which combat King IVBA being of greater strength then
AFRANIVS, slew him; and afterward commanded aslaue of his own, to kill
himself, and so he died desperately.

The good MARCUS CATO who was in the city of Vtica, knowing that CAESAR
marched thitherwards, and although he knew that he would not put him to death,
but had rather a desire to pardon him, and to do him honor; yet to the end
that he would receive neither life nor honor from his enemy, he slew himself:
in whose death passed many notable accidents recorded Cato V^icensis slew
himself. S. Aug. in his book de ciuit. dei. 1. Scipio slew and drowned
himself. Lactantius Eirmianus, Aulus Gellius in his twelfth book. Cicero in
the 3. of his offices. Valerius Maximus eap. 3. Caesar's triumphs.
by many authors both christian and heathen. CICERO did write in commendation
of the death of CATO, against the which CAESAR did write another discourse:
both which are lost. And FLORVS writes his death after this manner; Hearing of
the decease of his partners, he dallyed not at all, but (as it became a wise
man) did joyfully hasten his own death: for after he had embraced his son
and friends and bid them good night; he rested a while upon his bed, having
perused PLATOES book of the immortality of the Soul; then about the first
relieuing of the watch, he drew his sword, and thrust himself into the body:
After which the Physicians sought to wrong this resolute man, by applying some
salues, the which he endured until they were out of the room; but then he
pulled them away: and, the blood following abundantly, he left his dying hand
in the very wound. SCIPIO, who had been General in this war, escaped from
the battle by slight, and shipping himself in certain galleyes, wherein he
fled, was met withal by GAESARS navy; who, to the end he would not be taken,
giving himself some wounds, cast himself into the sea, and so was drowned.
CAESAR, having obtained so great and absolute a victory, spending some few
days in ordering the provinces of Africa, reducing the kingdom of king IVBA
into a province, he came to the city of Vtica, where he embarked himself the
third of June, and came to the Isle of Sardinia, wherein he stayed some few
days, and arrived at Rome the five and twentieth day of July. At his coming
(as SVETONIVS, APPIANVS, and PLVTARCH record) there were granted unto him four
triumphs. The first triumph was for his conquest and victories in France, where
were set the portraitures of the rivers of Rodanus and the Rhine, wrought in
gold: and in the second triumph of Egypt, and of King PTOLOMEY, were set the
river of Nilus and the Pharus of Alexandria burning. The third triumph was of
the province of Pontus and of King PHARNACES, wherein for the speed wherewith
he prosecuted the victory, was placed a brief writing which signified as
much; which was, veni, vidi, vici, which is to say, I came, I saw, I overcame.
The fourth triumph Veni, vidi, vici.
was of the province of Africa, wherein was placed King I (...)his son, as a
captive: and in this triumph (as SVETONIVS writes) were given jewels and arms
to OCTAVIUS, CAESAR'S Nephew, who afterward was Emperor, as we will declare,
notwithstanding that Caesar would not triumph for his victory against Pompey.
he was not present in those wars by reason of his young age: for he was not
then fully sixteen years old. As for the battle which CAESAR wanne against
POMPEY, he would not triumph for it, because it was against Citizens of Rome.

These triumphs being ended, giving great rewards to his soldiers, and
entertayning the Roman people, with feasts, gifts and other great bounty, he
caused himself to be chosen the fourth time Consul; and to the end that there
should be no place in the world wherein he would not be obeyed, he resolved to
go into Spain, where he understood that GNEVS POMPEIVS (POMPEIVS son) with
the remainder of the army which had escaped out of Africa, was gone to join
with his brother SEXTVS POMPEIVS, who already was there, as I have said, and
was in possession of a great part of Spain, with the cities of Seuill and
Cordoua, and many others in that coast, and many Spaniards were come to their
aid. CAESAR, departing, carried with him his most experienced and chosen
soldiers, and made so good speed, as within few days he arrived in Spain,
and in this journey (as SVETONIVS and VELLEIVS PATERCVLVS record) his Nephew
OCTAVIUS followed him.

CAESAR, being entered Spain, came into the province of Betica, which is
Andaluzia, where SEXTVS POMPEIVS and his brother GNEIVS POMPEIVS were with such
legions and Caesar's going into Spain against Pompy's (...). Betica, Andaluzia.
soldiers as they had gathered together; and so there began between them a
cruel and bloody war. The end whereof was, that near to the city of
Munda, CAESAR and GNEIVS POMPEIVS (for SEXTVS POMPEIVS was in Cordoua) joined
battle; which was one of the most obstinate and cruel, that ever was in the
world. For CAESAR being the most excellent Captain, and the soldiers which he
brought with him, the most valiant and accustomed to overcome; the resolution
and courage of POMPEY and his men was such, and they fought in such manner, as
CAESAR'S esquadrons began to give ground and were ready to forsake the field,
and at the very point to have been wholly overthrown: And the matter came to
this issue, that (as SVETONIVS and EVTROPIVS do write) CAESAR was about to have
killed himself, because he would not see himself overcome; and that he took a
target from one of his soldiers and rushed in among his enemies, saying with a
loud voice (as PLVTARCH reports) If you be not ashamed, leave me and deliver
me into the hands of these boys: for this shall be the last day of my life and
of your honor. With which words, and his example, his soldiers took heart in
such manner, that, recovering the ground which they had lost, the battle becam
equal, Caesar's cruel battle and victory against Pompeies sons.
which (as APPIANVS affirms) lasted the most part of one whole day, without
any sign of victory; sometimes seeming to incline to one party, and sometimes
to the other, until that at length CAESAR and his men did so great exploits,
as the evening being come his enemies became faint, and began to flee, and the
victory was apparently CAESAR'S. There died of his enemies above 30000 men in
this fight: and of CAESAR'S part, were slain a thousand men of account, besides
many other of lesser note. CAESAR esteemed this victory so much, and so
gloried in the danger wherein he had been, that after the victory he used to
say, that only that day he fought for his life, and in all other battles ever
for honor and victory. He then remaining master of the field, his adversary
POMPEY, who in nothing had failed of the office of a valiant and good captain
(after that he saw no other hope) escaped by flight, and wandering through many
places was afterward taken and slain by CAESAR'S friends, whose head was
brought unto him; the like happened unto LABIENVS. His second brother SEXTVS
POMPEIVS fled form Cordoua, and in the end forsook Spain: hereafter more
mention shall be made of him. I. CAESAR recovered the cities of Seuill and
Cordoua, and all the rest; and disposing of all things in Spain at his
pleasure, returned to Rome, and entered in triumph for the wars in Spain,
which was his fifth Caesar's triumph for his victories in Spain.
and last triumph: in this place LVC. FLORVS and PATERCVLVS speak of all his
triumphs.

CAESAR came to be the most mighty, the most redoubted, and most highly
esteemed man that ever had been in the world, having subdued and conquered the
greatest part thereof, with an Army and by force, in as little time, as it
might seem that another man might be able to trauail those countries by
reasonable iourneys. All which being in subjection unto him, he made himself
perpetual Dictator of Rome; and so without contradiction he finished the
making of himself sovereign Lord and Monarch of the Roman Empire, within
little less then five years after that he began the same. And this was the
original and beginning of the Roman The beginning of the Roman Empire.
Emperors: for JULIUS CAESAR would not be called King (for the name of King
was odious to the Romans above all things, ener since the Kings were chased
from Rome) but contented himself to be called perpetual Dictator and also
Emperor; although not with a name of such power and dignity as his successors
have done since; but as by a name which signified he had been a conqueror in the
wars, which in this sense was given to the Roman Captains, when they The
original of the name of Emperor.
had obtained any notable victory: but after JULIUS CAESAR, all his successors
took that name, glorying to be called Emperors, which was held for the highest
title and dignity in the world.

JULIUS CAESAR having attained to that absolute power which he so much desired,
he showed in all things great clemency and magnanimity, honoring and
rewarding his friends, and easily forgiving, and very cheerfully pardoning all
those which had been his adversaries; and so he not only pardoned BRUTUS and
CASSIVS, CICERO, MARCELLVS, and many others: but also some of them he admitted
to his company and private familiarity, and to offices and dignities. It is
certain that among all the many virtues wherewith CAESAR was endued, his The
clemency and bounty of Caesar.
clemency and liberality were most glorious. But this sufficed not to quench
the desire of their lost liberty, neither to assuage the hatred and malice
conceived against him by his adversaries, as in time did appear.

And notwithstanding that many were grieved: yet some for the love which they
bare him; others for fear and dissimulation; the Senate and people of Rome,
and finally all, gave him names, preheminencies and titles of honor, such as
never had been given to any other; neither ought he to have accepted the same,
as PLVTARCH, APPIAN and others do report: But CAESAR'S mind and ambition was
such, and his thoughts so elevated and so high; as he held nothing so great,
but he was worthy thereof and had deserved the same: and so he not only
accepted that which they offered him; but many more were offered, because they
knew that he desired the same. Whereupon they gave him the name of Emperor,
Father, restorer and preserver The names and high titles which were given to
Caesar.
of his country: He was created perpetual Dictator, and Consul for ten
years, and perpetual Censor of their customs. His statue and image was
erected among the Kings of Rome, and a chair and throne of Iuorie in the
Temples and Senate, and a high pulpit and throne in the Theater, and in the
place where the Senators did use to sit, his pictures and statues were set up
in all the Temples and public places. I pass over some titles which they gave
him, and he accepted, which only, to those whom they held for God, ought to
have been attributed. The month which they called Quintil, they called JULIUS
after his name, as March of their god MARS, and June after the goddess IVNO:
they did also consecrate and build Temples unto him, as unto IVPITER, and their
other gods: and gave him certain honors which they held particularly for
their gods, which they call Thensas: and so they did many other things to his
honor, which exceeded all measure.

JULIUS CAESAR enjoying such honor and power, so as he had no equal or second
in the world with whom he might contend; it seems that he would contend with
himself, and attempt something wherein he might excel himself: for he was
not contented with all the victories which he had obtained, neither (as PLINY,
SOLINVS and other report) to have fought in fifty several battles (in all
which he over came) saving in that one at Dyrrachium against POMPEY; where, as
we have already said, he was not wholly overthrown, neither (according to the
same authors) to have slain in the wars and battles which he fought, a
million, ninety and odd thousand men; and yet they say that they reckon not
those which died in the civil wars: but that as he was of a most haughty
mind, he sought to do greater matters, if greater might be. For, first he
resolved to pass into the East, there to conquer and subdue the fierce nation
of the Parthians, and to revenge the death of MARCAS CRASSVS, and The high
thoughts and purposes of Caesar.
to pass through Hircania and other countries, until he should come to the
Caspian sea, and so through all the provinces of Scythia Asiatica; and passing
the river Tanais, to return through Scythia in Europe, and in this retreit to
come into Germany, and other provinces bordering thereupon, conquering and
subduing them all to the Roman Empire; for the which conquest he presently
caused to be levied in sundry places, ten thousand horsemen, and sixteen
legions of chosen footmen, and appointing the time wherein he thought to
depart, he commanded them to march toward their Rendeuous. And besides all
this, he sought not only to subdue all the nations of the world, but to correct
and reform nature it self: for he purposed to have made an Island of
Peloponesus, which now is called Morea, by cutting the neck of the land which
is between the Egean and the Ionian Seas.

Of the River Tiber and the River Anien (as PLVTARCH says) he purposed to have
altered the courses, and to have opened new channels, through which they should
run into the Sea, making them to leave their natural course, and capeable to
bear great ships. He commanded, and already began to dig down and make plain
many hills and high mountains in Italy, and to dry up and dreine some of the
great lakes and marshes which are therein: and, in this manner, he thought to
have done other things more than a man, which seemed to be possible to none
but to God alone. He corrected (as many Authors affirm) the computation of the
year, conforming it with the course of the Sun, and brought it to that rule
which is yet held: for, before that time Caesar corrected the computation of
the year. Suetonius, Plutarch, Censorinus.
it was much out of order. He did the like in the course of the Moon, and the
conjunctions and oppositions of her and the Sun: and this was attributed to him
for tyranny, by those which did hate him. For, one day, in a discourse in the
presence of CICERO, it was said, that the next day there should be an Eclipse
of the Sun; yea, quoth he, it is so: for, CAESAR has so commanded. Many other
things CAESAR began, which were very great, in reforming the laws, customs
and offices, which for breuity I omit: among which, the reedifying of the
ruined city of Carthage by SCIPIO (as all the world knows) was one, and he
sent thither Colonies and Carthage repeopled by Caesar.
Roman citizens to inhabit: the like he did by Corinth. But all these works
and these so high conceits and resolutions were abbridged by death, which
within few days ensued: and this man, whom no force could resist, a few men
(yea, and those disarmed) were of power to bereave of life; as hereafter we
will declare. Five months only he lived a sovereign Lord in peace (as
VELLEIVS PATERCVLVS has noted) when those, in whom he reposed greatest trust,
conspired his death.

Some write, that CAESAR was counseled to have had a guard always about him:
whereto he answered, that he would have none; for, he would rather die once,
than live continually in jealousy and fear. Many set down the causes wherefore
they desired to kill him. Some say, The causes of the conspiracies against
Caesar.
that it was for the hatred they had long born him: some others say, that it
was for the desire of liberty, houlding him for a tyrant. But the most part are
of opinion, that it was for suspicion that he would have made himself King of
Rome; a thing in the highest degree hateful to the Romans: whereof he gave
many signs and causes to suspect; which PLVTARCH and others do write at large.
Heerunto was added, that he began to have men in contempt, and all other
things: whereby he became hateful to many. For, he used to say, that the
Commonwealth was but a voice and a name without a body or substance; and that
it well appeared, that CORNELIUS SYLLA had no learning, seeing that he
resigned the perpetual Dictatorship. All the whole Senate, coming one day into
the Temple of Venus wherein he was, he attended their coming, sitting still,
and rose not as he was wont to do, notwithstanding (as some say) that
CORNELIUS BALBVS counseled him to rise: which was a thing much noted, and
odious to the Commonwealth. His friends and favorites began also to say and
to publish, that in the books of the Sibyls (which in Rome were held in great
veneration, and for a true prophecy) it was written, that the Parthians could
never be overcome but by a man which should have the title of king; and they
practiced that CAESAR should take this name, for that conquest, whither he had
determined to go: and although that he made show to be much moved thereat, yet
they suspected the contrary. Which suspicion increased (besides that which is
already said) for that the Tribunes of the people commanded a man to be
apprehended, which had set a Diadem (which is the ensign of a King) upon the
head of one of CAESAR'S statues: Whereat CAESAR was so highly offended with the
Tribunes, that he deposed them from their offices, making show that he did it,
because they gave him cause of offense, in this, that they would make the world
believe that there was cause of suspicion, that he would make himself a
Tyrant-king. The like in a manner passed, when MARCUS ANTONIUS, who was a great
favorite of his, and (that year) his fellow and companion in the Consulship,
being at certain public games, came to CAESAR and put a Diadem upon his
head: and although that he cast it down, yet they all imagined, that MARCUS
ANTONIUS would not have presumed to have done it without his consent or liking,
and that he did this to prove what liking the people had thereto, and how they
would take it: so as these, and such other like things as passed, gave them
occasion to desire and to procure his death; as some of them did. This did also
encourage them, and made them attempt to do it; for that in sundry public
places certain Writings were set up, which did incite and animate them to
conspire against him: as, upon the statue of BRUTUS, who in ancient time chased
the Kings out of Rome, were written these words; Would to God thou were now
living, Brutus: And upon the image of MARCUS BRUTUS, who then was Praetor, and
descended from the other BRUTUS, these words; Thou sleep long, Brutus:
truly thou art not Brutus. And, as APPIAN recounteth, at other times they set
up others, which imported, Thou art dead, Brutus: would to God thou were
living: thou art unworthy of the succession from the Bruti: surely thou art not
descended from that good Brutus. And other such like things were set upon these
statues, and in other places: So as for all these reasons, and for other added
heerunto, there were seventy of the most eminent men in Rome which conspired to
murder him; one alluring another, until they grew to that number: of which,
the principal Heads were DECIVS, MARCUS BRUTUS, The conspiracy against Julius
Caesar.
CAIUS CASSIVS; yet MARCUS BRUTUS was held for CAESAR'S son: for, his mother
was suspected by him, and had received from him great honors and good
entertainments. With these were GAIVS CASCA, ATTILIVS CIMBER, SERVIVS GALBA,
QVINTVS LIGARIVS, MARCUS SPVRIVS, and many other men of account: which, after
some consultations, concluded to kill him upon the Ides of March, which is the
fifteenth day of that Month, in the Temple where the Senators were to sit that
day: which was agreed upon, and kept so secret, that (notwithstanding their
great number) there was not any one found that did discover the same. But there
were so many signs and prodigies, and to himself there happened so many auguries
and forewarnings, that, without knowing any cause, all men were of opinion,
that CAESAR'S death was near at hand. The which, among many other which recite
the same, OVID does most excellently set down in his Metamorphoses, which for
breuity I omit: but chiefly SPVRINA, who was his diuiner or soothsaier,
forwarned him, that he should look to Lib. 14
himself until the Ides of March were past; for, his life was in great danger:
and CAESAR'S own wife entreated him upon her knees, that he would not that
day go forth to the Senate; for, she had dreamt, that he lay dead in her lap.
Finally, CAESAR was so many ways forewarned, and put in such fear of some
great danger, as he was about to send to MARCUS ANTONIUS to make his excuse,
and to defer the Senate until another day. But (as it was Gods will he should
die so) MARCUS BRUTUS, being in place when this matter was in question (who, as
we have already said, was one of the conspirators) counseled CAESAR, that in
no cas^ he should make show of any such fear: whereupon he resolved to go.

Some (as SVETONIVS and PLVTARCH) write, that CAESAR made small account of
death, and that he suspected he should die in this manner: for he said, that he
did not so much esteem his own life, as the danger whereinto the Commonwealth
would fall by losing him: For, as for him, he had won power, fame and glory
enough for himself; and that he in no time could die with greater honor. It
gave also cause of this suspicion, that some discoursing in his presence, the
night before his death, what kind of death was best: even, quoth he, the
sudden, and that which is not prepensed. Whether this be true or no, I know
not: but, the fifteenth of March, he went from his house in a Litter toward
the Senate; and, passing along the street, there was a petition delivered unto
him, which (some say) ARTEMIDORVS, his Master A petition given Caesar.
in the Greek Tongue, gave him: others say, that it was given him by another,
and that ARTEMIDORVS could not come so near to him as to advise him: but,
whosoever he were that gave it, therein was given him (in writing) all that
which was concluded in this conspiracy, and he which gave it desired him to
read it presently; which he began to do: but there came so many to speak to
him, that he could but begin to read it; for, it was found in his hand when he
was dead. And, passing so along the street, he also met with SPVRINA, who had
given him warning to look to himself until the Ides of March were past: and as
CAESAR saw him, very pleasant and jesting he said, Do thou not know,
SPVRINA, that the Ides of March are come? Yea, answered SPVRINA, and I know
that they are not yet past. Being comn to the Temple where the Senate was to
sit that day, he came down from his Litter, and entered therein; and, having
first done sacrifice (as then was the custom) which all, according to their
superstitious ceremonies of that time, presaged to be fatal and unfortunate,
he sat down in the Senate in his chair: and BRUTUS ALBINVS, entertaining
MARCUS ANTONIUS at the door of the Temple, or (after some others) TREBONIVS; as
it was decreed, one of the conspirators (whose name was CELER) came to CAESAR
under color to entreat him to be pleased to release a brother of his from
banishment, and presently all the rest of the conspirators drew near to his
chair. Which when CAESAR perceived, thinking that they had all come for the
same purpose, it is written that he said unto them, What force is this? And at
that Instant one of them, whose name was CASCA, beginning, they all drew their
poiniards and swords, which they had brought in secret for that purpose under
their gowns, and began to wound him. The first blow he received, they say,
CASCA gave him in the throat: at which wound CAESAR spoke aloud; saying, What
do thou, Traitor CASCA? and, wresting the poiniard out of his hands, he arose
and stabbed CASCA through the arm: and being about to strike him the second
time, he was prevented by the other wounds which they gave him; with great
force and courage leaping from one side to the other to defend himself. But,
when he saw MARCUS BRUTUS (whose authority and reputation was great) with his
sword drawn in his hand, wherewith he had already wounded him in the thigh, they
write, that he was much amazed thereat, and said in the Greek Tongue (which
the Romans did then understand and usually speak) Why how now, son BRUTUS?
and thou also? And having said so, and seeing so many weapons bent against him,
and that no body came to his rescue (for, there was so great a tumult in the
Senate, as they all thought to have died; and, being in despair, none durst
attempt to defend him) he remembered to keep the honor of his person, and with
his right hand covered his head with part of his robe, and with his left hand
he girt himself, and settled his clothes about him; and, Caesar was sl^ in the
Senate, and d^d at Pompey's feet. The excellenci^s of Iul. Caesar.
being so covered, he fell dead to the ground, wounded with three and twenty
wounds: and his fortune was to fall at the foot of the seat or base whereupon
POMPEY'S starve stood; which was noted for the judgment and permission of God.
And so in this manner died the most mighty, the most worthy, valiant, wise, and
fortunate Prince and Captain, that without all doubt before him has been in
the world; and I know not if after him in valor and humane power there has
been the like. For, his excellencies, graces and abilities; his invincible
mind, his incomparable force and courage; the battles and victories which he
obtained; the provinces, Kings and nations, which he overcame and subdued; his
counsels, stratagems, policies, and bold attempts; his magnanimity, clemency
and bounty to the conquered and conquerors; the great designs he had
propounded when he was slain; being all well weighed and considered: it will
plainly appear, that in none of these things aforesaid, neither in many other
more which may be said of him, there has been any King or Captain that has
excelled him, but that he in the most has excelled all others, and had fewer
imperfections and vices then any other. For, setting apart his ambition and
desire to reign (which he held for no vice, and might allege that he was
compelled thereto) he was only noted and blamed, as too much given to women; as
for the rest, wherewith he was charged, it does rather appear to be the
murmuring and slandering of his adversaries, than any truth.

CAESAR was slain in the six and fiftieth year of his age, four years and a
little more (according to PLVTARCHS computation) after the death of POMPEY; in
the seven hundred The time wherein Caesar died.
and tenth year (according to OROSIVS) after the foundation of Rome; and
according to the Hebrew truth, in the three thousand and tenth year from the
creation of the world; and according to the greater account of the seventy
interpreters, five thousand, one hundred, fifty and seven years; in the
hundred, eighty and fourth Olympiad; and forty and two years before the birth
of Christ our Redeemer: But I would have the reader to understand, that in this
account of years, there sometimes happens difference between the authors.

CAESAR had neither son nor daughter legitimate, at the time of his death;
for notwithstanding that he was married four several times, yet he had but
one only daughter, named IVLIA, which (as I have said) was married to POMPEY,
and died: Wherefore he adopted for son by his last will, and made him his
heir in the Dodrant, which are nine parts of the twelve Julius Caesar adopted
Octauianus his Nephew for his son. Octauianus hi^ parentage.
of his goods, his Nephew OCTAVIUS CAESAR; which afterward was called
OCTAVIANVS AUGUSTUS, who was nephew to his sister IVLIA and of ACIVS BALEVS,
and son of ACIA his niece, and of OCTAVIUS Praetor in Macedonia, who died
suddenly. OCTAVIUS was at this time by the commandment of his uncle, in the
city of Apollonia in the province of Epire, where he gave himself to study;
staying for him there, thence to go with him to the wars of the Parthians,
being then of the age of seventeen years.

CAESAR being dead in the manner as I have said (as it happens in great
accidents) the news presently ran over all the city; and the tumult and
alteration therein was so great, as no man knew what to do or say: all offices
ceased, the temples were shut up, there was no man but was amazed: CAESAR'S
friends were afraid of those which slew him; and they, of his friends. It would
be a long discourse to recite what succeeded, but I will briefly set down that
which shall be most to my purpose. BRUTUS and CASSIVS and all the conspirators,
and others which were willing to ioyn with them, having murdered him, seeing
the great tumult among the people (and as PLVTARCH writes) for fear of MARCUS
ANTONIUS and LEPIDVS, whereof the one was Consul, and the other Master of the
horsemen, durst not go to their houses, neither do such other things as they
had pretended; but presently from thence went to seize upon the Capitol, and
cried by the way as they went, Liberty, liberty, imploring the assistance and
favor of the people. The rest of that day and all the next night, MARCUS
ANTONIUS and LEPIDVS who took CAESAR'S part, were in arms, and there passed
treaties and messages from the one to the other; wherein it was agreed the Senate
should sit, whither BRUTUS and CASSIVS came, M. ANTONIUS sons (by the persuasion
of CICERO, a great lover of the liberty) remaining hostages for them; where
they treated of peace and concord, and all that which was past should be buried
in perpetual silence and oblivion. Whereunto M. ANTONIUS (who was Consul) and
all the whole Senate agreed: and all the provinces being divided, there The
determination of the Senate.
was a great likelihood of peace; for the Senate approved and commended the
fact, and the people dissembled it: for on the one part, the authority of
BRUTUS and CASSIVS, and the name of liberty, seemed to give them some
contentment; and of the other side, the greatness of the fact, and love which
they bare unto CAESAR, did move and incite them to hate the murderers, and so
it rested indeterminate. But MARCUS ANTONIUS, as one who also thought to become
a tyrant, ever sought means to incense the people against them; and matters
passed in such sort, that among other things which were done, CAESAR'S testament
was opened; wherein (besides the adopting of his Nephew OCTAVIUS for his son,
and appointing him for Caesar's will and testament.
his chief heir, among other bequests which he made) he bequeathed to the
people of Rome certain gardens and heritages near the river of Tiber, and to
every citizen of Rome a certain sum of money, to be divided among them; which
being known, did much renew their old love, and ^ade his death far more
pitiful. And having agreed upon his funeral, which was, with great solemnity
to burn his body in the field of Mars, putting it in effect, MARCUS ANTONIUS,
who that day made a funeral oration in his praise, and with the intent
aforesaid, took the robe wherein CAESAR was slain; which being all bloody, he
showed to the people, using some speeches which provoked them both to wrath and
pity. So as before the solemnity of the funeral was thoroughly ended, they
all departed in great fury, with the brands of the same fire which was made
for CAESAR'S body in their hands, and went to burn the houses of BRUTUS and
CASSIVS, running up and down the streets of Rome seeking them and the rest of
the conspirators to have slain them; and in that fury they unadvisedly slew
ELIVS CINNA, by mistaking him to have been CORNELIUS CINNA, who was one of the
conspirators. This tumult put BRUTUS and CASSIVS and their confederats, in such
fear, as they all fled from The murderers o^ Caesar fled from Rome.
Rome to sundry other parts; and MARCUS ANTONIUS not observing what was
decreed, thinking to inherit CAESAR'S power and authority, sought their
destruction in all that he might: And notwithstanding that the Senate (having
appeased the tumult of the people) would have inflicted punishment upon some of
the seditious, and some were already imprisoned, yet BRUTUS and CASSIVS durst
not return to Rome, but after a while went into Graecia to govern those
provinces, which CAESAR (whom they had slain) had consigned unto them; which
were Macedonia to BRUTUS, and Syria to CASSIVS, and so all the rest of the The
death of those which conspired against Caesar.
conspirators absented themselves. Surely it was a wonderful thing that within
the space of three years, they all died, and not one of them a natural death.

At this time CAIUS OCTAVIUS, who (as is aforesaid) was afterward called
OCTAVIANVS AUGUSTUS, came to Rome from Apollonia, being advertised of CAESAR'S
death, and sent for by his mother and other his kindred, all continuing in the
confusion aforesaid. After the death of Caesar, Marcus Antonius became the
mightiest man in Rome.
For MARCUS ANTONIUS was now very mighty: for his brother LUCIUS ANTONIUS was
Tribune of the people, and other his friends and kinsmen were in offices and
dignities, many of which he procured for them, saying; that JULIUS CAESAR had
so ordained it in his Commentaries: and in this season came OCTAVIUS to Rome,
whose story we will now begin.

THE LIFE OF THE EMPEROR AUGUSTUS CAESAR.
THE ARGUMENT.
OCTAVIANVS, or Octauius, the adopted son of Caius Julius Caesar, after the
death of Caesar, applied himself, together with Marcus Antonius, to pursue
Brutus and Cassius with their accomplices; and ouercomming them he returned to
Rome: where plotting the Trinmnirat, he shed so much blood, and did such
execution, as there was not any street in Rome, but was polluted with civil
blood. He fought with Lucius Antonius, brother to Marcus Antonius, for that it
should seem that Octauius made small account of his brother: and besieging him
in Perugia, he constrained him (through famine) to come in person to sue for
peace and life; whom he gently pardoned, together with all those which were his
partakers in that war. He also overcame Sextus Pompeius, after they had
warred together many years. And falling at variance with Marcus Antonius by
means of his wife Octauia, sister to Octauius, for that Antonius was besotted
with the love of Cleopatra Queen of Egypt: Finally after many changes of
fortune, he overcame him: whose victory constrained Marcus Antonius (in a
manner) in despair to kill himself, and Cleopatra to poison her self; but
Marcus Antonius slew himself, more for that he believed that Cleopatra had
already killed her self, then that he accounted himself overcome by Octauius.
After this victory, Marcus Antonius being dead, and Lepidus reduced to a most
base estate, Octauius obtained the Monarchy and sole government of the Empire.
In which time, subduing many barbarous Nations, he several times made Ianus
temple to be shut, and was called Monarch; in which Monarchy he lived in such
manner, as with his greatness, he noway digressed from virtue by reason of his
high estate; and was no less virtuous then a favorer of learned and virtuous
men. He was unfortunate in honest wives, and chaste and continent daughters; and
most unhappy in sons, having none given him by nature worthy of the Empire.
He ruled the world six and fifty years; four and forty alone, and twelve
in company with Marcus Antonius. In his time our Savior Jesus Christ was
borne. And being little more then threescore and six years old he died, to
the great grief and sorrow of the whole world, which through his goodness had
been so long time maintained in peace.

IF in the History and life of JULIUS CAESAR it behooued me to be brief in
the relation thereof; I have now no less need to do the like in the History
of his Nephew OCTAVIUS CAESAR, which afterward was called OCTAVIANVS AUGUSTUS,
his son by adoption, as by that Octauius Nephew to Caesar and his son by
adoption.
which is before written may appear: as well for the great accidents which
happened in his time, as for the multitude thereof, which cannot be repeated
but by a long discourse. But we will do herein what we shall be able,
notwithstanding that his reign was long (for it was fifty and odd years)
that in reason we may spend somewhat more time, then in the actions of those
which were of less continuance. The father and grandfather of OCTAVIUS, I have
already said, who they were. His lineage and family of his fathers side, was of
the OCTAVII, and was of great antiquity in Rome, from the time of TARQVIN
their king, and in the beginning The Lineage of Octauianus.
they were Patricij (as SVETONIVS records in his life) although that
afterward the order altered, reducing it to the people by adoption, or some
other cause: and in process of time many of the OCTAVII, obtaining offices and
Magistracies, continued in the order of Knighthood, which was in the middle
degree between the Patricij and the Plebeians, until the time of OCTAVIUS the
father of OCTAVIANVS, who was a Senator, and a Praetor in Macedonia. Of his
mothers side (as it was said of JULIUS CAESAR) he descended from the Kings of
Rome. And yet notwithstanding all this, as OCTAVIANVS had many enemies and
emulators, it was said to his reproach, that his grandfather (the father of
his father) had been a monychanger, and that his great grandfather was a
Libertine; which is as much as to say, a man that had been a slave. But it
seems to me unlikely, that the son of such parents should have been admitted
into the Senate, and made Praetor; and that JULIUS CAESAR, whose place and
thoughts were so high, would have married him to his Niece. And so SVETONIVS
treats thereof, as a matter which he houlds for untrue.

OCTAVIUS then understanding of the death of his Uncle JULIUS CAESAR, being
advertised and sent for by his mother (as I have said) departed from Apollonia,
and with the best speed he could make came to Rome, accompanied with some of
CAESAR'S friends and some Octauianus his coming to Rome.
men of war, of those which in Epire and Macedonia attended the enterprise
and wars of Asia, as it was decreed: and, arriving at Brundusium, he found
there certain legions, which by CAESAR'S commandment were comn thither to have
been embarked for the war pretended; by whom he was received with the
greatest love and affection that could be. And (as says APPIANVS) he was there
called and took upon him the name of CAESAR, by the adoption of his uncle; and,
leaving off to be called OCTAVIUS the son of OCTAVIUS, was called CAIUS
Octauianus took upon him the name of Caesar.
CAESAR, son of CAIUS CAESAR; and commonly he was called CAESAR OCTAVIANVS:
wherein he preserved the memory of his natural father, with the name of his
adoptiue father: like as PAVLVS EMILIVS son of PAVLVS EMILIVS, being adopted by
SCIPIO, the son of SCIPIO the Great, was called SCIPIO EMILIANVS; SCIPIO by his
adoptiue father, and EMILIANVS by his natural father; a matter usual among
the Romans. So was OCTAVIUS called CAESAR OCTAVIANVS: and so from thenceforth
we will call him.

OCTAVIANVS CAESAR departed from Brundusium toward Rome, accompanied with the
old soldiers: and by the way many more joined with him, with many of his
uncle and father CAESAR'S friends, and of his faction, and entered into the city
with great show and pomp. But, as MARCUS ANTONIUS was of great power, and
therewith very proud, and took in ill part that OCTAVIANVS was preferred before
him, as PLVTARCH records, he went not to receive him: which was much noted,
and was the first sign of the discord which afterward ensued between them.
OCTAVIANVS had a resolution and great desire to revenge the death of JULIUS
CAESAR. But, by his mother, and PHILIP his father-in-law, with whom she was
married, he was counseled to dissemble his purpose for a season: for, on the
one side, they saw that the Senate had approved the death of JULIUS CAESAR;
and, on the other, MARCUS ANTONIUS, who was to be their principal favorer
heerin, did not show himself a friend to OCTAVIANVS. Wherefore he, following
their wise counsel, advisedly concealed his thoughts for a time: and, to
justify himself, and to hold correspondence, and temporize with ANTONIE, he
went presently to his house to visit him. And, understanding that ANTONIE had
in his custody all the treasure which JULIUS CAESAR had left, after discourse
of some other matters, he desired him to command it to be delivered unto him,
therewith to satisfy his debts, and to distribute it as CAESAR had ordained by
his Will. To this, and all the rest which OCTAVIANVS required, he was answered
by MARCUS ANTONIUS with greater haughtiness and gravity than the mind and
thoughts of OGTAVIANVS were able to bear, denying to him what he required, yea,
and reproving him for his demands. Whereupon presently contentions and discord
arose between them; OCTAVIANVS Octauianus and Marcus Antonius fell at variance.
aiding himself with the counsel of MARCUS TVLLIVS CICERO, a great enemy to
ANTONIUS: whose authority at that time, by reason of his wisdom and eloquence,
was very great. The hatred increasing, although that friends of either side
passed between them to bring them to some conformity, and to have reconciled
them, yet in the end it brake out. And OCTAVIANVS his power increasing,
principally (as I said) through the favor and assistance of CICERO, MARCUS
ANTONIUS left Rome, and began to raise forces in Italy, and so levied four
legions of old soldiers against him. And because that DECIVS BRUTUS, who
commanded Gallia Cisalpina (which is now called Lombardie) was opposite unto
him, procured thereto by CICERO his counsel and letters, MARCUS ANTONIUS went
to besiege him in the city of Mutina, now called Modena. This being known in
Rome, CICERO his credit and authority in the Senate was such, as, after much
contention, MARCUS ANTONIUS M. Antonie declared an enemy to the commenweal.
was declared an enemy to the State: and the new Consuls HIRCIVS and PANSA were
sent against him, and with them OCTAVIANVS, with ensigns of Consul and title
of Propretor, with part of the Army, having been first received into the
Senate (notwithstanding that he was not yet eighteen years old) by the
procurement of CICERO, although that afterward he did ill requite it.

There were also assigned unto MARCUS BRUTUS the provinces of Illyricum or
Sclauonia, and Macedonia, with the Armies therein; and to CASSIVS, the province
of Syria in Asia, with the Army also. This and other things being granted by
the Senate, OCTAVIANVS and the Consuls with their Armies drew near to MARCUS
ANTONIUS, MARCUS TVLLIVS CICERO remaining for chief in all matters in Rome.
After some skirmishes and incounters, The battle against Marcus Antonius,
wherein Octauianus and the consuls had the victory.
which passed between the two Armies, they came to battle, or (as some record)
battles, which are declared in sundry manners; but in effect they all agree:
and the truth is, that the Consuls and CAESAR had the victory, and one of the
Consuls (which was HIRCIVS) was slain in the battle, and PANSA the other
Consul came wounded from it, and died shortly after: and so OCTAVIANVS
remaining with the whole Army, DECIVS BRUTUS was freed from the siege; and
MARCUS ANTONIUS, with part of his people, escaped by flight. In this service,
OCTAVIANVS made marvelous proof of himself (as SVETONIVS reports) not only
as a Captain, but also as a private soldier: and, among other things which he
did, one was, that seeing him which bare the standard to be sore wounded and
ready to fall, with the Eagle, the ensign of his legion, which were the Arms
of Rome; OCTAVIANVS took the same, and bare it a great while, until that he
put it in safety: yet for all this, some of his enemies forbear not to defame
him; saying, that, being in the battle, he himself slew the Consul HIRCIVS;
and that afterward he caused poison to be put into the medicines applied to
the Consul PANSA, and that thereof he died.

MARCUS ANTONIUS, being escaped from the battle, gathering together the
remainder of his Army, passed the Alps and went into France, soliciting the
friendship of LEPIDVS, who remained there with an Army since the death of
JULIUS CAESAR: with whom, after some treaties and matters which succeeded, he
concluded to be his friend. And OCTAVIANVS, after the battle and victory
obtained, seeing himself at liberty from the authority of the Consuls, began to
put in effect the high designs which he did inherit with the goods and name of
CAESAR, and presently sent to the Senate to require triumph for the victory;
and also the Consulship for the rest of the time which remained to the dead
Consuls, with succession in their charge, and command of the soldiers
succeeding them in dignity. But his demands were not so pleasing to the Senate
as he desired: for, the kinsmen and friends of the conspirators which slew
CAESAR, began to stand in fear of him, and they grieved to see him so
powerful. Wherefore (as APPIANVS ALEXANDRINVS and VELLEIVS PATERCVLVS
distinctly set down) they used a mean to protract and delay that which he
required; and in the end they resolved to assign the Army unto DECIVS BRUTUS:
and temporizing with OCTAVIANVS, they granted him the triumph, without
admitting him to the Consulship. Whereat he showed himself much discontented,
and took occasion thereby to attempt that which peradventure he had before
projected: which was this; He had secret treaties and practices of friendship
with MARCUS ANTONIUS, and having drawn unto him the hearts and good will of
the Army, imitating JULIUS CAESAR; accompanied therewith, he took his way to
Rome: and approaching near unto the city, in despite of the Senate he made
himself to be chosen Consul, being then not fully twenty years old. Wherein
he presently entered: and, discovering Octauianus made himself to be chosen
consul. Those which murdered Caesar, accused and condemned.
his desire and resolution, he made accusations to be exhibited against BRUTUS
and CASSIVS, and the rest of the conspirators, which was declared against them
all: and as there were none to defend their cause, and they absent, not daring
to appear, they were condemned. This being done, he again departed from the
city; and, with the Army which he brought, returned to draw near to the camps
of LEPIDVS and MARCUS ANTONIUS, who were already entered Italy.

DECIVS BRUTUS, being advertised of the treaties and league betwixt OCTAVIANVS,
LEPIDVS and MARCUS ANTONIUS, not daring to stay in that country, departed with
his people: by which, seeing himself abandoned, part whereof going to CAESAR,
and part to MARCUS ANTONIUS, he fled into sundry parts; and in the end was
taken and brought to MARCUS ANTONIUS, and put to death by his commandment, and
(his head being brought unto him, he caused him presently to be buried. The
Armies of these Captains approaching near together, with which ASINIVS POLLIO
and PLANCVS, with the legi^ns which they commanded, were joined; the league was
made, and friendship concluded between these three, to wit, OCTAVIANVS CAESAR,
MARCUS ANTONIUS, and LEPIDVS, all three meeting to that effect three days
together, at an appointed place in the fields between The Triumvirat and
league between Octavianus, Marcus Antonius, and Lepidus.
Bologna and Perugia, as APPIANVS records, which was an Island, which the
River Lavinum which passes thereby, makes, where they concluded their
accursed peace. And either of these firebrands of sedition entered into that
accursed Triumvirat, with a several design and intent. LEPIDVS was covetous of
riches, the hope whereof consisted in troubling the State. ANTHONY by nature an
enemy to peace, and troublesome to the common weal, desired to be revenged of
such as had declared him an enemy to the State. And OCTAVIUS, for the death of
his adopted father, upon BRUTUS and CASSIVS, whose lives were offensive to his
unrevenged ghost. After which, OCTAVIANVS, putting away SERVILIVS daughter, to
whom he was married, contracted himself to CLAVDIA, ANTONIUS daughter in law,
daughter to his wife FVLVIA, which was then a child; from whom he was also
divorced afterward, without touching her, by reason of the discord which
arose, as shall be declared. In this proscription and league which they made,
besides the dividing of the Empire and Provinces, as hereafter shall be
declared, they concluded each of them to kill his enemies, and the one
delivered The cruel proscription mad^ by Octavianus and Marcus Antonius.
Cicero delivered to his enemy.
them into the others hands, having more respect and care to be revenged of an
enemy, then to the saving of a friend; and so was made the most cruel and in
humane proscription and butcherie that ever was seen or heard of, giving and
exchanging friends and kinsmen, for enemies and adversaries. For MARCUS
ANTONIUS gave his fathers brother; and LEPIDVS, LUCIUS PAVLVS, his own
brother; and OCTAVIANVS, MARCUS TVLLIVS CICERO, whom he called father, and by
whom he had been entreated and honored as a son. Be-, sides these, they
proscribed and condemned to dye, three hundred other principal men of Rome, as
PLVTARCH sets down in their lives, although LUCIUS FLORVS, and TITUS LIVIVS
do but briefly set down the number of the Senators: of which one says,
there were put to death 130, and the other 140. But if we shall believe
APPIANVS, a most diligent and grave Author, there died of the Senators in a
manner 300 (therein agreeing with PLVTARCH) and near 2000 Romans of the order
of Knighthood: so great power had ambition and hatred in the hearts of these
three Citizens.

Having made their agreement, and resolved what they would do, they all three
(newly reconciled) went to Rome, where they took upon them the government of
the Commonwealth, by the name of a Triumvirat, for that they were three, the
time being appointed for five years, although they never meant to leave the
same. And presently those which by them were condemned and proscript, were by
their commandment put to death, being sought out in all parts and places,
ransaking their houses and confisking their goods: In the execution whereof
there was so great confusion, sorrow and heaviness in the city of Rome, and
almost in all Italy, as the like was never seen nor heard of by man. And
although APPIANVS ALEXANDRINVS very eloquently recounteth the cruel death of
many, it shall be sufficient for us to describe the murdering of CICERO only:
who understanding that his name was in the catalogue of those which were
proscript, only for that he had been a lover of the Roman liberty, fled
toward the Sea, where imbarking himself, he had so cruel fortune, as he
was forced to return to the shore: and coming to certain his possessions
near to Capua, not far from the sea, sleeping, he was awakened by Crows,
which with their bills plucked the clothes from his back. His servants moved
with this evil presage, took him and put him in his Litter, and again
carried him toward the Sea; but he was overtaken by the executioners, which
smote off his head, and right hand, wherewith he had written the orations
against MARCUS ANTONIUS called PHILIPPICKS, imitating those which DEMOSTHENES
made against PHILIP, father to ALEXANDER the great: and so CICERO was slain by
one whom he had defended and delivered from death. And his hand being
joyfully beheld by MARCUS ANTONIUS, was by his order nailed up in the place
where he was wont to plead; whither repaired all the Roman people to behold
so miserable and sorrowful a spectacle: whereof there was not any one but was
heartily sorry for the death of so great a personage, and so fervent a lover of
the Commonwealth.

These Princes having done their wills in Rome, and knowing that BRUTUS and
CASSIVS had a great and mighty Army in Graecia, able both to defend, and
offend, and called themselves deliverers of their Country, and gave it out
publicly, that they would go to set Rome at liberty from oppression; CASSIVS
having before overthrown and slain DOLABELLA in Syria, who was made Consul in
the place of JULIUS CAESAR when he was slain; and in the time that CICERO bare
sway, was adjudged for an enemy to his Country: and being certified that they
had (with the assistance of the Kings and provinces of Asia, and such people as
they could levy) drawn together 18 legions: This (I say) being known, MARCUS
ANTONIUS and OCTAVIANVS resolved to go against them with the greatest Army
they were able to levy, which they had of expert and old soldiers, and that
LEPIDVS should remain behind to guard Rome. Being departed from thence, and
arrived in Graecia, dividing their Army, for the more commodious marching
thereof, they drew near to the place where BRUTUS and CASSIVS were encamped,
which was in Macedonia, in the fields called Phillippicks, for that they were
near the City Philippos. Before the Armies came to join, there were apparent
signs of an inevitable overthrow; for those birds which used to gorge
themselves with Carrion, hovered about BRUTUS Camp, as if it had been their
own already: as they marched out to battle, a black Moore met them, which was
an eminent sign of ominous success: and BRUTUS himself being alone in his
tent at night in meditation, a man sad and ghastly appeared unto him; and being
demanded by him, what he was? he answered, I am thy evil spirit; and so
vanished out of his sight. In Caesar's Camp, all presages were as good as the
others bad, birds and beasts promising all fair fortune. These contrary
Armies being so near together; after some encounters and skirmishes, they came
to a battle, where the victory was divided after a strange manner: for
either party having ranged their Army into two squadrons, or battles, the
right wing of BRUTUS his Army, joined with the left wing which OCTAVIANVS
commanded; and the right, whereof MARCUS ANTONIUS was leader, with the left
which CASSIVS governed: where wounding and cruelly slaying one another, BRUTUS
his Battalion was of such power, as that it brake and put to rout OCTAVIUS
CAESAR'S Battalion; who, as APPIANVS Brutus puts his enemies to rout.
ALEXANDRINVS, PLVTARCH, and LUCIUS FLORVS report, was not in the battle, for
that he was then very sick; neither durst he abide in his Tent in the Camp,
for a certain augurie or dream of one who was his Physician, who (they say)
advised him, that he should not abide in his Tent in the Camp; for if he did,
he would be slain by his enemies. Yet SVETONIVS, VELLEIVS PATERCVLVS, and
PAVLVS OROSIVS affirm that he was there, and that being overcome, he retired
to ANTONIUS battle. And although that this be diversely reported (as it
usually happens in great exploites and adventures) the truth wherein all
agree, is, that his people being overthrown, and his Camp entered by his
enemies, imagining that he had been in his bed, there were many thrusts and
stabs given thorough the curtains, and into the bed, and it was published
abroad that he was dead. And while as BRUTUS followed this victory, his
companion CASSIVS was overthrown by MARCUS ANTONIUS, Cassius deseated by
Antonie
notwithstanding that he performed all that was possible for him to defend his
people; so as there was victory on either side, whereof the clouds and dust
of that day were a great occasion; for the one could not see nor understand the
other: and CASSIVS seeing his people overthrown and scattered, retired himself
to a high ground, where he had pitched his Tent, whereinto he could not come,
for that the enemy had already possessed it: And so standing and looking
about, he saw BRUTUS troops come to his aid, and to relieve him: but he
imagining they came flying, or that they were his enemies, as he had before
resolved (so great was his grief and sorrow) so commanded he a slave of his,
whom he had made free (named PINDARVS) to kill him, who performed it
presently, and so he died foolishly, yet bound by The death of Cassius.
necessity, believing that which was not.

OCTAVIANVS his people escaped by flight, and retired to MARCUS ANTONIUS camp,
whose forces returned to him with victory: although their General MARCUS
ANTONIUS, as some write, did not that day discharge the part of a good Captain
but rather affirm, that the battle being begun, he left it, and went into
a lake which was thereby, where he remained until that he certainly
understood, that the victory remained on his side: which truly is hardly to
be believed in so valiant a man, and of such experience as he was; so as there
was a great broile and a confusion. But PLVTARCH affirms, that if BRUTUS his
people had not that day busied themselves in ransacking and pillaging of
OCTAVIANVS his Camp and Tents, his party had obtained an entire victory: for
they might in sufficient time have rescued CASSIVS, and both being joined
together, might easily have broken MARCUS ANTONIUS his battle. But the
victory divided in such manner as I have told you, the Captains of either
party gathered together their forces, where of BRUTUS part were slain 8000
men; and of his adversaries a far greater number: and BRUTUS did his best to
comfort the soldiers and gentlemen which followed CASSIVS. And although the
next day there were some show between the two Armies of a desire to fight, and
that they were near the one to the other, yet they came to no battle: but
within few days after (during the which, there past some skirmishes of small
importance) it was tried between them; whereto BRUTUS was forced by his
soldiers. For he would willingly have delayed and prolonged the war: being
advertised (...)his enemies wanted victuals, and many necessaries, and also for
that he repose^ (...)^ust in CASSIVS forces; for he found that they were grown
fearful, by mea^ (...)that which was past, and were ill to command: but being
come to the encounter, (...)^roughly discharge all the offices which to a good
Captain and valiant knight did (...). But in the end, his men unable The
Battle against Brutus.
to endure the force of OCTAVIANVS and MARCV^ ^TONIVS, were by them broken and
overcome: And BRUTUS, after that he had done all that which was possible to
gather his troops together, being out of hope to be able to make any
resistance, the night being come, he was counseled by some which joined
themselves with him, to fly, to whom he answered, that he was resolved to do
so, not with his fecte, but with his hands: and having spoken these words, he
took a sword from a servant of his, named STRATVS, and slew himself. Brutus
slew himself.
Some affirm, that this STRATVS killed him by his commandment. And so DRVSVS
LIVIVS and QVINTILIVS VARRO and some others of the conspiracy slew themselves,
besides many others which died fighting in the battle. And in this manner
were OCTAVIANVS CAESAR and MARCUS ANTONIUS Lords and Masters of the field, and
all things succeeded unto CAESAR according to his desire: for whom alone, God
in his secret judgment, had reserved the sole Monarchy, which then was divided
and shared between three.

This exploit being achieved, and BRUTUS and CASSIVS legions being reduced to
their obedience (saving those which flying sundry ways went to SEXTVS
POMPEIVS, son of the great POMPEY, who in these troubles and confusions
seized on the I Will of Sicilia, and was very mighty by Sea) OCTAVIANVS, and
MARCUS ANTONIUS agreed together, that ANTONIUS should remain in the Provinces
of Graecia and Asia, LEPIDVS should go into Africa, and OCTAVIANVS should
return to Rome, whither with some difficulty he came, through want of his
health; and MARCUS ANTONIUS went into Asia, and afterward gave himself to
sensuality, delights and pleasures in Egypt, with Queen CLEOPATRA, of whom
Marcus Antonius fell in love with Cleopatra Queen of Egypt.
we have spoken in the life of CAESAR.

Within few days after that OCTAVIANVS came to Rome, there arose new wars
and troubles: for although that he were in peace with LEPIDVS, to whom was
given the Province of Africa, OCTAVIANVS remaining with the rest of Spain,
France, and part of Germany, Italy and Illyricum: LUCIUS ANTONIUS, who at that
time was Consul, incited thereto by his Sister in law FVLVIA, wife to MARCUS
ANTONIUS, began to oppose himself against LEPIDVS and OCTAVIANVS, attempting
to defeat the Triumvirat, and the league and government Lucius Antonius
opposes himself against Octavius.
of three; which began about the division of the fields, which OCTAVIANVS
CAESAR had made to the men of war which had served him. APPIANVS writes,
that FVLVIA did this with an intent to disturb Italy, and so to procure her
husband MARCUS ANTONIUS to come unto her, for that she was jealous, hearing of
his familiarity and company keeping with CLEOPATRA, the Queen of Egypt. The
discord in Rome grew to that height, as they came to Arms: and LUCIUS ANTONIUS
departed from thence, and Ievied an Army against OCTAVIANVS, who marched
toward him with his power: but LUCIUS durst not join battle with him, but
rather suffered himself to be shut up in the City of Perugia, where CAESAR
besieged him, and at that time divorced himself from CLAVDIA, the daughter of
FVLVIA, to whom he was contracted (as isaforesaid) without ever touching her,
and was married the third time with SCRI^ONIA, by whom he had one daughter.
Perugia was so Lucius besieged in Perugia, yields.
strictly besiedged (OCTAVIUS being then 23 years old) that LUCIUS ANTONIUS,
and the rest which were besieged with him, endured so great hunger, as it grew
to a proverb, to say, The Perugian hunger; wherewith LUCIUS ANTONIUS oppressed
and forced, yielded himself to OCTAVIANVS, who pardoned him, and used him well,
and those which were with him: and so this war was ended without shedding of
blood, and he came victorious to Rome, and was The beginning of Octavius his
Empire.
ever after Lord thereof. Wherefore many account the beginning of his Empire
from this time, which might be about some 4 years after the death of his uncle
CAESAR: and the account which is commonly called CAESAR'S computation, agrees
with this time: four years (as I said) after the death of CAESAR, and thirty
and eight years before the birth of Christ.

CAESAR being in this quietness (the which cannot long continue in the course of
this life) presently without any delay, FVLVIA with letters and false
persuasions, sought by all means to set MARCUS ANTONIUS and OCTAVIAN at
variance, seeing that LUCIUS ANTONIUS his attemptes took no better effect: and
with this resolution she went out of Italy, by OCTAVIUS permission, and took
her way toward her husband, in hope to persuade him to come into Italy
against OCTAVIUS, as he did. When she parted from Italy, MARCUS ANTONIUS
parted from Alexandria in Egypt: and coming to the I Will of Rhodes, he was
informed of all that happened to his brother; and arriving in Graecia at the
city of Athens, he found his wife FVLVIA there sick, but sound and constant in
her determination against OCTAVIUS: whom he there leaving by her own good
will and consent, he came with two hundred Galleys into Italy; and landing
near unto Brundusium, now B^indez, the wars began between him and OCTAVIANVS
his forces, who then was in Rome. SEXTVS POMPEIVS (as I said) held Sicilia, and
was in such sort Lord of the Sea, as he caused a great scarcity and want Sextus
Pompeius in Sicilia.
of corn in Italy. But as this war was not through OCTAVIANVS his fault, or
by his will, so MARCUS ANTONIUS, by the relation of sundry persons, understood
it to be so; and therefore there were some friends which interposed themselves
to reconcile them and make them friends: and it was agreed there should be
arbitrators which should compound the differences between them: whereto were
nominated of OCTAVIANVS side, his great and private friend MECENAS, chanted by
VIRGIL, HORACE, and other Poets; and for MARCUS ANTONIUS, was ASINIVS POLLIO.
And in this time, news came that FVLVIA The death of Fulvia wife of Marcus
Antonius.
the wife of MARCUS ANTONIUS was dead: whereby a great obstacle to the peace
was taken away. MECENAS then, and ASINIVS POLLIO, set down the agreement
between them; the principal points whereof were, to renew the league and
Triumvirat for other five years, and to share the Roman Empire between them,
as they before had done. To MARCUS ANTONIUS was assigned all the East from
Italy, from the beginning of the Ioniane Sea, which is the entry into the
gulf of Venice, unto the River Euphrates in Asia, wherein were included all the
Provinces of Graecia and Asia, and the Islands contained between these two
limits. To OCTAVIUS was allotted from the said Ionian Sea to the western Sea
(which we call the Spanish Sea) Italy France, the provinces of Spain,
Germany, Britannie, with their Islands and bounds. And to LEPIDVS was confirmed
Africa wherein he then was, and all the provinces therein contained, subject
to the Empire. And for the better corroborating of this league of friendship,
it was agreed that MARCUS ANTONIUS, who was a widdower, should marry with
OCTAVIA, who was sister to OCTAVIANVS by his fathers side, and lately the
widow of MARCUS MARCELLVS, with whom she had bin married, and had by him
Marcus Antonius married Octavia sister to Octavianus.
one son called MARCELLVS, whom he much loved, and OCTAVIAN adopted him for
his son, of whom VIRGIL makes much mention. This marriage was made by
dispensation of the Senate, because that in Rome it was not permitted for
widows to marry, until they had lived ten months in widdowhood.

This being concluded, OCTAVIANVS and MARCUS ANTONIUS went to Rome: where the
wedding was solemnized, and they returned again good friends. But this peace
was greatly disquieted, by means of the ill neighborhood of SEXTVS POMPEIVS:
for he commanded the Sea from Sicilia where he lived, and with his ships and
Pirates (for he had many in his service) he disquieted CAESAR'S part (relying on
the friendship of MARCUS ANTONIUS) and OCTAVIANVS had determined to make war
and to ruin him: but at the entreatie of the Senate, and of MARCUS ANTONIUS,
he gave ear to a peace, and by the mediation of some which were friends to
them both, it took effect in this manner: That all matters past being
forgotten, they should become good neighbors and friends, and that SEXTVS
POMPEIVS should enjoy Sicilia, Sardinia, and Corsica, which he had in
possession; and that he should clear the seas from danger, for Merchants and
passengers; and that he should furnish Rome yearly with a certain quantity
of corn. This being concluded, they agreed upon a meeting between them three,
ANTONIUS, OCTAVIANVS, and POMPEY, upon the Seaside, in the straight of Messina,
in a Fortress built for that purpose, which reached into the water, whither
SEXTVS POMPEIVS might come with his galleys, and might be in safety on all
parts: which was performed with great joy and solemnity, and afterward POMPEY
feasted them in his galleys, and they him like wise by land: and from thence he
returned to Sicilia, and OCTAVIAN and ANTONY to Rome, where they remained
certain days in very friendly manner. And MARCUS ANTONIUS, making preparation
for his journey into the East, sent VENTIDIVS away before with a great Army
against the Parthians, against whom he had resolved to make war, as he did.
VENTIDIVS had so good success in his journey, as he overcame and defeated
PACORVS, the Kings son of the Parthians, and slew of them twenty thousand
men: so as he sufficiently revenged the death of MARCUS CRASSVS: for the which,
after his return to Rome, he triumphed. Ventidius tritumphed of the Parthians.


MARCUS ANTONIUS departed Rome toward the East with his new wife, with whom he
wintered in Graecia in the City of Athens, and from thence he continued his
journey. Within a while after, as OCTAVIUS (remaining in Rome) grew mighty,
and in great estimation, so likewise he became pensive: and as the company
and neighborhood of SEXTVS POMPEIVS in Sicilia was displeasing unto him, so he
attended an occasion to war against him: which having resolved, he prepared a
great fleet for that purpose, under pretext that POMPEY with his galleys and
ships hindered the coming of provision of corn into Italy. These wars of
Sicilia were long (resting sometimes) and continued certain years. In the
beginning whereof OCTAVIUS had ill success, more through tempests and foul
weather at Sea, then the force of The first wars between Octavian and Sextus
Pompeius.
his enemies, although there were some fights between the ships of either
party; but by tempest and shipwreck OCTAVIUS lost sundry fleetes. And if
SEXTVS POMPEIVS had been as able to offend and conquer as he was to defend
himself, and overthrow his enemy; and as he was valiant, if he had been wise
and politic, most authors affirm, that he might have greatly distressed
OCTAVIAN in all matters concerning Italy. But the matter was so handled, that
in this war MARCUS ANTONIUS came twice out of Graecia into Italy, whither
he came from the East at OCTAVIANVS request; in one of which journeyes he
came to Brundusium: and not finding him there according to his appointment, and
as he had sent him word, he returned without seeing him, upon some suspicions
and jealousies which grevve between them. Wherefore OCTAVIANVS having lost
the most and best part of his Navy in a storm, he sent MECENAS his private
friend unto him; at whose entreaty, MARCUS ANTONIUS returned again into
Italy with three hundred sail of ships and galleys, giving it out, that he
came to CAESAR'S aid: And notwithstanding that there were some differences and
jealousies between them, yet in the end OCTAVIA, who came thither (being wife
to the one, and sister to the other) prevailed so much as she reconciled them,
so as they met together in the mouth Octauius and Antonie parle and agree by
the means of Octauia.
of a River near to Tarentum, where MARCUS ANTONIUS gave to OCTAVIAN one
hundred and twenty galleys for the wars: and OCTAVIAN gave to him certain
troops of Italian trained soldiers; and they renewed their Triumvirat for
other five years then begun: MARCUS ANTONIUS returned toward the East, to the
war which he had begun against the Parthians (which concern not me to
write) his wife OCTAVIA and her children remaining in Rome.

ANTONIE being gone; OCTAVIANVS, who was resolved to prosecute the wars with
all his forces against SEXTVS POMPEIVS (whom it seemed fortune and the winds
did favor) was not contented with the arming of two navies (AGRIPPA being
Captain of the one, and himself of the other) but he earnestly entreated
LEPIDVS, a Triumvir and his companion, to come from Africa to his aid: who
came with such power, as APPIANVS affirms, that he brought with him a
thousand ships little and great, and fourscore galleys, wherein he transported
five thousand horse, and twelve legions of foot. SEXTVS POMPEIVS, whose power
by Sea was very strong, seeing so great preparations made against him, did
marvailously fortify all places upon the Sea side in Sicilia; and on the
frontiers of Africa, near unto Lilybaeum, he placed a very good Captain
called PLINIVS, with good troops of soldiers: his whole fleet by Sea (whereof
he was abundantly provided) he drew together in the port at Messina, where he
purposed to follow the wars with his ships and galleys, for by land he was
neither Octauian^ his second war with Sextus Pompeius.
of such experience nor power; and in this order he stood ready to prosecute
it, which APPIANVS, TITUS LIVIVS, and LUCIUS FLORVS write at large. The sum
whereof is, that LEPIDVS parting with his whole fleet from Africa, was
overtaken with a tempest, wherein with great loss of his Ships, he landed
at Lilybaeum; and having taken certain places in those parts, he might have
done much hurt: but being of small judgment and little experience in the wars,
he managed it with greater cost and outward show, then to any effect or profit.

And the very same day that he was in that tempest, OCTAVIUS also was at sea,
and lost thirty galleys, besides Foists and Brigandines, and with much
difficulty returned into Italy: and TAVRVS, who had the command of the
galleys, which MARCUS ANTONIUS left with him, the same day took land at
Tarentum, with great loss and danger; so as it seemed that the winds and
weather took part with POMPEY. Wherewith OCTAVIANVS was so much grieved, as he
was in doubt to have given over the war for that year: but altering his
determination, he repaired his Navies and Armies, and commanded AGRIPPA with a
great fleet to pass into Sicilia, and there to make war by Sea and Land: and
he with all the rest afterward did the like.

In this time, or a little before (as it seems by SVETONIVS) OCTAVIANVS
divorced himself from SCRIBONIA, notwithstanding that he had by her one
daughter, called Octavianus puts away his wife Scribonia, and married Livia.
LIVIA, and married LIVYA DRVSILLA: wherefore TIBERIUS NERO, to whom she was
married, and by him had a son called TIBERIUS as his father, was driven to
leave her, which he unwillingly did, to please OCTAVIANVS, she being with
child of a son. This LIVIA he much loved, and continued with her til his death.
But returning to our history of the war; I say, that AGRIPPA assaulted and
took certain places upon the coast of Sicilia: which when POMPEY understood,
he departed from Messina, to relieve them; at which time he had of his own,
and of Pirates which served him, one hundred seventy and five Galleys.

It is a wonderful thing to consider the great Fleets that were put to sea in
those days. AGRIPPA being advertised of his coming; put his Galleys, being
almost equal in number, in a readiness to encounter him; and so they joined
battle: wherein, although at first the victory was doubtful, yet in a short
space it plainly appeared, that AGRIPPA had the better: which POMPEY
perceiving, fled, before he would be wholly overthrown; and his galleys and
foysts withdrew Ab^tuile by Sea.
themselves to some places and Rivers near at hand. But AGRIPPA, for that his
Galleys were greater, could not follow the chase, nor come so near the shore
as he would: but yet notwithstanding, POMPEY lost thirty of his Galleys.
AGRIPPA the next day went to a city called Tindaria, which he thought to get
by reason of certain secret intelligence he had with those of the City: and
POMPEY, in the dark of the night, giving secret advice to his whole fleet,
took his course toward Messina. And OCTAVIAN, to lose no occasion, embarked
abord his ships and galleys a great part of his army; and passing over into
Sicilia, set them on shore, appointing CORNIFICIVS for their Commander, little
thinking that POMPEY had been so near; of whom he was in great danger, if he
had been suddenly charged by him: so as if POMPEY had then given him
battle, he had defeated him. But he losing that opportunity, OCTAVIAN
embarked himself again, with intent to determine the quarrel by a battle
at Sea, leaving CORNIFICIVS with his land soldiers fortified on land: and
POMPEY, with the same desire, after some accidents which happened, sailed out
of Messina with all his whole fleet: and neither party refusing it, they came
to fight; in which conflict (although the histories recite it with some
difference) OCTAVIANVS CAESAR was overcome, and all his Octavianus Caesar
overcome in a battle at sea by Sextus Pompeius.
great Fleet scatered and lost, and he driven to fly into Italy in a
Brigandine, where he escaped many dangers; and in the end arrived where his
Army was; whereof MESALLA was General: and being nothing discouraged with this
loss, he presently took order for all that was needful. To Rome he sent in
have his familiar friend MECENAS, to foresee that these news should breed no
alteration: and by a Brigandine he presently sent direction to AGRIPPA, who (as
is said) was Admiral of his other fleet, that with the greatest speed that
might be, he should go to succor CORNIFICIVS, who remained in Sieilia with
his Army by land: and to LEPIDVS he sent word, that (all matters set aside)
he should make his present repair to the Isle of Lipari, which is between
Sicilia and Calabria; whither he should come so soon as he might possibly.

With these provisions, and the diligence and good order which he took, he
so much prevailed, as within a short time, being helped with the wars which
LEPIDVS and AGRIPPA made (in despite of POMPEY) he passed overall his forces
into Sicilia. And joining himself with LEPIDVS, he encamped near to the city
of Messina, where the war began to be most cruel both by sea and land: which
truly was admirable, to consider the power and sufficiency of POMPEY, to know
how to defend himself against so great enemies. Who seeing himself oppressed,
(notwithstanding that he had well fortified the land, and wanted no forces for
his defense by sea) he sent a challenge to OCTAVIANVS CAESAR, with this
message; that to avoid the effusion of blood, and to make an end of the war;
although he Pompey does challenge Octavianus.
were well provided and furnished with singular good Galleys, and well trained
soldiers; yet that he would come to a battle by Sea, so many against so
many Ships and Galleys; whereunto were made many answers and delays, but in
the end they agreed to do so. And appointing the number, which were three
hundred Ships and Galleys of either side; and the time and place set down,
either of these Commanders prepared himself as strongly as he could for the
battle: and OCTAVIANVS, leaving LEPIDVS with his Army by land, embarked
himself in his Fleet; and POMPEY doing the like, they joined battle; A
battle by Sea.
which, without doubt was one of the most cruel that ever was, considering the
Commanders and power of either part: wherein, after that POMPEY had done all
that which to a good and valiant Captain did appertain, and after the death
of much people of either Octavianus Caesar overthrew Sextus Pompeius.
side, he was overcome by OCTAVIANVS, and all his Fleet was taken, burnt, or
sunk, saving xvi Sails which escaped by flight, and he in one of them; and
so he entered into the haven at Messina: The which though it were sufficiently
fortified; and that he knew, PLINIVS, a Captain of his (as is aforesaid) came
to his rescue: yet, acknowledging that all sufficed not to defend him from such
powerful enemies, in a dark night he embarked himself in a Galley; and with
the other xvj which escaped, abandoning Sicilia, he fled toward the East, and
sailed to MARCUS ANTONIUS, in hope to have found some relief with him; but it
happened contrary to his expectation: for being arrived; after some great toil
and accidents that happened (which for brevity I omit) he was slain at the
command of MARCUS ANTONIUS, The death of Sextus Pompeius.
by the hands of one named TICIVS. And so ended the power of SEXTVS POMPEIVS
(which truly was very great) and in him the house and memory of his father the
Great POMPEY.

It is a great example, and a fair document of the inconstancy of all things
in this life, to see and read the changes in the History which we are now to
relate. For when it seems that matters succeed in such sort as quietness
and peace may ensue, then begin new alterations, and greater troubles; as we
have seen hitherto, and shall see hereafter in the process of this discourse.

SEVTONIVS writes, that at the very instant of this naval Battle, OCTAVIUS
was in such a sound sleep, as his friends were feign to waken him, and to
raise him from his bed to give the signal; wherewith ANTONY did afterward
repro ach him, that he could not with his eyes see his battle arranged, but
lay like a senseless corp^ on his back, looking up unto the sky, and that he
never came in sight of his soldiers, until that M. AGRIPPA had put twelve of
his enemies ships to flight.

He escaped many dangers in this war. For having transported part of his
Army into Sicilie, and sailing back again to conduct the rest from the firm
Land; he was at unawares surprised by DEMOCHARES, and APOLAPHANES,
Lievetenants and Admirals to POMPEY: from whom, with great difficulty he
escaped with one only Bark. In like sort, travailing by land to Rhegium,
near to Locris, seeing a far off, certain of POMPYES Galleys near the
shore; and supposing them to be his own, he went down, and was in danger to
have been taken by them: And even then seeking to escape away by unknown
passages, a Bond-slave of AEMILIVS PAVLVS his familiar friend; grieving that
his masters Father PAVLVS had in times past been proscribed by him: he
embraced this opportunity of revenge, and attempted to kill him.

OCTAVIANVS, having obtained so great a victory (although not without great
loss) going to land with his Ships, and the Army; he commanded AGRIPPA
presently to join with LEPIDVS and go to Messina, whither PLINIVS POMPEIES
Captain had retired himself (after POMPEYES flight) with all his troops;
who, for that he would not stand upon his defense, yielded himself to LEPIDVS,
with all his Legions: whereof LEPIDVS grew so proud, that coveting to have all
Sicilia for himself, he presumed to contend with OCTAVIAN: And entering into
the city of Messina (notwithstanding that AGRIPPA requested him to stay for
OCTAVIANVS) he placed a Garrison therein to his own use, and did the like in
many other places in that Island. And OCTAVIAN being come, he sent the next day
to speak with him, greatly complaining of his proceedings.

But as in rule and command, equality is intolerable; so either of them
coveting the I Will of Sicilia particularly for himself, they fell at variance,
and OCTAVIANVS made his Navy to draw near the shore: both Armies began to
stand upon their guard, the one against the other, and many messages and
complaints passed between them: in the end although they met and spoke
together, yet they could not agree. But as OCTAVIAN was much Discord between
Lepidus and Octavianus.
more beloved and better esteemed by the men of war for his many virtues and
nobility, and for the names sake and remembrance of JULIUS CAESAR, this
dissension did much grieve them all, and both the one part and the other laid
all the fault on LEPIDVS. Which when OCTAVIAN understood; before that they
would fall so far out as to take arms, he practiced secretly with sundry in
LEPIDVS his Army, and with gifts and promises drew them to his will: so as
having well effected this device, he one day with a great troop of horsemen
road near to LEPIDVS his Camp: and singling himself from his company, he
began to parley with his soldiers, complaining of him, and laying the fault of
all that was like to ensue, upon LEPIDVS: which being heard by them, many of
them began to come over to his side. LEPIDVS, advertised hereof, commanded the
alarm to be given, and to sally out against him; so as they skirmished, where
in the beginning, OCTAVIAN was in some danger, but it continued not long: for
the most part of LEPIDVS troops passed over to OCTAVIAN, whom LEPIDVS could
not contain; but, seeing himself in danger to be abandoned by his whole army,
for his last refuge, he yielded himself into CAESAR'S power; and putting off
his robe of General, went out of his Tent, and submitted himself unto
OCTAVIANVS, humbly entreating him to pardon him: whom OCTAVIAN received, as if
he had never offended him, very courteously and honorably, but he restored him
neither to his estate nor power, but sent him to Rome well accompanied, and
entertained, but without Magistracy or office, with the dignity of highest
Priest only, which he had ever held from the death of JULIUS CAESAR, whose it
was: and so this quarrel was ended without battle or bloodshed, which some
feared would have brought both danger and ruin.

OCTAVIANVS CAESAR remained Lord of Sicilia: and, depriving LEPIDVS of the
Triumvirat, he appropriated to himself the province of Africa, and remained
General of the three Armies, viz. that which was LEPIDVS army, POMPEIES, and
his own, wherein APPIANVS Lepidus deprived of his province of Africa
affirms, were 45 Legions of footmen, and 25000 horse, well armed; besides
many other light horsemen and Numidians: which seems not incredible to him
that considers how great a part of the world they commanded which levied the
same. He affirms also, that An exceeding great assembly of men of war.
there were then at sea, and upon the coast 600 Galleys, and a greater number
of Ships, Foists, and Brigandines: And although that OCTAVIANVS had these great
forces, yet would he not pursue or send after POMPEY, who (as we have said)
fled, which he did (as some did suspect) supposing that MARCUS ANTONIUS would
have harbored and succored him, being glad that occasion might be offered to
quarrel with him, for that now there was no other man living that was an
eyesore unto him: or else he did it, as he himself said afterward, for that
POMPEY was none of those which conspired CAESAR'S death. And purposing now to
disperse his forces, and to return to Rome, he paid his soldiers, giving
Coronets, and other honors and arms to those which had performed any notable
exploits in the wars: and having given many gifts, and made many fair
promises to his legions, pardoning the Captains and soldiers which had
followed POMPEY, and in the best manner that he could, paying and contenting
LEPIDVS his companies, he sent them home to their houses; notwithstanding that
there were some scandals and mutinies: but he pacified and brought all in good
order. Leaving in Sicilie: and sending into Africa, Pretors and Governors, he
took his way toward Rome, where he was received with ovation (which was
little less then a triumph) with incredible joy and honor, and began to be so
beloved and esteemed, as in many places they erected Temples and Altars unto
him, as to their gods; and he reformed all things which by reason of the wars
and troubles were corrupted and out of order. It would be a long discourse to
relate the particulars of all things which he did in Rome and in the provinces,
as well concerning the government and justice, as the decency and beautifying
thereof.

At this time, MARCUS ANTONIUS, who was in the East; although that in the
Parthian war he had no prosperous success: yet nevertheless he was still
of great power, very rich, and greatly obeyed in all the provinces of Gracia,
Asia, Egypt, and in all the rest of his governments. But he was so much blinded
and besotted with the love and company of CLEOPATRA Queen of Egypt, as he
thought of nothing but how to satisfy her humor, being unable Antony
captivated by Cleopatra.
to leave her, or to have any regard or remembrance of his wife OCTAVIA, sister
to OCTAVIANVS, who in beauty and wisdom was nothing inferior to her, and in
virtue and goodness did far excel her.

And so the Monarchy of the world was divided between these two, the one in
the East, and the other in the West: and as the desire and grediness to reign
is endless, and the thirst with continuance increases; as though that each of
them had not had enough to his share, both of them bethought themselves how
they might be able to obtain the whole. Principally OCTAVIAN seeing that
ANTONY cared not for his sister, neither sent for her after that he had left
her in Rome, he therefore continually advised and urged her to go to her
husband, to have (as I conceive) occasion to fall out with him (as PLVTARCH
observes in the life of ANTONY) if she were not well entertained. And she not
understanding this device, with an intent to prevent all controversies that
might arise between her husband and her brother, departed from Rome, bearing
with her many jewels and presents, which she had gathered together to present
them to MARCUS ANTONIUS, as VELLEIVS PATERCVLVS reports. But he who had fixed
his heart upon CLOPATRA wrote to her upon the way, that she should stay in
Graecia in the city of Athens, until he should return from the journey which
he intended against the Parthians; the which he never performed, CLEOPATRA
hindering the same. Finally, to be brief (for otherways there were much to
say) OCTAVIA sent all those things which she brought with her, to her husband;
and this nothing availing, she returned to Rome sorrowful, and forsaken.
Whereunpon OCTAVIAN began openly to complain of MARCUS ANTONIUS, and to show
himself his enemy: and MARCUS ANTONIUS (who had the same desire) entered into
league and amity with the King of the Medes in Asia, causing CLEOPATRA (besides
the title of Egypt) to be called Queen of Syria, Lybin, and Cyprus; and
jointly with her a son of hers named CAESARION, of whom (as we have already
said) JULIUS Caesarion the son of (...)Caesar.
CAESAR left her with child when he was in Egypt; and to two sons which he
had by her, the one named PTOLOMY, and the other ALEXANDER, he gave titles of
kings: to ALEXANDER, of Armenia and Parthinia, which he meant to conquer; and
to PTOLOMY, of Cilicia and Phoenicia: for which and many other causes which
were offered, the hatred betvveene him and OCTAVIAN was apparent; but the
war was yet deferred, for that OCTAVIAN was hindered by the wars in Illyricu^
and Dalmatia, now called Slavonia. The people of which countries, seeing the
civil wars of the Romans, rebelled, with other nations which conspired with
them, and did assist them, although not subjects as they were, to wit, the two
Pannoniae: the upper, which is now Austria; and the lower, which is Hungary,
and Noricum, which is now part of Bavaria, with other their borderers ^d
neighbors. Which war OCTAVIAN undertook of purpose, and The wars which
Octavianus made in Illyr^.
followed it in his own person, the which was very cruel and dangerous:
wherein he was twice wounded, and made marveilous proof of his person, both for
valor and wisdom: wherein there passed great and famous actions, which
require a large field to relate. APPIANVS, in his sixth book which he calls
Illyricus, writes thereof at large: and also VELLEIVS PATERCVLVS, although
more briefly LUCIUS FLORVS, and TITUS LIVIVS abbreviated by him and some
others. The end thereof was, that OCTAVIAN not only subdued and tamed
Illiricum, and sundry Nations contained under that name, but also the
Pannonia's, and the rest which had conspired with those of Illyricum, partly by
himself in person, and partly by his Captains.

These victories being obtained, OCTAVIANVS CAESAR came victorious to Rome: and
Octavianus refuses to triumph after his victory.
notwithstanding that the triumph was granted unto him, yet he would not
triumph as then; so great was the desire he had to make war against MARCUS
ANTONIUS, who was no better affected unto him: but he levied soldiers, procured
friends and arms against him, and promised his friend CLEOPATRA, to bring her
triumphing into Rome. LUCIUS FLORVS, writes, that she requested of him the
rule and Empire of Rome, and he promised it her: as though the Romans had been
more easy to subdue then the Parthians. And matters standing on these terms,
MARCUS ANTONIUS sent to his Wife OCTAVIA, sister to OCTAVIANVS, a divorcement
and renunciation of his marriage, in such manner as then was accustomed;
commanding her to go out of his house, wherein she dwelt in Rome: All which,
with many other indignities OCTAVIAN imparted to the Senate, complaining
against him, and in his orations and speeches to the people, accusing him, that
the second five years of his Triumvirat and league being expired, without
coming to Rome, or respecting the authority of the Senate, he exercised
Octauianus complains of Antonie.
the same, and held the possession of Gracia and the provinces of the East, and
so used many speeches against MARCUS ANTONIUS to incense the people against him.

MARCUS ANTONIUS on the other side, complained by messengers and letters,
alleging that OCTAVIAN had often broken the peace, and had cast SEXTVS
POMPEIVS out of Sicilia, retayning those provinces and others which he held;
and that therein he had no respect of him, neither had he given him any part
thereof; and that he detained the galleys which he lent him Antonie
complains of Octauius.
for that War: and besides this, that he had practiced means to deprive
LEPIDVS, and so held all the provinces of Africa, and all the Legions which
were his, without imparting any thing thereof unto him; and that he had given
the lands of all Italy to his Soldiers, not contributing any part thereof unto
his. And in this manner the one accused the other, and either of them made
show, that he was urged and enforced to undertake this war. But the truth
is, they both desired to be Lords of the whole: and in my opinion,
vainglory, ambition, covetousness, The causes of the war between
Octauianus and Marcus Antonius, and the beginning thereof.
and envy, moved them thereto, each of them putting his determination in
effect, and calling diverse Nations to their aids; so as the whole world in a
manner, either of the one side or other, was in arms: those of the West in the
behalf of OCTAVIAN, and those of the East in favor of MARCUS ANTONIUS; at the
least, the best and most choice men of all, although not so many as they might
have levied: for the Romans never used to make wars with such huge
multitudes and excessive armies as they should not be well able to maintain
and rule, as the Persians and other barbarous nations did.

ANTONY was first in field, and came with great troops to the famous city of
Ephesus, which was in Ionia a province in Asia the less, whither he had sent
for his ships and Navy, to pass into Europe, and had there in readiness 800.
galleys and ships of burden; 200 whereof CLEOPATRA gave to him with all the
munition and victuals necessary for the fleet; and her self he carried with
him, contrary to the opinion of all those which were of his council: And
herewith sailed to the I Will of Samos, whither he had appointed to come by a
prefixed day, all the Kings, Tetrarchs and people of those cities which served
him in this war, and from thence he Samos an I Will in the Ionian Sea over
against Ephesus. The people and preparation of Marcus Antonius.
went to Athens. PLVTARCH sets down the Kings which came with him, and those
which sent forces to his aid, part whereof were friends and allies to the
Empire, and others vassals and subjects; to which were given the title and
government of provinces: of which he names TARCONDEMVS of the upper Cilicia,
and ARCHELAVS of Cappadocia, PHILADELPHVS of Paphlagonia, and MITHRIDATES of
Comagena, with others; besides those which sent their forces, as HERODES king
of Judea, AMYNTAS of Lycaonia, and the king of Arabia, the king of the Medes,
and PALEMON king of Pontus, with some others: wherein (it was said) he brought
100000 good and well trained footmen, and 22000. horse: and according to the
same PLVTARCH, besides this army by land, his Navy by Sea consisted of five
hundred galleys, besides the ships of burden which carried the munition and
victuals.

Although that in the number of Ships and Galleys Authors do vary, yet it
should not diminish the credit of the History; sithence that in actions which
pass now adays the which we see with our eyes, we can hardly know the
certain number of Ships and Armies. MARCUS ANTONIUS came with such power, as
Historiographers affirm, that if he had presently taken his passage for Italy,
he had put OCTAVIAN to his shifts, and in great hazard: for he had not then
sufficient forces levied to have fought with him, neither had he necessary
provision for the vvarres. And so MARCUS ANTONIUS delaying the time, he was
taxed with want of discretion, knowledge and foresight of the good fortune
which was offered him. For he spent so much time in Athens, that OCTAVIAN had
leisure to provide all things wanting, from Italy, France, Spain, and other
provinces under his subjection: and leuying 80000. choice and well trained
Soldiers, and above 20000. horse, seeing that ANTONIE stayed so long, he sent
him word, that for as much as he had Ships and provision fit, he should draw
near to Italy, where he stayed in field to give him battle, promising to
give him free Ports and Havens, where he might safely take landing without any
interruption, to the end that he might the more commodiously order and provide
all things thereto necessary. Whereto ANTONY answered, that it would be more
honorable, if he would determine this quarrel in person against him body to
body, which he would willingly accept; notwithstanding that he was now old
and crazed, and the other young and lusty: and if he liked not hereof, he would
stay for him with his Army in the fields of Pharsalia, in the same place where
his father JULIUS CAESAR fought with GNEVS POMPEIVS.

These Embassies and messages passing between them, without effect; ANTONY
drew his Army by land, and his Navy by Sea, toward the coast of Italy, and
OCTAVIAN, drawing his Ships to Brundusium, embarked his legions, and crossing
the Sea came to a place called Torma, in the province of Epire, which is now
called Romania. After certain notable exploits which ^pire, Romania.
passed, the two Armies drew near, and the like did the Nauies by Sea.
OCTAVIANVS Navy (as PLVTARCH affirms) consisted of 250. galleys, but better
appointed and swifter, then MARCUS ANTONIUS his galleys were, which were more
in number, although (as I have said) Authors, in this matter, agree not: but
the most common opinion is, as I have said. But howsoever it were, MARCUS
ANTONIUS, persuaded by CLEOPATRA (who even in this also was the cause of his
ruin) would needs try his fortune in a battle at Sea, notwithstanding that
in his army by land he had the advantage. CLEOPATRA did this (as some write,
and as it after appeared) thereby to have the better means to fly if the
battle should be lost. ANTONY choosing 22000. men out of his army, put them
aboard his fleet, which was near at hand: and OCTAVIAN, who refused not to
fight at sea, made his provision also for the battle; and shipping himself
aboard the galleys, committed the charge of his army by land, to TAVRVS: and
ANTONY doing the like left his forces with CANIDIVS; in sight of both which,
these two most powerful Captains with the best troops and Nauies of the
world, took the Seas, where they fought for no less then the Empire and
Monarchy of The battle at Sea between Octauianus and Marcus Antonius.
the world: The which was deferred for three days space in despite of both
parties, the Seas swelling so high as they could not govern their vessels. The
fourth day they came to encounter at a Cape called Accius, which is in Epire,
not far from whence were their armies by land. The battle was one of the most
cruel that hat'h been written of: for it lasted ten hours before that
OCTAVIAN, who was the victor, did wholly obtain the victory, although that
ANTONY stayed not so long in the fight: for as CLEOPATRA knew better how to
mollify and soften men's hearts, then to encourage them; in the hottest and
greatest fury of the battle, with a feminine heart unable to endure the sight
of so furious a spectacle, she fled away in her galley, whom 70 of her other
galleyes followed; which is not to be woundred at, but how she durst stay so
long. But the unfortunate MARCUS ANTONIUS, who all his life time had been The
shameful slight of Marcus Antonius.
a valiant and worthy Captain, that day metamorphosed into CLEOPATRA, seeing
her galley fly, whereon he had fixed his heart and eyes, went out of his (for
that it seemed too heavy) and embarking himself in another more swift
(desiring rather to fly with CLEOPATRA) then to conquer without her) followed
her, without respect of his Armies by land or sea: and, ouertaking her, he went
aboard the same galley wherein she was; wherein he sailed three days without
seeing or speaking to her, for shame (as it is most likely) for the great
weakness which he had showed. And after some wandering, he arrived in the Port
at Alexandria in Egypt, Octauianus his victory.
where he afterward ended his life, as we will declare.

His Army which he left fighting, although without a captain, made resistance
as I have said, whereof there were slain about five thousand men: but in the
end it was wholly overthrown, more through want of a captain, then through
any force of the enemy: although some write, that the lightness and swiftnes of
OCTAVIANS galleys was a great help unto him, and so he remained conqueror, and
granted life and pardon to the conquered, and had in his power three hundred
of their galleys. In the army by land there wanted neither constancy, nor
faith to their general ANTONIE, although abandoned by him; who continued seven
days in their camp ready to give battle, without accepting any composition
or offer, made unto them by OCTAVIAN (with a show that they would yet have
stayed longer) if CANIDIVS, whom ANTONIE left in his place, had not abused his
charge, as he who had given him that charge had done. For it happened after
seven days that he fled secretly in the night from the camp to seek ANTONIE,
and abandoned the army: which being forsaken, yielded to the enemy; and
OCTAVIAN used his victory with great clemency: which being obtained, he
either thought it not good, or could not at that time pursue ANTONIE, but took
his way toward the city of Athens, where taking order for all matters in
Graecia; by reason of some mutinies of his souldiars in Italy (as SVETONIVS
writs) he returned thither, where he stayed somewhat longer then he would have
done, as well by reason of the former letts, as the evil weather to sail in,
which followed.

After all this, OCTAVIANVS having set all things necessary in a readiness, he
sailed with Octauius goes into Egypt against Antonie.
great forces into Egypt, with a resolution to make an end with MARCUS ANTONIUS
(as indeed he did) and arrived near to the city of Alexandria: where ANTONIE
(recovering courage, and Queen CLEOPATRA making great preparation for the
wars, in the time of OCTAVIANVS his stay) had levied great forces, both of
foot and horse for their defense. They had also a great navy by sea, as well
of CLEOPATRA'S, as of those which came from other places: and MARCUS ANTONIUS
with his old courage, which now too late and to no Antonie raise^ a new arm^
purpose he recovered, took the field and entertaining a skirmish with CAESAR'S
horsemen, which were then landed and strongly entrenched, he used such skill,
and charged them with such dexterity, as he made them fly to their strength:
and being returned to the city, he again sent to challenge OCTAVIANVS to
fight with him body to body. Whereto CAESAR answered, that MARCUS ANTONIUS had
other ways and means enough in a readiness to die, Antonie challenges
Octauius, and his answer.
without dying by his hands.

ANTONIE receiving this answer, determined to die fighting, although it
happened otherwise. The next day in the morning he again salied forth with an
intent to fight; and standing upon a high ground, looking toward the sea, he
saw that his navy and galleys moved, and made toward OCTAVIAN his fleet;
which he thought they had done, with a resolution to fight: and staying a
little to see the sequel, within a while, he saw them join together in
company, by means of a secret practice past between them. Which when he
saw, and fearing the like in those which he brought with him to field, he
returned to the city, suspecting and affirming that CLEOPATRA had betrayed
him, although that in truth she was blameless therein: and she being advertised
of what ANTONIE had said, stood in fear of him; and withdrew her self into a
strong temple or sepulcher: and commanding the doors thereof to be shut and
fortified, she sent some fainedly to tell him that she had slain her self
with her own hands. Which MARCUS ANTONIUS believed as firmly as though he had
seen it, and refusing to live any longer, without stay to die fighting; after
he had uttered certain speeches, he stabbed his poiniard into his own breast,
and so (deadly wounded) he fell down Antonie kills himself.
upon a bed in a swoune. And within a while coming again to himself, being
advertised that CLEOPATRA was yet living, he made himself to be carried
thither where she was: who received him with so many tears and such pitiful
complaints, as he being so near death, began to comfort her, saying, that she
ought not lament for him, neither to hold him for unfortunate, fith he
accounted not himself so, for he had been a great captain and very powerful,
and in the end died overcome by the Romans. He counseled her to yield to the
mercy of OCTAVIANVS CAESAR, and speaking these words (his strength failing
within alittle while after) he dyed: and so ended the power and life of MARCUS
ANTONIUS. Who in truth for matters of war was very famous: and if his excellent
wit and courageous mind had not been captiuated with the love of CLEOPATRA,
after JULIUS CAESAR he was in election to have obtained the monarchy of the
world: but it appeared plainly that the stars and the divine powers were
inclined to favor OCTAVIUS.

OCTAVIANVS having intelligence hereof, and of the bad order and guard of the
city, ma^ched thither with his forces and entered the same, sending to comfort
CLEOPATRA, and to make great offers unto her, to the end she should not kill
her self; and going to see her in person, he did the like: but all his care
little auailed. For she being advertised, that he would send her to Rome, and
would carry her and her sons in his triumph, chose rather to dye, then that
he should triumph over her: and some say, that she took poison which she had
provided for that purpose, wherewith she killed her self. Others (and this is
the most common) that she put an Aspicque to her arm (which is a certain
kind of Serpent or venomous Adder) to the end that it should sting her, which
was brought to her in a basket of flowers; so as she was found The death of
Cleopatra.
dead without any sign of blow or wound, but as if she had bin asleep. Whereat
OCTAVIAN was much grieved (not without great admiration at the resolution and
courage of that woman) and he commanded her to be buried in the same Sepulcher
wherein she had entombed her self; together with MARCUS ANTONIUS, with whom she
had lived andraigned 14. years, she being 39. years old when she dyed, and
MARCUS ANTONIUS 56, or (after some) 53. He commanded the tomb which they had
begun, to be finished.

OCTAVIANVS easily pardoned all those which had served or sent succors to
MARCUS ANTONIUS, and also his children, which were seven, by three women,
FVLVIA, OCTAVIA The Clemency of Octauius to Antonies children.
sister to OCTAVIANVS, and CLEOPATRA; saving the eldest, which he commanded to
be slain, and the like he did by CAESARION CLEOPATRAS son by JULIUS CAESAR,
of whom we have already made mention: the eldest (they say) he slew upon
particular displeasure which he conceived against him; and CESARION, by the
counsel of ARRIVS a Philosopher, who told him that it would not do well to
have many CAESAR'S; an usual thing among Princes to secure their estates.

This business touching MARCUS ANTONIUS being ended, and the kingdom of Egypt
made a tributarie province, that it might be fit to yield corn and victuals
for the City of Rome; he viewed the tomb with the body of ALEXANDER the
great, taken newly out of the vault or secret Chapel where it had been laid,
he set a coronet of gold upon it, and strewing flowers thereon worshipped it;
and being demanded if he would look upon the PTOLOMIES, he answered that his
desire was to see a King, and not the dead.

Afterward passing through Syria and Asia the less, leaving all quiet and in
peace; he passed into Gracia, and there doing the like, he came into Italy:
where having ended all civil wars, and the whole Empire being subject to
himself alone; he entered into Rome in triumph, with the greatest feasts and
solemnities of the Senate and the people of all Italy, that could be devised or
imagined. It was granted unto him to triumph three times, to wit, for the
victory in Illiricum, and for the victory in his battle by Sea, and the
overthrow of MARCUS ANTONIUS, the conquest of the Kingdom of Egypt, and Queen
CLEOPATRA, whose statue was placed in his triumph, with the Aspicques set to
the veins of her arms.

And so OCTAVIANVS finished the building, and erected the Monarchy which his
Uncle JULIUS CAESAR had begun and founded: which (at it seems by PAVLVS
OROSIVS his computation) was sixteen years after the death of JULIUS CAESAR.
And although that he obtained it by means hardly justifiable, yet truly, he
afterward governed it most justly Octavianus an excellent Prince
and wisely, and was one of the best Princes that ever was in the world;
gentle, merciful, liberal, just, valiant; endued with many virtues and
excellencies, most happy and fortunate in all his affairs, and beloved above
measure of all men.

As there was no man to contend with OCTAVIANVS CAESAR, and he so beloved of
all men (as is aforesaid) the people and Senate of Rome gave him a new name,
which before that time was never heard of, AUGUSTUS; and so he was afterward
called CAESAR AUGUSTUS: a name which they held for holy, venerable, of great
majesty, and which appertained to the Gods and Titles given to Octavius.
their temples; as we find it used by CICERO, VIRGIL, OVID, and other
authors; although that some derive it from the Verb augeo, in Latin, to
increase, because that OCTAVIAN enlarged and increased the Empire: and some
others give it other derivations; but whethersoever be the most certain, it
was given him for the most honorable name of al others: they also called him
father of his Country, and gave him all the other titles and names they could
devise.

CAESAR AUGUSTUS (for this name henceforth we sometimes give him) seeing
himself now in such quiet, and without war with any person or nation in the
world, commanded the temple of IANVS to be shut, which they religiously
observed that during the wars it should stand open; and never had been shut
but twice from the foundation of Rome, according to TITUS LIVIVS, LUCIUS
FLORVS, and PLVTARCH, and other Authors: once in the time of NVMA How many
times the temple of Ianus was shut.
POMPILIVS, second King thereof; and the other after the end of the second
Punick wars, which they waged with Carthage, whenas TITUS MANLIVS was Consul.
I know that some Authors set this shutting up of IANVS temple by OCTAVIAN to be
a great while after, at the time of the birth of Christ our Savior. But in
this place I follow the authority of PAVLVS OROSIVS, a Christian Author, who
used great diligence and truth, and is of 1200 years antiquity; who
reckons, that CAESAR AUGUSTUS shut this temple three times, whereof this was
the first; and I hold his opinion for certain: for he is assisted by the
authority of TITUS LIVIVS, who in his first book affirms, that AUGUSTUS did
shut this temple after the wars with ANTONY: and LUCIUS FLORVS, and other
Authors set down, that this temple was shut after that. And hereby it
appears, that OCTAVIANVS CAESAR did shut the temple of IANVS more then once,
and every one shows his time when; and PAVLVS OROSIVS all, which was thrice,
setting down the time to every one of them, as he notes; which is also drawn
out of SVETONIVS TRANQVILLVS, following the letter, as PHILIPPUS BEROALDVS
follows. I have a desire to set this down here (although Note the saying of
the Author.
it little imports) to the end that the variety and difference which the
Reader shall find among Authors shall not offend him; and that he may know
that I have an approved Author whom I follow, though I name him not, if he
shall find ought written by me contrary to that which he has read. OCTAVIANVS
CAESAR, living in this peace and tranquillity, omitted no part of his care for
the government of the Roman Commonwealth, and Provinces thereof; sending
thither Pretors, Proconsuls, and other Governors, which were excellent men, to
rule and govern; and himself gave direction, and was very diligent in all
things touching justice, customs, religion, and public buildings: so as in
all things his reign was most happy, peaceable, and quiet; and so it
continued during his life.

VELLEIVS PATERCVLVS, speaking like a Gentile, does so extol his reign, that
he says, Paterculus commendation of Octavius.
men could not desire or ask any thing of the gods, neither think nor imagine
ought; neither could the gods give that to men which OCTAVIANVS CAESAR
AUGUSTUS, after his victories and return to Rome, did bring and give to the
Roman people, and the whole Empire. Notwithstanding that this was common to
them all (as great minds naturally affect liberty) yet in that so prosperous a
time, some people and nations were so presumptuous as to shake off the Roman
yoke, and to molest and disquiet the Empire; as the Spaniards, the nations of
Illyricum and the Pannonians. In Spain the Cantabrians, which are the Alaveses
and Biskains, the Asturians, and part of Gallicia were not only unwilling to
obey; but passing their limits, began to make war against the subjects of the
Empire. OCTAVIANVS CAESAR knowing this, holding it to be a doubtful war, and
of importance, commanded (as PAVLVS OROSVS writes) the temple of IANVS to be
opened, and determined to go thither in person, and to send other Captains to
follow the other wars. The time of these wars, which were first or last,
the Authors do handle very confusedly, so as I cannot bring it to light:
whereof it might be that diverse of these things did concur at one time. But
OCTAVIANVS AUGUSTUS took Augustus goes into Spain to make war.
his journey into Spain, and began the war with three armies against the
people before named, which rebelled; which war was very doubtful and
desperate, and lasted five years. During this time passed many conflicts: and
although that AUGUSTUS did suppress the Cantabrians and Asturians, and drove
them to the rocks and mountains; yet they did so defend themselves, as it
behooved him before he could subdue them, to raise a great Navy on the coast
of France, to invade the sea coast of Cantabria, Asturia, and Gallicia: at
which time he drove the people of those countries to such extreamities by land,
as he compelled them to yield and submit themselves to his obedience; His
great favorite AGRIPPA, serving him well and faithfully in this war (as in
all the rest) whom he married to his daughter IVLIA, who then was the widow
of his nephew MARCELLVS, son to his sister OCTAVIA, with whom she had been
married. And so AUGUSTUS finished the full subjection of all Spain, above two
hundred years after that the Romans began to make their first war there: so
as no province cost the Romans more blood, more toil, and more time, then
Spain. And this long and doubtful conquest being finished, PAVLVS OROSIVS
says, that OCTAVIAN esteemed the same so much, as having established peace in
Spain, in sign thereof, he again commanded the doors of IANVS Temple to be
shut, and came to Rome in great triumph. But this Temple continued not long
shut, for some Nations of the Germans rebelled (although at diverse times) so
as it was again opened to make war against them which were the Inhabitants
of Noricum, which is War in Germany and Hun garie.
now Bavaria, and the Pannonies, which are Austrich and Hungary, as is
aforesaid, and the two Missias, which are Bulgaria and Servia, and also
Illyricum, which is Slavonia, although at another time tamed by him; and the
Province of Dacia, which now is Transylvania and Walachia, and some others
also. Against all these Nations this most fortunate Emperor CAESAR AUGUSTUS
sent his Captains and armies: among which were his sons in law, the sons
of his wife LIVIA, TIBERIUS NERO, who succeeded him in the Empire, and his
brother DRVSVS NERO, of whom LIVIA was with child when OCTAVIAN married her:
and these two brothers (although the war lasted somewhat long) vanquished
those Nations, and obtained great victories in Germany, and the confines
thereof; especially TIBERIUS (as SVETONIVS writes in his life, and PAVLVS
OROSIVS in his histories) who in three years space subdued the Pannonies,
Illyricum, and Dalmatia: for which victories he afterward entered into Rome in
ovatian triumph, with great honor and pomp. And another Captain, whose name
was MARCUS CRASSVS (as LUCIUS FLORVS, and TIT^S LIVIVS report) overcame and put
the Missians to flight in their own Country, a nation which had never seen
the Romans; which (as LUCIUS FLORVS records) being ready to give battle,
in manner of justification, said to the Roman Army: Tell us who you are that
seek to molest us? Whereto they were answered: We are Romans, the Lords of
Nations. Whereupon they replied: It shall be so if we be overcome. And so
they were afterward, both they, and those also which conspired with them. But
OCTAVIAN had not these victories without some crosses: for in this war died
his son in law DRVSVS, who was highly extolled and esteemed for his great
acts and victories, for whom he and the Empress LIVIA his mother were very
sorry. But that was far greater without comparison, which he conceived for
the mishap whch be fell to QVINTILIVVS VARRO, who was Captain of three legions
in Germany, and being careless, was surprised by the Almanes, and himself
and all his legions, and the Auxiliaries slain, and two Standards with the
Imperial Eagles taken: wherewith he was so wonderfully Augustus sorrow for the
loss of his Legions.
grieved, as they write, that he cried out very unadvisedly, and knocked his
head against the walls, saying: QVINTILIVS VARRO, give me my legions again.
For certain months together he suffered the hair of his head and beard to
grow carelessly: And the very Augustus sorrow for the loss of his Legions.
day of this unfortunate accident he did every year observe mournefully, with
sorrow and lamentation.

Of his son in law DRVSVS, there remained two sons, called GERMANICVS and
CLAUDIUS, which he had by ANTONIA, OCTAVIANS niece, and daughter of his sister
OCTAVIA and of MARCUS ANTONIUS: of which, CLAUDIUS was Emperor: and this
GERMANICVS which married with AGRIPPINA, the daughter of IVLIA which was
OCTAVIANS daughter, was father to CAIUS CALIGVLA, who afterward was also
Emperor. But these losses confirmed the victories which his son in law
TIBERIUS obtained: Wherefore OCTAVIAN married him to his daughter IVLIA, who
was a widow by the death of AGRIPPA, causing him to put away AGRIPPINA the
daughter of the same AGRIPPA, by his first marriage, by whom he had one son
named DRVSVS: so as after many notable victories, and subduing sometime one
nation, and sometime another, which were compelled to sue for peace, OCTAVIAN
again commanded the Temple of Ianus to be shut, and from thence forth all
things succeeded unto him most prosperously.

He was careful to have martial discipline observed: he dismissed all the tenth
legion with ignominy upon a mutiny and unwillingness to obey. Whole bands and
Cohorts, if they gave ground and recoyled before the enemy, he decimated, and
to the rest he allowed barley in steed of wheat to feed on. A Roman Knight,
having cut off the thombes of two young men his Sons to avoid the military
oath and service of war, he set him and all his goods to open sale: but seeing
the Publicans bid freely for him, he delivered him to his own freed man;
that being confined and sent away unto his living in the Country, he might
suffer him to live free.

The subjects of the Empire were very obedient unto him, and all others sent
him ambassades seeking his favor and friendship, offering him their service:
the Indians (a people of the remotest part of the East) and also the Scythians
which inhabit in the North, and the Parthians (a people most fierce and
untamed) sent their Ambassadors to him, giving security to keep the The
greatness of the Roman Emperors.
peace, and delivered the Standards and Eagles taken in battle, when MARCUS
CRASSVS was slain. There came also Kings, friends and subjects to the Empire,
to Rome, to do him honor, as his familiar friends, laying aside their
Ensigns and royal Robes; and many of them built cities to his name, for his
honor, calling them Caesareas in remembrance of him: so did HEROD in
Palestina, IVBA in Mauritania, and others.

The world continued in this quietness and general peace, forty and two years
being fully expired since that OCTAVIAN, after the death of JULIUS CAESAR,
came to Rome, from which time is commonly accounted his Empire. In this
general peace was borne ISSVS CHRIST our Lord and Savior in Bethlem, of the
holy womb of the blessed Lady the Virgin MARY (HEROD being King of
Jerusalem, placed there by the Romans, he who slew the innocent children)
coming to the world in humane form and nature, to save and redeem mankind
with his blessed death and passion: whose most holy life, mysteries and
infinite miracles ought not to be mixed with profane Histories, and therefore
I will not intermeddle to treat thereof. But returning to my purpose, I say,
that OCTAVIAN enjoying so great prosperity and good fortune, was not altered
in his natural condition, as in other Princes it has happened, but rather
became more mild, just, and affable, more courteous, more liberal and more
temperate. He established wonderful good orders and laws, for the reformation
of abuses and evil customs: he erected in Rome and without it, great and
sumptuous edifices, and bestowed great gifts and favors upon all sorts of
people: he delighted the people with feasts and plays in diverse manners,
going himself in person, to honor them, and sent Colonies and inhabitants to
sundry parts and provinces: he made an excellent good order for the government
and governors of the whole Empire. The like he did for the war and martial
discipline; he showed himself loving and sociable to his familiars and
friends, and honored and loved them much. Some conspiracies which were
discovered against him, he punished without rigor, giving more pardon then
punishment and correction. Of murmurings and defamatorie libels The virtues and
qualities of Octauianus.
he never sought nor desired to know the authors, but with great gravity
answered, giving satisfaction, and purging himself of those things which were
imputed unto him. He was much given and affected to letters and learning, and
was very learned and eloquent, and compiled books and notable works: He did
much honor and reward the wise and learned men of his time, wherein were many
very learned in all Arts. But for all these virtues and perfections, and other
which for brevity I write not, yet he escaped not to be noted of some vices,
growing through humane weakness and great liberty, especially to be much given
to women; although that in eating, drinking, in his apparel and ornaments, he
was very modest and temperate: he gave himself also excessiuely to play at
dice, and other games then accustomed. But SVETONIVS says, that the most part
thereof was upon ceremonious and festival days, which ought well to be noted
for a shame and example to our time, wherein Christianity is professed. For that
is accounted by many for bravery and valor, which to OCTAVIAN being an Heathen
and unbelieving Prince, was imputed for vice. Wherefore, to conclude and make
an end of his History, as is reason; I say, that although that in many things
he was happy and fortunate, yet besides all his troubles and dangers, he was
unhappy and unfortunate in his children and succession: for by four wives,
with which he was married, only by SCRIBONIA, which was his third wife, he had
one daughter named IVLIA; and yet this one scarcely proved honest of her body:
so as for want of sons to succeed him, he first adopted his Nephew MARCELLVS,
his sister OCTAVIAS son aforenamed, to whom he first married his daughter IVLIA:
and MARCELLVS dying without issue, he married her to his favorite AGRIPPA, who
also left her a widow, as is above said: but he left by her, three sons and
two daughters, the daughters proving no honester then their mother, and two of
his sons dyed in OCTAVIANS time, having bin first by him adopted. Wherefore,
desiring to overcome the crosses which he had herein, he adopted the third, who
was called AGRIPPA as his father was, the which adoption he afterward revoked
for some displeasure conceived against him: and taking this care for his
succession, he adopted and made his son in law TIBERIUS NERO, his son,
whom, as is aforesaid, he married to his daughter IVLIA, who, as I said, was
AGRIPPA his widow. But he commanded TIBERIUS when he adopted him, that he
(notwithstanding that he had a son called DRVSVS) should adopt his Nephew
GERMANICVS, son to his brother DRVSVS, who died in Germa^ie, for that he had
married his niece AGRIPPINA the daughter of IVLIA: and by this means came
TIBERIUS to be OCTAVIANVS successor, more through the diligence of his mother,
then any good liking that his father in law had to him; who rather was, and
seemed to be very sorry, that he should succeed him.

All things standing in this state, OCTAVIAN being now seauentie and six
years old and odd days, having reigned above fifty and six yeeares, and
being the best beloved and most obeyed Prince, that ever was in the world,
death ouertooke him: the cause thereof was a flux which held him for certain
days, whereof in the end he died in the city of Nola (whither he The death of
Octauianus Caesar Augustus.
came sick from Naples) a quiet and peaceful death, in the fifteenth year
after the birth of Christ our Redeemer.

TACITUS writes, that it was suspected his death was hastened by the lewd
practices of his wife, for that it had been bruited abroad, that AVOVSTVS
accompanied only with FABIVS MAXIMUS had been in the Island of PLANATIA to visit
his Nephew AGRIPPA, both weeping when they met, whereupon there was some hope
that the young man should be recalled to his Grandfathers house. This secret
FABIVS disclosed to his wife, by whose means it came to LIVIA and to TIBERIUS:
which made them to practice all the means they could to prevent this
reconciliation.

His death was generally lamented, and there was an universal sorrow and
heaviness over the whole Empire for him: for he did wisely and uprightly govern
that, which by force and cunning he had gotten. OCTAVIAN was of a mean
stature, and of a very good shape and proportion Octauian his proportion of
body.
of his body, exceeding fair of face mixed with modesty and gravity, his
eyes were exceeding clear and bright, he was very advised, and loved to speak
quick and briefly. His last will and testament was written a year and four
months before he died, and left in the custody of the Vestall Virgins. It was
then produced, and in open Senate read: the contents whereof you may read in
SVETONIVS.

THE LIFE OF THE EMPEROR TIBERIUS.
THE ARGUMENT.
AFter the good Augustus, succeeded his son in law wicked Tiberius Nero, who
was most subtle, and knew how to dissemble and fai^ to love those will whom
he hated, and to hate those which he loved. He made show to be unwilling to
accept of the Empire, to observe who was his friend and who his enemy: and
whereas before this dignity, he was very orderly and discreet, he became
afterward so riotosis and such a drunkeard, that he was called in scorn
Biberius. In his time died Jesus Christ and John Baptist in Jerusalem: he
caused Germanicus a great Comander to be slain, although he made show to
Agrippa to be very ^orie for it. He subdued many provinces which rebelled
against the Roman Empire, and was no less cruel then libidinous: and of
these three vices (to wit) cruelty, incontinencie, and gluttony, it is hard
to say, which was least. He ruled the Empire, four and twenty years, and was
no great enemy to Christians: he proponed in the Senate whether Christ should
be accepted for a God or no, whereto the Senate consented not. Finally, he died
through the treason of Caligula, whom he had nominated his successor, being
seventy and eight years old: which he did, as it was thought, to the end that
Caligula his vices should make his seem less, who was so wicked and cruel,
as he wished that the world might end at his death.

AFter the good and valiant Emperor OCTAVIAN, succeeded his son in law, and
adopted son, the wicked and cruel TIBERIUS NERO, unworthy of his succession
and of the Empire: for he was one of the most cruel and wicked men that ever
was: yet in OCTAVIAN his time, both in Germany and in other parts he did many
great and notable feats in arms. In the beginning of his Empire he made show
of a good prince, and did many good deeds, but afterward (as this was but
counterfeit) he discovered his malice, and governed cruelly, couetously, and
dishonestly. This TIBERIUS (as I have said) was the son of TIBERIUS NERO and
LIVIA, whom OCTAVIAN afterward took to wife, of both sides descended of the
ancient family of the CLAVDII: whose grandfather by his fathers side was
TIBERIUS CLAUDIUS NERO; and by his mothers side he descended from APPIVS
CLAUDIUS PVLCHER, and by adoption he likewise descended from the The lineage and
corporal constitution of Tiberius.
LIVII, a worthy family (although but Plebeian) for Consulships, censures, and
triumphs. He was of a tall and strong body, and had a large breast and broad
shoulders, whereto all parts of his body were answerable: he had a fair face,
and great eyes; and so clear, as they affirm a strange thing of him, which
is, that awaking in the night, for a good space he clearly saw the place
wherein he lay, and al things therein as well as if he had had a light. He was a
man of great strength, and had the use of both his hands alike; whereas
commonly every man uses the right hand with greater dexterity then the left,
and he had so great strength in his fingers, that with a fillip he would (as
often as he listed) break a pages or a young man's head, as SVETONIVS
reports. He was very learned both in Greek and Latin, delighted chiefly in
poesy, and made many verses in both tongues, which truly was ill employed in
him, seeing he so little profited Tiberius (...)learning.
thereby. When OCTAVIUS AUGUSTUS fell sick, TIBERIUS was gone toward the
province of Illyricum or Slauonia: and his mother LIVIA seeing that his sickness
increased, sent in great haste for him, and he happily arrived at the city of
Nola, CAESAR AUGUSTUS being even near his end, but yet in such case as he
could speak, and (as SVETONIVS reports) he conferred with him a great while
in secret: Although CORNELIUS TACITUS says, that it is not certainly known
whether he found him alive at his coming or no, for his mother the Emperesse
had set so many gards as the death of OCTAVIAN was not known, until that all
had consented that TIBERIUS should rule, and succeed him. At that time was
Posthumus AGRIPPA Nephew to OCTAVIAN, and son of his daughter IVLIA by
AGRIPPA her second husband, slain by the hand of a Tribune of soldiers who had
him in keeping (as it was thought) by the commandment of his father in law
TIBERIUS, and by the counsel of his mother LIVIA, to the end that he should
be assured of the succession.

But yet he gave it out that it was done by AUGUSTUS commandment, who (as he
said) had given charge to the Tribune or Centurion which had him in guard, to
make him away as soon as he should have notice of his death: but it is not
credible, that to assure the state to his wives son, he would seek the blood
of his own Nephew. The Centurion bringing word that he had fullfilled his
commandment, he answered presently that he had commanded him no such thing,
and that he should answer it before the Senate. CRISPVS SALVSTIVS who was
acquainted with Tiberius greatest secrets hearing hereof, having sent the
Centurion letters to proceed in the business, fearing his own danger advised
LIVIA not to diuulge the secrets of her house, the counsel of friends, nor the
services of soldiers; and that TIBERIUS should have a care not to weaken his
power of sovereignty, by referring all to the Senate, and so this business was
past over in silence.

In Rome liberty now was so forgotten, and the Monarchy so settled by thy
custom of many years continuance, under the reign of OCTAVIANVS, that
notwithstanding that there were Consuls, Pretors, Tribunes, and other names of
dignity and magistracy; yet there was in a manner no man in Rome that did
remember and understand the manner of the old government, which was before that
JULIUS CAESAR suppressed the Commonwealth; and the death of OCTAVIAN being
known, there was no man that durst name or speak of liberty, but when as
TIBERIUS came to Rome, they presently gave the government and administration of
the Commonwealth unto him. And he was the first Emperor that did quietly and
peaceably inherit the Empire, so as he was not forced to make a conquest
thereof, as JULIUS CAESAR and OCTAVIAN had done. And notwithstanding that
before he would accept thereof he caused himself to be much entreated, and
made great show to have no desire to the Empire, yet afterward it appeared
plainly that he did but counterfeit, to the end he might discover every man's
affection toward him: For to all those which yielded to accept of his excuses,
and did not importune him, he bare a perpetual hatred; for although that one
way he excused himself, yet in many other things he began to use the
authority of an Emperor, taking a guarde, and mustering the armies, as Emperor.

Having accepted the Empire, there were some accidents which put him in great
fear: the first was, that the armies in Pannonia or Hungary, mutined, and
revolted from JULIUS BLESVS their Commander, a captain called PERCENIVS being
principal of this mutiny, and they sent to require many excessive things:
against whom TIBERIUS sent his son DRVSVS, whom he had by AGRIPPINA, with whom
he was married before he espoused IVLIA. The which was pacified with much
danger and difficulty; PERCENIVS and VIBVLENVS, with some other ringleaders of
this mutiny being put to death.

It happened also that the legions which were by the river of Rhine, as the
custom was, did the like, through the absence of GERMANICVS their General
before named, adopted son and Nephew to TIBERIUS: And those of Pannonia were
not only discontented with the paies and exemptions which they required, but
they presumed to choose a new Emperor against TIBERIUS, nominating their
general GERMANICVS, who (as is before said) was TIBERIUS Nephew and adopted
son, and preferred before his natural son, by the commandment of
OCTAVIAN. But GERMANICVS was so loyal, that when these news were brought unto
him, he not only refused their offer, but with great danger and hazard of his
life, and with much trouble, pacified those alterations.

TIBERIUS was another way disquieted, being advertised that LUCIUS SCRIBONIVS
an eminent man, and one which bare great sway in the commonwealth, had some
secret practices against him: but he freed himself from all these troubles,
and they were pacified, though not without great difficulty. For his son
DRVSVS on the one side (after some treaties) reduced the legions of Pannonia to
his obedience, and did justice on PERCENIVS. And GERMANICVS (as I said) after
some great difficulties (which CORNELIUS TACITUS relates at large) made those
of Germany to obey: and not therewith content, he passed the river of Rhine
(which commonly was the bounds of the Roman Empire on that part) and made war
within the country of Germany, with good success. While these matters were
a-doing, and for some space after, TIBERIUS did cloak and conceal his wicked
inclination and vices; and What good Tiberius did in the beginning.
(as I said in the beginning) performed many parts of a good, discreet and mild
Prince, wherewith he deceived the people, especially those which did not
inwardly know him; whereof (although they be recited before their time) it
shall not be amiss to set down some, to the end that (as of a venomous Beast)
that which is profitable and medicinal, may be taken. First, many of the names
and titles of Honor which were offered him by the Senate, and other Honors and
Ceremonies, he refused, and would not consent that they should erect or build
any Temples unto him; and forbad them to set up his Statues and Images without
his express commandment: and if sometime he did permit it, it was upon
condition that they should not place them among the Images of the gods.

He seemed also to grieve to hear himself praised, crossing and interrupting
them in speeches which did it. One in a discourse called him Lord, whom he
commanded to use that word no more: but insolency and presumption since that
time has so increased, as that which in those days seemed pride in an
Emperor, there is not any now (be he never so base) but presumes he
deserves the same. The like discretion did TIBERIUS show in other words, which
were also proper to the gods, and the things to them appertaining. He fained
also patience and meekness; for although that in the Senate there passed some
matters contrary to his will and opinion, and that in other affairs they gain
said him, yet he seemed not any way to be displeased or offended therewith. And
understanding that some spoke ill of him, and murmuring, used reproachful
speeches against him, he showed no coffeehouse or alteration thereat: but
said, that in a free City men's tongues ought to be free, and men might
lawfully speak freely. And whereas the Senate would have exhibited an
information, and have proceeded against those which had written defamatorie
libells against him, he would not consent thereto; saying, that he had not so
little employment as to lose time about such matters: affirming that he would
do nothing against them which spoke ill of him, but trouble them with keeping
account of what he said and did; and if that were not sufficient, it should
satisfy him, to love them as little as they loved him.

At first, TIBERIUS showed great respect to the Senate, and gave them so great
authority in all things, as he did nothing without their counsel, willing that
all should be done by their advice and consent. In execution of justice and
government he made many good beginnings, taking care and order that there
should be no thieves nor robbers by the high ways side in all Italy, but that
men might travel in safety: and that justice should be executed in Towns
and Villages. The Ensigns, and pretorian Cohorts, which in Rome were the
Emperors guard (to The pretorian cohorts were the Emperors guard The fained
virtues of Tiberius.
ease the citizens of their guests and other troubles) he made to encampe and
lodge without the city in the fields, where they should continue and abide:
which although it then seemed profitable, yet afterward it bred great
inconvenience and prejudice. By these means he not only dissembled and
covered his cruelty, pride, and ambition; but he was so double and false
hearted, that even his avarice and covetousness (which of all other seems to
be the most apparent passion) and his incontinencie and looseness he could so
mask for a time, as he seemed to be no way touched with those vices. So as
when some governors of Provinces gave him notice of means how to increase his
rents and revenues; he answered, that a good shepherd The speeches of a good
pastor, and the mind of a Wolf.
ought to sheare his flock, but not flay them: and so he abated some tributes,
and showed favors to certain particular persons. His loose life he sought to
cover, by ordaining a public informer against dishonest and adulterous Matrons
of Rome, which he did (as it afterward appeared) to the end there should be no
other adulterer but himself. He did other things (which for brevitie I omit)
which seemed to spring from a good root and intent: but it failed in the end;
for he fauned, to bite; and drew back, to charge again with the greater
force: As we will hereafter declare in part, for the whole cannot be related
as it was, nor mentioned for the filthiness thereof, which is the occasion why
that order and style cannot be observed which is fitting; for certainly,
disordered and obscure lives cannot be clearly and orderly written. And
besides this, he used his wife IVLIA cruelly and disgracefully, forgetting that
by her as for her dowry, he enjoyed the Roman Empire: for he never lived nor
kept company with her after the death of OCTAVIAN.

One of the first signs he showed of an evil Prince and governor, was; that
notwithstanding there came great complaints against the Proconsuls, Pretors,
and Prefects, sent into Provinces; yet he would not remove them: which was
contrary to the order and custom of Rome, and his predecessor OCTAVIAN: which
some atrributed to his carelessness; others held it to proceed of malice and an
ill disposition, to the end that many men should not enjoy the honor and profit
which grew in such charges. After this he began to envy and malice GERMANICVS,
for that he was preferred before his son DRVSVS, and it grieved him to see
his good success in the wars of Germany. Wherefore to find occasion to
remoove him from that charge, he dissemblingly caused the Triumph to be
granted unto him, for the victories which he had obtained, and wrote to him
many times to come to triumph: but GERMANICVS understanding his evil intent,
deferred his coming. It happened within a while after, that the King of the
Parthians took arms and made war against the Roman Empire, breaking the
peace confirmed in the time of OCTAVIAN, entering into the Province of Armenia,
the King whereof was invested there by the Romans: wherewith TIBERIUS was
nothing displeased, supposing thereby to have the better occasion to draw
GERMANICVS from his charge and government of Germany, under color to send him
to the Parthian Wars, as he did: And so GERMANICVS being sent for, came for
this purpose, having few days before won a great Germanicus sent against the
Parthians.
battle, and slain ten thousand of his enemies, and so he entered into Rome
in a solemn triumph, and (as CORNELIUS TACITUS reports) he brought thither
with him the ensigns which QVINTILIVS VARRO had lost, and presently began to
prepare for the war against the Parthians.

A little before GERMANICVS his triumph, there arose a man in Italy, called
CLEMENS, a bondslaue to AGRIPPA, who named himself AGRIPPA, nephew to OCTAVIAN
(whom we have said to be slain by TIBERIUS his order) which action seemed of
some importance: for much loose and seditious people joined with him, which
caused a great tumult i^ Italy; this man pretending that he ought of right to
be Emperor, and not TIBERIUS: But as he had a weak foundation, so was he
soon overthrown, taken prisoner, brought to TIBERIUS, and finally executed
although secretly. And about the same time TIBERIUS committed a foul and
perfidious act of cruelty: for having with gracious and kind words allured
ARCHELAVS King of Cappadocia to come to Rome (who was a friend and vassal to
the Roman Empire) for fained and unjust causes he made him to be accused and
committed; where afterward this miserable King died in prison, and his
country was made a tributarie province. In the like manner he Cappadocia made
a province.
dealt with many Princes and great men of Spain, France, Gracia, and other
parts. The expedition which TIBERIUS had intended against the Parthians, was
much hastened by reason of the death of ANTIOCHVS King of Comagena, and of
PHILOPATER King of Cilicia in Asia, vassals to the Empire: by means of whose
deaths some alterations grew in those provinces; for some would have a King,
and others would be governed by the Empire.

GERMANICVS being prepared for his Eastern Journey (as he was commanded)
departed from Rome, carrying his wife AGRIPPINA and his children with him:
between whom and LIVIA the mother of TIBERIUS was great emulation. There was
also at this time great controversy and parts-taking, both in words and
affections in TIBERIUS his Court; some taking part with GERMANICVS, who (as we
have said) was his adopted son and nephew: others adhered to DRVSVS, his
son legitimate. TIBERIUS and his mother LIVIA ever sought to advance the
reputation of DRVSVS, and in secret to disgrace GERMANICVS: for which occasion
he gave the charge of all the legions of Illyricum to his son DRVSVS. And to
the end, that GERMANICVS should not be too powerful in the East whither he
went, he made GNEVS PISO captain of the province and legions of Syria (who was
an eminent man, greatly allied in Rome, and of a good house) for that he held
with DRVSVS; and dispossessed CRETI^VS SYLLANVS of that charge, being a friend to
GERMANICVS. This PISO was married to a Roman Matrone called PLANCINA, of the
same condition, but of an hautier spirit then her husband; to the which husband
and wife the Emperor TIBERIUS and his mother LIVIA gave in charge, to procure
hatred and dislike against GERMANICVS; yea and his death also: as it after
appeared. And with this resolution they departed from Rome toward the East:
where PISO presently, with gifts and flattery, began to draw to himself the
love and good Piso animated by Tyberius against Germanicus.
liking of the army against GERMANICVS, and to murmr and speak ill of him:
who, while as PISO practiced these things, took so good order in the war and
government, as he placed a King in the province of Armenia, who was a friend
and subject to the Romans; and the kingdoms of Comagena and Cilicia being
void by the death of their Kings, he reduced into provinces, and placed in
them Pretors and governors. In Comagena QVINCIVS SERVIVS, and in Cilicia
QVINTVS VERANIVS; moderating in them both the royal subsidies and tributes.
And after this he took so good order, as he compelled the King of Parthia to
sue for peace and friendship: which he granted and concluded, to the honor of
the Empire. Being thus busied about these things, PISO and his wife never left
to murmr against him, and to tax him openly: the which he dissembled,
knowing from whence it did proceed. And having made an end of the Parthian
war, he departed from thence to visit the province of Egypt: and in his
absence (although it were not long) his competitor PISO plotted such matters
against him, as when he understood of his return, he departed out of that
province. But as he had practiced his death, he went not far off, but remained
some days in an Island: during which time, GERMANICVS coming on his way, was
poisoned by the practice of PISO, but by the direction and counsel of TIBERIUS
(as it was thought) whereof he dyed suddenly, leaving behind Germanicus
poisoned by Piso.
him sons and daughters; among which was CAIUS CALIGVLA, who was afterward
Emperor. For which cause it has been very expedient to make such mention of
his father GERMANICVS, who if he had lived had been Emperor and successor to
TIBERIUS.

Before his death he complained much unto his friends of the lewd practices of
PISO and PLANCINA his wife, by whose fraud he was brought to an untimely death,
entreating them to prosecute revenge. And turning to his wife, he conjured her
by all the bonds of nuptial love, to submit her courage to the frowns of
fortune; least at her return to the City, by emulation of greatness she
should purchase to herself two powerful enemies.

The worthy and valiant Captain GERMANICVS being dead in this manner, as is
said, his wife AGRIPPINA came to Rome with her children, and brought with her
the ashes of her deceased husband. The Emperor TIBERIUS made show of great
sorrow (though counterfeit) for the death of GERMANICVS (the like did LIVIA and
her son DRVSVS, who then was come to Rome) but in truth was very glad thereof:
for by the death of GERMANICVS he did assuredly hope to succeed in the Empire.
But true and unfeigned was the sorrow which all the people of Rome conceived for
the death of GERMANICVS; and great were the favors and love which they showed
to AGRIPPINA and her children: and great was the hatred they bare against PISO,
whom they openly charged to have murdered him; who presuming on TIBERIUS his
favor (being altogether shameless) came to Rome: where, in the behalf of
AGRIPPINA and her friends, he was accused before the Senate for hatred to
GERMANICVS; that he had corrupted the common soldiers with licentiousnes and
done wrong to the Confederats; that he was called father of the Legions by the
leudest sort; that he had been cruel to all good men, and that he had
poisoned GERMANICVS, and borne arms against the State. To most he answered
weakly, only the poisoning could not be well verefied. Which, TIBERIUS
dissembling, (as one who was not to love him any better then the rest) he was
driven to such an extremity in the accusation, as before that the cause was
determined, he was found dead in his bed (as it was thought) by his own
hands; although (as CORNELIUS TACITUS says) it was never certainly known:
but there were many opinions concerning the same. Who also writes that a
powerful man named TACFARINAS rebelled in Africa in the province of Numidia;
and leuying great forces, overthrew certain Roman cohorts, thinking to have
been able to possess the country: against whom went the Proconsul LUCIUS
ASTRONICVS with an army: and coming to a battle he overcame him and put him
to flight, to his great loss. Which (as it seems) happened in the seventh
year of the reign of TIBERIUS; although afterward the same TACFARINAS was
again overthrown, by the Proconsul BLESVS, in a second rebellion.

The year following, the Emperor TIBERIUS made himself to be chosen Consul,
and his son DRVSVS his Companion, as at other times he had done: and faining
that it behooued him for his health, he went forth of Rome, to the end he
might settle and establish DRVSVS in the government of the Empire; for of his
brother CLAUDIUS until then he made small account: but God disposed of all in
another manner. In the same year many cities in France rebelled, being unable
to endure the intolerable tributes and exactions which TIBERIUS imposed upon
them. The captains and authors of this rebellion, were two hardy men, the one
called FLORVS, and the other SACROBIS, which did so much trouble the country,
as they put Rome it self in great fear, much more being there reported then
was true. But this did nothing trouble TIBERIUS; so much had he forgotten all
virtue and goodness, giving himself wholly over to vice and sensuality in his
old age. But CAIUS SILIVS, who was Captain of those parts, did soon suppress
the troubles of France, who with his legions came against those which rebelled,
put them to flight in a battle, and slew a great number of them: and so he
pacified that country, and his son DRVSVS did principally employ himself in
the government. TIBERIUS passing the most part of the time in Campania,
between whom and his mother LIVIA began some secret (which grew to public)
quarrels and dislikes, he being very vnreuerent and undutiful; and she much
discontented with his manner of government, and chiefly for the private
familiarity between him and ELIVS SEIANVS, whom he favored so much as he
made him captain of the Pretorian cohorts, and gave him many other dignities:
and finally made him so great, as he presumed to contend with his son DRVSVS:
and his presumption was such, as by wicked practices and devices, he allured to
his dishonest lust the wife of the said DRVSVS, daughter in law to TIBERIUS,
whose name was LIVIA, the daughter of GERMANICVS. Committing this adultery
(with a conceit to succeed in the place of DRVSVS) he practiced his The
Insolences of Seianus
death, and found means by an Eunuch his servant, to poison him: which took
effect, and DRVSVS died thereof, and left one son named TIBEIVS, as his
grandfather; but it was not then known who was the cause of his death. Whereof
arose great murmuring in Rome, although The death of Drusus, Tiberius son.
it little grieved the greatest part: for they deemed that GERMANICVS his three
sons should have succeeded in his place, whom they much respected for their
fathers sake: whose names were CLAUDIUS NERO, CAIUS CALIGVLA, and DRVSVS. This
happened in the ninth year of the reign of TIBERIUS, which was a beginning of
his misfortunes: we may say the like of the Commonwealth; for from that time
forwards, all his actions and resolutions had ill success, his detestable
vices discovered themselves, and the subjects endured infinite cruelties,
robberies, outrages and oppressions: as also in this same year, TACFARINAS
rebelled again in Africa, who in his last rebellion escaped by flight: and
having levied much people, in the end was the third time overthrown in
battle, and wholly defeated by PVBLIVS DOLABELLA the Proconsul.

In Rome the wicked SEIANVS (TIBERIUS favorite) although that in the beginning
he made show publicly to favor GERMANICVS sons, which (as has been said,
and it was thought) should have been TIBERIUS successors: yet afterward all
his study and practice was to disgrace and ruin them, and to that end,
procured false accusations to be made against all such as took their, or
AGRIPPINA their mothers part. And to bring this and other his wicked devices to
effect, he procured TIBERIUS to depart from Rome whither he was come: who
following the others counsel, as well for this, as the more freely to give
himself to his detestable vices, went into the I Will of Capra, which lies upon
the coast of Naples, where he remained for a time; and being returned into
Italy, making his progress into diverse places, never came any more to Rome:
neither in the rest of his life is there any more to be spoken, but of his
vices and cruelties, whereof in sum we will make a brief relation. Before
which it is requisite that all men understand, that during this peregrination of
the Emperor TIBERIUS in the eighteenth year of his reign, our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ true God and man suffered The passion of Christ our
redeemer. Josephus in his antiquities n^ his 15. 16. 17. and 18. booker, and in
his first and second of the wars of the Jews Saint Ierom upon the second
chapter of S. Matthew. The Herodes how many they were. Herodes Ascalonita.
Saint Matthew the second chapter, I.
his death and passion, PONTIVS PILATE being president or governor of Jerusalem
in the province of Iudaea. And to the end that it may be the better known and
understood how PILATE came to concur with one of the HERODES, and how many
there were of the HERODEs, of whom mention is made in the holy Scriptures,
(which is a matter whereof some have made a doubt) in few words I will here set
down: which was in this manner, as the Evangelist testifies, and as out of
Saint IERO^ and JOSEPHUS it is gathred. HEROD the great, son of ANTIPATER,
who was called HEROD ASCALONITA, was placed there by the Romans: and having
reigned many years, was the same to whom the three Kings came from the East
guided by a Star, and he who murdered so many innocent children, and some of
his own children also, when Christ was borne; who within short space after
died, and by his death, his son, whose name was ARCHELAVS, had the kingdoms
of Iudaea, and Idumea; and to his other two sons (for the other three died
before their father) were given certain Tetrarchies, whereof to this HEROD
ANTIPAS (which was one of them) was allotted the Tetrarchie of Galile, and by
this means he is called Tetrarch* and this was he which put Saint JOHN BAPTIST
to death, and he, to whom PILATE sent Christ, who disdained him. And to PHILIP
his other son was given the Tetrarchie of Thrach^nitis: and the other
brother, who (as I said) had the title of a King, was accused to OCTAVIAN, and
by him deprived and banished into France, to the city of Vienna, by means
whereof PILATE was sent to govern that province; and by this means it
happened that Christ died in the time of PILATE and of HEROD ANTIPAS the
Tetrarch, from whom the Tetrarchie afterward was taken by CAIUS CALIGVLA, and
he died banished in Lions in France, and his Nephew the Herodes Antipas. Saint
Luke chapter 2. Herodes Agrippa.
son of his brother ARISTOBVLVS, who was one of the three which their father
slew in his life time. HEROD AGRIPPA was he, to whom CAIUS CALIGVLA, restored
the kingdom of Judea. And afterward the Emperor CLAUDIUS gave the Tetrarchie
of Galile to his Uncle: and this was he, who put Saint JAMES to death, who
beginnning to persecute the Apostles, died stricken by an Angel, as Saint LVKE
bears record.

Christ being put to death by the sentence of PILATE, and he knowing afterward
that The acts of the Apostles chap. 12.
Christ was risen again, by the report of those which he himself had set to
watch his body, being also informed of the many miracles which he did in his
life time (notwithstanding that he was an idolater and a wicked judge, and had
adjudged him to die) yet TERTVLLIAN and EVSEBIVS in his ecclesiastical
history, and PAVLVS OROSIVS in his seventh book, Pilate made relation of the
miracles which Christ wrought to the Emperor Tiberius.
most ancient and true authors, do record, that by his letters, he advertised
the Emperor TIBERIUS thereof, to the end that he should advise and determine,
whether Christ should be held for a God or no; and TIBERIUS sent to the Senate
to consult thereof, he giving his opinion that he ought to be so: but the
Senators, as the devils scholars, counseled TIBERIUS that he should not do
it. Which (as these authors affirm) was for that he had not first made the
Senate acquainted therewith, which pretended by an ancient law which they had,
to have the superintendence in all matters of religion: yet TIBERIUS
notwithstanding that the Senate consented not to his opinion, commanded that
the christians should be free from persecution; but he neither embraced the
faith of Christ as he ought, neither left his sin and vices.

First he gave himself to his old vice of excessive gluttony and drunkenness,
for which cause from his youth (in steed of TIBERIUS NERO) they called him
BIBERIVS MERO, which signifies a drinker of the best: and even in this his old
age, he has been often known to sit a whole night, and part of the day, at a
ba^ket, giving gifts and rewards to such as drank most, and in favor thereof
he instituted a new office and magistracy; as, master of delights and sports.
After this, his chiefest time was spent in abominable luxury and incontinencie,
which was such and so abominable as christian ears can hardly endure the
hearing thereof, nor a christian hand write the same, wherefore I will pass
most of the^ over in silence. Let this suffice, that it was horrible and
detestable: and not contented to commit it himself, he induced and drew others
thereto, and gave jewels and rewards to those which invented and committed most
filthiness.

For during his private abode in Caprea, (as SVETONIVS writes) he devised a
room with seats in it of purpose for his secret wanton lusts. For the
furnishing whereof he drew from all parts a number of young strumpets, and
stale Catamites or baudes, and such also as invented monstrous kinds of
libidinous filthiness, whom he termed Spintrie, who being in three ranks
linked together, should pollute one another body before his face, that by the
sight there of he might stir up his own cold courage and fainting lust,
with many other such shameful devices, as are not to be mentioned, for the
which men did usually term him CAPRINEVS after the name of the Island.

This wicked old Emperor, perseuering in his libidinous sin, forgot not his
cruelty and covetousness, whereto he was no less addicted: for he increased
his subsidies and tributes in such manner, that the provinces became ruinate
and desolate; and committed many other extortions of the like quality.

As for his cruelty, all the examples cannot be repeated, they did so exceed:
for he condemned the principal and best men in Rome to death, and confiscated
their goods, for very light causes, and most of them forged. One he put justly
to death, and with great reason caused him to be slain, which was his great
favorite SEIANVS, for many sins which he had learned of him (as DION COCEIVS
records:) but for the rest, it is a matter ridiculous, and otherwise
lamentable, for what causes they were accused and condemned. One he caused to
be slain, because that commending BRUTUS and CASSIVS, he said, they were the
last Romans: another he caused to be flaine, because that in a tragedy which
he had compiled, he spoke ill of AGAMEMNON: another Roman Knight he commanded
to be slain, because that in a garden he had taken up a Capon: and for other
such like matters as these, he put to death sixteen, of twenty ancient noble
me^; whom he had chosen for his counselors. And he forbear not to execute
these cruelties upon his allies and kinsfolks: for besides that which is
already related, he commanded his Nephew GERMANICVS to be slain, and
afterward the three sons which he left, seeing them to grow in estimation;
the two elder of them he caused to be accused by false witnesses, and he
himself wrote such things to Rome against them, that in the end they were
condemned to death: the one of them desperately killed himself, and he caused
the other to pine to death with hunger, as SVETONIVS reports. It was a
marvel that he had not done the like by the third, whose name was CAIVA
CALIGVLA, and by their Uncle CLAUDIUS: but it is likely he would have done it,
if he had lived a while longer. These executions he thus commanded to be
done, to the end that his cruelty might attain to the highest degree, which
were not ordinary: for before their death, they suffered hunger, torments, and
disgraces, to qualify them. Finally, to conclude, they were so many and so
fearful, that many which were condemned, slew themselves, some with poison,
and some with the sword, for fear; for TIBERIUS did execute his fury with
such cruelty, as he accounted it a deed of charity, to put them to an
ordinary kind of death: so as, for that one had killed himself before that
he could execute his rage upon him, he cried out; Oh how has CORNELIUS escaped
me? for so was that man's name: and to another, which entreated him that he
would not defer his death; TIBERIUS answered, I am not so much thy friend, as
to hasten it. And employing himself in these dinelish exercises, wherein he
continued until his death; ARTABANVS King of Parthia, breaking the peace and
league which he had contracted with GERMANICVS, presumed to enter into Armenia,
and the limits of the Empire, and also the Sarmates invaded the provinces; for
which TIBERIUS took no care, neither levied any new army; but they defended
themselves with their ordinary legions and armies the best they could.

Now, forasmuch as in many places of this history, mention is made of legions
and armies, which the Romans ordinarily entertained in their provinces, in
time of peace and war, I hold it fit to declare what they were, for the
better understanding of what is already, and shall be said hereafter. Which is
a great argument, to prove how great the wealth and power of the Romans was:
and although that some Authors do treat thereof, I will only set down what
CORNELIUS TACITUS writer^ in the fourth book of his histories, an
historiographer of great authority. He first says, that in the two seas, of
the one and other side of Italy, to wit, in the Adriatike sea, now the gulf of
Venice, and in the Sicilian sea called Mediterranean, they maintained Na^ies
and fleets maintained by the Romans in sundry places and provinces.
two great nauies of galleys and ships for their guard and security, and for
the safe passage of Merchants, and such other necessary occasions. Another
great navy they maintained upon the coast of France, between Spain and
Italy; besides those which they had in a readiness and caused to be built when
any occasion of war was offered. Their armies by land were divided in manner
following: upon the Rhines side on the frontiers of France, they maintained
eight legions, to keep those countries which they possessed in Germany, and
to resist the Germans and other northerly nations, and these ordinarily were
the most experienced and best soldiers. And although that the number of a
legion did increase and diminish upon diverse occasions, yet the ordinary in
the time of the Emperors was (after VEGECIVS and MODESTVS) that every legion
should contain six thousand and one hundred footmen, and seven A legion, of
how many foot and horse it consisted.
hundred twenty and six horsemen. Of these they held, in Spain, three
ordinary legions; and in Africa, in the province of Carthage, two; and in
Mauritania one; and two for the guarde of the kingdom of Egypt; and in the
provinces of Mesopotamia and Syria (to wit) in the countries contained between
the Syrian sea, the furthest end of the Leuant sea, and the river Euphrates,
which were (for a long time) the bounds of the Roman Empire, they held four
legions. And here in Europe (besides those which I have already mentioned)
they had other six legions, in this manner: in Austria and Hungary they had
two; in Seruia and Bulgaria, as many; and other two in Slauonia; and near unto
the city of Rome, were always lodged twelve Cohorts, nine of which were
called Pretorian, and the other three Vrbane, which by turn did guarde the
Emperors palace. Of all these Cohorts (according to the same authors) the first
and chief Pretorian and Urban Cohorts.
of them contained one thousand, one hundred and five footmen, and one hundred
thirty two horse; and the others equally each of them five hundred and fifty
footmen, and threescore and six horse. Besides all which, they had in diverse
cities and provinces, companies of horsemen, which were friends and subjects to
the Empire; and also other companies of footmen, which werere called
Auxiliaries, which were not trained after the Roman order and discipline: so
as they continually entertained and paid five and twenty legions, besides
those which Auxiliarie forces.
were paid by their friends. And this was in time of peace, for the authority
and guarde of the Empire; for when there happened any wars (according as
need required) they reinforced their armies, and increased the number of their
legious.

With the force of these great garrisons the Roman Empire maintained and
defended it self, notwithstanding the want of care and diligence in some
Emperors, as in TIBERIUS, of whom we now discourse; who (as is said) spent the
rest of his life until his death, in wicked practices: which being much wished
for by all the world, ouertooke him in a house of pleasure near to Naples,
having reigned twenty and three yeeares Emperor, in the seventy and eight
year of his age, and thirty, and nine years after the birth of Christ. In
what manner he died, authors agree not, for some say that he was poisoned, by
his Nephew and successor CAIUS CALIGVLA: others write that being sick (as it
was thought) mortally, and seeing that he made some show of recovery; for
fear that he should mend, CALIGVLA smothered him with a pillow, or with the
covering of the bed, he having ordained him for his successor; Notwithstanding
that by reason of a certain prophecy which he held, he had resolved to make
his Nephew TIBERIUS the son of DRVSVS his heir, whom DION COCCEIVS in his
histories says, he would not name, because he was not assured that he was his
sons son, for the suspicion which he held of his mother; and also because
that the Mathematicians and Astrologians, to whom he was much affected and gave
credit, had told him, that he should live but a little while, and that CALIGVLA
should kill him: and so upon a time being very much offended, he said to
CALIGVLA, thou will kill me, and another shall kill thee. It is also imagined,
that TIBERIUS chose CALIGVLA for his successor, for that ke knew his evil and
wicked inclination, hoping that with his vices, he would deface and blot his
wickedness out of remembrance; and also for that he believed, that he would
extinguish the Roman nobility; for he was so wicked and cruel as he desired
that all the world might end with his life, and so hewas sometimes wont to say,
that he wished, that when he should die, then the heaven and earth might be
dissolved: but he deserved not to see the heavens; and all the earth rejoiced
and was glad when he died; as all Authors write: and this was the end of
TIBERIUS. SVETONIVS writes, that the people rejoiced much at his death: and
some running up and down, at the news thereof cried out Fling TIBERIUS into
Tiber. Others besought the mother Earth, and the infernal gods to vouchsafe him
no place but among impious wretches. And some threatened to drag his livelesse
carcass into the Gemoniae.

THE LIFE OF CAIUS CALIGVLA, ONLY OF THAT NAME, AND FOVRTH ROMAN EMPEROVR.
THE ARGUMENT.
CAligula, before he was made Emperor, was so pleasing, and in such grace with
the people and Senate of Rome, as when he was advanced, it is unknown whether
was the greater, the sorrow which was in Rome for the death of Octavian, or the
joy which it conceived for the succession of Caligula. But being made Emperor,
as if with his dignity he had changed his natural inclination, he became so
wicked and infamous, as I cannot set down his vicious life without offending
the chaste ears of him that shall read the same; nor without a burden to his
modesty that shall write it. He made the Bridge at Baias, a work of no less
folly then great expense. He deflowred three of his own sisters; and of his
Palace (with reverence be it spoken) he made a brothel of Roman Matrous. He
was so covetous, as he raised a tax upon the Whores, and had a share of their
gettings. He used to walk up and down upon Crowns; and was so prodigal,
that sometimes he caused most precious jewels to be dissolved with vinegar
and put into his meat: he was finally in all his actions so contrary to
himself, that no man knew how to behave himself toward him. He would be
called and reputed for a God, which name he stained with such abominable
cruelty, that he was worse then the devil: he shed so much blood, and made
the wild beasts which he kept, to devour men, and to drink their blood; so
as those which were condemned to be slain by them, rather chose to kill
themselves, then to endure the torments which he devised in his cruel
disposition. He died of thirty wounds given him by certain which co^spired
against him, having reigned almost four years: whose death was so acceptable
to the people: as it is hard to say whether was the greater joy, that which was
conceived when he was made Emperor, or that when he left the Empire, together
with his most shameless life.

CALIGVLA the son of GERMANICVS succeeded TIBERIUS in the Empire, who during
the time of his reign, was in the highest degree of all kind of wickedness
most abominable: Caligula in the highest degree abominable.
and his words and deeds were so odious and detestable, as in truth it is a
shameful and unworthy thing, having written the lives of so worthy men, as
were JULIUS, and OCTAVIANVS CAESAR'S, and their heroical acts; now to descend
to the sink of the villainy, cruelty, and ribauldrie of CALIGVLA. For
although there wanted not in TIBERIUS cause to be abhorred and blamed, yet some
part of his reign was good, and he in former times had been an excellent
Captain, and had enlarged the dominions of the Empire, for which cause his
evil conditions might be somewhat the better tolerated: but this wanting in
CAIUS CALIGVLA, who was a man of no such valor (although in the beginning he
deceived the world with an appearance of some good deeds) yet it makes the
remembrance of him the more detestable, and his hand that shall write the same,
the more heavy. But because I am not to make choice of Emperors, In Caligula
wa^ nothing that was g^od.
of whom I am to treat at my pleasure, but to continue the course of my
history, wherein my chief foundation is, to observe the truth, and cleaving
thereto, to continue my troublesome journey; Let him which shall read it
consider how detestable and odious his actions were, and how small time his
Empire endured (which attained not to four years complete) and the end which
he made; to the end that he may fly and abhor them, and may do the like by
some others which followed, like to him, or worse.

After the death of TIBERIUS CAESAR (as I said) the joy which the Senate and
people of Rome conceived was incredible, and therewith they accepted and
approved the Empire of CAIUS CALIGVLA (whom before his death TIBERIUS had
adopted and nominated for his successor) for the love and goodwill which they
bare to his father GERMANICVS, and for the pity and commiseration which they
conceived for his death, and the afliction and wrong done to his house. For
these causes was he accepted by all the Provinces, and provincial armies: for
his father being General in Germany, and in the East, he was bred up among
them, and this name of CALIGVLA was given him for a certain kind of hose,
called Caliga, used Wherefore he was called Caligula.
among men of war, which he did use to wear. Coming from the place where
TIBERIUS died, to Rome, a great number of the principal men of all estates
went forth to entertain him upon the way, with exceeding joy, notwithstanding
that he came mourning with the dead body of TIBERIUS, which the soldiers
brought to be burnt at Rome, according to the manner of that time. And coming
with great solemnity to Rome, he was obeyed with unspeakable gladness and joy,
they giving him new names and Epithetes, showing great reverence and love.

CALIGVLA was a man tall of stature, great boned and corpulent; but his neck
and legs Caligula his gesture and disposition of body,
were very small and slender, deformed and unsuitable to the rest of his body;
his countenance was horrible and ugly: being Emperor, he took pleasure to
terrify people with his looks; and to this effect it is written, that
beholding himself in a glass, he would study what countenance to set, to
seem more fierce and terrible. His eyes were very hollow, his forehead broad,
his complexion yellow, his head very bald, and in those parts of his head where
he had any hair, it was very thin, all the rest of his body being
marueilously hairy. He was very unsound and unhealthy, and in his youth was
troubled with falling sickness and other diseases, and afterward (as we will
presently show) he was ill disposed both in body and mind, changing his
conditions with the Empire: for before that time, he was ever held for good.
Wherefore it is said of him, that he had been the best servant, and was the
worst and most wicked Lord in the world. The first thing he did after he came
to be Prince, was to disannull and make void the testament of TIBERIUS, which
he had made two years before, wherein he made him and his nephew TIBERIUS his
coheirs: whereto the Senate did willingly agree, and every man devised and
plotted how to gratify him and do him service, with such love as within few
days after he was confirmed in the Empire. Going forth of Rome to recreate
himself upon the Sea at the I Will of Caprea; and in other Islands upon that
coast, they made vows and sacrifices for his health and return: and writers
affirm, that there were slain 170000. beasts, according to the rites and
ceremonies then used: And then making show of a man, and not of a beast (as his
deeds did afterward make manifest) he presently commanded the ashes of his
mother and brethren to be brought to Rome, and there to be sumptuously buried.
He then took for his companion in the Consulship, which he would execute, his
uncle CLAUDIUS, brother to GERMANICVS, who in the time of TIBERIUS lived
private and in disgrace; and young TIBERIUS, (which was nephew to TIBERIUS the
Emperor) faining to love, and affect him: to do him honor, he made him
captain and prince of all the Roman youth. Seeking by counterfeit goodness and
bounty, to draw to himself the goodwill of the people; he did twice give unto
every body (excepting none) a certain donatiue of money, which they called
Congiarius; and to all the Senate, and to all those of the order of Knighthood
(which was a degree between the communaltie and the Nobility) he made a most
solemn banquet. And faining also that he meant to govern with justice, he
commanded OCTAVIANVS CAESAR his Institutions to be sought out, which TIBERIUS
interrupted and brought out of use. He commanded also great plays and feasts
to be made in Rome of Sword-plaiers, who were men which to show pleasure to the
beholders, fought and killed one another; and certain men on horseback which
they called Trojans. He also appointed certain huntings, wherein were slain a
great number of Lions, Panthers, Boares, Bears, and other wild beasts; and
besides this, Comedies and other shows which were made in the Theater, and
other kinds of sports and pleasures to delight the people, whose love and grace
he then affected. And besides that which is already said (as SVETONIVS
recites) principally in the beginning of his Empire, ARTABANVS King of
Parthia, who rebelled and was an enemy, came to a conference with the General
of the Romans which commanded the legions in Syria, and fearing the new
Emperor whom he yet knew not, made a peace with him; and passing the river
Euphrates, which was the bound of Peace with the king of Parthia.
the Roman Empire, came in person to adore and to do reverence to the
Emperors statue, and to the Imperial standard and Eagle: so as the little,
until this time, may be reported of CALIGVLA, as of a wise and discreet
prince; and the remainder seems to be of a senseless man and a brute and
savage beast. The beginning whereof was one of the greatest fooleries or
vanities that ever was seen, which was to make such a feast as was never heard
of, to show his greatness and vanity, and to be able to walk and tread on the
Sea as well as upon the land* Or (as others say) because he would imitate King
XERXES, who passed his army aut of Asia into Europe over the straight of
Hellespont upon a wooden bridge, he commanded to be brought together, and to
be new built all the ships he could get, which were infinite; and in a bay or a
creek A wonderful bridge made by Caligula.
which the Sea makes near to the haven of Baias in Campania, from one point
of the land to the other side of the Bay, which is about three miles distant,
he commanded a bridge to be made upon the said ships, set in two ranks,
fastened and moared together with anchors, chains and cables, which made them
to stand fix and firm: he commanded this bridge to be made of boords, so
strong and eeuen, and to lay so much earth upon the same, as it seemed to be
firm ground, and one of the streets of Rome. And bringing for this work a
great number of Artificers and laborers, with an infinite charge; he also
caused houses and lodgings to be built upon the bridge, as writes DION, who
relates this work more at large then all the rest.

This being finished, and he with all the Court going thither, with an
infinite number of people which from all parts came to see this work; he
proudly attired in robes of gold and pearl, with a crown of Oaken boughs
upon his head (which was called Ciuica) on horseback, accompanied with men of
war, and all the Nobles and gentlemen of Rome, entered at the one end of the
bridge and road to the other; and lying one night upon it, the next day he
returned, riding in a Chairot drawn by most excellent fair horses, in manner
of a triumph. DION writes, that the night when he lay upon the bridge, he
caused such an infinite number of Torches, Lant-hornes, and other lights to be
lighted and set up, as the cleerenes thereof did exceed the darkness of the
night, of all that side of the mountains near adjoining; CALIGVLA bosting
that he had made of the night, day; and of the Sea, land. And spending herein
two whole days (in all which time the Sea happened to be still and calm) he
said; that Neptune (whom they held for the god of the Seas) did it for fear,
and to do him reverence. The fruit which ensued of this strange folly, was
great famine and scarcity of corn, and other necessaries, for that the ships
were stayed about this bridge, to make the which there were employed an
incredible number. Such like benefits as this, did ever follow the actions of
CALIGVLA. Wherefore before I speak of the rest, to say the truth, it is to be
understood, that many were of opinion, that to this man was given a certain
drink by his wife, whose name was CESONIA, wherewith she made him mad and
distract of his wits; she giving it him, to the end he should love her: for
having been at other times married he had put away his wives; so as his
cruelty and riots were by some attributed to his foolishnes and want of wit. Of
this opinion is JOSEPHUS in the 18. book of his Antiquities, and the Poet
IVVENAL with SVETONIVS: and they say that after he had taken this drink,
CALIOVLA slept not by day nor night above three hours; and rising sometimes
affrighted, it seemed to him that he saw apparitions and visions: adding this
to his perverse condition and nature, he suffered himself to be led by her,
and committed outrages without number or measure, which I know not how to set
down in any order: among which he showed himself so haughty and
vainglorious, as he despised all men.

In the end (besides that he was the first of the Emperors which caused
himself to be called Lord) he purposed to be honored as a God, or to say
better, a Devil; and made himself to be adored, taking first upon him names
never thought nor heard of, calling himself father of Armies, Devilish pride.
Optimus and maximus, with other epithetes, which they gave to their god
IVPITER only. And certain Kings in his presence which came to visit him, and
to do him honor, being at contention among themselves about the antiquity
and nobility of their houses and linages, he interrupted, repeating a verse
out of HOMER in the person of ULYSSES, which says, That there neither is, nor
ought to be, but one King and Lord; and had then taken a Crown and Diadem of
a King, but that he was given to understand, that his own was a more high
estate and dignity. Nevertheless, he determined with his pride and elation to
usurp the dignity which he held for divine, and caused to be carried before
him the statue of IVPITER, and some The images of the gods, with heads to be
taken off and on.
others, which (as PLINY recounteth) the Romans used to have with heads to be
taken off and on, to the end they might serve for diverse gods; and taking away
those heads which they had, he caused other heads to be set on, to his own
likeness: but in my opinion it had been better they had cut off his head and
set it thereon. Besides this, he caused a temple to be built, and tobe
dedicated to his name and honor, and made his statue at Life to be set up
therein, which they called Iconium; and he instituted Priests to serve him: and
this his image to be every day clothed in such attire, as himself did wear.
Also he caused Peacocks, Feasants, and an infinite number of other princely
birds to be sacrificed in this Temple, as in other Temples of the gods of the
Gentiles was used; with whom he sought to make himself equal: which truly was
no great matter: for they all were devils, Impostures and deceits.

But considering the opinion and conceit which they then held, it was a
presumption never heard nor thought of, which came to be accounted a
ridiculous foolishness: for presuming much upon his deity, he came forth
one night by Moonelight (she being then at the full) and wooed and made love
to her, as if she had been a fair Lady. Sometimes A ridiculous folly such
as the like was never heard of.
he would also go to the Temple of IVPITER; and joining himself close to the
Image, he made show as though he had spoken in his care: and sometimes he
laid his care to the Image, as though it should speak to him: and sometimes
he made as though he were very angry, chiding, and threatening to send it
into Gracia: and afterward he would feign himself to be pacified, and that
he was contented that they two should dwell together: and in this manner he
proceeded to a thousand idle fooleries, although they were devilish. And on
the other side, this man which presumed to displace the gods and to make
himself one of them, showed his envy to men; grieuing to see their statues
and memories honored, commanding many of them to be overthrown, and defaced.
He practiced and was desirous to disgrace the poems of HOMER and of VIRGIL, and
in like manner the histories of the excellent historiographer TITUS LIVIVS, and
commanded his image to be taken out of the Libraries in Rome, where they used
to keep the Images and pictures of great and excellent learned men. Of VIRGIL
he said, that he was a man without any wit, and less learning; and TITUS
LIVIVS he reproved for a man of many words, and negligent; of SENECA (who in
that time was much esteemed, and with great reason) he said that he was sand
without lime, and a work made without mixture: and so did he tax the most
sublime and excellent wits. Besides which, he took from many Patricij and
Noblemen of Rome the Arms and Ornaments which they bare of their Linages and
Families: and his envy yet descended to lighter and meaner matters then these;
so as there was no man (were he never so base) whom he envied not for any
prosperity or good success that might happen unto him; as to make men to be
shaven, if he saw they had yellow or fair colored hair.

Now for matters of lasciviousness and dishonestie, truly there is so much to
be said, as a man may not, neither ought to make the whole relation thereof; to
the end that his filthiness do not soil and corrupt our History: for it is
certain that he was as filthy and abominable, as his predecessor TIBERIUS, if
not more. He was so shameless in his incontinencie and lust, as he respected
neither persons nor place. He abused all his Sisters: of which (it is thought)
he deslowred DRVSILLA being a Virgin, himself but a very boy. She being
afterward married to LUCIUS CASSIVS LONGINVS, a man of Confular degree, he
took her from him and kept her openly, as if she had been his lawful wife,
and being sick he made her heir of all his goods, and his successor in the
Empire: but she dying he sorrowed with impatiencie. His other Sisters LIVIA and
AGRIPPINA, he neither loved nor respected, but would often prostitute them to
his own stale Catamits. And in the end he condemned them to exile with
AEMILIVS LEPIDVS, as Adultresses and privy to treasons against, his person.
Neither was any Roman Matron (how honorable or virtuous soever) free from his
pollution. He would usually inuit them with their husbands to supper: and if
any one liked him, he would rise from the table, and call her to him into an
other room, and there abuse her, and then presently return again and brag
of his foul fact.

In other vices he was beyond all measure passionate, being extreme in
extremities, the one The abominable vices of Caligula.
against the other: for he was greedy and covetous in extreme manner; and of
the other side, prodigal and a spender above all measure. To glut his greedy
covetousness he invented means to gather wealth, and to rob the land and the
people: so as there was no kind of tribute or imposition to be devised which
he put not in practice; even amongst common and dishonest women; His extreme
avarice.
and of all suites in law, he had the fortith part of any sum that was
recovered; and if the parties agreed before sentence given, he had a certain
portion: and so in all matters wherein any thing was to be gotten, he took a
share, even of those which were porters and got money by carrying of burdens
upon their shoulders. And having amassed together an infinite sum, by direct
and indirect means; he would lie down and tumble upon it, recrea^ing himself
in his covetousness: wherein he showed great simplicity, seeing how little he
did otherways esteem it, and his lavish expenses, as the most prodigal man
that ever was, which a man may easily judge by these few examples following.
Into the bathes wherein they did use to to bathe, he caused most precious and
sweet smelling ointments to be cast which were of exceeding great price, that
they might bathe in them, hot and cold, as in other water. In the feasts and
bankets which he made, Caligula his prodigal^ies.
he commanded most precious pearls and jewels to be dissolved in most strong
vinegar, and to be put into their meat, because the cost should be
inestimable: and he commanded that all the services in steed of meat, bread,
flesh, fish, and fruits, should be of fine gold for his guests. Besides this,
he sometimes cast among the people great sums of money: whereby it seems
they had reason, which attribute the doings of this man to foolishnes, as well
as to his ill disposition. The inconstan^t and variety (...)h^ doings and
behauior.
There was so great variety in his actions, affections and desires, as may be
gathred by that which is already said, and the rest which we will declare; as
on the one side he contemned the gods, and presumed himself to be one of them,
and yet he was so afeard of a thunder clap that he ran and hid himself under
a bed. Sometimes he was very familiar, and called men to converse with him,
seeming to be much delighted with their company and conversation: at other
times he shunned them, and retired himself to his works. He sometimes
dispatched matters with such expedition and diligence, as he seemed to be the
most quick and active man in the world, and at other times, with such slacknes
and leisure, as he seemed not to be the man which he was before. Many which
committed heinous crimes, he punished not: and others he commanded to be
slain, which had done no offense. He would this day praise one thing: and the
next day, he would peradventure cause him to be slain which spoke well
thereof. Finally, he was so variable that (as DION reports) men knew not what
to do, nor say, his conditions were so doubtful. The like he did in his
apparel, in his exercises, and in all his other actions: for procuring one
thing, he would do clean contrary; as we said in robbing and heaping
treasure together, he would spend so prodigally that those treasures should not
suffice for his expenses. Besides what is already said, authors affirm that he
commanded certain ships to be built, which were the greatest and most costly
that ever were seen, of which all the timber was of Cedar, and Ships of
incredible cost a^ greatness.
the poupes and sternes of Iuorie set with gold and precious stones, and all
the sails and tackling were of silk of diverse colors: they were so great, as
they had in them halles and gardens, wherein were many trees and flowers: in
one of these ships, he sailed along the coast of Naples one whole day, to
disport himself. He also began certain buildings and works against all
reason and humane discretion, and such as seemed impossible. For in the sea he
commanded Proud buildings.
huge pillars and towers to be built, and by land he raised certain valleys,
and made them equal with the mountains, heaping up rocks and earth in them,
until they were even therewith. And in other places, he began to dig down
mountains to make them level with the meadows, presuming to correct the
works of nature.

As CAIUS CALIGVLA was so variable and inconstant, as we have said; so in
cruelty only he was constant, using it indifferently to all without respect
of parentage or friendship: in the like manner he used his grandmother ANTONIA
daughter to GERMANICVS, so as she being in despair, took poison whereof she
died. And the young TIBERIUS Nephew to the Emperor TIBERIUS, and son to DRVSVS
(as I have said) he making show to love him, living secure and without fear,
he sent to kill him by the hands of a Tribune, for no other cause, The
cruelties of Caligula.
but for that he used a certain kind of confection of sweet savors for his
delight: CALIGVLA saying, that he did it, for fear to be poisoned. And
SILLANVS, (who had been his father in law,) he forced to kill himself, only
for that he went not one day to sea, with him. Which SILANVS did forbear,
because the sea made him sick. And PTOLOMIE the son of IVBA King of
Mauritania, to whom he was near allied, and MARCO which had helped him to get
the Empire, and others with whom he was in great league and friendship, in
requital of their deserts he caused them to be cruelly put to death. To all
men generally, both in word and deed he used such cruelty, as it would seem
incredible, had not so many and such authors written the same: for he
commanded wild beasts which he kept for feasts and triumphs, to be fatted
with the bodies of living men, condemned to death. And sometimes causing some
to be executed, he commanded their parents and kindred to be present at their
execution, and then invited them to eat with him, and compelled them to
discourse of pleasant matters. He also qualified his cruelties, with sundry
kinds of deaths which he inflicted; prolonging it, to the end that the torment
should be the greater: So as they stood in so great fear of this man, that
many (if they had opportunity) slew themselves rather then they would stay for
his sentence: among which the accursed PONTIVS PILATE, who condemned to death
the giver of life JESUS CHRIST our Redeemer, was one; who being accused and
banished, slew himself with his own hands.

This wretched CALIGVLA was so nusled in blood, as he much desired and wished
that all the Roman people had had but one head, to the end that he might cut
off that head at one blow. He also held the time of his reign unfortunate,
and complained of the infelicitie thereof, for that in his days there was no
pestilence, famine, earthquakes, deluges, spoils by fire or other misfortunes.

There came by chance one day into his presence, a man who had been banished by
the Emperor TIBERIUS, of whom he asked what life he led in his exile? the
other to flatter him, answered, that he spent his time in praying for the death
of TIBERIUS, to the end he should be Emperor: which when CALIGVLA heard (as he
had banished a great number of men) he believed that they all made the like
prayer for him, and therefore commanded so many of them as could be found, to
be sought out and slain. Using these cruelties and such like, or greater, he
made himself within few days so hateful, as his death was generally desired,
and practiced by some: but the conspiracies against him being discovered, it
deferred his death, although but for a small time, which was as he deserved, as
we will presently declare. But first we will speak of the wars and conquests
which he made, wherein he showed no less vanity then in all the rest. For upon
a sudden at the end of the third year of his reign, he caused a great number
of men of war to be levied, wherewith he departed from Rome, giving it out
that he went to make war in Germany whither he took his journey: whereto he
added the ordinary legions, which were in those parts, and with a show and
appearance to do some great exploite with his army, he passed the river of
Rhine: and he began to make war at such time as it seemed to all men
(considering The conquests and vain war of Caligula,
his great number of men, and the resolution wherewith he came) that he would
have ouerrunne the world, and have made some great conquest; but he contented
himself with this, that the Kings son of Batauia (which is now called Holland)
being in disgrace with his father, came Batauia, Holland.
to his service, and herewith having done some small harm in that country, he
returned, and passed the river: And after he had given some alarmes, he took
his way with his army toward the sea; and in memory of his victory, he
there commanded a tower to be built, and all his soldiers to gather abundance
of cockle shelles, as the spoils of his enemies: and then calling his army
together, in such manner as captains use to do after some notable victory,
he made a long oration unto them, and commended them all; and afterward he
commanded a great some of money to be distributed amongst them, over and above
their pay.

Returning to Rome, he sent before, to command that there should be prepared a
most solemn triumph; carrying with him to that effect, certain Barbarians his
enemies, such as he could get: but afterward he altered his determination,
deferring the triumph until another time, and entered into Rome in ouacian
triumph, and there began again to execute some of his accustomed cruelties,
purposing to have done greater. Which the world being unable to endure, many
conspired against him: he which did most therein, and the first that began to
practice, was a Tribune of the Pretorian Cohorts, whose name was CHEREA: he
died of thirty wounds Caligula murdered, and in what manner.
which they gave him, in a vault or secret gallerie, wherein he used to pass
unseen, from his palace to certain bathes, having most unworthily reigned
three years and ten months, in the nine and twentieth year of his age.

The manner of his death, besides SVETONIVS, DION and others, is written by the
true Historiographer JOSEPHUS: to whom I refer the curious reader to make an
end of so brutish a monster, as was CAIUS CALIGVLA.

This happened in the three and fortith year of CHRIST our Lord. After that he
was dead, there died the same day CESONIA his wife, and one only daughter which
he had: and notwithstanding that the Almaines which were of his guarde fell to
arms, and would have slain the conspirators, and did kill some of them, yet
in the end all was pacified, and his death was generally approved, as of a
Tyrant and most cruel Prince; in like manner as the death of such Kings and
Princes is usually approved and pleasing, whose lives have been detestable and
odious. It is certainly known, that when CALIGVLA was slain, he had purposed
to have put many to death: for in his closet or privy chamber, were found two
books; whereof the one was called the poiniard, and the other the sword,
wherein were written the names of a great number of Senators and Knights of
Rome: whom he had condemned to death.

There was also found a chest full of diverse kinds of poisons, such were the
relickes and jewels of this wicked man. In this short time wherein CAIUS
CALIGVLA reigned, the name and faith of CHRIST was published and preached in a
great part of the world, the holy Apostles Saint PETER and Saint PAVL preaching
the same; and particularly in Judea Saint MATTHEW, who first of all wrote the
Gospel.

THE LIFE OF CLAUDIUS, THE FIRST OF THAT NAME, AND FIFTH ROMAN EMPEROVR.
THE ARGUMENT.
Claudius the son of Drusus, and Uncle to Caligula, obtained the Empire more
through the temeritie of the soldiers, then for any worthy acts done for his
country: for Caligula being dead the Senate resolved to extirpate the race of
the Caesar's, and to restore Rome to her ancient liberty, and with many armed
men had seized upon the Capitol. Whereupon he standing in great fear, seeing
so great a tumult (as commonly it happens upon innovation in States) and
being by nature fearful, and a coward, he hid himself in a secret place of
the palace, where being found by a soldier which by chance came to seek for
pillage, he was by him reverenced, and hailed Emperor. This soldier being
seconded by others who together with the people desird a prince, in the end
maugre the Senate they made him Emperor; in which dignity he carried himself
in the beginning with such modesty and humanity, as all men began to assure
themselves of an excellent government: but he continued not long in that good
disposition: for through his little care, the natural vices of his mind
increasing, he desrauded the world of the hope conceived of him, and in short
space became both luxurious, cruel, a drunkeard, and a glutton. He had many
wives, but above all the rest Messalina was so incontinent and so infamous, as
her filthiness cannot be written without indecent and immodest words. This
Emperor was so forgetful, as he remembered not in the evening what he had done
in the morning; by reason whereof, he did oftentimes cause those to be called
to eat, or play with him, whom he had commanded to be slain; and amongst
others, he asked wherefore his wife Messalina came not to dinner having but a
little before caused her to be put to death. He caused with excessive charge
the lake Fucinus to be dried up, wherein before that it was dreined, he made an
infinite number of men (condemned to die) to fight a nauale battle. He
subdued Mauritania which rebelled against him: and in his old age took to wife
Agrippina the mother of Nero: who perceiving that he was not greatly affected
to her son, as a woman desirous to make him to succeed in the Empire,
poisoned him in certain Mushrumps which be loved to eat, alleging that they
were meat for the gods, for that they grew of their own accord, whose death
was concealed by Agrippina, until she had confirmed her son for his
successor in the Empire. He lived sixty and four years, and reigned
fourteen; his death was not greatly lamented, for that his life was not much
beloved.

BY the death of CAIUS CALIGVLA, his Uncle CLAUDIUS, and brother to his father
the good GERMANICVS son of DRVSVS and son in law to OCTAVIANVS, had the
Empire. But the manner how he attained thereto was very strange, and therefore
worthy to be related. The sudden death of CALIGVLA caused great alteration
and confusion in the city of Rome, as soon as it was published. Some would
not believe it, seeing it was done in a secret place, imagining that it was a
matter fained by him, thereby to discover every man's affection toward him. The
conspirators, as they did not practice his death to the end that any of them
should aspire to the Empire, neither for any other man, but only to free the
commonwealth from so cruel a Tyrant, had more care for their own safeties
then to make choice of a new Emperor. The Consuls as soon as they were
certified of his death, assembled the Senate; and being terrified with the
miseries past, resolved to reduce the city of Rome to her ancient liberty,
and to extinguish the name of CAESAR'S and the Monarchy; and perseuering in
this determination, The Senate sought to reduce the city to her ancient
liberty.
they seized on the Capitol, with some of the Cohorts of the city, which had
the guarde of the palace, who were also of their opinion. But herein were
diverse opinions in the city: for the common people would have a head and an
Emperor, for the hatred which they ever bare to the Senate, and for that the
least part of the evils and cruelties committed by the Emperors, fell upon
them; and also for that they enjoyed and tasted of the feasts and largess which
the Emperors The common people and men of war would have an Emperor.
used to make. The men of war of the pretorian Cohorts which were lodged hard
by Rome, desired there should be an Emperor; because they were in hope to make
choice of him at their pleasure; and in regard of the rewards and privileges
which they inioyed from the Emperors. But the matter remaining in this
co^fusio^, neither the one nor the other knew who^ to nominate.

It happened that CALIGVLA being dead, CLAUDIUS was in so great fear of his
life, as he dared not go forth of the Imperial palace, neither openly to
show himself. But being amazed and in this fear, he went to hide himself in
the most secret place he could find; but certain soldiers running up and
down to take what they could find, it chanced that one of them found him,
seeing his feet: who to the end he might know who he was, uncovered him, and
knew him. And CLAUDIUS imagining himself to be sought for to be slain, cast
himself at the soldiers feet, desiring him to save his life: whereof the
soldier assured him, and presently resolved to name him Emperor: who gathring
together those which came with him, they all did the like: and taking him upon
their shoulders, they carried him in a litter to their Camp; where (trembling
in great fear) he knew not to what issue this would come. But he was well
entreated in the Camp, and the soldiers agreed to make him Emperor. The
Co^suls and Senate hearing he was carried to the Camp, in such manner as
aforesaid, sent to him requiring him by a tribune of the people, to come to the
Senate, and there to treat of such matters as should be for the common good.
Whereto he answered, that he was there detained by force and could not come.
It chanced that at this time, HEROD AGRIPPA King of Judea, was in Rome: whom
(as is above said) CAIUS CALIGVLA had restored to the Kingdom, which in right
had belonged to his uncle ARCHELAVS, and to his grandfather HEROD, which slew
the Innocents.

This HEROD showing himself a newter, began to mediate an agreement between
CLAUDIUS and the Senate; although that secretly he favored CLAUDIUS,
counselling Claudius assistest by Herod Agrippa.
him to be resolute, and not to submit himself to the Senate. One whole day
and a night was spent without any resolution, during which time CLAUDIUS
wauered between hope and fear: the next day the people began openly to
demand an Emperor, and many abandoned the Senate and Consuls; so as there
followed much trouble (which JOSEPHUS notes.) But at Lib. 19. c. 30.
length, seeing that the succession in the Empire more rightly appertained to
CLAUDIUS, then to any other, they all agreed to make him Emperor: and the
Senate went unto him, and the Cohorts took the oath, and did their accustomed
homage, he making many large promises; and so the Senate accepted and
confirmed him. And thus he obtained the Empire of the world, who but a day
before knew not where to find a place to hide himself, for the safety of his
life.

When CLAUDIUS attained to the Empire, he was fifty years old, having ever
lived poorly and little esteemed, notwithstanding that he was near of kin
to the Emperors, and had passed great dangers and perils, without any office
or dignity; saving some few months the Consulship, wherein by CAIUS CALIGVLA
he was admitted for his companion. He was a man of a tall stature, neither fat
nor lean, of a fair and pleasing countenance; and whether he sat or stood,
he ever showed a greatness, representing majesty: whereto his fair gray
Claudius his gesture and bodily disposition.
hairs were a great ornament. He had so little strength in his knees as he
went weakly, and as though he were careless. And when he was angry, he was so
much altered therewith, as the tears would fall from his eyes, and he stammered
in his speech; besides all which, his head did ever shake. He was a sickly man:
but being once Emperor, he was cured of his infirmities, except the pain of
the stomach, which sometimes troubled him very much. He was learned both in
Claudius was learned in the Greek and Latin tongues.
the Greek and Latin tongues, and wrote books and histories. He also took
upon him to add three letters to the Latin Alpabet: but as a matter
superfluous they continued not.

CLAUDIUS is numbered among the bad Emperors, for his vices and the great
cruelties which he committed, suffering himself to be governed by certain
enfranchised men which were his favorites: yet he did many things befitting a
worthy Prince, which were profitable, so as PAVLVS OROSIVS in some sort
seems to defend his actions.

Beginning to take the government upon him, notwithstanding that there were
diverse opinions, and many both attempted and spoke much against him; The first
thing he did, was to give a general pardon, and to command all things past to
be buried in perpetual silence and oblivion: yet for example, and to fear
others to attempt the like, he commanded justice to be done on CHEREA the
captain of the co^spirators and upon some of the rest; who suffered death with
Cherea died courageously.
great courage, and resolution, making mention of BRUTUS and CASSIVS, who slew
JULIUS CAESAR; CHEREA desiring that he might be slain with the same sword
wherewith he had slain CALIGVLA. CLAUDIUS showed himself merciful to all
which had offended him, and were opposites in his election: and disannulled all
the cruel edicts made by CALIGVLA. He also commanded to be delivered out of
prison, and to be released from banishment, all those which unjustly, or for
small causes did endure the same: among which he released from banishment
CALIGVLA'S sisters and neeces. And to HEROD AGRIPPA King of Judea (in
requital of them eanes he used to advance him to the Empire) he gave the
Tetrarchie of Galile, which CAIUS CALIGVLA had taken from his uncle HEROD
ANTIPAS, Herod Antipas which put S. John Baptist to death, died miserably in
exile at Lions in France. Herod Agrippa a great persecutor of the Gospel, was
stricken by the Angel of God. Chap. 1^. Three Herodes. Herod Ascalonita was he
which murdered the Innocents, died of death natural.
who had put S. JOHN BAPTIST to death, and was an actor in the death of our
Savior. This HEROD AGRIPPA was of great state, and honored in Jerusalem:
where putting S. JAMES to death, and persecuting the Apostles and Primitive
Church, he was stricken by the Angel of God, and died as S. LVKE recites in
the Acts of the Apostles. And so these three HEROD'S died an evil death. Of
this AGRIPPA, and his uncle HEROD Tetrarcha, called ANTIPAS (who put Saint
JOHN to death, and in whose time our Savior died; and the other HEROD the
great, who slew the Innocents, in whose time CHRIST was borne) I have twice
made mention, because these HERODES commonly breed a confusion in reading of
the Scriptures, not distinguishing the one from the other.

Returning to the Emperor CLAUDIUS (I say) that touching the ceremonies, names
and titles, which for honor the Romans were wont to give to their Emperors,
he showed himself very discreet and temperate, and would not accept of many of
them: and forbad upon great penalties, that none should do sacrifice to him, as
they had done to CAIUS CALIGVLA: and so in the beginning of his Empire, he did
these and such like as a good Prince. Among which, one was, that he had an
especial care that Rome should be continually well provided of wheat and
grain, warranting the Merchants against all dangers and pirates by Sea: and
herein (although afterward he committed many errors) he was ever diligent and
careful during his life. CLAUDIUS was also a great lover of sumptuous
buildings: among which there were The wonderful buildings of Claudius.
three so proud and stately, that it seems they excelled the most of all that
ever were in the world; and for such, PLINY, SVETONIVS, and most authors do
account them. The one was a marvelous Conduit or Aqueduct of water, which
after his name was called Claudia, Plin. lib. 36. cap. 15.
with which none of the Conduits in Rome could compare, either for abundance of
water, or for cost and excellency of the workmanship: for it was brought
forty miles from Rome, by mines and passages thorough mountains; and in low
valleys, by erecting most high Arches of a wonderful charge; and so was it
carried and mounted to the top of the highest hills in Rome. The other work was
a Haven of the Sea made by hand, in the city of Ostia, the which was capable
of a great number of ships, made in the firm land; and afterward he let the
Sea into it (as DION reports) having first fortified and made firm the
bottom thereof: in truth a marvelous work, and such as his posterity and
those which succeeded him were not able to maintain. His third work (although
less profitable, yet most costly of all the rest;) was to drein and lay dry
a great Lake called Fucinus, in the country of the Marsi, a people near to
Rome, which was the greatest Lake in all Italy: the which he did (as some say)
to bring that water into the River of Tiber, to make it greater with the
current thereof, and to dry up and lay open the fields, which that water
covered, to the end they might be tilled. Which to effect, among other
difficulties and infinite toil, he mined through a very high mountain of
flint, three miles in length; a work which seemed impossible, being (as I
said) a mine thorough a rock. Finally; how great and admirable this work was,
may appear by the time which it continued, and the laborers which wrought
therein, which (as some authors affirm) were 30000. men, which labored eleven
years without ceasing; a matter which seems incredible: so as besides the
rest, A wonderful work.
if EVSEBIVS (a most Christian and true author) had not written it, I durst not
report nor believe it. What end this work and labor had, shall be related in
his place: for (as I said) although it began in the beginning of his reign, it
was ended eleven years after. I also forbear to speak of other his
buildings, which although they were excellent, yet not comparable to the above
named.

Having begun and continued these works, he was not careless for the
reformation of evil customs and abuses within Rome, and abroad, and in some
other matters: wherein if he had perseuered, he had bin worthily held for an
excellent Prince. But afterward by reason of his great liberty, and wickedness
of his favorites and such as were inward with him, (by whom he was much
ouerruled) he became so dissolute, that it defaced and stained all his former
actions, as hereafter shall be declared. Besides that which is already spoken,
this made the beginning of his reign the more famous, that in the first,
second or third years thereof (as EVSEBIVS, PAVLVS OROSIVS, BEDA, and S.
ISIDORE report) S. PETER the Apostle came to Rome, and there seated himself,
after he had preached in diverse parts, but principally had remained in Antioch
eleven years: and being come thither, remained there twenty five years,
until the end of the Emperor Nero, as shall be specified: they also affirm,
that with S. PETER came the Evangelist S. MARK, and being by him informed, and
enspired with the holy Ghost, he wrote the Gospel, by whose direction he
returned to preach CHRIST in Alexandria; of whom, and of the other holy
Apostles and Disciples of CHRIST, of their miracles, martyrdomes, and what
success they had, I make little mention, because (as I have said) in a
profane history, as this is, I hold it not fit to insert divine and holy
matters, although that in brief there shall be mention made of that which
shall be most convenient for the light of this history and the general good.

To return to our discourse of CLAUDIUS, it passed in this manner, that in the
fourth year of his reign, notwithstanding that the Emperors power was then so
great and so much redoubted, as no Nation of the world durst bear arms
against him: yet the inhabitants of the Island of Britain, which JULIUS CAESAR
had subdued, did boldly rise in arms, and deny their obedience and vassalage:
which the Emperor CLAUDIUS took so ill, as he resolved The Emperor Claudius
his coming into England.
in person to undertake the enterprise to subdue and pacify them. For which
action (besides the ordinary legions) he assembled a great Navy by Sea, and a
great army by land; and purposing to go by Sea, he embarked the same in the
Port of Ostia, notwithstanding that the passage was far about: but in the
beginning of his voyage he was so overtaken with a tempest, as he was in
danger to have been cast away. Wherefore he disembarked his forces in the
city of Marselles in France; and altering his determination, crossed through
France, and shipping himself again right over against England, he passed into
the Island with so great a power, that he easily pacified all: The Britains
rebelled against Claudius.
yet (as DION testifies) he came to a battle with the Britains, wherein he
overcame them. But the common opinion is as I say, and so does GILDAS, an
ancient true English Historiographer of 960. years continuance, record. The
journey into Britannie being ended to his content, he sent his Navy into the
Islands called Orcades, which lie to the North of Scotland, and are now subject
to the King of great Britanny, which within few days he subdued and made
subject to the Empire: which until that time were unknown to the Romans, as
EVSEBIVS and OROSIVS record. Having performed all these things in the space of
six months, he returned toward Rome, where he entered triumphing with the
greatest solemnity that could be, and to him was given the name of
BRITANNICVS, for subduing the I Will of Britanny. To the solemnity of this
triu^ph, SVETONIVS TRANQVILLVS reports, that he not only suffered the
Governors and Prefects of provinces to come to Rome, but also he releast many
others who lived in exile, from their banishment.

For this victory, he caused a crownenauall to be made, which was used to be
given for victories by sea, which crown was of gold wrought with the prowes of
galleys and ships, and placed A Crow^ nauall.
over the gate of the imperial palace, hard by that which ordinarily did stand
there made of oken boughs, called Ciuica; and for the same reason he commanded
that a son of his, which he had by his wife MESSALINA, whose name was
GERMANICVS, should be called BRITANNICVS: And in this triumph he began to honor
with arms and other favors some of his libertines, which had been slaves and
were enfranchised and set at liberty, and did them so great honor, as men
began to murmr against him, and thereby he made himself ill beloved. For
they committed many insolences and wrongs, by means of their great riches and
authority: of which the chiefest and most spoken of, were six or seven, one
named DIODONES, to whom he gave for his arms, the triumph aforesaid: another,
whose name was FELIX, he made governor and prefect of Judea, Samaria, and
Galile, by means of the death of HEROD AGRIPPA, before which FELIX we read
in the acts of the Apostles that Saint PAVL was brought prisoner. Another
called CALIXTVS, of whom PLINY, SENBCA, and CONELIVS TACITUS make mention.
Another was POLYBIVS, who was a learned man, whom CLAUDIUS himself held for
his companion, and as it were master of his studies, to whom SENECA wrote a
consolatorie epistle for the death of his brother. Another named NARCISSUS,
whom he made his Secretary, whom SVETONIVS prefers before all the rest.
Another was PALANTE, a man also very famous: to all which he did such favors
and gave so excessive gifts, as they attained to such riches, that CLAUDIUS
upon a time complaining that his treasury and exchequer was poor, he was
answered, That it would be rich enough, if his freed men NARCISSUS and PALANTE
would accompany him, and share with him in their trade and stock. Within short
space he made himself so subject, and was so much ouerruled by these
Libertines, and his adulterous and dishonest wife MESSALINA, to whom he was now
married (after other wives which he had had) that by their directions and
counsels he committed many disorders, follies and wrongs, more like their slave
and subject, then their Prince and Sovereign, and suffered others to commit
the like; pardoning such grievous offenses and committing such cruelties, as it
would be long and displeasing to right them all. But by that which he committed
against his own blood, which I will declare, the rest may be coniectured which
I pass in silence. One of the first and most notable, was the death of APPIVS
SILANVS a worthy noble Roman, who sometimes had been governor of Spain, and
married with his own mother in law, whose death was plotted by his wife
MESSALINA, and his enfranchised NARCISSUS. DION writes, that having no cause
whereof to accufe him, it sufficed to command him to be slain, for that
NARCISSUS in a morning came into CLAUDIUS chamber before he was up, faining
great haste and fear, persuading him to stand upon his guard, and to take heed
of APPIVS SILANVS: for he dreamt that night he was slain, and that SILANVS
only had killed him. The Emperor well pleased with the matter, went to the
Senate, acquainting the Senators therewith; much commending and extolling the
loyalty The strange cruelty of Claudius.
of NARCISSUS, that he even sleeping had care of his life and health. After
SILANVS, he also put to death his two sons in law, LUCIUS SILANVS and POMPEY,
and two of his own neeces called LIVIAE, one of which was the daughter of
DRVSVS, and the other of GERMANICVS; no man knowing any cause wherefore he did
it, nor admitting their defense. And so were a great number of others put to
death, all by the counsel and practice of MESSALINA and his freed men, who
bare such sway in the government and counsel of estate, as they sold offices,
Captainships and dignities; and that which was worse, took money for
absolutions, penalties, punishments and banishments: finally, all was to be
sold for money. And the most part hereof was put in practice (as some authors
affirm) without the priuitie of CLAUDIUS, or being acquainted therewith: so
great was their power and authority. And in the like manner did he put some
to death, being abused, to please and content these his favorites; so subject
was he to be governed by them.

By means of the great disorders, murders, and grievances, which CLAUDIUS by
the counsel and practice of his libertines and his wife MESSLINA committed, he
made himself to be hated of many, and principally of the better sort; so as
some practiced his death, and conspired against him: although that for his
other good deeds, before repeated, he was beloved and much esteemed of others.
But as those which hated him were more, and boulder in courage: so they feared
not to practice his death which they wished him; chiefly two Roman Knights
resolved to kill him, and STACIVS CORVINVS and GALLVS ASINIVS, two principal
Romans conspired against him. But the one and the other being discovered, it
was brought to light, and he prevented the danger by executing new cruelties
upon the said parties, and upon such as had consented and participated with
them: and seeing himself freed from this danger, he continued in his evil
purposes and cruel courses. In like manner the hatred increasing against him,
it happened that FVRIVS CAMILLVS SCRIBONIANVS, who was Lieutenant, and Governor
of Dalmatia (incited by many principal men of Rome) openly rebelled against
him: and the legious of that Province consenting with him, he called himself
Emperor. This put CLAUDIUS into such a fear and amazement, as he was much
dejected and base minded: and as sin and an evil conscience is one of the
chiefest causes that makes men cowardly and fearful, he was so daunted,
that CAMILLVS (who rebelled) writing unto him, and persuading him to leave the
Empire and to live private, he remained doubtful what to Furius Camillus
rebelled against Claudius.
do; and caused certain principal men to consult thereof: So as if the matter
had gone forwards, it seems that he would have had small courage to have
defended the Empire. But as CAMILLVS had no more right thereto then he, and as
his purpose was not to redress the Empire and reform the evils committed by
CLAUDIUS, but to make himself lord and tyrant, and peradventure do as ill or
worse, God would not suffer it to take effect according to his desire: for it
happened that the same legions which had raised and chosen him, repenting of
what they had done, the fifth day after slew him. Some Authors (among which are
SVETONIVS, and PAVLVS OROSIVS) Furius Camilus sla^e by the Legions.
report, that herein happened a strange accident: for the Ensigne-bearers coming
to give their oath and obedience to the new Emperor by his commandment, were
not able to remove the Ensigns with the Eagles from the place where they were
set; so as moved by this prodigious spectacle, they all concluded to submit
themselves to CLAUDIUS devotion, and to slay CAMILLVS. And so was CLAUDIUS
delivered from this danger, but not from fear and jealousy, but lived ever
after in continual disquiet and fear; insomuch as being one day in the temple
offering his sacrifices (as then was the custom) and by chance finding a
sword, which some man peradventure without any ill intent had brought thither,
and there forgotten it, he as a man which knew that he had deserved death,
fearing all men, thinking that it was brought thither to effect some treason
against him, was in such a perplexity and fear, as presently in great haste
he commanded the Senate to be assembled; and with tears in his eyes, he
complained unto them, publishing himself to be a man of most miserable
condition and unhappy, and that he was at no time nor in any place assured,
but in danger; and so held himself many days retired, and came not abroad.

By means of these things which were attempted against CLAUDIUS, MESSALINA his
wife and her favorites and confederates, took occasion to put many men to
death, and The wickedness of Messalina.
to confiscate their goods, using other cruelties to all manner of people,
alleging that they were guilty of the conspiracies aforesaid, or of some of
them; and this in a most wicked manner: for many upon suspicion without any
trial or proof, were condemned and put to death; and to the contrary, others
which were guilty, by bribes and gifts were freed: wherein although that for
the most part CLAUDIUS was abused by those he most trusted, yet the blame was
laid upon him, and the world hated him for it. For besides the remiss
forgetfulness which he had of all things, and the trust which he reposed in such
wicked people, he showed himself cruel and bloody; for oftentimes he would
be present when torments were inflicted, and at the execution of these
cruelties: a thing unworthy of the state and dignity which he held. He would
sometimes also suddenly be in such a rage, as he seemed to be out of his
wits: and so SVETONIVS accounts his fury for folly and madness;
notwithstanding that CORNELIUS TACITUS writes of him, that he was naturally
inclined to pity and clemency: so as in truth it is a strange thing to
consider of the contrariety of this man's mind. After all this (as JOSEPHUS,
EVSEBIVS, and SVETONIVS affirm) in the ninth year of his reign, he
commanded all the Jews to be cast out of Rome, whereof Saint Luke makes
mention in the Acts of the Apostles: and PAVLVS OROSIVS writing the same,
makes a doubt whether they were cast out for their discord with the
Christians, or whether the Christians were expelled in the like manner: for
SVETONIVS says, that they were cast out for that there was some tumult about
the Christian religion. The next year following there was a most grievous
famine in Rome, and A general famine.
almost generally in all the world; whereof besides other Authors, Saint Luke
makes mention in the Acts of the Apostles.

CLAUDIUS having now reigned nine or ten years, and matters passing there in
such manner, as I have said; yet the state and greatness of the Roman Empire
was not empaired in his days (for hereof it seems both he and those which
governed were careful) but it defended, and in part enlarged itself: For
besides the pacifying of the I Will of Brittanny, Mauritania also in The two
Mauritanies made tributarie Provinces.
his time rebelling (which is a Province in Africa, where there reigned Kings,
friends and confederates with the people of Rome,) he made wars there by his
Captains SVETONIVS PAVLINVS, and GNEVS SIDIVS GETA, as DION witnesses. Those
countries were subdued and divided into two tributarie Provinces: the one was
called Mauritania Caesariensis, Mauritania Casariensis, the kingdom of Fez.
Mauritania Tingitana, the kingdom of Marocco.
which for the most part is this day the kingdom of Fez, but it extended it
self so far as Argiers, Tunes, and Oran; and the other Mauritania Tingitana,
which is much of that which we call Marocco, and Barbaria, and the coast of
Zale and A^amor, even unto Arzil and Tanzar. At that time the Province of
Numidia was infested by certain barbarous Africans, which were overcome by the
ordinary legions. In like manner the Imperial authority was vpheld in the
Provinces of the East, CLAUDIUS placing therein Kings and Tetrarches at his
pleasure, as DION records. But besides all this, in all parts (as well as in
Rome) they endured great vexations and oppressions, and the disorders which his
favorites and libertines committed, and commanded to be committed were very
great: of the greatest part whereof his wife was the chief instrument, who was
so incontinent and dishonest, as she was not only a common adultresse, but she
also procured and brought many others to be so: and she her self would pray,
and even enforce men, and was of such credit with her husband the Emperor, and
had such power over him, as no man durst make it known, or give him
intelligence thereof.

The dishonestie of this woman mounted to so high a pitch, that judging (as it
seemed) open Messalina marries with Caius Silius during the life of Claudius.
adultery to be but a light sin, she devised a wickedness never heard nor
thought of before in such manner as she did it, which was to be married with
another, even as she was to the Emperor; and putting it in effect, CLAUDIUS
being gone forth of Rome to Ostia to do certain sacrifices, she married in
form and with the solemnities accustomed, with a Roman, whose name was CAIUS
SILIVS, whom they affirm to have been the fairest and properest young man of
his time.

The love which CLAUDIUS bare to MESSALINA was so great, and the power she had
over him such, as she thought that this might also pass in silence, or that he
should dissemble it as he had done many other great abuses. But it now pleased
God that she should receive punishment for all her misdeedes; as he oftentimes
permits wicked men after some great sins, to commit other greater, to the
end at once to be punished for all. And it was so, that his great friend and
favorite NARCISSUS, a libertine before named, discovered this infamous act to
CLAUDIUS, with a multitude of other villainies committed by her: who awaking in
some sort out of his drousie slumber and forgetfulness, notwithstanding that
this action had put him in great fear; yet after that he was well informed of
the truth, he came to Rome, sending first before him LUCIUS GETA, who was
captain of the pretorian Cohorts, to confirm them in his service; and being
arrived, he caused his wife MESSALINA to be apprehended, and many others which
were guilty of this action: and by the diligent industry of NARCISSUS justice
was done both upon her and them. And so they were put to death by his direction
before The death of Messalina.
that CLAUDIUS commanded the same, notwithstanding that he had so resolved; He
fearing that she with her counterfeit flatterings would so mollify the heart
of CLAUDIUS, as she might obtain pardon, or that of himself he would alter
his resolution, whereof he made some show, as CORNELIUS TACITUS reports. It
is a marvelous thing to think of the neglect and forgetfulness of this
CLAUDIUS: for although they came and told him that MESSALINA was dead, he never
spoke word, neither asked by whom, nor how she died; neither then nor after
that time seemed he to rejoice or to be sorrowful for it; neither spoke word
good nor Claudius his monstrous forgetfulness.
bad. SVETONIVS TRANQVILLVS adds another thing to this forgetfulness, which
seems incredible (but he and others of great authoritiy affirm the same)
which is, that the next day after that MESSALINA was put to death, sitting
down at the table to eat, he asked how it chanced that MESSALINA came not to
dinner? The like happened at other times concerning those which he had condemned
and commanded to be slain, that having put them to death one day, the next day
he was so forgetful, as he has sent for them and called them to his
counsel, and others to come to play with him, as they had used to do.

The Emperor CLAUDIUS remaining a widdower after the death of his wife
MESSALINA, by whom he had one son called first GERMANICVS, and afterward
BRITANNICVS, and one daughter whose name was OCTAVIA, he resolved and gave it
out that he would marry no more, for that he had been very unfortunate in his
wives: and therefore now in his old age he would not try any more hazards;
wherein he spoke the truth: for in his youth he had been twice married, first
with EMILIA LEPIDA, who was great grandchild to the Emperor OCTAVIANVS
AUGUSTUS; and the second time, with LIVIA MEDVLLINA CAMILLA, of the ancient
lineage of the CAMILLI: the first wife, before his marriage took effect, he
put away; and the second died of an infirmity the same day which was appointed
for their wedding: and afterward he married with PLAVTINA HERCVLANA; whom,
after that he had by her one son named DRVSVS (who died a child) he
forsook, as dishonest and an adultresse: and married the fourth time with ELIA
PETINA, of the family of the TVBERONES, from whom, for some causes and
discontents he was also divorced, notwithstanding that he had by her one
daughter called ANTONIA. All these marriages he had before he was Emperor;
and when he took upon him the Empire, he was married to MESSALINA, whose
death we now made an end to relate: and although (as I said) that he remained
a widdower, and had protested that he would marry no more, adding thereto that
if he did, he gave them leave to kill him: yet afterward forgetting himself
(as in former time, of other matters) by the counsel of his libertine and
favorite PALANTE, he lastly married with IVLIA AGRIPPINA, who was exceeding
beautiful, being his Niece, and daughter to his brother GERMANICVS, who was
the widow of DOMICIVS NERO ENOBARBVS, by whom she had a son named DOMICIVS
NERO, as his father. And for that the marriage with his Niece within this
degree of consanguinitie was prohibited and detestable among the Romans, he
procured that a law should be made whereby it should be lawful: and his new
wife took such order with her old husband and uncle, that within few days
after that she was married, she obtained of him that he should marry his
daughter OCTAVIA, with her son DOMICIVS NERO; and that he should adopt him
and make him his son, preferring him Claudius marries his daughter Octavia to
Domicius Nero his son in Law.
before his own son BRITANNICVS; and that in stead of DOMICIVS NERO he
should be called CLAUDIUS NERO, which was performed accordingly. And not
content herewith, she procured the death of certain Roman Ladies, which had
been her rivalls for her marriage with CLAUDIUS (notwithstanding that they
were favored by NARCISSUS and CALIXTVS, his freed men) the better to maintain
her greatness.

Having in this time finished that great work of undermining the mountains,
and making those great Caves and Mines to draw the water out of the lake
Fucinus, wherein (as I said) thirty thousand men had wrought eleven years;
the Emperor CLAUDIUS decreed, that in memory thereof, there should be in the
same Lake a Naval battle before that the water should be let out, which did
so much resemble a battle in earnest, as therein were 24 Galleys, which were
built there hard by for that purpose (DION writes there were fifty) which is
not very unlikely; considering, the number therein, which, as CORNELIUS TACITUS
reports, were 19000 men; many of which were slaves, or men condemned to death
or banishment; the Emperor promising those which should prevail and vanquish,
life and liberty, and so they were commanded to fight to the uttermost: and to
that purpose the Galleys and men were divided into equal battailions; and
their apparel, ensigns, banners, flagges and streamers were of diverse
colors: the one part of them were called Sicilians, and the other Rhodians, as
though the wars had been between Sicilia and Rhodes. To see this spectacle,
there came an infinite number of people from all parts of Italy, and from out
of Italy, which covered all the hills and mountains near to the said Lake, and
the banks thereof. CLAUDIUS with his wife AGRIPPINA, and NERO CLAUDIUS his
adopted son and Nephew were most richly attired in gold, stone and pearl:
and so the battle began, and was maintained between them most cruel and
bloody, the poor men endeavoring of either part to have the victory, thereby
to win life, liberty and honor: and so it was obstinately fought and
continued a great part of the day, the one killing and wounding the other; and
most miserably until at last the one part over came A wonderful pastime, but
cruel.
the other; and so was ended that most cruel and horrible sport. Which being
ended, presently the next day CLAUDIUS commanded the passage of the Lake to be
opened: and the water beginning to issue out, it brake forth with so great
force and vehemency, as it seemed that the earth would have sunk; and it was
so violent, as it did much harm in all the borders thereabout; and in like
manner great was the fear and amazement of CLAUDIUS and his wife AGRIPPINA,
who were there by, notwithstanding that they were upon sure ground and in
safety. This was the end of this costly vanity.

These things being past in such sort as we have written, AGRIPPINA seeing her
self much made of, and beloved by the Emperor CLAUDIUS, being grown proud of
the power and favor wherein she saw her self (which are two things which few
men can enjoy and use moderately) she became so proud, hauty and ambitious
(following the footsteps of MESSALINA) as she would command alone and bear
all the sway in every thing: whereupon she presently grew to be hated and
envied by some of CLAUDIUS his favorites, yea and by himself; so as he began
to be sorry that ever he married her, or that ever he adopted his son in law
NERO. Which AGRIPPINA soon discovered, as well for that he began to make much
of his young son BRITANNICVS, as for words which he spoke to the same effect:
for upon a day he said, That it was true he had ever been unfortunate in his
wives; but none of them had escaped unpunished: with other speeches to the same
effect. Whereat AGRIPPINA grew into such fear and suspicion, as to assure her
own life, and the succession to her son, she determined to procure her
husbands death by poison, and there wanted no ministers nor means to
accomplish the same. For although that Historiographers agree not herein, yet
they all concur that poison was given him, such as killed him: and the most
part write, that it was in a Mushrump, which was a meat he used to eat with
great appetite.

It was the just judgment of God that CLAUDIUS shoold die by eating: for he
was so gluttonous and insatiable in eating and drinking (among his other vices)
as he thought no time nor place sufficient thereto, and did ever eat so
immoderately, that most commonly surfeiting, he used vomits to discharge his
stomach, putting a feather into his throat, a remedy which some gluttonous
men do use, eating upon assurance thereof, and carrying themselves more
filthily, then if they fell sick. In which feather some authors affirm that
the poison was given The Emperor Claudius poisoned by his wife Agrippina.
him. He died in the sixth and fiftith year after the birth of CHRIST our
Savior, in the 14. year of his reign, and the 74. of his age, the 13. day of
October about the break of day, and his wife AGRIPPINA concealed his death the
most part of that day: and pretending that he mended, she caused certain vows
to be made for his health, until she had confirmed the Empire to her son
NERO, according to his adoption, which (seeing they then thought CLAUDIUS to be
living) was no hard matter to be effected.

In the time of this Emperor CLAUDIUS the Christian faith was preached, and
did much prevail in the world, the Apostle S. PETER then preaching in Rome
from the beginning of his reign, although with great contradiction and
difficulty. There happened also in his time a thing which all authors affirm,
and chiefly EVSEBIVS, to be very strange and wonderful, which was, that
between the I Will Thera and Therasia in the Egean Sea, there was discovered a
new Island of three hundred furlongs in length, where before was nothing but
water of an ordinary A new Island in the Sea.
depth, and no sign of any Island.

THE LIFE AND ACTS OF THE EMPEROVR NERO, ONLY OF THAT NAME, AND SIXTH ROMAN
EMPEROVR.
THE ARGUMENT.
Claudius being dead and his death published, the Senate and people of Rome
swear fealty to Nero: who by the practices and cunning of his mother
Agrippina, was made Emperor. This man for the first five years carried
himself so well, as all men said that a God was sent from heaven to govern
Rome, notwithstanding that his mother used much cruelty, who ruled the Empire
a long time. Nero afterward growing in years, and beginning to be
disobedient to his mother, grew also in vices, and began to walk abroad by
night alone, and to hurt such as he met, whereby he was in some danger, and
escaped not unwounded. In his youth he dearly loved an enfranchised woman
called Aeta, and loved Poppea Sabina, wife to his great friend Otho, whom in
the end he obtained and enjoyed. And for that his mother showed her self very
contrary to his humors, she became odious to her son: but to recover his
former favor again, she made great semblance to be in love with him; so as
it was thought that he had the use of her body: but she growing every day more
odious, in the end (supposing certain apparent ^ignes of treason) he caused
her to be slain. After her death, he wholly let slip the reins to all shame
and licentiou^nes, by which example the people of Rome where also corrupted,
and openly practiced the like dishonestie. He overcame the Parthians, and
subdued the Britains: after which victories, giving his mind to cruelty,
amongst many others, he put his mastor Seneca to death, having (besides his
wife Octauia) married Poppea Sabina, which he before held for his wife: in the
end he made the one to be slain, and the other he killed himself. He caused a
young youth named Sporus to be gelded, and publik^ly married him: And amongst
his other infamous practices, in the end he set Rome on fire, and stood ^ith
great pleasure to behold it burn. He built so huge a Palace, as it contained a
very great part of the city of Rome, and took upon him to alter the name of
the city, and called it Neroniana. He so cruelly pers^uted the Christians,
that besides S. Peter and S. Paul, he put an infinite number of others to
death. Under this Emperor, began the war against the jews. Finally growing
intolerable, and odious to God and man, first he understood of the rebellion of
many nations: and perceiving the enemy to draw near, and the sentence of the
Senate pronounced against him to be apprehended, (...)was in such fear, that
flying secretly from Rome, he was constrained miserably to kill himself. He
lived 32. years, and was Emperor 14: whose death was so grateful to his
country, to Rome, and to the whole world, as they clad themselves in joyful
garments in steed of mourning: and in him ended the line of the Caesar's.

SVch a successor had the Emperor CLAUDIUS, as he deserved and made choice
of; and this was NERO, the most famous man for cruelty that ever was: for
although that otherwise he he was very wicked, yet in cruelty he so exceeded
all measure, as you shall never hear any man pronounce NERO, but you shall
also hear an addition thereto of Cruel; notwithstanding that he had the most
wise and virtuous Schoolmaster of his time, which was SENECA, of whom in his
youth he learned the liberal Sciences, wanting no capacity; whose counsel
and precepts were of force, for a time, to suppress his bad inclination, and
were the occasion that in the beginning of his reign, he performed many parts
of a good Prince, in such sort as TRAIANE (as many write of him) afterward
said, that for Nero in his first five years wa^ a good Emperor.
the first five years, NERO was peerless. But after that time, setting all
shame aside, occasions with his power and liberty increasing, he did things
which did so much stain and blemish his good deeds past, as there remained no
sign or spark of any goodness in him. Yet there wanted not some authors, who in
part to excuse his actions affirm, that of envy and malice writers made his
vices and faults seem so odious, among which was JOSEPHUS in his book of Anti
quities; Lib. 20.
after that he himself had laid open many of his cruelties and parricides. I
will write what I shall find written by most approved authors, and in the
order and progress of things and time will follow CORNELIUS TACITUS, who in my
opinion excels the rest. CLAUDIUS being dead, through the treason of his
wife AGRIPPINA, as we have mentioned, after that she had by her authority and
cunning gotten the peoples good will, and taken away all occasions that might
hinder her son in attaining to the Empire, she published his death, which
until then she had commanded to be concealed. At which time NERO came forth
of the Imperial Palace, accompanied with BVRRVS the Prefect of the Pretorian
Cohorts, who was very private with AGRIPPINA, and also had the command of that
Cohort which had the Burrus the P^fect of the Pretorian Cohort^.
ordinary guard of the Palace; and proclaiming him Emperor, they carried him
to the Camp, where by all the Cohorts, he was joyfully received: and having
made a speech, and promising great donatiues to the soldiers, he was by them
presently carried back to the Senate, where all the Senators, conforming
themselves to the will of the men of war, obeyed and received him for
Emperor with the ordinary and accustomed solemnities, giving him names and
titles of great majesty: among which, he refused the name of Pater patriae,
because he was of opinion Nero was Emperor at seventeen years of age.
that that title agreed not with his young years, being then but seventeen
years old. And so NERO obtained the Empire, which he ought not to have had;
and there wanted not some which murmured, that an adopted son should be
preferred before a legitimate and natural son, and would have had GERMANICVS
called also BRITANNICVS, and not him: But th^se men were not of power to
withstand him: for as he was obeyed in Rome, so was he in like manner in all
the provinces of the Empire. He then presently commanded the obsequies of
CLAUDIUS to be solemnized, (as the custom was) with great pomp; and according
to the superstitions of that time, they canonized him among the gods.

Great was the joy wherewith NERO began his reign, as well for the
coffeehouse of the government past, as for that change and innouations are
ever pleasing, and desire commonly brings good hopes, which were confirmed by
his outward show and apparances in the beginning. First he promised to govern
according to the rules and institutions of AUGUSTUS CAESAR, and began both in
word and deed to show himself, or (to say better) to feign himself, to be
liberal, pitiful, just, mild, and tractable; doing favors, and moderating
the impositions and tributes of the provinces, dividing amongst the people of
Rome, and the pretorian T^ counterfeit vertu^s of Nero.
soldiers, a huge sum of money and corn, bestowing other donatiues upon them:
and to the Senators which were poor, he assigned pensions out of his
eschequer; using all men with such humanity and courtesy, as it seemed there
was no reason to fear any thing of that which afterward ensued. He likewise
showed great clemency and pity, in the execution of justice and punishments;
so as one day, a warrant being brought to him to sign, for the putting of one
to death, he making show to be very sorry for it, said, I would to God that I
could not write: which words as though they had proceeded from a pitiful
inclination, his master SENECA In his second book of clemency.
does highly praise and extol. He entertained in like manner all men lovingly
and friendly, and in his disports and exercises, he permitted any to be
present: so as it seemed that God had sent them such a prince as they desired.
And above all in the beginning of his reign, he honored and bare great respect
to his mother, and gave her greater power and command in the government, then
indeed he ought or was fit: for the truth is, she was a cruel woman, proud
and hautie: who through the counsel of PALANTE (one of CLAUDIUS enfranchised
men before named) without the consent of NERO, she caused JUNIUS SILANVS
Proconsul in Asia, to Agrippina caused Silanus and Narciss^ to be slain
through the (...)of Palante a ^crime.
be slain, l for the hatred she bare him; the like she did by NARCISSUS
another famous Libertine, whom she also greatly hated. And her cruelty had
extended further, but that SENECA and the Prefect BVRRVS, and another eminent
man whose name was AFRANIVS (by whom NERO in the beginning of his reign was
much ruled) did oppose and cross AGRIPPINA in her wicked practices, as far
as in them ^ay: but she had such authority in all causes, and over them which
had the managing thereof, as it could hardly be done, as long as she continued
in good grace with her son.

The state standing in these terms, news came to Rome, that VOLOGESVS King of
the Wars with the King of the Parthians.
Parthians levied forces to make war against the Empire, practicing to make his
brother King of Armenia, in which province from the time of AUGUSTUS CAESAR,
the Romans had authority to place Kings at their pleasure: so as upon this
occasion the wars began in the second year of the reign of the Emperor
NERO; who sent VINIDIVS with new legions thither, beside the ordinary legions
which were in Asia, under the command of DOMICIVS CORBVLVS. But the war as
then continued but a while; for a peace was concluded, VOLOGESVS Peace with the
Parthians.
desisting from his attempts and giving certain principal men in pledge for
the keeping thereof, which we commonly call hostages. About this time began NERO
to show himself somewhat alienated from his mother, and desirous to abate her
great power and authority, beginning to show her less obedience then formerly
he had done: for he then fell in love with a base enfranchised woman, (but she
was very fair) whose name was AETA; notwithstanding that his wife OCTAVIA was
very fair and a virtuous lady. And herein to have his will, against the will
and liking of his mother (who sought to cross him in his love, to the end that
he should not be free from her power) he began to take into his favor OTHO a
Noble man, of whose family (...) and ^udius Phenicius, Nero his favorites.
there had bin Consuls, and CLAUDIUS PHENICIVS, the son of one of the most
powerful enfranchised men in Rome; and these wrought means for him to obtain
his beloved AETA, which opened a passage to many other accidents which
followed, whereby he began to be disobedient to his mother, who had had so
great power over him and all others. And he commanded the enfranchised
PALANTE, (who was a great favorite of hers) to be deposed from all government
in the Imperial estate.

AGRIPPINA seeing this, she attempted by all means possible, to recover the
grace which she had lost with her son: sometimes by giving him counsel; at
other times by entreaties and flatteries, accompanied with threatenings and
fears: among which one was to do great honor, and to bestow many favors upon
BRITANNICVS, who was the Emperor CLAUDIUS his son, and then about 14. years
old: imagining that through fear and suspicion of this man, NERO would return
to her obedience: but his wicked mind freed him not from that danger, by those
means which she conceived, for he delivered himself thereof, by giving him
poison; whereof the poor BRITANNICVS died. Whereat AGRIPPINA was much amazed:
but The death of Britannicus.
being either unable or unwilling to suppress her pride, she perseuerd in this
controversy with her son, and presumed to contend with him (although upon
unequal terms). Whereupon NERO setting all shame and respect apart,
commanded her guard of Germans to be taken from her, and she to be lodged out
of the palace, doing her other open disgraces, forbidding certain persons to
have recourse unto her, or to visit her: and he himself went very seldom to
see her, and that very coldly, and with little respect. And being thus out of
favor (as few keep true friendship with such as are dejected and in disgrace)
the most of her friends forsook her: and one, a great Matrone whose name was
IVLIA SILLANA, upon a private grudge Open contention between Nero and his
mother Agrippina.
(producing false witnesses) wrongfully accused her to have conspired against
her son the Emperor, and that she practiced to have made RVBELIVS PLAVTVS,
Emperor; who by his mother: descended from the Emperor AUGUSTUS CAESAR. And the
matter was so handled, that AGRIPPINA was in some danger, until the accusation
was found to be forged and the witnesses suborned, and this IVLIA the twister
of this web, escaped with light punishment which was but banishment. This gave
encouragement to a wicked fellow called PETVS, to accuse PALANTE also falsely
(a libertine many times before named) and BVRRVS the Prefect, who were servants
and favorites to AGRIPPINA, alleging that they practiced to depose NERO, and
to make CORNELIUS SILLA Emperor: but this also was discovered to be forged and
false, and for this offense PETVS and his false witnesses were only banished.
All which passed in the third year of NERO his reign, Saint PAVL the Apostle
being then prisoner in Rome, who alittle before was sent thither by the
commandment of FESTVS, governor of Judea, who succeeded FELIX aforenamed: In
which imprisonment (although he went abroad at liberty) he was detained two
years.

As the Emperor NERO grew in years, so began he to wax more vain and
vicious, and to discover his bad inclination: for by night he would go
disguised up and down the streets in Rome, and would hurt and abuse such as
he met, coming out of their houses; wherein he committed many notable
insolences, and offended many: and he himself being upon a time unknown, was
in danger to have been slain, being sore wounded. And as the vices and defects
of Princes, although that in their absence thy are condemned and men murmur at
them; yet in their presence they are most commonly excused, and sometimes
applauded: So NERO his favorites did not secke to withdraw him from this
dangerous vice and insolency; but they advised him to go no more abroad
without a guard, whereby they were the occasion of far greater riots and
disorders, then before: And some dissolute young men (faining themselves to be
the Emperor) took occasion to do the like, so as there were infinite
violences committed by him and them, by means whereof there was no small
scandal and tumult in the city, although that in the rest, until then there
was indifferent good order in all things, and justice was administered orderly
in Rome and in the provinces; and the people did dissemble or had patience with
the lightness and insolences of NERO, by reason of the distribution of money
and other things, which he made generally to all, and for certain taxes and
impositions which he commanded to be abolished.

The fifth year of his reign being come, which as it seemed would have proved
prosperous and peaceable both in particular and general; VOLOGESVS King of the
Parthians began anew to arm against the Empire, for the same reason and cause
concerning the kingdom of Armenia before spoken of. And CORBVLVS, who was
Proconsul in Asia, sent to entreat the Emperor that the ordinary army which
he had, might be reinforced and increased, for that by reason of the long
peace, his legions were grown more slothful and less serviceable then was
needful for so dangerous a war; and were also diminished, some by death, and
many soldiers were waxen old: for which NERO took order, that new companies
should be levied, and sent unto him, and with them one of the legions of
Germany, which were ever held for the best and most experienced, as those
which lay on the frontiers against the most fierce and valiant enemies. And so
began the wars with the Parthians, wherein after some great encounters, and
skirmishes which passed, fortune and victory being variable, and winter being
come, CORBVLVS sent a captain whose name was PACTIVS ORPHITVS, who with a good
part of the army had the guarde of certain straights and passages, whereby
the enemy might enter the country, whom he commanded that in any case he
should not give them battle: and he lodged himself in the Plains with the
rest of the army. But ORPHITVS, quite contrary to that Wars with the
Parthi^.
which was commanded him, by the enemies provocation joined battle with
them, and was therein overcome with great loss to the Romans: for which,
CORNELIUS was exceeding sorrowful, and it was no less grieved at in Rome.
Whereupon CORBVLVS, reinforcing his legions, took the field before the
ordinary time, and v^y resolutely followed that war: wherein passed many
things which CORNELIUS TACITUS recites, and I for brevity omit, to return to
NERO; of whom from henceforth there is no good to be spoken. I say then that
while as his captains made war against the Parchians, he gave himself over
to sensuality without contradiction in Rome, falling in love with the wife of
his great favorite OTHO, who in time came to be Emperor, called POPPEA SABINA,
and by some POPPEIA, a most beautiful woman and of high parentage, endowed
with many graces and good parts, but dishonest and incontinent; and to the end
that NERO without any obstacle might have her wholly to himself, giving to her
husband OTHO this reward in requirall of all his good services, he Poppea
Sabina Nero his friend.
sent him into Spain to be governor of Lusitania now called Portugal, and he
freely gave himself over unto this POPPEA, forgetting and abhorring his own
wife OCTAVIA, and his other above named friend; AETA a Libertine whom he had
much loved. Wherewith this POPPEA became so proud, that she taking scorn to
be his friend, very instantly entreated and desired the Emperor, that diuorcing
himself from OCTAVIA, he should marry her: and seeing that AGRIPPINA NERO'S
mother, who supported and defended OCTAVIA, was a great let hereto, she
endeavored all she might, to increase the discord begun between the mother and
the son. Against which, AGRIPPINA used all the means that she possibly could
devise to recover the good will of her son, as to procure him to commit most
detestable incest with her own self, from which he was withdrawn by the
means of SENECA, as CORNELLVS TACITUS reports: yet SVETONIVS says, that the
only fear of his mothers power and presumptuous boldness withheld him from it,
although other authors do not wholly clear him from this sin. Howsoever it
was, by POPPEAS great practices and his own wickedness, he so much abhorred his
mother, as he determined to kill her: but as it was a matter most odious, so he
would have it done covertly: and first he attempted and practiced it with
poison thrice: which taking no effect and perceiving that she was defended by
Antidotes and preservatives; he provided a bedchamber for her with such an
arched roof, as being easily unjointed, the frame might fall in pieces in the
night upon her being asleep. When this dessigne could not be kept close, but
was revealed by some privy thereunto, he then devised a ship so artificially
made as it should suddenly split in sunder, that either by the wrack or the
fall of the fore-deck she might perish: This was contrived by the direction and
counsel of one of his sea captains whose name was NICETVS: and the plot was
laid that she should be drowned in the sea on the coast of Calabria: whither
NERO (faining a reconciliation with her) caused her to go; Nicetus took upon
him the charge to kill Agrippina.
and under color to do certain sacrifices, he himself went thither also. But
this plot taking no effect, wherein certain of her company were drowned, and
she with great danger escaping, he seeing that secret practices auailed not,
he resolved to put her to death openly: and to that end (through the counsel
of the said NICETVS) he caused it to be bruted abroad that one by whom she had
sent him word of the shipwreck and danger wherein she had been at sea, would
have killed him; and for this purpose there was a poiniard let fall at his
feet, he which brought it faining, that by his mothers commandment he came
to have slain him. Under this false pretex^ only, he commanded eertaine
Tribunes, of which this NICETVS was chief, to kill Nero put his ^other to
death by the h^ of Ni^tus.
her: who being come where AGRIPPINA was, she presently understood the cause
of their coming: and seeing them vnsheath their swords, authors write, that
showing them her belly, she said, strike me here first; for this part has
deserved it, seeing it conceived and brought forth such a monster as NERO: and
so she died soon of the many wounds which were given her. And NERO who was in
a place there by, came to see his dead mother, and stood beholding her naked
body as if it had been the body of a beast; praising and dispraising her parts
and members. Te horrible cruelty of the so^e, and diue^h ambition of the
mother.
And thus did the wicked son murder his wicked mother, who cannot be
excused, but that she for her wickedness deserved the death which she died: And
it cannot be denied, but that herein NERO showed most abominable cruelty; for
nature does abhor that a son should punish and be executioner to his own
mother, moved thereto by his own wicked and evil disposition.

Doubtless, it is a strange thing to think of the love which this woman bare
to her son: for it is written of her, that before he was Emperor, it was
foretold her by an Astrologer, that he should be Emperor, and that he should
kill his own mother: whereto she answered; Let him have the Empire, and then
kill her and spare not. So great was her pride and ambition, that to the end
she might be mother to the Emperor, she would put it in hazard to be slain by
her own son: and so both the one and the other were accomplished.
Notwithstanding that the Soldiers, Senate and people, applauded him for this
foul and odious Matricide, yet was he ever after terrified with the sting of
Conscience for so fo^le a fact; and as he often confessed, was haunted with the
apparition of his Mothers Ghost, and tormented by the Furies. To this of his
Mother, he added the murder of DOMITIA, his Aunt by the fathers side: who
being an aged woman, and lying sick of a costiuenesse, coming to visit her,
and she using loving speeches unto him; he commanded the Physicians to plie her
still with stronger purgatiues: so he before she was fully dead, seized upon
her goods, and suppressed her last will, that he might enjoy the whole.

The Emperor NERO having performed so great an exploit as the murdering of his
mother (so much are Princes blinded with flattery and adulation, that
notwithstanding all the world Princes are ever abused by flatterers.
did see and understand the matter, and how all had passed; yet most men in his
presence approved and applauded the same: and there were many vows and
sacrifices made to their gods, for that he had escaped such a treason, and for
the discovery thereof, making him believe that they held it for truth) cloaking
his wickedness under this color, he came to Rome: where seeing himself at
liberty, and free from the controulement of his mother (whose authority was
ever great) he began to abandon all shame, giving the reins to his beastly
appetite, and to all kind of filthiness and most abominable luxury; which
was such and so horrible, that, to keep such honest decorum in our History as
is requisite, and not to offend the ears of chaste Readers, I purpose to pass
it over in silence. Wherein he spending great part of the time, all the rest he
employed in lascivious Comedies and other libidinous exercises, and oftentimes
in banquets and feasting, which lasted all the day and the night also. He was
prodigal in all things, especially in his rich and sumptuous attire. The
ornaments of his Palace, and his expenses and prodigalities were such, as the
like had never been seen. In Comedies and public Shows (most of which were
most vile and dishonest) he acted a Part in Person; and would that the Noble
young men of Rome, and some of the principal young Ladies, should be present to
hear and see the same. And, above all, he was so inclined to Music, and so
much affected it, as, besides that he was skillful in that Art, he gloried so
much in singing, as many times he refused to eat for hurting his voice; and to
clear it and make it better, he purged himself, and used other remedies and
medicines. Some write of him, that to that effect he wore a plaster or sheet
of lead upon his breast.

Finally, NERO forgetting the dignity and majesty of his estate, gave himself
over to base and vile exercises and vices, the which for that they were so
filthy, are not at all described, and which afterward brought him to the sink
of all sin and cruelty, as we will declare. And as the Subjects, for the most
part, do imitate the fashions and behavior of their Princes and Lords; so
presently in Rome and out of it, they began to practice and follow their vices
and follies, wherein the Emperor spent his time; and the Laws, good customs,
Arts and Sciences began to be corrupted and forgotten. Wherefore, he made
himself an enemy, and odious to all good men, although then there were but
few, as if it often happens.

While-as he busied himself in these base actions, the wars which his
General CORBVLVS Wars with the Parthians.
began with the Parthians, about the Title of the Kingdom of Armenia, never
ceased. In which, after sundry exploits of war, the Romans prevailing, the
Parthians were wholly driven out of the Province of Armenia: and NERO nominated
and sent thither for King thereof (as a Subject to the Empire) TIGRANES, who
was nephew to ARCHELAVS sometime King of Cappadocia, having a long time
continued in Rome in base and poor estate. This man was by some of the country
received and entertained with good approbation; and others, which held for the
King of Parthia, repined thereat, as commonly it uses to happen in such cases.
Wherefore there was given unto him an ordinary guard of foot and horsemen, and
some of the Roman Cohorts to aid him to defend that Kingdom. CORBVLVS being
victorious came with his legions into Syria: which happened in the seventh year
of the Reign of NERO. About this time there was so great an Earthquake in many
parts of the world, as many great Buildings fell; and the City of Laodicea was
therewith wholly ruined and laid waste.

Within few days after, the I Will of England and Scotland, then called
Britannie, rebelled against Rebellion in Britanny.
the Roman Empire, being unable to endure the insolences and oppressions of
the Roman Legions lying there in garrison, PAVLINVS SVETONIVS being their
General: for, from the diseases and vices of the Head, Rome, did flow
disorder and corruption through all the Provinces which were members thereof.
The cause of the insurrection in this Island proceeded from hence: PAVLINVS
being desirous to win honor, and envying the fame which CORBVLVS had gotten in
the East, who was daily victorious in the war against the Parthians, he
wanting neither courage nor discretion to do the like, but matter and
occasion; and seeing, that in the I Will of Britannie there was neither time nor
hope for his purpose, leaving such troops and garrisons there as he thought
sufficient, he went from thence with a great Fleet to make war in an Island
near to England, then called Mona, and now Man, which was inhabited by a fierce
Nation. And notwithstanding that all succeeded well in that journey, yet,
during his imploiment The I Will of Man.
there, the Britains, choosing among themselves a Captain, a man of great
account and reputation, called PHRASVRATVS or PRASVTAGVS, with the Title of a
King, as they ordinarily had in that Island, although it were subject; they
rebelled for their liberty, killing all the Roman soldiers they could find,
who had shut themselves up in a Temple: and, afterward The Romans ^t in pieces
by the Britan^.
overthrowing a Legion which came to their aid, they slew the greatest part
thereof, and compelled PETVS, who had the command in the absence of PAVLINVS
SVETONIVS, to flee to their Camp: where they presently besieged him, and so
were Masters of the Field, CALPVS (who, for the Emperor, was then Governer of
the Island) seeing himself unable to defend the same, with the greatest speed
that possibly he could fled into France, and abandoned the Island. And the
Britains took such order, and used such expedition in this war against the
Romans and their Adherents, as within few days in diverse places there were
slain 70000 men. PAVLINVS, being advertised of this great disaster, having
effected that which he had attempted of his own authority, with all speed
possible returned into the Island with his troops: where he assembled together
those which had continued constant in the Emperor's service, and the remainder
of the Roman soldiers which were left; and, reprehending some, and encouraging
others, without any longer delay he went to seek his enemies, and their
Captain PRASVTAGVS; who were now grown so hardy, as they came to seek him; and
did so assure themselves of the victory, as they brought their wives in Wagons
and Cars, to see the battle which they meant to fight. Which, PAVLINVS
SVETONIVS refused not; but, like an expert captain, took such advantage of the
ground, and marshalled his men in such sort, and in the battle A great battle,
fought so valiantly, as he obtained the victory; yet was it one of the most
fierce battles, and fought with the greatest obstinacy, that ever was seen:
for, of the Conquerers there died a great number; but of the conquered (as
CORNELIUS TACITUS reports) there were slain few less than fourscore thousand
men. But GILDAS, an ancient Historian born in the same Island, sets down a far
less number; who says, that there were slain but thirty thousand. With this
great victory, and with the new supply which NERO sent, the Romans prevailed in
that I Will; so as from thenceforth it remained in peace.

While these things were in action, NERO daily increased in his vices and
wickedness: and besides the abovenamed he began to put in practice many new
cruelties, commanding many to be slain upon light occasions, and some without
any; notwithstanding that his Schoolmaster SENECA, and BVRRVS the Prefect of
the Pretorian Cohorts, did hinder and mitigate the same all they might. But in
the ninth year of his Reign BVRRVS died; and SENECA, being brought into
suspicion with NERO (besides that virtue is ever hateful to the wicked) began
to withdraw himself from intermeddling with the affairs of the government: and
as the Physician leaves to apply medicines to the Patient, of whose recovery
there is no hope; so did he forbear to converse with NERO, or give him any
counsel, faining his old age and want of health to be the cause thereof. And
in like manner (as says CORNELIUS TACITUS) others, which had any spark of
ancient Romans in them, withdrew themselves; being unable to endure the sight
of what passed, and NERO committed. At this time NERO commanded PVBLIVS SYLLA
to be slain in France, who was one of the most famous men of his time; and
another whose name was RABELLIVS PLAVTVS, a worthy and eminent man; in whom was
found no other fault, or cause wherefore he should be slain, but that he was
virtuous, and therefore beloved of all men: and, being such, upon a time when
NERO was so sick as it was thought he would have died, the people of Rome fixed
their eyes upon this man, naming him for NERO'S Successor. Upon which occasion,
NERO banished him from Rome, and then resolved to release him from banishment
by causing him to be slain. And after this manner he slew in those days a great
number of other Romans, which these Authors do name, and I leave out as a
matter odious; putting them to death through cruelty and envy, without any
other cause.

A little after this, growing impudent through his customarie sinning, he
divorced himself from his wife OCTAVIA; and not content to put her away, he
took another man's wife, and presently married POPPEA, whom (as we said) he held
for his friend, having first taken her from OTHO who was her husband: and not
contented to put a way his good and virtuous wife, he caused her to be falsely
accused of adultery, having plotted with NICETVS, his Sea-captain Nero put
away his wife, and married another man's.
(who murdered his mother AGRIPPINA, who as it should seem was a man fit for
such services) that he should confess himself to be the man which had
committed adultery with her. And notwithstanding that this was plainly
discovered to be a fiction, he for a color banished NICETVS, and OCTAVIA was
also banished, and afterward slain by his commandment: so as to the
innocent was given an unjust punishment, and to the traitor a fained corection.
At that time he also commanded the famous Libertine PALANTE to be slain, for
the desire he had to his estate: for in the time of NERO it was more dangerous
to be rich, then to commit offenses; and many were slain because they were
rich, and few were punished for their evil deeds.

NERO committing these and many other such like enormities; VOLOGESVS King of
Parthia, taking it in scorn that his Brother TYRIDATES should be dispossessed of
the Kingdom of Armenia, and that it should by the Romans be given to TIGRANES,
began to levy his Forces: and, determining to renew the war, he sent his
Brother to recover that Kingdom; the which he soon effected, and seized upon
many countries and parts thereof. Against whom, CORBVLVS (who was Lieutenant in
the East, and had made the last war) with all expedition sent two Legions for
a supply to King TIGRANES: and, the war beginning very hotly on either side,
the Emperor, at the earnest suit of CORBVLVS, sent new Troops to reinforce the
Army against the Parthians, and CESONIVS PETVS for their Leader; who, with the
greatest speed he could, with many companies and great preparation for the
wars, New war with the Parthians.
departed Italy; and, following his journey, came where CORBVLVS attended his
coming: who dividing his Troops with CORBVLVS, each of them by himself followed
the war apart. In process whereof, CORBVLVS governed so valiantly and with
such discretion, as he not only defended the limits of the Empire in that part
which fell to his lot, but passed the River Euphrates, and surprised some
houlds in his enemies Country. And SESONIVS PETVS with less judgment or
experience, but more vainglory, promising great matters of himself, began the
war. In the beginning whereof, with appearance of good success, he entered
Armenia; and, extending his power farther than he ought to have done, passed
the Mountain Taurus, taking some towns without consideration whether he were
able to hold the same or no, and sent of his troops into diverse places with a
desire to get and to do more then he was able to accomplish, or was fit to be
done: So that (as CORNELIUS TACITUS writes (he governed himself so ill, that
when as VOLOGESVS came against him, there fell so many disgraces upon him, and
he so unadvisedly encamped himself, as he was besieged by VOLOGESVS in his
camp; in such sort as being unable to stay for the succors which came from
CORBVLVS unto him, wanting both courage and discretion to defend himself, he
came to a shameful and dishonorable composition for the Roman reputation,
with the King of Parthia: which was, That the King giving him leave to depart
out of the country with his army, he should abandon the province of Armenia,
and deliver up all such holds as he had taken: all which was performed
accordingly, and he very shamefully went out of Armenia, in great disgrace, and
with no small loss of his Army. The Emperor being advertised hereof, sent for
him to come to Rome, and to leave his legions with CORBVLVS: and when he was
come, he inflicted no other punishment, but in a word or two called him dastard
and coward; adding, that he would speedily pardon him, least the fear of
punishment should kill him.

CORBVLVS remaining General alone (notwithstanding that the Parthians were
grown proud by reason of their late victory) prosecuted the war in such
manner, as they motioned treaties of peace, and sent Ambassadors to Rome, where
after sundry Embassies and some truce taken, in the end a peace was concluded,
profitable to the Parthians, although in show and ceremonies Peace with the
parthians.
honorable to the Romans: which was, That TYRIDATES should remain in
possession of Armenia, but should give over the title and royal ensigns,
until he had been at Rome, and there personally receive the same at the hands
of the Emperor NERO. To confirm this agreement, he came into the Romans
camp, and in presence of all the army, humbled, and prostrated himself upon
the earth before NERO his image, and taking the crown from his head, he set it
at NEROES feet: and afterward being solemnly entertained and feasted,
appointing a time for his coming to Rome, he left a daughter which he had, for
assurance thereof; and so departed to visit his brothers, VOLOGESVS King of the
Parthians, and PACORVS King of the Medes, and to prepare all things necessary
for his journey. Which although it were not so soon performed as it was
appointed, and that there passed some things in the mean season, as we will
presently specify, yet to the end that we leave not this matter imperfect, it
shall be fit (although somewhat before the time) to speak of TYRIDATES his
coming to Rome, for it was a solemn matter and worthy to be remembered* which
was thus.

As NERO was a man desirous of fame and vain glory, so by Letters and great
promises he invited TYRIDATES to come to Rome; which he performed, being
greatly accompanied, and was most honorably entertained: NERO attended his
coming with sumptuous provision made by the Senate and people, set upon a high
throne, with all the show of majesty and greatness that could be devised: at
one end whereof, were all the Pretorian Cohorts and men of war, armed with
fair and rich armor. TYRIDATES coming to the place where the Emperor NERO
was, being alighted from his horse, he mounted up the stairs to the scaffold
where he sat, and coming near him, fell at his feet; but NERO taking him by
the right Tyridates crowned in Rome by the Emperor, Nero, with great solemnity.
hand, raised him, and took from his head an ornament which he ware, and did
put thereon a diadem or crown of a King; using herein other stately ceremonies.
TYRIDATES being crowned with this solemnity, after certain feasts which were
made in Rome, having remained there some days, departed toward his country,
carryi^g with him, an incredible mass of money, which the Emperor gave him
for his Journey. A peace with the Parthians being confirmed in this manner,
NERO gave himself more to his old vices then he did before; and to do the
same more freely, and to be at more liberty and farther off from the authority
of the Senate, he departed from Rome, with the most solemn and magnificent
court and attendance that ever was seen; although the greatest number were
conformable to his conditions. The report of this journey was, that he went
into Graecia, to cut the neck of a land in Achaia, which is a Nero his
journey into Graecia.
narrow passage between the Egean and Ionian Seas, which makes Peloponesus,
now called Morea to be as it were an Island. And in his journey, in Naples and
in other parts, without shame, he showed himself on the Theaters and Stages,
and acted a part in Comedies, as one of the Actors or Players, and sung
Tragedies and Fables, and wanne many prises and crowns, which were rewards
given in those controversies. Being come into Graecia, in this great action for
which he came, he did no more but appoint a day to begin his work: and having
made a speech to his people, he took a tool in his hand where with he began
to dig the earth, and making this beginning, he suddenly (no man knowing any
cause) left off what he had begun, without order for doing any more; and
presently returned to Rome. Wherein he entered in triumph, as if he had won
some great battle, demanding it for the victory above-written: wherein he
came mounted upon the same chariot wherein OCTAVIUS AUGUSTUS had triumphed,
compassed about with Musicians and Plaiers, such as represented fables and
tragedies upon stages, being brought from all parts of the world for that
purpose. And within few days after this, he pretended another journey into
the Kingdom of Egypt; and, all things being in a readiness for that purpose,
through a certain divination he gave over his journey. NERO, being comn to the
beginning of the eleventh year of his Reign, became so impudent, giving himself
wholly over to sensuality, that he did any thing without blushing or changing
color, and gave leave to an infinite number of others to do the like: and his
wickedness mounted to so high a degree, that SVETONIVS testifies of him thus;

Super ingeniorum paragogia, and n^ptarum concubinatus, vestali virgini Rubriae
vim intulit. Acten libertam paulum abfuit, quin iusto matrimonio sibi
coniungeret, summissis consularibus viris, qui regio genere ortam peierarent.
Pueru^ Sporu^, exsect is testibus etiam in muliebre^ naturam transfigurare
conatus est, cum dote and flamm^o persolenni nuptiarum celeberrimo officio
deductum adse, pro uxore habuit. Ext^tque cuiusdam non inscitus iocus, been
agipotuisse cumrebus humanis, si Domitius Neronis pater talem habuisset uxorem.
Hunc Sporum Augustarum ornamentis excultum, lecticaque vectum, and circa
conventus mercatusque Gracia, ac mox Romae circa Sigillaria comitatus est,
identidem exosculans. Nam matr is concubitum appetisse, and ab obtrectatoribus
eius, ne ferox atque impotens mulier, and hoc gratiae genere praevaleret,
deterritum nemo dubitavit, utique postquam meretricem, quam fama erat
Agrippinae simillimam, inter concubinas recepit. Olim etiam, quoties lectica
cum matre veher^ur, libidinatum inceste ac maculis vest is proditum affirmant.
That is to say,

Besides his unnatural abusing of boys freeborn, and the keeping of men's
wives as his concubines, he deflowred RV^RIA a Vestall Virgin. He would have
married ACT or AETA, a freed woman; suborning some, who had been Consuls, to
swear, that she was roially descended. There was a Boy called SPORVS, whose
genitories he cut off, trying to transform him into the nature of woman. Him
he caused to be brought unto him as a Bride, with a Dowry and a yellow Vail,
after the solemn manner of marriage, and a goodly Train attending on him; whom
he maintained as his wife: whereupon one said pleasantly, that it had been
happy for mankind if DOMITIVS his father had wedded such a wife. This SPORVS,
adorned with the ornaments of an Empress, he accompanied in a Litter through
all the Cities and Towns of Greece, and afterward at Rome, up and down the
streets; SIOILLARIA kissing him often. He had a desire to lie with his own
mother; but was terrified from it by some which hated her, lest that proud and
insolent woman should by this favor grow too mighty, whereof no man ever made
doubt; and the rather, for that afterward he entertained a harlot among his
concubines, very like (as it was reported) to AGRIPPINA. It is also said, that
in former times, as often as he rode in a Litter with his Mother, he used her
incestuously: the which did appear by the spots upon her garment.

Amongst all his dishonest and filthy pollutions, he never forgot the
fiercenes and cruelty of his mind, shedding blood, and killing an infinite
number of men, and made boast and vaunted thereof, saying, that none of his
Predecessors in the Empire, did ever know their own power, but he. And when
One in his presence said, as a byword, When I am dead let the world be
burned: Nay, quoth he, let it be before I die. Of so ill and envious an
inclination was this man to all mankind: which did fully appear by that which
he did within a little while after, which was, to set the City of Rome on fire;
as SVETONIVS, EVSEBIVS, EVTROPIVS, PAVLVS OROSIVS, and ISIDORE, affirm: yet
CORNELIUS TACITUS makes some Rome set on fire by Nero.
doubt thereof, whether it were done by chance, or by his commandment; and yet
himself says, that no man durst quench the fire for fear of him: and all
affirm, that it lasted six days and seven nights, and that NERO went up to the
top of a high Tower to behold this spectacle, which was very pleasing to his
sight: where he stood singing certain verses of HOMER, which contained the
burning of the City of Troy. And the fire did consume so much in the City of
Rome, as TACITUS writes, that of foureteen great quarters which were in the
City, only Four escaped free; and of the ten, three were wholly consumed and
burnt to the ground; and in the seven there was never a house, whereof the
greatest part was not burnt, and many wholly consumed. Finally, they were
innumerable, and not to be imagined, the houses, tempes, riches, the spoils of
victories, the clothes and merchandises, and other things, which this fire
confirmed* and to the end that the Reader may the better understand it, he must
consider that Rome* was then the greatest and most populous city in the
world, much frequented by strange Nations, and the most rich and beautiful
that ever was, the which in that time did draw unto it and swallow up all the
money and riches of all the provinces subject unto it, by takes, tributes,
impositions, briberie, and tyrannies.

This lamentable desolation being ended, there was not left in him any pity,
but all men held him to be the author thereof, although they durst not say so;
and that he desired to have the ruins; for the stones, pillars, and other
things, which escaped the fire, he would not suffer to be carried away by the
owners, but took them for the building of his own palace and houses, which
some days before he had built: and part thereof being bur^ed with this fire, he
afterward reedified and made without comparison fairer and greater then
before; so as it seems an incredible matter, what PLINY, SVETONIVS, and
CORNELIUS TACITUS write of the greatness thereof, to whom I refer the Reader for
the particular description of that Palace, because A description of Nero his
Palace.
it is a matter wonderful, and which only was sufficient to show the riches
of Rome. For it stretched from Mount Palatine to Mount Esquiline, which, as it
seems, were distant a good deal more then a mile in breadth; it contained in
it ponds of water so great, as they seemed to be gulfes of the Sea, compassed
round about with buildings and lodgings, It had in it also, besides gardens and
orchards, excellent hills and woods, wherein were all manner of wild beasts.
Moreover the halles and dining chambers, besides being built of Marble,
Alablaster, Iaspers, Topaces, and other excellent stones; the timber-workes
thereof and the seelings were inlaid with gold and Iuorie, and mother of
Pearl, and some stones of price. And some of these high places and chambers
were round, and made with such art, as the floor remaining firm and fixed, the
roof and vaults thereof went continually round like the sky, in such sort as
some bird-ca^es are made; and some of these rooms were wrought with such art,
as there were in them certain ventals and alimbiques of gold and Iuorie, which
at certain times did cast our sweet flowers, waters, and precious oils. This
house likewise had bathes of sundry waters hot and cold, and other ornaments
and excellencies, such and so many as would be tedious to recite; wherein, and
in other buildings which he made, he spent an inestimable treasure, and in
other which he began, which were strange and marvelous, the which for
breuity I omit. And although (as is said) he had commanded the City of Rome to
be set on fire, yet being thus burnt, he used all diligence to reedifie it
again, in better for me then it was before, and had determined to alter the
name thereof, and to call it Neroniana after his own name. But this his care
sufficed not to clear him of the infamy which he had purchased among the
people, for commanding it to be set on fire.

After all this, the Emperor NERO by the instigation of the devil, in whose
power remained his sins (the number of Christians in Rome then increasing,
through the preaching of the Apostles, S. PETER and S. PAVL, who then were
there) he and his like being grieved with the holiness and pureness of the
Primitive Church, resolved to persecute the same: and putting it in execution a
great number of Christians, both within and without it, were put to death by
his commandment. And this was the first general persecution which the Church
suffered. The first persecu^ of the primitive Church.
And although that after the death of CHRIST there wanted no persecutors (yet
was it never persecuted by the Emperors public edict until this time.
Wherein, how great the constancy of the Martyrs was, and what sundry kinds
of martyrdom they endured, CORNELIUS TACITUS an infidel Historiographer, and
an enemy to Christians, yet true in his history, besides other Christian
authors, shall bear witness: who (like a Gentile murmuring at them) recites
the persecution of the Emperor NERO: whereof SVETONIVS also making mention
says, that a very great number of Christian men and women were put to death:
And among other cruelties, burnings, crosses and other kinds of death, he
reports that they were thrown to the dogs, to be torn in pieces: and to
the end that dogs should be the more eager against them, they covered them
with the skins of Bears and other wild beasts. This persecution of the
church SVETONIVS and CORNELIUS TACITUS set down in this place after the
burning of Rome, in the eleventh year of the Emperor NEROES reign; yet
EVSEBIVS and other authors note it to be in the last year of his Empire,
wherein died the blessed Apostles S. PETER and S. PAVL by his commandment. But
it may be, and so I believe, that this persecution lasted till then, which was
little more then three years; or whether i. were only at this time, it pleased
God to preserve his holy Apostles until the time above said.

After that the Emperor NERO had executed this cruelty against the
Christians, which was the greatest that he ever used, there followed in Rome,
and in the marches thereof, one of the greatest pl^gues of pestilence that ever
was in the world; by the permission of God* as it is to be believed* for his
cruelty used against the Christians. But there was no amendment in him, neither
any repentance of that, or of his other villanie^: but* waxing worse, he again
began his intolerable extortions in all the Provinces, which were such and so
many, as they became unpeopled, and many places were wholly ruinated and
desolate. For, the ordinary Rents (though the sum were incredible) being
insufficient to maintain his prodigalities and immense expenses* The excessive
prodigality of Nero.
because they cannot be related at large, it shall suffice to make some brief
mention thereof, the better t^ (...)of the rest. Besides what, without measure,
he consumed in his Buildings and va^works; and in the curious work manship of
his famous house, which was a matter ^nestimable; in all the rest, his disorder
and excess was incredible. First, he apparelled himself with most rich attire,
and ordinarily consumed at dice and at other games great sums of money. When
he went a-fishing (whereto he was much affected) and for his pleasure went to
the sea or any river, he commanded the nets to be made of gold-thread, and the
cords of most excellent fine silk. In his progresses which he made out of Rome
(which were many) besides an infinite number of people of his Court which
followed him, he never had less than a thousand Wagons drawn with Mules for
his Wardrobe, excellently wrought and garnished; and those which led and
governed them were apparelled in rich at^ire, of gold, silver, cloth of gold
and silk; even unto the Mules shoes, which were of silver. Then the games and
plays which he presented were such and so many, as it cannot be valued what
they might cost: for, besides those which in Rome were ordinary, as, the Sword
plaiers, combats, huntings of Lions, Elephants, Bears, Panthers, Tigers, and
other beasts; the Comedies and Tragedies which in the Theaters and
Amphithea^ers were represented, and the sports on horseback, and with chariots
of diverse forms, in the circuits and places of Rome, which were many and more
frequent, and with greater magnificence than ever theretofore; he invented new
sports with chariots drawn with Camels, and Elephants with Castles on their
backs, with other new inventions and strange devices; which to bring to pass,
it behooved a man to compass the world: as was his Naumachie, a fight with
Galleys upon the water; making a Lake for that purpose by hand, which they also
called Naumachia, drawing water from the Sea to fill the same; and therewith
fishes to swim therein, because it should be more natural and at life. Then,
in the donatives which he threw to the people, for him which could first catch
them (which they called Missilia) he would Gift^ given by Nero.
not give such as were ordinary, as other Emperors did, of money, birds, and
other things of small value: but therewith he commanded rich apparel, gold,
silver, rich stones and pearls to be given; and, to increase this in all
superfluity, of things which could not be thrown abroad in their kind, he
caused certain Tables to be cast, wherein was set down what he should have
into whose hands they came, in wheat, herds, or slaves; which extended so far
as to give heritages, fields, houses, islands, and other matters of great price.
By all that which has bin said, he that will may see his prodigality, and may
imagine what his expenses might amount to in other matters. So as this accursed
man had no vice wherein he would not be extreme; and so would he be in
spending and wasting as he was in robbing and spoiling the people: Which his
prodigality as it was grateful and pleasing to the vulgar sort, so I presume
it was the cause why they so long endured his tyranny and wicked disposition.

But, as these things were intolerable, after the eleventh year of his Reign
many of the prime Noble men of Rome conspired against him: the head and chief
whereof was CAIUS PISO (the most Noble man by birth, parentage and virtue,
which at that time was in Rome) and, according Piso conspired against Nero.
to his name, this conspiracy was called Pisoniana. But it was discovered
before it took effect; and, in stead of the remedy which was hoped for, it
opened the way to the Emperors cruelty: for, upon this occasion he put to
death so many, and of all sorts, noble and ignoble, as well those which were
guilty, as those which he would hold for suspected, as they were without
number: among whom, died the witty and excellent Poet LVCAN, and his Master
SENECA; albeit he had sworn to him very devoutly (when as he often made suit
for leave to depart the Court, and yielded therewithal his goods into NERO'S
hands) that he had no cause to suspect him, and that he would rather lose his
own life, than do him any harm. And fear and flattery were of such power
(which things commonly concur) that the Senate determined to The Senate did
sacrifice for the health of Nero.
do sacrifice, and to give solemn thanks unto the gods, for the health and
safety of NERO, and his delivery from this conspiracy; and they ordained feasts
to be made therefore, and that the Month of April should lose his name, and be
called NERO; and that there should be a new temple erected to the God of
health, and other such like things. After this there was another conspiracy,
the captain whereof was a Roman Knight, whose name was VINDEX or VINICIVS: but
as the devil would help and support his servant NERO; so it was also
discovered, and the confederats were by him brought to their death; and many
other upon that occasion, The Conspirators had their trial, and pleaded bound
in chains, some freely confessed it; and others added that he was beholding
unto them for it, being impossible to cure him by any other means (infected as
he was and dishonored with all kind of impieties) but by death: The children
of the condemned were expelled the City, and afterward poisoned or starued.
After which he grew so fearful, and therewith so cruel, as from thenceforth
his greatest study and practice was to put men to death, upon any occasion
whether forged or true, according to his fantasy. And so he slew a great
number of noble men (as SVETONIVS, and more at large CORNELIUS TACITUS
reports.) Being nusled in these cruelties, he forgot not his other vices and
lewd exercises; among which one was to come personally into the Theater, and
there to contend and strive for the prizes which were given to him that best
could recite or sing verses and tragedies, and for other rewards of Music
which were given in that time, as if he had been the poorest Musition or
singing man in Rome. And coming one day very merry for a victory which he had
obtained in these Theatrall Iusts and contentions, he took some displeasure
against his beloved wife POPPEA: and as he was very proud and ill conditioned,
he gave her a spurn on the belly, whereof being with child she fell so sick
as she died; and Nero killed his wife Poppe^.
he, who was the cause of her death, was exceeding sorry for it. There was no
kind of Alliance or Consanguinitie, how near soever, but it felt the weight
of his bloody hand. ANTONIA the daughter of CLAUDIUS, refusing after the death
of POPPEA to be his wife, he slew, under color that she went about to
conspire against him; and to alter the state. He also murdered all others
that were in any sort allied unto him: Among the which, A. PLANCIVS was one:
whose body having by force filthily abused against kind before his death, Let
my mother now, said he, kiss my successors sweet lips; giving it out that
he was her dear darling, and that she encouraged him to aspire to the Empire.
His son in law RV^INVS CRISPINVS, son of POPPEA, being yet very young; for
that it was reported of him, that in game he would play for great places of
command and dukedomes; he gave charge to drown him in the Sea, when he should
be there fishing. After all this, in the thirteenth year of his reign, the
provinces being no longer able to endure his tyranny, and much less the armies
which were in them, they began to mutine and to think upon means how they
^ight rebel against him; as within short space some of them did, which was in
the 13. year of his reign. Moved upon the like occasion; the Jews rebelled
against the Empire, God permitting The Jews rebelled against Nero.
that they should be the first, and should continue in their rebellion, for a
public and evident punishment which should be inflicted upon them, for the
putting of our Savior CHRIST to death. For this war which was begun against
the Jews, VESPASIAN was appointed General, a man very famous both in peace
and war, and who afterward was made Emperor: he had for his lieutenant
(which is the second place after the General) his son TITUS, who in process
of time was also Emperor. VESPASIAN began this war very resolutely, and it was
afterward one of the most famous that ever was in the world; wherein as shall
be declared, the city of Jerusalem was wholly destroyed. This history is
excellently well written by JOSEPHUS a Jewish historiographer, who served in
that war, and was taken prisoner by VESPASIAN: and by EGESIPPVS a Jew by
birth, but a christian by profession; besides many other authors which treat
and write thereof.

VESPASIAN having taken some Cities in Judea; the envy and hatred daily
increasing against NERO, with the causes which he gave of the same, all Nations
conspiring to rebel against him; the provinces of France, and the legions
which were there, began, first choosing JULIUS VINDEX for their captain. The
news hereof came to NERO being then in the city of Naples, whither he went
for his virtuous recreations, such as he was accustomed to use: whereat he
seemed not to be much moved, and (as it was surmised) it offended him not,
because that thereby he might have occasion to rob and spoil all the provinces
of France. But the news still increasing, he began to stand in some doubt, and
came to Rome, where he was certified that a part of Spain called Tarragona,
was also risen against him, with SERGIVS GALBA proclaiming himself Emperor;
who was a man very famous for hisnoble lineage, charges and dignities
Insurr^ction against Nero.
which he had vvorthily executed. Which he did, as some write, being
persuaded thereto by letters from JULIUS VINDEX who (as I now said) was in
arms in France.

With these news of Spain, the Emperor NRRO was so much troubled, as after
that he had lien a good while (as though he had been dead) without speaking
any one word, he rose up as a man desperate; and tearing his clothes, he
knocked his head against the walls, not demanding, nor receiving counsel or
comfort from those which would have given it him. And this fury being past, he
began to take order for the leuying of forces, and to require succors and
aides: but he was so much hated of all the world, as no man came very willingly
to his service; rather persuading one another to the contrary: Things standing
in this state, as NERO busied himself about leuying an army, discoursing in
himself what cruelties and punishments he might inflict, there came certain
news unto him, that the legions which lay upon the frontiers of high Germany
whose captain was RUFUS VIRGINIVS, were also in arms against him, as well as
those of France and Spain. With this news NERO lost all courage and hope to
defend himself: and the Senate and people of Rome were therewith so much
troubled, as without any leader, but only of their own mere motion by common
consent, they determined Nero despaires of himself.
to abandon NERO, and refuse to yield him any obedience: whereof ensued his
death which was shameful and vile, as he deserved; which was in this manner.

SVETONIVS writes, that when the news came of the insurrection of the
legions, NERO was at dinner; and that presently when he heard it, he threw the
table to the ground, and in despair to defend himself, taking certain poison
in a box of gold, he withdrew himself to certain gardens which he had, where
he devised sundry ways and means to escape this present calamity; sometime
thinking to fly out of Italy to the King of Parthia, with whom he was in a
great league of friendship ever ^nce the coronation of his brother TIRIDATES
King of Armenia; otherwhiles he thought to yield himself to SERGIVS GALBA, and
to crave mercy at his hands: but finding no help nor remedy in either (for
few were they which repaired vnhim, or came at his calling) he was of opinion
to go forth into the public places of assembly in Rome, clad in mourning
attire, and there to crave pardon for his ill forepassed life; and if they
should not grant him to continue in the Empire, yet at the least that they
would bestow upon Nero brought into extreme misery.
him the government of the kingdom of Egypt: and to this effect, were found
certain orations already drawn in his closet; but he durst not put this device
in practice, fearing to be slain by the people; so great already was the
tumult in the City. Passing that day and part of the night in these doubts and
fears, he laid himself upon his bed, although he took little rest,
determining with himself the next day to put in execution that counsel which
should seem most profitable. And having slept a little, he awoke about
midnight, and was given to understand that the Cohorts which had the guard of
the palace were gone, and had forsaken him. Amazed at so great an alteration,
he sent for certain of his best and most confident friends to their houses:
but as between wicked men there is no true friendship, neither was there any
due to him, neither had he deserved any, so from none of them he received any
good answer: wherefore with some of his servants, and those very few (protected
by the darkness of the night) he went forth of his palace, and in person went
to many of their houses, at none of which they would open the doors, neither
give him any answer: so as he who within few days before was feared and
adored of all the world; returned sorrowful, despised, and in fear of all
men. And returning to the lodging from whence he came, he found it ransackt and
spoiled even to the very box of poison which he had reserved for his last
refuge. Which when he saw, in despair of his life, and desiring to die, he
began in great have to call for a certain sword player which served him, whose
name was SPICILLVS MIRMILON, and commanded him to kill him. And as neither this
man, neither any other would do it, he cried out with a loud voice, saying,
Now I perceive that I have neither friend nor enemy. And in this fury, he
went with a determination to drown himself in the River Tiber: and making a
stand, he asked of those which were with him, where he might hide himself,
until that he had bethought him what to do. Presently an enfranchised man of
his, named FAON, offered to keep him secretly hidden in a farm which he had 4
miles from Rome. And so NERO taking this for his last refuge, mounting on
horsback, being barefooted and in his shirt and wastcoate, with an old sullied
ouerworne cloak cast upon him, and so holding a handkerchief before his face,
in the dark of the night he went out of Rome with four men only, which did
bear him company, in the most covert and disguised manner that possibly he
could: And with great fear and trouble came to the village vvhither they
carried him; and leaving his horsehidden among certain trees, he went
covertly through certain Canes and Reeds; and before that he came to the
house vvhither he was to go, the same FAON which brought him, counseled
him to go into a Cave which was there, where they used to dig sand: whereto he
answered, that he would not bury himself alive; in the end he went into the
house, creeping in on all four at a hole which they made through the wall; and
coming into a chamber, he cast himself upon a poor bed which was there, and
being both hungry and thirsty, he desired to have something to eat: but
there was nothing to be had but a piece of brown bread and a little water; the
bread he would not eat, but he drank of the water with wonderful fear and
sorrow to see himself in that place.

As these things passed with NERO (as I have said) as soon as it was day, his
flight was presently discovered, and the Senate assembled, and by their common
consent he was adjudged an enemy unto his country; and being condemned to
die, was commanded to be sought for every The Senate send to seek out Nero.
where: to the execution whereof, the men of war of the Pretorian and Urban
Cohorts, consented by persuasions and promises which were made unto them. With
which news, the determination of the Senate being published, a servant to the
said FAON which brought NERO to his farm, went out of Rome, to give him to
understand thereof: for he knew the secret way. And being come where the
Emperor was, he found him making preparation to kill himself, through the
persuasion of those which came with him, seeing that there was no other means
for him to escape. He hearing the sorrowful news of his doom given by the
Senate, To be an enemy to the State, and that he should be punished More
Maiorum, hereupon he demanded what kind of punishment that More Maiorum was?
And when he understood that a man so condemned was to be stripped naked, his
head set fast in the stocks, and his body scourged with rods to death: He was
so terrified therewith, as he took the poiniards which he had brought thither,
and feeling their points and edges, he made show to do that which they had
counseled him: but growing fearful and a coward, he put them again into
their sheaths, faining that his fatal hour was not yet come. And sometimes he
prayed and entreated some one of those which were with him, to kill himself, to
the end that he might follow his example: At other times he would reprove
himself for his base mind and want of courage, until at last hearing the
noise of certain horsemen, which by the commandment of the Senate came to
seek him, he set a poinyard to his throat, wherewith, with the help of one
of his servants, he wounded himself, of which wound within a little while
after, he died; making Nero slew himself.
such gestures and countenances, as made all those which were present amazed
thereat. And so ended the enemy of mankind, the venom and poison of the earth
(for so PLINY calls him) after that he had ruled the Empire fourteen years,
and being of the age of two and thirty years, in the seuentith year after
the birth of IESVSCHRIST. This NERO was a man of a goodly constitution, neither
high nor low, of a fair countenance though somewhat wanton; his eyes greenish,
a round visage, reddish hair, with a thick and full neck, he had a great belly
and little legs, and was of a sound complexion: for notwithstanding that he
was given to all vice and excess, yet in fourteen years that he reigned, he
was never but thrice sick.

His death being known in Rome, the joy which the Senate and people conceived,
was incredible; and all came forth into the streets to congratulate one with
another, with bonnets upon their heads, which was a sign of liberty; for so
did slaves use to wear when their masters made them free. But with all this
(as NERO had been a great feaster, a spender, a giver, and was subject to
other vices, which many men loved more then other men's virtues) yet there
were some which for a long time honored his sepulcher and did ordinarily set
flovvers upon it. And the King of Parthia sent his Ambassadors afterward to
Rome to confirm the peace and amity: who with great instance, earnestly
desired that the remembrance of NERO might be held in honor and reverence. And
as vain and idle people use to sovve false reports; many believed that NERO
was not dead, but that he lay hidden and should return again to the Empire,
as though he had been enchaunted. Saint AUGUSTINE also in his book deciuitate
Dei says, that some were of opinion that NERO was antichrist: which vanity
gave occasion that twenty years after there rose a man in Asia, naming
himself NERO, which caused great trouble and alteration, being assisted by
the Parthians: although that in truth there remained no house of NERO, neither
son nor daughter, adopted or natural, and he was the last Emperor of the
house and family of the CAESAR'S, founders of the Empire; so In Nero was ended
and extinguished the lineage of the Caesar's.
in him ended his lineage, notvvithstanding that the name continues unto this
day.

SVETONIVS writes, that there were many signs fore-shewing the fall and end of
CAESAR'S house in NERO, but among the rest there were two most evident: As LIVIA
soon after her marriage with AUGUSTUS went to see a farm house of hers, an
Eagle soaring over her head, let fall a white Hen into her lap, holding in her
bill a Laurel branch. And thinking it fit to have both the foul kept, and the
Laurel set in the ground, behold, of the one there came many chickens all white
which multiplied daily; so as the very house was called Ad Gallinas: And of
the other there sprang so fair a row of Bay-trees, as all the CAESAR'S when
they did ride in triumph, gathered from thence their Garlands: and the manner
was, when they had triumphed, presently to prick down others in the same
place; and it was observed, that a little before the death of every one, the
tree, by him planted, did also die. But in the last year of NERO both
bay-trees withered at the root, and all the Hens died. And soon after the
Temple of the CAESAR'S being strooken with lightning, the heads of all their
statues fell down at once, and AUGUSTUS scepter was shaken out of his hand.

THE LIFE OF SERGIVS GALBA, ONLY OF THAT NAME, AND SEVENTH EMPEROVR of ROME.
THE ARGUMENT.
SErgius Galba succeeded Nero, and in his old age was advanced to the Empire.
This man was of the Noble Family of the Sulpitij, very intemperate in his diet,
and of no great good fame concerning Sodomic, and governed the Empire by the
counsel of three of his familiars. Before his coming to the Empire he subdued
many Provinces, and was very severe in the execution of martial discipline. He
was learned in the liberal sciences, but chiefly very expert in the laws. He
was unfortunate in his children: for those which he had dyed before him; and he
whom he adopted, whose name was Piso Licinianus, was slain a little after him.
This old man dyed through the sedition of Otho, who sent certain Soldiers to
cut off his head in the public market place, whither he came armed to repress
the tumults. His body was left to the mercy of the people; yet in the end it
was buried by one of his bondmen. He lived seventy and three years, and
governed the Empire seven months and seven days. His death seemed to be
very acceptable to the people, as to those which are ever desirous to see
alterations.

NERO being dead in such manner as we have declared, to the great joy (and with
a general consent) of all men, SERGIVS GALBA was created Emperor; who in the
time of NERO was nominated and proclaimed by the Army which was in Spain; and
he was the first that received the Empire from the hands of the Army, the
Senate consenting thereto and approouing the same; having no Affinity or
Alliance with the House and Family of the CAESAR'S, neither by Blood, nor yet by
Adoption: For, always until this time the Empire succeeded by inheritance and
succession from one to another, being either kinsmen by Nature, or else by
Adoption. Now to declare the life and fortunes of SERGIVS GALBA before he was
Emperor, would require a large discourse; for he came to it at the age of 72.
years, and enjoyed it not one whole year: so as seeing that I write an
Imperial history, I will not for so short a discourse (as was his reign)
make so long a preamble. Let it suffice for him, and so much as shall
appertain to our history, to know, that SERGIVS GALBA was of a most noble
family in Rome, descended from the SVLPITII; by surname GALBAE, and from other
noble and ancient families; whereof, although men speak diversely, yet he was
wont to boast, that by his father he was descended from IVPITER, and by his
mother from The Image of Sergius Galba.
PASIPHAE, wife to MINOS king of Creta; of whom is reported that notable fable
of a Bull. And you shall also know that in his life time he had obtained many
Magistracies and dignities in Rome and abroad, whereby he won great credit
both in peace and war: for being borne about the 40. year of the reign of
OCTAVIANVS AUGUSTUS, or within little more or less, he lived after in the
times of TIBERIUS, CALIGVLA, CLAUDIUS and NERO, and was well known and
honored by them all; which could not be, without great wisdom and valor, to
support and increase his honor in times of such confusion, and under so
tyrannous Princes; although imitating them, he eschued not some of their vices,
for which he was noted and defamed. So as speaking indifferently of this
Emperor, we may say, that he was between good and bad, and so it seems
that CORNELIUS TACITUS notes him; yet PLVTARCH, who writes his life gravely
and at large, amongst other defects in his reign, says the fault upon the
time, and the evil conditions of men in that age, and of GALBA he treats as
of a good Emperor. And he and others write, that he was learned in the
liberal Sciences, and much inclined and given to learning and knowledge,
particularly in the laws and Galba, learned in the liberal Arts.
customs. He was but once married, and then with a Gentlewoman, whose name
was LEPIDA: who being dead, and two sons which he had by her, he would never
marry any more. And this shall suffice for the notice of the person and
qualities of GALBA. Now let us speak of his reign, which although it were
short, yet it was not so in the accidents which happened.

After that GALBA had rebelled in Spain, in such manner as is said, and that
the title of Emperor was given him, and by him accepted; in the mean space
until NERO died, and a little before he knew of his death, he was in great
trouble and danger: for although that presently in the beginning all went well
with him, and he took a house and held the state of an Emperor, taking a
guard, and choosing for his council, with whom he might confer and consult of
matters of importance, certain of the principal and wisest men of the legion
whereof he had the charge, and had given offices and dignities, and the
inhabitants of the province made their repair to him to do him service: yet
upon a sudden all was in combustion; for part of the Cohorts began to repent
them of what they had done, and were ready to have abandoned him. And it also
happened that a certain servant to one of NERO his enfranchised men, having
been procured thereto, resolved, and mist but a little to have slain him, in a
passage as he was going to certain bathes. And above all, the death of JULIUS
VINDEX, which then ensued, News which put Galba into despair.
troubled him most; who, as we said, rebelled in France, and had induced him to
make himself Emperor, which VINDEX slew himself, for that his troops had
fought with RUFUS VIRGINIVS his forces, who was captain of the legions in
Germany which also rebelled; which battle was against the will of both the
commanders, and JULIUS VINDEX his forces being overcome, and of them 22000
slain, he therefore killed himself.

These news, being added to the former, did so trouble GALBA, as he was in
despair both of the Empire, and of his life. But about this time (for, it was
in a manner all at one instant) news came from Rome of the death of NERO, with
certain notice, that the Senate and Pretorian Cohorts had chosen and accepted
of GALBA for Emperor. Which news one ICEL^VS a Libertine brought him; for which
he afterward did him many favors: and, messengers increasing, much people
with these tidings repairing to his service, he took his way toward Rome,
accompanied with men of war. And upon the way VIRGINIVS RUFUS, Captain of the
Legions in Germany, sent to yield him his obedience, who until then had
showed himself neutrall, attending the will of the Senate, notwithstanding that
he had declared himself against NERO. This old (although new) Emperor,
traveling toward Rome (as it commonly happens in things that are done with
little consideration) his coming to Rome was nothing so pleasing as his
election: for, before him there came certain news, which gave occasion of
coffeehouse, that he was not only cruel, but also covetous; as Princes are
much noted both in their doings and sayings. And it was also reported, that
such Cities of Spain and France as had not in time repaired unto him to offer
their service and obedience, he had condemned in great sums of money, and
had charged them with great tributes, and that of some of them he had
commanded the walls to be thrown down, and the Governors to be put to death.
Which reports of his cruelty and covetousnes were confirmed and augmented at
his first entrance into Rome: for, when he would have forced the mariners and
seamen (whom NERO had inrouled in a Legion, and made lawful soldiers) to
return again to their former estate and condition, and they (making refusal)
called insolently for their Eagle and other military Ensigns; he not only
sent a troop of horsemen among them, who trod them under their feet, but also
executed every tenth man. In like manner the Cohort of the Germans, which in
former times had been ordained for the guard of CAESAR'S person, and had been
always found very trusty and faithful, he discharged, and sent them home into
their Country, without any recompense for their service; pretending that they
were better affected to CNEIVS DOLABELLA, than to him.

Being in Rome, with this secret coffeehouse, although with public joy and
solemnity, he began to take upon him the administration and government of the
Empire, and did some things as a wise and worthy Prince, and took good order to
assure himself against those which had rebelled: for, in Africa he caused
CLODIVS MACER to be slain, because he practiced to make a combustion in that
Country, by the means of TREBONIVS GRATIANVS; and for the same cause he
commanded to be slain, in the Frontiers of Germany, FONTEIVS a captain, whom
VALENS FA^IVS and CORNELIUS AQVINVS, Lieutenants to the Legions in Germany,
slew. And in Rome NEVFIDVS SABINVS, a Prefect, was put to death: who, after
NERO was dead, practiced to make himself Emperor. Which executions although
they were not to be blamed, yet they did discontent and grieve many. Also the
common people, being affected to the feasts and dissolute sports of NERO, and
being accustomed thereto, loved better those his vices, than the ancient
virtues of GALBA.

The Pretorian and Vrbane Cohorts, seeing that the Emperor GALBA did not
perform the promises which were made unto them, began likewise to murmr; yea
and to repent them to have yielded him their obedience. They were also much
discontented, for that he had brought with him a legion of Spaniards, and
lodged them certain days in the city; wherewith they held themselves
wronged. But that which made him to be hated and abhorred of all men, were his
favorites, which principally were three; unequal in conditions and behavior,
Galba hated, and the reason.
but equal in power and credit with him: the one of them was called TITUS
JUNIUS, and had bin his Lieutenant in Spain, and then was Consul; the other
was CORNELIUS LACVS, an infamous man and ill beloved, whom he made Pretorian
Prefect, which was the greatest dignity and authority next to the Emperors;
the third was ICELLVS MARCIANVS, who had brought the news into Spain of the
death of NERO. By the counsel of these men he was governed, the short time
that his reign endured. And this was such, as without any constancy or
resolute staiednes (as became a Prince) he did things many times one contrary
to the other, according to the will of some of them: so as sometimes he showed
himself severe and rigorous; and at other times slow, remiss and negligent,
condemning some unheard, and pardoning others without any reason, at the
instance of those men. And as they for their deserts were ill beloved; so
commonly with the Prince which is governed, all those which have not the like
authority with him, are discontented; by this reason he made himself ill
beloved. Whereto this was a help, that he sought to moderate and diminish the
excessive gifts and rewards which NERO was wont to give without measure or
reason, seeking to apply it to his own benefit, allowing but a tenth part out
of it; and with this strict condition, That if any actors upon the stage,
wrestlers or other Champions had sold any such donations formerly given unto
them, the same should be taken from the buiers, seeing that the parties who had
sold the same, had spent the money, and were not able to repaie it. And to
increase the peoples hatred and discontent, when as they called on him for
Justice, and to have HALOTVS and TIGELLINVS executed, the only men of al NEROS
Instruments who wrought most mischief, he saved them from danger, advancing
HALOTVS to a Procuratorship, and rebuking the people for their cruelty against
TIGELLINVS.

And besides what is already said, his vnwieldie old age began to be had in
contempt, so as every man durst presume to murmr at him, and to do any thing
against his authority. Matters standing upon these terms in Rome, those
abroad were in as little rest: for seeing that the Army and province of
Spain had made an Insurrection and chosen an Emperor either of envy or
coffeehouse, there were in most parts mutinies, factions and desire of
alteration, and principally in the Roman army which was in high Germany, the
captain whereof was RUFUS VIRGINIVS before named: for these legions waxing
proud, by reason of the victory which they had obtained against the army of
JULIUS VINDEX, and making no account of ORDEONIVS FLACCVS, who was their
Commander, and Lieutenant to VIRGINIVS; holding themselves for suspected, and
in disgrace with the Emperor GALBA, because they were the last that came to
his service, they determined to be the first that should leave the same. And
the first day of January being come, wherein they did use to swear, and to
do homage of fidelity to the Emperor, they refused to do it to him, but to
the Senate; and The legions in Germany refused to do homage to Galba.
sent to the Pretorian Cohorts at Rome, to let them understand, that they would
not obey that Emperor who was created in Spain; and that the Senate should choose
such a one whom they thought fit; whereto they remitted them selves: Yet
SVETONIVS says, they referer this choice to the same Cohorts. The legions in
Germany standing upon these terms, those in low Germany were as little
obedient, whose captain was VITELLIVS: who having sounded the good will of the
soldiers (notwithstanding that he was sent thither by GALBA, and had received
that charge from him) through a desire to reign violating his faith (as JULIUS
CAESAR was wont to say, that for rule it was lawful to break any faith) he
practiced to get the Empire to himself. And for as much as he afterward came
to be Emperor, it shall not not be amiss to give the reader to understand
what he was. This VITELLIVS was a man of great reputation and authority;
which he had gotten in the offices and Magistracies which he had held in Rome,
and abroad, in the time of the Emperors CAIUS CALIGVLA, CLAUDIUS and NERO,
with all which he had been very private, more for his vices, and some abilities
of his person, then for any virtues. With CALIGVLA he was in grace, for that he
was a great Auriga; for so were they called which had the charge and rule of
chariots and wagons: with CLAUDIUS, for that he was a great gamester: with
NERO, for the same, and such like qualities. And besides this, as he was very
subtle and cunning, so he obtained in those times great dignities and
offices, of Prefect, of priesthood, and also to be Viceconsul in Africa, which
he wisely executed: and in the end GALBA gave him this command in Germany;
where succeeded that which we will declare. His principal descent was from the
family of the VITELIII; whereof because there are sundry opinions, some
making it very ancient, and others to be of later time, I will make no question
thereof: the same happened to his fathers and ancestors; for some said that he
was of mean degree. SVETONIVS in his life treats thereof more at large, to
whom I refer the curious reader: for, what is spoken, suffices for my
purpose, thereby to understand what shall be said hereafter.

The Emperor GALBA being advertised of all that had passed in the armies of
Germanie' and knowing that besides his age, he was not respected, for that he
had never a son that might succeed him, he resolved to put in execution what
he sometimes before had proiected, which was to adopt and choose for his son,
some personage of such age and authority, as might be sufficient Galba
resolves to adopt one to succeed him.
and capable of the Empire, and who in his lifetime might protect him, and
after his decease succeed him. His favorites, and such as were private with
him, understanding this his determination, each of them apart pretended to give
him a son of his choosing, so as there arose strife and contention amongst
them upon this occasion. OTHO gaped after it and thought to have obtained this
adoption (it was he, from whom we said, that NERO took his wife POPPEA and
sent him into Spain) alleging for his desert, that presently after GALBA'S
rebellion against NERO, he was the first that came to his service. A great part
also of the Pretorian and Urban Cohorts favored him (which Historiographers
indifferently call the Army which lay near to Rome) and most of all TITUS
JUNIUS assisted him, who was one of GALBA his fauourits, and was Consul with
him that year: so as OTHO did assure himself that no other should be adopted
but he. But GALBA being fully resolved to that which was most expedient for
the good of the commonwealth, without any other respect; and likewise
disliking the disposition of OTHO (which sented of NERO'S conditions) he took
no regard of what was said unto him; but upon a day when no man thought of any
such matter, being in the Senate, he took PISO LVCINIANVS by the hand, who
was a man both wise and virtuous, and in whom did concur all the qualities
and good conditions that might seem fit and requisite Piso adopted by Galba
for his son and suc^or.
for an Emperor: and calling him son he adopted him, after the manner then
accustomed; and with a great train, in great pomp, he went with him to the
Camp, and made the Army to swear obedience unto him, and to receive him for
CAESAR: which he did without giving any rewards to the soldiers, or promising
them ought, whereto they were accustomed; but only made a grave oration with
great majesty, after the ancient manner: and so it was coldly accepted among
them, they performing more with silence, than with any sign of gladness either
in countenance or in speeches; and with the like coldness he was accepted by the
Senate: for, now Rome was not capable of equity, or the ancient integrity.
GALBA, having made this adoption, conceived that it would have been the mean to
have preserved and protected his life: but it proved in effect to be the
occasion of his confusion and utter ruin. For, OTHO, seeing himself deceived
in his hope of adoption, and finding the soldiers well-affected toward him,
for the hatred they had conceived against GALBA, resolved to effect his
purposes by force and treason: which he presently practiced by all means
possible with the Pretorian soldiers, by Otho incites the pretorian Bands
against Galba.
great gifts, and greater promises which he made unto them. And he so cunningly
handled the matter (for, so little faith and loyalty was used in those days)
that in less than eight days he had plotted his treason; and it was
concluded, that they should rebel, and create him Emperor (as they did) with
the death of poor old GALBA, which was performed in this manner:

GALBA being with certain his private friends in his palace doing sacrifice;
this OTHO being there with him, he stole secretly away from him to a place
appointed, where a number of soldiers of the Pretorian Cohorts attended his
coming; who took him upon their shoulders, calling him Emperor, and drawing
their swords (to give the greater terror to the people) went with him toward
their camp. This being related unto GALBA, who doubted not any such matter, it
extremely perplexed him; and as his counsels were sudden, so were they
inconstant and variable. For some were of opinion that his best course was to
put himself in arms, and to go publicly abroad; for with his presence he
might have staid the tumult from proceeding any further; others, that it were
best for him to fortify himself in the Capitol, and there to stay till he
should see to what issue the matter would grow. The poor old man wavered, and
was doubtful what resolution to take, the messages which were brought him were
so diverse: for, some made the matter nothing; and others, very dangerous. In
the end, deceived by a false report which they brought him (that the Army had
not only refused to receive OTHO for Emperor, but had slain him) he rode armed
with his guard, and some others which repaired unto him, even unto the
principal place in Rome; where all the people were assembled to see what would
be the end of so great a combustion. At that Instant there entered on the other
side a great troop of horsemen which OTHO had sent from the Camp (where he was
chosen Emperor) against GALBA, to kill him: who although they came with that
resolution and charge, yet coming within his sight, and knowing him, they stood
amazed a pretty while, as doubting what they should do. At this time was GALBA
most perplexed, not knowing whereon to resolve; and the multitude and prease of
people was so great about him, as they swaid him sometime to one side, and
sometime to the other: and, as it commonly happens in such accidents and
tumults, that then the counsel is praised and approved when the time is past
wherein it might have been put in execution; and, standing irresolute whether
he should return to the Palace, or shut himself up in the Capitol, having had
sufficient time for either; now, when he would have done the one or the other,
he could not: For, being abandoned by the greatest part of those which did
accompany him, they who were sent by OTHO, set upon him, after they had stood a
good space doubtful (as I said) and there slew him. PLVTARCH writes (although
some others report it after another manner) that when as those which came to
kill him drew near unto Galba was slain by the direction of Otho, and his head
presented unto him upon the point of a Lance.
him, he thrust out his head, to the end they should cut it off; willing them
to do it, if so it were expedient for the Good of the Commonwealth, and of
the Roman people. And so it was stricken off, and set on the point of a Lance,
and presented to OTHO, and from him was carried up and down the Camp; and his
body remained in the place without a head, for any man to tread upon, until at
last it was buried by a bondsman of his. And the same day, by OTHO his
commandment, was PISO LVCINIANVS put to death, whom GALBA (as I said) had
adopted for his son and successor: and so was TITUS VINIVS also, who was
Consul; and others of his Favorites, whose heads were all carried to the Camp
to OTHO, whom all men now obeyed for Emperor: and, being laid together with
GALBA'S head, every one gloried to have embrued his hands in their blood. No
man's death did OTHO so much rejoice at, no man's head did he view and review so
unsatiably, as PISO'S; whether he thought himself then freed from fear and
care, PISO being his enemy and concurrent; or that the remembrance of Majesty
in GALBA, or acquaintance with VINIVS, had moved him to compassion.

And so ended the life of the Emperor GALBA, having held the Empire only seven
months. His death was in the year of our Savior JESUS CHRIST 71, and 73 of his
age. He was a man of a good constitution of body, greenish eyed, hawk nosed,
very balde: and by reason of the great pain of the gowt wherewith he was
afflicted, his fingers and toes were vveake and crooked; he was a great feeder,
very incontinent, and given to women.

THE LIFE OF MARCUS SILVIVS OTHO, FIRST OF THAT NAME, AND EIGHT ROMAN EMPEROVR.
THE ARGUMENT.
OTHO borne of a Noble Family, took the Empire after Galba, although his evil
fortune would not suffer him to enjoy the same long: for at the same time that
Otho was made Emperor in Rome, Vitellius was proclaimed Emperor in Germani^.
And for as much as the on^ would not give place to the other, in the end they
came to blows: and after sundry b^ttailes, Otho being the los^r, not knowing
what other course to take in his adversity, slew himself; which act ^med not
answerable to the life which he had led, which was more like to the ^minacie of
a woman, then the courage of a man. This man governed the Empire four months,
and dyed in the xxx. (...)of his age. He was so dear to his own soldiers,
that whilst his body was burning after the manner then of the Romans, many of
them sl^w themselves with their own hands.

THE Reign of GALBA (of whom we have now ended our discourse) of OTHO, and
VITELLIVS his successors, of which we are to treat, were so short, so
turbulent, so confused, and gotten by such wicked and unlawful means, as more
properly they might be called Tyrants, then Emperors, and so some writers
term them: neither do they put them in the catalogue of Emperors; of which
are Saint ISIDORH and BEDA. And the great Magician APOLLONIVS THIANEVS, who
lived in that time used to say, that GALBA, OTHO and VITELLIVS Galba, Otho, and
Vitelliu^, called Theban^ Emperors, and compared to Kings upon a (...)in a
^ragedie.
were Thebane Emperors: and the reason was, for that the Thebanes held the
Empire a very small time, and so did these as little the Empire of Rome.
PLVTARCH in the life of GALBA, compares them to Kings in a Tragedy, which
last no longer then the time that they are represented upon the Stage. But
howsoever it was, they obtained the names of Emperors; whether the Senate gave
it them for fear or flattery, I will not decide: But passing on with
PLVTARCH; CORNELIUS TACITUS, and the rest which write of them, I say that the
same day wherein GALBA was slain, there was no man of any account which went
not to the Camp where OTHO was, to yield him obedience and to flatter him, as
their sovereign Lord and Emperor, commending the Cohorts, and Army for that
which they had done, in putting GALBA to death, and for the election of OTHO.

OTHO was a man very valiant and witty, and was the son of LUCIUS OTHO who
had bin Consul, of an ancient and honorable family; and was so like unto
TIBERIUS in his gesture Otho his descent.
and countenance, that some held him for his son. His mother also was of a
noble house, and so were her progenitors and ancestors. Hereof writes
SVETONIVS, and PLVTARCH in the life of him: by which and by CORNELIUS TACITUS
may be understood what was the course of his life before he came to the Empire,
or had the name of Emperor; which in brief I have before declared, and
therefore hold it needless to make repetition thereof. OTHO besides the
occasions which he had to rise against GALBA, they write that he had this for
one, which was, that an Astrologer which he carried with him when he was sent
by NERO into Spain, did foretell and assure him that he should be Emperor of
Rome. Being in the Camp in such manner as before is recited, compassed about
with Senators and the principal men of Rome, he came to the Senate; having
first commanded the Pretorian Prefect of the city to assemble the same: where
besides the ordinary blessings and applauses, they gave him the name of
AUGUSTUS, and all the other titles and preheminences which the other Emperors
desired to have. And having there made a brief Oration, wherein he let them
understand that he was compelled and forced to take upon him the charge of the
Empire, promising to govern the same by the counsel and advise of the Senate,
he went from thence through the midst of the place (which was all bloody and
full of dead bodies) to IVPITERS Capitol, and thence to the Imperial Palace:
and so was OTHO advanced to the Empire; who was the first that by the Otho was
the first that was made Emperor by the Pretorian Cohorts.
Cohorts (which were the Army lodged too near the City of Rome) was chosen and
made Emperor, and from whom came the custom to create Emperors, after they
had forsaken GALBA: before which time they were ever the Emperors ordinary
guard. This was an accursed and most pernicious introduction for the Roman
Empire, and for the Emperors themselves, as experience did afterward make
manifest.

OTHO, to perform his promises, and to make a good beginning and show of a good
Prince, he commanded much confiscated goods to be restored to their owners,
and to such men as NERO had banished; and did other things in like manner,
which were exceeding pleasing to all the people, in such sort, as they took
such love and liking to him, that they continued evermore faithful unto him
until his dying day, although in truth his life continued but a short time
after. While these matters passed in Rome, the Legions and Army, which both in
high and low Germany (as I have said) were disobedient to GALBA, their
Captain VITELLIVS having by gifts and promises purchased their favor and good
will, after some treaties (which TACITUS and PLVTARCH describe at large)
concluded to create him Emperor, and Vitellius made Emperor by the Legions in
Germany.
(without attending the will and pleasure of the Senate) they made him so: so
as in a manner, at one instant, OTHO was advertised thereof, and VITELLIVS knew
what passed in Rome.

The German Legions, presuming that VITELLIVS (whom they had chosen) should
continue Emperor, pretending that they had as great authority to create an
Emperor as the Legions in Spain; the Senate in like manner, the Cohorts, and
army at Rome pretended to have the supreme power, and that in them rested the
absolute authority to choose and create the Emperor, which was OTHO only. And
although that OTHO by this means seemed to have the greatest interest and best
title: yet whether his guilty conscience did put him in fear, or that it
grieved him to think of the evils which were likely to ensue (as he afterward
showed) he sought means by letters and messengers to come to a composition and
agreement with VITELLIVS; but nothing was concluded: and the dissension daily
increasing between them, either party made preparation for the wars. And
certain tidings being brought that VITELLIVS his forces came marching toward
Italy, under the conduct of two Captains, whose names were VALENS and CECINNA
(VITELLIVS remaining behind them attending more aid) OTHO departed from Rome
with a fair and well ordered army, of all the Roman Nobility, the Pretorian
Cohorts, and the Legions which were in the Nauies by sea upon the coast of
Italy, which he sent for to that effect, and such others as he then could
levy: and in this manner he marched from Rome very mighty in number of men,
though not much accustomed or trained up to the wars, leaving FLAVIVS
SABINVS, brother to VESPASIAN, for governor, who (as is said) followed the
wars against the Jews, and so he continued his journey against VITELLIVS,
whose forces were already come to the Alps, to the number of 70000 men,
whereof forty thousand were commanded by VALENS, and the rest by CECINNA,
VITELLIVS remaining in France expecting the remainder of those in Germany, and
the Legions of Britanny which also came to do him service. These two Armies
drawing near the one to the other, the civil war began between them, and was
very cruel in many parts: or to say better, that war was prosecuted which
was begun between GALBA and NERO* Rome for a good War between Otho and
Vitellius.
space had not bin infested with any civil dissensions, although it escaped
not free from sundry calamities, by reason of the wicked Princes which reigned
there; by which means the present miseries which were very great, brought the
battles fought between MARIUS and SILLA, JULIUS CAESAR and POMPEY, AUGUSTUS
and MARCUS ANTONIUS, and others which depended thereon, into remembrance; with
which these whereof we now treat may well make comparison, both for alteration
in estates, for number of men, and effusion of blood; I cannot say whether for
continuance of time, in countries and provinces, or no: for after these wars
began, there died by the sword four Emperors (as it has bin, and shall be
declared) Four Emperors slain in the civil wars.
which which were NERO, GALBA, OTHO and VITELLIVS, besides VINDEX, and other
Noblemen which were slain; and besides VINDEX Legions, which (as we said) were
overthrown in France, there were great encounters and battles fought, and
extreme cruelties committed. And these wars lasted until VESPASIAN came to
be Emperor, no part of the Empire remaining free from this fury; whereof I
can set down but the sum and most notable accidents which happened therein.

OTHO, coming to the City of Brixellum, upon the side of the River Po, remained
there, sending his Forces before him, under the conduct of good Captains; who
were ill obeyed by their soldiers, being grown proud for that they had made
an Emperor; imagining, that no man ought to have the command of them. The like
want of obedience was in VITELLIVS Army, and for the same reason: and, the
wars waxing cruel between these two Commanders Battles betwixt Otho and
Vitellius.
and their Armies, they made such haste, as leaving apart the great skirmishes
and other encounters, there were within few days space two or three notable
battles fought betwixt them: one of which was near to the City of Placentia;
the other, near to Cremona; and the third near to a place called Castor, in
which were slain a very great number of men: and in all these three battles
OTHO his Captains and the Romans had the better, although that of either side
the word was, Rome and the Empire.

After which, VALENS and CECINNA, who were VITELLIVS Lieutenants (which until
then had made wars apart) joined their Forces together, reinforcing their
Armies with new soldiers and supplies; determining to set up their whole rest
in one battle, if the enemy would give it them. At that time (as PLVTARCH
reports) OTHO, very joyful for the victories obtained by his Captains, came
to his Army at Bebriacum (where then it lay) near unto Cremona; and, seeing
that his enemies (notwithstanding they had been put to the worse, and were
routed) made show to desire to fight again, took counsel whether that of his
part he should do the like or no. The greatest part, and wisest men, were of
opinion, that he should prosecute the wars without hazarding any battle; for
that his enemy endured want of many things, and with their losses past had
likewise lost much reputation; and many Countries were revolted from VITELLIVS,
and held for OTHO: besides that, VITELLIVS could send them little relief; and,
on the contrary, his Army was well provided of all things necessary, and Rome
and all Italy were wholly at his devotion. And, besides all this, the
Provinces of the East stood firm for him; and the Legions in Servia, Bulgaria,
Hungary, and Austria, were upon the way coming to his aid: so as he had no
reason so often to tempt his fortune, and therefore he ought to weary his
enemy by delays, or else to stay for greater power; wherein there was no doubt
of victory. But those which were haughty, and desirous to fight, alleged many
reasons to the contrary; that he ought not to lose the occasion, and the good
success of fortune, neither to suffer VITELLIVS to come to his Army, and to
free it from the fear wherein it was; with many other reasons, to the end a
battle might be given. And OTHO, being inclined thereto, approved it, and
commanded the same to be put in execution: for, in truth, he did so much
abhor the war, as he held it for a less evil to lose the victory, than long
to stand in suspense. And being resolved upon this counsel, he returned to
Brixelle: for, it was agreed, that he should not personally be in the
battle; and so his Army went to seek VITELLIVS his Forces, which were not
far off. And, as of either party they were desirous to fight, so they came to
a battle; where, in the beginning, OTHO his Army was deceived by a show of
peace which his enemies made: whereupon they gave the charge very slowely, and
Authors report the manner thereof very diversely, as it uses to happen in the
like accidents: but all affirm, that both the one and the other fought
valiantly, saving the Pretorian Cohorts, which were those in whom OTHO reposed
his chiefest trust; through whose default and cowardice, OTHO lost the battle,
and VITELLIVS was Victor, and (with great slaughter of his adversaries) became
Master of the Field.

OTHO his Captains with such others as by flight escaped from the battle,
retired themselves to their camp, and fortified the same, in hope to have been
relieved by their Emperor; notwithstanding that many fled to sundry parts: but
he, hearing the news of the overthrow of his Army, brought by those which
fled unto him: And among the first that brought this disastrous news was a
common Soldier, who when he reported the overthrow of the Army, and could
purchase no credit, but was taxed with untruth, and that he had run away
through fear and cowardice, he fell upon his own sword, at OTHOES feet: at
which sight he cried out: That he would no more draw such valiant soldiers,
and so well deserving, into danger. Notwithstanding he knew that in the camp
there were sufficient forces, and that he had opportunity to temporize, and to
stay for the legions which came out of Missia, Hungary, Austria and Dalmatia to
his aid, and were near at hand: yet he regarded not any of those helps, but
with his own hand resolved to end the civil wars, which as it passed (for
that it is a notable action, although I shall be somewhat tedious) I will
declare as PLVTARCH and TACITUS write it, and SVETONIVS TRANQVILLVS also after
the report of his own father, who was then present, which was thus. The heavy
tidings of this overthrow being published, all thosewhich were in the city)
which were many and very good men, and the greatest part of the Senate of Rome)
came to OTHO his lodging, fearing and suspecting that which afterward ensued,
by reason of that which they had understood by him before: all which with show
of great courage offered to die for his service, and endeavored to animate and
comfort him: but all this (notwithstanding that he knew a great part of his
army yet remained, and that more forces were coming unto him, and that there
wanted neither courage in his soldiers, nor means to continue the wars)
sufficed not to alter his resolutions; so much did he abhor civil discord
and contention. And giving answer to all the reasons and persuasions which
they used unto him, he made unto them a very notable Oration, signifying, that
he would never Otho his Oration.
have begun the wars against VITELLIVS, but in hope of peace, which he had
sought and procured before he took Arms; and that he had no use for those
legions and forces which they said came to his aid, seeing that his enemy was
neither HANNIBAL nor PYRRHVS, or any other common enemy to the people of Rome;
but Romans themselves, and the Lords thereof: so as the Conquerers and
Conquered did wrong their Country if they contended any longer, seeing that
the joy of the victory was to the loss and prejudice thereof: And that he
could no way so much advance the Roman Empire by winning battles in war and
contention, as by making a sacrifice of himself for the peace thereof, seeing
that by his death only a general union and concord would ensue: wherefore he
was content that VITELLIVS should be Emperor without any more bloodshed, and
he desired no revenge nor rule, to the ruin of his Citizens, neither to
diminish the Commonwealth by the loss of such Armies; and that as others had
purchased honor and fame by well-governing and supporting the Empire, so he
would likewise procure himself a good name by leaving it resolutely, to the end
he would not damnifie it. And, finally speaking these words, and giving other
good reasons, permitting and persuading all those which were with him to go and
serve VITELLIVS; night being come, he retired himself to his chamber: where he
commanded all his money and jewels to be taken out, which he divided among his
servants and friends. Which although they would not accept, yet Otho divided
his money and Jewels amongst his servants and friends.
he commanded them to go to their rest: and he did the like, laying first the
sharpest of two Rapiers which he had, under his beds head: and, being laid in
his bed, he slept part of the night, in presence of those which were in his
chamber, the door standing open; and, awaking about the break of the day, and
seeing one of his servants remaining, he commanded him to go forth. And, then
presently taking the Rapier in his hand, he thrust himself under the left side
with such force as the wound was mortal, giving one only groan, which was
heard by his servants, who hastily ran unto him, and found him striving with
death, and died presently under their hands. By Otho slew himself.
those which were present, and such as presently repaired thither from all
parts of the city to him, there was so great lamentation made for him, as it
seemed the heavens had rent asunder: so much was this man beloved in so few
days. And his body was presently burned, according as the custom then was.
And so ended the Emperor OTHO manfully and resolutely, according to the
opinion and law of the Romans: scarcely four months after that he had
usurped the Empire, in the 38. year of his age, and the 71. after the birth of
CHRIST, leaving after him neither son nor daughter. He was a man but of a
small stature, and had crooked feet; but he was so neat and curious in attiring
himself, as the care which he took therein, was more beseeming a woman then a
man. He ever ware a periwig, and suffered no jot of his beard to grow, shauing
it every day, and so used such other eff^inate toys, much dissonant from the
manly resolution which he showed at his death. Many of his soldiers which were
about him, when with abundance of tears they had kissed his hands and feet as
he lay dead, and commended him for a valiant man, and the only Emperors that
ever was, presently slew themselves near unto his funeral fire. And many
which were absent, hearing of his end, (oppressed with grief) slew one another.
Finally, many who in his life cursed and detested him, being now dead, highly
commended him, so as it was an ordinary speech, That GAL^A was not slain by
him for that he affected Sovereignty, but because he desired to restore the
Commonwealth to her lost liberty.

The news of his death and of the victory was brought to his enemy VITELLIVS
in France: who having intelligence of the losses which his captains had
received, was coming with all the forces that he was able to make, to join
with them, and to reinforce the army. In those days, LINVS who was S. PETER'S
successor, held the chief seat in the Church of Rome, where there was a
Church and congregation of Christians, which made their prayers to God for
those which persecuted them.

THE LIFE OF AVLVS VITELLIVS, ONLY OF THAT NAME, AND NINTH ROMAN EMPEROVR.
THE ARGUMENT.
AFter Otho, Aulus Vitellius, borne of a Noble Family, succeeded in the Empire,
wherein he was unfortunate: for he governed the same but 8. months. This man
was of a cruel disposition, and of a bountiful mind. In his time Vespasian,
being in the East, was made Emperor by his Soldiers; who coming to a
battle in Italy against Vitellius, took him prisoner: and binding his hands
behind him, leading him (publicly) half naked, and his face all durtie, they
slew him with many wounds, in the same place where he had put Sabinus,
Vespasians brother, to death. He lived 57. years, and reigned (as is above
said) little more then half a year. By whose misery it plainly appears how
variable the motions of fortune are, and that oftentimes a kingdom is lost
through the same means whereby it was unjustly gotten, as appears in this
Emperor: for Vespasian did by him as he had done by his Predecessor Otho.

AS the contention for the Title of Emperor continued betwixt OTHO and
VITELLIVS, as by that which is already said may be understood; OTHO being dead,
all yielded to VITELLIVS: which happened in this manner; The great lamentation
made for the death of OTHO being ended, all the men of war, both Legionarie
and Pretorian, with all the rest, made repair to the lodging of VIRGINIVS, who
had been Commander of the German Legions, who fought against VINDEX his Army
when they both made a mutiny against NERO. And, being all assembled together,
they entreated him to take upon him the name of Emperor; offering him their
service, and to die in the action; and if that he pleased not to accept
thereof, yet at the least that he would be their Ambassador to VALENS and
CECINNA, and obtain their pardon of them. VIRGINIVS RUFUS, who was a wise and
valiant man answered them with the best words he could devise, alleging that
to him it seemed folly to accept of the Empire from the hands of those which
were overcome, having refused the same of the Germane Legions, which now were
victors, when in the life of NERO they had offered it him. And as concerning
the ambassade which they requested him to perform for them, he gave them a
doubtful and uncertain answer, still putting them in hope, until that he
was gotten into his lodging, and out again at a back door, and so retired to
a secret place where he hid himself until that fury was past. But a certain
man of note whose name was RVERIVS GALLVS, afterward accepting of that
journey, went to VITELLIVS his Captains to treat thereof; and peace and
pardon was granted, as well to these men as to the army overcome near
Bebriaco, and so all came to the obedience of VITELLIVS in his absence. The
like was done by part of the Senate which came with OTHO, and was then in
Modena. And in Rome, when as the death of OTHO was known, FLAVIVS SABINVS
(being Prefect of the city) assembled the Senate, who conforming themselves to
the time (which was now to profer service and to flatter) with the accustomed
solemnity proclaimed VITELLIVS for Emperor, giving him the title of AUGUSTUS,
and Pater patriae, with other honorable titles and Vitellius confirmed
Emperor by the Senate.
Epithetes, resolving to give great thanks, and to commend the Army for that
which was done. The news of all this came to the new Emperor VITELLIVS in
France upon the coast of Italy: which how pleasing it was to him, may easily be
imagined; wherewith he hastened his way with admirable pomp and pride, his
soldiers in all the cities as they passed, committing many disorders and
insolences.

The German Legions which were in Italy, grown proud through the victory which
they had obtained, and for that they were the Authors of VITELLIVS his Empire,
committed outrages never seen nor heard of in that country before, whereof
the spoils and loss which the people sustained was inestimable, as TACITUS
and SVETONIVS report: And VITELLIVS, coming full of pride for his victory into
Italy, either could not, or would not remedy these disorders. And that in
some sort he might seem to do justice and show himself a Iusticer, he caused
all the Pretorian Cohorts, which had been actors about the death of GALBA, and
making of OTHO Emperor, to be disarmed and deprived of the name and honor of
Soldiers, and commanded their arms to be taken from them, and one hundred
and twenty of the most guilty he condemned to death; and being sought and
found out, a just sentence was executed upon them, if it had proceeded from a
just Judge. VITELLIVS, thus marching toward Rome, desired to see the place
where his Captains obtained the victory against OTHO his Army: and being but
forty days after the same, the fields lay full of dead bodies which were yet
unburied; and as many of those which were with him could not endure the evil
smell thereof, the cruel tyrant reproved them, saying, That there was no
sweeter sent in the world, then the smell of an enemy when he is dead, and
especially of a citizen: A The cruel speech of Vitellius.
speech doubtless very inhumane and cruel; the which is written to be
abhorred, and ought to be read with the like affection.

VITELLIVS being come to Rome, as upon the way many scandals and outrages were
committed by the sundry nations which came with him, with infinite robberies
and spoils done in the country; so was his entry into the city fearful and
terrible: for he entered into it as into an enemies country which had been
conquered, mounted upon a great horse, clad in military and warlike
habiliments; the Senate and people of Rome going before him as though that he
had Vitellius his entry into Rome.
triumphed over them; compassed about with standards, with the Eagles, and
sundry other ensigns, and his whole Army both of foot and horse, armed in the
best armor and furniture that could be gotten. In this manner he went to the
Capitol to make his prayers to IVPITER, and afterward he went in the same
manner to his Palace: and the next day commanding the Senate to be assembled,
he came thither; where he made a fit speech, magnifying with little wit or
discretion his acts and adventures, and promising great goodness of himself;
and by them was humbly answered, obeyed and honored as Emperor, and their
sovereign Lord.

Departing from the Senate and taking his way toward his palace, all the
people of Rome (being accustomed to flatter and to make offers of their
service) met him, making show of great joy, applauding and blessing him: and as
new accidents ever bring good hopes, so all were of opinion that* VITELLIVS
would prove a good Emperor. These first solemnities being ended, he made
himself presently to be chosen high Priest, and perpetual Consul; and took to
himself certain dignities, such as he thought good, and commanded that
Magistrates should be chosen for ten years before hand: so absolutely and
tyrannously purposed he to have usurped all things, if time would have suffered
him. And, thinking by his industry to have prolonged his life, he banished out
of Rome and all Italy all the Judicial Astrologers called Mathematicians,
because they had said, that his Reign should not continue one year complete.
And he was so Vitellius banished the Mathematicians from Rome.
incensed against them, as, if Information were made against any one, he
presently put him to death without hearing the Party. Presently after the
making of his Edict for their banishment by the first of October, there was a
Writing set up in the open market place, to this effect: We give warning by
these Presents unto VITELLIVS GERMANICVS, that by the Calends of the said
October, he be not extant in any place wheresoever. After this, falling to his
old humors and licentious inclination, he began to give himself to the
practices and vices of NERO, and such like; which were plays and dishonest
sports upon Theaters, with public feasts: wherein he consumed an infinite
treasure, desiring to make the beginning of his Empire acceptable and pleasing.
In which time he made so great banquets, as never any Emperor had done the
like before him: at which, was given to his guests (which were a great number
of people) such things as never were thought or heard of; wherein he spent in
estimable sums. SVETONIVS writes, that he sometimes commanded one, and
sometimes another, to invite him: in which feasts they spent at the least ten
thousand crowns. But, above all others, one supper was most stately, made by
his Brother the day he entered into Rome; at which there were two thousand
choice Fishes, and seven thousand Foul. At which supper, to make it more
magnificent, he did consecrate a Charger of a huge capacity, and called it
MINERVA'S Shield: in the which were the Livers, Brains, and Tongues, of rare
Fowls; with the spawn of Mullets, which he had caused to be fisht from the
Carpathian Sea to that of Spain.

During these pleasures (and afterward) he executed great cruelties; in such
sort, as, if his Reign had lasted long, he would have made himself equal with
NERO, whom he did imitate: for, he did put many to death contrary to all law
and equity, seeking forgeries and false accusations against them; with some of
which he had held strict friendship and familiarity: one of which, coming to
visit him being sick, and calling for a little water to drink, he with his own
hand cast poison into the cold water, and poisoned him. At another time he
commanded two young men being brothers to be slain, for no other cause, but
because they came to entreat him to pardon their father, whom he had condemned
to die. And on a time a Roman Knight being Cruelties committed by Vitellius.
carried by his commandment toward the place of execution, he commanded him to
be staid, because he said he had nominated him for his heir by his Will and
Testament: and seeing his Will, and finding that jointly with him he had made a
bondsman of his, whom he had enfranchised, his heir with him, he commanded him
to be slain, and the poor Libertine also, without any other occasion. An
Usurer, coming to salute him, and to do his duty, he delivered him to the
executioner to be put to death; and presently called for him back again: But
when as the standers-by commended him for his clemency, he commanded the
Party to be slain before his face; saying, that he would feed his eyes. He
also used the like cruelties upon some poor and mean people; of which upon a
time he commanded a great number to be slain, for no other occasion, but for
that in certain sports which were used on horseback, and in chariots (wherein
were sundry men apparelled in sundry colors) they took part with those which
were clad in green, which was called the Prasian faction; he being affected to
the contrary color, which they called Venetian, which was gray: which two
colors and factions (although there were white and red also) were the chief
among all the rest. And amongst these colors the good liking and favor of the
Roman people was so divided, as this affection extended it self even to the
Emperors themselves: as, now to VITELLIVS, who favored the gray color; as
NERO and CALIGVLA before him had affected the green: and sometime (as it shall
be hereafter declared) about these vanities there followed great riots and
murders.

These and other such like cruelties and tyrannies committed VITELLIVS in Rome,
and some of his Captains and Favorites did no less: for, having obtained the
victory, every one revenged himself on him whom he hated; and sometime they
fained displeasures, thereby to have a color under which they might rob and
spoil the innocent: such are the fruits of civil war. Besides this, the
violences and opressions which were committed in Rome were very great, and in
the marches thereof by the men of war which he brought with him, and were
lodged in the Country, staying to see him settled in the Empire.

While-as VITELLIVS made so ill a beginning in the City of Rome, suffering
himself to be led and governed by Libertines, and such as were odious to all
men; after that Italy, Spain, France and Africa, were come to his obedience;
in the East the Legions which were there for the defense thereof, although that
in the beginning they refused not his Command, yet they presently did begin
to mutine, and very shortly after resolved to make VESPASIAN their Emperor,
who at this time (as is aforesaid) made war against the Jews, which began
about the end of the reign of NERO; They having rebelled, being abused with
an old fabulous Prophecy, which they did constantly believe, That by the
appointment of the destinies about such a time there should come some out of
Jury, who should be Lords of the whole world: but the event did show it was
meant by the Roman Empire. The issue thereof passed in such manner as follows.
VESPASIAN, who for his worthy acts in his life past, was much esteemed, in this
war gained greater estimation: for he obtained many victories, and besieged and
took many cities in Judea, and PALESTINA; until that at last being ready to
besiege the city of Jerusalem, the Emperor NERO died: and understanding of
his death, and being doubtful what would ensue, he continued the war for a
space, until he might see who should succeed in the Empire: and knowing that
GALBA prevailed, he took no care to proceed any further or to oppress the
city, but preserved what he had gotten, and kept the enemy in awe, observing
what course the new Emperor would take: and so he sent his son TITUS to Rome,
to treat of this business, and to offer him his obedience. Who being hindered by
contrary weather, when he came to the coast of Achaia in Gracia, he was
advertised that GALBA was slain by the direction of OTHO; wherefore he held it
for his best course to return to his father, and so he did: and as OTHO his
reign continued but four months as is above said, and in the same followed
the civil wars between him and VITELLIVS, VESPASIAN continued as nowter
although that he acknowledged OTHO for Emperor, until that VITELLIVS obtained
the victory, and OTHO was slain; which was nothing pleasing to him, neither
to the Captains in the East, neither to their armies, for the dislike they had
that so vicious a man as VITELLIVVS should be Emperor: and so that day wherein
they swear fealty to their new Emperor, with the accustomed solemnity, in
presence of VESPASIAN (CORNELIUS TACITUS writes) that the Legions performed it
with great silence and heaviness. And VESPASIAN prosecuting the war with great
honor and fame, and having now resolved to besiege the city of Jerusalem; the
murmuring and coffeehouse so much increased against the new Emperor
VITELLIVS, as well in the army which VESPASIAN commanded, as in those in
Syria, in Egypt, and other ordinary Legions in the East; as they all fixed
their eyes upon VESPASIAN, resolving to create him Emperor against VITELLIVS:
whereto was a great help, the certain news which came that the Legions in
Mysia and Pannonia, had the same resolution: for (as is before related) they
came to the aid of OTHO when his army was defeated, and he slew himself: and
continuing in the same resolution, they disobeied VITELLIVS, desiring and
nominating VESPASIAN for Emperor. In such sort as upon these motions, there
passed some messages and letters between TIBERIUS ALEXANDER, who was governor
of Egypt, and LICINIVS MVCIANVS governor of Syria; who concluded that
VESPASIAN should be Emperor, although that he refused it. And this matter
being begun by TIBERIUS ALEXANDER, who was governor of Egypt, in the city of
Alexandria; VESPASIAN was in his absence proclaimed Emperor, and all the Army
confirmed the same with great applause, doing their accustomed homage: which
happened the first day of July in the seauentie and two year after the birth
of CHRIST. And this was accounted Vespasian made Emperor, which ^e re ^ling,
was compelled to accept thereof by whom and in what manner.
for the beginning of the reign of VESPASIAN; and within eight days or little
more or less his Army did the like, entreating him first to accept thereof:
and he refusing and gainesaying it (as EGESIPPVS and JOSEPHUS doetestifie) they
forced and compelled him with their drawn swords threatening to kill him if he
refused the same. Having accepted thereof and performed all the solemnities
requisite in so great an accident, VESPASIAN as a valiant and excellent prince,
with the like wisdom and valor as he had lived being a subject, began to
show himself a Lord; and to provide for all things with great authority and
judgment, sending Ambassadors, and writing letters to all parts of the world.

And within few days after this, all the armies and provinces of the East came
to his obedience and service; and the like in Europe did those of Mysia,
Bulgaria, Seruia, and those of Hungary and Austria then called Pannonia; and
also those in Slauonia, then called Dalmatia and Illiricum, whose ancient
names I will sometime use until such time as they shall lose the same. The
like I have done and will do in most of the provinces of the Empire. All
things happening so prosperous and luckily to VESPASIANVS, having resolved with
MVCIANVS governor of Syria, TIBERIUS ALEXANDER governor of Egypt, and with
his own son TITUS what was best to be done, it was decreed that TITUS
should continue the wars against the Jews; that MVCIANVS with the greatest
part of the Legions, should with all speed take his journey for Italy; and
that VESPASIAN should go to Alexandria in Egypt to make provision Antonie
captain of the Legions in Slauonia came into Italy against Vitellius.
from all parts, and with a greater power pass over into Italy, there to make
an end of the war, if it were not before hand finished by MVCIANVS. This
being concluded, it was commanded to be presently put in execution. But while
as LICINIVS MVCIANVS was traveling toward Italy, ANTONIE, who was General
of the Legions in Illyricum and Dalmatia, having intelligence of what had
passed, desiring to do VESPASIAN some great service, and to show the hatred
which he bare against VITELLIVS, marched in great have with his Leigons, and
such as he could levy in Mysia and Pannonia, and came to make war in Italy
against the Emperor VITELLIVS, who was in arms.

Of the election of VESPASIAN and of other things (as we have said) and of
every particular which had passed, within few days VITELLIVS had
advertisement, who spent his time in Rome in banketting and riot, although that
he could not long enjoy the same. And desirous to make resistance against so
great forces, he began to levy the greatest power he was able, besides those
which he had already, the which he yet had not discharged: and knowing with
what haste and resolution ANTONY commander of Illiricum came forwards; without
staying for LLCINIVS MVCIANVS, who came with as great speed, he sent VALENS
and CEGINNA his Captains before named, who had served him in the war against
OTHO, with so great an army and power, as seemed sufficient to make head both
against him and LICINIVS MVCIANVS. He also provided extraordinary fleets and
Captains for the Seas. Thus the war begun, but it would be too long to
repeat all the particular accidents which happened: the effect was, that the
two armies approaching the one near to the other, there grew a jealousy that
CECINNA one of VITELLIVS Captains practiced some agreement with VESPASIANS
Commanders: which being known in the army, he was slain by the old
soldiers* ANTONY hearing this, as he had a great desire to fight before that
MVCIANVS should come (after sundry great encounters and skirmishes, which
happened between them) came to a maine battle with the Vitellians, near to
the City Cremona: which was fought with such fury, and was so bloody and
cruel, that of ANTONY his side who was Conqueror, there were slain A
cruel battle.
4500. men, and of the Vitellians, who were overcome above 30000.

This great victory being obtained, Italy, which until then had been wholy
at the devotion of VITELLIVS and took his part, was suddenly divided, and many
Cities sided with VESPASIAN. It is an admirable thing, and worthy of an
excellent History, to recite the accidents which happened within few days, and
the cruel war which CORNELIUS TACITUS vvriteth more at large then any
other, the which I cannot relate for breuities sake, which I observe. But the
issue was, that VITELLIVS Captains, who were ouercom and escaped from the
battle, reinforcing their Army, and gathering together their Soldiers, made
what resistance against VESPASIANS Captains they were able, although they
were not of force to stop their passage to Rome, as hereafter shall be
declared. For, ANTONY being Victor, with the same greatness of mind, and
expedition vvherwith he began the war, endeavored to obtain the victory,
seeking means to put it in execution. As soon as VITELLIVS, being in Rome, was
given to understand of the overthrow of his army, affrighted with such news
(although that he never gave over his vices and beastly courses) he made
election of new Captains, which were JULIUS PRISCVS and ALPHENVS VARRO, who
with thirteen Cohorts should guard the passage of the Appennine mountains;
and should also seek to stop ANTONY his passage for Rome, and MVCIANVS also,
who as it as is said, was already arrived in Italy. And of the rest of his
forces which he held for the guard of the city, he made his brother LUCIUS
VITELLIVS General, and used all possible means to levy men of all sorts. But
the success was such, as fear made VITELLIVS desire to come to some
composition and agreemeent howsouer: And being offered by letters from ANTONY,
who was victor, and also from MVCIANVS that if he would quietly resign the
Empire, his life should be granted him, and a place with means sufficient for
his maintenance; thereto he gave ear and took A compositio^ offered to (...),
co^nally that he should resign the Empire.
counsel thereupon, with FLAVIVS SABINVS, VESPASIAN his brother, who in all
these troubles remained in Rome, and never withdrew himself from VITELLIVS,
having also with him DOMITIANVS, VESPASIANS youngest son, who afterward was
Emperor: and it was concluded in the temple of IVNO; where he swear and
promised to renounce the Empire, and would presently have put it in effect, as
he twice protested openly: so great was his fear. But those which were of
greatest authority about him did so much oppose it, and chiefly the Pretorian
Cohorts, as he took heart again, and altered his determination.

Which when FLAVIVS SABINVS understood (to whose house were drawn together a
great number of the chiefest noble men of Rome, as to his brother whom they
made account should be Emperor) he was much moved therewith. And knowing that
in the behalf of VITELLIVS there came some to murder him in his house, being
induced thereto by those which were with him, he went forth of his house with
strong hand, although with less power then was requisite for so great an
action, and retired to the Capitol (which was the chiefest strength of Rome)
and seized on the same, where he was presently besieged by VITELLIVS his
friends. And as it commonly happens, Many will give honorable and grave
counsel, but there are few will thrust themselves into danger, neither lend
their hand to put it in execution: so, few of those which had persuaded him to
enter into this action, came to his aid, or made any repair unto him. The
next morning he was assaulted with great fury; in the defense whereof was no
good order, but rather little agreement: and as in such misfortunes and
disasters it happens, all will direct and command, but few will execute; so
as by the means of ill fighting and worse direction, the Capitol was by force
entered and burned, and all those which were therein, slain, and FLAVIVS
SABINVS taken prisoner, who within a little while after was put to death by the
commandment of VITELLIVS; and young DOMITIANVS his nephew and son to
VESPASIAN, escaped by flight, and so might SABINVS have done that night (as
CORNELIUS TACITUS reports) if he would have come forth of the Capitol: for
there was no sufficient guard to have hindered him: but he with too little
judgment, and too much presumption was lost, as is said.

After the death of SABINVS, VITELLIVS hearing that ANTONY drew near to Rome
with his forces, he again began to seek some agreement; and to that end sent
letters and messengers unto him: and he grew so fearful and dejected, as he
sent the vestall virgins, who were virgins enclosed like Nuns in a Cloister;
which was the most religious and most ceremoniously guarded of any thing in
Rome. But ANTONY, being incensed for the death of SABINVS, would give no ear
to their words, neither come to any composition; but kept on his way until he
came near Rome, where VITELLVS his Forces attended him, resolutely determining
to defend themselves. So there being, both without and within, a very great
number of the best soldiers in the world, ANTONY assailed it in three parts,
and VITELLIVS his people sallied out against him in as many; and there began at
each of them one of the most cruel fights in the world: which CORNELIUS
TACITUS describes excellently well; affirming, that it lasted the greatest part
of the day. And, in the end, that City (which was the Head and Lady of the
world) was taken by those which were her own natural Subjects; and they which
were Rome entered, taken, and sacked, and by whom
subdued endured that which in like cases happens, and much more; as,
slaughters, spoilings, violences, and extreme disgraces, as against enemies
whom they deadly hated for the death of SABINVS, for that he was their Lords
Brother, and for the obstinacy and fury wherewith they had fought.

When VITELLIVS saw that the City was entered, thinking to escape by flight, he
went forth of his Palace; and, finding no safe way (I know not with what hope)
he returned thither again; and, finding it abandoned without guard or defense,
in the best manner he could he hid himself in a secret place: where he staid
not long before he was found by a Tribune. And being taken by him, without
attending any further determination or counsel, they bound his hands behind
him, and cast a rope about his neck: and, tearing his clothes from his back,
half naked they led him through the streets of Rome, until they brought him to
the principal place; where by the way they did him an infinite number of
indignities and disgraces; pulling his hair behind him, as they used to
malefactors; and, setting a dagger under his chin, that he might be seen of
all men, some casting dirt and filth in his face, others calling him
Incendiarie and glutton; and some reproaching him with the defects of his body:
and there he was slain by the The death of Vitellius.
soldiers (no man being able to aver for certain, who either began or ended)
and cast into Tiber. And this was the end of this tyrannous Emperor, and with
him died his brother LUCIUS VITELLIVS, and one only son which he had at his
death. He had not been Emperor much above eight months, as most authors
affirm, although that SVETONIVS sets down a longer time: for he makes his
account that VESPASIAN was chosen Emperor in the East, in the eight month of
VITELLIVS his reign, which was some months before his death, which was in the
57. year of his age, and the 72. year after the birth of our SAVIOVR. Anno
Dom. 7^.
What happened after his death shall be referred to the history of VESPASIAN,
seeing that it was in his time. VITELLIVS was so tall, and so corpulent of
body, as he was therewith deformed. His face was very red, by reason of the
much wine which he drank, and was very corpulent: he went lame of one leg,
through a bruise which he had received by a wagon.

THE LIFE OF FLAVIVS VESPASIANVS, ONLY OF THAT NAME, AND TENTH ROMAN EMPEROVR.
THE ARGUMENT.
VItellius being ignominiously slain, the good Vespasian attained to the
Imperial dignity, who restored tired Rome to such rest, as it seemed to have
recovered her ancient dignity and greatness, from whence the vices and
wickedness of many former Emperors had made it to fall. This man, before that
he attained to the Empire, was no less wise then valiant in Art Military: so
as he grew to be so excellent, as notwithstanding he was not borne of any very
Noble house, yet for his virtues he deserved to be made Emperor. In his time
were ended the wars of Jerusalem, under the government of his son Titus. He
made many Provinces tributary to the Roman Empire, which until then never
yielded obedience. He beautified Rome, not only by repairing the ruins,
grown by the fire, made by Nero; but he also built a new Amphitheater and
Temples, which he adorned with fair marble, and most beautiful Statues: for
in his time painting and caruing flourished. He was very courteous and mild,
and amongst his other virtues, this was one: to forget injuries, and not to
regard what malicious tongues said of him. He was very cleanly, and neat of his
body. In his diet he was very temperate, and fasted one whole day in every
month. He was noted for no other vice but avarice, whereof he excused
himself, alleging, that he found the Imperial Treasury empty, through the
pilling of former Tyrants. He lived 69. years, and reigned ten, and dyed of
the flux. Truly, it seems this Emperor was borne for the good of the Roman
Common wealth; to the end, that after the cruelty of so many Tyrants it should
not be wholly ruinated.

AS fair weather comes after tempests and storms: so was the Reign of
VESPASIAN after the troublesome and stormy times of the detestable Emperors
TIBERIUS, CALIGVLA, NERO, and the tyrannies and civil wars of GALBA, OTHO,
and VITELLIVS: wherewith the Roman Empire was so divided and shaken, as it was
ready to come to ruin, if VESPASIAN had not upheld and supported the same by
his goodness, valor and wisdom. VESPASIAN was of the Family of the FLAVII,
Vespasians (...) nage.
mean and low, and not honored with any titles and dignities. He had, long
before these civil combustions, tokens presaging Sovereignty. First, within a
Country Farm belonging to the FLAVII, there stood an old Oak consecrated to
MARS, which at three child-births of VESPASIA, suddenly put forth a bough at
every birth. The first was small, and withered soon (for, a daughter then born
died within one year): the second grew and continued long: but the third came
to the bigness of a Tree. Whereupon SABINVS (Father to VESPASIAN) told his own
mother, that she had a Nephew born which should be CAESAR. Being in Achaia, he
dreamed that he and his should prosper, when as NERO had a tooth drawn: and it
happened, that the day following a Barber showed him a tooth of NERO'S, newly
drawn. And JOSEPHUS, being taken in the Jewish Wars, and cast into prison,
maintained constantly, that he should be shortly set at liberty by him, but he
should be Emperor first. These, with many other presages, confirmed his hopes
to obtain the Empire. He was 59 years old when he was chosen Emperor; and
came to be known, and to win reputation and credit in the times of CLAUDIUS,
CALIGVLA, and NERO; and he obtained offices and dignities in the wars, and in
the government of Cities. In Thracia he was Tribune of the soldiers; and,
being Questor Vespasians offices and dignitie^
or Treasurer, the I Will of Creta (now Candia) fell to his lot. He was Edil and
Praetor in Rome, and afterward was Lieutenant to the Legions in Germany: and
from thence he was sent to be Governor and General in Britanny when it
rebelled, where (as EVTROPIVS and SVETONIVS report) he fought above thirty
times in battles and skirmishes, in his own person: so as for his desert there
were Arms and triumphant ornaments given him, such as they did use to give to
such as did triumph. After all which, he was Consul in Rome two months in the
end of a year, and was afterward Proconsul in Asia in the time of NERO; and in
the end was sent thither by him to that war against them: the which he
followed when as he was chosen Emperor against VITELLIVS, his Army compelling
him thereto, as it is already observed. He had at that time two sons, the one
called TITUS who was with him, the other DOMITIANVS who was in Rome: both which
he had by FLAVIA DOMICILLA his lawful wife, daughter to FLAVIVS LI^ERALIS; by
whom he had had a daughter which was dead, whose name was DOMICILLA also.

And this is the sum of his life before he came to the Empire. But, returning
to our History, it passed in this manner: VITELLIVS being so reproachfully and
ignominiously slain in Rome; although with his death the war ceased, yet the
fruits and effects thereof were not ended: for, the Conquerors committed so
many slaughters and spoils upon those which had taken VITELLIVS part, as there
was no part of Rome wherein was not effusion of blood; so as that City endured
(by means of this battle) the like or greater misery, than in the wars and
proscriptions of MARIUS and SILLA, or any other whatsoever in times past. But,
as soon as MVCIANVS came to Rome, who was the chief Commander sent by
VHSPASIAN, and that DOMITIANVS was returned, who ever since the death of his
Uncle SABINVS, and the burning of the Capitol, lay hidden; these murders and
revenges ceased, and there began some order to be taken in the Commonwealth.

The Senate was assembled, and the government of VESPASIAN was accepted and
approoved, and there were given unto him the names and titles which were
usually given to other Emperors, and messengers with all diligence were sent
unto him, to advertise him of the victory, and to yield obedience in the
behalf of the Senate. And for that (being absent) he could not take order and
provide for the estate of Rome, his son DOMITIANVS, MVCIANVS and ANTONIE
which then were of greatest power, began to manage the government, not without
confusion and emulation between them, until the coming of VESPASIAN, which
by reason of the dangerous sailing in the winter time was deferred. The only
thing he wanted (being as it were a new unexpected Prince) was countenance and
authority, and a kind of royal Majesty, which also followed suddenly upon
this occasion: Being in Alexandria (attending a seasonable time for his passage
to Rome) there was a certain man of mean quality stark blind, and another
lame, both which came together when as he sat on his Tribunal, craving help
for their infirmities, it being foretold them by SERAPIS in their dreams,
that If VESPASIAN did but spet in the blind man's eyes, he should recover his
sight; and the others leg should be made strong, if he would but touch it with
his heel. He doubted much of the success, and therefore durst not put it in
practice: yet in the end, by the persuasion and importunity of his friends,
before the whole Assembly he tried both the means; and they were both cured, as
SVETONIVS writes.

DOMITIANVS was called CAESAR, and made Praetor of Rome with Consulary
authority; and, because he was the Emperors son, had the preeminence and chief
place in all matters, although he proved not afterward to be such as he ought
to have been: for, besides that he was vicious, he was disloyal aand
disobedient to his Father. The Senates Ambassadors, and others which were sent
from Rome, found VESPASIAN in the City of Alexandria in Egypt, with his Legions
and men of war ready to pass into Italy against VITELLIVS (knowing nothing,
that he was dead) and stayed there with the King of Parthia's Ambassadors,
which offered him 40000 horsemen. In like manner, there were Ambassadors from
other Kings and Tetrarchs of the East (some subject to the Empire, and some
free) which came to the like intent: but, seeing there was no such need to draw
so great Forces to Rome, he gave great thanks to the King of Parthia's Legates,
and the rest of the Kings for their offers, and resolved to take his passage as
soon as conveniently he might: And so, as a wise Emperor, forgot not to take
order for the defense and extent of the bounds of the Empire; resolving to send
his son TITUS to make an end of the wars begun by him against the Jews and
the holy City of Jerusalem: to whom besides the ordinary Legions, he gave three
other Legions; wherewith TITUS continued the wars with great resolution: and,
by Gods permission, the Jews were in his time, by the hands of the Romans, and
through their own civil dissension, vanquished even to their total
confusion, as hereafter in brief shall be declared. VESPASIAN could not so
soon depart from Alexandria as he desired, by reason of the stormy and
unseasonable wearther by Sea, unfit for Navigations, in which time there arose
in Rome great troubles, emulations, envy, and contentions between MVCIANVS
and ANTONY, each seeking to be preferred before other: Tumult in Rome
MVCIANVS, for that he was the chief commander sent by VESPASIAN, and had
borne great sway in his election; and the other, for the great victories which
he had gotten in his service against VITELLIVS and his Captains. The bad
practices of DOMITIANVS were also partly cause of these tumults, who could not
be easily restrained, considering who he was. But the reuolts and insurrections
which then were in Germany and part of France, did much more trouble them that
swayed the government: for all was in combustion, and in Arms against the
Empire, which had a former original in the time of VITELLIVS, although that
then we could not relate it. The original and occasion thereof was in manner
as follows.

In the province of Battauia, now called Holland (a province in low Germany,
which the Rhine An in^ (...)in Holland.
dividing it self makes an Island) there was an audacious man, of great credit
among them, whose name was CLAUDIUS CIVILIS, who under color of taking part
with VESPASIAN against VITELLIVS, when the war began between them, levied
some forces of that country, and induced the Frieslanders and their captain,
whose name was B^INO, to do the like: and being thus in arms, they assailed
those of the Roman legions which held for VITELLIVS; and taking them at
unawares, slew many of them, being left weak by reason that VITELLIVS withdrew
the greatest part of the forces from thence when he went against OTHO as
before has been mentioned: So as they drove all the Roman garrisons out of
that province, and there happened afterward many encounters and skirmishes of
either side, until that VESPASIAN prevailing in Italy, FLACCVS HORDHONIVS,
being for VITELLIVS captain of those legions in Germany, was slain by his own
soldiers, proclaiming VESPASIAN; and so the legions remained without order of
commander. CLAUDIUS CIVILIS with the forces of Holland and Friesland, joining
with another captain called CLASSICVS, imagined that in the confusion of those
troublesome times, they might free their countries; or to say better, make
themselves Lords thereof, as many have done: and drawing to their faction
certain of the legions which remained firm for VITHLLIVS, they made an
insurrection against VESPASIAN, publishing that he was dead; in such sort as
within few days, some cities in France reuol^ed, so as it was feared that some
great alteration would have ensued in the Empire. Which, as I said, put
MVCIANVS and ANTONIE in great doubt; for DOMITIANVS who should have had the
greatest care, spent his time in his vices and pleasures. After many counsels
and consultations held about this business, QVINTILIVS CERIALIS was sent for
General into those parts: who both valiantly and wisely followed the wars,
and reduced those legions to the service of the Empire, who being abused, had
joined with CLAUDIUS CIVILIS; and obtained notable victories although hardly
gotten and very bloody, which CORNELIUS TACITUS sets down at large. Being in
the hear of this war, holding it to be of great importance, MVCIANVS and
DOMITIANVS departed from Rome, with the greatest power they could raise, to
give relief and aid where need should require; who being come to the Alps,
they had intelligence that CERIALIS had obtained another famous victory in a
great battle: by means whereof, and of the fame of their coming, all those
countries yielded their obedience, and the Germans laying down their arms,
desired peace. Notwithstanding this, DOMITIAN, although there were no Domitia^
suspected.
need, had a desire to march forwards, and to take the government and forces
which CERIALIS held and commanded, and wrote sundry letters to him requesting
the same: whereupon he was suspected, that his intent was to rebel against his
father, and so writes CORNELIUS TACITUS. Others suspect that he did it of
envy against his brother TITUS, and to make himself equal with him: But his
practices, whatsoever they were, took no effect. For, CERIALIS dissembled and
would not yield his command and government unto him, and MVCIANVS hindered his
passage from going any further: for CERIALIS within few days had pacified the
country, and DOMITIANVS returned to Rome to receive his father, who (he knew)
was coming, and within few days came, having sailed from Alexandria to Vespa^
coming to Rome.
Rhodes in ships, and from thence in galleys; and passing all along the coast
of Graecia, visited all the cities thereof which were in his way, till his
arrival in Italy, and so came to Rome, where he was most solemnly received
(which JOSEPHUS most elegantly relates.) For, as his coming had been long
desired and wished for; so was it very grateful and pleasing to all men, and
he presently began to do things conformable to the desire and hope which they
had conceived of him, in ministering justice, in reforming the laws and
customs of Rome, revvarding those which had served him, and pardoning and
punishing with singular clemency those which were his adversaries: in
conclusion, he made a good and laudable beginning of his Empire, and perseuered
and ended therein, as shall appear.

In the mean time while as the Emperor VESPASIAN parted from Alexandria and
came to Rome, his son TITUS prosecuting the wars against the Jews, having
subdued the country round about, he came and besieged the City of Jerusalem,
at such time as from all parts of the world an incredible number of Jews were
come into the City, to celebrate the feast of the Paschall Lamb. Of the siege
and destruction thereof, because it was a matter of great moment, and
prophesied of before, and was famous afterward, it shall not be amiss in few
words to declare the end thereof; and for as much, as in truth, it was the most
strictly and obstinately besieged, and best defended City that ever was in the
world, the Jews persisting in their obstinacy and rebellion, by Gods
permission, in revenge of the death and passion of his only Jerusalem besieged
by Titus.
son JESUS CHRIST our Savior God and man: all which JOSEPHUS, EGESIPPVS and
CORNELIUS TACITUS write at large, to which I remit the curious reader, besides
many others which are more brief: being by TITUS besieged in such manner, as
no man could sallie forth, or enter into it. For the effecting whereof, not
contenting himself with the multitude of his men of war and provision,
within few days he compassed it round about with trenches and ramparts, such
as were sufficient, making the soldiers of his army set their hands to the
work: so as he besieged it in this manner the space of five months; in which
time there were so many assaults, skirmishes and slaughters, as by the numbers
of the dead, which we will set down, may appear: and such as I never read or
heard that the like had passed before any City; with such obstinacy and
resolution the besiegers assailed it, and the besieged defended themselves. In
all which TITUS performed the duty of a most excellent Captain and a valiant
Knight; sometime giving direction and commanding, and also when need required
fighting, that, as JOSEPHUS testifies, in this conquest he slew twelve Jews
with his own hands. The hunger which afflicted the City of Jerusalem in this
siege, is wonderful to read: for, all ordinary sustenance being spent,
although they made the greatest spare thereof that was possible, they gave
themselves to eat all things that might yield any taste, without any
difference, good or bad, eating the flesh of horses, asses, dogs, cats, rats,
snakes, adders, and other unclean and strange things, as it seems incredible
to all humane reason: But The extreme famine in the city of Jerusalem when it
was besieged. A mother killed and ate her own son. Jerusalem taken by Titus.
this gives it the more credit, for that all writers both Christian and
Heathen affirm, that there was a mother which killed and ate her own son,
whom she had at her breast. Finally, after the death of an infinite number by
sword and famine, upon the eight day of September (having been besieged about
five months, and above four years after the war was begun by VESPASIAN in
the reign of NERO) the City of Jerusalem was entered by force, and a great
number of those which were therein slain: and so had they all been, but that
TITUS, moved with compassion, commanded the execution upon women, and such as
bare no arms, to cease. But although that this slaughter was stayed, yet in
the province and the city there died of hunger and the sword (as EVSEBIVS,
PAVLVS OROSIVS and other authors affirm) six hundred thousand men able to
bear arms. And if we shall give credit to JOSEPHUS, who was an eyewitness
to most part thereof, there died eleven hundred thousand; and there were
Captives which were sold, nintie seven thousand. EGESIPPVS, who is of no less
credit and authority, agrees with him in the number of the captives; but in
the number of the dead, he sets down 100000. less, which seems to be an
error but in the letter: both which do yield the reason of so great mortality
to be, as is said; for that so great a number was gathered together in
Jerusalem to the feast at Easter, and had retired thither as to the head of all
that province, there to die or defend the same. Also that famous Temple was
burnt, and those strong and stately walls of the famous Temple of SOLOMON were
thrown down, Salomons temple destroyed.
and all the City laid waste, desolate and wholly ruined, as sundry Prophets
had before prophesied.

And this just and deserved destruction of Jerusalem happened in the second
year of the Emperor VESPASIAN, and the fortith year after the death of CHRIST
our Lord, and the seventy theee after his birth, being (according to EVSEBIVS
and PAVLVS OROS^ one thousand one hundred and two years after that the Temple
was first built by SALOMO^ and five hundred nintie and one year after that it
was reedified in the time of K. DARIUS, having been destroyed by the
Babylonians. In this account I follow EVSEBIVS his computation, to avoid
disputation about the difference which is among Writers. All affirm, and it
does plainly appear by PLINY and CORNELIUS TACITUS, that Jerusalem had never
been so rich, Jerusalem destroyed and laid waste, so that there remained not
one stone upon another, An. Dom. 40
nor so populous, nor so sumptuous in walls, temples and buildings, as at the
time of CHRIST his passion, and when it was destroyed. And so that City and the
holy Temple were ouerthrown and laid even with the ground, not one stone
remaining upon another; according as our Savior CHRIST had told his
Disciples, they showing it to him, and extolling the greatness and building of
that Temple, as the holy Evangelist recites more at large: and so it lay
until the Emperor ADRIAN began to reedifie it, although not in the same place,
neither such as it was before; as hereafter shall be declared. And so that
Province, which had been governed by the Romans as their friends, and in a
manner free, was made captive and tributarie; and the The Jews taken in
Jerusalem, sold and dispersed over the world.
Jews being captives were fould and dispersed through all parts of the world.

This war being ended by TITUS in such manner as is specified, his Father and
all Rome greatly rejoiced thereat, and to both them the triumph was granted by
the Senate, because they both had followed that war. And TITUS, leaving all
things in good order in the East, came victorious to Rome. And, within few
days after, both the Father and the Son entered triumphing with one of the
most solemn and stately triumphs that ever was seen in Rome. The Vespasian and
Titus came to Rome in triu^ph for the wars of of the Jews.
which he that will see more at large, shall find it written by JOSEPHUS in
his seventh book of the wars of the Jews.

While-as TITUS was busied about the siege of the City of Jerusalem, the
Alanes, a people of Scythia (of whom hereafter we shall speak much) had their
abode above the lake Meotis, near the River Tanais: who in very great numbers
abandoned their Country, it being barren and unfruitful, or for that it was
not sufficient to sustain them, and came into the Territory of the Medes,
robbing and spoiling that Country; and marching forwards came into Armenia,
where Tiridates King of Armenia overthrown and put to flight by the Alanes.
they did the like. TIRIDATES, King thereof, fought a battle with them; wherein
he was overcome, and by great good fortune escaped by flight. Which when TITUS
understood, having then fully ended his enterprise against Jerusalem, he
marched with his Forces to the relief of TIRIDATES, to assist a King who was
vassal and friend to the Empire; and came to the City of Antioch, as EGESIPPVS
writes: but the Alanes, upon the only report of his coming, returned to their
Country, contented with what they had gotten by theft. VESPASIAN being in Rome,
enjoying the Empire in peace, had his son TITUS continually with him, having
had good experience of his wisdom and mild disposition: he did most matters
by his counsel, and after his opinion, and in all things held him for his
companion in the Empire, and made him his fellow in office in the Censurie and
Tribunate; and afterward in seven Consulships together.

VESPASIAN, continuing as he had begun the whole course of his life, never
omitted any thing that was fit for a good and excellent Emperor, as well in
preserving and enlarging the The good deeds of Vespasian.
Empire, as in beautifying and reforming the same; in correcting the abuses and
evil customs, as in execution of Justice and other virtues: and chiefly he
took great care for the public edifices and buildings, wherein he spent much
treasure; and made the Capitol which VITELLIVS had burnt (when his brother
SABINVS was slain) to be reedified and new built, far more stately and
beautiful than ever it had been. He also repaired the City of Rome of those
ruins which yet remained since it was burnt in the time of NERO, as in his
life we have declared. Besides this, he built a most stately Temple to the
goddess PALLAS; the workmanship whereof was so rich, so exquisite, and so
excellent, as the like had never been seen in Rome. For, touching the painting,
caruing, and inlaying, all the most excellent workmen of the world (these Arts
being then at the highest) showed their skill, and left memorials of their
handworking, as PLINIVS writes; and JOSEPHUS (who was an ey-witnes) affirms,
that men came from all parts of the world to see the riches and excellency of
this Temple. VESPASIAN also built an Amphitheatre, of singular and most rare
workmanship; which is yet at this day to be seen in Rome, although ruined and
defaced: which is a building of mavelous and sumptuous greatness, round in
form, as if two Theaters were joined together like to half circles: in the
midst of which were represented the plays, shows, wrestlings, fightings
with wild beasts, and also combats of sword-plaiers: And every thing was
wrought and framed in such manner, as by means of their seats it was capable of
an infinite number of people, without any hindrance one to the other; which we
may comprehend by the Theater which OCTAVIANVS CAESAR built in remembrance of
his Nephew MARCELLVS, of which we read that there were seats for four score
thousand persons. And VESPASIAN did not only consume great treasure in building
(whereto he was much affected) but he also bestowed great gifts and pensions
upon such as were masters and excellent workmen; and no less but rather
greater, upon learned men, and such as were expert in arts: and to the
Rhetoricians and masters in eloquence, both in Greek and Latin, he gave great
fees and pensions out of his Exchequer; and also upon Poets and other excellent
learned men, he bestowed notable favors and rewards: so as it is certain that
he not only showed himself liberal in these things aforesaid, but to all
persons and in all places. And in the Provinces where he knew that any public
buildings were ruined or decayed, by reason of the ill government in times
past, he commanded them to be reedified and repaired at his own charges out of
the subsidies and tributes. The like care he took for some Cities, which in his
time were defaced by earthquakes. And for that he would not forget to repair
and amend the living bodies as well as the dead, he endeavored to reform and
order the multiplicitie and tediousnes of suits and pleas in law, choosing new
judges and Arbitrators, which should take order, and set agreement between the
parties contending, and within few days should decide and determine
controversies and pleas in suit: and he ordained and established most excellent
laws and statutes.

After that the good Emperor VESPASIAN had taken such good order in all his
actions, as he made the time of his reign most happy, he was still careful to
continue and increase the same. We also read that he made many Provinces
subject and tributaries, which until then were in a manner as friends and
obedient, but yielded no tributes, or did other services: Among which in Asia
the less were the Provinces of Lycia, Pamphilia, and Cilicia; and in Asia the
great, Comagena, which lies Eastwards from Cilicia; and here in Europe, the
Province of Thracia, and the City of Byzantium which is now called
Constantinople, with the Isles of Rhodes and Samos, Provinces brought into
subjection by Vespasian.
and other Countries and Provinces which he also made tributaries. For what
cause or reason he did so, I find it not written: but duly considering the
acts and proceedings of this Emperor, I presume that he did it not without just
occasion in them all. JOSEPHUS sets down the cause thereof in the Province
of Comagena only, and in what sort it was made tributary, and how that
ANTIOCHVS the King thereof being overcome and taken in battle Comagena made a
tributarie province by Vespasian.
by CESONIVS PETO Governor of Syria for the Empire, was sent by the same
CESONIVS, prisoner to Rome. But VESPASIAN remembering himself that he held
friendship with this King when he lived in the East, and although that he held
it fit and requisite to dispossess him of his country, yet he would not deal
severely with his person: for, being upon the way, he sent commandment that he
should not be brought to Rome, but commanded him to be carried to the city of
Lacedaemonia in Gracia, and that he should live there, and that sufficient
provision should be made to maintain him and his children in royal estate:
and so that King led his life afterward in that City, and the Province of
Comagena remained tributarie to the Empire. What else happened in the time of
VESPASIAN, the Authors which I follow, have not written, peradventure because
they were of small importance. But as concerning his virtue, bounty, and good
government, they have written more at large then I have done, such and so many
were they: and because I will not be too sparing and brief in this subject, I
will say somewhat for a remembrance and an example to good Emperors. First, the
manner and course of his life after that he came to the Empire was this. He
awoke every morning before day, and in his bed did read and hear letters and
instructions of diverse affairs; and then he commanded The life and manners of
Vespasian after that he was Emperor.
the door to be set open for his friends and such others as would come into his
chamber: in whose presence he arose and made himself ready, without any page
or servant to help him, but to bring his clothes to his hands; and then he
stood a good space giving audience to such as he had to deal withal,
providing for all things, and making therein such dispatch as was convenient:
then he went into his litter or chariot, as the manner then was, and for his
exercise went into the field of MARS or to some other place, and sometimes he
went on foot. After all this, he retired himself to his Palace, to his
exercises and pastimes: after which he used the bathes, whereto men in those
days were much addicted: which being ended, he returned to his business, and
to provide for all thing necessary; wherein he spent the greatest part of the
day. He was very moderate and temperate in his diet, and after supper was very
pleasant and merrily disposed, delighting much to use quick and brief
speeches, whereof SVETONIVS recites some. He was a Prince of great modesty,
patience, and singular clemency, enduring and dissembling with those which did
murmr and speak ill of him, pardoning and forgetting injuries and offenses:
the examples whereof (which were many) I omit because of breuity. VESPASIAN
was noted and taxed for being ouercouetous: true it is, that he caused his
rents Vespasian noted of covetousness.
to be collected rigorously, imposing new taxes and services, seeking
extraordinary and strange means to get money: whereof AVR^LIVS VICTOR and
other Authors excuse him; alleging, that he was forced thereto, for that he
found his Exchequer poor, and the Imperial Treasure wasted and exhausted: so
as for the maintenance of his State it was very requisite to raise it to some
good proportion. Which makes it seem to be true, seeing he was very bountiful
and liberal to all men, and spent and freely parted with that which he so
gathered. Finally, howsoever it was, he is reckoned in the number of good
Emperors; for, with singular wisdom and valor he governed the Empire nine
years: at the end whereof (being seventy and nine years old) a Flux took him,
and he died in peace in the year of our Lord 81. He was a man of a middle
stature, well compact in his lims, and of a good complexion, and lived ever
sound and in good health: for the preservation whereof, he ordinarily used
frictions on his arms and legs; and every month fasted one whole day, without
eating any thing.

THE LIFE OF TITUS, ONLY OF THAT NAME, AND ELEVENTH ROMAN EMPEROVR.
THE ARGUMENT.
VESPASIAN being dead, his Son Titus succeeded him, who reserved his Fathers
name. This man in his youth applied himself much to the study of learning and
sciences; and delighted so much in writing, that with great facility he
counterfeited all manner of letters; being General, the tedious wars of
Jerusalem were ended. Coming afterward to the Imperial dignity, be wholly
altered his former disposition, and becam very merciful and most bountiful.
His bounty was such, as he said, He had lost that day wherein he had not done
some deed of courtesy. He was also of so mild a nature, as he said to his
Brother Domitian, who (it seemed) conspired against him, that he should not
seek to get that by fratricide which he might obtain by love. He lived 41
years, and ruled the Empire little more than two. His death was so grievous to
the City of Rome, and to all the Provinces subject to the Roman Empire, as all
affirmed with one voice, that the Father of the Empire, and the Delight of
mankind, was departed out of the world.

AS soon as the Emperor VESPASIAN was dead, his eldest Son TITUS (called by
his surname VESPASIANVS) without any contradiction was received and obeyed for
Emperor; as well for that his Father in his lifetime had made him his companion
in the Empire (and that, as some Authors say, he did participate with him, and
that he gave him the name of Emperor) as also for that in his Testament and
last Will he appointed him his Successor: yet his brother DOMITIANVS proudly
maintained, that his Father had nominated him, and not his Brother TITUS, and
that his Fathers Will was falsified. TITUS was an excellent Emperor, but his
Reign was short; for, it lasted little more Titus was endued with noble virtues.
than two years: so as, for his natural bounty and noble disposition, he was
called The love and delight of mankind, although before he was Emperor he
was taxed upon some occasions; some imagining, that he would have proved
wicked and perverse. But truth and virtue, although for a time they may be
suppressed, yet at length they will preuail, and overcome envy and slander: and
as the clear Sun disperseth the dark clouds; so did TITUS clear himself of the
suspicions conceived against him, with the brightness of his virtues and worthy
actions. He came to the Empire at the age of 39 years, and somewhat less; in
which he followed the wars, and gat great experience both in peace and war.
First, in his infancy he was brought up in learning and other virtuous
exercises, and thereby grew to be very learned both in Greek and Latin, and
expert in many Arts. He was a very good horseman, and most skillful in Music;
a very good Singer, an eloquent Orator, and could make verses with wonderful
ease and facility. He had a singular memory, and was endued with an excellent
wit; and was so speedy in writing in ciphers and abbreuiations, as he excelled
all his Secretaries and Notaries; and would so well counterfeit any man's hand
and writing, as it was said of him, that he might have been a notable
counterfeiter or forger.

Being endued with these graces and sufficiencies in his youth, before his
Father came to the Empire he bore Arms in the wars, and was Tribune both in
Germany and Britanny, and purchased the reputation of wise and valiant. After
which, being comne to Rome, he used to plead and defend causes and actions
(which was then the exercise of the most eminent men); and afterward in time
he was made Questor or Treasurer. In process of which time he married twice:
the first, with ARRICIDIA the daughter of a Roman Knight whose name was
TERTVLLVS, who had been Prefect of the Pretorian Legions; and, after her death
being a widower, having never a child, he married the second time with a
woman of great blood, whose name was MARTIA FVLVIA, whom he afterward put
away, having first had a daughter by her.

The wars beginning against the Jews, he went thither with his father,
having the command and charge of a Legion: and matters succeding in such manner
as is already said, he made a final end thereof. And although that some
practiced to bring him in suspicion with his father, falsely suggesting that he
would have rebelled against him; yet after those victories he came into Italy,
sufficiently cleared himself, and triumphed of the Jews; and (as we have
said) obtained so much grace with his father, as he made him his companion,
and in a manner equal with him in the Empire. In his fathers life time he
purchased dislike upon some occasions: whereof one was, that they charged him
with the covetousness and avarice of his father, for the new impositions which
he laid upon the subjects of the Empire: whereof although that he might well
have purged himself, yet he would not make manifest his innocence, for that
the fault should not be imputed to his father. The other was, for that he had
caused AVLVS CINNA and certain others of great note to be put to death,
although he had just occasion to do it; as SVETONIVS shows in AVLVS CINNA:
and other authors, in others.

TITUS also discredited himself for bringing of Queen VERONICE from Judea
with him for his friend or concubine, whom he so dee^ly loved, as he
entertained her in a manner as his wife: and there is an author which affirms
that he slew AVLVS CINNA, through jealousy of her. All which being laid
together, when by the death of his father he came to the Empire, they doubted
that he would have proved wicked and cruel: but his clemency and other
virtues did presently disperse all those clouds of suspicion. The first, and
happily the greatest conquest was, the forcing of his will and bridling his
desires and affections by withdrawing himself from the company of VERONICE,
for the which he was taxed with infamy, although that he loved her
exceedingly, and was by her beloved in the same degree. He also gave over his
other pastimes, which he held unfit and unbeseeming an Emperor, and began to
live and carry himself very modestly and honorably, and to show his
liberality, clemency, and singular courtesy. Whereof I hold it requisite
(although I keep not order, seeing his time was so short) to make some
mention; that seeing his bounty, clemency and wisdom made his Empire void
of civil mutinies, wars and alterations, which usually please the readers,
yet they may speak of the virtues and greatness of this Emperor. First for a
show and ostentation to the world (which great Princes sometimes should make,
because that thereby they do in some sort purchase the love of the common
people) he repaired and made some new great buildings, and he also presented
games and sports, wherein (according to EVSEBIVS, EVTROPIVS, and SVETONIVS)
were slain 5000. wild beasts, and therein also fought a great number of
Sword-players. He caused also to be represented a Naual battle in one of the
ancient Naumachias, whereof mention has been made heretofore. And as he was
by nature most noble and liberal, all the favors, graces and rewards, which
his Predecessors had given and granted (which none of them would confirm, but
they granted some new) he confirmed by a decree. And, moreover, to any
petition made unto him he never gave unpleasing answer, neither suffered any to
depart from him discontented, or without hope to obtain his demand. And being
reproved by some of his Council, for promising more than it seemed he was
able to perform: he answered them, that It was not fit nor worthy, that any
man should depart from him sorrovvfull and discontent with his entertainment.
He was naturally so desirous to do good and to help others, as one night after
supper remembering himself, that that day he had given nothing, with a sad and
heavy countenance he turned toward those which were in his company, and said:
My Friends, I have lost this day; which were speeches worthy to be noted and
engraven in the minds of all great Princes. He was also so desirous to
pleasure and give contentment to all men (houlding always his gravity and
authority) as in all his speeches and discourses with any people whatsoever, he
always showed himself affable, pleasant, courteous and tractable.

In some sinister accidents which in his time happened in Rome, as one was (as
says PAVLVS OROSIVS) a great fire, wherewith were burned a great number of
houses, and also a great plague; he not only used the diligence of a careful
Prince, but also showed the love and affection of a pitiful Father; helping
with his own rents to repair and new-build that which the fire had consumed,
and causing those which were wounded to be cured with great diligence; and
those which died of the pestilence, to be buried. The clemency and mildnes of
this Prince extended to so high a degree, as he not only pardoned many, and
moderated the rigor of the laws in cases of ordinary crimes; but two great
men of Rome having conspired against him, and being thereof convict, so as they
could not deny the fact, he would make no other inquisition, nor put them to
any torments, or otherwise punish them, but only advised them in secret that
they should alter their evil purposes; willing them to consider, that the
Empire was given by Gods providence and ordinance, and by the fates, and not by
any humane industry; and if they desired any other thing, it should be more fit
to sue to him, and he would not deny it: and saying this, he pardoned them, and
used them lovingly, and afterward entertained them with other complements,
which SVETONIVS writes; so as he took such order, that they did repent and
reform themselves: whereby he did better assure his life, than if he had put
them to death. For, therein he should have had greater cause of fear, and more
would have hated him. The like temperance he held with his Brother DOMITIANVS;
who never left to lay snares Snares laid (...) (...) (...)there T^.
to entrap him, and to ly in wait for his life, and to practice his death, and
to incense the Legions and Cohorts against him: yet for all this he would not
put him to death, as he might justly have done, neither seclude him from him,
neither diminish his reputation and authority wherein he lived; but made him
his companion in the Empire, and proclaimed him for his successor. And the
better to reclaim him, sometimes retiring him into a secret chamber alone, with
tears in his eyes he would admonish and require him, not to attempt that by
treason and fratricide, which he shortly should have voluntarily, and that
which he already enjoyed with him by his good will. And, for conclusion, this
excellent Prince TITUS, in the short time that he reigned, governed with such
wisdom and in such manner, as he was through the whole Empire extremely
beloved, and generally obeyed and served by all men: So as during his whole
Reign there were no contempts, insurrections, wars, rebellions, nor
contentions. But as men for their sins were not worthy of so good a Prince,
so by Gods secret judgment he was taken away from among them: for, being
taken with a strong burning Fever, within few days he died The death of Titu^
thereof in the same village wherein his Father died, near Rome, being of the age
of one and forty years, two months and twenty days, although EVTROPIVS sets
down some months less, which may be through error in a letter.

As soon as his death was known, there was the greatest lamentation and sorrow
that ever was seen in Rome: and, the Senate being assembled, there was more
spoken to his honor and commendation, being dead, than was of any man that ever
lived before him, or was ever, spoken in his presence in his lifetime: which
happened in the year of our Lord 83.

THE LIFE OF DOMITIANVS, ONLY OF THIS NAME, AND TWELFTH ROMAN EMPEROVR.
THE ARGUMENT.
DOmitianus, brother to Titus, after his death was made Emperor; who in the
beginning of his government, faining much goodness, was mild, pitiful, and
above all, most just. He prevailed in all the wars he began, and in Rome
finished many edifices already begun, and built many more from the ground: so
as in the beginning of his reign he purchased much reputation, and the credit
of a very virtuous and good man. But afterward altering his conditions, he
became so cruel, so insolent and so covetous, that putting men to death for
very small and ridiculous causes, he usurped the goods of the dead, pretending
that he was their heir. He persecuted the Jews, and particularly those which
were of the line of David; being informed that from him should descend a man
which should be Lord of the whole world. He was also a great Persecutor of the
Christian Religion, so as in his time many holy men were martyred. He made such
war with flies, as a Courtier being demanded, who was above with the
Emperor; answered, that there was not one fly with him. He made great show of
Astrology, and was a great friend to those which made profession of that
faculty: yet he dealt hardly with an Astronomer, which told him that he should
dye shortly. He lived five and forty years, ruled the Empire fifteen; and by
the conspiracy of one Stephen, who was Steward of his house, and certain
others, amongst which his wife was an assistant; he was slain in his Palace.
The common people were neither sad nor glad of his death: but the Gentlemen and
Senators were so well pleased with it, that even the very same day they made
all his statues to be thrown to the ground, which he would have of no other
thing but of pure gold.

TO the good Emperor TITUS, his brother and successor DOMITIANVS was far
unlike; for this Emperor D^itianus was wicked, and far unlike to his brother
Titus.
was wicked and lewd, although that in the beginning of his reign he did
some things which were pleasing, and governed the Commonwealth reasonable
uprightly; using clemency, humility, and liberality, deceiving the world
with fained bounty, clean contrary to future actions. When he came to the
Empire, he was of the age of thirty years (little more or less) in his
younger years, he lived in mean estate, and in evil fame, for the
dishonestie of his person. His father being Emperor, in his absence he was
called CAESAR, and to him was given the greatest dignity and authority in
Rome, which he used licentiously and dishonestly, committing adulteries, with
other vices and insolences: upon one day, he deposed twenty several persons
from their charges and governments, and gave them to others: so as his father
(when he understood thereof) said, that he marvelled, that his son DOMITIANVS
had not sent one, to have succeeded him also: and wars then growing in
Batauia, he attempted that which we have related. But when his father was come
to Rome, to dissemble and cloak his wicked practices he gave himself to study,
and to the exercise of poesy, although with little affection: for before that
time he never regarded it, or any other learning, and so afterward abhorred it
according to that flattering age. For the small time which he spent in poesy,
SILIVS ITALICVS, QVINTILIAN, and PLINY in the proem of his natural history,
commend him: and MARTIAL forgets him not in his Epigrammes. And much less
did DOMITIANVS give himself to the practice and exercise of arms, but was
much affected to shooting with bow and arrows; wherein he was so skillful,
as he would oftentimes for his glory cause a Page to spread his hand open for
a mark against a butte, and he standing a good distance off, would stick his
arrows between the boys fingers without hurting him; and in like manner
would do many other strange things, which SVETONIVS reports as an
eie-witnes, wherein and in dicing was his principal delight and pastime. After
the death of his father and brother, for whose sakes he came to be Emperor,
without any contradiction, he governed the same contrary to his natural
inclination, as may appear by that which he did afterward. But because we
will not deprive him of the commendation, which his good deeds deserved;
before that we will speak of his accursed cruelties, we will first speak of
that which was good and commendable, seeing he lived in such manner, as his
actions were intermixed with some blemishes of evil: wherein I cannot observe
any order or time, as I always desire to do, because the authors which I
follow write it so confusedly and out of order.

First, he made great show of liberality, and jointly therewith of clemency,
justice, and Domitianus his good deeds
equity, of either of which we will produce some examples. He showed himself
so free from covetousness, and so willing to give, that he refused certain
heritages which certain free personages would have given him; and gave
ordinarily gifts and rewards, and forgave penalties and tributes, and erected
certain pillars and public buildings, which were very excellent, and of
wonderful great cost, among which this was one: He repaired and new built the
Capitol, which again had bin burnt, wherein he caused a sumptuous Temple to
be built to his god IVPITER, and other Temples and wonderful buildings. And to
obtain the love and applause of the people, he ordained so many shows and
games which were so rare and costly, as it is wonderful to read, and tedious
to write them. Frst he made a Lake, for a Naumachia or battle by sea, wrought
all by man's hand, which was so great as it was sufficient to contain many
galleyes, wherein were such battles, as they vvanted nothing to prove them
to be in good earnest and not counterfeit. He had also a very great number of
Svvord-players, and great rewards for those which did run with chariots. He
had turneyes and battles of horsemen and footmen, and huntings of an
infinite number of wild beasts, in such sort as other Emperors had don, and
more then any other: for he had also women which like men fought with wild
beasts, whereof SVETONIVS, IVVENAL, and MARTIAL, make mention. He also made
games and feasts which they called secular, represented but every hundredth
year, which were the Secular games made but once in a hundred years.
most solemn of al others: for then were accomplished a hundred years since
the time that OCTAVIUS AUGUSTUS had celebrated them, although that the Emperor
CLAUDIUS at another time commanded them to be made, without observing any order
or time, wherein he made the addition of the two new colors, which the
horsemen did before use to wear, whereof before has been made mention, which
were purple, and gold color. And besides all this abouesaid, he caused
disputations and arguments to be held, wherein great rewards were Gifts given
by Domitiants.
divided between Poets and Orators both Greek and Latin, and all kind of
Music. There were also Comedies, dumb shows, tragedies, and wrestling games.
In conclusion, there were made by his commandment all those feasts, games and
revels that ever had been seen or known in Rome until that time, besides
many which were newly invented. Among all which he made a distribution among
all the Roman people, which they called Congiarij, of 300. deneers to every
person: and during the time of these revels (which was not short) he made many
banquets and public feasts, and there were thrown to the common people all
kinds of coins, and clothes, with other things which were cast from out the
windows, this was called Missilia. I will not herewith forget one pleasant
thing, whereof SVETONIVS writes, which was, that in the beginning of his
Empire he was wont every day one hour to be in some Domitianus delighted much
in catching of flies.
chamber or secret place alone, wherein he did nothing at all but catch flies,
which he afterward filed up upon a stiletto or long sharp needle: So as upon a
day one asking whether any body where within with DOMITIANVS, answer was
made, that there was not so much as a fly with him; meaning, that he had
killed and th^vne them all away.

DOMITIANVS did not only those things which were pleasing to the people; as
making of feasts and sports, but in all other things he took good order,
showing himself diligent in hearing complaints, and doing justice, and
particularly in punishing such judges as received bribes and rewards, as well
the Roman Magistrates, as the Presidents and Governors of Provinces. And herein
concerning Judges he perseuered, not only before that he discovered his cruelty
and wickedness, but even afterward: and though that he were evil of
himself, yet he forbear not to punish evil Governors: and so SVETONIVS
affirms, that Governors were never so temperate, just and upright at any time
as in his. He also caused himself to be chosen Censor, wherein he endeavored
to reform and correct the abuses and evil manners of the Romans, The Justice
of Domitian.
as though that his own conditions had been good; and so he made many other
good orders, and did justice in all things: and of the other side showing
himself merciful and pitiful, in such sort that if he had perseuered in that
manner of government which he began, he had this day been held for a very good
Emperor. But never any man fell from good to evil so notably, nor made so
strange an alteration as he did, whereof in that which we have before said, he
gave some indice and forewarning. For in those good things which he did, he
used such pride and ^lation, and showed himself so vainglorious, that a man
of any judgment might well perceive, that what he did, proceeded not from any
good mind, or from his natural inclination; which he manifested in some of his
words and speeches: chiefly when he was made Emperor (without shame or
blushing) he vaunted in the Senate, that he had given the Empire to his father
and to his brother, which they had now restored unto him; this being as false,
as by the history before does appear. And those his statues which they
commanded to be set up in the Capitol, he would not consent that they should
be made of any other thing, then of clean Domitianus had his statues of pure
gold.
gold, and so in other things he showed extreme pride. But he did one thing
which was so accursed and abominable, as to make mention thereof only, is a
sufficient proof of the incomparable pride of this man: for he commanded by a
public Edict, that in all Letters and Edicts they should write our Lord and
God, which both the christian and heathen authors do affirm: For which sin
and wickedness it pleased God to suffer him to fall into those abominations
which he afterward incurred, as covetousness, cruelty, and other wicked
actions: whereof before that we discourse, it shall not be amiss, to treat of
the wars which happened in the time of his wickedness, although he
prosecuted them not in his own person, which were three or four with strange
nations, and one civil war.

The first wars abroad were against the Sarmates in Europe, which invaded
the Empire, with whom and also with those of Asia, there joined many of the
ancient Scythians. That Province is situate in the north of Germany, and
stretches to the sea called Mare Sarmaticum. On Sarmatia what countries it
contained.
the East it is bounded with the river of Tanais, and the lake Meotis: and on
the West with the river Vistula. Under this Province are now contained
Muscouia, Russia, Polonia, Lituania, and some other Provinces. This war was
cruel and dangerous, and in the beginning it went ill with the Romans: for in
a battle were slain the General of the Romans, and one whole legion: but
DOMITIANVS afterward reenforcing his armies, the Sarmates were overthrown and
constrained with loss of many of their people to retire themselves. He had
twice wars with the inhabitants of the great province of Dacia, the
inhabitants whereof (as Pliny affirms) were called by the Greeks, Get^.
That province contained all that which is now called Walachia, and
Transsyluania, and other countries. Of this war SVETONIVS, EVTROPIVS, and
PAVLVS OROSIVS make mention, but none of them reports how it Dacia how it is
called at this day.
passed, neither for what cause it was undertaken, although they affirm that
it was very costly to the Romans: for in the first war wherein OPPIVS
SA^IENVS was General, who had been Consul, whom EVTROPIVS calls APPIVS, he
was overcome, and the greatest part of his army slain.

And, in the second, CORNELIUS FVSCVS, Commander of the Pretorian Cohorts, had
the like fortune; whom DOMITIANVS made General of that war. In both the one
and the other were great encounters and battles; wherein was spilt much of the
Romans blood, as PAVLVS OROSIVS relates; and he says, that CORNELIUS TAC^TVS
treats thereof very largely and copiously in his Histories: but that perished
with the rest of that Authors works, whereby we know not the discourse of
those wars, but they all write, that DOMITIANVS triumphed of that Province. And
he also triumphed of a people in Germany, which they called Catti, with whom
he also had a doubtful war. During the time of these wars, wholly
discovering his wicked inclination, DOMITIANVS never ceased to commit murders,
robberies, violences, and other vices, as hereafter you shall hear. Wherefore,
having freed himself from the wars aforesaid, therearose a civil war more
dangerous: which was, that LVOIVS ANTONIUS (called also SATVRNINVS) being
General in Germany, rebelled against DOMITIANVS, usurping the name of
Emperor; making profit of this occasion, that DOMITIANVS for his evil life was
ill-beloued: against which SATVRNINVS, DOMITIANVS sent APPIVS NORMANDVS for his
General. This war was very doubtful and much feared: but, coming afterward
to a battle, LUCIUS ANTONIUS was slain, and APPIVS remained Victor. And heerin
happened a most strange and wonderful Accident; which was, that the same day
wherein this battle was fought in Germany, it was known in Rome how every
thing particularly did pass: and DOMITIANVS, that same day seeking to know
the Author of those news, could not find him, and therefore believed that it
was false; so as preparing himself to go to those wars in person, messengers
came which brought certain news of the victory, and they avouched that it was
at the same instant according to the news then in Rome.

After the wars were ended (as we have recited) and during the time thereof,
DOMITIANVS Domitianus did put many Noblemen to death; with the causes.
put to death many eminent men, Senators, and such as had been Consuls, for so
light and fained causes, as thereby he clearly manifested the cruelty of his
mind. ELIVS LAMIA he commanded to be slain, for that he used pleasant speeches
and jests: which although he suspected, yet were they offensive to none. He
commanded SALVIVS CO^EIANVS also to be slain, because he celebrated the
birthday of his Uncle, the Emperor OTHO; and METIVS POMPOSIANVS, for that he
heard that his constellation did prognosticate unto him Imperial dignity, and
because he had given to some of his slaves the names of HANNIBAL and MAGO: And,
in like manner, SALVSTIVS LVCVLLVS, for that he caused certain lances to be
made of a new fashion, which (according to his own name) he called Luculleian.
He put JUNIUS RVSTICVS to death, because he published a Treatise in praise of
PETVS TRASEA, and of VI^IVS PRISCVS, very wise men; who had been of a faction
contrary to his Father.

How little love this tyrannous Emperor bare unto learning, may well appear by
that which SVETONIVS and other Authors write of him: for, he commanded to be
banished out of all Italy the Philosophers, and with them (as EVSEBIVS writes)
the Astrologers; of which banishment, Domitian banished Philosophhers and
Astronomers out of Italy.
AVLVS GELLIVS and PHILOSTRATVS make mention: PHILOSTRATVS says, that some
fled into Spain, and others into the deserts of Libya and Scythia. And, having
expelled the Philosophers and Wisemen, proceeding in his cruelty, he slew an
infinite number of people (as SVETONIVS reports) forvery ridiculous causes: and
his fury was such, that some whom he purposed to put to death the next day, he
entertained over night in his chamber, and showed them many favors with a
cheerful countenance. And, among these his cruelties, he gave himself to
luxury and incontinency, and other dishonest exercises, co^uersing and keeping
ordinary company with dishonest women; and heerwith committed many robberies
and strange extortions, seizing upon men's wares and goods for fained crimes;
and those so light, as they deserve The cruelty and incontinency of Domitian.
not to be mentioned. He would fain himself to be heir to those which were
dead, seizing upon their goods, and suborning some to depose that they had
heard the deceased in their lifetime say, that they meant to leave him for
their heir. With which devices, and as many more as he could imagine or invent,
he never left robbing and spoiling men, as well in Rome and Italy, as in other
Provinces subject to the Empire. But, amongst all other nations, those which
endured the greatest oppression and tyranny were the Jews, by Gods permission
for their sins: for, all those which were of that religion, or lived after
their manner and custom, although they were not so, he made them pay a certain
new and rigorous imposition and tribute by the head, over and above all that
any other nation paid. And SVETONIVS and EVSEBIVS write, that as HEROD when
CHRIST was born, so was he in fear, that out of the stock of DAVID The fear of
Domitian.
one should come, which would bereave him of the Empire: for, he was informed
that it was written, that from DAVID should descend a man who should rule and
command the whole world. Wherefore he commanded with all diligence all those
among the Jews, which were of the lineage of DAVID, to be fought out and slain:
yet EVSEBIVS writes, that he pardoned two which were of that lineage. And, to
set his seal to all his wicked deeds, being induced by the devil or some of
his angels, he gave himself to the persecuting of the Catholic Church, The
second persecution of the primitive church
and by his Letters and Edicts, both in Rome and out of it, an infinite number
of Christians were banished and put to death: upon whom he executed horrible
kinds of cruelties; written by EVSEBIVS, PAVLVS OROSIVS, and other Catholic
Authors. And this was the second general persecution of the Primitive Church;
in which Saint JOHN the Evangelist was banished into the I Will of Pathmos, where
he saw the Vision of the Apocalypse. How long this persecution endured, I
cannot say: but by EVSEEIVS it seems, that it lasted little more than two
years; for afterward, in the thirteenth Chapter of his third Book, he says,
that DOMITIANVS did moderate this persecution, and commanded it to cease. So as
by that which is written and has been seen, DOMITIAN was one of the worst
Princes that ever was in the world; and so bad, as he used to say, The vice of
the flesh was but a kind of honest recreation: and such were those wherein he
used to pass his time.

For these causes, and many other which I omit, wherein DOMITIANVS spent
foureteen years of his Reign, he came to be extremely hated and abhorred of all
men. And as now it was grown to a custom in Rome, Not to endure wicked
Emperors long; and as God also permits, that sometime wicked Princes com to
evil ends: so those which were most private and nearest about him conspired
against him; the Chief and Captain of which was STEPHANVS, who was steward to
his wife and Emperesse DOMICILLA, whom they affirm to have been partaker in the
conspiracy and practice to murder him: and they afterward slew him in such
manner as I will tell you.

During the time this conspiracy was a plotting, there appeared certain
signs in the skies, whereof all men conceited and prognosticated, that the
death of DOMITIANVS was at Signs prognosticating the death of Domitian.
hand: and he also stood in extreme fear thereof, as he which took great
heed to auguries and signs, and presumed much to be an Astrologer and
Diuiner. And amongst other signs which then were seen, there appeared for
many days together round about the Sun a great bright shining Crown that
did compass it about, which resembled the Rainbow against foul weather; but
that it was a whole Crown and did compass the Sun in such manner, as it
bereaved and eclipsed the same of his brightness: Which sign all men did
interpret to signify a change and alteration in the Empire, with the death of
DOMITIANVS. And for as much as STEPHANVS in Greek signifies a Crown, there
were some which conceived that the said STEPHANVS should kill him,
notwithstanding they knew nothing of the practice. By means whereof, and of
other things which then were seen, DOMITIANVS was in such fear and despair,
that as upon a day there was a great tempest, and there happened certain
flashes of lightning, which he and all others did presage to be against him:
and he being very angry, they write that he said, Let IVPITER then smite whom
he will. Whereof, the fear which I told you of, was the principal cause:
for even then was the time accomplished which the Astrologers, casting his
constellation, had told him that he should die. But one thing above all the
rest made him most amazed, which in truth was very strange, and for such
(although it be of small importance) I will declare it, which was this: that he
living in this fear, sent for an Astrologer, who at that time was very famous,
and asked him many questions thereupon: who An Astrologer foretold Domitian of
his death, and of his own also.
answered him, that by his art he found that his death was near at hand.
Wherewith DOMITIAN was so wroth, that having determined to command this
Astrologer to be slain, he asked him, if he knew what end he himself
should have. The Astrologer answered him, that by his constellation he knew,
that he should shortly be torn in pieces by dogs. And DOMITIAN thinking to
make him a lier in that which he had foretold, and that, what he had
prophesied of his own death, should not come to pass, commanded him presently
to be slain, and his body to be burnt, and his ashes to be buried, to the
end that dogs should not tear him. And having begun to burn his body,
there fell such a tempest and rain as quenched and dispersed the fire; and the
body of the poor Astrologer remaining half unburned, there came certain dogs
which tare it in pieces, as he had prognosticated. Which (I think) was, by
Gods permission, a practice of the devil, as he which knew the secrecy of the
conspiracy, which then was in hand to kill him. Now STEPHANVS and his consorts
having agreed upon the day, wherein they determined to give DOMITIANVS his
deserved death, one morning this STEPHEN came into his chamber, bringing a
poiniard hidden under his arm, which for that purpose he had some days before
fained to before, and carried it bound: and coming to the Emperor (who was
suspicious enough and very fearful) having opportunity to come to his
presence, by reason of his office, with much dissimulation he told him that he
had brought him certain intelligence of a conspiracy against him. Which when
DOMITIANVS heard, as he was very jealous thereof, and believing his words to be
true, without any further consideration, he withdrew himself apart to talk
with him about this matter: and standing in that manner, the rest which were of
the same confederacy, being all his ordinary servants, and at hand, this
STEPHEN gave gim a memorial, such as he had devised; wherein he discovered a
conspiracy, naming therein such at he thought good. And DOMITIANVS beginning
to read it with great attention, STEPHEN at his pleasure stabbed him into the
groyne; and the Emperor feeling himself wounded, began to call and to cry out
aloud: and as he was very strong and valiant, before that STEPHEN could give
him another wound, he closed with him and threw him to the ground, and
striving to take the poiniard from him, he cut and mangled his own fingers:
And by this time before that any succor could come to him, there ran upon
him SATVRNINVS, CLODIVS, PARTHENIVS, MAXIMUS, and others which were of that
conspiracy, being all his own servants: and there giving him many wounds,
they The death of Domitianus.
slew him. And so had DOMITIANVS such an end as his deeds deserved, which
happened in the year of our Lord 98. in the five and fortith of his age, and
the fifteenth of his reign, leaving no son to succeed him: for althought
that in his fathers time, he had a son by his lawful wife, named DOMICILLA,
that son died being a child. DOMITIANVS was a man tall of stature, and in
his youth of a good constitution, and pleasing countenance, great eyes, and
somewhat read: but coming to age, he lost his proportion and good grace, by
reason of a long sickness, so as his legs became little and slender, and
afterward he had a great gorebelly, and a very bald head. His death was taken
in Rome in diverse manners, for it grieved the Pretorian soldiers very much: so
as if that day they had had any Captain that would have but made the motion,
they would have slain all the conspirators. The common people took it
indifferently, showing neither joy nor sorrow. The Senate was not only well
content The Senate glad for the death of Domitia^.
therevvith, but conceived exceeding joy thereat: and assembling themselves
that same day, they caused all his statues to be thrown down, and all the
inscriptions and memorials of him to cancelled and defaced.

THE LIFE OF COCCEIVS NERVA, ONLY OF THAT NAME, AND THIRTEENTH ROMAN EMPEROVR.
THE ARGUMENT.
THis worthy Emperor was borne in the City of Narnie: it is not certainly
known whether he were an Italian, or of some other Nation, yet all agree that
he was of a Noble house: he was advanced to the imperial dignity being old,
and in the beginning of his reign he had news (though false) that Domitian
was not dead, which much troubled him. He recalled the Christians from
banishment, eased the oppressions of the city, and made the children of poor
parents to be bred up at the public charge; and to be brief, did many good
and virtuous deeds. There was never but one conspiracy against him; which had
ill success: the conspirators in his time were contumeliously slain, which
slew Domitian, though against his will: He adopted Traiane for his son,
having none of his own, to whom he might commit the charge of the Empire. He
held the Empire thirteen months only, and dyed of choler, taken against a
Senator, whose name was Regulus, which choler cast him into such a sweat that
he died thereof; and the same day that he departed out of this life, there was a
great eclipse of the Sun.

THE death of the Emperor DOMITIAN was not only profitable for the Empire,
being freed and delivered from his cruelty and tyranny, but for that it gave
means to NERVA to succeed him: and that afterward TRAIAN and ADRIAN should
reign, who were most excellent Emperors, and honored and enlarged the Empire.
And although that NERVA reigned but a while, yet he did many good things: but
the best that he did was, in that he made TRAIAN his successor, as when time
serves, shall be declared. The death of DOMITIAN, as I have said, did not
grieve nor joy the Roman people, but pleased the Senate exceedingly: who having
commanded the remembrance of him to be cancelled, they presently took order to
give him a successor, before that any one should be chosen by the army.
COCCEIVS NERVA, being at that time for his many virtues, wisdom, experience,
and age, a man of the greatest reputation and authority in Rome, was by the
Senate chosen Emperor, having been favored and assisted therein by PETRONIVS
SECVNDVS, Captain of the Pretorian Cohorts, and PARTHENIVS, who was one of
those which killed Nerua chosen Emperor by the Senate of Rome.
DOMITIAN. This NERVA was of a noble family, borne in the city of Narnia in
the province of Vmbria in Italy, his fathers name was also NERVA. Saint
IEIDORE only says, that he was borne in Spain, I know no ground for it;
neither have I read it in any other ancient author. Being received in the
Senate and accepted to the Empire, upon a sudden without knowing who was the
author, it was told him that DOMITIAN was living, and that the report of his
death was untrue. This news did so much trouble NERVA, that all the color
went out of his face: and being unable to speak, he had much a do to stand
upon his seete, until that PARTHENIVS did encourage him, assuring him of the
truth. Whereupon he came again to himself, and set a good countenance upon
the matter: presently they all came to him to do him reverence, and to receive
him for their Lord and Emperor, showing great joy, in hope of good success.
Only ARRIVS ANTONIUS, who was a very wise and just man and had bin his
familiar friend, spoke unto him in a more strange manner then any of the rest:
therefore I will relate it. Truly NERVA, in that thou art advanced to this
high degree, I will attribute the benefit and happiness thereof unto the
Senate and people of Rome, and generally to the whole Empire (for such has
been their good fortune) but not unto thee. For thou having escaped Speeches
used by Antonius to Nerva.
with such honor and reputation by means of thy virtue, and wisdom, from the
injury of those wicked Princes past, art now made subject to infinite troubles
and dangers; and above all, to the infamy and hatred of thy enemies, and as
much or more of thy friends: for they will presume that they have deserved all
favor, in respect of the ancient friendship which they held with thee; and if
thou shall deny them any thing they shall ask, although it be never so
unjust, they will become greater and more cruel enemies unto thee, then those
which openly show themselves to be such. Now, as the solemnities and
accustomed ceremonies for the new Emperor were ended, in the beginning of his
Empire he began to do most noble and excellent works, whereof in sum we
will make a brief relation, without distinction of time, seeing his Empire was
so short, as in a manner not to be divided. And one of the best and first was,
in releasing from banishment all the Christians, which from Rome and other
Cities were banished in the time of the Emperor DOMITIAN, and to permit and
give liberty to Nerva his good deeds.
every man to hold what faith and religion he would: and in this time
(according to EVSEBYVS, and other Catholic historiographers) Saint JOHN the
Evangelist came from the I Will of Pathmos (whither he was bannished) to the
city of Ephesus in Asia. The like humanity did NERVA use in all other
matters: First he released and discharged all the cities of the Empire from
the new impositions, which VESPASIAN and DOMITIAN had laid upon them. And to
many which by DOMITIANVS were unjustly disposessed of their goods, he
commanded their possessors to be restored to all their movables, which could
be found in the imperial palaces. And he not only showed himself liberal to
those which were oppressed: but to all poor men which had sons, he made
them to be bred up at his charges. He made also a distribution among all the
people of Rome in greater measure then was usually done by any others. And to
some poor Citizens of Rome which he knew had no wealth, he made certain
possessions, which he bought for that purpose, to be divided among them. And
above all he did great favors, and bestowed great gifts upon those which had
bin his friends and allied unto him: and his liberality was so great, as DION
writes, that in the beginning and first coming to the Empire, he was
constrained by necessity to sell his gold and silver plate, and other movables
of his house, to perform those his favors and good deeds. And in this manner
he did many deeds of charity and piety; for it is written for certain, that
he swear that no Senator of Rome should by his commandment be put to death,
which he afterward performed, although there were those which deserved the
contrary. He also forbad many slanders and accusations used in those times;
desiring, all men should live contented and at liberty.

Athough that NERVA was so good a man (as we have said) and used so mild a
kind of government, so as there was nothing in him to be reproved; yet there
wanted not some which murmured against him, as wicked men use to do against
the good, alleging that so great humility and mildness in a Prince was not
profitable: so as FRONTON a principal man in Rome presumed to say openly, that
it was an evil thing to have such an one for Emperor, which would suffer no man
to do any thing that he desired; but it was a worse matter to have such an one
under whom every man might do what he listed. When NERVA was advertised
thereof, he was not angry, but forbad some things, which had given him cause to
say so: and he desired so much to govern uprightly, as he did nothing of his
own head; but had always about him, and sent for wise and good men, such as
were of the greatest experience in Rome, by whose counsel he provided,
ordained and dispatched all matters. He also made during the small time of his
Empire some very good laws and ordinances; among which, he sharply forbad an
abuse of those times, which was, to geld men and to make them Eunuchs. He also
forbad that any man should marry his niece, or brothers daughter; and many
other things which wanted reformation. To conclude, this Emperor had in his
short time al those parts a good prince ought to have; and so clear a
conscience, that he oftentimes said, he remembered not to have done any thing
(albeit he gave over the Empire) why he should not live secure, and without
fear of any body. And, though all this was true, (as to the wicked, the yoke
and scepter of the just is a heavy burden, and Rome had then got such a
custom, that it could neither endure an evil Emperor, nor obey him that was
good) yet there wanted not some which practiced his death, and conspired
against him: the motor and head thereof was CRASSVS CALPHVRINIVS; but it pleased
God that it took no effect, but was revealed to the good Emperor; who without
any rigor or bloodshed was freed thereof, contenting himself only (as SEXTVS
AURELIUS writes) with the banishment of those which were culpable, though the
senate would have inflicted a more rigorous punishment.

All these things being passed (as I have said) and all things succeeding well
and prosperously both in Rome, and all the Provinces subject thereto, it happened
that ELIANVS CASPERIVS, who at that time was Prefect, and Captain of the
Pretorian Cohorts, incited the soldiers to revenge the death of the Emperor
DOMITIAN, and to put all those to death which had bin confederates therein;
which they determined to put in execution, though NERVA gave them no leave.
This motion was sudden, and NERVA was much troubled, and would have hindered
it, and have defended those from whose hands he received the Empire, or have
died in the quarrel; and so he said and published openly: but the matter came
to such issue, as the old Emperor was not able to resist or prevent it: and so
PARTHENIVS and PETRONIVS were slain, and all those which CASPERIVS would
require or nominate of those which were culpable. With this contempt NERVA was
so grieved and offended, that he was very sorrowful he could not punish it as
the case required; for by reason of his old age and infirmities he was not
regarded by the soldiers. Wherefore to redress the present, and provide for
that to come, he determined to adopt and make TRAIAN his successor, who was
then Captain and Governor in the nether Germany, and was at that time in the
city of Colen; which charg he had executed with great honor and fame, and was
the most excellent man then living, as well in peace as war: to whom he was no
way allied, being a Spaniare, and a stranger to Rome and Italy. And although
NERVA wanted not allies and kinsmen, yet he chose TRAIAN, having more respect
to the public good, then to his own house and posterity: wherein how justly he
made his choice, this history will hereafter manifest. Having put this his
determination Traiane adopted and invested in the Empire by Nerua.
in execution, and the accustomed solemnities performed, and adopted him in the
Capitol, and made him CAESAR in the Senate, he presently sent him Ambassadors
with the Ensigns and Arms of the Empire, and they invested him in the Empire:
and herewith he sent him a verse in latin, Teli^ Phoebe tuis lachrymas
vlciscere ^ostras.
wherein he briefly exhorted him to come and succor him. The adoption of
TRAIAN was so great a bridle to the mutinies which were feared, as all remained
still and obedient. But it pleased not God that NERVA should long enjoy his
good resolution: for as SEXTVS AURELIUS writes, he lived only three months
after: in which time they write not that there passed any notable matter,
neither is it understood by the histories that TRAIAN came to Rome before his
death, which happened (in a manner) suddenly, through anger and displeasure
which he conceived against a Senator, whose name was REGVLVS: for as he was
old and feeble, he gave a great shout, and was taken with so great a sweat,
that being unable to endure it, he died thereof. The same day there was a great
Eclipse of the Sun, which might The death of Cocceius Nerua at the Eclipse of
the sun, An, Dom, 100.
be (in part) cause of his death; which was in the 100 year of CHRIST. He
reigned 1 year, 4 months and odd days; according to SEXTVS AURELIUS,
EVTROPIVS, and BEDA. About the time of his age there is some difference among
Authors: for, some say, he was 71 years old; others, 76. But as it imports
little, so I mean not to spend much time about contrarieties of so small
moment: and heerin I hold decorum with my curious Reader, to the end he condemn
me not of negligence, if he find me to differ from that which he shall read
elsewhere.

THE LIFE OF TRAIAN, ONLY OF THIS NAME, AND FOVRTEENTH ROMAN EMPEROVR.
THE ARGUMENT.
AFter the good Nerua succeeded a better Traian, born (as is said) in the city
of Italica near to Seuil: yet soni^ say that he was borne elsewhere, whose
fathers name was Traian; and his mothers, Plotina. He was advanced to the
Empire with the good liking of all men, for that his goodness, clemency,
liberality, and equity toward all men was publicly known; which virtues he
lost not when he was Emperor, but rather seemed to have increased the same:
neither did he omit them, although he were never so much busied in matters of
importance concerning the wars, or standing for the recreation of his mind,
to behold feasts and sports. The first action he undertook, being Emperor, was
against the King of Dacia rebelling the second time: and he likewise persecuted
the Christians, but afterward he mitigated the persecution, which was the
third that the Church suffered, then daily greatly increasing. He also subdued
Armenia. In his time there was a very great earthquake, which was in a manner
general, but it did most harm in Antioch, where he then was. After this he
made very great voyages. In his time the Jews rebelled; whom when he had
tamed, he returned to Rome, where there was a wonderful triumph prepared for
him: but being ouerburthened with age, and infirmities, he died in the city of
Seleucia, to the universal sorrow and grief of the whole world. He lived 64.
years; and being dead and burnt, his ashes were carried to Rome, and set upon
the top of a pillar, which is to this day to be seen in Rome, which was a
wonderful piece of work, and truly worthy of so great an Emperor, who was a
no less father to the country, then to all virtues and virtuous men.

AFter the wise and good Emperor NERVA, succeeded TRAIAN, as he had ordained
in his life time; who was the flower of all the heathen Emperors, and in his
time was the Roman Empire at the greatest height: for never, either before or
after, was it so great, so much feared or esteemed. The valor, virtues and
excellencies of TRAIAN were so many and so great, that as SEXTVS The virtues of
Traian.
AURELIUS affimeth, the best writers of those times were hardly able to
express and declare the same. For although that I would exceed in the
history of this excellent Prince, for the love of my country, of whence I
might say that TRAIAN wa^ (as presently shall appear) yet I could not do it
according to my desire and his deserts, for the brevity of those authors which
we have at this day which wrote of him: wherefore I hold it for a better course
to observe the style and form already begun, then by breaking it, to be
notwithstanding too brief and defective. I say then that TRAIAN was by nature
and birth a Spaniard, whereof there is no doubt: for so do all ancient true
authors affirm. EVTROPIVS in the life of him, and EVSEBIVS in his Chronicle,
say, that he was borne in the town of Italica, which is subject and near to
Seuil: the which is also affirmed by SEXTVS AURELIUS, although he name it not;
and ANTONY LEBRISHA, whom we may allege among the ancient authors, calls
Italica The place of Traians birth.
TRAIANS country: wherefore I cannot conjecture by what authority he did it,
which wrote that TRAIAN was borne in Cales. This town of Italica (according to
PLINY in his third book) was in that time in subjection, and within the
jurisdiction of Seuil: and ANTONY in his perambulation says, that it was
sixteen miles from thence: the same in a manner is gathered by PTOLOMIE his
geographie, and that it lay Northwest from Seuil: but at what time it was
ruinated, or where about it was, I could never certainly understand: so as
Seuil may glory and vaurt it self to be TRAIAN his country: for although
that he were not borne in it, yet he was borne in a place subject and near
unto it. TRAIAN was also of noble blood and lineage, although not very famous
for any great dignities. His fathers name was also TRAIAN. When he came to the
Empire, he was 42. years old, but not fully complete, and married to a woman
of great account, whose name was PLOTINA. For the certain knowledge they had
in Rome of his goodness and valor, he was by general consent joyfully
received and obeyed: and he presently began to put his great virtues in
practice, showing himself both in word and deed, good, affable, mild,
merciful, very wise, and a lover of truth and equity, and of all other
virtues; wherein he perseuered until the end: it shall not be amiss if I
recite part thereof in the beginning, seeing that all historiographers which
write of him do the like.

TRAIAN, taking upon him the government of the Empire, first endeavored to
reform the laws, and to cause them to be observed, and that equity and
justice should be used in all things. In public charges and offices he took
care to prefer noble and virtuous men; and such as Traian his good deeds.
were not so, he reformed and reclaimed with gentleness and clemency, and not
with rigor and extremity. He did so moderate and repress his wrath and
choler, as he was never known to be overcome therewith; and was most abstinent
from other men's goods, and free from covetousness. His liberality and bounty
did exceed, bestowing benefits and favors upon all men, greatly relieuing the
poor and needy, imitating and excelling his adopted father NERVA. His
liberality.
He bestowed much cost and took great care for the bringing up and instructing
of poor men's children in Rome and in all Italy. He was a great builder of
public and necessary Edifices; and also made an infinite number of bridges,
gates and temples, and repaired high ways and causeies; as yet is to be seen
in many places in Spain; whereof one (as says S. ISIDORE) is the bridge at
Alcantara. In all his buildings he never made benefit of any man's goods or
labor; as some of his predecessors had done. He was to the multitude and
common people mild and courteous, and the principal personages he honored and
entertained with love and familiarity; and chiefly those which deserved it, he
admitted to private conversation: whereof being upon a time reproved, he
answered, that he desired to be such an Emperor toward his subjects, as he
would wish they should be to him, if he were not so. In Arts and Sciences he
was not very learned, by reason of his great affairs but he never left to
practice when he had time; having for his master the excellent Philosopher and
Historiographer PLVTARCH, whom, Plutarch wa^ Traians m^ster.
and others for their excellent wits, he loved and honored much, as IVVENAL
testifies; besides other writers.

To conclude, this Prince had all the good parts and conditions which an
excellent King ought to have: in peace he was upright and just, and in war
(whereto he was so affected as hereafter shall be declared) he was valiant; and
in both the one and the other very wise and prudent. And for that we will not
conceal the truth, of two vices and passions he was noted; and accused: the
one was, that he did eat and drink much, and that very sumptuously; and the
other, that he was much given to the vice of the flesh: the cause whereof was
the want of faith, together with his great power and liberty; but it was never
known that wine overcame his wits, or that by means thereof he committed
ought that might seem unfit; neither through the other passion, that he ever
used violence, or forced any woman, or offended any.

With these conditions he began his reign and Empire, governing it most
happily for some s^ce. As he was a most excellent and valiant Captain, and
addicted to the wars, desirous of honor and fame above all his predecessors,
he resolved to extend and enlarge the bounds of the Empire by arms. His first
enterprise was against the King and inhabitants of the province of Dacia, a
very great and spacious country; ^wherein are now included Walacia, and
Transiluania, and other provinces, taking the occasion for the wars and
spoils which that nation had done to the Roman Empire, in the time of the
Emperor DOMITIAN. TRAIAN went to this Wars made by Traian against the King
of Dacia.
war with an exceeding great Army, and the King of Dacia, named DECEVALVS,
had levied for his defense all his force and power, being very great: so as
this war was very cruel. But the King of Dacia, being no other way able to
defend himself, determined to come to a battle (as he did) wherein TRAIANE
had the victory, with exceeding great loss to his enemies, and not a little
to the Romans, for the battle was very cruel and bloody. This victory
being obtained, and TRAIAN following the chase of his enemies, he pursued them
so hard, that Deceualus demands peace of Traian.
DECEVALVS, being in despair, sent to him, humbly desiring peace, offering to
accept any conditions he should prescribe. And TRAIAN (who took as great glory
in pardoning the humble and meek, as in taming and subduing the proud and
hautie) notwithstanding that he had taken almost all his country, was
contented to admit him to his grace and favor, sending certain conditions to
be performed: which were, that he should presently deliver up all his
Conditions prescribed to De^ualus.
instruments and engines of war, and the enginers and masters thereof,
together with all fugitives that were within his dominion, which were Romans,
or their confederats, and ran to the enemy. And that out of all the Castles
an^ fortresses within his dominions, he should withdraw the garrisons, and
should throw down such as should be appointed: and before all these things,
that he should surrender certain lands which he held within the bounds of the
Empire; and that he should ever hold for friends and enemies, those which the
Senate of Rome held for such.

These articles and conditions the King of Dacia accepted and promised to
accomplish, more through necessity then for any good will; and having sworn
to observe them, he came to the Camp to the Emperor; where prostrating
himself upon the earth before him, he confessed himself to be overcome, and
to be his vassal. This solemnity being ended, and other things done which were
expedient, TRAIAN returned victorious to Rome, where he entered in triumph, as
says EVSEBIVS having reigned two years, and brought with him the Ambassadors
Traian came into Rome in triumph.
of the King of Dacia, to whom was given audience in the Senate; and the peace,
which TRAIAN had granted, was there confirmed. And he for his victory was
called Dacicus, for that he had subdued the country of Dacia, as the Romans in
former time had usually done to some other excellent Captains.

When TRAIAN had ordered all things in the province of Dacia in this manner, for
joy and honor of this victory, and to please the Roman people, he made all
manner of sports and games, which of custom were wont to be observed by the
Emperors (as is above said) adding thereto such other things as he thought
good. But these games and sports did not withdraw him from doing justice,
neither from care of the government: but rather so long as they lasted, he
spent the greatest part of his time in dispatching of business, and doing
justice, going himself in person to the Tribunal and public audience, to
judge and determine many causes: which he did most justly and wisely. Passing
sometime in good quiet, rest, and general peace, the King of Dacia being as
unable to endure subjection and servitude, as his predecessors, began some
combustions and alterations; first secretly, and afterward publicly:
repayring and fortifying his Castles, The king of Dacia rebels against the
Empire.
providing arms and engines, and leuying his neighbor forces against the
Empire: whereof as soon as TRAIAN and the Senate had intelligence, he was
adjudged the second time, an enemy to the Empire. And so with an equal army,
but much more incensed then formerly, TRAIAN went this second time to the
wars in person: in which the King of Dacia taking warning by that which was
past, refused to come to battle, and used policies, stratagems and trecheries
against TRAIAN; which were such and so many, as the Emperor was in danger to
have been either slain or taken: and by treachery (upon a safe conduct) they
took a singular good Captain and a great favorite of the Emperors called
LONGINVS. The King of Dacia having so good a pawn, sent to TRAIAN to entreat
a pardon, and to treat of peace, threatening that except he might obtain the
same, he would put the said LONGINVS to death. Whereto TRAIAN gave such an
answer, as the King understood, that he preferred his honor and the public
good before any particular peril, and prosecuted the wars by all ways and
means possible: During the which, within a very short space he built a bridge
over the river Danubius, beyond which (parting from Italy) lies the country
of Dacia, which was one of the most stately bridges that ever was made in the
world, all of squared stone of marvelous A bridge over the river Danubius.
beauty. This bridge contained twenty Arches; each of which was one hundred
and fifty foot high, besides the foundation, and sixty foot broad; the one
Arch was distant from the other one hundred and sixty foot, which was the
compass of the Arches of the bridge: which truly was a wonderful work, as
well for the greatness thereof, as for the many difficulties, and the short
space wherein it was made: Which among other things is an argument of the
wealth and greatness of the Roman Emperors. Which bridge this Emperor made,
to hold a free passage for his Armies to pass the river Danubius, against
those barbarous nations: And ADRIAN his successor being of a contrary opinion,
to bereave the barbarous of the like passage (as some say) commanded it to be
broken. This bridge being finished, TRAIAN continuing the war, did many
things, wherein he showed himself to be a valiant and excellent Captain: and
so oppressed the enemy (notwithstanding that the country was great, and the
people very fierce and hardy) that he conquered and subdued it all, and put
their King DECEVALVS to such a straight, that to escape taking, being The death
of the King of Dacia.
in great danger thereof, he slew himself; and his head was carried to Rome,
and the country of Dacia was made subject and tributarie to the Roman Empire:
the greatest part whereof at this time (for our sins) is subject to the
Turk. After this, taking such order for all things in those parts as was
requisite, TRAIAN came to Rome with great honor, bringing with him an
exceeding great sum of money and wealth taken from that King and country,
being now (as EVSEBIVS testifies) the fifth year of his reign. And his name
and bounty was so famous through the world, that upon the way Ambassadors met
him from the East Indies, and diverse other parts to sue for peace, and to
acknowledge him for their Lord. Being come to Rome, he entered in great
triumph: and afterward there were made great shows and feasts for joy of his
Victory and Return; which did last 120 days, which were four whole
months: A feast of one hundred and twenty days continuance.
which being ended, he applied himself to the administration of justice, and
the tranquillity of the Empire. Remaining in Rome busied in these exercises,
he made many bridges, causeies, and other public edifices both within Italy
and without. About this time there died a great The death of Sura Li^ius
lamented by Traian.
friend and favorite of his, whose name was SVRA LICINIVS, whose death he took
heavily and honored his memorial with public statues, which he commanded to
be erected to him, and other honors then used. This SVRA was so good a man, and
TRAIAN reposed such trust in him, that being told one day for certain, that
SVRA meant to kill him, he went that night to sup at his house; and commanding
his guard to return, remained there alone amongst SVRA his friends and
companions, and commanded his Barber to shave his beard with a rasor, which the
Emperors then held for a custom, until the time of his successor ADRIAN, who
wore his beard somewhat long: and having so much trusted and tried this SVRA
LICINIVS, he returned to his Palace; and calling those unto him which had told
him thereof, he said to them, that he had made trial of LICINIVS loyalty, and
that they should no more hold him in suspicion: and so he ever after loved him
both alive and dead, as I have said.

TRAIAN living in this prosperity without blemish or disorder in any thing
that might deserve reproof, being deluded by the devil, or some of his
ministers, he resolved to persecute the Christians, and made edicts and decrees
against them, commanding them to adore his Idols; so as an infinite number of
them were put to death upon that occasion. This was the third general
persecution of the Christians, whereof EVSEBIVS treating says, that it was in
the tenth The third general persecution of the primitive Church.
year of his reign, and so does OROSIVS and other Christian authors. Which
persecution TRAIAN commanded afterward to cease, as it appears by some
histories, and by the Letters written by PLINY to TRAIAN, and from TRAIAN to
PLINY, which are extant to this day: Wherein he commanded, that if the
Christians were not accused of any other crimes, they should be suffered to
live at liberty, and according to their laws. In these and other things, and
in doing justice, TRAIAN, busied himself in Rome, until that moved with
desire of fame and glory, he resolved to make war against the King of Parthia,
and against the King of Armenia, making this his occasion; that the King of
Armenia had received the crown and ensigns of a King, from the hands of the
King of Parthia (acknowledging him for his superior and sovereign) and not
from the Emperor of Rome, as he was bound to have done, as appears by that
which is already said. And having ordered his troops, and made such provision,
as for so great an enterprise was requisite: he parted from Rome, with a very
great army Traian made war against the Parthians.
both by sea and land; and arriving in Asia, he invaded Armenia, where the fame
of his coming was such, and there was so great a fear over all the Country,
that but in very few places he found any resistance, as well in Armenia as in
countries adjoining. And the greatest part of the Kings, Nobles and Governors
of the provinces bordering thereupon, came peaceably to him, humbly confessing
themselves to be his subjects, and him to be their sovereign Lord, and
bringing him many presents they made great show of subjection. Among many other
things of great price which they presented unto him, there was brought him a
horse, in greatness, color and shape, one of the most fair in the world: which
being taught before hand, A horse given to Traian.
as soon as he came in the Emperors presence, kneeled down upon both his
knees, and bowed down his head to the earth; which although it were known to
be artificial, yet it made a very good show, and did greatly delight the
beholders, being a thing rare and unthought of.

TRAIAN having in short time subdued Armenia, and gotten the King thereof into
his power, PARTAMITASITES by name, who had submitted himself, he seized all
into his hand.

And so (as EVTROPIVS and SEXTVS RUFUS testify) the country of Armenia was
made a tributary province, and at that time he gratified and gave gifts and
rewards to those Kings and Tetrarchs, which had served him in those wars, and
to many others. And others he condemned in great sums of money, according as
each one had deserved. And setting all things in good order, leaving sufficient
garrisons to defend the same, he marched forward with his Army; conquering
Armenia and Mesopotamia made tributarie to the Empire.
the dominions of the King of Parthia, and particularly entered into the fertile
country of Mesopotamia, and took the city of Nisibe, and other places there,
and made that province, like Armenia, tributary and subject to the Empire; the
King of Parthia being no way able to hinder the same, therein happening many
skirmishes, encounters, assaults of cities, and feats of arms, TRAIAN showing
himself in all things an excellent Captain, as well in travails and dangers,
as in directing his army, in lodging it, in marshalling his men, and marching
with them according to military government and discipline. For whom the Senate
(being advertised of his great victories and good success) commanded great
sacrifices to be made, after the manner of the Gentiles; and sent him new
titles and names, signifying his victories, calling him Optimus, Armenicus,
Parthicus, and other titles, for the conquest of Armenia, and other countries
New titles given to Trajan by the Senate.
of the Parthians. Having had in all things good success, increasing and
enlarging the Roman Empire, desiring, for some respects, to repose himself
for some few days, he came to pass the winter in the Province of Soria;
where dispersing his Army in those marches, he lodged himself in the City of
Antioch, whither came Ambassadors from many parts of the East: And being there
in great prosperity and at rest, with a full determination to return to the
wars as afterward he did, the whole city being full of his Court, and of
Ambassadors and Princes which came to see him, and to follow their suits unto
him, there happened an earthquake which was in a manner general, which in
that city and in a great part of Asia (but chiefly in those quarters) was the
greatest that ever was seen or heard of, which began after this manner. On the
22 of October there did rise so furious and violent a wind, as it ^are and
turned up trees, made the birds fall to the earth, uncovered the roofes, and
made the houses An horrible and fearful Earthquake in the city of Antioch.
shake: then followed lightning and thunder, in such abundance, as being yet
night, it seemed noone day; after which there fell from heaven such fearful
thunderbolts, as with their violence they brake down stately buildings, and
slew many men, so as it seemed the world had been set on fire, and that the
earth had opened. The Sea was also wonderfully troubled; after all which there
was such a violent heat, as, not able to endure it, men stripped themselves, and
hid them under ground; and the sky was so dark, and the dust so great, as one
could not see another, but shocking together fell down dead: But he that will
know the wonders which passed therein, let him read DION, and COCCEIVS in the
life of TRAIAN; for many cities were ruinated, much people perished; many
mountains and hills sunk and became plain; many rivers were dried up; and many
fountains and waters sprang where never had been any before. And in the City
of Antioch, almost all the houses and buildings thereof fell to the ground; and
the Emperor TRAIAN, escaped by flight, and was driven to leap out at a window
into the fields, seeing that all his palaces fell down: in which fields he
remained many days in Tents, until the earthquake was past; so great fear
possessed him for that which was already happened. This misfortune being past,
and this City and others, which endured the like calamity, being repaired by
TRAIAN, and summer being come, gathering together all his forces, he parted
from Antioch to proceed in the war which he had begun, directing his journey
toward the East, to make a conquest of Assyria and Chaldea, with the great
City of Babylon, head of the ancient monarchy of the Assyrians. And being to
pass the river Euphrates, at a great turning which it makes, he underwent
many difficulties and dangers; for the Parthians with all their whole power
endeavored to stop his passage: But TRAIAN knew so well how to use such
industry, and to proceed so warily, as making boats and bringing A bridge
over the river Euphrates.
them in carts, from the mountains nearest at hand, he made a bridge, and
passed his Army in despite of his enemies, although not without great slaughter
and danger to both parts: And having passed the river, he marched forwards,
conquering Cities and Castles on every side, and among other the great City of
Arbela in Assyria, which MARCELLINVS calls Arbela.
Gandabela, in whose fields ALEXANDER the Great, overthrew King DARIUS. And
from thence he went and took other countries, wherein never had any Roman
ensigns been displayed: And from thence without finding any that durst to give
him battle in his Babylon and Thesiphonte taken by Trajan.
march, he came to the famous City of Babylon, of whose greatness and power
we read maruels; and taking it by force of arms, he did the like by all the
borders: and from thence he marched by land to the river Tigris, and assaulted
and took by force the great city of Thesiphonte, which is in Persia, and other
towns in those parts. But in what manner TRAIAN took this City, and what
happened in the many assaults and battles given, and how long this war
continued, we find it not written: for those authors which are come to our
hands treat thereof succinctl^; and the books of his life and famous
exploites which FLAVIVS MARCELLVS and A^VRELIVS VERVS wrote at large and
copiously, are perished, with other notable works, which time has consumed and
wasted; by which means the acts of this Emperor are unknown. Neither is he
compared with ALEXANDER the Great, or the greatest captains of the world;
notwithstanding that he was no less, considering the countries, the Seas, and
Nations, which he traveled, tamed and subdued, with his army, his mind, his
wisdom and bou^ty.

TRAIAN having made himself Lord of all those Countries, both on this side,
and beyond the rivers Tigris and Euphrates, to wit, Syria, Babylon, Chaldea,
and other countries and provinces, thereto adjoining; DION writes that he went
down the river Tigris, toward the Persian. Sea, to subdue a mighty King,
named ATHA^ILVS, who lived in an Island (which that river makes, dividing it
self into two arms) and coming to that country, the King and inhabitants of
those countries not daring to make any resistance, yielded all those places
into his hands. But here he was in the greatest trouble and danger of all
others: for, winter coming on, there fell so much rain, and there were such
tempests, and the river Tigris made such inundations, as he was in danger to
have lost the greatest part of his army. After which, these authors affirm,
that he rigged up a great fleet, wherewith sailing along the Persian Sea, he
came into the maine Ocean, Traian made war in Persia and the Indies.
conquering even to the Indies, and subduing them to the Roman Empire: and
finding by chance certain Merchants ships which sailed to the Indies, on this
side the river Ganges, they write, that he informed himself thereof, and
discoursed with such as were in those ships of all matters concerning those
parts. And he sometimes said, that had it pleased God that he had been a
little younger, and had more strength and health, he would not have stayed until
that he had attained to the uttermost and most remote ends of the world: and
that he accounted ALEXander the Great for very happy, in that he began to
reign when he was but young; yet he purposed to pass further then he had done.
And so he wrote from those Seas to the Senate of Rome, and sent them the
relation and names of all the Nations which he had conquered and subdued; the
number whereof was so great, as they could hardly be reckoned and known. Upon
which news, there were made in Rome great ioys, new sacrifices, and many other
things to his honor; among which was a most sumptuous Arch. But this attempt
and enterprise of the Indies prospered not with TRAIAN, according to his
expectation: for as those countries, which he left behind him in the East,
were newly conquered; while as he continued his Navigations and conquest by Sea,
many of those countries revolted, and thrust out the Roman garrisons which were
left in them. Besides this (whereof he was advertised) he found not in those
coasts and countries where he came, such fertility and abundance of victuals
as he expected; neither were they answerable to the reports of writers, which
fabled thereof: for he found there great scarcity and want of many
necessaries, and the enterprise seemed unworthy of so great a Prince: for which
causes, and for that that he was now old and vnwieldie, he resolved to return
with his fleet to the place from whence he came.

TRAIAN returning in this manner by the Persian gulf, and taking land near to
the river Tigris, he speedily took order for the punishing of those which
revolted, and the recovery of those countries which had rebelled, whither he
sent two Captains called LUCIUS and MAXIMUS, with two good armies, which in
the beginning prospered ill; for MAXIMUS in a battle against the Parthians
was overthrown and slain: but LUCIUS afterward reinforcing and relieuing his
army, obtained some victories against the enemy, wherein he repaired the
losses received, and recovered again by force of arms the city of Nisibe in
Mesopotamia, and others which had rebelled; and did the like by the city of
Edesta in the same province, which he set on fire and wholly ruined. While as
LUCIUS was busy about these things, TRAIAN his other Captains and
Lieutenants, named EVRICIVS and CLARIVS, made war in other parts against such
as had revolted, and took by force the city of Seleucia, which stands upon
the river Tigris, and other cities which the Parthians had recovered in those
quarters: so as in short space TRAIAN not only recovered all those countries
which had rebelled, but also conquered many other cities and provinces: so as
he was Lord of the greatest and best parts of Asia. His wisdom and valor was
so great, that during all the time that he followed these wars and
conquests, so remote and far from Rome, yet there was not any tumult or
disorder in the City.

But this sage and wise Emperor seeing himself now old and tired, and knowing
how great the Roman Empire was, and that it seemed impossible (as indeed it
was true) well to govern a state so large and great, chiefly those provinces
which he had conquered from the Parthians, who were so hard to be tamed and
kept under; he resolved to settle a King in Parthia and Persia of his choosing,
and in some other countries which he had taken from the Parthians, which King
should rule and govern the same, as before they were ruled, yet as a King
which should be subject and a vassal to the Roman Empire, reserving to
himself the supreme jurisdiction and sovereignty. And with this resolution
he came to the great city of Thesiponte, which is in Traian in Persia.
Persia: and calling thither the principal men of the Parthians, he conferred
with them concerning the making them a King of their own stock and nation;
they giving him great security to serve and obey the Roman Empire. This being
concluded, he placed and established, in the royal throne with great
solemnity, a great man of the royal house of the Parthians, whose name was
PARTHENASPATES. And afterward (as SEXTVS AURELIUS and EVTROPIVS record) he did
the like in the province of Albania in Asia, near to the Caspian Sea, seating
there a King to govern the same: and placing governors and Presidents in the
other provinces, he enlarged and extended the bounds and limits of the Roman
Empire beyond the river Tigris, where before his time the name of Roman had
scarcely been heard of. And having ended all things in good sort in the East,
with great glory and honor (for no place could defend it self against him,
saving one little city in Arabia deserta, which the Agarenes had taken, which
could not long be besieged for the great sterilitie and want of water in all
the fields and marches thereabout) he resolved to direct his journey toward
Italy, and so to Rome, with greater honor and triumph, then any of his
predecessors had ever obtained.

While as TRAIAN made provision for his journey toward Italy, it happened that
the Jews which inhabited the province of Cyrene, which is in Africa, to the
East of Syrtis Magna, conspired The Jews rebelled against the Romans.
and rebelled against the Romans and Greeks which lived in that province, and
slew most of them. The like did those Jews which dwelled in Egypt, and both
the one and the other committed such cruelties, as were never seen or heard
of: So as PAVLVS OROSIVS writes, that they left the land in a manner
dispeopled; and that Nation was ever so ready and apt to rebel; as those
Jews which dwelt in the I Will of Cyprus, knowing what had passed in the province
of Cyrene, and in Egypt, rebelled also, and committed greater cruelty and
excess, then the The cruelty of the Jews.
others had done: so as DIDON says (although it seems incredible) that there
were slain by them 200000. persons, which inhabited that Island. Which is
confirmed and made credible by that which EVSEBIVS and PAVLVS OROSIVS report,
who affirm, that they slew all those which dwelt in the city of Salamina,
which is in that Island: upon which occasion there was afterward an Imperial
law made, that no Jew upon pain of death should come within the I Will of Cyprus,
upon what occasion soever. This law was afterward so seuerly executed, that if
any of them came thither, although through mischance or fowle-weather at sea,
they were presently put to death.

When the Emperor TRAIAN understood of this great rebellion and cruelty
(being upon his way toward Italy) as a just prince willing and desiring to
give condign punishment, according to the quality of the crime, he sent
Captains with sufficient troops of soldiers into diverse parts, to put to
death all the Jews they should find in those countries before named, or in
any other wheresoever: which they affirm, was the greatest execution and
punishment that ever was done in the world, God permitting the same for their
stubbornness, and obstinacy. A just punishment inflected by Traian upon the
Jews.
This great slaughter and punishment being executed, taking the best order that
might be for matters in Asia, the good Emperor began his journey toward
Italy, leaving his Nephew AELIVS ADRIANVS, who was afterward Emperor, for
General of the Armies in the East, and so continued his journey with infinite
honor and joy; there being in Rome the greatest triumph and the most solemn
reception prepared for him, that had ever been made. Coming into the province
of Cilicia which is in Asia the less, as he was old and somewhat sickely, his
disease increased upon him in such sort, as staying in the city of Seleucia,
within few days after, he died there, of a natural sickness, although that
some suspected that he was poisoned. And so The death of the Emperor Traian.
ended this excellent Emperor, having reigned nineteen years and a half, and
lived sixty and three, in the year of our Lord 119. leaving neither son nor
daughter by his wife PLOTINA, with whom he was married; neither would he adopt
or name any one that should succeed him, which he did in some men's opinion
(as SPARCIANVS writes) to imitate ALEXANDER the Great, whom he ever sought to
excel in honor and renown. TRAIAN'S ashes were afterward brought to Rome,
and set upon the top of a Pillar, which he had commanded to be erected in the
marketplace: which Pillar was of one whole piece, containing one hundredth and
forty foot in height. This Prince subdued many Countries and Provinces, and
held the greater part of the world in subjection; or, to say better, was the
greatest and mightiest Prince that ever was in the world, either before or
after him; as he which is curious may find by this our History. True it is,
that discoursing indifferently touching valor in Arms, and many other parts,
he was not to be paralleld in greatness with JULIUS CAESAR. He governed the
Empire with such authority and so much justice, and his virtues were so many,
as he therein excelled all those which had not the light of our faith: for,
therein is no comparison. And this was held for a custom in Rome after him,
that, when they poured out their blessing upon their newchosen Emperors, they
would pray that he might be as fortunate as AUGUSTUS CAESAR, and as good as
TRAIAN; accounting him to have attained to the height of all goodness.

It is great pity To think that so excellent a man should be lost and damned,
as doubtless he was: for, he not only was an Idolater, and held not our
Christian faith (without the which there is no salvation) neither did he
confess or profess it; but, persecuted and oppressed the Christians. And some
men, being moved more with pity and compassion, than with any wit or
understanding, fained a fable and jest; saying, that, through the prayers of
St. GREGORY, TRAIAN'S soul was released out of hell (from whence is no
redemption) and carried to Paradise: whereof, besides that our faith does
control it, there is no Historiographer either ancient or modern, of any
authority that ever I saw, that makes any mention thereof in their Treatises of
TRAIAN, and of S. GREGORY: whereby it is clear, that those which maintain it
bear false witness both against heaven and hell. TRAIAN was of a big stature,
of a swarth complexion, and had thin hair on his head and beard; and likewise
had a hook nose, great broad shoulders, and long hands; and, above all, had a
very loving aspect with his eyes. He was born the one and twentieth day of May,
in the second year of the Reign of the Emperor NERO.

THE LIFE OF PVBLIVS AELIVS ADRIANVS, ONLY OF THAT NAME, AND FIFTEENTH ROMAN
EMPEROR.
THE ARGUMENT.
AFter Trajan, Adrian was advanced to the Empire, more through the policy of
Trajans wife, than by the election of the people or the Senate, or for that
Trajan had adopted him. Nevertheless, after he was preferred to the imperial
dignity, he gave so good an account of himself, as Rome had no cause to repent
for having made him her Lord. He made very great voiages, and in his person
visited in a manner all the Roman Empire. He was very studious in all arts and
sciences, and caused all such as were famous and excellent in any Art, to come
to Rome. He happily ended all such wars as he began; and was very severe to the
Christians. His many virtues were accompanied with many vices; nevertheless,
he could so well dissemble the passions of his mind, as he seemed to contemn
those things which he chiefly loved. He lived 62 years, and governed the Empire
12. In his old age he had so grievous an infirmity, as he desired to dye, and
entreated his familiars to kill him; who having not the heart to commit so
brutish an act, he was finally advised by his physicians to abstain from meat
and drink, so as following their counsel he hastened his death by hunger.

THe death of the good Emperor TRAIAN was much lamented and grievously taken
through all the Empire; being for his bounty and goodness much beloved of all
the people and nations subject to the Empire. And, as he never had any son,
either natural or adopted, that might succeed him, and seeing his Nephew
ADRIAN for his virtues, great wisdom, and the affinity between them, was much
beloved and esteemed; PLOTINA, the Empress, wife to TRAIAN, who was with him
at his decease, for the great love she bare unto ADRIAN, sought means to
advance him to the Empire. To bring which her device to pass, she agreed with
ADRIAN (who already was a man of great power, and had been very familiar with
TRAIAN, and was his countriman) and took such order, that his death was
concealed until he had sounded the good will of the Army which he led, and of
such other great Personages as were in the Emperors Court; faining (after some
Writers) that TRAIAN had adopted him for his son, showing a counterfeit
instrument or Writing to that effect. Finally, the matter was so cunningly
handled, that it took such effect as they desired, and the Army presently swear
obedience and did homage to ADRIAN; notwithstanding that he was absent, in the
City of Antioch in Syria, where he was left (as is said) General. Who being
advertised heerof, and the Legions whereof he was General consenting Adrian
being in Antioch, was chosen Emperor.
therereto, he presently wrote to the Senate, entreating to be confirmed in the
Empire. When the Senate had received his Letters, and understood what passed,
his request was easily granted, and so was he of all men obeyed and held for
Emperor.

ADRIAN was TRAIAN'S Nephew, as some say, by his mother; and some say, by his
father: it may be that he was his kinsman of both sides, and so both the one
and other may say the truth. He was also a Spaniard both by lineage and birth,
and according to EVTROPIVS and EVSEBIVS, was borne in the same city of
Italica: yet SPARTIANVS infers that his father in Rome was called ADRIAN as
He was, but was borne in Italica, and his mother DOMITIA Adrian nephew to
Traian and a Spaniard.
PAVLINA, was also native of Spain, and borne in the city of Cales. He was
married to SABINA TRAIANS sisters daughter (as DION writes.) And was a tall
man of stature, of a good constitution and countenance; and of a very clean
strength, which he much exercised. He is reckoned among the good and excellent
Emperors; and with great reason, considering his many virtues and
excellencies, his knowledge and wisdom wherewith he governed, and the peace
and justice wherein he maintained the Empire two and twenty years, that he
lived therein; whereof for that all authors write briefly, I also purpose to
treat thereof in sum, seeing I spent so much time in the last, so as except I
use more brevity then hitherto I have done, the volume of this my book will
grow to a greater proportion then I purposed, or is convenient. Wherefore I
will do, as he which within a lymited time has determined to travel a long
journey, and having taken leisure in the beginning, deeming that traveling in
this manner, he shall not be able to attain to that place at the time
appointed, hasteneth his way with greater speed, until that he know that he
may come to his iourneis end before the time be expired: So will I do from
henceforth. At the least when I am past ADRIAN, I purpose to proceed with
greater expedition then heretofore, until I come so far on my way, that I
may safely divide the process of this history, and hold the proportion which
I have determined, presuming rather to make this inequality in the style, then
to make a work so tedious and wearisome.

I say then, that when as the barbarous nations understood that TRAIAN was
dead, notwithstanding they also knew of the election of his Nephew ADRIAN; the
Parthians chiefly, The Parthians and other nations lately subdued, be a ring of
Traians death, rebelled.
and other nations which were lately subdued, began to mutine and rebel: and
there were also some alterations in Britanny, and in some other parts. All
which, ADRIAN might easily have pacified and subdued by force of Arms, and
wanted neither courage nor means thereto: but he would not seek it by the
extremity of war and rigor. For, truly, albeit these two Princes were both
very valiant and excellent Captains and Gouerners, yet heerin they did much
differ: for, TRAIAN, being greedy of honor and fame, desired by conquests and
wars to increase and enlarge the Empire; but ADRIA'S care was To preserve the
ancient limits without any greater ambition, and rather he diminished a great
part thereof: and so presently in the beginning of his Reign, to the end he
might live in peace, he left to the Parthians, and to other Princes of the
East, all those Provinces beyond the River of Euphrates unto the Indies which
TRAIAN had conquered; nothing regarding Armenia, Media, Assyria, Persia,
Mesopotamia, nor all the rest; and he set his bound and placed his Legions at
the River Euphrates. Some thought and also wrote, that he did it of purpose,
envying TRAIAN'S honor: but I truly attribute it to that he held it for the
better and most assured course. And having taken such order in the East (as is
said) and left CATILLIVS SEVERUS for Governor of Syria, and pacified the
troubles lately raised by the Jews; he took his way by land toward Italy, and
sent the ashes of Adrian sent Traians ashes to Rome.
TRAIAN by sea: and, coming near to Rome, he was advertised that they had
prepared a triumph for him in the same manner as it was provided for his Uncle
TRAIAN, for that he was in the same wars and conquests with him. But he would
not accept thereof, commanding that the same triumph and entertainment should
be made and given to TRAIAN'S Image, and so it A triumph given to Traians
statue after his death.
was done; and he (as far as I have read) was the only man that ever triumphed
after that he was dead. And ADRIAN was received and obeyed with the greatest
love and applause that could be, and presently performed many parts of an
excellent Prince, conformable to the course of his life past, and the hope
conceived of him for the time to com; so as all were glad and well satisfied
with his government, with his manners and conditions: and truly with great
reason, for he deserved no less. And because that the graces and excellencies
of this Emperor were in the highest degree, besides the virtues and wisdom
wherewith he was adorned, I hold it fit in this place to speak thereof, to
the end that they may serve for an example to other Princes; whereby they may
make themselves the more respected by his imitation.

First, he was naturally inclined to learn all such sciences as apperteined to
wit, and to the exercise both of mind and body, as well in learning, as in the
exercise of arms and other virtues, wherein he sought to excel all men. It is
a wonderful matter to consider how God endued this Prince with wit and
understanding, capable to comprehend whatsoever he desired, with skill, Adrian
was expert in all faculties.
strength and ability in all exercises: whereby he grew very learned in both
the tongues, Greek and Latin, and compiled excellently well, both in verse
and in prose. He pleaded causes and exercised himself in the art Oratorie; and
so much affected the style and phrase of ancient times, that he preferred CATO
before CICERO, E^NIVS before VIRGIL, and CELIVS before SALVST. He was as
skillful in other arts as herein: for he was a singular Mathematician,
Arithmetician, Geometrician, and a great Astronomer, and took great delight in
judicial Astrology, and would give his judgment: so as SPARCIANVS writes,
that the first day of the year he would cast the revolution of the whole, and
foretold what would ensue, and did so by the same year wherein he died. He
was very skillful in Physic, and knew the virtues and properties of herbs and
stones. He was expert and very politic in wars and military discipline,
and was very strong, able and skillful in arms both on foot and horseback: And
besides all this, he could play on instruments, and sing marvelously well. He
could draw and paint, as well as the skilfullest master workman in that art.
Finally, in all things he had so great skill, as any man could have in any one
thing particularly: wherein, besides his deep understanding, his exceeding
memory did much help him: for they affirm, that he forgot not any thing that
he had either read or hard. He was of such capacity (as SPARCIANVS writes)
that he would both endite, write, and confer of business all at one instant, and
had a singular grace and promptnes in using quick speeches and quips, either in
earnest or in jest; and the like in answering upon the sudden, if he were
touched by any. Of his quick and sharp speeches which they write of him, I will
recite one, as fitting this time, although it be none of the sharpest and
subtillest of them, which was thus: A certain Roman Knight came to entreat a
favor at his hands, who (according to his age) had a gray beard, and full of
white hairs: and failing of that which he desired, within few days after he
came again with a new petition to the same effect. But in the mean season (it
seems that men were then as skillful in painting as now they are) he had dyed
his beard, and looked young again: which was noted by the Emperor; who to
guird him therewith, answered to his request, I would be very glad to do you
the pleasure which you require, but a few days past I denied it to your father
who desired the same; wherefore it seems to me a matter unjust, to grant that
to the son which I would not yield to the Father: and so the old man
departed with shame, and in this manner he used many such like jests. Besides
all that is spoken of him, he was very strong, and able to endure any labor;
and was so active of his body, as he ordinarily went the greatest part of his
way on foot, and bare headed, in the sun, in the rain and mists. He was
much addicted to the chase, and was a great Hunter, and excellent therein: so
as with his own hands he killed Lions, Bears, wild Boares, and other most
fierce Beasts; he was oftentimes in great danger, falling once unawares from a
rock; where he put one of his shoulders out of joint, and brake one of his
legs, with some of his ribs. Finally, there was nothing wherein the Emperor
ADRIAN was not excellent and very able, and in all things presumed to excel
the wisest; as truly he did in the most. And although he were a great
reprouer of Masters in all Arts, and did often put them to their shifts with
his questions and arguments, yet he did much honor them, and bestowed many
gifts and rewards upon them; and had about him Philosophers, Astronomers,
Poets, Rhetoricians, Grammarians, Musicians, Arithmeticians, Geometricians, and
excellent Painters and Carvers: with all which he might compare, and the most
of them he did far excel; and did use to say, that He had not forborne to
learn any thing more than other men did, that might be needful in peace or
war, either for an Emperor, or a man of any other condition whatsoever.

Being endued with these qualities above mentioned, he was not void of other
virtues and gifts of the mind, which he showed and put in practice during the
time of his reign, more, and better then before; although in the beginning he
was noted of cruelty, for that some special men, by his commandment and
permission, were put to death. There were also some vices and bad Adrian taxed
for cruelty.
inclinations noted to be in him: but they all affirm he did suppress and
dissemble them, and was so much master of himself, as he easily masterd his
natural evil inclination; which well appeard in his manner of governing the
Empire, and the good usage of his subjects, bestowing favors upon all men;
abating the tributes and subsidies through all the Empire; ministering justice
with indifferency; doing all things by the advice and counsel of the Senate,
and of wise men which he kept about him, and carried with him whithersoeuer he
went: for, he not only loved to be counseled, but also to be reproved and
advised. He entertained all men mildely and courteously: and although to the
common sort he showed greatness and majesty, yet men of note he honored much,
and visited them in their sickness, and invited them, and went to them when they
invited him. And although he ever loved and procured peace, yet all his
lifetime he had exceeding great care of martial discipline; punishing the
liberty and vices of men of war; reforming errors past, and prescribing rules
for time to come. In this manner (as I have said) he had lived when he was
private, and followed the same course after he was Emperor.

ADRIAN having remained some space in Rome, governing the Empire in good form
and Northern nation rose against the Empire.
order, many northern Nations rebelled against the Empire, to weet, the Alanes
and Scythians of Europe; and the Sarmates, which are now the Inhabitants of
Russia, Muscouia, and Poland, and other Countries thereto adjoining; which,
with intent to make war in the Empire, came down into the Provinces of the
upper Missia (now called Servia) and the lower Bulgaria, both which at this day
are in subjection to the great Turk. Against which nations, the Emperor ADRIAN
parted from Rome with a mighty Army: but, coming near to those Provinces where
the enemies were, there were certain treaties of peace propounded; and ADRIAN,
who was addicted thereto, granted the same: and, making his abode for some
days in those Quarters, he returned to Rome, leaving MARCIVS TVRBO for
Lieutenant and Governor of Pannonia and Dacia. In this journey there was a
certain conspiracy against him; which being discouerd, four principal men
which had been Consuls (being guilty thereof) were put to death: which
execution the Emperor ADRIAN afterward denied to have been done by his will or
consent. Being comn to Rome to purge himself of the infamy and envy thereof, he
made a great congiarie or distribution of money among the people, bestowing
many graces and favors upon all men; and commanded also infinite games and
sports to be made, such as were accustomed in Rome; not forgetting
(nevertheless) the execution of justice in his government. Staying at this
time a lesser space in Rome than at the first, he departed with a great Court
and Army to visit France and the Provinces near adioining; upon the Cities
whereof, he bestowed many graces and favors. And from thence he went to visit
the Legions and Armies in Germany; wherein he set good order in many things
concerning military discipline: and, having remained awhile in those parts,
having resolved to visit the whole Empire (as afterward he did) he directed
Adrian visited the Empire.
his journey into Flanders, and from thence into Britanny; where he reformed
many things, and reconciled the Inhabitants, and the Romans which lived there;
as well the garrisons, as the Inhabitants and Colonies. And, for their better
quietness and security, SPARCIANVS says, that he caused a strong wall of
fourscore miles long to be built, to make a division of the lands of the one
from the other; which was a marvelous great work. And, having made such
provision for all things in that Island as he thought needful, he returned into
France: where he erected some singular Buildings, and bestowed other graces and
favors in that Country.

After that the Emperor ADRIAN had visited France and the borders thereof, and
the I Will of Britannie, he directed his journey for Spain; where he was joyfully
received, as a man native and borne in that country: and after that he had
visited some places, he went to winter in the city of Tarragona, where he
called a parliament of all the provinces, and ordained many things for the
public good thereof. After that the fury of winter was past, he traveled
through all He comes into Spain, and dealt many favors to his Country.
Spain, visiting the cities, and bestowing benefits upon them: principally
unto his own country Italica and Seuil, he granted many privileges and
exemptions, and did many great favors, as DION writes; but would not come
thither, notwithstanding that he was in the matches thereof. Thus having
visited all Spain, he returned toward Rome, and at this time he set down the
limits and bounds of the Empire, from the barbarous Nations: where there were
no rivers, to divide them with notable marks of stone, pillars, trees, and
other things; and his authority and reputation at that time was so great, that
to the high Germans who were free, he appointed a King: and at that time some
tumults were punished in Africa.

The Emperor ADRIAN living now in peace, being the seventh year of his
reign, the Parthians a fierce and turbulent nation, began to arm and to make
wars against the Empire; and ADRIAN making provision for all things
accordingly, passed into the East, with a sufficient Army to follow that war
in person: but seeing that he managed it himself, they propounded certain
treaties of peace; which being concluded, he traveled peaceably through all
the Eastern provinces, and came into Asia the less, and from thence into
Graecia, where he did many favors to the Athenians, and other cities, where he
remained some space. From thence he took his passage into the I Will of Sicilia,
and visited the principal places of that Island, and desired to see mount Etna,
which is so famous for the fire which it continually casts out. Setting all
things in Sicilia in such order as he thought good, being very joyful he
returned to Rome, now the fourth time after that he was Emperor. After his
last coming, he stayed not long: for he had undertaken (for the better
government thereof) to visit the whole Empire in person; and to that purpose
preparing ships and galleys he passed into Africa: where the joy Adrian in
Africa.
is incredible that was conceived for his coming. For besides that ADRIAN was
very much beloved, it happened (as SPARCIANVS and others do write) that Africa
for five years space had endured great want of rain, and by consequence
hunger and famine; but as soon as he was arrived in that Country, rain fell
plentifully: which made his coming most joyful. And the time that he was in
that country, he spent in reforming of the government, in ending
controversies, and commanding certain public buildings to be erected: among
which was the reedifying of a great part of the city of Carthage, which
(according to my author) he commanded Carthage reedified by Adrian.
should be called Adrianopolis, after his own name.

And all matters being ended in Africa at his pleasure, and having stayed there
so long as to him seemed good, he returned prosperously to Rome, where he
provided for all other matters of the Empire: yet the time was not long that he
stayed there; and when every man thought least of any journey, he again
provided for his passage into the East. And within short space he went into
Graecia; and travailing through it, stayed in some cities, and made those
buildings and temples to be finished, which before he had commanded to be
begun, and enjoined others to be built: and so continuing his journey he went
into Asia the less, and did there as he had done in other provinces where he
had travailed. Being come into Syria, by letters and messengers he invited the
Kings and Tetrarchs, as well those which were friends and subjects, as others
which were neighbors and strangers, to come to see and speak with him. Among
which; one was the King of Parthia, to whom he freely sent his daughter, whom
the Emperor TRAIAN in the former wars had taken prisoner; for which generous
act, many came to his Court to visit him and to do him honor: all which he
so friendly and courteously entertained, as such which came not did exceedingly
envy those which came, grieuing very much that they had not done the like.
These meetings and feasts being ended (which in truth were very great and
memorable) ADRIAN took his way toward Syria, and came into Palestina and
Judea, visiting the principal cities thereof; and from thence went forwards,
and did the like in Arabia. After which, he presently went into Egypt; where he
remained longer than in any other part, and there commanded a most sumptuous
Sepulcher to be built over the great POMPEY, for A Sepulcher made by A drian
over the great Pompey.
that his Tomb was ruined and decayed. He also caused a City to be founded to
the name and memorial of a most fair young youth which died there, whom he
deerly loved. And at the same time he permitted and also commanded, that the
holy City Jerusalem, which (as is before said) was destroyed and laid desolate,
should be reedified and new built; which was presently done with admirable
expedition, principally by the Jews; and commanded, that (leaving the first
name) it should be called Aelia Adria Capitolina: so great was then the power
and wealth of the The power of the Roman Emperors.
Roman Emperors, that it was as easy a matter for them then to build Cities,
as now houses, or things of lesser moment. And although the Jews did greatly
rejoice for the new-building and restoring of Jerusalem, yet afterward they
took it very grievously, that the Gentiles should jointly dwell there with them;
who built Temples to their gods and idols, not suffering the Christians freely
to use their rites and ceremonies. And this is the cause of the rebellion which
afterward ensued.

Truly, it is a thing much to be noted in this Nation; which became so
stiff-necked, that when they were bound to keep and observe their law, being
good and holy; for very light occasions they would forsake it, and take strange
religions, and become idolaters: but after that it was abolished, and ought no
longer to be observed, they would never leave it, neither receive The perverse
perfidy of the ob^matt Jews.
the holy Catholic faith; and yet, until this day, some of that generation in
sundry parts of the world obstinately persevere therein.

These and many other things being ended by ADRIAN in the time of his abode in
Asia and in Egypt, he returned into Europe: and, arriving in Gracia, he stayed
with his whole Court in the City of Athens. Being there (which was in the
eighteenth year of his Reign) all the Jews rebelled, and cast the Roman
garrisons out of their Provinces of Judea, Galile, and the rest; killing as
many of them as they could, with a very great number of Christians. This was a
very dangerous war: for, with them did conspire all the Jews that dwelt in
any other Provinces, which were very many. ADRIAN considering the importance of
this accident, provided a new Army, whereof he made JULIUS SEVERUS General
against the Jews, causing him to come from Britanny, where he commanded the
Army; who came with great power, and passed into Syria, and made most cruel
war: wherein, after the shedding of much blood on both sides, the Jews were
ouercomn and destroyed, and the whole Country left in a manner desolate. So
(as writes DION) there were fifty excellent strong Castles and Fortresses
laid The Jews ouerthrown and destroyed by Julius Seuerus and banished from the
new Jerusalem by Adrian.
even with the ground; and nine hundred, fourscore and five Towns and
populous Villages burnt; and there were slain in skirmishes and battles fifty
thousand fighting men, besides those which without number died of hunger,
sickness, and misery of the war: and so was performed the subduing, and (in a
manner) the total destruction of the Jewish Nation. And ADRIAN gave
commandment and made an edict, that the Jews should be perpetually banished
from the new Jerusalem, and prohibited to inhabit there.

Within few days after the war against the Jews was ended, the Alanes and
Masagets, which are barbarous and fierce Nations of Scythia Asiatica, came with
great fury, and entered into Media making war, and afterward into Armenia, and
came as far as Cappadocia (where FLAVIVS ARRIANVS was General for the Empire)
putting all the Countries therabouts in great fear. But ADRIAN (who ever loved
peace) used such means, as through the gifts which he sent to their King
VOLOGESVS by his Ambassadors, they returned peaceably to their houses, laden
with spoils and riches which they got in other barbarous Countries.

ADRIAN, having ended all matters to his best liking; after he had bestowed
many gifts and favors upon the Cities of Gracia, came in the end to Rome,
having (as I have said) traveled a long time through the world; where his
coming was very grateful to all estates in that City: and although he were now
old and unwieldy, yet he failed not to provide and take as good order for all
things then, as when he was of greatest strength. But, considering his age,
which was now above threescore years, that he had not any son, and that a
disease he ordinarily had, which was much bleeding at the nose, did now more
oppress him than ever; he took great care who should be his Successor, and
therefore determined to adopt some excellent man to succeed him in the Empire;
and heerupon took much counsel, and made many doubts before he would resolve.
In the end, contrary to the liking of most of his Council, he adopted one
LUCIUS CECINIVS COMMODVS, intituling him CAESAR, and nominated him for Lucius
Cecinius adopted by Adrian to be his successor.
his Successor; which (as SPARCIANVS reports) had not been used to be done in
that manner until then: and changing his name, after his new Father he was
called AELIVS VERVS. The same day he did this, he commanded SEVERIANVS to be
slain (who was a great man in Rome) and FVSCVS which was his nephew, for
certain evident signs and suspicions which he discouerd, that they practiced
to tyrannize and vsurp the Empire: and so likewise he commanded some others to
be put to death, and made away. After this election and adoption, and great
feasting for the same, this new-adopted CAESAR was overtaken with an infirmity,
which was so grievous, and of so long continuance, as ADRIAN found himself
deceived: and seeing that now he could not live long, he repented that he
should leave so weak and feeble a successor. It is written, that he often
said, he leaned to a rotten wall. But it so happened that within few days, he
was eased of that care: for this LUCIUS CECINIVS, whom he had adopted and
called AELIVS VERVS, died. And notwithstanding that this man left sons
behind him, yet ADRIAN presently adopted ANTONIUS or ANTONIUS (for I find
him written after both names) who was afterward surnamed PIUS; upon condition
that he should also adopt a son of the said AELIVS VERVS, who was called
LUCIUS VERVS ANTONIUS, and MARCUS AURELIUS also; but in the first place
ANTONIUS, of whose lineage hereafter mention shall be made, who were Noble, and
very excellent and virtuous men. This being done to the good liking, and with
the consent of the Senate, and of all the principal men in Rome, ADRIANS
infirmity increasing, he made himself to be carried to the city of Baias:
where his grief so extremely tormented him, and therewithal came so many
passions and convulsions, as he oftentimes desired to die, and procured his
own death; and with gifts and flatteries, and sometime with threatenings
provoked some to kill him: and seeing that no man would do it, and that he
wanted strengthto do it himself, for the last remedy of his infirmity, by
the advice of some of his Physicians (for he had many about him) he The death
of the Emperor Adrian.
resolved to forbear either to eat or drink, and so he died in the year of
our Lord 140. using the common saying, Turba Medicorum interfecit Regem: which
is, Amultitude of Physicians killed the King.

ADRIAN at the time of his death was sixty two years old and five months,
and had reigned twenty one years and eleven months: he neither left behind
him, or ever had any son; he was but once married, and then with a woman
whose name was SABINA; and after her death, he married no more. He was a man
tall of stature and of a good presence, and did wear his beard and hair long,
and took delight therein. He was as excellent a Prince as ever was any,
although that he had some vices, which with his wisdom he covered and kept
secret. As concerning the Christian faith, although in the beginning (as an
Infidel) he did hate it, and was an enemy to it, yet afterward he showed
himself more temperate toward the Christians: for as EVSEBIVS and others do
write, QVADRATVS a disciple of the Apostles, and ARISTIDES a Philosopher of
Athens and a Christian, did compile certain notable books in defense of our
faith: wherewith ADRIAN being moved, wrote to MINVCIVS FVNDANVS who was
Proconsul in Asia, and to other parts, that no Christian should be compelled to
renounce his faith, neither punished, except he were accused for some other
offense. So as the Christian faith was taught and preached freely, a great part
of the reign of the Emperor ADRIAN.

THE LIFE OF MARCUS ANTONIUS PIUS, FIRST OF THAT NAME, AND SIXTEENTH ROMAN
EMPEROVR.
THE AROVMENT.
ANTONIUS was adopted by ADRIAN; and by reason of his adoption, succeeded him
in the Empire: in which dignity he lived so virtuously, as it may be said,
that he lived without example, and was compared to the good NVMA POMPIEIVS.
There was no great war in the time of this good Emperor: for he with his
authority bridled all Nations, and to him came Ambassadors, in a manner from
the furthermost parts of the World. He would never be very far from Rome,
in such manner as his Predecessor had been, being of opinion that it was
most fit for the Emperor to remain in that city, which was head of the
Empire. He was liberal, courteous, just and pitiful, and a great lover of
virtuous men, so as it might be said, that he was father of the virtuous. His
life was not stained with any vice, as his predecessors were. And being of the
age of 72. years he died in his City of a fever, when he had ruled the
Empire 23. years whose death was much lamented by the world, for that they had
lost an Emperor and a father, who, they might justly say, was Pius.

ADRIAN was not only wise and fortunate in governing and ruling the Empire,
the time that he held it; but he was also, in the successor whom he chose and
left there: for he proved to be such, and so good, that after he had ended
his days, ADRIAN was not more praised and remembered for his wisdom and good
government, then for the succession which he left, by adopting ANTONIUS: who
what he was we will presently tell you. The death of ADRIAN being known (which
was greatly lamented) ANTONIUS PIUS, his adopted son, was presently without
any contradiction admitted and obeyed for Emperor, accordingly as he had
appointed by the consent of all the Senate, as in his life we have written.
This ANTONIUS Antoninus his descent.
was the son of AURELIUS FVLVIVS, and Nephew of TITUS AURELIUS FVLVIVS, who
had been Consuls and had held other offices and dignities, and were Noble men
and of an ancient Family, whose original was in Gallia Cisalpina, now called
Lombardie. His mothers name was ARRIA FATIDILLA, the daughter of ARRIVS
ANTONIUS a Noble gentleman and twice Consul. This Emperor ANTONIUS was one
of the most excellent princes in virtue and bounty, that ever was in the
world; and who with greatest authority, justice, liberality, and clemency
governed the Empire. He had a good aspect, was tall, and of a good
constitution of body, of an excellent wit, mild of condition, moderate in
eating and drinking, well learned, and singularly eloquent, very bountiful,
and willing to give of his own, and very abstinent from taking from others. He
was a great lover of husbandry, and delighted much in hunting; and he was so
free from all manner of vices, as therein neither TRAIAN, ADRIAN, nor any of
his predeeessors could compare with him: Wherefore Antoninus compared with Numa
Pompilius.
the wisemen of his time compared him with NVMA POMPILIVS, who was second King
of Rome, and deserved to be called PIUS, for which they show many reasons.
Before that he was Emperor he had bin Questor, Praetor, and Consul, and had held
some other charges and magistracies. In his time their was little war, or at
least little spoken of; and those troubles which were, he easily pacified by
his Captains: and therefore the most that Historiographers write of him, is of
his good conditions and bounty: and so will I; although it will not be so
pleasing to the Reader as to discourse of wars; yet to follow the truth, and
principally to show the fruit which is to be gathred out of this history,
which are examples to live well: as for the rest there will be sufficiently
enough found in the process of this book, and that is not a little which is
already written.

ANTONIUS, as soon as he began to rule, he presently made show of his
natural goodness: for he removed not any of those from their offices and
charges, which he found placed and established by ADRIAN; but rather confirmed
them therein: and ever held it best, to suffer those which proved good
Governors to continue long in their charges and governments. He commanded also
his rents and services (besides that they should be moderated) to be favorably
and temperately collected. He presently did so many favors, and gave so many
gifts of his own goods which he had before, that his wife ANIA FAVSTINA
daughter to ANIVS VERVS reproved him for it: to whom he made answer that she
knew not what Antoninus answer to Faustine.
she said, and therefore he did let her know, that at what time he attained the
Empire, he had lost all that which before he enjoyed living private. In matters
of equity and government, he was as vigilant, and took as good order as ADRIAN
did. He resolved never to depart from Rome during his reign, except it were to
recreate himself, and sometime to hunt, being herein contrary in opinion to
his Predecessor ADRIAN: for he said that the Court and people, which traveled
with the Emperor, were troublesome and prejudicial to the Countries and
Cities by which they passed: and that in visiting some parts, he was far from
others; and therefore the most fit and convenient place for the Emperor to stay
and make his abode in, was in Rome, which was the Lady and head of the Empire,
and in the midst thereof, and most fit to receive Ambassadors and messages
from all parts. So as following this counsel (which indeed proved not ill)
the Wars and Insurrections which happened, he suppressed and pacified by his
Captains; as the Britains, which rebelling in part of that Island, the Rebels
were defeated by his Captains, and the Island brought to subjection.

And within a little afterward, the like happened in the Country of Dacia, and
also in Germany, which took Arms; but through the victory of his Legions,
peace was established: whereby he wanne so great reputation, that during the
rest of his reign, there happened no dangerous war, and all men feared and
honored him for his goodness; and therewith he was so much beloved, as he was
held and esteemed, for Father, Lord and Emperor. The barbarous Nations which
were unknown to the Romans, did so much love and esteem him, as in
contentions and matters in controversy which fell out between them, they
chose him for their Judge and Arbitrator, submitting themselves to his censure.
And so those of Hircania, (which is a Province of Asia, near to the Caspian
Sea) and the Bactrians which are more to the Eastwards, and both very far and
remote; and also the East Indians sent to him their Ambassadors, offering
Ambassadors and princes from ^ar countries came to see Antoninus*
amity and obedience. And from other Countries which were exceeding far, there
came some Kings to do him honor: among which, they make mention of STANGORVS
from India, and of King PHARASMANES, and others. And in other Countries, he
settled Kings at his pleasure: whereto the Inhabitants did consent,
notwithstanding that they were not subject to the Empire. And the King of
Parthia resolving to make war, being with a great power entered into Armenia,
one Letter from the Emperor sufficed to make him retire and to discharge his
Army.

ANTONIUS being in this manner beloved and feared by Strangers, was no less
esteemed and beloved by his Subjects and Vassals, but rather without comparison
far more; as by those which knew and enjoyed his goodness and equity: and
seeing that he was such, he was by the whole Senate entitled, Father of his
Country, which he much refused, but yet in the end he accepted thereof, with
great courtesy and humility: for he was naturally mild, and Noble of
condition; and therewith so courteous, as he entertained the Senators and
principal men gently and lovingly, with great honor and courtesy; and never
did any thing of importance, without their counsel and consent, and toward
all men generally he sought to moderate the state and majesty of an Emperor,
showing himself affable and pleasant. And above all, he took order that no
man should make benefit of his favor to another; neither take bribes from such
as were Suitors unto him: for he gave audience and answer to all men himself
in person, and in this he knew the quality and difference between men, using
herein sometime the opinion of others when need required. Whereto, besides the
ordinary counsel of the Senate, and his own skill and knowledge in the laws,
he had always some excellent Lawyers near unto him, as VLPIANVS, MARCELLVS,
IABOLENVS and others: By which means and such others as shall be declared, the
Provinces and Cities in his time flourished and grew rich, which he relieved
with his own rents toward the buildings thereof, as well such as were
necessary as others, to beautify and adorn the same. And when any misfortune
or calamity happened, he repaired and reedefied it with money out of his
Eschequer: as, a great fire which happened in Rome, wherewith were burnt three
hundred and forty principal houses, and a great part of the City of Narbone
in France, and the City of Antioch in Asia, with the Marketplace Great harm
done by fire in several places.
in the City of Carthage. In time of great famine which was in Rome, he
provided for their wants, and maintained the people with bread and wine, the
most of the time that the famine lasted, making Victuals to be brought from all
parts, paying for the same at his proper cost: so as generally through the
whole Empire, all men were well content with him; for he maintainned them in
peace, quietness and equity.

And doubtless in this place there is to be observed (as touching the power
and government of humane things) how great and potent the Roman Empire then
was; and how contentedly, A wonderful obedience, and universal peace.
and at what liberty the Subject lived in the time of ANTONIUS, TRAIAN,
ADRIAN, and other good Emperors; and to see the greatness and riches of that
Court frequented by the worthiest and best men in the world: and to observe the
greatness, buildings and wealth of that most populous City of Rome, beautified
with the goodliest Statues and Pictures that ever Eye had seen; so as at this
day her ruins are more esteemed then all the stately buildings in the world:
and to consider the liberty and security wherein men might travail, through the
world, no man being tied to obey more then one Lord and King, and he good and
just, without fear of wars, thieves by Sea or Land, without finding every
where new Laws, new Lords, Kings and Tyrants, needing no security or safe
Conducts, without being taken prisoners, and made Captives, or ill used by
enemies, strangers and unknown persons, but using all men as friends and
neighbors in the greatest and best parts of the World, which as a little
Kingdom was quietly and justly governed. One Country was furnished from
another, with such things as in the one did abound, and the other wanted;
Merchandise and Traffic passing through the World without so many
Impositions, molestations and troubles, as we see now adays, all living then
under one law; being in the best and most habitable parts of the Earth in
union and peace: which they more perfectly enjoyed, after that the Emperors
were Christians, as hereafter shall be declared. But as this was but humane
power, so could it not continue long without alteration and change: for such is
the condition of this world; nothing can continue long in one estate.

But returning to our ANTONIUS, among his other virtues wherewith he made the
time of his reign happy and pleasing, one was his clemency; wherewith he
greatly moderated the rigor of the laws, punishing offenses with pity, or
pardoning them, ever desiring and procuring peace: So as to such as sometimes
discoursed with him of the valor of JULIUS CAESAR and HANNIBALL, he did
commmonly answer with that saying of SCIPIO, that he more desired the
preservation of one friends or subjects life, then the death of an hundred
enemies. This Emperor ANTONIUS was a great friend to Learning, and much
honored learned men, giving them great rewards and pensions, drawing them from
all the parts of the world; among which he caused to come from Chalcide a great
Philosopher which was a Stoic, whose name was APOLLONIVS, whom he sent for to
be Master to his adopted son MARCUS ANTONIUS, who afterward was Emperor.
This Philosopher being come to Proud speeches of Apollonius (...)Philosopher,
with Antoninus his answer.
Rome, ANTONIUS sent for him to come to see him, seeing that he stayed long
ere he did it of himself: whereto the Philosopher made answer, that with
greater reason the scholar ought to come to the master, then the master to
the scholar. This arrogancy did nothing offend ANTONIUS: but laughing
thereat, he said to those which were with him, that he marvelled that
APOLLONIVS should deem it a shorter way from Chalcide to Rome, then from his
lodging in Rome to his Palace. This Emperor, among the weighty affairs and
matters of importance, forgot not to please and recreate the people; but (as
the custom then was in Rome) at certain times caused feasts and solemn
sports to be made. In conclusion, he was an excellent Prince, and left nothing
undone, that was behouefull for the good government of the Empire: and having
ruled the same 23. years, being above threescore and ten years old, he was
The death of Antoninus Pius.
taken with a burning fever, whereof within three days he died in peace and
rest; first recommending the Empire to MARCUS ANTONIUS, who was his son in
law, and married to his daughter FAVSTINA, and is commonly called MARCUS
AURELIUS, commanding that the image of FORTUNE which the Emperors did use to
have in their chambers, should be carried to ANTONIUS chamber, which happened in
the year of our Lord 163. Some time before he dyed, being a man of great
stature, and by reason of his age unable to go upright, A^i. Dom. 163.
but stooping, he ware upon his breast certain thin boords, whereupon he
made fast his clothes with such art, that it covered the defect of nature. His
death was generally lamented, and the Romans did him great honor, and made
sacrifices unto him, canonizing him for a god, and builded a Temple also unto
him, as they did to the vanity of their other superstitious gods.

THE LIFE OF MARCUS AURELIUS, ONLY OF THAT NAME, ALTHOUGH SECOND OF THE
ANTONINES, CALLED THE Philosopher, and of LUCIUS COMMODVS VERVS, ANTONIUS his
companion, and seventeenth Emperor of ROME.
THE ARGUMENT.
MArcus Aurelius being adopted by Antoninus Pius, succeeded in the Empire, and
was endued with so much bounty and virtue, as he was worthily called the
Philosopher: and considering the many calamities which in his time oppressed
the Roman commonwealth, there needed a man no less good and vertnous. In his
time were most dangerous wars, very great earthquakes, inundations of Rivers,
pestilence, and most extreme famine; all which he, through his singular
wisdom, remedied. He made the Christians to be persecuted, whereby the Church
endured much. He was unhappy in his wife, and in wise children: and
notwithstanding that she was dishonest, yet he would not put her away,
accounting to have had the Empire for her dowry. This good Emperor dyed in the
wars against the Germans, taken with a most grievous infirmity, when he
had reigned 18. years. His death was deplored through the whole Roman Empire,
where he had ever showed himself a good Prince, and loving father.

WHen as the Emperor ANTONIUS PIUS was dead, MARCUS AURELIUS ANTONIUS VERVS,
without any contradiction succeeded him, who was called the Marcus Aurelius
called the Philosopher.
Philosopher, whom (as we have said) ANTONIUS PIUS had adopted for his son
in the time of the Emperor ADRIAN, and afterward married him to his daughter
FAVSTINA. This man when as he was confirmed in the Empire, and began to
govern, took for his companion and equal, LUCIUS VERVS COMMODVS ANTONIUS:
who together with him, was adopted, by ANTONIUS, by the commandment of the
Emperor ADRIAN, being the son of LUCIUS CECONIVS COMMODVS, Lucius Commodus
taken by Marcus Aurelius for his companion in the Empire.
whom ADRIAN had first adopted, but died before him. These two were the first
that ever ruled in Rome together with equal power. This excellent Emperor
MARCUS ANTONIUS was also called AURELIUS ANTONIUS. I would that the Reader
should understand, that this confusion and variety of names is caused by
reason of the adoptions which then were made: for the Romans did use to have
Adoption in what manner.
three names, a forename, a name, and a surname. And to declare it more
plainly, when any one was adopted for a son, he received the name and
surname, and sometime changed all the three names. Sometime they held one, and
changed the rest, to continue the memory of both fathers: and from hence grew
so many names, which obscure the history, and oftentimes deceive the Reader.
To be eased of this trouble, I will call this excellent Emperor, MARCUS
AURELIUS; and his brother and companion, LUCIUS VERVS, giving to them both
sometime the surname of ANTONIUS.

MARCUS AURELIUS was the natural and true son of ELIVS VERVS, who died
Praetor. And his Grandfathers name was ELIVS VERVS, who had been twice Consul
and The origin of Marcus Aurelius.
Prefect in Rome, and was enobled and made Patrician by the Emperor VESPASIAN,
as JULIUS CAPITOLINVS relates. His mothers name was DOMITIA CAMILLA and was
the daughter of CALVISIVS TVLLVS, who had been twice Consul. By his fathers
side he was of so ancient a lineage, as it was reported that he was descended
from NVMA POMPILIVS the second King of the Romans. This Emperor was endued
with so many virtues, good qualities, and rare parts, as there will not any be
found that has excelled him, and hardly any to be compared unto him. In his
time there were such dangerous wars, and so many calamities, as there was
great need of his virtue, wisdom and valor, to resist so many perils, and
to prevent so may ill fortunes. He was so addicted to the study of
Philosophy, and all Arts and Sciences, as he was surnamed the Philosopher, and
he did honor and greatly enrich wise and learned men. His chief masters in
Philosophy amongst others, were APOLIONIVS CHALCIDONENSIS; in the Greek
tongue, SEXTVS CHERONENSIS, nephew to PLVTARCH; and in Rhetoric, FRONTO an
excellent Orator in that time, by whose instructions he greatly profited. And
beginning to govern in company of his adopted brother L. VERVS ANTONIUS, as
he did in all things far excel him, so (in a manner) he had the
administration of all matters: for which cause, of him chiefest mention is
made; as also for that he lived longer, and remained alone in the Empire;
governing them with the good liking and contentment of the whole Senate and
people of Rome, for the great experience they had of his virtue and bounty. In
the beginning of his reign, there happened so great an inundation and
ouerflowing of the river Tiber, as it overthrew many buildings in Rome, and
drowned The ouerflowing of Tier.
many people, with a great number of cattle; and spoiling the fields caused an
extreme dearth and famine. Which, MARCUS AURELIUS through his great
liberality, with the consent of his brother LUCIUS VERVS, sufficiently
repaired, relieuing and victualling the City at their own proper cost and
charges, making provision of corn to be brought from all parts.

After this, in the third year of his reign, followed the dangerous war
against the Parthians (a nation which the Romans ever feared) which war was
raised by their king VOLOGESVS; War with the Parthians.
who, leuying an exceeding huge Army, came against the ordinary legions in
Syria, where ATIODIVS CORNELIANVS was Captain, and governed that country for
the Empire: who having no sufficient Army to make head against the Parthians,
was driven to retire, and VOLOGESVS took some Provinces. At that time also
rebelled a certain people in the I Will of Britanny, and in Germany in like
manner: and northern people called Catti, invaded the borders of the Empire,
against all which MARCUS AURELIUS made speedy provision. Into Britanny was
sent CALPHVRNIVS AGRICOLA with new supplies; who joining with the ordinary
legions of that Island, pacified those troubles. Against the Catti, was sent
AVEIDIVS VICTORINVS for General. To the war against the Parthians, because
it was important and more dangerous, it seemed requisite to the Emperors and to
the Senate, that one of them two should go, and it was concluded that LUCIUS
VERVS ANTONIUS should undertake the charge, because that MARCUS AURELIUS could
not be spared: for his presence was very needful in Rome for the general
government, and to provide for all occurrents. And so LUCIUS VERVS with great
provision, and a great Court, departed, whom MARCUS AURELIUS accompanied to the
City of Capua: but LUCIUS fell sick by the Lucius Verus against the Parthians.
way (as some write) through his disorders, riot, and surfeiting; by reason
whereof and his long lingering, the Roman legions were put to the worse, and
were overthrown by the Parthians, and their General slain in a battle
which was fought between them. But LUCIUS VERVS being arrived with his great
Army, the war was managed with apparent advantage to the Romans; not by the
endeavor of LUCIUS VERVS, but of his Captains ESTACIVS PRISCVS, AVIDIVS
CASSIVS, and MARCIVS VERVS, valiant commanders; he giving himself to his
pleasures and pastimes; in Summer, in the City of Antioch; and in winter, in
Laodicea, for four yeeeres space, that these wars continued: wherein passed
many great conflicts, skirmishes and battles between the said Captains, and
the King and Nation of the Parthians. But succeeding prosperously with the
Romans, they obtained many victories in diverse parts: so as recovering what
was lost in Syria, they did the like in Armenia, and entered the province of
Media: finally, being masters of the field, they came with their Ensigns
displayed, even to the City of Babylon. While as these things were in action,
the Emperor MARCUS AURELIUS continued in Rome, applying himself with great care
to the good government, providing all things necessary for the wars, with
great wisdom and foresight; dissembling and with patience enduring the vices
and neglect of his Companion LUCIUS VERVS, to whom at that time he sent his
daughter LVCILLA to be married unto him in Syria, where he then was; which he
did, the better to confirm the friendship and brotherhood betwixt them. And,
during the time of these wars with the Parthians, EVSEBIVS and PAVLVS OROSIVS
The fourth persecution of the primitive church
write, that the Christians were persecuted by the commandment of the
Emperor, chiefly in Asia where LUCIUS VERVS was: which was the fourth
persecution the Church endured. Wherefore (as it is to be supposed) God sent a
general pestilence, and other calamities, which afterward ensued.

Having obtained so many victories against the Parthians, LUCIUS VERVS
ANTONIUS resolved to come to Rome; leaving that Country quiet and in
subjection: and, setting the affairs of Asia in good order, he divided the
Kingdoms among those which to him seemed to have most right, leaving them as
subjects and vassals to the Empire; and in other Provinces and Countries he
made the Officers of his House and Court, Gouerners; which were called Comites
or Earls: from whence the title and dignity of Earls now-adaies might have
the Original. Being comn into Italy, with the new surname of PARTHICVS, for
the victory attained against the Parthians, which was also given to MARCUS
AURELIUS, with the triumph, they both together triumphed with great solemnity:
and so this enterprise was happily achieved and ended. And although this
coming of LUCIUS VERVS from the East was very joyful, by reason of the many
victories obtained by his Armies, yet was it otherwise the cause of much sorrow
and heaviness: for, when he came out of Syria, the plague was very sore there,
and he dispersed the same into sundry places by the way as he came; so as many
of his Soldiers, and of his Court and Company, died thereof: and, doing the
like in Italy and Rome, he infected the whole Country; in such sort, that it
was the greatest and most furious pestilence A great plague in Rome and all
Italy.
that ever was seen until that day. For remedy whereof, MARCUS AURELIUS used
all care and diligence possible, as well in preserving those which were
infected, and avoiding further infection, as in curing the living, and burying
the dead; to his great cost and hazard of his life. This calamity being past,
before it, and whilst it continued, he omitted no time nor care that was
necessary for the government and good of the commonwealth; hearing and
dispatching all causes in general; seeing in person what was done in the
Senate; without whose opinion (and of the principal and wisest men) he did
nothing: for, he used to say, that there was greater reason he should follow
the counsel of so many and so good friends, than that so many and so wise men
should do after his will alone. At the meetings wherein Magistrates were
chosen, he was ever present; and in all things caused the ancient order and
liberty to be observed. In Courts and Judgments he increased the number of
the Judges and the judicial days. He also increased the alms and rewards of
his Palace; and, in a time of famine and want of corn, he spent an infinite
treasure, providing for many Cities a sufficient quantity of grain. And in
Spain Marcus Aurelius relieved many cities with corn in time of scarsity.
(being more fruitful than the rest) where his Predecessors had too much
gleaned, he mitigated great part of the tributes, releasing many taxes and
services.

And heerin he was so temperate and pitiful toward his subjects, that
whatsoever briberies and extortions were committed by his Collecters and
Receivers, he most severely punished: yet in all other crimes and offenses he
ever used great clemency, and ever inflicted less punishment than the laws
commanded. This Emperor not only tasted of adversities (as we have said) as,
famine and pestilence, with inundations and earthquakes; but within his own
house he endured a greater plague with his wife FAVSTINA, who was (as all
Writers affirm) dishonest Faustina, Marcus Aurelius wife, dishonest and
dissolute.
and wonderful dissolute; which he sought by all means possible to reclaim,
although not by such rigorous punishment as she deserved. And, being by some
persuaded to put her away, and to divorce himself from her, seeing that he
would not put her to death; he remembering, she was ANTONIUS PIUS his daughter,
who had left him the Empire, they write that he answered them in this manner:

If We put away FAVSTINA, We are also bound to leave the Empire; which was the
dowry We had with her at our marriage.

There ensued so many calamities after that LUCIUS VERVS ANTONIUS came from the
East, as well by means of the general and cruel pestilence, as by
earthquakes, famine, inundations, and caterpillars, not only in Italy, but in
other Provinces of the Empire; as that all Writers affirm, that if it had not
happened that MARCUS AURELIUS had been so diligent, so wise, and worthy an
Emperor as he was, the Roman Empire had been ruined and rent in sunder, and
barbarous Nations had subdued the greatest part thereof. For taking occasion of
that which is aforesaid, seeing the Countries wasted and unpeopled, many
northren Nations conspired against it, as the Sarmates, Vandales, Marcomans,
Sueuians, and in a manner all Germany Northerly nations conspired against the
Empire.
who seized upon the Provinces of Pannonia, which were Austria, Hungary and
other countries, threatening Italy and France. Whereto the Emperor MARCUS
AURELIUS desirous to yield redress, thought it not sufficient to send thither
his companion, and much less durst he leave him in Rome, he was so retchlesse
and vicious, and therefore resolved that they would both go together: Which
putting in execution, with all provision necessary, it happened that upon the
way, LUCIUS VERVS ANTONIUS was taken with an Apoplexy, The death of Lueius
Verus.
whereof he died suddenly, having reigned abount nine or ten years in company
with his brother. And so MARCUS AURELIUS remained alone in the Empire, who only
was worthy thereof, prosecuting his journey with his Army, and began the war
with great courage and judgment: in which, the infection did greater harm to
his Army, then the force of his enemies; although it passed not without many
battles and encounters. And so with great difficulty by reason of the
pestilence, he maintained this war three years: and wanting money to pay his
soldiers (for the Provinces, by reason of the miseries past, could not pay
their taxes) he was constrained to sell all his jewels, vessels of gold and
silver, the furniture of his chamber, and his own proper possessions,
therewith to pay his Army, which was greatly diminished of the chief
commanders and valiantest men which died of the plague, whereby it received
much more harm then by the enemy: Wherefore he was often counseled to leave
the wars and to return. But he, willing rather to die then to lose any jot of
his honor, continued it with a very great resolution, until that (after many
great perils and extremities, which were such that Historiogriphers describe
this war to be as dangerous as the wars of Hannibal) he obtained the
victory, which he thoroughly accomplished in a great battle. Wherein (as it
was thought) through the prayers of the Christians which were in his Army,
unto which he recommended himself, God showed a most evident miracle; which
was, That he and his people being ready to perish through want of water (the
passages being on every side stopped by his enemies) there A most manifest
miracle.
fell such abundance of rain from heaven, that his Army was sufficiently
relieved with drink: and therewith there fell such lightning and so cruel a
tempest amongst his enemies, that he then setting upon them overthrew and slew
a great number; as EVSEBIVS and JULIUS CAPITOLINVS report. And this being past,
he recovered the Pannonies, and the rest which they had usurped; and had done
much more, but that at that instant AVIDIVS CASSIVS, before named, who was
Captain and Governor in the East, rose against MARCUS AURELIUS, proclayming
himself Emperor, taking occasion for that he was so much troubled in A
rebellion against Marcus Aurelius.
so doubtful a war: Wherefore the Emperor was constrained to leave the best
order he could, concerning Germany, and to return into Italy, from thence to
take his way toward AVIDIVS CASSIVS; whereupon he came to Rome, and he entered
in triumph for the Germans, and jointly with him his son COMMODVS, whom he
had made CAESAR, and nominated for his successor.

The triumph being ended, and leaving in Rome such order for the government as
was most expedient, with part of his victorious Army which he brought with him
out of Germany, and with other forces which he had newly levied, he departed
toward the East, against AVIDIVS CASSIVS; where being arrived, the matter went
so well of his side, as before that he came to any conflict or battle, the
same Legions which AVIDIVS CASSIVS commanded, rebelled against him, and slew
him, without the commandment or knowledge of MARCUS AURELIUS: For, he was
rather displeased therewith then otherwise; so mild and noble he was. And his
head being brought unto him, he commanded it to be honorably buried, and
therewith seemed to be very sorrowful, saying, That they had bereaved him of
all means to show him mercy; and that he much desired to have had him in his
power alive, to have given Marcus Aurelius pity toward Cassius a rebel.
him his life, and to have reproved him of his ingratitude. And those Cities
which had conspired with him, he easily pardoned, and commanded that they
should not be rigorously dealt withal. And of their goods, which the Senate
had commanded to be confiscated, and put into his Exchequer, he would not
receive any part; but commanded that they should be put into the public
treasury of Rome. And being by one of the Council reproved, for showing such
clemency in a crime so notorious, telling him that he ought not to have done
so, and that AVIDIVV CASSIVS would not have dealt so by him if he had been
overcome, he answered with great constancy and assurance, that AVIDIVS had not
so well served the gods, nor lived in such sort, as to be able to have
overthrown him.

BVLGACIVS GALLICANVS, who is an Author very ancient, and lived in the time of
the Emperor DIOCLESIAN, in the life which he wrote of this AVIDIVS CASSIVS,
reports, that the Emperor commanded to be given to his sons and daughters
the one half of their fathers goods, and that there should not any injury or
disgrace be done unto them; and that they should be admitted to magistracies
and dignities, if they were thereto chosen: and so to others which were guilty,
he used the like clemency and grace.

This rebellion being pacified, MARCUS AURELIUS withdrew himself to the City of
Antioch in Syria, now called Soria; whither came unto him many Kings and
Ambassadors from the East; where, treating of peace and amity, and concluding
the same with them, he was greatly esteemed and beloved of all men. And,
setting all matters of the East in good order, being now old and wearied, he
made his return into Italy; and by the way, his wife the Emperesse FAVSTINA
died, whom he buried sumptuously and with great honor. Being comme to
Faustina the Empress dies.
Rome, he entered in triumph for the victory obtained against AVIDIVS; and
returned to his accustomed goodness, and upright government of the Empire, as he
was wont to do. When he thought he should now have rested from his former
toils, there began new alterations and insurrections in Germany: which he
fearing (as was reason: for, that Nation had always been feared and doubted)
determined in person to go to that war, and did so with a very great power, and
prosecuted the same for the space of three years together; wherein were done
many Feats of Arms on either side, and he obtained some notable victories. But,
being ready to have fully concluded his conquests (they being as it were in his
hand) he was taken with a grievous pestilent Fever; which perceiving to be
mortal, he commanded all the principal men which were with him to come before
him: to whom he made a notable speech, which HERODIANVS recites: wherein he
recommended unto them the Roman Commonwealth, and his only son COMMODVS, whom
he left for his Successor; and him he charged very effectually to end that
war which he left in so good terms; concluding, that he should not suffer
the enemy which was brought low, and well-nigh to confusion, to recover force
and courage. And The death of Marcus Aurelius, Anno Domini 182.
then, being no longer able to resist his sickness, he died, having reigned
eighteen years, in the year of our Lord (as EVSEBIVS reconneth) one hundred,
fourscore and two, being threescore and one year old. Yet SEXTVS AURELIUS
says, two years less.

His death was extremely lamented and bewailed through the whole Army, and
afterward in Rome, and generally through all the Provinces of the Empire: for,
in them all he was infinitely well beloved. MARCUS AURELIUS had had another
son, whose name was ANTONIUS or VERISIMVS, who died young; and one daughter
named LVCILLA, who married with a great and mighty man called POMPEIANVS.

THE LIFE OF COMMODVS ANTONINUS, ONLY OF THIS NAME, AND EIGHTEENTH ROMAN
EMPEROVR.
THE ARGUMENT.
AFter the good Marcus Aurelius, succeeded his wicked son Commodus: who, for
that he was held to be the Son of so good Father, was without any difficulty
saluted Emperor: and for that when his Father died he was in Germany, when he
returned to Rome all the City made great joy. But, being comn to the City,
giving himself over to all the wickedness that man could imagine, he behaved
himself so, as some conspired against him; which escaping, he took occasion to
show his cruelty. He was very active of his body, and so expert in casting of
darts, as he would openly kill wild beasts in the Amphitheatre. Finally, his
wife Martia, finding a book wherein were written the names of such as he had
resolved to put to death, and her own name among the rest, she took order for
his dispatch: and giving him poison, whilst he was vomiting it up again, she
made him to be stabbed. And so died that monster; to the great contentment of
the whole Empire, which he had wickedly governed thirteen years.

THE good MARCUS AURELIUS being dead, his Son COMMODVS was by the whole Army
obeyed and acknowledged for their Lord and Emperor; and so he was afterward by
the Senate and people of Rome, and likewise by all the Provinces: for, no man
would deny obedience to the Son of so good a Father. But he proved so lewd
and wicked, as he seemed not to be his son: and, considering the adultery of
his mother FAVSTINA, he Commodus suspected to be a bastard.
was suspected to be the son of some base fellow. The ancient Authors which
write of him (which are many) in a manner treat of nothing else but of his
abominable vices and cruelties; which were so great, as it seems he exercised
himself in no other thing, neither left any other memory behind him. He came
to the Empire being of the age of nineteen years, and was of a good
constitution of body, of a very fair complexion, cleer-eied, and had a flaxen
hair; all (in truth) ill bestowed upon him, seeing that these gifts and such
exquisite corporal beauty, he employed so filthily and dishonestly; being a
Gamester, incontinent, negligent, slothful, a glutton, a drunkeard, and (above
all) cruel.

Within some few days after his Father was dead, he came to the Camp where
the Army lay, accompanied with all the Roman Nobility; and made a good speech
to the soldiers, promising a good hope of him, and matters clean contrary to
that which followed; and he gave such donatiues to the soldiers as the new
Emperors were accustomed to give.

In these good beginnings he continued some few days: which being expired,
through the the counsel of some lewd persons, he resolved to leave the wars,
and to return to Rome. And the advice and counsel of POMPEIANVS, being his
brother-in-law, a man of great authority, could no way persuade him to stay,
neither other wise men and his loyal servants; who were of opinion that he
ought to stay, and to see an end of the war.

With this resolution he presently wrote to Rome, aduertising them of his
coming; making such a truce or peace with his enemies, as was rather to their
advantage than his. HERODIANVS writes, that he bought it with money: yet only
EVTROPIVS affirms, that he first wan a great battle. He then, leaving Captains
on the Frontiers of Germany, held on his way toward Rome; and in all the
Cities through which he passed, was received with incredible joy and solemnity,
^odus, (...)^ars (...)Germany, returned to Rome.
for the great love they bare to his father, and for the hope they conceived of
him; not yet knowing his conditions. In Rome he was received with exceeding
great joy, triumph and blessings, generally of all men; they strewing the ways
with flowers where he went, making all the demonstratiues of ^oy that were
possible; hoping and assuring themselves that they should have a good Prince,
being the son of MARCUS AURELIUS ANTONIUS, and nephew to ANTONIUS PIUS; who
were good and excellent Emperors. But it was not long before he put them out of
doubt, making frustrate their good hope: for, he openly gave himself to vice
and incontinency, going by night with others of his condition (as there never
want those which will imitate the prince, although in doing evil) to brothell
houses, and public tauerns; spending also whole days and nights in
banqueting, feasting, bathings and most abominable luxury. And as wicked men
never love any, but such as are like themselves; so he sent for Governors into
the Provinces, such as were his companions in his villainies: whereto he was so
much addicted, and spent so much time in them, as he took no care for the
government; leaving all to the disposition of a Favorite of his, whose name
was PERENIVS (whom he afterward made Pretorian Prefect, which is, Captain of
the Pretorian Cohorts) who was a most covetous, vicious, and cruel man; yet
very expert in the wars. This man governing all things, the accursed Emperor
COMMODVS increased so much in his vices and lewd life, as they write he kept
three hundred Concubines, and as many boys, for detestable uses: for which
cause he Commodus his concubines.
grew to be so odious, that certain eminent men conspired against him,
resolving secretly to have slain him, his sister LVCILLA who was wife to
POMPEIANVS being a partaker in the action: Whereby it may well be imagined what
he was; seeing that his own sister held Lucilla, Commodus his own sister,
conspired against him.
him worthy of death.

All being concluded how it should be done, and the charge of the execution
being given to one, whose name was QVINCIANVS (as HERODIANVS reports) yet
LAMPRIDIVS says, that the charge was given to POMPEIANVS, that he should first
strike him, and should have been seconded by the rest of the conspirators; It
happened that this man, as he was very bold and hardy, failed in the action:
for having had sufficient opportunity to have slain him, and being come near,
he would not so dispatch him, but in a brauing manner, being somewhat far from
him, he set his hand upon his poiniard; and going toward him, said, here
COMMODVS, the Senate has sent thee this poiniard; and for any haste that he
could make to stab him, with greater haste he was prevented by some of the
Emperors guard, and by them was taken; so as the conspiracy was presently
discovered, and a great way laid open to COMMODVS his cruelties. For after that
all such as were guilty, had been executed, together with his own sister
LVCILLA, and her husband POMPEIANVS, by the hand and direction of PERENIVS,
many Senators and a great number of other Noble and prime men, were also put to
death, and their goods seized upon, by producing false witnesses, which were
suborned to accuse them: Wherewith PERENIVS became so rich, as he practiced,
and was in hope to have made himself Emperor. But COMMODVS being advertised
of these and other his Commodus slew his favorite Perenius and his son.
treacheries, made him and a son of his to be slain. After which he suffered
himself to be governed by another favorite, named CLEANDER; who was so wicked
and extreme in cruelty, rapine, and briberie, that he surpassed PERENIVS. And
this fellow did so exceed, as the people of Rome unable to endure him, took
Arms, and in a tumult, went to a house of pleasure in Rome, where the Emperor
was, and required to have CLEANDERS head; and notwithstanding that the Emperors
guard began to make resistance, yet the matter came to such issue, Cleander
slain by the people.
that COMMODVS was constrained in despite of himself to deliver him, and so
were both he and his two sons slain.

This tumult being pacified, which COMMODVS durst not punish, he was so
incensed and therewith so fearful, that from thenceforth he trusted no man:
but as a Swine drawn out of the mire, so returned he to his abominable vices,
taking care for no other thing. Within a while after, according to his
accustomed manner, he suffered himself to be abused by another favorite, whose
name was IVLIANVS, and another called REGILIVS, both which he afterward caused
to be put to death, with other his favorites which succeeded them; together
with a multitude of great men, which LAMPRIDIVS recites: and all things were
so far out of order, that magistracies and the gouernements of Provinces were
sold for money; and they which bought them were oftentimes slain. Matters
being thus managed by the Emperor, and by those which ruled him, he spent his
time only in vices, and most dishonest and effeminate pleasures; coloring his
hair, and often bathing himself in company of others of his condition: whom
he called by most dishonest names, to the end they should be conformable to
their lives and actions. And he was not ashamed (notwithstanding these his
vicious and abominable courses) to take the name and habit of a man who was a
great enemy to those vices, which was HERCULES: so as for COMMODVS ANTONIUS,
son to MARCUS Commodus changed his name.
AURELIUS ANTONIUS, he commanded himself to be called HERCULES the son of
IVPITER; and cladding himself in a most ridiculous manner with the skin of a
Lion, and a club in his hand, like HERCULES, he so used to go abroad; whereat
some laughed, and others murmured. And sometimes he went clothed like an
Amazon woman, which was more correspondent to his condition: which he did for
the love of one of his Concubines Commodus attired like an Amazon.
whom he much loved, whose name was MARTIA, whose picture he ware, drawn at
life, upon that habit. After this, as if he had as well deserved it as AUGUSTUS
CAESAR, he commanded the month of August should be called Commodus; and
September Hercules; for he had taken that name: and December Amazonius, after
the name of an Amazon: But this was observed no longer then he lived.

This accursed man, among his vicious parts, had a strange ability of body,
which was, to cast or hurl a dart or a lance, better then any man of his
time: he was a most certain shooter, either in crosse-bow, or long bow; and so
skillful, that (in certain feasts and huntings, which according to the custom
were then made in Rome, whither came an infinite number of people to behold the
same) he commanded a gallerie to be made round about the Amphitheater; within
which he might run freely and in safety; and there running round about with
exceeding swiftness, hurling his darts or iauelins, he killed almost all the
Stagges and Hearts that were let loose, without missing one throw, or needing
any more then one shot; he was so sure to strike them, either in the heart,
in the forehead, or any other part whersoeuer he would: and he did the like by
Lions, Panthers, and Ounces, which to that end, were brought thither that day.
With his bow and arrows he would kill birds flying in the air, and did such
other active exercises, as in truth were very strange: Whereby it appears
that this man wanted not wit and ability to have applied himself to
goodness, as well as to sin and wickedness. And as cruelty was the thing
wherein he did principally delight, so it pleased the most merciful King The
cruelty of Commodus was the cause of his death.
of heaven, that the same was the cause of his death. For it happened, that
having resolved to put a great number of the best reputed Citizens to death,
he wrote a memorial of those which he purposed should die, amongst which was
his loving friend MARCIA, and AELIVS LETVS Captain of the Pretorian Cohorts:
it happened that this his beloved MARCIA upon some occasion came to the sight
of this note; who seeing her self condemned to death, determined with her
self to assure her life by the death of COMMODVS. And taking counsel with
AELIVS LETVS, and with another whose name was ALECTVS, who was also condemned,
Commodus poisoned by his friend Marcia.
concerning the contents, they agreed among themselves to poison him, which as
speedily as might be, was given him by the same MARCIA in a cup of mingled
wine which he did use to drink: and being presently taken with a heavy
slumber, MARCIA commanded all the company to go forth of the chamber, under
color to suffer him to take his rest. This being done, within a little while
after he awoke, extremely vomiting; and MARCIA and the rest fearing that he
would again have cast up the poison, in all haste called in a valiant young man
named NARCISSUS, showing him the note, and how the Emperor would have put him
to death also; and making him large promises, they concluded that he should go
in and kill him, which he did: and so this unhappy and wretched COMMODVS
vomiting and strangely tormented with the poison, was by this NARCISSUS stabd
and slain, to the good liking of the Roman people, and generally of all the
world. When his death was known, there was o Commodus slain by Narcissus.
man but did commend and approve the fact. He died, being of the age of 32
years, and in the year of our Lord 194. having reigned twelve years and
eight months. The joy which afterward was conceived in Rome when his death
was published, was incredible: and although that An. Dom. 194.
at the present it was not certainly known, but that he died suddenly of an
Apoplexy, which EVTROPIVS affirms in his life; They ran up and down the
streets that night, crying and calling one to another with joy, and went to
the Temples to render thanks to the gods for so Joy conceived by the Romans for
the death of Commodus.
great a benefit: and others went to the Palace to behold his dead carcass.
The Senate and Roman Nobility conceived no less joy then did the people,
which may sufficiently appear by the number of cursings which the Senate gave
him, when PERTINAX was chosen Emperor, and his successor: which M. MAXIMUS
writes, and AELIVS LAMPRIDIVS makes relation thereof, which is a pleasing
thing to read.

THE LIFE OF PVBLIVS AELIVS PERTINAX, ONLY OF THIS NAME, AND NINETEENTH ROMAN
EMPEROVR.
THE ARGUMENT.
AFter Commodus, Pertinax was Emperor: who being borne of base condition
attained to the Imperial dignity, more by his virtues, then the Nobility of
his blood, or the glory of his ancestors; being the son of a Libertine. He
was first a Doctor of the Law; and afterward leaving that profession, he gave
himself to Arms; wherein he behaved himself so excellently, as he deserved to
be made Emperor, to which dignity those which conspired against Commodus
advanced him; who went to him, he lying in his bed, expecting death rather than
the Empire. And, notwithstanding that he carried himself excellently well in
the government of the Empire, and never sought to be revenged on those which
had offended him, yet there failed not some which envied his goodness, and
desired his death; which was given him with many wounds, when he had reigned
the space of three months, being of the age of sixty seven years: for whose
virtues, the Senate resolved to place him in the number of their gods.

THE good and valiant PVBLIVS AELIVS PERTINAX succeeded the wicked and
tyrannous Emperor COMMODVS, being almost threescore and ten years old; and held
the same but three months. The manner how he attained thereto, I will presently
show you, when we shall briefly have declared the wars, the offices and
troubles, which he first passed: for, they were such and so diverse, as he was
therefore called The wheel of Fortune. Truly this Emperor Pertinax called the
wheel of Fortune.
was a notable example of humane changes. He was the son of a Libertine,
which had been a slave and made free, called AELIVS; and being a child was
taught to write and read, and cast account; which his father did, to the end
he should help him in his poor Mercery-shop. Afterward he came to learn the
Greek and Latin Gammar; so as he came to be a Master, and to keep a school in
Rome. After this he gave himself to the study of the Laws; and, by the
intercession of LOLIANVS AVITVS who had been Consul, and his fathers master, he
obtained liberty to plead, and to defend men's causes; which he did for some
space. But, being naturally a man of strength and courage, and more inclined to
Arms than Letters, he gave over that exercise, and went to the wars; wherein he
carried himself so well, as within few days he was made Captain of a Cohort in
Syria against the Parthians: and, increasing in credit or estimation, he was
sent to the wars in Britanny, and afterward to the wars of Missia, and was
made a Captain of horsemen in the wars which MARCUS AURELIUS waged against the
Germans; and afterward was Admiral of a Fleet in the Flemish Seas: and, that
charge being ended, he continued in the wars of Dacia; where through sinister
informations he was deprived of the charge he held, by MARCUS AURELIUS:
although afterward Pertinax deposed from his charge by Marcus Aurelius.
he returned into grace by the intercession of POMPEIANVS the Emperors
sonne-in-law, and was made a Senator, but then he used it not: and, in
recompense of the disgrace past, the Emperor made him Colonel of a Legion; so
as in the wars which were in the time of MARCUS AURELIUS he performed many
notable feats of Arms, as well against strange and barbarous nations, as
against AVIDIVS CASSIVS; who (as we said) rebelled against MARCUS AURELIUS.
His valiant acts were so many and such, that he was many times publicly
praised by him, and made Consul of Rome. After that, he had the government of
both the Pertinax made Consul by Marcus Aurelius.
Missias; and of Dacia: in all which charges he carried himself so valiantly,
and with such equity, as the same Emperor honored him with the government of
all Syria and Asia; which was the greatest charge the Emperors gave. And,
MARCUS AURELIUS being dead, and the time of his office expired; he came to
Rome, after that he had governed four consulary Provinces, and had himself bin
Consul; besides other commands, governments, and charges of greater quality,
with great renown and fame of bounty and valor. But, coming to Rome during
the Reign of the wicked Emperor COMMODVS; by the instigation of a certain
favorite of his, he was banished from Rome. But, he being dead who was the
causer of his banishment, COMMODVS sent Pertinax banished from Rome by Co^modus.
him into the I Will of Britanny, to reform the abuses of an Army and certain
Legions which were there: whither he went, and settled all in good order; but
he was first in great danger, and hardly escaped with his life: for, a Legion
being in mutiny slew some of his people, and used him in such manner that he
was left for dead in the field among the dead: and, having escaped this danger,
he resolutely punished the offenders, and pacified the Legions. At his
especial request there was one sent to succeed him, and he was sent Proconsul
into the Province of Africa: wherein he likewise passed many dangers in
mutinies, in seditions of the people, and of the ordinary Pertinax Proconsul in
Africa
Legions; for, as long as COMMODVS was Emperor, there was no such order in any
place as was convenient. And Writers affirm, that had it not bin for PERTINAX
and such other Captains as lived after the death of his father M. AURELIUS, the
Roman Empire had bin exposed to great danger. But having performed his charge
in Africa with honor, although not without much trouble and difficulty, being
now old and spent, he came to Rome, and COMMODVS made him Prefect thereof;
being in this estate, death seized upon COMMODVS by reason of his cruelties,
PERTINAX daily expecting when COMMODVS would have bereaved Pertinax made
Prefect o^ Rome by Commodus.
him of life. This valiant man ly^ng one night carelessly sleeping in his bed
when COMMODVS was dead; MARTIA, his friend, which had plotted his death, and
AELIVS LETVS Captain of the Pretorian Cohorts, and those which conspired with
them, agreed together to cause PERTINAX to be chosen Emperor. And to this
effect about midnight, before that the death of COMMODVS was published, the
said Captain AELIVS LETVS with some of his soldiers of the Cohorts, came to
the house of PERTINAX, who (as I said) lay secure in his bed; and in great
haste causing the door to be opened, went up into his chamber: whom when he
saw, yea and before, when he but understood that he was coming up, he assured
himself that by COMMODVS his commandment he came to kill him, not knowing him
to be dead: and resolving to suffer death with courage and patience, he lay
still, without any show to be moved thereat, but said unto AELIVS LETVS; I have
for many days expected to end my life in this manner, and I marueiled that
COMMODVS has deferred it so long: and The speech and great courage of
Pertinax.
seeing it is so, why stand you still? Make an end with me, and do that which
you are commanded.

Whereto AELIVS LETVS answered, persuading him to put away all such fear, and
not to think that he came to kill him, but to desire safety of his own life,
for that the tyrannous Emperor COMMODVS was dead, and that they came to offer
the Empire unto him, who was only worthy thereof. PERTINAX could hardly
believe what he heard with his ears: but in the end the matter being declared
unto him more at large, and the occasion which induced them to kill the
Emperor, he accepted of their offer; and was carried by them to the Cohorts
Camp: where the soldiers being assembled, their Captain made a speech unto
them, containing the wickedness and vices of the Emperor COMMODVS, and how that
he by means of his excess was dead of an Apoplexy; and reciting the virtues
and excellencies of PERTINAX, counseled them to make him Emperor. Which they
presently performed joyfully, and calling him AUGUSTUS, swear to him as the
custom was; yet PERTINAX remained still doubtful; and accepted thereof with
fear, and against his will.

This being ended, and the day coming on, they came with him into the city:
and assembling the Senate, this old new Emperor came thither, unwilling they
should bear before him the Imperial Ensigns, neither the fire, as the
custom was; until such time as the Senate had agreed and given their consent.
But when as he came into the Senate house, all the Senators saluted him
Emperor, CAESAR AUGUSTUS, and with great acclamations and blessings Pertinax
after many chaunges of fortune is made Emperor.
swear and yielded to him obedience: which he still withstood, saying, that he
deserved it not, alleging his old age, and nominating others, which he said
were more worthy of that dignity. But in the end being overcome and forced by
them, he sat down in the Imperial chair, and made unto them a solemn
oration (which HERO DIANVS writes). His oration being ended, he went forth of
the Senate house (accompanied with all the Senators and Roman Nobility, with
an infinite number of others, to the exceeding joy of all men) to the Temples,
as the custom was, and from thence to the Imperial Palace. And so he began
his reign and obtained the Empire, to the general good liking and contentment
of all men, and was obeyed in like manner in all the provinces of the Empire,
in all which he was well known: and truly they had not been deceived in their
opinion and great hope which they had of him, if the wickedness of the Pretorian
Soldiers had not hindered his good thoughts and resolutions.

The first thing he attempted in the government of the Empire, was to bridle
the licentiousnes of the Pretorian Cohorts, and the insolences and wrongs
which they did to the citizens and people of Rome; by means of the favor and
loose life of COMMODVS. The like he also performed in all other disorders and
abuses which in his time were tolerated; seeking to reduce all things to that
form and manner of government which was used in the time of his father MARCUS
AURELIUS ANTONIUS. He entertained all men honorably and lovingly, which had
any occasion to negotiate with him: and he divided the fields of Rome, and of
the provinces which lay untilled and waste, granting that for ten years
space no rent or tribute should be paid for the same. With these and such other
things, this excellent and gracious Emperor so wanne the hearts and love of the
common people, that al men held themselves happy in such an Emperor: for
which occasion, besides the ^o nourable titles which were given him by the
consent of the Senate, the same Senate entitled his son, CAESAR, and to his
wife LICINIA was added the name of AUGUSTA: the good Emperor said, That his
wives name he did accept, because her virtue was worthy thereof: But for his
The Senate made Pertinax his son Caesar, and his wise Augusta.
sons name, he would that it should rest until that he had better deserved
it. Perseuering in his good works, all the goods and moueables, which COMMODVS
had escheated and taken, he made to be restored to their owners, for which they
should pay some small matter in exchange.

Every day when the Senate did ordinarily sit, he went thither; and in his
house he never refused to give audience to any person at what time soever. When
as the barbarous Nations and enemies to the Roman Empire had intelligence, and
did certainly know that he was Emperor, they laid down their Arms, and
ceased to make war against the Empire; and many sent Ambassadors unto him (if
they had found him living) to treat of peace and friendship: so as the small
time he reigned, was to the general good liking and contentment of all the
world, Pertinax hated by the Pretorian Cohorts.
excepting the men of war, principally of the Pretorian Cohorts which lay
about Rome; who presently began to abhor him for that he kept them in quiet,
bridling them with justice, not suffering them to commit such riots, abuses and
outrages as they did in the time of COMMODVS: and in like manner he was not
beloved by the officers and ministers of the Imperial Palace, for the like
reasons. The shameless audaciousnesse of the soldiers grew to this height,
that one day they would have taken a Senator of a very Noble and ancient house,
named T^LARIVS Triarius Maternus, not to yield to the will of the soldiers
which would have made him Emperor, fled to Pertinax, and so from Rome.
MATERNVS, and have carried him to the Camp to have made him Emperor, to the
end he should have rebelled against PERTINAX: But this MA^NVS (as a good and
loyal servant) escaping out of their hands, came to PERTINAX, and thence fled
from Rome: which put the Emperor in great fear and amazement. And to content
and pacify them, he made donatiues and distributions amongst them. But that
li^ailed: for they esteemed it not, but sought means to live dissolutely at
their liberty.

PERTINAX reigned about three months: in which small time he had set all
things in so good order, as the state of the Empire seemed to be changed, and
not the same. And although he were so good, yet was there one whose name was
FALCO, which practiced his death, with a conceit to have been Emperor: which
being discovered to him, he came to the Senate, and would not endure they
should proceed against him as against a tyrant. And notwithstanding that the
proofs were so plain and manifest, as the offense was apparent; yet he
pardoned him: but justice was done upon certain soldiers which had practiced
this treason; which the soldiers took so ill (their hatred and presumption
daily increasing) as they concluded to kill him; and being so resolved, they
cared not to conspire, or to use any cunning or deceit: But openly a great
troop of them went from their lodgings in a tumult with their Swords drawn,
and with Halberds and other weapons, and came into Rome, and without resistance
(as the matter was sudden) they entered the Palace.

The Emperor being advertised hereof, sent AELIVS LETVS to stay and pacify
them; The wickedness of Aelius ^us
who forgetting that he had made PERTINAX Emperor, cared not to perform his
commandment; but rather approving the fact, being (as some say) a partaker in
the action, went forth another way to his own lodging, at such time as the
soldiers came into the Palace, where there was no means to make any
resistance, being taken suddenly and disarmed. Wherefore the greatest part
abandoned the Emperor and fled; and those which remained counseled him to The
high mind of Pertinax being assailed by (...)
fly, which he might easily have done, and the people would have defended him.
But notwithstanding that he knew their counsel to be good and profitable, and
that they spoke the truth; yet would he not follow the same, alleging it to be
unworthy the majesty of an Emperor and his acts and life past, to save his
life by flight, or by hiding himself: and so he resolved to go forth unto
them; conceiving, that with his presence they would be ashamed, and so return.
And truly this conceit was ready to have taken effect: for, coming forth of
his chamber, and meeting with a multitude of them in the Court, they made a
stand, and gave him place to speak unto them; which he did with great courage,
without any show of alteration; First, asking them what might be the occasion
of their coming in such a tumult, and without any respect? And afterward
(without show of any humility or fearfulness, but with as great gravity and
authority, as best fitted the dignity of his person) he began to say to them:

Soldiers and companions, if you come to kill me, and do put in execution
what you have Speeches used by Pertinax to the Soldiers.
determined, you shall perform no act that is valiant, great, or commendable;
neither very grievous unto me, which am now so old, and have gotten so much
honor and fame, that I regard not my life: for every man's life has an end.
But you to whom belongs the guard and defense of my Person, seeing your
charge is to free and deliver the Emperor from perils and treason, and shall
be the first to lay your hands upon him; consider, that for the present, it
will be shameful and odious, and hereafter in time to come, dangerous, and
prejudicial: For I have done you no displeasure nor injury. If the death of
COMMODVS offend you, it was no new matter to dye, seeing that he was a man: if
you suspect that he was murdered, I am guiltless thereof; and you know that I
am free from all suspicion in this case: what then passed, you knew before me;
if there be any suspicion of his death, it concerns others, and not me. But I
say this, and assure you, that by reason of his death, there shall nothing be
taken from you that you shall require, or that shall seem necessary for you;
requiring such things as are honest and possible; and not by force and violence.

PERTINAX herevvith ending his speech, some of them began to alter their minds
and to depart, moved thereto by his words and gravity: but the fury of
those which came behind them was so great, as they could not do it nor defend
him; so as one of them called TRVCIVS charged him and vvounded him in the
breast with a Lance: and he seeing The miserable death of Pertinax.
their determination, covered his head with his Robe, suffering himself to be
wounded by them all; and so they slew the poor and innocent Emperor. And
ELIVS LETVS, who had been one of the chiefest in making him Emperor, going
about to help to defend him, was also slain; having first with great courage
and resolution slain two soldiers: and so they also flew some others which
were his chamberlaines and other officers. A son and a daughter of his
escaped, for that they were not lodged in the palace.

This Prince in his gesture, showed great grace and majesty: his stature and
constitution did well represent his state and dignity. He ware his beard
long, and his hair curled, his breast was large and full of flesh, and he was
indifferently eloquent, using smooth and loving speeches. This Accident was so
sudden, that he was slain before the people knew of any mutiny, or the coming
of the soldiers: and the soldiers fearing the people, who they knew would
take it grievously, returned with as much or greater haste than they came; and,
fortifying their Camp, they set out sentinels, and held guards in the Bulwarks
and Towers, fearing to be assaulted.

As soon as the death of the Emperor was known in the City, the sorrow and
lamentation which was made for him was extreme; the people running up and down
the streets with incredible wrath and fury, seeking the murderers to be
revenged of his death. Thus they went unadvisedly, without any certain
knowledge of what passed, doing nothing but weep and complain one to another.
But, when they understood what happened, they saw they neither could or durst
proceed any further.

This Emperor died in the year of our Lord 195: some say less. He governed
the Empire (according to EVSEBIVS) six months: JULIUS CAPITOLINVS in his life
says, 85 days, and no more; with whom agrees SEXTVS AURELIUS VICTOR. All
which write, that his Successor IVLIANVS was of counsel and accessory to his
death.

THE LIFE OF DIDIVS IVLIANVS, ONLY OF THIS NAME, AND TWENTIETH ROMAN EMPEROR.
THE ARGUMENT.
DIdius Iulianus took the Empire, being a man proud, rich and ambitious; and,
seeing that the Empire was set to sale by the soldiers which murdered
Pertinax, was so presumptuous, as to go to buy it, with one other who would
have had the same for money; who was son-in-law to the murdered Emperor. But
the soldiers doubting, that, making Pertinax his son-in-law Emperor, he would
revenge his death, they agreed to sell it to Iulianus; who was confirmed
contrary to the will of the Senate, and in worse manner accepted by the people.
Nevertheless, as though he had obtained that dignity by his virtue, or that it
came to him by inheritance, he gave himself to pleasure, respecting no man's
envy. But Septimius Seuerus, a man of much wisdom and great power, being
Captain of the Legions in Germany, hoping to be able to get the Empire by
force of Arms, came to Rome with his Army: of whom Iulianus standing in fear,
would have sent the Vestall virgins for Ambassadors unto him. But the Senate,
refusing to yield thereto, deprived him of the Empire, and proclaimed Septimius
Seuerus, Emperor: who sending to Iulianus (the palace being abandoned, and he
retired to weep) caused him to be slain, having been 7 months Emperor.

AFter the good old PERTINAX, IVLIANVS succeeded in the Empire; having
obtained the same for money from those soldiers which slew the Emperor
PERTINAX. This IVLIANVS The line of Didius Iulianus.
was native of Milan by his Fathers lineage, who was called PETRONIVS DIDIVS
SEVERUS: his mothers name was CLARA EMILIA: his grandfathers name was SALVIVS
IVLIANVS, who had been Prefect of Rome, and twice Consul; which did enoble his
house. This IVLIANVS was brought up in the house and service of DOMICIA
LVCILLA, mother to MARCUS AURELIUS ANTONIUS the Philosopher; by whose favor
he attained to offices, and was made Questor, Edil and Praetor, in Rome.
Afterward he followed the wars, and proved a good Captain, performing many
notable exploits, which in the time of MARCUS AURELIUS were in Germany and
other parts. He was in the beginning Captain of a Legion, and afterward with
an Army he had the charge and government of Dalmatia, and then of low Germany;
and, after that, he was made Gouerner of Bithynia in Asia, although in this
government he did not bear himself with so good fame as in the rest. He was
jointly Consul with PERTINAX, and afterward Proconsul in Africa; and, having
executed these charges and offices, was now grown old, and very rich by means
of his possessions and money which he had in Rome.

When PERTINAX was dead, he obtained the Empire in such manner as was
shameful, and unbefitting the greatness of Rome. For, after that the soldiers
had murdered the Emperor PERTINAX (as is said) they fortified their camp and
lodgings for fear of the people: and the people durst not assail them, for that
they were too strongly defensed with great bulwarks and turrets. The Senators
and Nobility knew not what to do in this so cruel an Accident; but retired
themselves to their houses, wherein they fortified themselves; and many of them
went to their Castles and Possessions in the Country, holding themselves not
very safe in Rome: and so they passed that day, and the next after PERTINAX
death.

The Pretorian Soldiers (as writes HERODIANVS) seeing no man durst attempt to
offend them, became yet more audacious: for, some of them, standing upon the
Ramparts of their Camp, cried out with loud exclamations, that they would give
the Empire to whosoever would buy the same, and pay best for it. This sale was
presently published in the City, and this Proclamation was so odious and full
of scandal and reproach, and also there were so few rich men left in Rome by
reason of COMMODVS his cruelty and tyranny, that there were but two merchants to
be found to buy the Empire that was to be sold. The one was SVLPITIANVS at
that time Prefect of Rome, a man who had been Consul, and was sonne-in-law to
the late Emperor PERTINAX; and the other was DIDIVS IVLIANVS, of whom we now
speak. Truly, it is a matter worthy of great consideration, and a notable
example for Princes: whereby it plainly appears, how little constancy there is
in their greatness, and generally in all things in this life; and how little
they ought to esteem the power, the kingdoms and dominions of this world, and
all those other things called goods which are gotten in this world. For,
considering that a Roman Emperor, being a wise old man, redoubted, beloved, and
known to be good and valiant by long experience, who (as we may say) was Lord
of all the world (for, he peaceably governed (in a manner) all that which the
Kings in Christendom hold in Europe, and the Infidels in Africa, and as much
as the great Turk possesses in Asia, Graecia, and Egypt, and many other
Princes and Lords besides) only three hundred, or few more soldiers,
sufficed to bereave him of his life and dominion; being in Rome it self, which
was the head and strength of all the Empire; and that they should escape free
without any punishment, no man then seeking any revenge of his death.

Who would regard or greatly esteem the riches and dominions of this world, or
account the dignities, estates, and riches thereof to be great, and lose his
own life, and pawn his soul to get them; seeing that a Throne, and so great
a power and majesty as was the Roman Empire, was set to sale at an Outcry; and
there were but only two that came to buy it, and it was sold for a little
money? Truly, in my judgment, it was handled as it deserved.

And this may suffice for a warning and example to us, that there is nothing in
this world that is ought-worth, and to be held of price; nor ought to be
gotten and held with the danger of the soul: and therefore men ought lightly
to regard the losing or winning of the goods of this world, so as they may
increase the riches of the soul, and live virtuously as Christians ought to
do. He that can attain heerto, is rich and mighty: and all the rest without
this are miserable, beggarly and unhappy, although they command and reign over
the whole world.

To return to our History: HERODIANVS writes, that the same of the soldiers
proclamation came to the house of DIDIVS IVLIANVS, being held the richest man in
Rome: who with his wife and daughter sitting at dinner, very merry and pleasant
in the midst of his favorites and pleasant company, was by them all
counseled, that, seeing he had more money than any other man in Rome, he
should not let slip so good a bargain, and so precious a Jewel as was the
Roman Empire; but that he should go to the Camp to confer with the soldiers,
and to procure himself to be chosen and sworn Emperor: Who, presently arising
from the table, went thither accompanied with his friends and servants. ELIVS
SPARCIANVS (who wrote Didius Iulianus went to buy the Empire.
his life) says, that the first which persuaded him heerto, were PVBLIVS
FLORIANVS, and VECTIVS APER, Tribunes. But, whosoever were his counselors,
they all agree, that when he came thither he found SVLPICIANVS the Prefect of
Rome there before him, soliciting the soldiers to make him Emperor; promising
them a great sum of money, with other favors and rewards: And the reason why
his offers were not accepted, was, for that he was son-in-law to PERTINAX whom
they had slain, and therefore they suspected him. Whereof, DIDIVS IVLIANVS put
them also in mind; willing them to take heed that they made not choice of one
who another day would revenge the death of PERTINAX; He promising to give them
an infinite sum of money which he had in a readiness; and that he would
restore all things to that order and form wherein COMMODVS had left the same,
and would presently bring them a great sum of money to be divided among them.
His offer at last was accepted by the soldiers, and he with ladders was
received into the Fort, where they swear obedience unto him: and, there having
done certain ordinary ceremonies and sacrifices, he went into the City,
accompanied with the Pretorian Cohorts in Arms; ranged in so good order, as if
they had been going to a battle: for, they were in great fear of the people.
And so Iulianus being made Emperor caeme into Rome.
IVLIANVS entered the City, all the soldiers proclaiming his name, and calling
him Emperor: the citizens durst not make any resistance, neither did they
approve his election, as they used to do by other Emperors, but cursed him and
threw stones at him.

IVLIANVS then went to the Senate: where assembling such Senators as were
present, by their decree he was proclaimed Emperor, and they presently made his
son in law CORNELIUS REPENTINVS Prefect of Rome, putting SVLPITIANVS out of
that office: and from thence he was carried to the Imperial Palace, and held
for Emperor, more through force, then the good will of any honest men. And he
as though that the Empire had descended to him by inheritance from his father,
and that he had peaceably obtained the same with the good will of all men, gave
himself to riot and pleasures, showing himself negligent and retchlesse in
matters of government. And notwithstanding that he was mild and affable, and
did no harm to any man in all the time of his reign; yet he presently began
to be hated of the soldiers, for that Iulianus generally hated.
he did not perform that which he had promised. The people of Rome hated him,
because he was chosen and made Emperor by those which murdered PERTINAX whom
all the world loved; and they were of opinion that he was guilty and
accessarie to his death. So as whenever he went out of his Palace, the people
openly powered out their curses against him; which he patiently endured,
sometimes with laughter, beckening with his hand that they should come to him,
making show of love and goodwill unto them: yet it little auailed him, but
rather increased their hatred; in such manner, as standing one day to behold
certain games and sports, the people of Rome proclaimed PESCENIVS NIGER who
was Proconsul, and Governor Pescenius Niger proclaimed Emperor in Syria.
of Syria, which was the greatest charge and government of the Empire, calling
to him that he should come to their rescue and to procure their liberty; of
all which insolences, IVLIANVS made little reckoning. And it happened that as
soon as the Armies which were on the frontiers of Germany and in Syria,
understood how ill IVLIANVS was beloved in Rome, and how carelessly he governed,
each of these Armies presumed to make their General, Emperor. In Syria
PESCENIVS NIGER was Governor, who was a man of good years, and had held great
commands and governments, and had done very many notable feats of Arms: it
was reported of him, that he was mild and wise, and seemed to imitate the life
and government of the Emperor PERTINAX. This man knowing the goodwill which was
borne him in Rome, and that his Army and soldiers loved him, determined to
proclaim himself Emperor, and presently took the ensigns thereof: and all
those nations, Kings and Potentates of Asia, yielding obedience, came or sent
Ambassadors unto him. The Army in Germany held for their General SEPTIMIVS
SEVERUS, borne in Africa, a man of great courage and counsel, Septimius
Seuerus a valiant Captain of great experience, pretended title to the Empire.
and above all, very double and subrile, and of great experience, who had had
many governments, magistracies, and commands, and had been Consul in Rome, and
Proconsul in the governments of Sicilia, Africa, and the Pannonies, and was
also very well beloved of his soldiers, by whom he was importuned: and seeing
the occasion and opportunity, he resolved also to proclaim himself Emperor,
taking upon him the state and ensigns thereof: and publishing that he would
revenge the death of the Emperor PERTINAX, he made himself beloved of the men
of war in Germany, and of the Roman people: so as there were at one time
three Emperors, or to say more properly, three tyrants. IVLIANVS (who was
Emperor in Rome) notwithstanding that he knew what passed in Syria, when it
first began, made no great account thereof, holding it sufficient to send to
kill him: but knowing what SEPTIMIVS SEVERUS did in Germany, it troubled him
very much; and he dealt with the Senate to proclaim him rebel, and that they
should send certain principal men Ambassadors to procure the Army to abandon
SEVERUS, and to hold him for Emperor whom the Senate had approved, which was
himself: and he sent VALERIVS CATVLINVS to further the business, and to
succeed SEVERUS in his government. But SEVERUS had taken so good order, that
this did little profit him: for he had already obtained their obedience, and
had assured unto himself the love of all that country and the marches
thereof; resolving to march with his Army toward Rome, where he knew that
IVLIANVS was not beloved. Now PESCENIVS NIGER who was called Emperor in Asia,
was not so circumspect as he might have been: for, seeing himself served by
Kings, rich in gold and silver, mighty in Armies and men of war, confidently
trusting in the love of the people of Rome; he gave himself to feasting and
banqueting in Antioch.

When it was known in Rome that SEPTIMIVS SEVERUS came thitherwards, IVLIANVS
awakened from his drowsy sleep, began to put himself in Arms, and applied
himself wholly to make provision for the wars; and, mustering his Troops,
took the Fields with the Pretorian Army which had made him Emperor; which he
found very feeble, as well for want of experience and exercise in Arms, as for
that they were ill paid by him: and the people of Rome repaired also unto him
with a very ill will, for that he was made Emperor against their liking: and
the Cities of Italy had a long time lived in quiet and peace, and were not
accustomed to the wars.

In this manner all went ill with IVLIANVS; and well with his enemy: and
IVLIANVS was generally ill obeyed; whom his friends counseled, that, with the
best forces he could be able to levy, he should meet SEVERUS upon the way, and
stop his passage over the Alps: but either he would not, or durst not do so,
but made the best provision in Rome he could; and, before he was aware, he
understood that SEVERUS was already entered Italy, and that the most part of
the Cities had received him, and yielded him their obedience. The people of
Rome seeing this, and that PESCENIVS NIGER whom they desired remained in Asia,
began to like of SEVERUS his coming.

IVLIANVS, seeing himself driven to this straight, obtained of the Senate to
write and to send Ambassadors to SEVERUS, offering to make him equal and
companion in the Empire with IVLIANVS. But SEVERUS, not contented with part,
but with the whole, would not Seuerus refuses to be partner in the Empire with
Iulianus.
accept thereof, holding himself to be of greater power than IVLIANVS,
notwithstanding that until then the Senate held with him: but they, seeing the
little counsel and less strength of IVLIANVS, began to abandon him. And
although he desired that the Vestall Virgins (which was the most precious and
highly-esteemed thing in their vain religion) should be sent to pacify
SEVERUS, and to work some means of peace; yet the Senate would not yield
thereto, alleging that he was unworthy to rule, who durst not defend the
Empire by force of Arms. And the matter came to this pass, that disguised
persons daily came into Rome from SEVERUS, and others went from thence to him;
and IVLIANVS, void of all relief and succors, remained in his Palace
generally abandoned, saving of a very few soldiers.

The Senate was assembled, and by the common consent of all the Senators it was
decreed, The Senate abandons Iulianus.
that IVLIANVS should be deprived of the Empire, and SEVERUS proclaimed
Emperor; and there were of the principal of the Senators sent to SEVERUS in
embassage, to yield to him their obedience, with the ensigns of Emperor,
CAESAR, AUGUSTUS: and spreading a rumor abroad that IVLIANVS had poisoned
himself, they commanded him to be slain in his Palace, where the unfortunate
Emperor was found disarmed, and with some few of his friends weeping like a
child. And so was IVLIANVS slain at the age of 57. years, having Iulianus
slain by the Senators.
reigned only seven months, in the year of our Lord 195.

THE LIFE OF SEPTIMIVS SEVERUS, ONLY OF THIS NAME, AND ONE and TWENTIETH ROMAN
EMPEROVR.
THE ARGUMENT.
SEptimius Seuerus having taken the Empire more by force of Arms and fear,
wherein he did put the Senators and people of Rome, then for any right he had;
the first thing he did, was to revenge the death of Pertinax, by depriving all
those which had slain him and sold the Empire, of all Military dignity.
Afterward, entering Rome with great pomp, he persuaded the Senators and people
to hope well of him, and to bend their weapons against Pescenius Niger, who was
called Emperor: Whom finally after many changes of fortune, he overcame. He
likewise overthrew Artabanus King of Persia, and took the City of Tisiphonte,
wherein was all that Kings treasure, and overcame Albinus, who was made Caesar.
This Seuerus was a man addicted to the wars, ambiguous, ambitious, constant
in his resolution to bring any thing to pass that he had once undertaken, and
therewith very wise and circumspect in all matters appertaining to the
preservation of his estate, and government of the Empire. Finally, oppressed
with a long infirmity, and particularly with anintolerable pain in his feet,
he dyed, having ruled the Empire eighteen years; using no less wisdom in
preserving it, then he had showed boldness and courage in getting it.

AFter IVLIANVS, SEPTIMIVS SEVERUS succeeded in the Empire, who only among all
the Emperors was borne in Africa, in a city The lineage of Seuerus.
called Leptis. His fathers name was GETA, and his mothers FVLVIA PIA. He had
two Uncles by his mothers side, which were Consuls in Rome; his grandfathers
name by his mother was MACER; and by his fathers side, FVLVIVS APIVS. IVLIANVS
being dead insuch manner as we have declared, and SEVERUS marching with his
Army toward Rome, as against his enemies; upon the way certain Ambassadors
met him, which in the name of the Senate and people of Rome yielded to him
their obedience, and gave him the title and ensigns of Emperor, certifying
him of the death of IVLLANVS. He received this Embassage in presence of the
Army, being marshalled and in Arms, and gave gifts to the Ambassadors; and
entertaining them with great honor, continued his journey toward Rome: where
as well the Pretorian soldiers stood in fear of him, for that they had slain
the Emperor PERTINAX whom they knew he loved, as also all the Roman people,
for the desire they had that PESCENIVS NIGER should have been Emperor; who in
the East (as is said) was called so. SEVERUS, when he came near to Rome, sent
commandment that all the Pretorian Soldiers should come forth to receive him,
clad in show of peace, leaving their arms in their camp; which they did,
hoping thereby to have pleased and pacified him by joyfully obeying his
commandment. And he conealing what he purposed to do, having only acquainted
some of his favorites and captains therewith, attended their coming, in
field, in a place which he had chosen for that purpose; where they coming to
do him reverence, were compassed about by his The punishment of the Pretoriax
soldiers which slew Pertinax.
Army: and making a short speech unto them, he reproched them with the
cruelty and treason which they had used in killing the Emperor PERTINAX:
Which being ended, he made them to put off the clothes and apparel which they
ware, and to put away their daggers and poiniards from them (for other weapons
they had none) and then he pronounced sentence against them; wherein he
deprived them of the honor of soldiers, and banished them from Rome and a
hundred miles about. He presently sent to their Camp to take their arms from
them, and the imperial ensigns; and so they were punished and disgraced,
although not so much as they deserved, for the cruel murder which they had
committed, and the selling of the Empire.

This being done, SEVERUS entered into Rome, with his whole Army, with their
Ensigns Seuerus entered Rome with ensigns displaied.
displaied, and his soldiers in arms, appparelled in the best and most
solemn manner they could. The number of his men was so great, that it was a
most fair and stately spectacle to behold. The Senate went to the gates of the
city to receive him, and there saluted him after the accustomed manner: and
the people received him with blessings and applauses; notwitstanding that it
was odious unto them to see him come armed, and in warlike manner. Having
performed the solemnities, and visited the Temples, as the manner then was, he
went to his lodging in the Imperial palace: and the next day he commanded the
Senate to be assembled, whither he also went accompanied with armed men;
wherein (as he was a wise man and well advised) he made a very smooth speech,
giving them great hope of good government, and excusing himself for taking
upon him the name and authority of Emperor, without their His speech to the
Senate.
consent and good liking first obtained; pretending that he did it, to revenge
the death of PERTINAX, and to free them from the tyranny of IVLIANVS: for that
it was a thing unworthy the Roman Empire, he should live which had bought it
with money. In conclusion, his words were of such efficacy, as the Senate went
thence satisfied and well content: yet some of the old Senators which better
knew his condition, gave little credit to his words; for they held him for a
man that was very double, subtle and a great dissembler: and notwitstanding
that he was so, yet in truth he was a most sufficient man in any thing, very
valiant in arms, and before The valor and learning of Seuerus.
that he was Emperor had governed great provinces, and attained to be Questor,
Tribune, Praetor, Proconsul, and Consul; and had held Commands and charges,
wherein he purchased the name and reputation of a valiant, wise, and excellent
Captain. And if a man well consider how the Empire was then divided between
three Lords, and with what valor he subdued the whole, with the other wars
and accidents which happened in his time; he may well be esteemed for a very
valiant Emperor and excellent Captain, and may be compared with any of those
in ancient time. Besides all which, he was very learned, and a great
Mathematician, a good Orator and Philosopher. But his prowess in Arms was so
great, as it cannot be written by me (considering the brevity which I use) but
cursorily, and so to express such things as are most clear, although in
haste: yet will they glister in their sight which shall behold the same.

After that he had taken upon him the government of the Empire, he set speedy
order for the reformation of abuses in the City, by reason of the dissensions
and tumults passed. He also presently honored and buried the Emperor PERTINAX:
and in remembrance of that good old man, he took to himself his surname,
calling himself SEPTIMIVS SEVERUS PERTINAX. He paid and gave gifts and rewards
to his men of war, and also to the people of Rome; and as the custom of the
new Emperors was, he made distributions and gave large donatiues. He also
married two daughters which he had, with two principal men, one called PROBVS,
and the other ECIVS: and after that he had given great dowries with them, he
used such means that they were both chosen Consuls. And whereas at that time
there was great scarcity of corn in Rome, he took such order, and that with
such expedition, as the City was sufficiently provided for and furnished:
which course he held ever during all the time of his reign, in such sort as
there was never any want. All these things and other, concerning the government
of the Empire, he performed with such expedition, in thirty days only that
he remained there: for from the first day that he was Emperor, he determined
to address his journey toward the East with his Army against PESCENIVS
NIGER, who (as is said) was Seuerus goes against Pescenius.
called Emperor, and was very powerful, and an excellent Captain. Having made
preparation for his journey, he sent a Captain and new legions into the
Province of Africa, to guard the same; to the end that by the way of Egypt and
Libya, PESCENIVS NIGER should not make any profit of that Province. And the
better to leave all things in safety behind him in the West (for he was in
fear of CLODIVS ALEINVS a Nobleman and a Senator of Rome, who was Captain of
the Legions in Britanny, and was a man of a great parentage, rich, and well
beloved, he bethought himself how he might compass him and make him his
friend, by giving him the name and title of CAESAR and his successor, whereof
he advertised him with very loving and gracious speeches: by which means for
that time he remained in quiet and in peace.

This being done, leaving the best order in Rome he could, and such as was most
expedient (nominating and choosing companies and Pretorian Cohorts to remain
in the City, in the Seuerus against Niger.
place of those which he had cassiered and degraded from the honor of bearing
Arms) he departed thence, continuing his journey with the best and greatest
force he was able to levy. PESCENIVS NIGER being advertised of the coming of
his enemy, as until then he had lived idle and careless; so now with great
diligence and expedition he levied soldiers: and beside Pescenius leuies what
for^ he can.
the ordinary Army which he had, he sent some Captains speedily to stop the
passages out of Europe into Asia the less; and also sent to crave aid of the
Kings of Parthia, Armenia, and other Kings and Tetrarchs of the East; from
whom, and from the Provinces which were under his obedience, there came great
power and relief unto him: and so the world was divided into two factions; so
as there began one of the most cruel wars that ever had been, as well for
the valor of the Captains, as for the power and multitude of soldiers; which
war was continued in many parts, both by sea and land. SEPTIMIVS SEVERUS
passed out of Europe into Asia the less, but with great trouble and
difficulty, having many skirmishes, and being often assailed by PESCENIVS his
troops, who sent against him an excellent Roman Captain called EMILIANVS, who
was General of all his forces. This EMILIANVS having drawn together all the
power which PESCENIVS sent him, and all the rest that he was able to levy out
of Cappadocia, Galatia, Bithynia, and other Provinces of Asia the less, took
the field, in the way where SEVERUS was to pass: where followed many great
skirmishes and encounters, and in the end a most cruel and terrible battle,
wherein EMILIANVS was overthrown. After this battle, the conquered troops
which escaped, went to PESCENIVS NIGER, Emilianus overthrown by Seuerus.
who with all his power was in the City of Antioch in Syria; from whence he
departed to meet with SEPTIMIVS SEVERUS upon the way as he was coming: and
marching toward him (after some matters of lesser importance which passed) the
two Armies drew near the one to the other in a great Plain by the Sea side in
the country of Cilicia (as HERODIANVS reports, A battle between Septimius
Seuerus and Pescenius Niger.
yet SPARCIANVS and EVTROPIVS differ therein) in the same place where DARIUS
was the first time overthrown by ALEXANDER the Great; where (by the consent of
both the Generals) they came to a battle with the greatest numbers and best
soldiers that then were in the world; which by reason of the experience,
valor, and wisdom of the Captains, was most cruel. For, fighting the
greatest part of the day without any apparent advantage, the number of the
slain and wounded was so great, that the streams of waterwhich ran through
the fields, were so full, and died with the blood of men and horses, as there
seemed to be no water therein; A great number of disarmed people of the
inhabitants thereabouts, standing upon the tops of the hills to behold the
battle, and to see whether party should have the victory. Which when either
party by all means possible had endeavored to obtain, in the later end of the
day PESCENIVS NIGER was overthrown, without failing in any point in what he
ought, and was most expedient for a good Captain to have done: for in truth
SEVERUS his soldiers were more expert and better trained in the wars; and
seeing there Pescenius Niger ouerthrown and slain.
was no other remedy, he fled, but was followed and afterward found by
SEVERUS his soldiers, who smote off his head, and carried it through the Camp
upon the point of a Lance. This PESCENIVS NIGER was a man of mean parentage;
yet some say that he was Noble The lineage of Pescenius Niger.
and ancient: his fathers name was ANIVS FVSCVS, and his mother was called
LAMPRIDIA. He was a man indifferently well learned, and obtained great riches.
He was sharp and quick witted, ever followed the wars, and was an excellent
soldier; and afterward performed the charge committed to him, with great
discretion and courage: for, they write of him, that he was a valiant and much
commended Tribune; a very singular and excellent Captain; The wisdom and
valor of Pescenius.
a most severe and upright Lieutenant General; a most wise and prudent Consul;
and in all things happy and fortunate, but only unfortunate in being Emperor,
not knowing how to govern himself therein. So as it plainly appears, that
men do often times desire and purchase to themselves shame and perdition, by
presuming to attain to honor and greatness.

SEPTIMIVS SEVERUS, having obtained so notable a victory, with all speed
advertised the Roman Senate thereof, and as a conqueror did his will upon the
conquered, cruelly killing many of those which had taken part with NIGER: and
principally he ruined the City of Antioch, by reason that it (more then any
other) had aided and assisted his adversary, whose wife and children he
commanded to be banished from Rome. And to the contrary, he gave gifts and
rewards to those which had done him service and assisted him; and repaired the
harms and damages which some Cities, which held with him, had received by
NIGERS soldiers. For in truth this man was very cruel in punishing offenses,
and in persecuting his enemies; and very liberal and grateful to his friends,
and most bountiful in rewarding those which had done him any service. In all
the Provinces of the East, after this victory, he found no resistance, saving
among the Parthians, the Persians, and the Adiabenians, very mighty Nations:
who for the love they bare unto NIGER, and the ancient hatred to the Roman
name, presently took Arms against SEVERUS; and he in person went against
them, and had many battles and incounters, and obtained great victories,
which I have no time to relate: so as he enlarged the Empire and the Roman
name, and pacified the Provinces.

SEPTIMIVS SEVERUS having brought all his purposes to so good and prosperous
estate, The fifth persecution of the Primitive Church.
being seduced by the devil, he resolved to persecute the Catholic Christian
Church, so as an infinite number of the faithful were put to death; and this
was the fifth persecution of the Church. For which occasion (as PAVLVS OROSIVS
notes) God would not permit that he should long enjoy the Empire in peace: for
he was advertised from Rome how that ALBINVS, who (as we said) was Captain in
great Britannie, and whom he made CAESAR when he went for the East, was risen
in Arms, and proclaimed himself Emperor; and that he was Albinus in Arms
against Seuerus.
of very great power, and much beloved of the Roman Nobility: for he was
native of Rome, and of a great and Noble Family. But he being of a hautie
mind little regarded those difficulties: and setting all things in order in
the East, with his Army, took his way toward Rome, to the end he might go
against ALBINVS, as against a tyrant and a rebel. And passing from Asia into
Europe over the straight at Byzantium, which is now called Constantinople, he
wholly ruined that City; for that when he went toward Asia, that City would
not receive him; and so he left it level with the ground (which was one of the
most famous Cities in the world) and it remained so desolate until the time of
CONSTANTINE the Great; as in his time we will declare.

SEVERUS traveling thus toward Rome, his Adversary ALBINVS being advertised
thereof, came out of Britanny into France, where he raised a mighty Army; part
whereof he sent to keep the passages of the Alps, thereby to hinder him, who
was arrived at Rome, and was now upon his way coming to meet him: before
which time he put PESCENIVS NIGERS children to death, thereby wholly to
extinguish all remembrance of him. And going to the wars, he appointed his
son BASSIANVS ANTONIUS for his successor, Seuerus put to death Nigers
children.
and entitled him CAESAR; and changing his name, he commanded him to be
called, AURELIUS ANTONIUS. Drawing near to his enemies, the wars began in a
most cruel manner between them; where in the beginning in some encounters,
SEVERUS his Captains were overthrown by those of ALBINVS his party.

But after that he had passed the Alps, and was entered into France, the war
was kindled in many parts; and in many conflicts and skirmishes fortune showed
her self variable, the victory inclining sometimes to one side, and sometime
to the other; until at last near unto the City of Lions, (wherein ALBINVS
was) either party drawing together his whole power, they fought one of the
most bloody battles that ever was written of: which continued the A great
battle between Seuerus and Albinus.
greatest part of the day without any appearance of advantage. First, the
victory seemed to be of ALBINVS his side: for his Battalions were of such
force, as they forced SEVERUS Troops to retire; in such sort, as his Soldiers
began to fly: and it so happened that SEVERUS horse fell with him, and every
man held him for dead; and ALBINVS his Soldiers began to cry Victory,
victory; taking no care but to follow the execution. Then LEON, one of SEVERUS
his Captains, who until then had never charged; with a very great Troup of
armed men which he brought with him, renewed the fight in such sort, as SEVERUS
was The valor of Leon, one of Seuerus Captains.
rescued: and being remounted upon another horse, charged with such fury, as he
took the victory out of ALBINVS his Soldiers hands, who accounting
themselves Victors, observed no order: and the matter was so handled, that
ALBINVS his Troops were driven to turn their backs; and SEVERUS followed the
execution, killing them even to the gates of the City of Lions.

The number of those which were slain and wounded, was infinite: and the city
was presently entered, and ALBINVS taken; and his head being stricken off, was
brought to SEVERUS. A man may well believe that he was not a little joyful
when he saw it, considering that a little before he was wounded and cast to the
ground, and by all men accounted for dead, and his enemies victorious; but
escaping all this, he now saw himself an absolute Lord, and his enemies
confounded. Wherefore let every Christian reader consider how inconstant all
things are in this life; and that a man neither can, or ought to repose his
assured confidence in any thing in this world. Great were the cruelties which
SEVERUS committed after that he had obtained this victory: and truly if this
Prince had not been so cruel and greedy of bloody events The cruelty of
Seuerus.
both in war and government as he was, I am of opinion that no man either
before or after him, had excelled him; considering the actions and enterprises
which he brought to an end, whereof I write but the sum.

These things being past, SEVERUS presently wrote to the Senate and people of
Rome, aduertising them of his victory, and sending them ALBINVS his head,
which he commanded should be set upon the end of a pole in the public place:
and all those Senators which of ALBINVS his party were slain in this
battle, he commanded to be quartered; and those which were taken alive, he
commanded to be slain. He was so cruel and vindicatiue (as some write) that
he mounted upon a very furious great horse, and rode manytimes over the dead
body of ALBINVS: which is not much to be marvelled at, considering from how
cruel and barbarous a Nation he was descended. Some write, that he first
caused his body to be torn in many pieces, and to be thrown into the River
Rhodanus. And SPARCIANVS says, that he commanded his wife and children to be
slain, and did by them as he had done by ALBINVS: and so he made a number of
his kinsmen and friends which were found with him in Lions to be slain, and
with them other principal Noble men of France and Spain. He concluded the
victory which he gat near Lions only in Rome, there to make an end of the
war: and after this victory he presently assaulted certain cities and
holds which continued friends to ALBINVS; which he subdued, not without great
trouble and danger. And as he was busy in these matters, news was brought him
that one of those Legions which he had left in Arabia, did mutine, and took
part with ALEINVS before this battle: and so he leaving France and Germany in
peace and quiet, and sending into Britanny the ordinary Captains, to keep
the inhabitants in subjection and peace, he came triumphing to Rome, bringing
his Army with him; Seuerus came triumphing into Rome.
where he was most solemnly received, with great show of joy and contentment,
although that in truth they stood in great fear of him: whither when he came,
he paid his soldiers with larger allowance, then ever had been seen; and the
first day that he went to the Senate, in disgrace and despite thereof he
renewed the titles and memory of the wicked Emperor COMMODVS, and made him to
be canonized, and adored as a God. He also condemned to death, and confiscated
the goods of a great number of Noble Personages of Rome which had been
Pretors, Consuls, and Senators, for that he found they had been friends to
ALEINVS, and of his faction, showing letters which he said were written by
them, wherein they had offered their persons and goods to ALBINVS service;
alleging other reasons and proofs, which peradventure were forged. Finally,
he used great cruelty, and put many to death; whereby he extremely enriched
himself in treasure, whereof some he distributed and gave to others: but
principally he enriched and and advanced in the highest degree, one whose name
was PLANCIVS, a great favorite of his, who also was an Africane, and his
countrie-man, whom he made Plancius (...)great favorite of Seuerus.
Prefect of the Pretorian Cohorts: and afterward he married his son BASSIANVS
ANTONIUS, whom he had made CAESAR, with his daughter, whose name was PLAVTINA;
and then he made him his companion and equal, and made the Senate to give him
the ensigns and prerogative of the Empire; by reason whereof PLANCIVS grew yet
more proud and insolent. Matters standing in this estate, the cruel SEVERUS
stayed but a small time in Rome: in which space he executed many cruelties upon
those which had been friends to NIGER and ALBINVS, putting to death a great
number of Noble Personages most cruelly, together with many Matrons, and Roman
Ladies: and to the contrary, he showed himself very liberal and bountiful,
and bestowed many favors upon others, and became also very popular, and sought
to be pleasing and acceptable to all men, and to that end made the greatest and
most costly feasts and games that ever were made in Rome, and divided money
amongst the people. But he stayed but a little while there, as I said: for
knowing that matters were in no security in Asia, principally that the
Parthians infested the bounds and frontires of the Empire, and desirous to be
revenged of certain Kings, which had assisted his enemy NIGER; as he was
most valiant and desirous of honor, although old and gowtie: yet with his
accustomed celeritie he departed toward the East; and being come into Asia
sooner then any man expected him, he presently began the war in Armenia,
marching against BARZENIVS, King of the Atrenores, who had been PESCENIVS
NIGER'S friend: The King of Armenia durst not make any resistance, but sent him
presents, suing for peace, and gave him such hostages as he required. Whereupon
finding no resistance, this valiant Emperor returned against Arabia felix,
wherein there was a mutiny, and there took and sacked some Cities: And Seuerus
his enterprises. Tesiphonte with the King of Parthiaes children taken by
Seuerus.
from thence returned to the frontires of the Atrenores, and besieged the City
of Atras, or Atramas. But being unable to take it, for that it was very strong
and well furnished, in great fury he went against the Parthians, and the
Persians, and besieged the famous City of Tesiphonte, wherein King ARTABANVS
lay with all his power and household: and after many assaults, encounters, and
slaughters of men of either side, he entered the City by force of Arms; and
the King escaping by flight, his children and treasure fell into the hands of
SSVERVS, which was held for a very great victory: for the Romans stood in
greater fear of the Parthians, then of any other nation of the world.

SEVERUS presently wrote to Rome, aduertising them of his victories and good
success, and sent them the description of the countries, cities, rivers,
battles, and assaults which he past, drawn and painted in tables.

When he had ended all things at his pleasure, he bountifully paid his
soldiers: and coming into Palestina, and from thence into Egypt, he was
desirous to see the Pyramides, and other great and ancient monuments in that
country: And from thence he returned to Rome in great triumph, laden with the
spoils and riches gotten by his victories in the East. At this his return he
married his eldest son to PLAVTINA, daughter of his great favorite PLANCIVS,
which marriage BASSIANVS ANTONIUS solemnized much against his will; and so
would not converse or keep company with her. Whereupon there began great
dislike and dissension between PLANCIVS and BASSIANVS: PLANCIVS knowing
himself the richest and most mighty man of the Empire; and seeing that
SEVERUS was now old (with whom he was in great favor) and fearing that if
BASSIANVS should succeed him and inherit the Empire, he should be ill entreated
at his hands; he resolved to kill both the father and the son, and to make
himself Emperor, making choice (for the effecting this exploit) of a Tribune of
the Pretorian Cohorts, whereof he himself was Commander. But it pleased God
that this his treason was discovered by the same Tribune. SEVERUS held this in
a manner incredible, conceiving it to be some practice of his sons, who loved
not PLANCIVS. But being assured thereof by the Tribune, it was concluded, that
he should go and bring him into the Emperors chamber. The Tribune, coming to
PLANCIVS, told him that he had slain SEVERUS and BASSIANVS; and that if he
would go with him, he should see them dead: which having delivered, he made a
reverence as to the Emperor. As PLANCIVS desired their deaths, so he easily
gave credit to his words, and went with him. The Tribune (it being late in the
night) brought him to the Emperors chamber; where he found him and his son
living, amongst many of their confident friends, the chamber being full of
torches. Which PLANCIVS seeing, he was much amazed: and being demanded by the
Emperor what he did there at so unseasonable a time; not knowing what to
answer, but confessing his error, and craving pardon, he was slain by BASSIANVS.

After that SEVERUS had escaped this danger, he spent his time in visiting
some Cities in Italy, in hearing complaints and doing justice, and in most
sumptuous Works and Buildings in Rome, and other Cities; and, seeking to bring
up his sons virtuously, and (by abating their pride) to reconcile them, and
make unity between them; for, they did ill agree, and were very unquiet and
ill-affected the one to the other. He desired to establish peace and amity
between them, having determined that after his death the Empire should be
divided between them; and to that end invested them both therein. And so this
poor old Emperor labored in vain to reform the bad inclination of his sons.
And, living in rest from war, although not without domestical care, he
received Letters, importing, that the Inhabitants of great Britanny were in
Arms and rebelled, in such sort, that his Legions there were in such danger, as
they were at the point either to be overcome and lost, or at least to flee and
abandon the Country; wherewith he was much displeased. And to the end that the
Empire in his days should not be diminished by the loss of that Island (it
being of such importance) he determined to go thither himself in person to
pacify the same. And, without any delaying of time, he went thithervvards
with all his forces. Being arrived in Britauny, the Inhabitants conceived such
fear, by reason of his sudden coming upon them, that, as he was a warrior, if
he had been inclined to peace, they would have comn to any reasonable
composition: but he, rather desiring to punish them, made cruel war against
them: which was both tedious and dangerous, by reason of the lakes and many ill
passages for his men in several places of that Country; so as he was
constrained to make many bridges and other devices, with wood and timber, for
his soldiers to pass. And so he obtained many victories, and subdued the
Inhabitants. And to the end that his Legions from The Britans subdued by
Seuerus.
thenceforth might live in greater safety, and that the Picts and Scots should
not so freely pass their bounds (as SEXTVS AURELIUS VICTOR and EVTROPIVS
report) he commanded a strong wall to be made, which did cross the I Will from
sea to sea; which wall was two and thirty miles in length; wherein (as I
conceive) he did but finish or repair that wall which the Emperor ADRIAN had
made before: which truly was a work worthy the greatness of SEVERUS his mind,
and the mighty wealth of Rome. Which when he at his pleasure had ended in like
manner as he had done all his other enterprises, his old grief did so much
torment him, that he desired and sought means to end his own life: and,
having reigned 18 years and ten months, he died in the same I Will of Britanny.
The death of Seuerus.


This Emperor was one of those which fought as many battles, and obtained as
many victories, as any other that ever ruled the Roman Empire: for, he
overthrew and brought to confusion three Roman Emperors, and many other Kings,
and subdued an infinite number of Provinces and Cities. He took so good order
for the preservation of his treasure, and was so covetous and greedy in
gathering the same together, that, notwithstanding his great expenses, and the
infinite great gifts and rewards which he bestowed, yet he left more ready
money and treasure in his Treasury and Exchequer than any other Emperor of his
Predecessors. He paid and maintained so many Legions of soldiers, as there
was no cause to fear any King or Nation in the world. He left in Rome so great
abundance of wheat, wine and oil, as was sufficient (as SPARCIANVS writes)
to maintain and victual the same for five years. He erected wonderful works
and Buildings in Rome and in other parts, and in many things performed the part
of a good governor, and of a wise and prudent Prince: So as the Romans used to
say of him (noting his cruelties and covetousness; and afterward his provisions
and victories) That it had been good that this Emperor had never been borne,
or that he should never have died: and so after his death he was highly
extolled and commended. He left for his equal successors in the Empire his two
sons, the one called BASSIANVS, and the other GETA; and when he lay a dying,
the last words he spoke to those which were with him were these: When I took
upon me the government of the Empire, I found it tyrannized and out of order;
and now being old The words of Seuerus at his death.
and gowtie, leave it in peace and subjection to my sons (if they prove
good) a firm and settled Empire: but if they prove evil; feeble, and without
force, and ready to fall. This good Prince was so temperate and spare in his
diet, that he did seldom eat any flesh: for his common food was salades,
pulse and fruits of his country; but he used to drink somewhat deep: yet
never so that he was at any time distempered therewith. He was of a very comely
personage, representing authority and majesty, and was tall of stature, and
used to wear a long white beard; his hair was curled and gray, and he spoke
with a deep sounding voice. Finally, his personage and mind were fitting for
an Emperor. He lived (as SEXTVS AURELIUS VICTOR and others do testify)
seventy years, and died in the year of our Lord, two hundred and three.

THE LIFE OF BASSIANVS ANTONIUS CARACALLA (THE FIRST OF THAT NAME, AND FOVRTH
OF those which were called ANTONINI) and of his brother GETA, being the two and
twentieth Emperor of Rome.
THE ARGUMENT.
AFter the decease of Seuerus, his two sons, Bassianus Antoninus Caracalla*
and Geta, took the Empire: which two being borne of several mothers; as
brothers oftentimes use to do, the one deadly hating the other, sought one
another death and destruction. But Caracalla, who was a warlike man and
bloody, unable to endure the company of his brother, who led the life of a
Philosopher rather then of an Emperor: or that for his good parts he should be
so much beloved by the Roman people as he was, failing to kill him secretly
with poison, in the end sl^w him openly in the lap of his mother in law, which
was Geta his mother; remaining sole in the Empire. And knowing himself to be
generally hated, he disposed of himself to visit the Empire: whersoeuer he
came, he sought to imitate the fashions of the country wherein he was;
sometimes attyring himself after the Germane fashion; then after the Greek:
besides that he would be called Alexander, and be reputed another Achilles, for
that he had travailed the countries of those Princes. He was very inhumane and
cruel; and so dishonest in his life, as he shamed not to marry his stepmother
Iulia, who was mother to his brother Geta, who also was so shameless as to
consent to so wicked a marriage. But they both ended accordingly as they
deserved: for the Emperor was slain by the practice of Macrinus, at such time
as he went to ease his body; and she hearing the news, falling into despair
killed her self, he having held the Empire six years.

SEVERUS being dead, his two sons, which he had by several women, according
as he had ordained, remained Emperors. One of them he had by MARTIA, which
was his first wife; and the other by IVLIA, as is already said. The eldest had
to name BASSIANVS ANTONIUS, and the other GETA; both very young men, and in
virtue far unlike to their father, chiefly BASSIANVS CARACALLA which was the
eldest: Bassianus at the first virtuous and beloved.
Although that in his youth being but a child, he seemed to make better show
of himself, to be of a mild condition, and of a good wit; he profited very
much in learning (as SPARCIANVS writes) and therefore was much beloved and
greatly accounted of: but afterward, with his years, and the Empire, he
altered his condition, and in cruelty not only surpassed his father, but any
other cruel Prince of all that ever were; as if he had been borne at one birth
with NERO.

As soon as he was sworn Emperor in England, where he then was (for his
father carried both his sons with him, and his wife IVLIA also, which was
mother to the second son) ANTONIUS CARACALLA practiced with the Army to
choose him Emperor alone, and to disinherit his brother GETA. But the men of
war would not consent thereto, because that GETA was chosen CAESAR and
successor to his father by them; and BASSIANVS ANTONIUS was nominated by his
father SEVERUS. Whereupon being out of hope to bring his purpose to effect,
accompanied with his brother and mother in law, they agreed to come to Rome,
and brought with them the body or ashes of their father SEVERUS. But there
presently grew so many iealousies between the two brothers, that it was daily
feared the one would kill the other; notwithstanding that IVLIA (as though she
had been mother to Inmity between Bassianus and his brother Geta.
them both) used all possible means to have pacified them, and to have brought
them to live lovingly and like brothers together: which she could never bring
to pass, and so upon the way either of them did lodge and eat apart; and
either of them stood upon his guard, for fear of the other. Being come to
Rome, they were received with great solemnity, triumph and joy; but in their
palaces they took their lodgings apart, and each of them had his guard and
particular officers from the other: and they never visited, saw, or spoke the
one to the other, except when they went to the Senate: so great was the hatred
which the one bare to the other.

The first thing they did after their coming to Rome, was to bury their
father, whom they canonized for a Saint, placing him among the Gods, as the
custom was to do by those which were good Emperors. And seeing that occasion
will often be given to read of some Emperors which have been deified; in my
opinion it shall not be amiss, in this place to recite the ceremonies which
were then used therein. The order which they held (the Emperor being dead) was
In what manner the Romans deified their Emperors.
to assemble the Senate, to consider whether such an Emperor had deserved or
were worthy to be placed among the Gods or no: and finding him to have been
wicked, the Senate would not be present at the ceremonies used at his funeral:
but if he had been a good Prince, they all went in mourning attire to do him
honor at his consecration. The manner to consecrate him, was first to bury
him without any ceremonies; then they made his image of wood, which resembled a
pale sickly weak man, which they placed upon a high scaffold over the entering
into the Palace; which image was clothed in rich attire; and on the one side
thereof, sat the Senate, and on the other side the Roman Matrons, where they
continued from the Sun rising until the evening, doing nothing but groan
and sigh. This order they observed the space of seven The folly of the ancient.
days, in which the Physicians came and felt the pulses of this Statue,
saying, that the Emperor would surely die: at which words, they lamented and
scrieched out. The sixth day the Physicians said that he was dead: then the most
ancient men carried the image on horseback in a beer to a place which was
called the old place; passing through that way which was called Via Sacra. In
this place was erected an edifice after the fashion of a throne, with stairs
round about it, and upon this throne they placed the Image: on the one side of
the stairs were many children, which were gentlemen's sons of Rome; and on
the other, a number of young Roman damsels which sung some heavy and sorrowful
songs and ditties; and the boys sung hymns in praise of the dead Emperor. From
thence they carried the Image with the beer to the field of Mars, where was
another scaffold made of most dry wood, upon which they placed this Image.
Upon that day people came from all parts of Italy to Rome to see the
solemnity: and every one there present, was bound to cast upon the stairs,
certain precious odors of sundry sorts. After this the Senators made show of a
skirmish on horseback; and after them the two Consuls gave a turn upon their
chariots richly adorned, being followed by the most ancient men in Rome, and
those which had been Captains in the wars, on foot: all which after they had
gone round about this scaffold, making sundry shoutes and exclamations, fell
to the ground. Then came he which did inherit and succeed in the Empire, and
with a burning torch gave fire to this throne or scaffold; which, for that it
was made of most dry wood, in short space was set all on fire.

But before any of these ceremonies were performed, the Senate provided a great
Eagle: which being set on that side where the Image of the dead Emperor was,
while as this image did burn, the Eagle was very cunningly let loose; which,
according to her nature, mounting aloft into the air, the people said that it
was the Emperors soul which flew to heaven, there to dwell amongst the gods*
which HERODIANVS does write at large in the history of these two Emperors.
GETA the younger brother was of a more gentle nature: for showing himself
mild and courteous, he began to be generally well beloved of all men.
ANTONIUS CARACALLA was sour, and would be obeyed for fear. Envying the love
which he saw al men bear to his brother GETA, and the reputation wherein he
was held, he devised with himself how he might secretly kill him with poison,
or otherwise howsoever: he also sought to get the good will of the Pretorian
Soldiers, giving them many gifts, doing them many favors, and Bassianus
sought means to put his brother Geta to death.
giving them leave to do what they listed. So as it was easily perceived, what
manner of government there would be in the Empire, where were two Emperors
with equal power and authority, and so contrary in condition each to other,
that being brothers they practiced and desired each others death; and in
matters of justice and government were ever contrary in opinion; and for
Captains and governors which were to be made, each sought to prefer his
friends and favorites, and did the like in choosing of Consuls and other
Magistrates: And so all things went by favor and in contention. There were
committed intolerable disorders, and wrongs, either of them persecuting the
contrary faction, without daring to punish those which were of their own
party, for fear to make them their enemies: whereof grew an universal
prejudice to all the provinces, and generally to the whole Empire. Wherefore to
avoid these troubles and inconveniences, some practiced to make a division of
the Empire; and that ANTONIUS BASSIANVS should remain in Rome and govern the
West; and that GETA should govern Asia and all the East. But this took as
little effect: for IVLIA, mother to GETA, hindered it, thinking to draw them to
some composition and make them friends: and when she thought herself to be in
the right way to have brought them to concord and agreement, BASSIANVS
CARACALLA (who was more proud and presumptuous, and who in truth did scorn his
brother, as well for that he was his younger, as for that he gave himself more
to his book and to civil discipline, then to Arms and chivalry; having
always about him honest and learned men) resolved to kill him in what manner
soever; which he had till then attempted to do by secret and colored means,
thinking with himself that he was and ought to be sole Emperor, and could not
endure any rival or companion in command. And with this cruel determination,
as they were lodged both in one palace, GETA being one day with his mother,
nothing suspecting any open violence, although he mistrusted secret practices;
BASSIANVS just Bassianus slew his brother Geta in his mothers arms*
at the time when every body was at dinner, suddenly entered his brothers
lodging, and with the aid of those which came with him, slew his brother in
his mothers Arms, before that he was able to put himself in defense, or could
be rescued. And having committed this detestable murder; with the like fury
and haste as he had done this fact, he went forth at his palace gates,
compassed about with his friends and servants; and showing great amazement,
cried out, that his brother would have slain him, and he said to those which
saw him, that he had escaped an extreme danger of death, but his innocence
had preserved him. And calling to his guard, he commanded them to convey him to
his Pretorian Cohorts, where he might remain in safety; for whilst he
continued within the city he stood in fear of his life.

Those which heard him, not knowing what had passed, believed what he said: and
both those which heard him, and heard him not, followed him; and the people
began to be much troubled to see their Emperor, so out of season, and in such
haste and manner go to the Camp. When he came to his Camp, where in truth by
reason of his former practices, he was better beloved then his brother, the
first thing that he did was to go to a place apart, where their ensigns and
banners were, which they held for religious and sacred; and then he began with
great exclamation to say, That he gave infinite thanks to the gods for
delivering him from such and so imminent a danger. And the soldiers flocking
about him, maruelling at his so unseasonable coming, he put himself in the
midst of them, and with a huge voice began to implore their aid and succor,
telling them that his brother would have slain him; and being assailed by him,
was rescued, and had fought, and God had given him the victory, although with
great difficulty; and that he now fled unto them from the fury of those which
would have slain him. He spoke and fained the matter with such efficacy, as
the soldiers believed him: and notwithstanding that he expressed not so much,
yet they plainly perceived that he had slain his brother, as he gave them to
understand: and inco^tinentlie he promised them, seeing he remained sole
Emperor, that he would bestow upon them the accustomed favors, gifts and
rewards; and presently sending for a mass of money which remained of his
fathers treasure, he divided it among them: wherewith having got their good
wills, although some were hard to be persuaded, and did contradict it, yet in the
end they proclaimed himsole Emperor, and approved the death of his Brother
GETA, pronouncing him a rebel, and an enemy to the Roman Commonwealth.

BASSIANVS, remaining all that night in the Camp among the soldiers, the next
day compassed with men of war, returned into Rome: and, assembling the
Senate, he went thither, and brought in his guard with him, wherein he made a
set Oration (which HERODIANVS writes at large) excusing himself, and
grievously accusing his Brother, affirming, that he was openly assailed by him;
but being rescued, in defending himself, he had slain his Brother. The
Senators, some for that they were his Favorites, and others for fear; approved
his death: and he, to justify his wickedness with greater cruelty, began to
proceed against men of all estates, as though they all had been guilty, and had
practiced his death, committing infinite murders and cruelties. First, he
commanded all his Brothers servants to be slain, together with many Senators
Cruelty used by Bassianus, in putting many great men to death.
and Roman Knights, which had taken his Brothers part. He also made PLAVTINA,
the daughter of PLANCIVS, which had been his wife, to be put to death. He slew
POMPEIANVS, nephew to the Emperor MARCUS AURELIUS the Philosopher, and son to
LVCILLA and POMPEIANVS. He caused all the Gouerners and Captains to slain,
which his Brother had placed in the Provinces. To conclude, he murdered an
infinite number of men of quality; so as in all parts of Rome most horrible
murders and cruelties were committed: for which he is accounted one of the
worst and most cruel Emperors that ever governed the Roman Empire; and was
generally hated and abhorred of all men, saving of the Pretorian Soldiers
only, whose love and good will he bought with his money, and therewith did
continue them for his friends (by suffering and enduring them, and giving them
liberty in all things) permitting them to commit whatsoever outrage or
insolency they would.

Having exercised himself in these abominable cruelties, his own conscience
accusing him, and knowing how much he was abhorred in Rome, he resolved to
depart from thence, and to go and visit all the Provinces of the Empire, which
he did, and in his journey played many mad pranks, some of which in truth were
very ridiculous. Purposing to go into Germany, where-as Bassianus travels and
fashions
Rome ever maintained great Armies against the northerly nations, who could
never be brought to any perfect subjection; he gave it out in speeches, that
he went to reform the Legions, and to visit the Provinces: and, taking his way
toward the River Danubius, where (to win the hearts of that Countrey-people)
he followed the fashions used in that Country, hunting and killing wild
beasts, and apparelling himself like a German, praising and esteeming their
fashions better than the fashions of the Romans he chose such of the German
Soldiers as seemed to be most strong and active, for his guard. He sought
also to win the good will of other men of war, showing himself very affable
and sociable, helping them in person in their bodily exercises; eating and
drinking with them such things as they did, and doing many other things like a
soldier and a man of war: whereby he made himself beloved both of the one
and the other, although he forbear not to commit sundry cruelties, killing
certain eminent men among them.

Having set all matters in such order as he thought good in Germany, taking
his way toward Thracia, he passed through Macedonia, where a notable folly
possessed him: for, here he made show to be much affected to ALEXANDER the
Great, and to publish his Noble acts; sending commandment to erect his statue
in many parts of Rome: amongst which he set up one with two faces; the one
resembling ALEXANDER, and the other himself, desiring to make others believe
(himself being so persuaded) that he did very much resemble him; and, because
he had read that ALEXANDER'S neck stood a little awry toward one shoulder, he
counterfeited the like: and so within few days, of an Almain, he was becomn a
Macedonian in apparel, behavior and fashion; and one squadron of his Army he
commanded to be called Phalanx (for so were they called in that Kingdom) and
some of his Captains he caused to be called by the names of some of
ALEXANDER'S Captains. Having made this show in Graecia, he took his way toward
Asia; where he desired to see the ruins of Troy: and, seeing the Sepulcher of
ACHILLES, another humor took him, which was, to resemble ACHILLES; so as he
seemed to travel the Countries like a Player, with Comedies and making shows:
at which his lightness and in constancy, the Romans which were with him,
laughing to themselves, were much discontented and ashamed.

Traveling through Asia the less, and thence into Soria, he went into Egypt
(as he said) to see the City of Alexandria, because ALEXANDER the Great was
Founder thereof: where he was most solemnly received, and with great joy; for
which he ill requited them: for although that he showed them a pleasant
countenance, yet secretly he was much displeased with them: for he understood
that they had used quips and jests of him behind his back, and gave him
nicknames conformable to his vices, and the cruelties which he committed;
Matters, in truth, not so heinous as could deserve so cruel punishment, as
that which he inflicted, which was: that the people being upon a day assembled
together to see certain public pastimes, he made them to be compassed about
by his soldiers, and an infinite number of them of all ages, Extreme cruelty
executed by Bassianus upon the citizens of Alexandria.
conditions, and degrees to be slain, to the great fear, grief, and terror
of the whole City.

After this his great inhumanitie done in Egypt, he returned by Palestina: and
traveling toward the East with a very mighty Army, of his fathers old
soldiers, he invaded the Parthians country, which suspected no such matter;
and did great spoil there (as SPARCIANVS SEXTVS AURELIUS VICTOR, and
HERODIANVS do write) for upon safe conduct and assurance of peace which he
made to the Parthians, he obtained some victories, deceining their King
ARTABANVS, giving him to understand that he came of purpose to marry with his
daughter; and the other coming to receive him in peaceable manner, was
suddenly set upon. But the King (by great hap) escaped by flight. And although
that this his victory wereof small importance, yet he made great boast,
writing to Rome tedious and proud letters thereof; and in all these actions he
forbear not to be cruel: but to govern uprightly, and to do justice, as he
ought to have done, he took no care. He was very gluttonous, and vnmeasurably
given to wine, luxury and dishonestie of life, so as he married with his own
mother in law, Gluttony and incontinency of Bassianus.
IVLIA: yet HERODIANVS makes no mention thereof, but seems to be of a
contrary opinion; for he ever speaks of IVLIA, as though she had been mother
both to BASSIANVS and GETA: But SEXTVS AURELIUS writes it; and also EVSEBIVS,
EVTROPIVS and SPARCIANVS say, that it passed in this manner. IVLIA was a very
fair woman: and upon a day, the mother and the son in law standing talking
together, she carelessy or dishonestly, as it afterward appeared, letting fall
a veil which she ware, discovered part of her breast, which when BASSIANVS saw,
he said, If it were lawful, I would have that which I see: she, forgetting all
honesty, and that she was mother to GETA whom BASSIANVS had stain, answered,
To thee any thing that thou desire is lawful: do thou not know, that the A
monstrous fact.
Emperor makes laws and is subject to none. When he heard her say so, setting
aside all duty and loyalty which he ought to his dead father, and his living
mother in law, he resolved to marry her, and celebrated his nuptials with the
mother of his brother, whom he had bereaved of life.

But to return to the History of his life, it passed in this manner; That
coming from his invasion against the Parthians, he stayed some days in
Mesopotamia: For, that country was very pleasant and commodious for hunting
and other sports; where, within few days having reigned full six years, he
was slain by treason. The manner whereof HERODIANVS writes, saying that he
was much addicted to Mathematicians and Astrologians, and gave great credit
unto them; and in all matters used their opinions and judgments, and had in
Rome and with him all the Astrologers that he could get; wherein he resembled
his father SEVERUS, who did the like. Being fearful of conspiracies, knowing
what he had deserved; he sent to MATERNVS who was the greatest and most
confident friend he had, whom he left governor of Rome, commanding him secretly
to assemble all the best Astrologers he could get, and demand of them what
death he should die; and procure them to give their opinions, whether any
conspired or practiced his death or no. MATERNVS did what the Emperor commanded
in the foot of his letter, and with great haste answered him (either faining
it, or being so advertised by the Astrologers) that MACRINVS which was his
Prefect, and with him in Mesopotamia, went about to kill him, and therefore he
should in any case presently dispatch him; for so did the Astrologers advise
him. Which letter he sent sealed, and made it up amongst other letters, to be
the more secretly conveyed. The whole packet was delivered to the Emperor as he
was going into his chariot, to run for a wager with other chariots; which was
a kind of sport, wherein he took much pleasure, and was greatly used in those
days. And he, for that he would not give over that which he had pretended,
gave his letters to the said MACRINVS to read, and afterward to make relation
to him of the contents thereof. MACRINVS reading all these letters, met with
that wherein BASSIANVS was counseled to put him to death: whereat he was much
astonished; and concealing that letter, made relation to the Emperor of all the
rest. And considering with himself, that he which wrote that Letter would
doubtless write another, and that length he should surely die; he resolved
first to murder the Emperor: and, ruminating upon the matter, he bethought
himself of a ^stie strong fellow, a Centurion of the Emperors guard, called
MARTIAL; who, being discontented, murmured against the Emperor, and secretly
hated him, for that he had caused a Brother of his to be flain, and he him self
was ill-intreated and disgraced. MACRINVS, conceiving this man to be fit for
his purpose, after some other discourse told him, that seeing he had
opportunity to kill the Emperor, being ever near unto him having charge of his
Person, he ought to revenge the death of his Brother, and then flee to him;
who, with others of his faction, would protect and defend him against all such
as might seek to offend him.

Some days after MACRINVS had laid this plot, it happened that the Emperor,
coming from a Temple wherein he had been, near to a City called Carras, and
riding smally accompanied toward the City, withdrew himself out of the way
behind a bush, to do such things as nature required; with one Page with him
to hold his horse, the rest for manners sake being withdrawn. Which when
MARTIAL perceived, being one of them, faining that the Emperor had called him
upon some necessary occasion, he ran hastily unto him; and, before he was
perceived, stabbed him in behind, whereof he presently fell down dead.
SPARCIANVS says, that, coming to help the Emperor to horse, he stabd him in
with his poiniard; and that MARTIAL, returning to take horse from which he
was alighted, by little and little withdrew The death of Bassianus Caracalla.
himself from the company: but the Page bringing news of the Emperors death,
he began to flee so fast as his horse could run; but could not make such
speed, but that he was overtaken by the Germane horsemen of the Emperors
guard; who presently slew him.

The death of BASSIANVS being understood by those which accompanied him, there
grew a great tumult among them, not knowing with whom to be angry: for, as then
it was unknown by whose order he was slain. And, they approaching to the dead
body of the Emperor, the first that came to have aided him, was MACRINVS; who,
weeping and lamenting, seemed to be very sorrowful; no man suspecting him or
any other, all men conceiving that MARTIAL had murdered BASSIANVS upon
passion, and for some private revenge. Taking the Emperors dead body they
burnt it, according to the custom then; and, putting his ashes into a pot,
they sent them to his wife and mother-in-law IVLIA, who was in Antioch; who
being in despair poisoned her self: and so they both had such ends as they
deserved. BASSIANVS at the time of his death was full three and forty years
old, having reigned six Iulia poisons her self.
years Emperor. He left one son very young, whose name was ANTONIUS
HELIOGABALVS, by his wife whose name was SEMIRA, as SPARCIANVS writes. AVREIVS
VICTOR calls her SEMEA, a very dishonest woman, and his cosen German; who
lived like a strumpet. ANTONIUS BASSIANVS was by his surname called CARACALLA,
for a certain kind of apparel which he gave to the people of Rome. He died
in the year of our Lord 219.

THE LIFE OF OPILIVS MACRINVS* ONLY OF THIS NAME, AND THE THREE AND TWENTIETH
ROMAN EMPEROVR.
THE ARGUMENT.
ONE Audentius having refused the Empire; for his excuse, alleged his old
age to be unfit for the troubles of so important a government: but Macrinus
without any such consideration accepted thereof, it being offered him by the
Soldiers, notwithstanding that he was the Author of the death of Caracalla.
He took the Empire, made head against Artabanus King of Persia, who rose in
Arms against the Romans in revenge of the injuries done by Caracalla; and
being come to a battle, which continued two days, in the end they came to an
agreement; Artabanus understanding of the opprobrious death of his enemy. But
fortune, which had prepared a troublesome reign for Macrinus, saw him no
sooner out of one danger, but it cast him into another far greater, which was
this; that Heliogabalus a Youth of fifteen years old, being by the means of
an old woman made Emperor, it behooued him to fight with him; and being
overthrown, fled unknown through Asia the less, with an intent to come to
Rome: but being overtaken by the Soldiers which pursued him, in a City
wherein he fell sick, he was slain, together with his son Diadumenus; whom
he had made his companion in the Empire: Having reigned only fourteen months.

BASSIANVS being dead, a council was held in the Army concerning the election
of a new Emperor: for there was little account made of his son ANTONIUS
HELIOGABALVS; as well for that he was but a child, as also for that his mother
led such a life, as it was doubted whether he were the son of BASSIANVS or
no. In the Army, besides MACRINVS which was Pretorian Prefect, was AVDENTIVS, a
man of good sort and of years, very expert in the wars, and an excellent
Captain: of these two they were in great doubt whether they should choose, and
in this doubt they continued two days: and in the end they resolved to choose
AVDENTIVS, Audentius refused the Empire.
who was a discreet old man, and little regarded the Empire; who considering
the perils and disorders, would not accept thereof, excusing himself by reason
of his great age, alleging, that he was not able to govern the Empire as it
ought to be, a thing seldom seen that any man would refuse the Empire of the
world. The men of war perceiving that AVDENTIVS would not accept of the
Empire, presently made choice of MACRINVS, who was the author of the murder
Opilius Macrinus chosen Emperor.
and death of BASSIANVS; and so was chosen, and he gladly accepted of their
election. This MACRINVS was of a very base stock and parentage, who with small
deserts, and by way of favor attained to the office of Pretorian Prefect. As
soon as he was chosen Emperor, he made a notable flattering Oration to the
Army, and paid the Soldiers, and distributed much money among them, thereby
to purchase their love and good will, and addressed himself with all haste
against ARTABANVS King of Parthia, who came with great power against the
Romans, to be revenged of the injury which BASSIANVS had done them, knowing
nothing of his death. He also presently nominated and chose a son of his for
his companion in the Empire whose name was DIADVMENVS, whom he made to be
called ANTONIUS, as well to takeaway the suspicion of the death of ANTONIUS
BASSIANVS, as for that the name of ANTONIUS was very acceptable to the
Romans, in remembrance of the good Emperors ANTONIUS PIUS, and MARCUS
AURELIUS ANTONIUS: for all these Emperors did leave their own names, or
together with them did take the name of ANTONINI, until that for the
abominable and execrable life of ANTONIUS HELIOGABALVS, they left it, as we
will presently declare. He also wrote long letters to the Senate and people of
Rome, reciting the manner of his election, and desiring them to approve the
same, with many solemn oaths that he was not guilty of the death of
BASSIANVS. The Senate being certified of the death of BASSIANVS, approved the
election of MACRINVS, and the election and company of his son in the Empire.

This new Emperor MACRINVS, and his son DIADVMENVS, going against ARTABANVS
and the Parthians, who came very strong both in foot and horsemen, and also
brought many camels with them, the two Armies came to a most cruel battle
which continued two days, wherein both the Romans and the Parthians fought so
valiantly, as in both days the A cruel battle between Macrinus and
Artabanus.
dark night parted the fray, and either party cried Victory, victory,
although that in truth there was none: for the slaughter and number of the dead
and wounded was equal.

MACRINVS, knowing that ARTABANVS came greatly enraged by reason of the injury
done him by BASSIANVS, sent him Heralds and Ambassadors, certifying him of the
death of BASSIANVS: and moreover, that if he desired the friendship of the
Romans, he would grant it ARTABANVS, being advertised of the death of his
enemy BASSIANVS, was very joyfully of the news: for until then he had no
intelligence thereof, and was also glad of the peace offered him, which he
accepted, upon condition that all such prisoners as were taken Peace between
Macrinus and Artabanus, upon conditions.
by BASSIANVS through treachery in time of truce, should be restored; which
was accordingly performed, and they concluded a peace; and the King of Parthia
returned home to his country; and MACRINVS, to Antioch in Soria: Where he gave
himself over to lust and sensuality, forgetting the government of the Empire,
delaying his going to Rome, whither by letters from thence he was daily
solicited to come; wherein he committed a very great error: for if he had
left his Army, and had gone to Rome, and there settled himself in the
government of the Empire, without all doubt both his reign and life had lasted
longer; but he taking no care of that which he ought to have done, and which
most concerned him, gave himself in Antioch to ^ot, pleasures, and banketting:
whereat the Roman soldiers began much to murmr, The causes of the death of
Macrinus.
and to make little account of him, moved thereto through their desire to
return into their country. They also much abhorred him for that he did most
cruelly punish them: for in those times loyalty was so out of use, and men of
war had such liberty, were so audacious, and had taken such a custom to make
Emperors, as they presently began to repine and murmr, yea and boldly to
speak ill of MACRINVS, and to wish his death, within alittle more then one
year after they had given him the Empire, and within few days after plotted
the same in in this manner. In a city of Phoenicia called Emesa, was young
ANTONIUS HELIOGABALVS, who had there a Grandmother, sister to IVLIA wife to
SEPTIMVS SEVERUS, which afterward married with her son in law BASSIANVS,
son of the same SEVERUS. This his Grandmother, whose name was MESA, had there
another nephew called ALEXIANVS, of whom more shall be said hereafter, and she
also had in her company SIMIAMIRA, mother of the said ANTONIUS, and another
which was sister to ALEXIANVS.

This MESA was a very rich woman both in jewels and money: for she had been
mother in law to two Emperors, the father and the son: and it is to be
believed that in their life time there were infinite bribes and gifts bestowed
upon her, and so she remained there after the death of BASSIANVS with her
daughters and nephews. These two cosins, her nephews, MESA made Priests in a
most sumptuous Temple which she built and consecrated to the Sun; from whence
it grew that this ANTONIUS was called HELIOGABALVS, which is as much to say,
as a Priest of the Sun: for the Phoenicians did call the Sun HELIOGABALVS, to
which Temple for their vain devotions sake came many Roman soldiers of the
Legions which lay there in garrison, and many from MACRINVS his camp also; whom
this MESA, Grandmother to these youths, enterteined very courteously,
bestowing many gifts upon them; and showing them her nephew HELIOGABALVS, she
used to tell them that this her nephew was son to their Emperor BASSIANVS,
whom MACRINVS had slain by treason. With these and such like effectual
speeches, she brought the matter to such pass, that what The policy of Mesa
to make Heliogabalus Emperor.
with the courtesy which she used toward them, and also for that the boy was
a most fine child, they generally began to affect him, some by seeing him, and
others by report of him; so as the whole Army loved him, and desired that he
might be their Lord and Emperor. And to the contrary, MACRINVS being
generally hated of all men, some Coronels and Captains moved by the gifts and
large promises made by this MESA unto them, the greatest part agreed that she
should send ANTONIUS to their Camp, and then they would proclaim him
Emperor. The good old woman, who had bin accustomed to Emperors Courts,
setting all other matters apart, took her nephew by the hand and went with him
to the Camp, and he presently was received for Emperor, and they swear
obedience unto him (as writes HERODIANVS). Heliogabalus made Emperor.
But JULIUS CAPITOLINVS says, that certain of MACRINVS Legions being in a
mutiny came to seek HELIOGABALVS. But howsoever, as both the one and the
other might be, HELIOGABALVS accepted of the Empire, being but fifteen years
old: and the matter being published abroad, the news thereof caused great
alteration in men's minds; and al men began to affect him, for that he was both
son and nephew to Emperors, and for the names sake of ANTONIUS, which they
held for sacred and happy. MACRINVS presently understood these news in
Antioch, where he then was, and made less account thereof then he ought to
have done, jesting at HELIOGABALVS, for that he was but a child, and at his
mother and grandmother; deeming it sufficient to send a Captain of his whose
name was IVLIANVS, with certain Legions to besiege, and so to ruin him: which
(as it was thought) he might easily have effected, if he had himself gone
presently in person. When IVLIANVS with his troops came, HELIOGABALVS forces
were not of sufficient power to give him battle; but being in their Camp,
which was well forttfied and victualled, they suffered themselves to be
besieged: but the soldiers of the one side conferring with those of the other;
and those of the Camp showing young HELIOGABALVS to IVLIANVS his soldiers,
putting them in mind of his father, persuaded them to follow him. Whereof it
insued, that they not only Iulianus, a captain sent by Macrinus, slain by
his own soldiers.
did so; but apprehending their Captain IVLIANVS, smote off his head, and went
over to HELIOGABALVS; and the one and the other made such such an Army, as
MACRINVS resolved with his whole power to make head against HELIOGABALVS. Doing
so, they joined battle in the confines of Syria and Phoenicia; in which,
conscience and fear made HELIOGABALVS soldiers to fight valiantly; and of
MACRINVS side only the Pretorian soldiers fought well, but all the rest of his
Army fought faintly; and a great part thereof aba^doning him A battle where
Heliogabalus had the victory, and Macrinus fled.
went over to HELIOGABALVS: wherefore he accounting himself lost and
forelorne, fled from the battle, and so HELIOGABALVS had the victory.
MACRINVS and his son, with certain of their friends which would not forsake
him, travailed with the greatest speed they could make, secretly, through the
city of Asia the less, and came into Bithynia, with a determination to get to
Rome; where MACRINVS knew that his coming was much desired. But falling
grievously sick in the city of Chalcedonia, those which HELIOGABALVS sent to
Macrinus fallen sick in Chalcedonia, being overtaken by such as Heliogabalus
sent after him, was by them slain.
pursue him, found him there; and bringing letters and commandment to the
city, through the fame of HELIOGABALVS his victory they were obeyed; and
MACRINVS lying sick, void of all favor and friendship, together with his
son, was there put to death, within one year and two months after that he
had been chosen Emperor. And being dead, all men fixed these eyes and thoughts
upon HELIOGABALVS.

Surely, it is a pitiful thing to consider of the infelicitie and misery of
those times, to see how many Emperors were murthred, and how wicked and
vicious the most part of them were, and how little time they reigned; and that
which makes me most to admire, is, to think how lightly they were slain,
notwithstanding that they were Lords of the whole world; And how easy a matter
it was for a Captain, having the favor and friendship of five or six
Legions, to make himself to be obeyed. So as it seems that he which first
had intelligence of the Emperors death, and was any thing friended, and
therewith durst adventure, was commonly chosen for his successor, as we said of
IVLIANVS: And that which is worse, that he which murdered the last Emperor
commonly became his heir; as we see in MACRINVS and others. And touching him
of whom we now discourse, one feeble old woman, and child of fourteen or
fifteen years old were sufficient to overthrow and ruin him, being an
ancient, wise and mighty Emperor, and to bereave him both of his life and
Empire, and quietly and in peace to enjoy the same, if the contentment and rule
of the wicked may be called peace and quietness.

By this aforesaid it appears more clear than the light, how variable and
inconstant all things are in this world: and that there is no other firm and
stable dominion or kingdom, but the service of God: whereof the faithful
Christians in those days had especial care, and sought no The service of God
the surest command.
worldly dominion, Magistracies nor Empire, but to live holily and uprightly;
and so, contemning the world, attained the everlasting Kingdom of heaven. But
these unhappy Infidels forbear not to commit any cruelty or treason whatsoever,
so as thereby they might get the supreme government and command, although it
were but for three days. God for their sins permitted (for the example of
others) that by the same means whereby they obtained it, by the self same they
commonly lost it; being either put to death by the sword, or else by treason,
as they had done by others. And, that which is worst of all, together with
their bodies they lost their miserable souls: in such sort, as is said, it
happened to the Emperor MACRINVS, who died in the year of year of our Lord 220.

THE LIFE OF HELIOGABALVS, ONLY OF THIS NAME, FIFTH OF THOSE WHICH WERE CALLED
ANTONINI, AND FOUR AND TWENTIETH EMPEROVR OF ROME.
THE ARGUMENT.
HEliogabalus, being a Priest of the Sun, attaining to the Empire, as soon as
he had taken the Imperial dignity became so wicked, that in filthiness he
far surpassed all his Predecessors. He was most dishonest in his life, more
than befitted a lascivious and intemperate man; and was so addicted to women,
that he granted them to hold a Senate by themselves. When he was near to the
sea, he would eat no meats but such as were bred far within the land: and when
he was far from it, he would eat nothing but seafish; neither would he eat
of any thing that was not of an excessive price. He was inclined to no kind of
virtue, neither regarded any but parasites, russians, bawds, and such like
persons: and all his actions were so abominable, and his riotousnes so great,
that to write the same, were to amasse an heap of villainy. He made one which
was his cosen german, Caesar; a very honest and virtuous young man, whose name
was Alexianus. He was slain by his soldiers; who, because they could not cast
him into a most filthy ditch, trailed him through the City, and threw him into
the river Tiber, he having held the Empire for a certain time: the truth
whereof is uncertain, Writers do so much differ; and had such a death as his
filthy life had deserved.

MACRINVS dying as he deserved, ANTONIUS HELIOGABALVS, without any
contradiction, was made Emperor: who in truth proved to be such, that in
Histories there ought no memorial to be held of him, nor mention to be made
of his life; to the end, that if it were possible, none should know that such
a monster had ever attained to the Majesty of the Roman Empire, if we had not
already written the lives of CALIGVLA, NERO, VITELLIVS, COMMODVS, and such
others. But as one and the same ground commonly produces unwholesome herbs full
of poison, and which kill; and likewise good and wholesome, which heal, and
feeds both sheep and serpents: So in our History, in recompense of these
wicked Princes, we will oppose OCTAVIAN, VESPASIAN, TITUS, TRAIAN, ADRIAN,
ANTONIUS PIUS, M. AURELIUS, and (in part) SEPTIMIVS SEVERUS; who were singular
Emperors, and governed the Empire with great wisdom and equity. And so the
vices of the one are to be laid open, as well as the virtues of the other; to
the end, that if any Prince of our time shall read their lives, he may see how
abominable and detestable their actions were; and so, eschewing the evil, and
making choice of the good, may follow the same; and may consider how short a
time those cruel and vicious Emperors reigned, and what shameful and fatal
ends they had; and how that the good lived and governed longer time, and ended
their days in peace and quiet, dying their natural death: except some which
were murdered by traitors, to vsurp the Empire.

But, coming to HELIOGABALVS: when he had obtained the victory, and that
MACRINVS was slain, and he chosen Emperor, he wrote the most loving and kind
Letters to Rome that could be devised. But the Senate and people of Rome did
hardly digest the news; for, they would rather have had MACRINVS: but, daring
to do nothing to the contrary, they yielded obedience to HELIOGABALVS; of whom
they presently conceived a good hope, for that which they heard of his gallant
feature, and of the good constitution of his body, and for the names sake of
ANTONIUS, which in Rome was exceedingly much beloved and respected. In the
beginning of his Reign (by reason of his young age) all things were ordered by
the counsel Mesa grandmother and gouernesse (...) Heliogabalus.
and direction of his grandmother MESA, and her favorites: who, taking order
for all matters in the East, determined to come speedily to Rome with the young
Emperor, which she put in execution; but was driven to stay longer than she
purposed, by reason of the winter which was very tempestuous. Wherefore she
wintred in Bithynia; where he began to discover his wicked inclination, giving
himself to most odious luxury: and apparelling himself in such attire as was
far unfit for an Emperor, and feeding on most delicious fare, he gave himself
over to all sensuality: which faults his prudent old grandmother endeavored by
speech and good admonishment to reform and amend; but she prevailed nothing.
Being comn to Rome, he was most solemnly received; where he spent the whole
time of his Reign in such manner, as we have nothing else to write of this
Emperor, but of his abominable vices: which were such, that I neither can nor
will describe them for the filthiness thereof. The first thing he took in hand
after his coming to Rome, was, To build a Temple to his god the Sun, or
HELIOGABALVS, whose Heliogabalus built a temple in Rome, and dedicated the same
to the Sun.
Priest he had been in Phoenicia. He procured that the Christians (whose
number at that time was infinite) should also hold that for a Temple, and
therein should use their ceremonies, make their prayers, and do their devotion
to CHRIST. But it pleased not God to permit, that the Sun, being a creature,
should in worship be made equal to the Creator. He showed himself so
effeminate, and so addicted to women, that the first time he went to the
Senate, he carried his mother SYMIAMIRA with him, and took order that her
opinion should be demanded in all causes; and that from thenceforth she should
be present when any matters of importance were determined: a thing never seen,
that any woman until then had any voice in the Senate of Rome. After this, he
made a Chapter House or Senate apart; where women should meet A Senate of women
made in Rome by Heliogabalus.
and consult, what apparel and attire the Roman Matrones should wear. And,
proceeding to a far more shameful practice, he commanded certain Stews to be
made in his Palaces, of common women, for his friends and favorites. And,
delighting himself so much in the company of such, he commanded upon a day all
the women that could be found of that name and life, to be assembled together;
and he, clad in women's attire, came into the place where they were, and made a
very set and studied Oration unto them, calling them Commilitones; a word used
by Captains to their soldiers when they would do them honor, by calling them
their fellows and companions in Arms. The matters which there were treated of,
were inventions and means how to practice their filthiness and abomination:
and thither he brought with him ruffians and bawds, which were his Brokers in
those detestable actions and assemblies. In truth, this HELIOGABALVS was so
detestable in all manner of vices, that it cannot be sufficiently expressed. He
was so great a spender, and so prodigal in his attire, and in the furniture of
his house, in his fare and diet, and his other follies, as that which is
written of him seems incredible. HERODIANVS and AELIVS LAMPRIDIVS write his
life; wherein they recount most strange matters, besides what other Authors
report of him. All his study and care was, To devise The prodigality of
Heliogabalus.
how he might spend excessiuely, and to find out such dainties and delicates
as never had bin thought of. He never sat but among sweet smelling flowrs,
mixed with Amber, Musk, and other most exquisite sweet odors; neither would he
eat any thing but should be of an excessive price, and sought means to make all
those things which he did eat to be most costly; and used to say, that that
meat had no taste, which was not dear bought. He attired himself in cloth
of gold and purple, set with pearls and most precious stones: and even on his
shoes he wore stones of inestimable value. The chamber wherein he lay and all
his palace, was furnished with cloth of gold, silver, and of silk,; and his
beds were of cloth of gold, of silver, and of silk, coueted with Roses and
sweet flowers; among which were strawed many jewels and pearls: And all the
way whereupon he should set his feet, between his chamber and the place where
he took horse or coach, when he would ride abroad, he made to be covered with
the powder of gold and silver: for he disdained to tread upon the earth, as
other men did. All his tables, chests, chaires, and vessels of service for his
chamber, even to the basest offices, as close stools, chamber-pots, and such
like, were all of fine gold. He made no account of wax light, but had in his
hall and chambers great lamps, which in steed of oil burned most excellent
Balsame, brought from Judea and Arabia: and even his very vrinals were made of
Onyx and other most precious stones. His expenses were so infinite and so
excessive, as no Kings revenues in the world were sufficient to defray the
charge thereof, but his only: for he devoured all the revenues of Spain,
France, Africa, part of Germany, Italy, England, Sicilia, Grecia, Asia,
Syria, Egypt, Arabia, and of all the Islands and provinces of the world; and yet
all this was not sufficient but that he endured want, by reason of his
prodigious expenses: for he never ware any one suit of apparel twice, being
such as we have said. His fingers were ever full of rings; and those which he
had had once put off, he never ware any more: and so in plate of gold or
silver, he would never drink twice of one cup: which he gave to him that
served and attended on him that day. And the very Bathes wherein he did use to
bathe himself, must be new built, and furnished with perfumes, and most
precious odours; and after once bathing they were to be thrown down: so as
they built new Bathes continually. His matteresses and beds were neither of
wool, flocks, nor feathers; but of the down growing under the wings of
Partriges. He made certain feasts in Rome, which were the greatest and most
sumptuous that ever were: and he gave to the citizens and soldiers a donatiue
and distribution of money and corn, to an infinite value. After the feasts and
sacrifices were ended, he gave to the people (as HERODIANVS reports) great
store of plate, gold, silver, and other jewels; which truly was the cause why
they endured this detestable man the the little time he lived in the Empire,
for the desire of of those gifts and benefits which they enjoyed by him; as
also for that his grandmother, being a most wise and discreet woman, sought by
all means to reform his voluptuous sensuality and rioting, and to procure a
good order in the government. But there were great oppressions in the
provinces; and the barbarous nations invaded the frontiers of the Empire. For
he gave all offices and places of charge unto wicked men, which did accompany
him in his abominations, and by their counsel he was governed: for, depriving
all good and virtuous men from all charge, he sent them into exile. Among which
his favorites, one whose name was ZOTICVS was so private, and in such favor
with him, that he was held as a Lord over all the rest. Zoticus a favorite of
Heliogabalus,
This man's counsel was as a law unto him, and by his direction all offices and
Magistracies were sold; and he made Consuls such as were the sons of slaves,
and men of most base condition.

The like order he observed in the choosing of Generals and Lieutenants, giving
those charges unto base and simple men: for which and his other vices,
notwithstanding that they made benefit of his prodigality, yet both the people
and soldiers began to wish his death, so as he was oftentimes in great danger.
Which when his mother and grandmother perceived, they persuaded him to adopt
his cousin germane ALEXIANVS, and to make him his companion in the Empire, who
was the son of MAMEA his mothers sister, which he performed accordingly, and
ALEXIANVS Alexander Seuerus chosen by Heliogabalus for his companion in the
Empire.
was called ALEXANDER SEVERUS; ALEXANDER after the name of the great ALEXANDER
K. of Macedonia; and SEVERUS after SEPTIMIVS SEVERUS, grandfather to
HELIOGABLVS.

This young man was so well inclined, and so well bred, that during the time
his Cosen led a wicked and infamous life, he spent his time in learning,
conuersing with learned men, and such as were good and honest, and exercising
himself in Arms and in such other The creditt of Alexander Seuerus.
practices, as were fit for a Knight and a virtuous Gentleman, and sought
excellent masters to instruct him in all those faculties. Wherefore, all men,
conceiving good hope of him, began to love and affect him; and the hatred
which they bare against HELIOGABALVS daily increased. Which he perceiving,
sought means to kill ALEXIANVS, or at the least to deprive him of the name of
CAESAR, and his successor: But he could not effect it, by reason of the
diligence used by his Grandmother in protecting him: and also for that the men
of war dearly loved him; but upon a time they would have slain HELIOGABALVS
for that cause, as he was walking in a garden: where he escaped by hiding
himself in a corner, so as he was not seen; and through the entreatie of
ANTIOCHIANVS who was his Pretorian Prefect, the soldiers returned to their
Camp, where remaining in a tumult and mutining, they threatened him; and upon
composition, they required that HELIOGABALVS should put from him, certain
vicious and wicked persons which were very private with him, and which sold and
gave offices for bribes; and after this manner dispatched the business which
men had with the Emperor. They also required that certain of their companies
might have the particular guard of ALEXANDER SEVERUS, to the end that
HELIOGABALVS should not kill him; and that his favorites and familiars should
not converse with him, for corrupting him with their evil conditions: all
which demands were presently put in execution.

But after that the fury of the Cohorts was pacified, HELIOGABALVS returned to
his former abominable vices, gluttonies, and incredible expenses. First when he
went forth of Heliogabalus his progress.
Rome (as sometimes he did) he had with him six hundred chariots and
horselitters: the principal carriage was most dishonest young boys and
wenches, with bawdes and their interpreters, and all was little enough,
considering his insatiable beastliness: for as he was most luxurious, so did he
account it for a greatness, to have the company of one woman but once; except
her two whom he was married, and that one he neither loved nor regarded. For as
HERODIANVS Heliogabalus his wives.
reports, he fitst married a Roman Lady, of a Noble house, to whom he gave
the name of AUGUSTA, and other titles; and within a while after he forsook her
and deprived her both of her name and honor; and married himself to a Vestall
virgin: which in the vanity of the Gentiles was held for a matter so
religious, that she which had carnal knowledge of a man, was buried alive. And
so he left her and took another; behauing himself as a most beastly barbarous
man.

And amongst other matters, he did one thing which the devil himself would
never have Heliogabalus turned the day into night, and the night into day.
imagined, which was, he commanded that all businesses to be done by day,
should be dispatched by night; and those that were to be done by night; should
be done by day; and so he arose from his bed at the sun setting, and was then
saluted as other Emperouts were in the morning: and he laid him to sleep about
day breaking, so as it seemed that the world went backwards. All his study was
to find means to spend excessiuely, in his diet, and in all other things.
That supper Heliogabalus his diet.
which was of least price did commonly cost thirty pound weight of gold, which
after our computation, might amount to the value of above a thousand pounds
starling; and there were some which did cost threescore thousand crowns.
Sometimes he promised to give his guests a Phoenix to eat, whereof (they say)
there is but one in the world, or else he would give them a great quantity of
gold for it: which he afterward performed. When he was near to the sea, he
would never eat any fish, but land foul, and other flesh which should be
brought from far. And when he was far from the sea, he would eat nothing
but fish, which by Posts was brought fresh and alive, to the end that it should
be dear and costly. And for the same reason he would eat such things as were
never thought of, and had a great quantity of every thing: as, of the combs
of Cocks, the tongues of Peacockes and of Nightingales. To all his whole Court
(which was without number) he made ordinarily to be given to eat, certain
great beasts, stuffed or farced with puddings, made of the livers and lights of
Peacockes, of small birds brains, Partriges ^gges, Parrots, and Phesants
heads. He also kept certain dogs and hounds, which did eat nothing but the
souls of Geese: and his Lions (which were many) were fed with Phesants and
other costly birds, for this was all his study. Truly* who shall well
consider of this man's expenses* may conjecture what the charge might be; and
how hard they were to be gottten. He also spent infinite sums of money in
keeping of all kinds of the most fietce wild beasts in the world, which were
brought from far countries, as Lions, Panthers, Ounces, Tigres, Hippotames,
Crocodiles and many other such like. And if he were by the sea side, he
accounted it a special greatness of mind, to sink such shipping as he should
find there laden with merchandise, paying afterward the worth both of ship
and goods. And being upon a time reproved thereof by a friend, who asked him
what he meant to waste and consume so much, warning him to take heed that he
stood not in need hereafter; he ansvvered what better thing can there be,
then for a man to be heir to himself living: And said moreover, that he
desired not to have any children, for that they peradventure through desire to
rule would conspire against him.

Finally, the vices and lewd conditions of this wicked Emperor were such; as
in that kind, none either before or after him was to be compared with him:
wherefore I will not spend any longer time in so bad a subject; for the rest of
his doings were so filthy and abominable, as they neither may well be written,
neither ought to be published; and so could not long be endured: neither were
the means used by his grandmother MESA sufficient to protect him; nor to
pacify the wrath and rage the people had conceived against him. Having
(according to HERODIANVS) reigned six years (yet AURELIUS VICTOR, and
EVTROPIVS say, that he reigned but two years and eight months) the Pretorian
Soldiers conspired against him. And as AELIVS LAMPRIDIVS reports, they came
one day armed from their Camp; and having slain most of his servants, and such
as were his companions in his beastly actions, they The vituperable death of
Heliogabalus.
killed him in this manner. First they haled him out of a Privy, wherein he
(flying from them) had hidden himself; and then drawing him from thence, they
threw him into a most filthy sink: from whence (for that therein was not room
enough for him) they trailed him like a dog through the principal places of
Rome, and threw him into the river Tiber, and tied great stones and waights
about him, to the end that his body should never be found again, and so want
burial. All this was done to the good liking and contentment of the people;
and the Senate also approved the same, and commanded that he should no more be
called ANTONIUS; and that in detestation of him, no other Emperor should ever
afterward be called by that name; and that he should be called TIE^RINVS,
according to the manner of his death. HERODIANVS writes, that he was slain in
the Camp out of Rome, whither he went with his cosen ALEXANDER SEVERUS: and
that they killed his mother also, who went with them. Wheresoever it was, it
was in this manner, and he died according to his deserts, and conformable to
the life which he had led: for it is the will of God, that wicked princes make
evil ends. For being by his divine providence made lords to govern and give
good example to their people, to minister justice and equity, and to correct
and punish the wicked and malefactors, these by their own evil example hurt
and corrupt others; and protect and support the wicked. Let Kings and great
Lords and Princes know, that as they have greater power then others, so have
they less liberty to sin and to commit wickedness; and so God inflicteth
greater shame and punishment upon them, then upon other men. HELIOGABALVS,
after the opinion of HERODIANVS, died at the age of twenty years: for he
says that he reigned six years; and all agree that at the age of fourteen
years, he came to the Empire. AURELIUS VICTOR says, that he died in the
seventeenth year of his age, and is of opinion that he reigned not fully three
years; which (according to EVSEBIVS) was in the year of our Lord 224. whereby
it appears that this Emperor reigned not above four years, and so the same
EVSEBIVS affirms in his ecclesiastical History. Ann. dom. 225.


THE LIFE OF ALEXANDER SEVER US, ONLY OF THIS NAME, SECOND OF THE SEVERI, AND
FIVE AND TWENTIETH EMPEROVR of ROME.
THE ARGUMENT.
AFter the death of Heliogabalus, his ^sen Alexander Seuers took the Empire;
under whom it seemed that the Roman commonwealth had a breathing: for he
retaining in the imperial dignity, those good parts which before he had
learned* desired, that all things should be ordered and governed by wise and
learned men. He was very severe to Judges, sharply punishing those which for
bribes or other means had swarued from the right line of reason and equity.
In wars he was most fortunate, as a man which governed with wisdom, and he
returned to Rome triumphing from the East, to the great contintment of the
Roman people. He was no enemy to the Christians, but gave liberty to such as
would become Christian, setting up the image of Christ in his Temples: and he
had an intent to have erected a particular Temple to his name, but was diuerted
by his Priests. Finally, the Germane soldiers, unable to endure the severity
of his military discipline, slew him, together wiih his mother Mammea
instigated thereto by one Maximinus. His death was much deplored in Rome; for
it was hoped, that seeing in his youth he governed so well, he would do much
betterwhen he should come to riper years.

AFter the dark clouds of the forepassed miseries and sorrows which
miserable Rome had endured, it pleased God to send them joy, and contentment:
for when this accursed HELIOGABALVS was dead; by the common consent of the
Senate, and of the Roman people, and of all the men of war, his cousin german
ALEXANDER SEVERUS, was sworn and obeyed for Emperor, who was the son of
HELIOGABALVS mothers sister called MAMMEA; and his fathers name was VARIVS,
borne in Mammea was Seuerus his mother.
Syria, in a city called Auersa. He came to the Empire being of the age of 16.
years, and governed the same little more then 13. years, with such wisdom
and integrity, that he is accounted one of the best Emperors that ever has
bin in the world: whereto was a great help the discretion and good advice of
his mother, who was a good and discreet woman, unto whom her son was most
obedient. AELIVS LAMPRIDIVS, and HERODIANVS report so many excellencies of this
Emperor, that of necessity I must needs make some little stay, as on a
pleasing subject. First, he was much affected to learning; and having excellent
men for his masters and tutors, he was very skillful in all the liberal
sciences: for he was a good Mathematician, and did prefectlie understand the
rules of Geometry. He was much delighted with Music, and could paint and
carue very well, and had good skill in Song: but he never sung but in secret,
in the hearing of some of his chamber. He was a very good Poet, and wrote some
works in verse, and could play on the viol, the organs and the flute, more
then indifferently well: but after he was Emperor, no man ever saw him do it.
Unspeakable was the joy which was in Rome upon the day of his election, and
coming to the Empire; and infinite were the blessings which by the Senate and
people of Rome were powered upon him that day. Beginning his reign with the
love and good will of all men, he governed the same with such discretion, as he
rather seemed a wise old man then a youth: and by the advice and counsel of his
wise mother, he chose the wisest, best, and most experienced men that could be
found for his counselors: and he neither did, nor decreed any thing without
their opinion and advice; notwithstanding that of himself he was of singular
judgment, and so wise, as no man could deceive him. He had ever near unto him
DOMICIVS VLPIANVS, a wise man and excellent Lawyer, and of a good and holy
life, by whose counsel he did chiefly dispose of all Wise and learned men,
Alexander Seuerus his Counsellor^.
matters in his government: although that at that time there were of his
counsel FABIVS SABINVS a just and upright man, who was called the CATO of his
time; and with these, POMPONIVS and ALEPHENVS, AFRICANVS, VENVLEIVS,
MODESTINVS, JULIUS PAVLVS, MEGIANVS, CELSVS, PROCVLVS, MARTIANVS, CALISTRATVS
FLORENTINVS; all noble, virtuous and learned men in the laws, and which had
bin scholars to the great PAPINIANVS: unto which he joined other most noble
men; as his kinseman CATILIVS SEVERUS, CAIUS MARCELLVS, AELIVS SERENIANVS,
which were good and upright men, and others whom he found out, to the end he
might in all things follow their directions and advice as he ever did; by
reason whereof, his government was highly extolled and pleasing, and there was
a sudden alteration in all things: for in the time of HELIOGAEALVS, and of his
father BASSIANVS, many insolences and disorders were committed and tolerated.

Wherefore the first thing that ALEXANDER SEVERUS did, was, To reform all the
Alexander first reformed his own house.
offices and magistracies in his own House and Imperial Palace, displacing
and discharging all those vicious and dishonest persons which HELIOGABALVS had
established there; neither would he admit any man to his service, or to any
office in his house, that was not an honest man, and of good fame and
behavior. The like he did by all the Judges which HELIOGABALVS had made; and
also, in the Senate and in the order of Knighthood, he restored to their
offices and dignities those which unjustly had been deprived. He observed so
good a rule and order in his government, that all matters of justice were to
be determined by men learned in the laws: and matters concerning the wars
were managed by wise men, and such as had experience therein; and by such wise
old men as were well read in Antiquities and in ancient Histories. Finally, he
never gave any charge to any man either for favor or reward, but for desert
and sufficiency only; being thereto chosen by him and the Senate.

He held another custom which in my opinion was very commendable; that when
he resolved to send to any City or Province a new Gouerner, he gave them to
understand thereof, making his name known to them before hand; to the end,
that if any man could except against him why he ought not to be preferred,
another might be provided; but the allegation must be just and true: otherwise,
they were grievously punished who did falsely slander or defame him. This
custom it may be he learned of the Christians of that time, who chose their
Priests and Bishops by voices, for their virtues and good works; and in no case
he would permit, that any office of justice, of what kind soever, should be
bought or sold; and he made diligent inquiry thereof, and did rigorously
punish the offenders: for, said he, He that buyeth his office, must The sayings
of Alexander.
sell justice; and I cannot endure merchants of charges and offices: for, if I
tolerate them, I cannot afterward condemn their doings; and I shall be ashamed
to punish him that bought, seeing I permitted him to buy.

Besides all this, he was a most severe punisher of such Judges as took bribes;
and used to say, that he always had his finger in a readiness to pull out
that Judges eyes which was partial, or a receiver of bribes and rewards;
wherein he was so extreme, that, among other Senators, one coming to do him
reverence who had bin accused thereof, he cried out aloud, that ARABINV^ (for,
so was his name) did not only live, but hold him for senseless and of no
worth, seeing he dared to appear in his presence. Also they write of him, that
he, seeing an unjust Judge, was so troubled therewith, and choler did so much
abound and overcome him, that it made him to vomit. To the contrary, he did
greatly honor those Gouerners and Judges which were good; and, when he passed
through their Provinces, he took them into his litter or chariot with him, and
bestowed many favors and rewards upon them; and, the better to understand the
truth concerning these men, he used singular diligence and care, the manner
whereof was this: He had certain secret and unknown chosen honest men, which
diligently looked into the dealings of Magistrates, and sought to know the
truth of all that passed in all the Provinces of the Empire. Which care I would
to God the Princes of our time had; for, besides that justice should then be
duly executed, they should know the good from the bad: and then they should
be informed of many injuries done in secret, which for fear are concealed by
those which endure them; so as the truth never comes to light, and the errors
and abuses are seldom punished.

SEVERUS desired also that good Judges, Gouerners and Magistrates, should
remain long in their offices and charges; and did use to say, that it was not a
sufficient punishment to deprive an evil Gouerner of his charge, but to give
him most severe punishment; yea even to bereave him of life. When he sent any
one to succeed in the place where had been a good Judge, he sent to him to
give him thanks in the name and behalf of the whole Commonwealth, and bestowed
rewards upon him; as, possessions, herds of cattle, and corn, with many other
things. As for money, he gave but little: for, this Prince although he was very
liberal, yet was he nothing Alexander liberal, but not prodigal.
prodigal; and the gifts which he gave were for the most part such goods as
fell to him by confiscation, and by order of law and justice, and such things
as became void by some men's death which died without issue or heirs, and so
fell to him. But of his money he was ever very sparing: for, he used to say,
that the public rents and revenues ought not to be spent, but in public
Buildings, in the wars, and in public occasions; and not upon the Princes
Favorites and Familiars: and so both within and without Rome he built most
sumptuous and stately edifices of Palaces, Baths, Theaters, Courts of Audience,
and many other. He abated the ordinary charges of his house, and reduced it to
a convenient order, abolishing the superfluous Expenses of his Predecessors. He
apparelled himself decently, but not costly, and never ware any precious stones
or jewels, neither would he have any in his chamber; houlding it for a vanity,
that a thing of so small a quantity should be of so great a price. His diet was
ordinary, neither delicious nor costly. He was a great feeder: for, he had a
good stomach, not that he took any delight therein. In drinking he was very
temperate, and never exceeded mediocrity. And although he were very careful of
his public Rents, and the Revenues of his Exchequer, yet he never increased
the same, neither invented any new impositions; but rather mitigated and
limited those which HELIOGABALVS had imposed: so as in his time the third part
of the tribute was not paid, as was in the time of his Predecessors. He also
reformed the coins of gold and silver, and the value thereof; so as, although
it cannot be denied but that he was most careful in augmenting his treasure,
and in preserving the same, he cannot be charged to have wronged or endamaged
any man. He punished all offenses ordinarily, but without cruelty: and above
all he was most severe against thieves: upon whom he had no mercy; but was very
liberal to such as he knew to be poor, to the end they should have no occasion
to steal, or to covet other men's goods.

In all other actions he was very merciful, and showed great clemency; in
such sort, that in his time time there was nor any Senator put to death,
neither any other man, but that his accusation was thoroughly heard, and his
offense sufficiently proved. He never gave any office, or charge of
government, for favor, or in reward of service done him, but for desert; and
used to say, that offices and places of charge were not to be given to such as
sought or labored to have them, but to those which refused them. He never
chose any Senator, but by the voice and consent of the whole Senate: much less
made he any man a Knight that was the son of a bondsman, or of base condition,
as other Emperors had done. Besides all this, he was so affable and mild in
condition, that he admitted any man to his presence, and heard him willingly.
He lovingly visited all men of esteem in time of their sickness, and permitted
any man to inform him in person of his affairs: and, having understood the
demands to be reasonable, he performed their requests; if otherwise, he
debated the matter with them, and made them to see their error. Being
sometimes reproved by his mother and wife, who was the daughter of SVLPITIVS (a
man worthy to have been, and had been Consul) alleging, that he being so
private and familiar made his Reign of less authority and reputation: he
answered, that it was true; but yet it was thereby the more firm and durable.

Among all his virtues he had one which did excel; whereby it is to believed,
that although he were an Infidel, yet God gave him the grace to govern well:
which was, that he permitted all those that would, to become Christians; so as
in all his time there was no persecution, neither were the Christians grieved:
and in his Temples he had the image and picture of CHRIST, and of ABRAHAM. But,
as a blind man without knowledge, he accounted him among his Alexander
(...)the image of Christ and of Abraham in his temples.
other gods; and would have acknowledged and adored CHRIST for a God, and have
built him a Temple apart, if he had not been dissuaded by his Priests.
Notwithstanding all these good conditions wherewith this Prince was adorned,
the people did not forbear to murmur against him; complaining, that he was too
much ruled by his mother, who was reported to be a most covetous woman,
although in all other matters she was held for excellently wise, and very
honest and virtuous.

ALEXANDER, houlding so good a form and rule of government in time of peace,
failed not to do the like in time of war, and in the exercise of military
discipline; so as in the wars which happened he thoroughly performed the office
and duty of a good and most valiant Captain, especially in those which were
most dangerous, as in brief I will declare; particularly in that which he had
against the Persians, wherein he obtained most noble victories: and although
HERODIANVS writes otherwise, yet in this place he is not to be believed; for,
all other Writers affirm the contrary. And this his notable victory against
ARTAXERXES the mighty King of the Persians, is recited by AELIVS LAMPRIDIVS,
EVTROPIVS, SEXTVS AURELIUS VICTOR, EVSEBIVS, PAVLVS OROSIVS, and other ancient
Authors: so as HERODIANVS only writes this war after another manner, to the
dishonor of ALEXANDER, being deceived by false information or report; or
otherwise of malice, or upon some particular occasion.

To the end that the Reader may the better understand this war which ALEXANDER
had with the Persians, it shall be requisite he call to memory, that in ancient
time, when the mighty King CYRUS translated the Monarchy from the Medes to the
Persians, ouercoming King ASTYAGES: this their Monarchy and power lasted 200
and odd years, and they grew very rich and powerful; until, in the time of
DARIUS, who governed infinite Nations and The original, succession, and
continuance of the kingdom and monarchy of the Persians.
provinces, ALEXANDER the Great took Arms against him and entered Asia: where
coming to a battle with him, DARIUS was overthrown and slain, and
ALEXANDER made himself Lord of Asia; and so the Monarchy of the Persians
ended, passing to the Grecians: and the kingdoms of Asia remained for some
space under the successors of ALEXANDER the Great; until that a valiant man
whose name was AR^ACES, borne in the country of the Parthians, arose and made
himself King; whereby the dominion of the descendents and lineage of the
Greeks, was transported to the Parthians, and it became a most famous
kingdom, and greatly feared during the time of his successors, which lasted
above four hundred years; and the most of them (after his name) were called
ARSACIDES. With this Nation of the Parthians, the Romans had often very
dangerous wars, and they ever stood in fear of them.

ARTABANVS being King of the Parthians, of whom in the life of BASSIANVS and of
MACRINVS we made mention; a Persian borne, being a man of base lineage, but of
great courage and very politic, whose name was ARTAXERXES, took Arms and
rebelled, and by Artabanus the last king of the Persians.
little and little grew to be very powerful; and coming to a battle with
ARTABANVS, he overthrew and slew him, and made him self a mighty King. And so
he again restored the Kingdom of the Persians, and defeated the kingdom of
the Parthians: Which the Romans were never able to do. And he gave it out,
that he would restore the kingdom of the Persians to their ancient power and
greatness: and not content herewith, he began to invade the borders of the
Roman Empire, infesting the countries of Syria and Mesopotamia. These news
being brought to ALEXANDER, who was then in Rome, and had therein reigned three
years in peace, exceedingly beloved of all men; and having intelligence of the
power and forces of this King: duly considering thereof, and holding the action
to be very honorable, he presently with all expedition made preparation for
this war, and went himself in person into Asia with an infinite number of
men of war. HERODIANVS writes, that he first sent his Ambassadors unto
ARTAXERXES, requiring him to contain himself without the bounds of the
Empire, and to live in peace with him. Which request ARTAXERXES (seeing
himself rich in treasure and very mighty) would not perform; persuading
himself that it was an easy matter for him to become Lord of all Asia.
SEVERUS being come into Syria, the wars began on either side to be very cruel
and bloody. In which war he observed so good order and discipline, that it
has not been read or heard, that any other excellent Captain has showed
Wars with the Persians.
greater judgment, or used greater diligence. First, he maintained such
justice in his Army, and so severely punished theft, robberies, violences,
injuries and misdemeanors committed by his soldiers, that his Camp seemed to
be a very well governed City. He was very careful The singular good orders
and provision for the Army.
concerning munition and victuals, as well to provide them, as to preserve
them; and that no man should rob or defraude any man: so as if any Captain
or Corronel detained never so small a quantity of his soldiers allowance in
any thing, he was condemned to die. And in other things he was very diligent
and careful, principally in curing those which were sick or wounded in the
Army. He endeavored that all his soldiers should always be in very good
order, well apparelled, and well armed, and their horses very ready and well
furnished, their Ensigns and Tents very neat and good: He behaved himself
very familiarly with his soldiers, and when he was at dinner or supper, his
Pauilion stood ever open, and he sat in the view and sight of all men, having
no other meat, but such as all the rest did eat. Besides all this, he Note
the martial discipline of Alexander Seuerus.
paid his soldiers with advantage, and bestowed many rewards upon them: and
otherwise he was very severe in punishing offenses; so as if his Army marched
among gardens and orchards, they did not any thing that might deserve to be
reprehended; and he that did otherwise, was whipped with rods of iron. But if
he were a man of worth and quality, he reproved him with The piety of
Alexander.
sharp and reproachful speeches; having these words ever in his mouth, Do
not that to another, which thou would not another should do unto thee: which
he learned (as he said) of the Christians. Other more heinous offenses or
mutinies, he punished with such rigor, that sometimes he tithed whole legions;
which was, to put to death the tenth man of all the legion. He did as little
endure that any Captain or Coronell should wrong a soldier, or that he What
it is to tithe a Legion.
should diminish the least part of a soldiers pay, or allowance. And if he saw
that a soldier was poor and out of apparel, he relieved him with what he
thought necessary for him: for (quoth he) how can that soldier live under due
command, which has not clothes on his back, and money in his purse? for hunger
and penury will put him in despair, and make him adventure to do that which
he ought not. For these and such like matters, which would be long to relate,
this Emperor was infinitely beloved, and feared by all his men of war: and
in his time soldiers were better ordered, governed and trained then in the
time of any other Emperor.

Returning to the Persian war; during the time it lasted, there passed
between the Armies of the one and other party, many great skirmishes and
encounters; wherein were many notable feats of Arms, until that at the last
they came to a battle wherein they joined with all their whole forces;
ARTAXERXES bringing in his Army an innumerable company of footmen, and 130000
horsemen (a proud and bold nation, for the victories which they had lately
130000 horsemen in one army
obtained against the Parthians) and had moreover in his Army seven hundred
Elephants, and one thousand and eight hundred Chariots armed with sithes, which
the Persians then used in the wars. The Emperor of the other side brought so
many men, both of foot and horse, as he who was Lord and Commander of the
Roman Empire might be able to levy. SEVERUS, in this battle performing the
office of an excellent Captain, visiting every squadron, encouraging the
soldiers with most kind speeches, calling them by their proper names,
promising them A most great battle fought between the Romans and the Persians.
great rewards, and fighting in person a great part of the day like a valiant
Knight; in the evening (for, so long did the Fight continue) he wanne one of
the most fierce and cruel battles that ever was fought in the world. King
ARTAXERXES escaped by flight; and there were slain in that battle ten thousand
horsemen, and so many footmen that they could not be numbered: as it appears
by the Oration which SEVERUS made in the Senate after his return to Rome; which
is recited by LAMPRIDIVS. And by the same it appears, that there were slain
by the Romans two hundred Elephants, and that three hundred were taken, with
one thousand armed chariots, and a great number of Persians; which afterward
were ransomed for a great sum of money. So as after this victory, the
Emperor, without any resistance, recovered those Countries which ARTAXERXES had
taken: and, passing through Mesopotamia, he enlarged the bounds of the Empire;
and, leaving therein such a guard as he thought fit, he returned to the City
of Antioch. Being in that City (according to the custom of the Roman Generals)
he paid his soldiers, and gave them great rewards, dividing the spoils of the
victory among them; so-as they remained infinitely joyful and well contented.

And so, leaving all parts of the East in peace and quiet, he returned to Rome;
where he entered in triumph with greater solemnity and pomp than ever any had
triumphed before him; Alexander came into Rome in triumph.
his chariot being drawn (to the wonder of the behoulders) by Elephants which
he had taken: and all the people and Senate of Rome blessed him, and received
him with unspeakable joy. At that Instant, FVRIVS CELSVS obtained a great
victory against the Mauritanians and The victory of Furius Celsus in Africa.
Tingitanians in Africa, which rebelled. And, in Germany, VARIVS MACRINVS had
very good success: and, from Armenia, JUNIUS PALMATVS returned with victory.

After this triumph was ended, SEVERUS made the accustomed donatiue and
distribution among the soldiers and people of Rome, with the feasts and
ordinary huntings; remaining in Rome certain years, in hearing causes and
doing justice. And in such sort he divided the hours, as there was no jot of
time lost, and the time of leisure he spent in reading of excellent books;
principally, PLATO'S Commonwealth, and TVLLIE'S Offices: and he did often use
to read HORACE and VIRGIL.

He living thus in peace and tranquillity, deerly beloved of the Romans, and by
all the Provinces subject to the Empire; it being about the thirteenth year of
his reign, the high Germans and other northerly Nations, with such fury and
such infinite numbers of men (as in former time they had used to do) took Arms
against the Empire; so-as, having past the rivers of Danubie and the Rhine,
they put all Italy in great fear. By reason whereof, the good Emperor
ALEXANDER SEVERUS with all haste departed from Rome, with the greatest forces
he then could levy: which was not done without great grief and heaviness of
the Roman people; Wars between Seuerus and the Germans.
so deerly was he generally beloved. And then the wars began between his
forces and the Germans; wherein, notwithstanding his enemies were very mighty,
yet through his great diligence and valor he suppressed their fury, in such
sort that they were daily put to the worse in all skirmishes and encounters.
But the ordinary Legions which lay there in garrison, accustomed to rapine and
other disorders permitted in the time of HELIOGABALVS; the Emperor was neither
able to endure their insolency, neither they his equity: for, virtue and vice
cannot dwell together. Whereupon, they conspired among themselves to kill him,
and to choose one MAXIMINVS, a most valiant old soldier, for Emperor; whom
SEVERUS had made a Captain of Tyrones (for, so did they call new soldiers) which
their conspiracy they afterward put in execution. Others write, that the cause
of his death was, for that following his mothers counsel in gathering of
treasure, he was not so liberal to his men of war and others, as he ought to
have been; and also for that he had determined in his council to leave the
wars of Germany, and to go into the East: for which cause the soldiers
conceived great hatred against him. But Alexander Seuerus slain by his German
soldiers, together with his mother Mammea.
I hold the first for the most certain cause: of which opinion were LAMPRIDIVS
and JULIUS CAPITOLINVS, writing his life, and the life of MAXIMINVS. Finally,
whatsoever the occasion were, the Legions of Germany slew him; the good Emperor
being in his Tent, void of all fear and suspicion, near to the City of Maguntia
or Mentz. And, together with him, they slew his mother MAMMEA; which they did
by the counsel and advice of the accursed MAXIMINVS, who was afterward his
Successor. HERODIANVS and AURELIUS VICTOT write, that before they murdered him
they made the other Emperor.

SEVERUS was twenty nine years, three months and seven days old when he was
murdered, and had reigned thirteen years and nine days. His death was more
lamented in Rome, then ever was any Emperors before him; and all the Cities
and Provinces of the Empire were extremely grieved thereat. In this manner was
this most excellent and virtuous Prince slain by treason, who never had
commanded any man to be slain, in the year of our Lord 237. And although that
we read that he was married, yet we read not of any children that he left
behind him.

THE LIFE OF MAXIMINVS, ONLY OF THAT NAME, AND SIX AND TWENTIETH EMPEROR of Rome.
THE ARGUMENT.
MAximinus was a Thracianborne, of a base and ignoble house: but he attained to
credit through the actiuitie of his body, which brought him into favor with
many Emperors; yet Heliogabalus did not greatly please him, being riotous and
lascivious. But fortune, as she is blind, so does she blindly bestow her
benefits and favors, and advanced him in the end to the Imperial dignity:
wherein he carried himself so cruelly and tyrannously, that poor Rome could
never have had a worse, or more wicked Prince. First, upon sundry occasions
he put to death all Alexanders friends; and being ashamed of his own lineage,
he also slew all such as had known his father, showing himself very
courteous: he turned his spleen against the Christians, and afflicted them
with new and unaccustomed torments. He discovered a conspiracy, which he
punished severely; and sought to maintain the love of his soldiers, being of
opinion that it lay in them as well to support him in the Empire, as it did to
give it him. He warred against the Germans; and was of so hateful a
disposition and so cruel, that in a manner all the whole Empire rebelled
against him: And in his life time old Gordianus was made Emperor in Africa. But
above all the rebellions, that of Rome did most displease him; against which,
coming in a great rage, and having in a manner besieged it, he was slain by
some Roman soldiers, considering the miseries which their country was likely
to have endured, if Maximinus obtained the victory. And to the end that no
memorial should remain of so wicked and cruel a man, they slew his son
also; whose heads being carried to Rome, brought great contentment to the City.

HOw great good, a good Prince brings to the world, and how prejudicial and
hurtful it is to lofe him; the death of ALEXANDER SEVERUS did sufficiently
manifest to the Roman Empire; which (during his life time) enjoyed all the
contentment that could be desired, for his equity, clemency, and justice: but
he dying, and that cruel monster MAXIMINVS succeeding (who reigned but three
years) in exchange of these and other blessings, there ensued discord, civil
wars, insolences, robberies, cruelties, seditions and other calamities.
Wherefore, in my opinion, men ought more earnestly and with greater instancy
pray to God to send them a good King and governor, then for health, wealth, or
long life: for in the reign of a wicked and unjust Prince, vices abound, which
corrupt good customs and manners, and virtue is suppressed, and men live in
danger both of life and goods. And in the time of a good Prince and Governor,
all these defects are repaired: for, the just reigning, the wicked amend and
become virtuous. For (as the Philosophers say) Such as is the Prince, such will
be the subjects: so he which prays for a good king, may be justly said to
pray for the benefit of the whole kingdom: For it does often times plainly
appear, that the diligence and industry of a good husbandman does more
avail, then the fertility of the soil: and so we see that some places which
are barren, do abound with necessaries to the use of man's life; and to the
contrary, other places which are most fertile, through evil government, become
wild and ouergrown with weeds, yielding little profit. And so histories, and
experience do teach us, that in time of good and peaceable Kings, men grow
rich and mount to estates and dignities: And in time of troubles and calamities
which happen when the Government is in the hands of Tyrants, many men lose
their estates and lives, and sometime their Souls, by their means, and all
things go to confusion and out of order.

But coming to our History, the good Emperor SEVERUS being dead: as he had
neither son nor brother that might challenge the Empire; and MAXIMINVS being
the chief man in the Army, and of greater power then any other, they all
agreed to choose and swear him Maximinus chosen Emperor
Emperor, willingly yielding obedience unto him, which they ought not to have
done: for he proved wicked, cruel, and covetous; notwithstanding that he was
old and laden with years. And because that this man was of a goodly stature,
and came to the Empire by great adventure, I will briefly declare the success
of his life, which I presume will be a pleasing History.

This MAXIMINVS was the son of a man whose name was NICEA, borne in Gotland,
Maximinus hi lineage.
and his mothers name was ABABA, of the nation of the Alanes, which lived in a
village in Thracia; so as of either side he descended of barbarous nations: and
he afterward grew to be so tall of stature, as he seemed to be a Giant: for
(as JULIUS CAPITOLINVS reports) he was eight and a half Geometrical foot
high; which is two foot and a half more then we The stature of Maximinus.
see any man ordinarily to be in these days. And as he had a great body, so
had he all parts thereof proportionable to his greatness: for he had a good
face and was very fair, with great full eyes; and was so extremely strong,
that a cart heavily laden, and which two oxen could hardly move, he would
easily draw and turn at his pleasure; and with his fist he brake a horses leg:
and (as JULIUS CAPITOLINVS says) striking a horse in the chap with his fist he
brake out all The force and bodily strength of Maximinus:
his teeth; and with a spurn with his foot, he split him in pieces: also with
his fist he brake a stone, and with his hands cleft a tree, and did many other
things, which were they not recorded by very true authors, would be accounted
fables. And besides all this, he was of so great courage, that he was never
known to stand in fear of any thing, and was naturally fierce, proud and
presumptuous, and made no account of any man. His bringing up when he was a
boy, was in keeping of beasts (for his parents were poor, and lived in the
country) and afterward his mind increasing with the strength of his body,
he came to the Roman Army to seek entertainment to be a soldier, and to
follow the wars: where by reason of his greatness of body and his extreme
strength, he was soon known, and admired of all men, which was in the reign
of SEPTIMIVS SEVERUS, who was father to BASSIANVS and GETA. CAPITOLINVS
writes, that SEPTIMIVS SEVERUS being in Soria with his Maximinus began first
to follow the wars in the time of Septimius Seuerus
Army, celebrating the birth day of his son GETA, with many sports (which
was a thing much used in ancient time) and giving the winners for reward
jewels, collars, bracelets, soldiers girdles, and such like things; MAXIMINVS,
who was but newly come to the Army, and could scarcely speak the Latin tongue
(which was then the vulgar Roman speech) came before the Emperor, and
entreated him to give him leave to try himself in those exercises. The Emperor
meruailing at the unmeasurable proportion of his person, and seeing him so
fair and well proportioned, granted his request; but upon condition, that he
should not encounter and contend with any Roman soldier, but with such as were
water-bearers, and seruitors of the Camp, among which were many very valiant
and strong men. MAXIMINVS coming to handy gripes with them, overcame 16 of
them which were of greatest strength, and sought out for that purpose, without
resting, or once taking any breath, not being moved by any of them: for which
victory, the Emperor caused some jewels of small price to be given him, but
not any such as were usually given to the soldiers; and commanded also that he
should receive pay; and be entered in the muster role to serve as a soldier.

Upon a day the Emperor riding to view his Camp, he saw this MAXIMINVS (who
was yet but a raw soldier) out of order; wherefore he willed a Coronell to
call him into his rank, and to instruct him in the duty that he ought to
observe in the wars: and MAXIMINVS, imagining that the Emperor spoke of him,
came before him, and kneeled down at his feet. The Emperor, desiring for his
pastime to see whether he could run well or no, spurred his horse, and gave
sundry turns in the field; and seeing that MAXIMINVS ever kept even with him,
and that his horse was tired, and he running afoot showed no sign of
weariness, he rained his The footemanship of Maximinus.
horse, and asked of MAXIMINVS whether he could wrestle: whereto he answered,
that he would wrestle so long as it should please his Majesty. The Emperor,
maruelling at his strength, made choice of certain of the strongest men in all
his Army to wrestle with him; and MAXIMINVS, without breathing or any resting,
overcame seven of them. Whereupon, SEPTIMIVS SEVERUS commanded a collar of gold
to be given unto him, and certain pieces of silver, and made him one of his
guard, and commanded that he should attend in the Palace: and by this means he
came to be much esteemed among the Coronels and men of war. And he daily
increased both in stature and strength: for, when he came to the Camp he was
but a boy; and sometime in wrestling he would overthrow twenty or thirty of
the strongest men in the Army: and in battles and encounters he ever bare away
the prize and chiefest honor, performing strange things. Wherefore SEVERUS
favored him very much, and gave him good places and charges in the wars. He
did eat and drink according to the proportion of his body, or rather more: for,
CAPITOLINVS writes, that he did daily use to eat 40 pound weight of Maximinus
his diet.
flesh, and to drink a measure of wine which contains about 6 gallons of our
English measure.

SEPTIMIVS SEVERUS dying in England, as we have said, he served his son
ANTONIUS BASSIANVS, and was a Coronell, and had other offices and dignities in
the wars. And, after the death of BASSIANVS in Syria, he would not serve
MACRINVS, because he held him guilty of the death of his Lord: but, returning
to the village wherein he was born, he there purchased certain possessions, and
lived there some time in rest, until MACRINVS was dead, and that the young
vicious HELIOGABALVS came to the Empire. At which time he came to Rome, as to
the son of BASSIANVS, and nephew to SEVERUS, both which had bin his Lords;
imagining, that he should have been as much respected by him, as he had been
by them. But HELIOGABALVS more regarding lascivious and dishonest men, than
such as were of worth and valorous, he found with him no such entertainment as
he expected. For, when he came to kiss his hand, HELIOGABALVS said unto him;
MAXIMINVS, it is The dishonest speeches used by Heliogabalus to Maximinus.
told me that in wrestling thou art too hard for twenty or thirty men: I would
gladly know, whether thou dare in amorous assaults encounter as many women.
Which speeches did so much displease MAXIMINVS, that he would presently have
abandoned the Court; but that certain of HELIOGABALVS friends (for his honors
sake) staid him: for, they held it a shame to him, that one which was held to
be the most valiant and strongest man of his time (and who for that cause was
by some called ACHILLES, and by others AJAX) should not be entertained in his
pay to serve in his Army. And so there was given him by HELIOGABALVS the
leading of certain footmen. But MAXIMINVS, abhorring and not able to endure the
behavior of this effeminate Emperor, in all the time of his Reign after that
time, never came into his presence; sometimes faining himself to be sick, and
othertimes seeking occasion and means to absent himself; until the good
ALEXANDER SEVERUS was made Emperor after the death of HELIOGABALVS; and then
he returned to Rome: where SEVERUS received him very gladly, commending him
highly in the Senate; and made him a Coronell and Commander of the fourth
Legion, which he had raised of new soldiers. MAXIMINVS accepted Offices given
by Seuerus to Maximinus.
the charge, and performed his duty singularly well in the wars of Germany,
where he showed great prowess: by means whereof, and of the gifts which he
used to bestow upon his soldiers, and of the Emperors favor, he wan such
honor and reputation with all men, that ALEXANDER (as we have said) being
slain by his soldiers, he was by them created Emperor: and some write, that
he was one of those which conspired his death. Of such force is the desire of
rule, that men forgetting the duty and loyalty they owe, and the benefits they
have received, practice notable villainies, and commit horrible treasons, to the
end they may reign and command; not remembering, that by what means they obtain
rule and dominion, by the self same they commonly lose their governments, and
are thrown down by the same means that they mounted.

After that MAXIMINVS saw himself an Emperor; as he was naturally proud and
fierce, and as base of condition as he was high of stature; so was he of
opinion, that his best course was to make himself obeyed rather for fear, than
for love; and presently began to show himself most cruel. His election being
known in Rome (after they had lamented the death of ALEXANDER Maximin^
(...)lection g^ disliked in Ro^
SEVERUS) was generally displeasing to all men: and, upon report of his
cruelty, they stood in great fear of him; insomuch that both men and women made
vows and prayers to their gods, to the end he might never come to Rome.

The first cruelty this fierce Barbarian committed, was, To put to death all
those which had served and been familiar with ALEXANDER SEVERUS: and then he
banished an infinite number of others, and would not suffer that in the Army
there should be any Captain, or in the Senate any Senator, that had been
advanced by him. And, for as much as he was ashamed of the baseness of his own
parentage, he commanded all those which were near about him, and had known
his parents, to be slain: among which were many who in time of their poverty
had relieved them, of compassion and in charity. And to all these his cruelties
he added a greater: for, he persecuted the Christians which were favored by
ALEXANDER; and by his The sixth persecution of Christians
commandment was the sixth persecution of the Church of God: principally those
were persecuted which had the charge and government of others; wherein he used
strange kinds of cruelties, and new devices in putting people to death;
reposing such confidence in his own strength and courage, that he held no man
able to kill him. Wherefore, as CAPITOLINVS reports, he held himself for
immortal: yet one day in his presence upon the Theater these verses were
recited in the Greek Tongue;

Whom one man cannot bereave of life,
many his blood may easily spill.
The Elephant is great, yet done to death:
strong is the Lion, and men him kill.
If through thy valor thou fear not any one,
beware what a number may do to thee alone.
The cruelty of MAXIMINVS did principally extend it self against such as were
rich, and in high degree and authority; whom he entreated very ill, and for
very slight occasions put them to death, and confiscated their goods; which the
common people little regarded: for, the rich are commonly odious and hateful
to the baser sort, and to such as are poor. On the other side, he cunningly
held himself in the love and good liking of the men of war; for, besides their
ordinary paies, he gave them many pensions and rewards, and provided all things
necessary for them; and took as great pains as any ordinary soldier, with
incredible courage and diligence: and as he was a strong man, and had a very
able body; so he ever went armed, and upon all occasions was as ready as any
soldier in the Army, and had always valiant men about him, although of base
degree and condition. Finally, the effect of all his actions was, To be feared
and to command like a tyrant: which was the occasion that a noble Roman
Gentleman called MAXIMUS, who had bin Consul, conspired against him, and
practiced with the old A conspiracy against Maximinus.
soldiers which had served SEVERUS, and with some others (to whom, MAXIMINVS
behavior and conditions were nothing pleasing) that whereas he with his Army
was to pass a River upon a wooden Bridge, as soon as he should be comn to
the further end thereof, the Bridge behind him should be broken or drawn away,
and so he abandoned to his enemies. But this was revealed to him: or else (as
some surmised) it was a matter fained by him, thereby to have the better color
to shadow his cruelties; which he executed in so high degree, that he caused
3000 persons to be slain, which he said were guilty of that treason.

After this, a great multitude of SEVERUS old soldiers mutined; and,
withdrawing themselves from the Camp, proclaimed one QVARCIANVS for Emperor (as
HERODIANVS writes): but CAPITOLINVS says, his name was TICVS, and it may be
he was called by the one and the other; who, for that he was a man of great
account, was by MAXIMINVS Quarcianus proclaimed Emperor, and then murdered in
his bed.
deposed from the charge which he held. And the soldiers (against his will)
forced him to accept the Empire; which he not without great reason refused:
for, one MACEDONIVS, who seemed to be his great friend, and was one of those
which had advanced him to that dignity, within few days after murdered him as
he lay sleeping upon his bed; and, having stricken off his head, carried the
same to MAXIMINVS: who greatly rejoiced to see himself freed from so great a
danger. And although he then gave him a good countenance which brought it, yet
he afterward put him to a cruel death, as for his treachery he had deserved:
first, for murdering his Soueraign; secondly, for being a traitor to his friend.

With these two good fortunes, the tyranny and cruelty of MAXIMINVS increased.
But following the wars he went out of Hungary into Germany; and, making most
cruel war against the Germans (having in his Army those soldiers which
ALEXANDER SEVERUS had left, being many, very well trained, and of great
experience) the number he increased; so as with them he wan many battles,
putting all to fire and sword where he came, spoiling all that was in that
Country: and in all the encounters that ever happened, he ever fought in person:
and performed more in Fight than any man in the whole Army.

Having pacified all matters in Germany, so as he found no more resistance; by
reason of winter which then came on, he returned into Hungary: from whence he
wrote to the Senate, extolling his victories; and sent unto them all his
battles and skirmishes painted in Tables. I cannot particularly set down the
murders and cruel slaughters of men which he commanded to Executions don in
Rome by Maximinus order.
be executed in Rome at this time, they were so many: for, he did put to death
many men which had been Consuls, and confiscated their goods, using infinite
other tyrannies against the noblest and of most esteem; presuming only upon
his own personal strength, and the power of his Army; to which he gave many
great gifts. And yet among his men of war he forbear not to execute notable
cruelties: for, he more desired to be feared, than any thing else. Wherefore
both in Rome, and in diverse parts of the Empire, they studied how they might
be rid of him, and to find out some other man fit to be Emperor; which began
in Africa, and passed after this manner:

In the Province of Africa MAXIMINVS had a Procurator, who with great rigor and
authority gathered his Rents and Tributes; and, being of his masters
conditions, committed incredible extortions and outrages, robbing and pilling
the Country, doing wrong to all men: and not content therewith, but as he
spoiled many of their goods, so he bereaved them of their lives. And he
continued so in his rapine and cruelty, that the people could no longer endure
his oppression: wherefore the chief among them concluded to kill him, and did
so. Afterward Maximinus his rent-gatherer slain in Africa.
considering with themselves how great and how dangerous a crime they had
committed, they resolved to commit yet a greater, which was, To create an
Emperor. Wherefore, conferring with the soldiers of those Legions which lay in
Africa, who detested MAXIMINVS for his cruelty, they all agreed to choose
GORDIANVS, a Nobleman, who was Proconsul of Africa, and to make him Emperor,
being a man welnie fourscore years old. Gordianus chosen Emperor


GORDIANVS (as I said) was of a Noble house, by his fathers side descended from
the GRACCHI; and, by his mother, from the most excellent Emperor TRAIAN. He had
been Aedil, Questor, Praetor, and Consul, in Rome; and had held many other
offices and dignities, and had been Commander and governor of many countries
and provinces, which he had governed with great wisdom and authority; and at
that time was Viceconsull in Africa, by the appointment of ALEXANDER SEVERUS,
who was MAXIMINVS his Predecessor; by whom, for his deserts and virtues, he
was greatly honored and esteemed: for, GORDIANVS was a virtuous and most
temperate man in all his actions. He was a man of a tall stature, rather
inclining to be fat than lean, and of a goodly presence. His face was
high-colored, representing great authority. He was in his fare and diet (as in
all other matters) very temperate; and was learned, and much given to the study
of Philosophy. He was married to the daughter of SEPTIMIVS SEVERUS, and by her
had sons and daughters, and by chance had with him when he was chosen Emperor
a son, whose name was also GORDIANVS; who had bin Consul, and was held in great
honor and reputation: whom they also chose Emperor together with his Father.

The soldiers and the country people being assembled together (whereof, one
MAVRICE, a Decurion was chief and first motive of the matter) they entered
tumultuously into GORDIANVS house: who, not thinking of any such thing, in the
beginning was in great fear and trouble, conceiving that they came to have
slain him: but after that he understood wherefore they came (for, they told
it him) he utterly refused their offer, excusing himself by reason of his old
Gordianus refused the empire
age. But they came so resolute, that notwithstanding his opposition, yet he
could not otherwise choose, but he must accept of the Ensigns, and title of
Emperor; which they gave him, together with his son. GORDIANVS, although he
were thereto compelled, and accepted thereof against his will: yet he presently
wrote with all speed, giving the Senate advertisement of his election, and how
he had consented thereto, and accepted of the Empire, that he might free the
same from the cruelty of MAXIMINVS. Having published the same in the city of
Tisdro, where he was chosen Emperor, he took his way toward Carthage, with
the magnificence, Ensigns, and officers of the Empire, where he was with great
joy received. From thence he sent his Ambassadors to Rome with particular
letters to many his friends and kinsmen; and likewise took order that
VALERIANVS the Pretorian Prefect of the Legions and companies which lay near
Rome should be slain: whom HERODIANVS calls VATALIANVS (who was a most
cruel man) a favorite and great friend of MAXIMINVS. These letters were
received with incredible joy and gladness, for the great hatred they bare
against MAXIMINVS: and VITALIANVS or VALERIANVS was slain accordingly, by those
which were sent for that purpose.

The Senate and people of Rome approved the election of GORDIANVS and his
son: and MAXIMINVS and his son (who was already made CAESAR, and named his
successor) were adjudged enemies and rebels; and the people with great fury
tare in pieces many ministers Maximinus and his son adjudged for rebels and
enemies to the Roman common wealth.
of MAXIMINVS his cruelty, among which were some which were not culpable. They
also slew SABINVS the Prefect of the city, for that he labored to have
hindered the approbation of GORDIANVS: and the Senate elected for CAESAR a young
man whose name also was GORDIANVS, who was nephew to old GORDIANVS: and so
there was a sudden alteration in all things, for there was a general fear
and confusion.

The Senate considering then in how great danger the city was, and what might
ensue by reason of the great power of MAXIMINVS, they made great preparation,
writing their letters into all the Provinces, commanding that al those
governors which were placed by MAXIMINVS, should be displaced, and therewith
also they proclaimed GORDIANVS for Emperor. This order and direction (as
HERODIANVS writes) in the most part of all the Provinces was obeyed, and in
the most of them they slew the governors set there by MAXIMINVS. And in some
places they did the contrary, killing or apprehending the messengers; so as
every where was bloodshed: for the cruelty of the Emperor had made al men
cruel. When as the news of that which happened in Rome and Africa came to
MAXIMINVS (CAPITOLINVS writes) he was therewith so troubled and enraged, that
he cried out like a man distempered: and running his head against the walls, he
tumbled in the floor, rent his clothes, and made many other shows of fury
and passion.

This Fit being past, the next day he assembled his whole Army, whereto he
made a speech, complaining to them of the treachery of the Africanes, and of
the lightness and inconstancy of the Romans, provoking them all he could to be
revenged; and making great promises, assured them that they should possess the
goods of all those which had offended. And when he had ended his oration, he
presently gave them their ordinary pay with great advantage, showing himself
very bountiful: so as they all promised to serve him faithfully,
notwithstanding that many among them hated him deadly. In this manner using
all possible diligence, MAXIMINVS directed his journey toward Rome, with the
best soldiers, and the greatest provision of munition he could, with intent to
assuage his wrath, by the execution of his extreme cruelty: and so he began to
march; not so fast as he would, for the great number of men, of cariages, and
baggage which went with him, and want of victuals: for all the cities (being
risen against him) had put all the victuals and fruits of the earth in safe
keeping.

While as these things passed in Germany and Rome, CAPELIANVS, who was
Governor of the Provinces of Numidia, and Mauritania in Africa, rebelled
against GORDIANVS, as well for that they were ancient enemies, as for that
CAPELIANVS was a very great friend unto MAXIMINVS, and had been settled there
by him: who, as soon as he heard that the GORDIANS were chosen Emperors, put
those Legions which were under his command in order, leuying thereto the
greatest forces he could, and took his way toward Carthage; against whom came
young GORDIANVS, with all the forces he could levy (the old man remaining in
the city in great care and fear of that which afterward followed) and these
two Armies joining battle (which was very bloody) CAPELIANVS in the end had
the victory, and GORDIANVS was overthrown and slain: for the greatest part
of his people were Bisonious, Young Gordianus slain in a batiaile.
or raw soldiers, and not accustomed to the wars. The father hearing of the
death of his son, and of the loss of the battle, seeing no hope of
relief, and the victorious enemy at the gates of the city, with the girdle
which he ware hung himself: and so died he with reproach and And old Gordianus
hung himself in ^is girdle.
dishonorably (having a few days enjoyed the name of Emperor) who had lived
fourscore years very honorably and in great reputation. And CAPELIANVS
following his victory entered Carthage: where he slew the principal of those
which escaped from the battle; and robbed many houses and temples, showing
great cruelty both within the city, and abroad in the country; robbing and
sacking towns and villages, in color of revenge for the wrong don to
MAXIMINVS, seeking by all means possible to please his soldiers, with a
desire to make himself Emperor.

The fame of this adventure came speedily to Rome: wherewith the Romans were
incredibly troubled and perplexed, to see themselves deprived of the favor and
succor which they hoped for from GORDIANVS and his son. And knowing that
MAXIMINVS came like an enraged lion against them (for redress and remedy
against so great a danger) the Senate assembled in the Temple of IVPITER; and
after many cousultations held between the principal and best experienced men
of the city, they chose MAXIMUS PVPIENVS, and CLODIVS BALBINVS for Emperors;
both which had held great offices, and had been valiant Captains and
governors, and lived with great fame. And to please the people which consented
Maximus Pupienus and Claudius Balbinus chosen Emperors, and Gordianus the
nephew of old Gordianus made Caesar.
not to this election, the Senate named young GORDIANVS, nephew to that
GORDIANVS who hanged himself in Carthage, CAESAR, who was his daughters son,
and of the age of eleven years.

These two being created and sworn Emperors, and having taken the Imperial
robes and ensigns, they levied the greatest forces that in Rome and the
borders thereof they were able, MAXIMUS PVPIENVS, who was the wiser and more
sufficient man, left the city, to make head against MAXIMINVS; who with great
haste and fury came toward Italy, and had conceived incredible joy, for that
he was given to understand of the death of GORDIANVS and of his son, and of the
victory which CAPELIANVS had obtained against them: but after that he knew of
the election of the new Emperors in Rome, his rage and wrath redoubled. And
understanding that PVPIENVS came against him with a sufficient Army, he put
his troops in order; and having passed the Alps, entering into Italy, where he
thought to have found great Maximinus entered Italy.
plenty of victuals, he found all clean contrary: for all sustenance was
carried away, and those places and towns which were not fortified, and able to
defend themselves, were abandoned and left desert: wherefore the soldiers for
the hunger and want which they endured, began to murmr and to speak ill of
MAXIMINVS; and he punishing some of them for it, grew hateful to all.

Drawing near to the city of Aquileia, which he made account to enter
without difficulty, he found very great resistance: for besides that the city
was very populous and rich, there were within it for the defense thereof, two
Roman gentlemen, which had been Consuls; the one was called CRISPINVS, and the
other MENEFILVS: who had in such sort furnished the city with men and
munition, that MAXIMINVS with great difficulty passing the river, and
encamping himself before it, gave a very cruel assault, in which much people
died of either side: but those which were within, defended themselves so
valiantly, as he was enforced to alter his determination, to raise his siege,
and to retire. While as MAXIMINVS lay before Aquileia, and PVPIENVS with his
Army marched toward him, Rome endured a great affliction: for there grew a
contention between the Pretorian soldiers and the people of Rome, about two
soldiers which had been slain by two Senators, whose names were GALLICANVS
and MECENAS. And both parties taking Arms, there were slaughters and cruelties
committed, the like whereof have bin seldom heard of: for the city was set on
fire, and a great part thereof burnt, the new Emperor BALBINVS not being able
to quench or stay it: who seeing that he could not redress so great an
inconvenience, retired himself to his palace. So as whosoeeuer shall well
consider hereof, shall find that the three years tyrannous government of
MAXIMINVS (for so long it lasted) was the cause that the city of Rome and the
whole Roman Empire were never free from wars, tumults, robberies, murders,
and all manner of calamities. And he (as I have said) lying before Aquileia,
prevailing little by the assaults which he gave, by reason of the great
resistance made by the besieged, and wanting victuals (for PVPIENVS, and the
Senate had commanded all to be carried away out of that territory, and the
borders and marches thereabouts) and jointly herewith his soldiers daily
hearing that all the East had revolted and rebelled against him, by letters
sent from the Senate of Rome: With this fear and for the secret hatred which
the old Roman Soldiers bare against him, they agreed to mutine and to kill
him; seeing that Rome (wherein were their parents, their wives, children and
kinsfolks) and also that all Italy was enemy unto them, and had proclaimed
them rebels. It happened that MAXIMINVS and his son one day about noone
reposing themselves in his Tent, the soldiers and many others with them, came
very boldly to his pauilion, and without any resistance slew him: the like they
did by his son, saying, That of an evil fire Maximinus and his son slain
in his Tent.
could never prove good whelpe; when he had reigned three years, and was
sixty and odd years old; and his son nineteen, and somewhat more. His
death was approved by all the Army: and as soon as it was known in the City
of Aquileia, they opened the ports, and became all friends. They sent the heads
of this tyrannous Emperor and his sons, to Rome; where with unspeakable joy
they were received: and by the way they carried them to PVPIENVS; who was in
Rauenna. This happened in the year of our Lord 240.

THE LIFE OF MAXIMUS PVPIENVS AND CLODIVS BALBINVS, ONLY OF THOSE NAMES, and
seven and twentieth Roman Emperors.
AFter the death of MAXIMINVS; MAXIMUS PVPIENVS and CLODIVS BALBINVS, without
any contradiction continued Emperors; which (as I said) were so already
created: and PVPIENVS, who then was in Rauenna, with all speed went to
Aquileia, to content the Army which MAXIMINVS had left there; where, by those
of the City and of the Army, he was with great joy received, sworn, and obeyed:
and he paid the soldiers, and gave them great rewards, and afterward
dispatched and sent the Legions very well contented to their Provinces and
places where they used to remain. And himself came to Rome with some companies
of Germans for his guard, by reason of the discord between the Pretorian
soldiers and the Citizens; who, understanding of the death of MAXIMINVS,
pacified themselves, and went with the Senate to receive BALBINVS into the
Empire, and GORDIANVS for CAESAR, as is aforesaid: and so they were most
solemnly entertained. And being comn into the Senate, besides the ordinary
acclamations, blessings and applauses, in remembrance that these Emperors were
created by the Senators, they used such like speeches: Princes, wisely chosen,
rule accordingly; and those which are chosen by Speeches used by the Senate.
unwise men, and such as know little, in like manner end their days: wherein
they seemed to note the men of war, who made choice of MAXIMINVS. Which
speeches the Pretorian soldiers took in so ill part, that they presently began
to missike and to be discontented with the Reign of PVPIENVS and BALBINVS; and
they held themselves for scorned and disgraced, in that the Senate should seem
to triumph over them, and to have taken from them the authority to make
Emperors: so great was their pride and ambition, that from thence-foorth they
not only wished, but practiced the death of them both, who governed all things
most excellently and prudently, and made very good and profitable laws and
ordinances; and into all the Provinces where need required, sent ordinary
Legions, doing justice to all men indifferently, greatly honoring the Senate;
and generally to all men showed themselves gentle and courteous. But all this
sufficed not to get the good will of the soldiers: for, virtue and goodness do
not pacify the hatred of the wicked; and by so much their envy and malice the
more increases, by how much they see those whom they hate, exercise themselves
in virtuous and good actions: In such sort, that as those accursed men in time
of peace were not so much esteemed, neither had the liberty to live so
dissolutely and licentiously, as in the time of wars; all their care and
study therefore was (although they did dissemble it, and keep it secret) how
they might without any danger to themselves, kill those two virtuous and
honorable old Princes, PVPIENVS and BALBINVS. Whereto, the emulation,
jealousy and contention, between these Emperors, although in secret, opened
the way to their determination; for BALBINVS held himself for far more Noble
and of a more ancient house and family, then PVPIENVS: For it was three hundred
years or little less since that his ancestors came from the Isle of Cales in
Spain, with the great POMPEY; and being made citizens of Rome had lived ever
Emulation between Balbinus and Pupienus.
honorably and richly: and therefore as PVPIENVS was but of a new risen family,
he made account to be more regarded then he, and disdained him. And PVPIENVS
notwithstanding that he was a newer citizen and lately risen: yet was he of
greater courage, very grave and severe, and had held many offices and
magistracies; which with great valor and wisdom he had discharged; and
therefore was of opinion that in true nobility, which wholly consists in the
virtue of the person, he did far excel BALBINVS. And thus their vain
presumption cost them both their lives. Notwithstanding that they stood upon
these points; yet they no way forgot ought that might concern the good
government of the Empire. These two wise Emperors agreed between themselves,
to go the one into the East against the Parthians; or to say better, the
Persians, which ruled in the East, as I have already declared, andby means of
the civil discords past, had entered the bounds of the Empire, and taken certain
Cities: And the other to the wars of Germany. And as one day all the whole
City was busy in beholding certain games and pastimes which were made, with
them was also the greatest part of the Emperors guard and household; so as they
remained in their Palaces smally accompanied, without any mistrust or suspicion
of any treachery. Whereof the Pretorian soldiers being advertised, they came
with great fury fully armed in order of battle, toward the Emperors Palace:
Which when PVPIENVS understood, and that they came to kill him, he commanded
in great haste the companies of Germans which were his guard, to be called:
the which truly had been sufficient to have defended them. And he also gave
BALBINVS to understand thereof, desiring him to do the like. But BALBINVS
entering into a fond suspicion, that PVPIENVS sent for his guard to have done
some thing against him, did not only leave that undone which was requested at
his hands, but hindered it, so as the guard was not called. By which means the
Pretorian soldiers had opportunity to enter the Imperial Palace in safety:
and there finding none to resist their fury, they took both the Emperors and
dispoyling them of their Imperial robes, used the poor princes with all kind
of villainy, as if The Emperors Balbinus and Pupienus slain by the Pretorian
soldiers.
they had been two thieves; carrying them through the midst of the City
toward their Camp: But hearing that the Almaines came to rescue them, they
slew them upon the way; leaving their dead bodies in the streets. And the young
GORDIANVS meeting them by chance (who, as we have said before, at the request
of the people was chosen CAESAR) was by them hailed AUGUSTUS and Emperor. And
they crying to the people said, that seeing those two Emperors were dead, which
in despite of them were chosen by the Senate; they should now receive GORDIANVS
for Emperor, which they themselves had desired Gordianus Nephew of the old
Gordianus proclaimed Emperour^
to be made CAESAR; and so they went to their lodging leading the youth with
them, who yet was not fully fourteen years old.

The Almaines after they understood of the death of PVPIENVS and BALBINVS,
seeing there was no hope to rescue them, returned to their lodgings, which was
in the fields ^eere to Rome. And so these two good Emperors ended their lives,
having reigned two years: and in reward for pacifying the Empire and
delivering the same from the tyranny of MAXIMINVS, these base rascals
murdered them, which PVPIENVS (as says JULIUS CAPITOLINVS) The words of
Pupienus to Balbinus when they were chosen Emperors.
did before Prognosticate: for when they were chosen, he said to BALBINVS; Tell
me BALBINVS, what good shall we reap, if we kill this accursed cruel beast
MAXIMINVS? BALBINVS answered; We shall win the love of the Senate and of the
people of Rome, and generally of all the world. It is true quoth PVPIENVS, but
I fear me we shall incur the hatred of the men of war, and that it will
cost us our lives. Which happened as we have declared, in the year of our Lord
242.

THE LIFE OF GORDIANVS THE YOUNGER; SO CALLED, FOR THAT HE WAS NEPHEW TO THE OLD
GORDIANVS, being only of this name, and the eight and twentieth Emperor of
Rome.
AFter the death of these two good Emperors PVPIENVS and BALBINVS; GORDIANVS
being chosen by the This Gordianus was Nephew of the old Gordianus who died in
Africa.
Pretorian soldiers (who in their life time was CAESAR) the Senate and people
of Rome, seeing no other remedy, willingly approved his election; for he was
generally well beloved of all men for the deserts of his Uncle and grandfather:
and through this election ensued concord and agreement between the soldiers
and the citizens; and so he began his government in good order and had good
success. The first thing he did, was to make many feasts, games and shows,
and to give many donatiues and rewards both to the citizens and soldiers;
whereby he made himself exceedingly well beloved. This happened, by reason that
this young Prince followed the counsel of wise men. Presently in the beginning
of his reign a certain Captain named SABINIANVS rebelled in Africa: and it
succeeded so well, that the Governor of Mauritania by the commandment of
GORDIANVS, coming against him; those which conspired with him, took him
prisoner, and craving pardon for their offense, brought him to Carthage; and
there delivered him into the hands of GORDIANVS his Captains. Who being freed
from this care, there remained yet another, which was for the wars against
the Persians, who (as we have said) usurped certain Lands of the Empire;
against which it was concluded that the Emperor GORDIANVS should go himself
in person: and notwithstanding that he was then very young, having married the
daughter of a most learned and eloquent Gentleman, whose name was MISITHEVS,
whom he presently made Prefect; the authority and counsel of the father in
law made the reign of the young Emperor GORDIANVS very fortunate, and much
esteemed. For, notwithstanding that MISITHEVS was but of a mean parentage, yet
he was a man of Misitheus father-in-law to Gordianus.
much virtue; and so discreet and considerat in all his actions, as,
notwithstanding that GORDIANVS was but a child and very young, and somewhat
inclined to vice and sensuality, yet he made him an excellent Prince and
Governor, both in peace and war. Whereby it plainly appears, that the
principal and most necessary thing that appertains to any King or Prince to
make him good, is, to have good and wise men for his Counselors, and that his
Court be replenished with honest men, and of good conversation: Which the same
GORDIANVS apparently manifested in a letter written by him to his father in
law, in answer to another written by him, wherein he had counseled him what
he ought to do, and had reproved him for some thing that he had done, in this
manner:

The Emperor GORDIANVS AUGUSTUS, to his Father, and Pretorian Prefect,
greeting. If the Almighty Gods had not defended and protected the Roman
Empire, I had truly by this A Letter written by Gordianus to his father in law
Misitheus.
time been deceived, and sold by these wicked and dishonest men: for I now
know, and do very well comprehend, that I ought not to have given the charge of
the Roman Cohorts to FELIX, neither to SERAPIO of the fourth legion: And
because I will not recite all my errors, I acknowledge that I have done many
things that I ought not. But thanks be to the Gods, that thou guiding and
instructing me, which do nothing for covetousness or reward, I have learned
and understood many things, which being shut up in my palace with my servants,
I should never have learned, neither was it possible for me to have known. For
consider a little I pray thee what I could do, being blinded, and sold by
MAVRVS, who was confederat with GVNDIANVS, REVERENDVS and MONTANVS; so as
whatsoever they commended or reproved, trusting to their judgment, I
presently accepted and allowed. The truth is, Father, That Prince is very
unfortunate, who has not about him those which may plainly tell him the
truth: for, as the King cannot be among the people, neither can he know what
passes and what is said, of necessity he is to understand it by the relation
of those with whom he is conversant; and according to their information, good
or evil, to govern and dispose of all matters. God give thee health. By this
letter is confirmed that which I said; and how that the good counsel of his
father in law, was of great efficacy to make him a good Governor.

In the beginning of the reign of this good Emperor, there were seen
certain signs and tokens in the air, and upon the earth, whereby many men
did prognosticate that his reign should not long continue. The first was so
great an eclipse of the Sun, as the day seemed to be turned to night: so as
every where the people kindled lights, thereby to see to do their necessary A
great eclipse of the Sun.
business, so long as the Eclipse continued. And, about one year after, there
was so great and terrible an earthquake in a manner through all the provinces
of the Empire, that many cities and towns were destroyed, and some were
swallowed up by the earth, which did open in A great earthquake.
many places. This being past, and the losses repaired in the best manner that
could be, GORDIANVS departed from Rome toward the wars of Persia, with great
provision and infinite Gordianus going to the wars against the Persians.
sums of money to pay the soldiers which he carried with him, which were
many in number, and excellently well armed and trained: for he had as good an
Army as ever had any Emperor; and marching over land from Italy to pass the
straight of Hellespont, he took his way through Missia, to stay the Goths and
other nations which came down with intent to have inhabited Thracia: against
which he obtained some victories, and left those provinces free from troubles,
and in peace. Having past that straight, he marched with his Army through
Soria, and came to the city of Antioch which the Persians had taken, and
fought some battles with the mighty SAPOR King of Persia, who succeeded his
brother ARTAXERXES in that kingdom; Gordianus his victory against Sapor King of
Persia.
where obteining some notable victories, he recovered the city of Antioch.
From thence he went further, and conquered the great cities of Carras, and
Nisibe: for being terrified with the first battles, SAPOR was in so great
fear, as notwithstanding that he had levied a very sufficient Army, yet he not
only durst not fight with GORDIANVS; but leaving the said cities and others,
he retired himself into his kingdom, abandoning the limits and confines of
the Roman Empire. In this war all things were governed and managed by the
counsel and direction of MISITHEVS, GORDIANVS his father in law, who was his
Prefect and captain general: who governed all things so well, that he failed
not in any thing; and so by his counsel and valor GORDIANVS obtained many
victories: and the Roman Army proceeded, being excellently well instructed
and trained, as well in the discipline which apperteineth to soldiers, as in
all other things which were requisite for the wars. The like happened in all
other matters, which were expedient for the good government of the whole
Empire: for h^ was so good and so wise a man, and therewith the good
inclination and disposition of the Emperor did so concur, in whom wanted no
sufficiency nor discretion for his age, that all the time of his reign (which
were six years) the Roman Empire enjoyed peace, rest, and all happiness. And
while as all things were in this estate, MISITHEVS fell sick and died. JULIUS
The death of Misitheus.
CAPITOLINVS writes, that he was secretly poisoned by PHILIP, who succeeded
him in his charge, and was afterward Emperor, and who also was the cause of
the death and ruin of the Emperor GORDIANVS; who as soon as MISITHEVS was
dead, made PHILIP his Prefect and Captain general, nothing suspecting him of
treason. This PHILIP was borne in Arabia, of a base and dishonorable parentage;
but a very valiant man, and bred up in the wars in the Roman Armies, and had
held many offices and governments. As soon as this barbarian was advanced by
GORDIANVS to that high dignity, he practiced how he might obtain the Empire
for himself, and sought by all means to win the good will of the soldiers,
and to make them enemies to GORDIANVS. It happened that in the Army was great
scarcity of victuals; which was done by the secret practice of PHILIP: and the
soldiers imagining the negligence of GORDIANVS to have been the cause thereof,
determined to make PHILIP equal with him in the Empire, and that he should be
as his tutor and governor: which the virtuous young GORDIANVS patiently endured;
For he could not withstand the audacious determination of the soldiers: and
PHILIP, seeing himself equal with him, became presently so insolent and
audacious toward GORDIANVS (by reason of his young years, and the favor of
the Army) as he began to command all, as though he had been sole Emperor.
But GORDIANVS being unable to endure this disgrace (for great and Noble minds
can hardly suffer themselves to be despised and oppressed) assembling the Army,
The wickedness and ingratitude of Philip, and the misery of Gordianus.
complained openly to the Captains and soldiers, of the pride and ingratitude
of PHILIP, calling to mind the benefits which he had bestowed upon him, and
sought to persuade them to depose him from the Empire.

PHILIP seeing this, setting all shame apart, assembling together such as were
of his faction, and seeking to get the good will of all men, brought his
purpose to so good issue, as the miserable Emperor GORDIANVS being abandoned,
was brought to such extremity, as he sent to entreat PHILIP, that if he would
not permit him to be his equal, yet at the least that he would be pleased to
allow him the dignity of CAESAR: which seeing he could not obtain, he
desired that he might be his Pretorian Prefect. Which being also denied, he
requested him to do him the favor, that he might be one of his Captains so
long as he should live. To this his last petition, his cruel mind seemed to
yield: but afterward considering how much GORDIANVS was beloved in Rome, in
Africa, and in all the other Provinces, as well for his The death of Gordianus.
natural virtues, as for the nobility of the house from which he was
descended, he commanded him to be slain. And this was the end of the Noble
and worthy young Emperor GORDIANVS; who reigned six years: four alone, and two
in the company of PVPIENVS and BALBINVS, in the year of our Lord 247, and in
the twentieth year of his age. Ann. Dom. 247


GORDIANVS was of a pleasant and very Noble condition, of gentle behavior,
very studious, and given to learning; so as they write, that he had in his
Library threescore and two thousand Books. He was infinitely beloved of the
Senate and people of Rome, and generally of all nations of the Empire, and no
less by the soldiers and men of war, who called him their son. Although in
this short sudden fury, after the manner of beasts they murdered him by the
procurement, practice and treason of PHILIP; yet their fury being past, they
made him a sepulcher in the confines of Persia, whereupon they wrote this
inscription in the Lati^, Persian, Hebrew, and Egyptian tongues, to the end
that of all men it might be read and understood: To the sacred GORDIANVS, who
overcame the Persians, the Goths, and the Sarmates, extinguished the Roman
Civil discords, and likewise subdued the Germans, but not the Philippicks.

Which seems to be annexed thereto, for that in the Philippicque fields he was
put to the worse by the Alanes; and also for that he was commanded to be slain
by PHILIP.

THE LIFE OF PHILIP THE FIRST, AND NINE AND TVVENTITH EMPEROR OF ROME.
BY the subtlety and wicked practices (which we have already before declared)
this traitor PHILIP came to the Empire, and was sworn and obeyed by the whole
Army: he presently advertised the Senate of his election, and of the death of
GORDIANVS, concealing the manner thereof; alleging that he died of a natural
infirmity. The Senate giving credit to his letters, approved his election, and
gave him the name of AVOVSTVS: which when he understood, having a great desire
to come to Rome, and to see himself Lord thereof, he Philip made peace with
the Persians.
made a dishonorable peace with the Persians: and leaving unto them the
Province of Mesopotamia, and part of Syria, he came with his Army toward
Rome. But first he desired to visit his country Arabia; wherein, for a
memorial of his name, he builded a City, which he called Philopopolis, near
the place where he was borne; and made his son his companion in the Empire,
whose name was also PHILIP, a child of six or seven years old: who (as
AURELIUS VICTOR, and EVTROPIVS do write) was naturally so sad and sour, as he
was never seen to laugh, neither could any man by any device provoke him to
laughter. PHILIP being come to Rome, although he was received as sovereign
Lord, yet was his coming nothing pleasing to the Senate nor Roman people,
considering that he had given away the Province of Mesopotamia to the Persians.
Which when he understood, after that he had made a great donatiue, and
distributed much money and other gifts among the people, thereby to get their
good wills and love; he sought occasion to make war against the Persians, and
proclaimed the same; with a resolution to recover the honor which he had lost.
But that war ended before it began, without any breach of peace: for the
Persians promised to restore the Provinces without war or any opposition.

PHILIP having now reigned two years (and a thousand years being expired
since that Rome was founded) he commanded certain feasts and games to be made,
which they called Secular, which was (as it were) to celebrate the birth day of
Rome; which feasts were made in Secular games, and why so called.
Rome every hundred years. Yet concerning the time there were many opinions;
and some Emperors celebrated these feasts and shows before their time: as, the
Emperor CLAUDIUS before remembered. But the truth is, that they were called
Secular, for that they could be made but once in a man's whole life time.
Finally, they were the most sumptuous and solemn that were made in Rome: for
so did OCTAVIUS make them, and CLAUDIUS also, as I have said. And afterward
the Emperor DOMITIANVS, although he observed not the just computation of the
years, as did the Emperor CLAUDIUS, but followed the account of AUGUSTUS
CAESAR: and after that, SEPTIMIVS SEVERUS; and now this PHILIP celebrated the
same, with the greatest pomp and magnificence that ever had bin seen before
this time, as EVSEBIVS records; who says, That in the place called Circulus
Maximus, were hunted and slain an infinite number of wild beasts; and there
also fought two thousand Sword-players, who (as we have said) slew one another
to give delight to the beholders, in as furious manner as men now adays use to
fight upon challenges in single combats. It is also written, that in POMPEIES
Theater were such shows and games, that they lasted three days and three
nights continually; wherein were so great lights that men might see as well at
midnight as at noone-daies; whereof EVTROPIVS and POMPONIVS also make mention.
In these sports and about the end of them; as they were many, there being
little heed taken, POMPEIES Theater took fire, and the greatest part of the
timber work was burnt, with other sumptuous buildings near unto it; which
fire was hardly quenched. PAVLVS OROSIVS writes, that this PHILIP was the
first Christian Emperor that was truly baptized, and that believed, Philip
baptized a Christian.
and received the faith of CHRIST. Other authors affirm, that both he, his
mother and his son were christened; and that ORIGIN wrote certain letters to
him; wherein he persuaded him to believe and to observe the Christian faith.
Others say, that he did but feign and dissemble it, thereby to make himself
the stronger against DECIVS, through the help of the Christians, which DECIVS
rebelled against him: But I rather believe OROSIVS and EVSEBIVS.

PHILIP and his son living thus in the quiet possession of the Empire, the
Goths, which in the time of GORDIANVS had infested Thracia, came now from
Scythia with a very great Army through Missia into Thracia, and did much hurt
there, burning many cities and towns: against whom, the Emperor sent for
Captain one MARINVS, a man very expert in the wars, and very valiant of his
person; who when he was settled in his charge, with the aid and favor of the
men of war, whereof he before was Captain, and of the ordinary Legions of
Illyricum, leaving the service wherein he was employed, resolved to rebel, and
to make himself Marinus rebelled against Philip.
Emperor, holding it lawful to betray him, that had been a traitor to
another; and for such was presently sworn and proclaimed by the Army.

When PHILIP understood hereof, he was much troubled: and in great fear
complained to the Senate of the ingratitude and presumption of MARINVS. Some
write that DECIVS was there present: who being a man of great wisdom and
experience, very Nobly descended, and was afterward Emperor, did comfort and
encourage him, and persuaded him not to be grieved therewith: for (quoth he)
MARINVS his presumption will shortly cost him very dear, which happened so
indeed: For, within few days after, the same Army which had chosen him,
being discontented with the manner of his carriage toward them, were as ready
to bereave him of his life, as they were to make him Emperor; and accordingly
slew him. Which news being brought to PHILIP, and he remembering what DECIVS
had said in the Senate, gave him the charge and command of the Army against
the Goths and Scythians, with a great increase both of men and munition, and
of all things necessary for such an enterprise. DECIVS as a man of experience
and discretion, and sufficiently able to discharge that office, came to the
Army: where within few days all the soldiers, as well for the worthiness of
his person, as also for that they stood in fear of PHILIP for those matters
lately past, resolved Decius made Emperor by the soldiers against his will.
to make him Emperor: and so indeed by force and against his will they made
him to take the ensigns, name and dignity of Emperor.

When DECIVS saw himself advanced to so high an estate, he practiced a cunning
policy, which was thus; He privily sent a secret messenger to tell PHILIP that
he had accepted the title of Emperor, being perforce constrained thereto, as
was well known; but held no man for Emperor but PHILIP; and that he therefore
should not be offended: for he did assure him, that as soon as he could
possibly get any liberty, he would renounce the Empire. This he did to the end
that PHILIP should take no care, nor make any such preparation against him, as
reason required; and finally, to temporize until that he might increase his
power, and make himself able to defend his cause. But PHILIP (whether he gave
credit to his speeches or no) forslowed not his business, but determined with
himself to repose no trust in Preparation made by Philip against Decius.
any other Captain, but to go against him himself in person: and to that end
levied many new troops, and sent for the ordinary legions out of sundry
Provinces, threatening and swearing that he would tear DECIVS and the
rebellious legions which were with him in pieces; And so departed from Rome,
commanding his men of war with such choler and in such hautie manner, as he
became hateful to all men, And they holding, DECIVS more worthy of the Empire,
before he went out of Italy, in the City of Verona proclaiming DECIVS
Emperor, his own soldiers slew him, cutting his head off, by the midst of
his face, just with the Philip slain in Verona by his own soldiers.
upper row of his teeth.

When as the news hereof came to Rome, the Pretorian soldiers killed his
melancholy son, who was never known to laugh; being (according to some
writers) about the fifth year of his and his fathers reign; and after some
other writers, the seventh: Which happened in the year of our Lord two
hundred, fifty and two, after EVSEBIVS his computation.

Truly, it was the just judgment of God, that by the same means that he
obtained the Empire, he lost the same: and the same soldiers by whose hands
he put his good liege Lord GORDIANVS to death; even the very same soldiers
murdered him: and, as he was a traitor and disloyal to his sovereign; so
found he none faithful to him being Lord.

THE LIFE OF DECIVS, ONLY OF THIS NAME, AND THIRTITH EMPEROR OF ROME.
PHILIP and his son being both dead (in such manner as before is expressed)
DECIVS without any contradiction was confirmed Emperor: for the Senate
presently chose him in his absence, and gave him the title of AUGUSTUS, and so
did all the Provinces and the Armies. For, all writers affirm, that morally
this DECIVS was an excellent man, and was endued with many virtues and
sufficiencies: he was very wise and discreet, and of great experience, and
had held many offices and dignities before he attained to the Empire; which he
obtained not by favor or any sinister means; but for his deserts and
goodness: And so governed the same wisely and uprightly, with singular equity
and authority. The like he did in the Empire, during the small time he enjoyed
the same: and above all, he was a most politic, valiant and excellent
Captain; so as he might justly have been numbered among the good Emperors, if
he had not (as an infidel) persecuted the Church of God, and all Christians,
with most barbarous cruelty; such, as the like thereof had never been seen:
the which (as some writers affirm) he did of malice, and for the hatred which
he bare against his predecessor the Emperor PHILIP, for that he was a
Christian: And so in his time the Church of God suffered the seventh
persecution. In such sort he perseuered in his cruelty, staining therewith his
other virtues, that he The seventh persecution of the church of God.
crowned many with martyrdom; leaving to us examples of their holy and
virtuous lives and endings. This Emperor was borne in a City called Cabali in
the lower Pannonia, which we call Hungary, and (as we have said) was of a
very Noble and ancient Lineage. As soon as he saw himself an absolute Lord,
through the desire he had to come to Rome, he made CORNELIUS LICINIVS
VALERIANVS General of his mighty Army, who was a wise man and of great
experience: so as for his good conditions, and his age, being threescore and
six years old, he was of great authority, and to all men seemed most to
be fit for that charge.

When DECIVS was come to Rome, he showed himself in all things a very good
Governor, and preserved the authority of the Senate; following their counsel in
all matters of government. And among other things, he permitted them to choose a
Censor at their pleasure, which was an ancient Magistracy of great authority;
for his office was to correct the manners and customs, and to reform the
abuses and disorders of the people, and therefore had supreme jurisdiction over
all men: and this office, from the time that Rome came to be commanded by one
head, the Emperors usurped, and made themselves Censors. Whereupon the Senate
chose the said VALERIANVS for Censor, notwithstanding that he was absent; and,
moreover, without Valerianus made Censor by the Senate. The Senate chose young
Decius for Caesar, and his fathers successor
any request made by DECIVS, they nominated his son (whose name was also
DECIVS) CAESAR, and his Successor. And so he lived in the City about one year,
governing all things with great wisdom and equity, by the advice and consent
of the Senate; to the great contentment of all the Roman people, excepting the
Christian Commonwealth: against which, he (as a blind man) made general
edicts and decrees; whereby he commanded them to be slain and persecuted, as
EVSEBIVS writes. And whereas the Goths, at this time inuading Thracia and
Misia, had subdued the greatest part of those Provinces, DECIVS determined in
person to make head against them; and, carrying his son with him, he left
the government in the hands of the Senate: and, leuying new forces, he marched
against the Goths; and, coming A battle between Decius and the Gothe^
where his Legions were, within few days after he joined battle with them:
in the which although it were very doubtful, yet in the end he had the
victory, and slew thirty thousand of them; constraining the rest to fly to
the mountains and other places of hard access, not daring to come into the
Plains; and he brought them to such extremity, as he had easily ruined them,
if he had not been betrayed, as you shall hear. For, the King of the Goths
sent him word, that if he would give him leave quietly to depart, he would
abandon that Land, and return to his country. But the Emperor having taken
the passages, imagining that he might easily kill them, or take them prisoners,
and so punish their breach of peace granted them in the time of BALBINVS, would
not yield to the Kings request. Having brought them to such a straight as they
could not escape out of his hands, he gave the charge to a notable Captain of
his, whose name was TREBONIANVS GALLVS, being a Roman Gentleman and Governor of
the frontiers of Misia, to keep certiane passages, through which the Goths
might pass; and to that effect gave him the command of a great number of
soldiers. Who, having a desire to make himself Emperor by such means as then
were used, not only discharged his office wherein he was employed, very ill;
but gave secret intelligence to the King of the Goths, that he would let him
pass, aduising him therewith to divide his Army into two parts; the one half
Trebonianus Gallus betrayed Decius, and was the cause of his death*
whereof he should lay in ambush, and with the other he should assault the
Emperors Camp, who mistrusted no such matter; and that, faining fear, he should
flee back, and draw the Emperor into his ambush, where he might in safety kill
him. This contract being made, the effect followed, as writes POMPONIVS LETVS:
but IORNANDES relates it after another manner. Yet all Authors agree, that,
through the treason of his Captain GALLVS, the Emperor DECIVS came to a battle
with the Goths, to their great advantage: wherein notwithstanding A battle
betwixt Decius and the Goths.
that he and his soldiers fought most valiantly, yet both himself and his
son therein ended their lives. IORNANDES writes, that, before a man could
well judge of the victory, the young DECIVS was so mortally wounded with an
arrow, that he fell from his horse in sight of his father the Emperor; who
with a loud voice called to his soldiers, willing them not be dismayed: for,
the death of one Knight would be no hinderance to the Commonwealth, The
gen^rous speeches used by Decius, seeing his son mortally wounded fall to the
ground. The miserable death of Decius
neither to the battle. But in the end foreseeing his ruin, and that the
Goths apparently had the victory; to the end he would not fall into his
enemies hands, he clapped his spurs to his horse, and (giving him the head) leapt
into a deep lake of water that was thereby; wherein, through the weight of his
armor, he was soon drowned: so as his body was never found. The Goths,
following the victory, made great slaughter in the Roman Army, which was put to
rout; and those which escaped fled to the Legions which TREBONIANVS GALLVS
commanded, who as a confederat with the Goths, was in safety; and sought no
revenge for the death of the Emperor. And in this manner ended the life and
reign of the Emperor DECIVS, who had oftentimes deserved the same for the
cruelties which he commanded to be executed upon the Christians, which happened
in the year of our Savior 254. and in the fiftith year of his age, when he
had reigned but two years. It is not known who was this Emperors wife, An.
Dom. 254.
neither what his father and ancestors names were, or who they were; neither
can we set down any particularities, as we have observed in the lives of other
Emperors, for that no author makes any mention thereof, and all write very
little of him. I say this, to the end that the reader may understand, that I
will not presume to write at large in a matter wherein I find such brevity
used by authors: for I seek rather briefly to set down the naked truth, then
to beautify the History with fictions, as I have seen some men do. My
purpose from the beginning has been to be brief: for I do not properly write
an History, but the sum and an abbridgment of Histories, containing the lives
of the Emperors, whereof we will write more largely when it shall seem more
expedient; although that in the times whereof we now write, Historiographers
wrote so negligently, and observed so little order, as a man can hardly draw
that little out of their writings which we treat of.

THE LIFE OF TREBONIANVS GALLVS, ONLY OF THAT NAME, AND ONE AND THIRTITH
ROMAN EMPEROR.
THE Goths having by the means above mentioned obtained this victory,
wherein both DECIVS and his son died, those soldiers which thence escaped
recovering GALLVS his Camp, hailed him Emperor, knowing nothing of the treason
which he had committed: and he which desired nothing more, accepted the same,
and took the Ensigns of the Empire. When the news of the death of DECIVS and
of his son came to Rome, and of the slaughter made in the Roman Army (before
that GALLVS his treason was discovered) the Senate understanding that the Army
had chosen him for Emperor, and that his companies had rescued those which
escaped from the battle, confirmed his election, and gave him the name and
title of AUGUSTUS. But this GALLVS, notwithstanding that he was a Gentleman
and descended of an honorable house, was not contented with A dishonorable
peace made by Gallus with the Goths.
the treason which he had used toward his Emperor and sovereign Lord, but
through a desire to com to Rome, made peace with the Goths; the most shameful
and dishonorable, that ever was made by any Roman since that Rome was first
founded: for he promised to pay them yearly a great sum of money; making
that people which was held for Lord of the world, and Subduer and Tamer of all
other Nations, tributarie to the barbarous: so as, to the end he might be
called Emperor, he made both himself and the Empire tributarie and subject to
the Goths. Such power has ambition and desire to reign, that men thereby make
themselves slaves to some, conditionally that they may command and have
authority over others. And he prospered as ill therewith as he had deserved:
for, the Goths afterward brake the peace, and did more harm in his time than
in any Age before, sacking and spoiling the Provinces The Goths brake the peace
made with Gallus.
of Thracia, Misia, Thessalia, Macedonia, and the Confines and Frontiers
thereof: for all which he took little care. And, on the other side, the
Persians in Asia, seeing the good success of the Goths, entered with great
power into the Countries of Mesopotamia and Syria; which were provinces The
Persians entered the provinces of the empire
of the Empire: and afterward, passing forwards, they subdued Armenia. But
GALLVS, taking no care for these things, made his son BOLVSSENVS his companion
in the Empire, who was a very child. And afterward he not only permitted the
persecution inflicted by DECIVS upon the Christians, but increased the same.

There began also in his time a most cruel general pestilence, whereof died
an infinite number An universal plague in the time of Decius.
of people; which began in Ethiopia in the Confines of Egypt, and from thence
infected all parts of the world, and continued ten years. During which time (as
PAVLVS OROSIVS recounteth) there was no Province, no City, nor private house,
which was not left in a manner desolate with this universal plague; whereof
he compiled a Book, as EVSEBIVS and S. CYPRIAN bear record, who lived in those
times. So as all the Reign of this wicked Emperor was unfortunate and
mournful; as well for the Provinces which he lost, as for the calamities
before recited. Only he had one notable victory in the Province of Misia
against the Goths, under the leading of EMILIANVS a Captain of his: where he
slew many thousands Emilianus overthrew the Goths in a battle.
of them, and followed the execution for certain days. This overthrow was the
ruin and total destruction of GALLVS: for, EMILIANVS, waxing proud for so
great a victory, and returning from it with an imagination of that which
afterward ensued, gave great gifts among his soldiers; and so, getting their
love and good will, was chosen and sworn Emperor. Which when GALLVS understood,
with all the haste he could make he parted from Rome with a Emilianus chosen
Emperor.
great Army, leading his son with him. Against whom EMILIANVS boldly came to a
battle, and had the victory: wherein GALLVS and his son were both slain, and
their soldiers went The Emperor Gallus and his son both slain in battle.
to serve EMILIANVS. This happened in the year of our Lord 256; GALLVS being
then (as testifies AURELIUS VICTOR) at the age of seven and forty years, and
in the second year of his most unhappy Reign.

THE LIFE OF EMILIANVS, ONLY OF THIS NAME, AND TWO AND THIRTITH EMPEROR OF ROME.
EMILIANVS succeeded GALLVS in the Empire. Some Authors account him not in the
number of the Emperors, and show a reason for it, considering the small time
that he held the same; which was rather in name than effect. But, seeing he was
so, I have thought good to make particular relation of him, for as much as
EVTROPIVS and other Authors have done the like. I say then, that the Emperor
GALBVS being overthrown and slain, and EMILIANVS* remaining victorious;
joining both Armies in one, he began to use the name and authority which was
given him. But, seeing the time of his Reign was so short that it lasted not
above four months, there can no worthy thing be written: for as his time was
very brief, so do authors briefly write. He was by birth an Africane, borne
in the country The origin of Emilianus.
of Mauritania, of base and obscure parentage, and from his youth was bred up
in the wars: and as he increased in years, so did he in honor and offices. At
length the Emperor DECIVS made him Captain General, and Governor of the
frontiers and confines of Sarmatia; in which charge GALLVS left him, and there
succeeded that which we have recited, which was to obtain a victory against
the Goths, and to rebel against GALLVS; and afterward to overthrow and kill
both him and his son, and to make himself Emperor. When as these matters were
ended he wrote with all speed to the Senate, giving them to understand of his
victory and election, putting them also in mind of the negligence and evil
government of GALLVS, and of the Provinces which the Roman Empire had lost in
his time; promising very confidently to recover Thracia from the Goths, and
Mesopotamia and Armenia from the Persians, and to clear all the confines of
the Empire Large promises made by Emilianus.
from their enemies: which his purpose as he would have put it in execution, he
was prevented; for the Army which was in the Alps (whereof VALERIANVS, a man of
Noble birth and of great authority, was General) opposed, and in no case would
allow the election of EMILIANVS, but rose against him, and chose their
commander for Emperor. Which when EMILIANVS soldiers understood, moved with
the reputation of VALERIANVS, which (as we will declare in his life) was very
great, and to avoid civil wars; they resolved to confirm his election: and so
in a manner by the Common consent of them al, EMILIANVS was slain, being 40
years old, Emilianus slain by his soldiers, and Valerianus made Emperor.
when he had reigned little more then 3 months. All his troops went to serve
VALERIANVS, to whom they swear, and obeyed him for their Lord and Emperor. And
this was the end of the reign of EMILIANVS, because his end should be
answerable to his beginning. And in truth, writing this discourse, and
considering of the estate and condition of things in those times, I was moved
with great admiration and pity, to think of the miseries of that age: for
where there was such insolency and disorder, as soldiers did daily murder
their Emperors, and chose others as they pleased, and no man sought to punish
them, or to revenge the wrong; what shall a man think was done in particular
provinces? what robberies, what rapines and outrages were there used? What
execution of justice could that Emperor command to be done, which came to the
Empire by treason, and killing his sovereign Lord? It is easy to be believed,
that he would willingly pardonall Offenses, upon condition that he might be
obeyed; especially such as were committed by powerful and mighty men. And
moreover, oftentimes the news of the election of an Emperor was scarcely
published, and his election confirmed, before that the like news came, that he
was slain by those which had chosen him, or by some other personage of more
power. And it may be that it happened so unto them, for that they took no other
care, nor busied themselus about ought else, but how they might support
themselus in the Empire. And so the reader shall find that thirteen Emperors
which preceded VALERIANVS, of which we will treat, died violent deaths; and
none of them naturally, in his bed, beginning from the time of the good MARCUS
AURELIUS, until this man. And so the same VALERIANVS, together with his son,
and other Emperors also died by the sword. In the time that this VALERIANVS and
GALIENVS reigned, there were thirty tyrants which usurped the name of Emperor,
who killing one another, or plotting it by some other means, none of them died
his natural death; so as, when one was proclaimed Emperor, he might be assured
to com to an ill end; in such sort, that among all the miseries of those times,
the greatest was, To be an Emperor: and the Emperors were such, and came to
that dignity by such means, that by Gods just judgment they made such ends.
And though in all estates there were disorders and confusion (and so it appears
by the histories of those times) yet only the holy faith and Christian
doctrine increased, as well in virtue and holiness of life, as in number of
people: but they escaped not free from persecution. This I thought good to note
and observe in this place, thereby to show that men ought not so much to blame
these times wherein we now live, as some have done; commending the customs of
ancient times, diffaming and reproving all that passes in our time. I deny not
but we now are wicked and sinners: but let the discreet Reader make a
comparison of the order now observed in all things, with the government of
those times; and he shall clearly perceive the difference, and how far this
does excel those times past. God grant that we may equal the good and happy
times, in virtue.

THE LIFE OF VALERIANVS, ONLY OF THAT NAME, AND THREE AND THIRTITH EMPEROR OF
ROME.
WE have already declared, how that VALERIANVS was chosen Emperor, by the
soldiers whereof he was General; and how that EMILIANVS was afterward
slain, by the hands of his own soldiers; and that all reduced themselves
under the service of VALERIANVS; and that in this manner he was held for
Emperor both in Rome, Valerianus favored of all men.
and abroad; with as great favor and good liking of all nations, as ever a^y
had been. VALERIANVS when he was chosen Emperor, was of great age: for all
authors which write of him affirm, that he was then fully three score and ten
years old, which time he had spent with great honor and same both under good
and bad Emperors, by means of his virtuous qualities and valor; and had
attained to many dignities, and had held many magistracies and offices: among
which, in the time of the Emperor DECIVS he was made Censor of Rome, and was
highly honored by the same DECIVS, and by all the Senate; and was also of a
very Noble and ancient house and family. Finally, in all his life time before
that he was Emperor, he was honored and happy in all his doings; and so there
was great hope that he should have repaired all the calamities and miseries of
his time; which happened clean contrary: for after his joyful beginning, in
all the rest of his age he was miserable and unfortunate. When he came to the
Empire he had two sons, the one called GALIENVS, and the other (as himself)
VALERIANVS, which he had by several women. TREBELLIVS POLLIO and others say,
that VALERIANVS was but his nephew. His victory and election being known in
Rome, and with great joy and gladness applauded; GALIENVS being there, was by
the Senate and people chosen CAESAR, and his fathers successor, as afterward
he was, as EVTROPIVS writes: but SEXTVS AURELIUS Galienus made Caesar by the
Senate.
VICTOR says, that his father made him AUGUSTUS, which was his equal and
companion with him in the Empire: both the one and the other might well be. His
second son VALERIANVS (as some say) was made CAESAR; and others name him not.
VALERIANVS beginning to take upon him the government of the Empire, the first
thing he did, was to nominate and appoint Captains (men of experience, and
that had showed themselves valiant) chosen among many Noble men, which had
served in the wars against the Parthians, the Persians, the Goths, and other
northerly nations: and so he determined to go himself in person (and did so)
to the wars of the East, against the Persians, which was most dangerous: for
SAPOR K. of Persia had invaded and taken certain provinces of the Empire. There
was also Corialus chosen Emperor by the consent of the King of Persia, and hi^
death.
then in the East, one CORIALVS, an audacious man, and of great account, who by
the consent of SAPOR K. of Persia, proclaimed himself Emperor, seizing on
Caesarea, Antioch and other cities and places in the borders; but his
prosperity soon ended: for his own people of malice and fearing VALERIANVS
coming, slew him ere the Emperor arrived: who, EVSEBIVS says, in the beginning
of his Reign was so mild, and so great a friend to the Christians, that he
suffered not any wrong or violence to be done unto them; but favored and
honored them in so high degree, that his House and Palace was as a Church and
Habitacle for them: but afterward, through the policy and persuasion of a
Magician or Nigromancer (who was an Egyptian born, an arrant cosener, and a
notable Master in sorcerie and witchcraft) he not only desisted from
favoring them, but used extreme cruelty in all places wheresoever he found any
of them; so as in his time was the ninth persecution of the Catholic Church,
whereof PAVLVS OROSIVS in his Histories makes particular mention. For which
sin it was supposed, that God plagued him with The ninth persecution of the
Christians.
the great miseries that befell him, which were; that He passing with a great
Army into the East against SAPOR King of Persia, SAPOR, who was a man of great
courage, and very mighty, came to encounter him; between whom it was supposed
there would have been a very great battle: but it happened otherwise. For, the
Emperor through the negligence, as some say, of the General of his Army who
conducted it; but, as others say, through the treason and deceit of the same
General, was set in a place without any sufficient guard: where being
compassed about by SAPOR'S men of war, all the passages were taken; in such
sort, that, being unable to Valerianus taken prisoner by Sapor King of the
Persians; and his usage.
make any resistance, he was taken prisoner by SAPOR, who was a proud
Barbarian: besides the other injuries which he used to the poor old imprisoned
Emperor, every time he took horse he made him to stoop down; and he, setting
his foot upon his neck, mounted on horseback.

In this sorrowful bondage and misery lived this poor old man six or seven
years: and his son GALIENVS took no care to procure his liberty; to the great
shame and disgrace of the Imperial Majesty.

This imprisonment of the Emperor was so much abhorred through the world, and
SAPOR was so much blamed for the excessive cruelty which he used toward him,
that not only those which were subject to the Roman Empire, but also the
barbarous Kings which were friends to it, were greatly displeased therewith: so
as presently, when they understood thereof, they wrote their Letters unto him,
that he should freely without any ransom set him at liberty: of which Letters,
TREBELLIVS POLLIO translateth one, which I will set down verbatim; whereby it
may appear, how much the power of the Romans then was by them esteemed.

BELSOLVS King of Kings, to King SAPOR, greeting. If I were assured that the
Romans A Letter from King Belsolus to Sapor King of Persia.
might at any time be wholly ouercomn, I would rejoice with thee for the
victory which thou have obtained against them; whereof thou make such vaunts,
accounting thy particular good to be profitable for us all. But, seeing that
through their fortune, or their force and virtue, that Nation is so mighty;
consider and take good heed, that the taking of an old Emperor (and that
through treachery) redound not to the ruin of thy self and thy successors:
and consider how many people and nations the Romans, of enemies, have made
subjects and vassals to their Empire; by which in former time they have been
overcome. We have heard and know that in times past the Gauls overcame them,
and that the great and mighty City of Rome was entered, yea and burned by them;
and now it is manifest, that the same Gauls are subject to the Romans. And
have not the Africans overthrown them sometimes? Yet at this day they are
their subjects, and do serve them. I will not make mention of any more ancient
and farther remote examples: only I will say, that MITHRIDATES, King of
Pontus, was Lord of all Asia; and yet in the end was overthrown by them: and
at this day all that part of Asia which he commanded, is subject to the Romans.
If thou will follow my counsel, make benefit of the occasion which is offered
thee, to obtain a perfect peace with them; which thou may do, by restoring
VALERIANVS to his people. And so I conclude, that thou have had great fortune:
whereof I am glad if thou know how to use it.

This is the contents of this Letter, and of others which he received from
other Kings; which in effect do import the same. And the Bactrians, the
Albanians, the Iberians, the Scythians of Mount Taurus, and other nations of
the East, were so much displeased with the taking of VALERIANVS, that they
would not receive the Letters wherein SAPOR wrote unto them of his victory: and
so they sent their Ambassadors to the Captains of the Romans, offering them
their aid and assistance for the delivery of the Emperor. But all auailed not
to mitigate the pride and presumption of that cruel King: for, all the time
that VALERIANVS lived in his power, he used him worse than if he had been the
basest slave in the world; and in the end (as EVSEBIVS writes) having
commanded his eyes to be pulled out, he died of age and sorrow in The death of
Valerianus.
prison. And AGATHVS (an Author of no small authority) writes, that before he
died, SAPOR caused him to be flaied alive: such was the pride and cruelty of
this barbarous King.

VALERIANVS died in the eight year after that he was chosen Emperor: and
because that the most of the time he lived in prison, the rest of his reign
they put to the account of his son GALIENVS, who was chosen Emperor at the
same time with him.

THE LIFE OF GALIENVS, ONLY OF THAT NAME, AND FOUR AND THIRTITH ROMAN
EMPEROR.
THE ARGUMENT.
VAlerianus being taken prisoner by the King of Persia, his son Galienus, in
whose company he had ruled the Empire the space of seven years, neither made
any preparation to revenge the wrong done to his father, neither took any care
to redeem him from imprisonment with money or any other means: and so seeing
himself alone in the Empire, wholly forgetting his father, leading a life no
less careless then dishonest; spending his time in banqueting, bathings,
lasciviousness, and in beholding sometimes bloody and cruel, and sometimes
pleasant and ridiculous spectacles. This Emperor made so small account of his
own honor; and was so careless of the Empire, as notwithstanding that he
understood of the rebellion of many Provinces, and that many men were made
Emperors, yet he seemed not to regard the same; alleging that he could live
well enough without them: In so much as a woman, Queen Zenobia, presumed to
make head against him, and to defend her self against his Armies. Finally,
going against Aureolus, who made himself prince of Slauonia, he was besieged
in Milane, through the conspiracy of some which aspired to the Empire; and was
slain in battle, when he had reigned eight years alone, and seven together
with his father: whose death, although it was displeasing to his soldiers* was
not much lamented by the Romans; who under his government had seen in a
manner all the whole Empire reinated, together with his own greatness.

WHen VALERIANVS was taken prisoner, his son GALIENVS was admitted for sole
and absolute Emperor; although that in his fathers time he was but AUGUSTUS. I
have already declared how offensive the imprisonment of VALERIANVS was, and how
that all the world surmised that GALIENVS would have employed all his power,
for the liberty of his father, and to have been revenged of the injury done
unto him: but he put no such matter in practice, for it was the least part of
his thought* so as it is to be presumed, and many were then of opinion, that he
was rather glad that his father was a slave to the King of Persia, then
otherwise: for by that means he was sole Lord of the Empire; which he
commanded fifteen years: seven years in the life time of his father,
although in prison; and the rest afterward. The History of which Emperors, is
the most confused and hardest to write, of all that ever I have read or treated
of for in the space of these fifteen years, there were more excellent men
which took upon them the ^me of Emperors, or were so, although tyrants; then in
three hundred years before, after that JULIUS CAESAR had opprossed the
liberty of Rome. For, in the time of GALIENVS there were thirty Emperors
chosen, and obeyed in diverse places. In the time of Galienus were thirty
Emperors in sundry parts.
Let the discreet reader then consider, that where there happened so many
accidents, which often came together, what order can be observed, but that
there will be confusion and obscurity in the History: especially considering
the brevity I am to observe; and having so little light from authors. For I
say, that although many have treated of the life of this Emperor, yet no one
has written so plain and distinctly as he ought to have done: and besides
this, in some things the one writes clean contrary to the other. Therefore I
will use my best endeavor The authors excuse.
to ^ing this obscuri^ie and confusion to light: wherewith let the Reader rest
satisfied, seeing I cannot possibly do otherwise; except I should write the
matter very much at large: which were to disorder the whole, thereby to set one
part in order. I say then, that in the reign and time of GALIENVS, there were
greater wars and calamities, then the Romame Empire had eue^ (...). ^or
VALERIANVS (as PAVLVS OROSIVS notes) having generally persecuted the Church in
all places and parts under his subjection; it pleased God, as well in his own
person, as in his ministers and officers, and in all those which therein were
confederates, to use public and notable punishment in all parts, in the time
of his son; and the greatest part thereof in his own time, living in
captivity. And notwithstanding that GALIENVS as soon as (...)alone swaied the
scepter of the Empire (as EVSEBIVS and OROSIVS testify) commanded the
persecution inflicted upon the Christians to cease, sending his letters and
edicts to all parts: yet as he did it as an Infidel, and for fear only, so
the divine justice ceased not to punish the excessive cruelties past, for a
fained present amendment. So as during the whole life time of GALIENVS, the
Empire was usurped by diverse tyrants, which were called Emperors: only Italy
and Rome continued firm to him.

And in that time also, strange Nations entered and invaded the Empire with fire
and sword; of one side the Germans came down into Italy, and passing the
Alps came as far as Rauenna: Harms done in the Empire by strange nations,
in the time of Galienus.
The Goths robbed and spoiled all Pontus, and a great part of Asia the less;
and in Europe all Graecia, Macedonia, and their confines: The Sarmates subdued
and robbed Austria and Hungary: The Germans passing through France entered
Spain, to the city of Tarragona, which they ruined. The Persians and
Parthians, already possessing Mesopotamia, seized upon the greatest part of
Syria. So as in conclusion all things went so to wrack, as all writers
affirm, that the Roman Empire had then ended and come to confusion, had not
those tyrants, which in many places rose and called themselves Emperors (some
of which were very valiant and worthy men) helped to defend and pluck the
Empire out of the hands of those strange Nations, as we will declare. And the
Emperor to whom it belonged to provide for all things, although that in the
beginning he made some good show of himself, perfourming some things as a
valiant Captain, and overcame and slew INGENVVS a wise and valiant Knight,
which rebelled and was called Emperor, being Captain and governor of Hungary
and Austria; and also fought a battle wherein he overcame the Goths, in
which victories he used incredible cruelty, so as in one city he left no man
living, of what age soever: Yet afterward he gave himself so much to vice
and sensuality, that when as the world was infested with wars and combustions,
he continued the most part in Rome, taking his pleasure among whores and
bawdes, compassed about with roses and flowers; seeking new delights;
oftentimes bathing himself; studying how he might keep figs and other
fruits green all the year; and how they might last two or three years;
having ordinarily at his table most exquisite and delicate meats, and of great
cost. And in such manner he passed his time, that nothing troubled him, neither
took he any care for the losses which daily ensued in the territories of his
Empire. It is strange, To consider, that the Roman Empire at that time was not
only molested with wars and persecutions by men, but even the very heavens
and elements did seem to conspire, and to plague it: for TREBELLIVS POLLIO
writes, that the heavens were darkened in such so^ that for many days space,
Great harms done in sundry parts of the world in the time of Galienus, by
Earthquakes and other fearful things.
they never saw the Sun; and therewithal the earth did oftentimes shake in
Rome, in all Italy, in Africa, and other countries: and with those Earthquakes,
many great buildings fell down, and slew an infinite number of people.
Principally in Asia many cities were destroyed, and the earth opened in many
places, and showed great vaults and caves; and there sprang out at them great
streams of salt water. And there were heard thundrings and rorings in the
bowels of the earth, without any thunder in the air, as is usual: whereat
many were so amazed, as they died with fear. The Sea exceeded the bownds, and
ouerflowed and drowned many cities; and many prodigious and wonderful things
happened. After this followed the most cruel pestilence that ever was heard or
written of: so as in Rome there died in one day thereof five thousand persons.
For all which accidents GALIENVS took so little care, as though there had been
no such matter. And when it was told him that the whole kingdom of Egypt
rebelled against him, he answered; And what then? Cannot we live without the
linen cloth of Egypt? Being advertised of the spoil and loss of other
provinces, he answered so scornefully, that he seemed not to care for any
thing: which was the occasion that so many tyrants made themselves Lords and
Emperors in his time. Of which it shall not be amiss to say something,
seethat we have showed the life and conditions of GALIENVS, and of his reign;
to the end that his history may be the better understood. If I should speak of
them all at large, and describe their parentage, and all their acts; it would
be an endless work: for (as I said) they were in all, thirty. But let the
reader understand, that all the accidents and occurrences cannot be set down
in order as they passed: for they were so many, and happened in so many places,
and many of them at one instant, that it would be impossible to be well
understood, if I should observe the order of the time, wherein every thing
happened: for to speak of one matter I must leave another; so as the history
would be abrupt and very confused. And therefore we will begin with those
matters which happened in the East; and when we have briefly given notice
thereof, we will pass to other parts. Wherefore let him that shall read it
understand, that many of these things came to pass at one instant; and
sometime before those which are treated of.

VALERIANVS then (as we said in the beginning) being taken prisoner, and his
son using no industry to set his father at liberty, the soldiers and
Captains which remained in the East, went dispersed and scattered with great
sorrow for the disgrace they had received; greatly offended with the carelesnes
of GALIENVS. Wherefore BALISTA, who was Prefect and General of VALERIANVS
Army, an excellent man of war, very sufficient, and diligent in making
provision for the Army, and in all other things requisite for the wars; and
another singular Captain of great experience and age, who was of greatest
estimation of any man of his time, whose name was MACRINVS, assembling the
Roman Legions and cohorts together; with the consent and good liking of them
all, they agreed to choose an Emperor, to defend and preserve the bounds of the
Empire, to recover what was lost, and to set VALERIANVS (if possible) at
liberty; seeing that GALIENVS took no care thereof. And after long
consultation between BALISTA and MACRINVS, in the end MACRINVS was chosen and
obeyed for Emperor; and with him his two sons, the one named. MACRINVS, and
Macrinus made Emperor, in the East, together with his two sons.
the other QVIETVS, were made his companions in the Empire: and he presently
made BALISTA Prefect or General of his Army. When MACRINVS saw himself an
Emperor and mighty by reason of the Armies in the East, which he speedily
drew together and put in good order; he marched with them to the confines of
Persia, and in some battles stayed their insolences by reason of their
former victories. But standing in fear of a valiant Captain whose name was
VALENS, who was Proconsul in the province of Achaia in Graecia; he sent
against him a great Army under the command of PISO, who had bin Consul, and
was a Noble and valiant gentleman, to seize on that country, and thence to
pass into Italy. When VALENS understood thereof, to the end he might be of
greater authority and power, he caused himself Valens made himself to be
chosen Emperor.
to be chosen Emperor, and took the ornaments and ensigns of the Empire:
wherewith he drew so many men unto him, that PISO was driven to retire with
his troops into Thessalia, and there was overthrown and slain by such as
VALENS sent against him; PISO having Piso slain by Valens his soldiers.
first proclaimed himself Emperor, using the same policy which his enemy
had done. But VALENS did not long enjoy this victory; for within few days
after, he himself was slain by his own soldiers. And MACRINVS, who reigned
Emperor in the East, having notice Valens slain by his own soldiers.
what had passed concerning VALENS and PISO, not contenting himself with that
which he held, determined with a great Army to go to Rome, to ruin the
Emperor GALIENVS (if he were able) and other tyrants which rebelled; leaving
behind him QVIETVS one of his sons, and with him BALISTA, with certain
troops of his best soldiers, for fear of ODENATVS, of whom we will speak
hereafter. He began his journey with five and forty thousand good men of
war: and marching over land through Asia the less, passing the streights of
Constantinople, he entered into Thracia. But before all this, there arose
another tyrant in Slauonia and Dalmatia, whose name was AVREOLVS, and was
commander of those men of war, which for the Empire were in those quarters,
who (as some say) against his will, was constrained by his soldiers to take
upon him the state and ensigns of the Empire. So as it appears, Aureolus
Emperor in Dalmalia.
that in that small time, every one held himself sufficient to be an Emperor;
and that Army which made none, was held to be of little worth and of no
reputation: but truly the world paid them their due; for none of them died of
their natural death, and most of them were slain by those which chose them.
MACRINVS being to pass with his Army through those countries which were in
subjection to AVREOLVS; as both of them sought to be sovereign Lords, they
fell at variance, and MACRINVS fought a battle with AVREOLVS his forces, A
battle between Macrinus and Aureolus, wherein Macrinus was slain.
whereof an excellent man called DOMICIANVS was General: wherein MACRINVS and
his son were overcome and slain, there ending their high dessignes and great
power: But before he fought this battle (in his way passing through the
province of Achaia) he overthrew the Goths, who had made great spoil and
slaughter in the lands of the Empire: whereupon they retired, and a little
withdrew themselves. And of MACRINVS his soldiers which escaped from the
battle, 30000. went over to AVREOLVS; and so where AVREOLVS thought he should
have lost, from thence arose his gain. Which news when the lawful Emperor
GALIENVS understood in Rome, finding himself too weak to subdue AVREOLVS, he
made with him a kind of league and peace, thereby to end the wars which he
had begun A peate made by Galienus with Aureolus.
against POSTHVMVS, another great Captain who rebelled in France, and was
called Emperor: of whom (although this be his place) we will speak hereafter,
first to make an end of Posthumus Emperor in France.
the troubles in the East, notwithstanding that in all parts of the Empire
there were tyrants; neither can we make an end of AVREOLVS, because he outliued
GALIENVS, and died in the time of his successor CLAUDIUS. I say then, that in
the East there was an excellent man, whose name was ODENATVS, who was Prince
and Captain of a certain people called Palmerini, inhabiting a province in
Syria, who seeing all things out of order (as all the rest did) sought to make
himself absolute, and in the beginning (as writes TREBELLIVS POLLIO) had the
title of a King: but afterward things succeding prosperously, he took upon
him the name and state of an Emperor, imparting the title and dignity with
HEROD the eldest of three sons which he had by his first wife. This his
tyranny was both honorable and Odenatus takes the name of Emperor.
profitable to the Roman Empire: for he performed many notable exploits
against SAPOR King of Persia, who held VALERIANVS prisoner: so as saving the
setting of his person at liberty (for that could not be done) in all the rest
he gat sufficient satisfaction for that which was lost, and recovered what
SAPOR had usurped. For, raising many troops of excellent good soldiers, he
gave him many battles, in which he gat the victory, recovered all
Mesopotamia, and the noble cities of Nisibe and Carras, and compelled King
SAPOR to fly (having first The prowess of Odenatus.
overthrown him) and taking his wives, his treasure and riches, he marched to
the city of Tesiphonte, and had other great adventures and victories. But for
as much as his chiefest purpose was against MACRINVS and his sons, he sent a
great present of the jewels and prisoners which he had taken from the Persians,
to the Emperor GALIENVS: and GALIENVS was so inconstant and so base minded, as
he not only accepted the presents, but confirmed his election, giving him the
name of AVOVSTVS and his companion in the Empire, and he triumphed in Rome for
the victory which the other had obtained in Asia. While as ODENATVS gat these
Odenatus accepted by Galienus for his companion in the Empire.
victories in the East, other great multitudes of Goths (besides those which
were already entered by Thracia into Graecia and into Europe) came down into
Asia the less, and so in Bithynia, burning and spoiling the countries.

When ODENATVS understood of the death of MACRINVS and of his son, (as I have
declared) he presently resolved to march against QVIETVS, who was his other
son, whom he had left in the East with BALISTA the Prefect of his Army, when
he was proclaimed Emperor. And this journey proving so prosperous to ODENATVS
as the rest had done, with little difficulty he gat QVIETVS into his power, and
caused him to be slain, and afterward did the like to BALISTA. And although
that some say, BALISTA was consenting to the death of QVIETVS, and that
afterward he attempted to make himself Emperor; yet all agree that he was put
to death by ODENATVS: and in this manner remained he without any contradiction
Lord of all the Provinces of the East, and valiantly warred against the
Persians. He had two other sons, the one called HERENNIANVS, and the other
TIMOLAVS by his second wife ZENOBIA, the most manly and valiant woman that ever
was in the World.

ODENATVS living in this prosperity feared of all the Princes of the world, it
happened that a cosen germane of his, whose name was MEONIVS, practiced his
death in hope to have had the Empire of the East after him, and used such
means that ODENATVS and HEROD, Odenatus and his eldest son brought to their
end through the treason of his cosen germane Meonius.
his eldest son (who by his fathers order was also called Emperor) were both
found dead: and MEONIVS the traitor and murderer, as he was wickedlie moved to
kill ODENATVS; so it pleased God to permit him to be slain in the like manner,
who was within few days after put to death by the same soldiers which holp
him to execute his treason, being a man which no way deserved the Empire,
except by being of kin to ODENATVS: for he was a most vile and wicked man.
ZENOBIA, ODENATVS wife, remaining with her two young sons a widow (seeming
rather to have need of a tutor and governor, then to be able to rule and
govern others) with courage and judgment more then manly began to rule, and
carried herself therein with such wisdom and valor, as is incredible: and to
the great disgrace The valor of Zenobia.
of GALIENVS in his life time, and of CLAUDIUS his successor, she possessed the
Empire of the East many years, on the one side making war against the
Persians, and on the other defending herself against the Roman Emperors. The
virtues and noble acts of this woman were so many, that I would I had longer
time to describe them: but because they require a particular history, we will
with our wonted pase hold on our way; wherein of force we must return to meet
with her, because that she lived in her prosperity until the time of the
Emperor AVRELIANVS, of whom we are to treat hereafter, where we will speak
of her fall and end, if God permit. But to the end that the excellencies and
virtues of this woman may be the The stature and beauty of Zenobia.
better known, seeing we recite not her acts, I say first that ZENOBIA was of
an excellent good constitution of body, and was exceedingly fair and
beautiful, not very white, but somewhat brown. Her eyes were great and black,
very clear and bright, and in all parts of her body she was proportionable.
And as she was very beautiful and amiable, so had she an honest countenance,
and had such white and bright teeth, that they rather resembled pearls then
teeth. Her voice was clear, but sounding deep more like a man then a woman.
Herewith she was most honest and continent, and would neuerly with her husband
after that she was conceived The chastity of Zenobia. Her learning.
with child; neither twice, until that by natural signs she knew whether
she had conceived or no. She was very wise, and learned, and spoke the Latin,
Greek, and Egyptian tongues perfectly, and was very liberal and temperate in
all things; somewhat severe, and yet Her moderation in her diet.
pitiful. In her diet she was most temperate: but yet when she invited any
guests, she would a little exceed, more to please others, then for any
natural desire. She was served very ceremoniouslie, and with great honor,
after the custom of the Kings of Persia.

When she made any speech to her soldiers, or sat in council among them, she
came armed Zenobia delighted (...)hunting.
with a caske upon her head, and rode in the like manner. She delighted much in
hunting, and did other things showing strength and courage, as though she had
bin a valiant and gallant Knight. She vaunted much that she descended from
CLEOPATRA, and from the PROLOMYES, Kings of Egypt; and she said, that she also
descended by another line from great SEMIRAMIS Queen of Babylon. By means of
this her prowess and valor, she held the Empire of the East, and was calldd
AUGUSTA, the space of many years. As for her two sons HERENNIANVS and
TIMOLAVS, I find not written what their end was, but only that they had the
habit and ensigns of Emperors, and are reckoned in the number of the tyrants
of those Herennianus and Timolaus called Emperors.
times. TREBELLIVS POLLIO writes, that the Emperor AVRELIANVS caused them to
be slain. Others affirm, they died of their natural death. When as the
Emperor GALIENVS (being in Rome) understood of the death of ODENATVS, thinking
to make a better hand against ZENOBIA, he commanded soldiers to be levied, and
to be sent into the East Heraclianus overthrown by Zenobias forces.
against her and the Persians, and sent with them a Captain whose name was
HERACLIANVS; who with his troops was overthrown by ZENOBIAS forces. The
Goths also in those times made another incursion into Asia the less, sailing
through the sea called Mare Euxinum, and were overcome by ATHENVS and
CLEOPHANVS, Captains sent by GALIENVS: but yet for all that, they made great
spoil in those coasts, and were also again overcome by sea, by another
Captain called VENERIANVS; and so that nation did much harm in the confines
of the Empire, although that sometime they were overthrown. About this time
there was in the kingdom of Egypt another Captain of certain companies of
Romans, whose name was EMILIANVS, who after some tumults which happened there
did as he saw others do, and proclaimed himself Emperor, and with great
courage and audacitie seized on that most ancient kingdom. But as these
buildings had but weak foundations, so small force and a little foul weather
overthrew them, which was in this manner. GALIENVS (notwithstanding that he was
careless and negligent) sent from Rome against him a Captain called
THEODATVS; who took such a course, that, EMILIANVS friends failing him, he was
apprehended by THEODATVS, and afterward put to death in prison.

I presume, that the Reader will imagine me to be very tedious in writing the
life of this Emperor, The Authors excuse.
seeing he was so remiss and negligent; having briefly written the lives of
others which were good and excellent. But, if he shall consider, that in this
History are comprehended the lives of thirty Tyrants (whereof many did better
deserve to have been Emperors, than GALIENVS) he shall have greater reason to
accuse me of breuity, than of being too tedious. But, to avoid the breach of
order, I will be as brief as possibly I may.

While matters passed in the East in this manner, the other Provinces of the
Empire were neither in rest nor peace: but rather there was not any of them
wherein were not wars, battles, and tyrants which called themselves Emperors;
the right Emperor GALIENVS solacing himself in Rome, contented with Italy,
which only obeyed him in peace. The rest sometimes obeyed him, and sometimes
they denied him their obedience: and he, taking no care to find any redress,
sent only certain Captains which did something; whereof we will say somewhat.
In this general combustion Africa forbear not to make some alteration,
although not so much as other Provinces did: for, at that time there was for
Captain-generall thereof, a Roman Knight called FABIVS POMPONIANVS; and for
Proconsul and Gouerner, another, whose name was VIVVS PASSIENVS; who, for that
they would have an Emperor of their own making, agreed to choose and nominate
a Tribune whose name was CELSVS, a man much esteemed and commended as well for
his excellent good carriage, as for his virtue Celsus made Emperor in Africa,
and put to death by a woman.
and justice, and also for his personage: for, he was exceeding tall of
stature, and of an excellent good constitution. Having effected their purpose,
the poor man's majesty lasted but seven days: for, he was put to death by the
order of a woman dwelling in those Countries, who was a kniswoman to the
Emperor GALIENVS, whose name was GALIENA: and, after he was dead, they showed
extreme cruelty to his body. After whom, I find not that any man rebelled
against GALIENVS in Africa: yet great and many scandals, and much trouble,
ensued in that Country.

While these things passed in the places aforenamed, in Hungary, and the
marches thereof, there was a Captain of the Armies in Dalmatia and Slauonia,
called REGILIANVS, which rebelled; and, with the consent and good will of the
Inhabitants of those Provinces, he was proclaimed Regilianus called Emperor in
Hungary and Dalmatia.
Emperor: for, they were greatly incensed against GALIENVS for the cruelties by
him used in those Countries, when he overcame EVGENIVS; who in the beginning
(we say) had rebelled in that Country, and been overthrown and slain by
GALIENVS. Truly, it is a troublesome piece of work, To make relation of all
the Tyrants; and it is as strange a thing to consider, that of all the Captains
that VALERIANVS, father to GALIENVS, made, there was not any one of them but in
the time of GALIENVS was called Emperor; wherein they showed little loyalty to
their Country and their Lord: but it was grown to a custom so to do; so as
they seemed to have right of inheritance. Nevertheless, it argued the great
judgment of VALERIANVS, in choosing for his Captains men of so great courage
and valor. There were also, besides these Captains, others, who in this
confusion of the Empire were called Emperors: among which was one TITUS a
worthy man, who in the time of MAXIMINVS had been Tribune; but he continued
with this title but six months: for, the same soldiers Titus made Emperor by
his soldiers, and slain by the same
which had elected him, slew him. And in the same manner began and ended
CENSORINVS; a man which had been Consul, and had held other offices and
dignities. And another Captain, called TREBELLIANVS, was chosen and proclaimed
Emperor by the Ysauri, Censorinus began and ended in the same manner.
which are a people inhabiting the mountains, bordering upon Cilicia in Asia
the less; who many times governed those Quarters: against whom, GALIENVS sent
a Captain called GAVSISOLEVS, born in Egypt. Between which two was fought a
terrible battle; wherein TREBELLIANVS was overthrown and slain. Yet, for all
this, the Ysauri continued not in peace; but rebelled many times afterward,
more for that their Country was of hard access, than for the valor or virtue
of the Inhabitants. And, to make a conclusion, let us write of those which in
France, and the marches thereof, were called Emperors, from the time of the
imprisonment of VALERIANVS, until the death of his son GALIENVS: which of
purpose I have left till the last, because in those wars GALIENVS employed
himself, and finally therein ended his days.

There was for Captain-generall of the Armies in the Provinces of France, an
excellent and valiant man, whose name was POSTHVMVS, of whom (speaking of the
Tyrant AVREOLVS) we made mention; whom VALERIANVS did highly honor and
esteem: and for that cause his son GALLIENVS held him in great reputation,
and as soon as he came to the Empire, he sent him his son SALONINVS, whom
he entitled CAESAR, to be brought up and instructed by him: But afterward
seeing the neglect and ill government of his father GALIENVS (forgetting the
loyalty which he ought to his sovereign Lord) putting the son to death, he
sought to get the Empire for himself. Yet others write, that he was provoked
and compelled by the inhabitants of that Country (which hated GALIENVS) to
accept the name of Emperor; and that they slew SALONINVS, scorning to have a
boy for their Lord. But howsoever it was, POSTHVMVS with great courage and
discretion Saloninus son of Galienus put to death by Posthumus who also was
called Emperor.
made himself Lord of all France; and so governed the same for the space of
seven years, defending it valiantly, and obtaining many great victories
against the Barbarians and northern nations, which continually invaded it and
made in cursions.

Against POSTHVMVS, GALIENVS levied an Army, for that he was so near to
Italy: and notwithstanding that he was vicious and careless, yet he wanted
^ot sufficient courage for the wars; if he would have followed them, as he
did his pleasures and ease. He went against POSTHVMVS, having with him for
General of his Army, a Noble man called THEODOTVS; and also another called
CLAUDIUS, who was a man of great probitie and virtue, and was afterward
Emperor. Being come before a City wherein POSTHVMVS was, the Frenchmen did
not only defend him, and the City, showing great courage and love; but the
Emperor GALIENVS in a skirmish was wounded with an Arrow, by means whereof he
was constrained to raise his siege. And holding this for a very doubtful
war, he made peace with AVREOLVS, who at that time was called Emperor in
Slauonia. But that was not sufficient to defeat POSTHVMVS: for he was supported
by VICTORINVS, who was an excellent Captain, and a young man, whom POSTHVMVS
made his companion in his Empire; with whose aid and diligence (although that
most commonly his side was overthrown) he defended himself and prolonged the
wars many days; having sometimes prosperous and sometimes adnerse fortune.

GALIENVS returning to Rome, as if he had left all in peace, entered in great
triumph, giving himself over to his old course of life and accustomed
pleasures; whither daily news were brought unto him (besides the strange
Nations which molested the Empire) of captains and other notable men which
entitled themselves Emperors: whereof his wickedness was the occasion, being
hated and scorned for his little care and stupiditie; which are things which
make wicked men audacious; and give good men hope and means to seek redress.

POSTHVMVS living all this time (as I said) in great prosperity, together with
his son of his own name whom he entitled CAESAR, and afterward Emperor,
and his companion in his Empire; he governed with great justice and severity.
But the Frenchmen, desirous of innouations, rebelled against him and chose for
Emperor a Captain whose name was LOLIANVS, The French rebelled against
Posthumus, and in his place chose Lolianus. Posthumus and his son slain in
the war against Lolianus
a man of good sort, very valiant and of great experience: and these two,
warring one against the other, POSTHVMVS and his son were slain by him and
them; and so he was paid for the treason which he committed against GALIENVS.
And LOLIANVS remaining Emperor in those parts, notwithstanding that he was very
valiant and of great power, yet he could never attain to that authority which
POSTHVMVS had; as well for that he was not chosen by common consent, as for
that VICTORINVS, whom (as we have said) POSTHVMVS proclaimed Emperor and his
companion, held a great part of the country and was called Emperor. This
VICTORINVS was a woman's son, whose name was VICTORIA or VICTORINA; which was
so valiant and manly, and so desirous to reign, that she was therefore called
mother of Armies, and VICEORINVS was altogether ruled by her counsel; and she
afterward after the death of her son, took upon her to make an Emperor of
her choosing: so great was her mind and policy.

VICTORINVS with the favor and reputation of his mother, made resistance
against LOLIANVS the new Emperor, which slew POSTHVMVS, so as VICTORIANVS
obtained a victory against LOLIANVS and slew him; and remained sole Lord,
together with his mother whom he called AVOVSTA. To say the truth, VICTORIANVS
was an excellent and valiant Prince; yet luxurious, and therefore reigned but a
little: for by the treason of a soldier (from whom he had taken his wife) he
was slain in the City of Agrippina, now called Colleine in Germany: which
when his mother understood, with the aid and assistance of some of her friends
she proclaimed her nephew VICTORINVS Emperor, who was the same VICTORINVS
son. But the fury of the men of war was such, as they presently slew the
son as they had done the father. Yet for all this, VICTORINA gave not over
her desire to rule and command: for by the means of her friends and
favorites* she persuaded TETRICVS, a Senator of Rome, who had a certain
government in France, to proclaim himself Emperor, and his son CAESAR;
which he did, and proved an exeellent and valiant Prince, and made Tetricu^
chosen Emperor by the means of Victorina.
himself Lord of all France, and of the greatest part of Spain, obtaining
some victories against the Northerly nations: whose reign continued long, even
until the time of AVRELIANVS. The right Emperor GALIENVS enjoyed Rome and all
Italy; which never forsook him: and the other tyrants (by turns) the one
destroyed the other* or else were slain by their own soldiers. I guess that
I have very near treated of all the tyrants, except of one whose name was
SATVRNINVS, and of another called MARIUS. Of SATVRNINVS I say, that the
soldiers Saturninus and Marius called Emperors, the one was slain presently,
and the other reigned (...)days.
which chose him, presently bereaved him of his life: and MARIUS his Empire
lasted but seven days.

Through all parts and provinces of the Empire there were committed infinite
murders, robberies, violences, insolences, and all kind of cruelties,
tyrannies and treasons, with famine, pestilence, and other miseries and
calamities, seldom heard of, but in the time of this GALIENVS; and the
greatest part thereof caused through his vice, cruelty, and negligence: and so
it pleased God that he had the like end as other evil Emperors had; which
was complotted in this manner. A great Captain (whereof the wars produce
abundance) called MARTIANVS, compounding with another called HERACLIANVS, and
one other whose name was A conspiracy against Galienus.
CERONIVS, determined to kill GALIENVS, to the end that one of them might have
the Empire; either of them pretending that they did it for the general good of
the Empire. And having laid their plot, they presently put it in execution: for
it happened that GALIENVS went from Rome with a great Army against AVREOLVS,
who (as we have said) was called Emperor: and they two had been companions in
the Empire. But afterward falling at variance, AVREOLVS took the city of
Milan; and GALIENVS having besieged it, MARTIANVS and the other traitors, which
had agreed with AVREOLVS, fained that the said AVREOLVS was making a salie, and
came to charge that place where GALIENVS was: whereupon he with greater haste
then good speed, went from his lodging smally accompanied; but before that the
rest of the Army could come together, he was slain by those which came with
him, together with a brother of his, whose name was VALERIANVS. And so GALIENVS
Galienus and his brother Valerianus slain.
ended both his life and reign, when as the Empire was little less then rent
in pieces and usurped by foreign nations: for the Goths and Scythians held a
great part of Thracia, and of Macedonia in Europe, and some provinces in Asia.
ZENOBIA reigned and ruled all in the East: and in France and part of Germany,
TETRICVS and VICTORINVS: and in Slauonia and Illyricum, AVREOLVS, who was
besieged in Milan; and so all the rest lived, part under the obedience of
GALIENVS, and part under tyrants. The soldiers of his Army were greatly
offended with his death: for they hoped to have had the sacking and spoil of
that city; so as MARTIANVS and his companions were driven to satisfy them
with ready money: but none of those conspirators could attain to the desired
title of Emperor. This happened in the year of our Savior JESUS CHRIST 271,
after EVSEBIVS, in the fifteenth year of the reign of GALIENVS.

THE LIFE OF CLAUDIUS THE SECOND, AND FIVE AND THIRTITH EMPEROR of ROME.
IAM now freed from no small labor, having finished howsoever the life of
GALIENVS; whose history is confused and out of order, and by authors written
obscurely, as it appears: which being ended, I come now to relate the life of
CLAUDIUS the second, who was one of the most virtuous and valiant Princes that
ever was in the world.

As soon as the Emperor GALIENVS was dead, the Soldiers of his Army were so
displeased, as neither MARTIANVS nor any of those which conspired with him in
his treason, could or durst take upon him the name of Emperor; but rather by
the common consent of al men, CLAUDIUS who came thither with GALIENVS, one of
the most excellent Captains of them all, as well for his bounty and virtues,
as for the worthiness of his person, and the great and notable services which
he had done in former times, was chosen Emperor. It cannot distinctly be set
down of what lineage or country he was: for some affirm, that he was born in
Dalmatia; and was descended of an ancient family: others say, that he was of
Dardania, and descended from the blood of the Trojans: and some (as AURELIUS
VICTOR says) affirmed, that he was the son of the Emperor GORDIANVS. He was
a very tall man of person, his eyes were clear and bright, and he had a The
stature and strength of Claudius.
great and full face, and was very strong and of marvelous ^orce: so as in
wrestling and other exercises, which young men did use, he ever wanne the
prize; he was also virtuous, and had excellent good parts. He was very chaste
and continent, temperate, just and upright, both before that he was Emperor,
and in the time of his reign. He dearly loved his friends and kinsmen, and
greatly honored strangers. He hated the evil, and severely punished them; and
was an extreme enemy to unjust Judges. He made excellent laws and
ordinances, and in very short time reformed the Commonwealth: so as when he
died, it seemed to be another world. Before that he was Emperor, he did many
noble feats of Arms in the service of GALIENVS, against POSTHVMVS in France,
and against the Goths in many parts, and likewise in other wars. Wherefore he
was worthily chosen by all men to the dignity of the Empire. For which
occasion, as soon as his election was known in Rome, the joy was great which
was conceived thereat by all estates: and they confirmed his election, with
great applauses and bessings of the Senate.

When CLAUDIUS was invested in the Empire, he governed the same with so great
wisdom and courage, as in a good Prince was requisite. The first enterprise
he had being Emperor, was against AVREOLVS, who (as we said) was in Milan.
Who, vnderstanof the death of GALIENVS, fortified himself in such sort, as he
made account to have remained sole and absolute Emperor. But CLAUDIUS, having
reinforced his Army, fought many battles with him; amongst which, in one
which was very famous, he obtained the victory The victory of Claudius
against Aureolus.
worthily, fighting therein most valiantly. Whereupon AVREOLVS retired into
Milan, and from thence sought to come to some composition with CLAUDIUS, as he
had done with GALIENVS: but CLAUDIUS, as a virtuous and victorious Prince,
would not hear of any agreement with a tyrant; but answered, That such demands
might well have been made to GALIENVS, who could have endured AVREOLVS his
conditions, and stood in fear of him: but of him he was not to expect any
unjust or unlawful matter. AVREOLVS was afterward slain, as some say, by his
own soldiers; and as others say, by CLAUDIUS his commandment, fighting at
the foot of a bridge. But wheresoever, CLAUDIUS became Lord The death of
Aureolus.
of his Army, and of all the countries which he held: and going with this
victory to Rome, he was there received with great tiumph and feasting; where
he settled the affairs of the Empire in such sort, as could not be bettered:
he did nothing without the consent of the Senate. And his goodness coming to be
known, he was obeyed in all parts of the Empire, saving in such as were
usurped by tyrants and barbarous nations. And as all his study and care was,
how he might restore the Empire to her former liberty, and to recover what was
lost, exposing his person to all kinds of dangers; it was debated in the
Senate, and that very doubtfully and with diverse opinions, what war was first
to be undertaken, and whether he should go against THTRICVS and VICTORINA,
which held France and Spain; or into the East against ZENOBIA; or else against
the Goths and other nations, which also usurped and infested sundry parts of
the Empire.

But the good Emperor CLAUDIUS soon resolved them of that doubt, saying; That
the first war that he would undertake should be against the Goths, and other
barbarous Nations, for they were enemies to the Commonwealth; but as for the
Tyrants they were enemies to him only: wherefore, he was bound to revenge a
public wrong before a private injury. This his resolution being approved by
the Senate and people of Rome, he with all possible After su^drie arguments
Claudius prepared himself to go against the Goths.
diligence raised the greatest Army that ever was levied by any Emperor for
such a war; and truly he could not well have had any less, considering the
present necessity: for the Goths (as IORNANDES in the acts of the Goths, and
PAVLVS OROSIVS, and others do write) had for the space of fifteen years
usurped many parts of the Empire, and had destroyed many Cities; amongst which
some were very great, and of special note. And notwithstanding that by
MACRINVS, and by CORNELIUS AVITVS, and in one place by the same CLAUDIUS in the
time of GALIENVS, they had been sometimes defeated and overthrown; yet
nevertheless they still held all Thracia, and in a manner all Macedonia and
other provinces.

At such time as CLAUDIUS resolved to make war against the Goths, they
through their greedy desire of spoil and booty, and for revenge of some
battles which they had lost, believing that CLAUDIUS would be sufficiently
busied in warring against TETRICV^ and other Tyrants, moved many northerly
people and Nations to come against the Romans. Whereupon they joined
themselves with the Heruli, Trutangi, Virtungi, and other Nations, New
commotions made by the Goths.
exceeding, in all, the number of three hundred thousand fighting men besides
servants and disarmed people: and taking their way through Hungary, and down
the Danubie, they fraighted two thousand Barks and Ships with men and
munition. Some are of opinion (as I say) that this Fleet came down the
Danubie; and others affirm, that this was a Fleet that the Goths had by Sea:
ancient Authors wrote it so confusedly, as I continue of my first opinion, that
the Goths were never mighty by Sea, neither then, nor at any time before. In
conclusion, they brought so many men, and so great store of Arms and victuals,
as they made the whole Empire to quake for fear; only the invincible Emperor
was not dismayed, but with a gallant Army marched against them: and being ready
to come to blows with them, he wrote a brief Letter to the Senate, wherein he
showed the great difficulty and danger wherein he was; and yet wanted not
courage to assault his enemies, the effect whereof was this:

Fathers conscript, I do give you to understand, and hold it for certain, that
into the Claudius his Letter to the Senate of Rome.
bowndes of the Roman Empire are entered three hundred and twenty thousand men
of war; I go to fight with them; if I overcome them, it is reason that you
give me such thanks and reward as such a deed shall deserve. But if it happen
otherwise, consider I pray you that I fight after that. GALI^NVS has reigned,
the commonwealth being rent in pieces, and almost ruinate, and that I shall
fight after the tyrannies and rebellions of EVGENIVS, REGILIANVS, LOLIANVS,
POSTHVMVS, CELSVS, and many others, which in contempt of GALIENVS rebelled
against their country and commonwealth. And we may welll say that we now have
neither whole sword nor lance: for France and Spain which are the sinews and
strength of the Empire, are usurped by TETRICVS, and the crossebowes and
archers (although it be a shame to speak it) ZENOBIA has them all: so as
having such want of all things necessary, whatsoever small matter shall be by
us performed, is to be reputed great.

Notwithstanding all these difficulties, CLAUDIUS led with him an excellent and
well governed Army: and by his wisdom and good direction, coming to a
battle, the Goths A most noble victory obtained by Claudius against the
Goths.
were overthrown, and an incredible slaughter made of them. This was one of
the most noble victories that ever was gotten, wherein there was a great number
of enemies slain and taken prisoners, and great abundance of spoil taken by
the soldiers: Insomuch as the same CLAUDIUS in a letter (extant to this day)
sent by him to JUNIUS ^ROCHVS, writes, that he had slain, taken, and put to
flight three hundred thousand men, and taken two thousand ships: so as the
houses were filled (almost to the tops) with swords, lances, shields and
targets of the subdued: and the banks of rivers, the seashore and the fields
were full of bones, and the ways covered with the dead carcases of the
enemies. For this victory there was conceived great joy in Rome: and for that
cause they made many vows and supplications to their gods. In this battle
were taken many barbarous Kings, and other men of great account; and there were
so many prisoners, as there was neither province nor city wherein were not
many slaves of that nation.

After this victory in Thracia near to Constantinople, and in Macedonia near
to the city of Thessalonica, CLAUDIUS his Captains fought sundry battles
with the Goths which were possessed of those cities: in all which, through his
good fortune, his enemies were overcome, in such sort, as he restored to the
Roman Empire all that which they had usurped; so as the Goths were wholly
driven out, and in long time after durst not hold up their heads. Likewise this
most valiant Prince (as EVTROPIVS and AURELIUS VICTOR report) had another
Claudius. his victory against the Germans.
very notable victory against the Germans, near to a Lake called Venacus (now
Garda) the enemy being little less then two hundred thousand strong: so as
having freed the Empire from strangers, and meaning to have gone against
TETRICVS and ZENOBIA, or against some other tyrants remaining, it happened that
the good Emperor fell sick in such sort, that (as TREBELLIVS POLLIO says)
within few days after he died of his natural death; a thing The death of
Claudius.
which I most desire to see in an Emperor, which seldom happens but in such
as are good and just, as this Emperor was. When he died he ^ad reigned only
two years, and for his death (except TETRICVS and ZENO^IA) all were very sorry:
which happened in the year of our Lord 27^. and by a decree made by the
Senate, he was horoured with all kind of honor, and placed in the number of the
gods. His statue made of gold was set up in the Capitol, and his target of
gold was set in the Senate. Truly they did in with great reason: for
considering his high attempes in the beginning, without all doubt if it had
pleased God to have given him longer life, CLAUDIUS had wholly defeated all the
tyrants of the Empire, and had again set it in perfect liberty.

THE LIFE OF THE EMPEROVR QVINTILIVS, ONLY OF THAT NAME, AND SIX AND THIRTITH
EMPEROR OF ROME.
THE Emperor CLAUDIUS had a brother whose name was QVINTILIVS: who as he was
his brother by nature; so was he in behavior, condition, and virtue* for he
was very wise, and as expert in the wars as in civil government: by reason
whereof he was much esteemed and beloved, and was left with certain Legions to
guard Italy, when his brother went to the wars against the Goths. The death
of CLAUDIUS being published, the little Army which QVINTILIVS commanded, moved
thereto by his deserts and virtues, chose him Emperor; and his election was
approved by the Senate of Rome being advertised thereof, and they gave him the
name of AUGUSTUS, after EVTROPIVS: and having accepted the Empire, and
beginning to make a good show of his valor, having reigned only seventeen
days, news was brought him that the victorious army which his brother had
with him, as soon as he was dead had made choice of a Noble man called
AVRELIANVS for Emperor* of whom we will presently discourse. Wherefore
QVINTILIVS bring out of hope to be able to make his party good against him, as
well for that he was a man of great valor and courage, as for that his Army
was the whole power of the Roman Empire, desiring to die in his estate rather
then to live deprived thereof, having first ^ounded the will of his soldiers,
and finding no hope in them, he caused his veins The death of Quintilius.
to be opened, and so died voluntarily bleeding, having reigned as some say,
twenty days; and as others say, but seventeen.

THE LIFE OF AVRELIANVS, ONLY OF THAT NAME, AND SEVEN AND THIRTITH EMPEROR of
ROME.
AFter QVINTILIVS, AVRELIANVS succeeded in the Empire; or to say better, after
CLAUDIUS: for as soon CLAUDIUS was dead, in the same manner as the Army in
Italy chose QVINTILIVS, the other great Army which CLAUDIUS led, chose
AVRELIANVS, and he remained Emperor; and was one of the most mighty that ever
reigned in Rome; and is by Historiographers compared in his feats of Arms
with the two greatest and best Captains of the world, which were ALEXANDER the
Great, and JULIUS CAESAR, for the great victories which he obtained in the
small time of his reign, and the Provinces which he subdued with incredible
celeritie, marching from one to another, as we will briefly declare; although
that in his condition he was neither equal to them, neither did he any way
imitate them; chiefly, he did much differ from CAESAR in clemency, for he was
cruel and bloody: wherefore it was said of him, that he was necessary for
the Empire, but yet he was ill beloved by the greatest part. Others said, that
AVRELIANVS was fit to be a Captain, but not to be an Emperor; and so he is
neither accounted among the good Princes, nor amongst the evil: for, of the
one side, he set the Empire at liberty, by destroying all the tyrants; and of
the other, he used much cruelty. Some say, that he was borne in Dacia; and
others say, in Misia, the truth whereof is uncertain: and so FLAVIVS VOPISCVS,
who does most copiously and particularly write his life, leaves it in doubt;
but all agree that he was of a mean family, and of poor parentage. He was
tall of stature, and of great strength, and had a gracious and pleasing
countenance; and with his fair aspect he seemed to be a perfect man. In his
diet he did somewhat exceed ordinary. From his infancy The disposition of
Aurelianus.
he was inclined to the wars and military discipline; and in observing it,
and making it to be observed, he was most severe. He was of great courage and
singular strength, and exceedingly desirous to come to blows with his enemies.
Being a private soldier, he ever affected battles, assaults, skirmishes and
encounters: and for that there was another in the Army whose name was also
AVRELIANVS; to distinguish the one from the other, they called this, AVRELIANVS
with his hand upon his sword: for upon all occasions he was in a readiness
with pike or sword in his hand, desiring to be doing. With which readiness and
valor he made himself famous wheresoever he came, and performed notable
matters in his own person. In so much that THEOCLIVS and FLAVIVS VOPISCVS
report of him, that in the wars The valor of Aurelianus.
of Sarmatia he happened in one day to kill forty of his enemies with his own
hands, and at several times above nine hundred men: which made him so much
esteemed among the Romans, as in their dancings which they used in those
times, among certain sonnets and catches sung by the dancer, they used to
pronounce this verse:

A thousand and a thousand,
one alone has killed a thousand.
A thousand years and a thousand
live he, alone which killed a thousand.
He did other things, which although they seem to be but mean and of small
importance, yet they demonstrate the valor and fortitude of this man; whereby
he was preferred to great offices and commands in the wars. He was many times
Captain and Tribune, and above forty times was Lieutenant to other Captains
and Tribunes. In which offices he did so severely punish soldiers for their
insolences, and did so strictly observe the discipline of the wars, that he
was much feared of them: and did likewise many notable things in battles and
skirmishes; and principally in the wars which his predecessor CLAUDIUS had
with the Goths, he won more honor then any other Captain did; he being
General of the horse.

Which his doings were the occasion, that, CLAUDIUS being dead, he was by the
general consent of the whole Army chosen and made Emperor. And, QVINTILIVS
being dead, who was obeyed in Rome, the Senate and people of Rome approved his
election, and held him for Emperor. Having accepted the Empire, without any
longer stay he marched with his victorious Army against the Suevians and
Sarmates, northerly nations, which had invaded the bounds of the Empire. With
whom he came to a battle, and obtained a most honorable victory: but therein
befell him one mishap, whereof many inconveniences ensued; which was, that
Being busied in this war, the Marcomanni, and other most fierce Nations of
Germany, came down into Italy, and made great spoil and slaughter in that
part which is now called Lombardie, and in the marches of Milan; whereof they
were in so great fear in Rome, as they thought they should have been wholly
lost: which put all into combustion, every man speaking ill of AVRELIANVS. But,
when as he heard the news, he was greatly grieved, and came with all speed to
the rescue of Italy. And this was so dangerous a war, that near unto Placentia
there wanted but a little, that the Emperor had not been wholly overthrown:
for, joining battle with their whole powers on either side, they fought a
whole day from Sun to Sun; and AVRELIANVS lost in that Fight the greatest part
of all his troops: so cruel was the battle. But he afterward reinforcing
his Army (in three notable battles having the victory) ended the war,
destroying the whole Army of the Marcomanni; and from thence went to Rome,
much displeased with those which had murmured and spoken ill of him: amongst
which were some that had practiced against him. And whereas he was very cruel
(notwithstanding that he was received with great feasting and solemnity) he
used so cruel punishment for light offenses, and Cruelty used in Rome by
Autelianus, and the occasion thereof.
of so small importance, that any gentle or merciful Prince would have
dissembled, and made no reckoning thereof. But he would not do so; but, to the
contrary, put many cruelly to death: for which cause he came to be extremely
feared, and therefore generally hated. He enlarged the walls of Rome, and
fortified the same, repairing that which was decayed; which was not lawful
Aurelianus enlarged the walls of Rome.
for any Emperor to do, but for such as had enlarged the Provinces and Limits
of the Roman Empire: for, by that title, AUGUSTUS CAESAR, TRAIAN, and also
NERO, enlarged the walls.

Having settled all matters in Rome (his chief delight consisting in Arms) he
could stay but few days there; but speedily departed toward the East against
the great ZENOBIA, accounting Aurelianus departed from Rome into the East
against Queen Zenobia.
it a shame that a woman should hold the East Empire, in disgrace of Rome and
the Emperors thereof. And, passing through Slauonia, and thence through
Thracia, he had some conflicts against certain barbarous Nations which sought
to resist him, and to have stopped him in his journey. But, keeping his way,
he came to Byzantium, which is now called Constantinople; and so passed with
all his Army into Asia the less, which is now subject to the Turk; first
pacifying the Province of Bithynia which then rebelled; all the nations
yielding themselves into his hands, without any battle or making resistance.

From thence he marched into Cappadocia; where, for that the City of Tiana
(which in that Country was an ancient Colonie of the Greeks; being the Country
also wherein the famous APOLLONIVS TIANEVS was born) made resistance and would
not receive him, he swear that he would punish the Inhabitants in such sort,
that he would not leave a ^og alive among them: which his resolution he
afterward altered and revoked. For, by the illusion of the devil (God
permitting it for some unknown cause) there appeared unto him in a dream (for
it seemed unto him that he saw a vision) one which told him that it was
APOLLONIVS TIANEVS, which warned him to forbear to destroy his Country Tiana,
and gave him also further advice. Which, as they write, was the occasion that
he not only pardoned the Tianeans, but from thenceforth he was not so cruel
as formerly he had been. So as in Tiana he only put HERACLAMON to death, who
betrayed the City into his hands; which he said he did, for that he which had
been a traitor to his Country, could never be faithful to him. A just reward
for treason.
But his wealth which was very great he commanded to be given to his heirs, to
the end that no man should think he had condemned him to be executed for the
desire of his goods. And to the soldiers, complaining that he had not given
them the spoil of the City, wherein he had sworn that he would not leave any
living, no not a dog; he answered, I promised that there should never a dog
remain alive in Tiana, and I give you leave to kill them all.

When the Emperor had gotten this noble City, he from thence marched to
Antioch, which bordereth upon the Mount Taurus; where, granting a general
pardon, with one only battle of small resistance, near to a Wood called
Daphne, he seized upon all that Province. And, leaving all those Countries in
peace, he passed thence into Syria against ZENOBIA; who with another woman
called ZAVALLA (in a manner as manly as herself) attended his coming with a
very great Army of singular good Soldiers and excellent Captains, trained up
with great experience in the wars with her husband ODENATVS; and afterward
in other wars against the Persians. The two Armies coming near the one to the
other, a most cruel war began A cruel battle betwixt Zenobia and
Aurelianus.
between them. For, ZENOBIA, not as a woman, but as though she had bin
HANNIBAL, provided and performed whatsoever was fit, against the Romans.
Finally, after some encounters they came to a battle near to the City of
Emesa, which bordereth upon the deserts of Palmerina, a Province in Syria;
which was so bloody and doubtful, that AVRELIANVS was welneer overthrown: for,
his Cauallerie, being tired with fighting, began to retire, refusing the
Zenobia ouerthrown and put to flight by Aurelianus.
battle, and were ready to have turned their backs, and to flee: but being
detained by their Captains, and by the footmen constrained to stand firm, he
obtained the victory, and ZENOBIA escaped by flight.

When AVRELIANVS had obtained so noble a victory, he went into the City of
Emesa, and from thence to the City of Palmyra, which is the Head of that
Province, and ZENOBIA'S principal seat. In which way his soldiers endured
many wants and difficulties, wrought by their enemies where they were to pass:
and the City with such courage made resistance, that his soldiers were greatly
distressed, and the Emperor himself in person incurred many great dangers:
which plainly appears by a Letter written by him to a familiar friend of his.
Whereupon AVRELIANVS, desiring to make an end of this war, thinking to induce
ZENOBIA to yield herself into his power, sent her a Letter wherein he did
assure her of her life, and that he would give her all her treasure, her jewels
and her money; and that she should live free and at liberty in any place or
city where the Senate should appoint.

ZENOBIA, having received this Letter, in lieu of granting or requiring peace,
became therewith more haughty and proud than before; answering him with another
very proud Letter; which, NICOMACHVS, a Writer of those Times, translated out
of the Syrian into the Greek Tongue; and FLAVIVS VOPISCVS has left it to us in
Latin: which I will set down, to the end that the haughty presumptuous mind
of this woman may be made known to the world, which says thus:

ZENOBIA, Queen of the East, to AVRELIANVS AUGUSTUS, greeting. No other A
Letter written by Zenobia to Aurelianus.
Captain until this day, but thou, has required by Letter that which thou
demandest of me: for, those things (AVRELIANVS) which are to be tried by
war, by Arms and force are to be demanded and determined. Thou requirest that
I yield and give my self into thy power, as if thou had never read that
CLEOPATRA Queen of Egypt (from whom I am descended) would rather kill herself,
than live in the power of OCTAVIANVS, in any dignity or liberty granted by him
whatsoever. I let thee know, that I shall not want the relief of the Persians,
which I expect. The Saracens will also come to my aid; and the Armenians favor
me. Thou do well know, that the thieves of Syria were sufficient to
overthrow and disorder thy Army. If then the forces and succors which I
expect shall come unto me, thou will abate the pride and presumption wherewith
thou do now command me to yield my self, as though I were absolutely
ouercomn. And so she ended her Letter, glorying more in her valor, than in her
eloquence.

This Letter being received by AVRELIANVS, he made no account thereof; but
drew near with his Army, and commanded his Captains to besiege the City more
straightly, and with such order and policy to assault the same, and to defend
his Camp, that he failed not in any thing of the duty of an excellent Captain.
For, upon the way coming to ZENOBIA, he overthrew the succors which came from
Persia, and did the like by certain companies of Saracens. And the forces which
came from Armenia, what through fear and fair promises, he drew to his
service, and made them his friends; in such sort, that ZENOBIA, seeing herself
overcome, in the best manner she could fled from the City with Dromedaries,
carrying such treasure with her as the shortness of the time would permit: and,
traveling toward Persia, she Zenobia taken prisoner by Aurelianus.
was overtaken upon the way by certain horsemen which the Emperor sent after
her. And so AVRELIANVS took her, and the City of Palmyra, and afterward all
the whole estate of the East. And although many counseled him, yet he would
not put ZENOBIA to death, purposing to have her alive in his triumph. But he
put the Philosopher LONOINVS to death, for that it was said he had penned the
Letter which ZENOBIA wrote unto him. TREBELLIVS POLLIO writes, that when this
valiant woman was brought into the presence of AVRELIANVS, he said unto her;
Tell me, ZENOBIA, how durst thou presume to contemn Emperors, and to defend thy
self against their power? Whereto she answered, excusing herself, and honoring
him, saying: Only thee, AVRELIANVS, I acknowledge to be an Emperor, for that
thou know how to overcome. But as for GALIENVS, AVREOLVS, and The answer of
Zenobia made ^o Aurelianus.
the rest, I never held them for Emperors nor Princes. In this manner (as I
said) ended the power of ZENOBIA.

The Emperor AVRELIANVS having ended this war, leaving order and forces in
the East, returned into Europe the same way he went: and, coming into high
Germany, he subdued a certain people called Carpi, which were in Arms, and
overthrew them in battle. Upon this occasion he was in Rome called CARPICVS:
whereat he was both angry and sorry, that for that only victory they should
give him a surname; And therefore caused himself to be called GOTHICVS,
SARMATICVS, ARMENICVS, PARTHICVS, ADIABENICVS, GERMANICVS, Aurelianus his
surnames.
and SYRICVS, after the names of the Countries and Nations which he had subdued.

As matters stood upon these terms, and he being to march against TETRICVS the
tyrant of France; news was brought him that the Palmerins which had been
under ZENOBIA were revolted, and did rebel, and had slain SANDARIO whom he
had left there for Captain The Palmerins rebelled.
and governor of the City, with six hundred archers with him; and that they
had made ARCHELAVS, who was of kin to ZENOBIA, their Prince. When AVRELIANVS
understood thereof, with his accustomed courage and expedition (which was
natural unto him) he returned by great iournies into Asia: and being come into
Syria, he made no stay until that he came to the City of Palmyra; which when
he had taken, he inflicted most cruel punishment, by putting all sorts of
people to death, men, women, old folks and young children, without leaving any
living creature therein. And afterward he left the whole City desolate, and
almost all the other Cities, which consented and conspired therewith in the
rebellion. Without any long abode in Asia, in great haste he returned into
Europe, where he happily pacified all matters; so as there remained no part,
but all was in obedience. Nevertheless, for as much as the people were
accustomed to the liberty and evil customs permitted under the government of
GALIENVS, a certain Captain called FIRMVS, who was in Egypt, arose and made
all that Kingdom to rebel; and, as some write, made himself Emperor: and, as
others The Egyptians rebelled.
write, crying Liberty, he promised to maintain the liberty and privileges of
that Country. Which when this warlike Emperor understood (who, for expedition
in the wars, was a second JULIUS CAESAR) he would put no man else but himself
in trust, and returned the third time into Asia, and thence came into Egypt:
and at his first entry with great difficulty he recovered all that Kingdom,
and left it in peace and quiet.

At that time (as AURELIUS VICTOR and EVTROPIVS report) there was a Captain in
Dalmatia whose name was SEPTIMIVS, who also rebelled, and proclaimed himself
Emperor. But AVRELIANVS needed not to come against him: for, the same legions
and soldiers which chose him, conspired against him and slew him. So as there
rested nothing for AVRELIANVS to do, but to defeat TETRICVS, who held a great
part of France and Spain with title of Emperor, as is before said. Whereof
AVRELIANVS made great account, and came from Egypt with intent to go against
him; this war being in all men's opinion very doubtful: nevertheless
AVRELIANVS took so good order therein, as it was soon ended. The reason was,
that TETRICVS being a tyrant, and no lawful Emperor, the legions and men of
war under his command, became so dissolute and presumptuous, as he was no
longer able to endure their insolency and pride, but chose rather to live a
subject to the Emperor AVRELIANVS, then to be an Emperor over such subjects,
with vexation toil and reproach. Whereupon he secretly wrote to AVRELIANVS,
and brought it so to pass, that he voluntarily yielded himself; and so all
became in peace and quiet, subject unto AVRELIANVS. Tetricus submitted himself
to Aurelianus.


And as at other times the legions had betrayed their Captains and Emperors: so
now the Emperor to be rid of trouble delivered up his legions to another: which
is a great example and proof of the miseries, ielousies, and troubles, into
which they are involved, which unjustly and tyrannously hold dominions; daily
expecting and fearing death, and to be dispossessed of their governments;
whereof ancient Histories are full: and in our time we have seen with our
eyes, that although they escape for a time; yet there is no day wherein they
are not vexed with the insolences and dissoluteness of those, by whose aid
they maintain their tyrannies: and most commonly they are by them brought into
greatest danger. And so to keep themselves on foot, they use great cruelty
against their subjects; and show themselves partial, remiss; and humble to
their favorites and friends. And above all, the secret martyrdom and remorse
of conscience does torment them: whereof DIONYSIVS, MARIUS, SYLLA, and other
famous tyrants which have been, are fair presidents: who, upon their subjects,
committed most horrible cruelties, and of their friends and companions endured
incredible insolences and intolerable audacious presumptions. Which TETRICVS
knowing well, although he were not unprovided nor destitute of power, courage
or valor; yet he voluntarily yielded himself to AVRELIANVS, holding it for a
more difficult thing to command with trouble, then to serve with quiet. Which
discreet advice may serve for a rule and admonition to fly and eschew a
vanity much used by those which in towns and commonwealths maintain
factions and discords, and will command and tyrannize over that which is none
of their own; who thereby vainly and foolishly make themselves servile and
slaves to very base fellows, flattering them and giving what they will have;
because they will not endure the company of those which are their equals: then
which there can be no greater madness. It proved no evil course that TETRICVS
took: for he lived many years after in great honor and peace, and ended his
days as we will declare: whereas otherwise if he had persisted in his
tyranny, he had made such an end as all such had: which was either to have
been slain by his enemies, or by his own soldiers; and the time which he
should have lived, would have been full of continual fear and Jealousy.

AVRELIANVS having fully subdued and pacified all the Provinces of the Empire,
and reduced the same to the ancient power and reputation, by taming and
subduing the tyrants, and by expelling the strange and barbarous Nations with
force, felicity, and admirable expedition, he resolved to come to Rome to
receive the triumph for his victories: which was given him with the greatest
solemnity and pomp that could be devised, which in respect of my accustomed
breuity cannot particularly be recited. It may suffice to say in brief, that
it was one of the most stately triumphs that ever was made in Rome, wherein
were led an infinite number of A most stately triumph prepared for Aurelianus.
Prisoners and Captives of diverse and sundry Nations, great variety of wild
Beasts, as Tigres, Lions, Ounces, Elephants, Dromedaries, Bears, and such
like. There was also abundance of Arms taken from those which were overcome,
and most rich and sumptuous chariots: one, which had been of ODENATVS,
ZENOBIAS husband; another which she herself had made: and another which the
King of Persia voluntarily sent to AVRELIANVS for a present.

There went also in that triumph the great ZENOBIA, most richly attired, in
cloth of great price set with pearl and stone, in manner of a prisoner bound
with chains of gold. There were in the number of them, of whom AVRELIANVS
triumphed, TETRICVS and his son, whom the father had entitled Emperor.
AVRELIANVS entered in another chariot, which had been the Kings of the Goths,
drawn by four stagges: and after him came all the victorious legions both of
foot and horse, most rich and gallantly armed, bearing boughs of laurel or
of palm in their hands: there were also many other things of great Pomp. And
he in this manner went to the Capitol to do his sacrifices according to the
custom, and thence to his Palace, and the next day were made in Rome all kinds
of sports and feasts, such as were wont to be made, with addition of many
things above ordinary, and more than other Emperors had don. He likewise gave
many gifts to the people, as the custom was at such times. TETRICVS he made
Governer of Lucania, Calabria, Puglia, and Campania, with other Provinces of
Italy; and Provinces given to Tetricus by Aurelianus. His bounty to Zenobia.
did him great honor together with his son. To ZENOBIA he gave lands and
possessions, the rents whereof sufficed to maintain her honorably: and so she
lived and died, being highly honored and commended of all men; still
preserving her ancient reputation, and the honor of her person.

AVRELIANVS being victorious, and in this prosperity (as his chiefest delight
was in the wars, and to bear Arms) resolved to levy a choice and selected
Army, and therewith to go into the East to make war against the Persians,
in revenge of the injury done to the Empire by the imprisonment of the Emperor
VALERIANVS; and within short space he marched thitherwards. And as he was
valiant, wise, and a most excellent Captain; so had he without doubt performed
great matters, had not death (through the secret judgment of God) by the way
made frustrate his high attempts and desseigns: which (as OROSIVS and EVSEBIVS
testify) God permitted for a punishment of his wickedness. For, having reigned
six years, favoring, or at leastwise tolerating the Christians to live free
and at liberty, he suffered not the Catholic Church to be molested or
persecuted: wherefore, notwithstanding that he was an Infidel, our Lord God
(who leaves no desert unrewarded) gave him so many victories, and so good
success in all his actions. But in the end, deluded by the Devil, and the
counsel of wicked men, he determined to persecute the Christians, and sent
abroad his Letters and Edicts to that effect; which was the tenth persecution
of the Church. But, being ready to sign the same, The tenth persecution of
the primitive church
there suddenly fell a thunderbolt from heaven so near unto him, that all men
thought he had been slain: yet, besides this sign and warning given him to
desist from his wicked resolution, God permitted his death; and that his own
servants, in whom he reposed most trust, should kill him, which was thus: As
he was ever cruel, and had put many to death for light occasions, his
principal Secretary, who managed his most secret affairs (whose name was
MENESTHEVS) being in fear of his life, for that AVRELIANVS had threatened him
for a matter of small Menestheus procured the death of Aurelianus.
importance, resolved to practice the death of his Lord: which to effect, he
presently wrote a forged memorial, wherein it seemd that AVRELIANVS had set
down the names of certain persons which he would cause to be slain: among which
he wrote his own name, and showed this memorial to all those (or to the
greatest part of them) which were contained therein: many of which were odious
to the Emperor; which made the matter the more likely to be true. And as the
Secretary was of great credit by reason of the place he held, and they knowing
the Emperors cruelty, presumed as much, and thoroughly believed it: whereupon,
they speedily agreed to make an end of the Emperor, for fear that he otherwise
would have done the like by them. And, having resolved upon the manner, they
slew him as he went one day with a small guard from Heraclea in Thracia (for,
many Cities are so called) toward Byzantium, now The death of Aurelianus.
Constantinople.

He died (according to EVSEBIVS computation) in the year of our Lord 278, and
in the sixth year of his Reign; a small time truly, considering his great and
noble acts. He left neither son nor nephew, but one only daughter. The
Senate was very sorry for his death; but the people, much more: for, they
lived in greater security, and without danger of his cruelty. And for his noble
acts they canonized him, and numbered him among their holy Emperors. When the
treason of MENESTHEVS was discovered, they drove a stake through him, and did
cast out his body to the dogs, and to be devoured by wild beasts. It is not
written that the rest were punished, because peradventure they were prime men;
and so great, that no man durst procure their punishment.

THE LIFE OF TACITUS* ONLY OF THIS NAME, AND EIGHT AND THIRTITH EMPEROR OF ROME.
THE warlike and invincible Emperor AVRELIANVS being dead, as we have said, who
with such valor brought all the Provinces of the Empire to peace and
tranquillity; and in so short a time, that it seems the fear and reverence
which they bare him in his life time, held the same authority even after his
death [For, no man attempted to make himself Emperor in any of the Provinces
wherein Legions lay in garrison, as at other times they were wont to do;
neither durst the Army which was with him choose an Emperor, he had in such
manner tamed the Provinces and the pride of the people: And the Captains which
then were with him were also better advised, and took warning by the death and
confusion of those which in the time of GALIENVS had usurped the name of
Emperors] Therefore, for that they deemed none worthy of the Empire; they
desiring to avoid the like inconveniences as befell in times past, and to the
end that a good Emperor might be chosen, who with his authority might preserve
and maintain the present estate, the men of war of AVRELIANVS his Army sent
The Army sent to the Senate to choose an Emperor.
word to the Senate, that (as reason was) they should choose and name an
Emperor; and that they would obey him, and confirm his election.

The Senate, knowing that the Army was not wont to be contented with a Prince
of their choosing, made answer, that they should name and make choice of one,
and that the Senate would approve their doings. In this straining of
courtesies, six months passed (which may serve for a wonder to him that has
read the former Histories); in which the world was without an Emperor, and the
Empire was governed by the Senate, and such Officers as AVRELIANVS had left. At
the end of which time, ouercomn by the entreaties and Ambassages from the
Armies, the Senate made choice of TACITUS, a Nobleman, who had been Consul,
and was a good man, and of great age, who earnestly refused the same; so as
there were many complements Tacitus chosen Emperor.
between them about the matter. But in the end he accepted thereof, to the
great my of the Senate and Roman people, and also of the Pretorian Cohorts
which ordinarily lay near to Rome. And so he performed the solemnities,
donatiues, and gifts which the new Emperors were accustomed to make. TACITUS
was very old when he came to the Empire; but of great experience in
magistracies and offices of charge, and had ever lived a virtuous life. He was
very temperate in all things, mild and kind, and a lover of justice and
equity.

When as TACITUS had taken upon him the government of the Empire (as a good
Prince free from ambition) he did all things by the advice and counsel of the
Senate; and held such a course in all his actions, that the whole Empire was in
peace and tranquillity, and justice was every where administered with quietness:
and to that end he made excellent laws and ordinances, abolishing certain
abuses and evil customs in Rome. But, for any notable matters which Readers
commonly desire in Histories (as, wars, battles, great adventures and
accidents) there were none in his time; as well for that he found all in peace
and in good order, as for that he reigned but a small time, which was but six
months, and those not fully expired. What death he died, the Authors do not
certainly set down. Some say, that his own soldiers slew him upon the way
traveling toward Asia, whither he was going with an Army to make war against
The death of Tacitus.
the Persians: but SEXTVS AURELIUS VICTOR and others write, that he died of a
burning Fever in the City of Tharsus; which seems most likely to be true:
for, he was a virtuous man, and much beloved. Among his other virtues, he was
very temperate in his diet, and in all other things; so as he would not allow
his wife the Empress to wear any precious stones or jewels of any great price:
and he much honored the memory of good Emperors. His country or lineage I
find not written. He left no son, either natural or adoptiue.

In those times sprang the famous Heretics of the Manichees; whose Original
and Master was a wicked man called MANES: who with his Followers were so
wicked and such Infidels, The original of the here^e o^ the M^iches.
that they presumed to say, that there were two Gods, the one good, the other
evil; adding thereto, that the one was the Original of all goodness; and the
other, of all evil. And this horrible and devilish Heresy lasted in some
wicked men above two hundred years: against which, Saint AUGUSTINE and other
holy Doctors opposed themselves. The life of this TACITUS is written by FLAVIVS
VOPISCVS, whom I have followed, and the other Authors aboue-named.

THE LIFE OF FLORIANVS, ONLY OF THIS NAME, AND NINE AND THIRTITH EMPEROR OF
ROME.
AS soon as TACITUS was dead, a brother of his named FLORIANVS, trusting in the
neernesse of blood to the last Emperor, without any authority or election took
upon him the name of Emperor: which he did through the favor of part of the
Army, and of certain principal men which were with him. But his estate
continued but a small time: for, when the Armies in the East understood of the
death of his brother TACITUS, they made choice of PRO^VS, of whom we will speak
hereafter; who was a man of such authority, and so well beloved, that FLORIANVS
upon the news thereof held himself forlorn. And, knowing that all the martial
men would abandon him (as, many of them already had done) he made his veins to
be opened (imitating QVINTILIVS, who, as we have said, did the like); and so he
died (as the other did) bleeding, about two months after he had taken The
death of Florianus.
upon him the name and title of Emperor. Wherefore, he could do no such
notable matter as might be worthy writing. He was a man very like his brother
TACITUS; as well in condition and goodness of life, as in the shortness of the
time he held the Empire. He died in the year of our Lord 279.

THE LIFE OF PROBVS, ONLY OF THAT NAME, AND FORTITH EMPEROR of ROME.
THE ARGUMENT.
ALthough Probus were of no very Noble Family, he was so honest a man and so
virtuous, that, in consideration of his virtuous deeds, he worthily deserved to
be chosen Emperor. After that he was confirmed in that dignity, he showed
himself to be so affected to the people, and so kind and loving to the Senate,
that by common consent and a public decree he was called Pater patriae: and
to him moreover were granted all the titles and dignities that might enoble and
make him famous. In his time arose infinite wars and troubles, so as he spent
all his life time in managing of Arms: wherein being victorious, he entered Rome
in triumph, having tamed and v^nquisht the Frenchmen and the Germans, and
subdued some which would have made themselves Emperors: amongst which was one
Saturninus, a valiant and politic man. And, seeing that all the Empire was in
peace and under obe^ce, he used to say, that within a while there would be no
need of martial men: which when they understood, they began to murmr and to
conspire against him; principally, because he would not permit them to live in
their accustomed liberty. And going with great preparation toward the wars
against the Parthians, he was slain by them upon the way. His death was greatly
lamented in Rome, and generally through the whole Empire; missing such a father
as in every respect did worthily deserve to be called Probus.

PROBVS succeeded FLORIANVS (or rather TACITUS) in the Roman Empire; who was
chosen Emperor by the Legions and the Army in the East, presently when as they
understood of the death of TACITUS, to the end they would not stay for one to
be chosen at the pleasure of the Senate. But this PROBVS was so valiant a man,
and so excellent a Captain, and so held and reputed for such by all men, that
the Senate and people of Rome presently confirmed his election.

There happened, in the time of this excellent Prince, such and so many wars, as
well against tyrants as strangers, and he obtained so many victories, that he
might very well be compared to AVRELIANVS; of whom a little before we have
written: and in like manner we may parallel him with HANNIBAL, with CAESAR,
or with any other great and famous Captain of ancient time; whose acts seem
greater than the acts of this Prince, by reason they were so fortunate, as to
have them registered by those eloquent and excellent Writers which celebrated
the same. Which ornament failed in those which wrote the lives of the Emperors
of these times, and a hundred years before: and in long time after there were
not found any so eloquent; or rather, never since. And although they write the
truth of the History, yet of^ times it is written so abrupt, and so brief, as
it makes their acts to seem less than they were. But the discreet Reader,
considering the acts of some of those Emperors which we have already written,
and which we are to write hereafter, shall certainly know, that the deeds and
prowess of some of these Princes, were no way inferior to theirs which were
so famous; but in some sort might rather seem greater, if they well consider
what nations and people they were, against which they fought. Which as they
were no less valiant or fierce, then those of ancient times; so were they more
expert and of greater skill in the wars, and in aught else that was requisite.

But to return to our good Emperor PROBVS: he was borne in Hungary in a city
called Sirmio, of noble parentage, principally by his mothers side. His fathers
name was MAXIMUS, The origin of Probus.
a man very famous, and one which followed the wars, and had had the leading of
martial men; and being Tribune, died in Egypt; His wife living after him, with
this son and one daughter, which was his sister. This young PROBVS proved to
be so virtuous and so valiant a young man, as the Emperor VALERIANVS who died
prisoner in Persia, made him a Tribune, being so young as he then had no sign
of any beard. He performed in the time of VALERIANVS, and of his son
GALIENVS, and of AVRELIANVS, and CLAUDIUS (wherein happened great wars, with
many battles and conflicts) such notable services, both as a soldier and a
Tribune, and afterward when he was a Captain; that he was held and reputed
for a most valiant man, and make men now to admire him, which read his doings.
In giving assaults to cities, he was many times the first man upon the scaling
ladders, and the first that entered the enemies camp or fortresses. He was
victorious in many single combats, man to man, and in battles freed many
Roman citizens from death: wherefore according to his deserts, there were
given to him many ciuical crowns, collars, bracelets, lances and banners,
with other ensigns, devices and martial privileges. And afterward being a
Captain of Legions, and General governor of provinces; there was almost no
nation but was subdued by him, in the infinite wars which were in those times.

In Africa he subdued a people called Marmarides, and overthrew some mighty
tyrants and rebels. In Egypt being a captain, he fought against the
Palmyrines, who would have usurped that country and kingdom; but he brought
them to quietness with great part of the East, in the service of AVRELIANVS. In
the time of CLAUDIUS, he overcame the Goths in many battles; and in the time
of AVRELIANVS, the Sarmates and Germans; and often was victorious in many
other parts. And with these victories and noble acts, with the goodness of life
and behavior he made the discipline and knowledge of Arms equal: So as he
was in all, a good and a valiant Soldier, Captain, and Emperor.

Many letters (recited by FLAVIVS VOPISCVS) written by GALIENVS, CLAUDIUS,
AVRELIANVS, TACITUS, and other Emperors and Princes of that time, bear record
of that which is said of him; in which they extol the virtues, valor, and
excellency of this man: wherefore he was infinitely beloved, and honored
generally. Which plainly appears by the manner of his election: for the
Army which was in the East desiring to make haste in choosing an Emperor,
being advertised of the death of TACITUS; the Captains, and Coronels drew
their soldiers into the field: and without any former request, practice or
agreement, they began to show unto them, that it was requisite to make choice
of an Emperor, a man which should be valiant, honest, religious, good,
pitiful, wise, and adorned with all virtuous qualities: which speech they used
in sundry squadrons and parts of the Army. The soldiers without any private
conference cried out with one voice, Let PROBVS be Emperor AUGUSTUS, God keep
and preserve thee PROBVS, and with such other words and applauses, Probus
proclaimed Emperor.
showing the great love and affection they bare unto him.

When PROBVS had accepted of the Empire, he presently wrote a brief letter to
the Senate, but yet with great honor and respect, approving what was done the
last year in the election of his predecessor TACITUS: and excusing himself
for having accepted of the Empire, without the knowledge and confirmation of
the Senate, he laid all the fault upon FLORIANVS, who for that he had taken
upon him the name of Emperor, the Army was therefore forced to make choice of
him. His letters being read, there was made great show of joy, and they
applauded his election with many blessings, and gave him the name of AUGUSTUS,
Father of the country, and they also made him high Priest, and gave him
tribunal power and authority.

When PROBVS had received this decree from the Senate, he was very glad: and
taking good order for all things, and leaving sufficient garrison in the East,
he came into Europe; where he was received by the Armies; which swear to be
faithful unto him. The first thing he did after his coming, was, to levy the
greatest Army he could; wherewith he went into France, which ever after the
death of AVRELIANVS was subject to the Germans, who made themselves Lords and
masters of all the chiefest Cities of that country. After that he came into
his enemies country (whose number was infinite) there began a most cruel and
bloody war: for the soldiers of either side were very valiant and expert.
There passed (as says VOPISCVS) many bloody battles between them, whereof
one continued two days together: so as each day the darkness of the night
parted the ^ight, the victory seeming to incline sometimes A cruel battle
fought between Probus and the Germans.
to the Romans, and sometimes to the Germans; which is found written in the
ancient Chronicles of Germany, as witnesses HENRICUS MVTIVS a modern writer:
but in the end through the good provision, and direction of PROBVS, he
prevailed after that he had obtained many victories against the Germans,
wherein died 400000 of their men and a great number of the Roman Army. He
wrested out of their possession sixty principal cities, and drove them out of
all that which they had usurped: and passing forwards he took other cities, and
his Army made great spoil and havoc. Being thus overcome, they yielded
obedience, and became vassals to the Empire: which without my particular
relation will plainly appear by a letter written by PROBVS to the Senate,
which says thus.

I give thanks (fathers conscript) to the immortal Gods, seeing they have
approved your judgment of me, showing it to be reasonable and true. For, know
that I have conquered and subdued all Germany, and that nine Kings of sundry
Nations and Provinces have prostrated A Letter written by Probus to the Senate.
and humbled themselves at my feet, or to say more rightly at yours; and are
now become subjects, and fight in our army against other barbarous Nations
more northerly. You shall (fathers conscript) make your accustomed prayers unto
the Gods, seeing that we have slain four hundred thousand of your enemies,
and sixteen thousand men very well armed have yielded themselves unto us; and
we have recovered threescore Cities which they held, and all the Provinces of
France. All the Crowns of gold which the French Cities gave unto me for
presents, I send unto you, to the end that by your hands they may be
consecrated, and offered to the most good and mighty IVPITER, and to the rest
of the immortal Gods. The prey that we have taken, is greater then all the
harms that they have done unto us. The fields in France are ploughed and
tilled with Oxen taken from the barbarous, etc.

And so in his letter he proceeds, signifying unto them his victories: for
which, in Rome, was made great joy, feasting, and supplications to their gods,
according to their rites and customs. After this conquest, he came with his
forces into the Provinces of Slavonia, invaded by the Sarmates, which are the
inhabitants of Muscouia, Russia, Polonia, and others as is aforesaid, and had
the same in possession; which war was no less dangerous then the last, for
the great multitude and fierceness of those Nations with which he fought
certain battles: Wherein he showed himself a most prudent, hardy, and
valiant Captain; and having wholly subdued them, he forced them to fly out of
the bounds and confines of the Empire, the greatest part of Probus drove the
Sarmates out of Slauonia.
them being either slain or taken. And from thence with great expedition he
marched with his Army into Thracia, which with the rest is now called Graecia,
wherein is the great City Constantinople; and marched farther toward the
North, with a resolution to make war against the Goths in their own
country, and wholly to subvert that Nation for revenge of the harms and
spoils which they in time past had done in the Empire. He was of such
reputation, and all Nations stood in such fear of him, that wheresoever he
came he found no resistance: for they sent to yield their obedience, and bound
themselves to be confederats and friends to the Empire. Whereupon leaving
Europe in peace, he went into Asia, with a resolution to have made war
against the Persians and NARSEVS, who then was King of Persia and Parthia: and
passing so through Asia the less, he invaded the Province of Isauria, which is
a part thereof, bordering upon Cilicia, which (as in the life of GALIENVS we
said) is mountanous, craggie, and hard to be assaulted, ill to be conquered,
and easy to defend, wherein were many thieves and tyrants which sought to make
themselves Lords of that Country; all which the valiant Emperor subdued, not
without great toil and danger: for the inhabitants being fortified by the
natural situation of that country, defended themselves courageously, so as
there passed dangerous battles and conflicts between them; but PROBVS in
short space pacified all. And they say, that entering the country he desired to
see the natural and artificial fortifications thereof: which he much
mervailed at, and said, that the country was hard to be won, and easy to be
defended. He divided the fields which he there took from the tyrants, among his
old soldiers, and such as had borne themselves valiantly in that service. After
that he had pacified all that region, he marched into Soria, and into the
Eastern parts: but first he went against a certain people which they called
Blemij, which came out of Ethiopia, and had taken part of Arabia, of Palestina,
of Judea, and the Cities of Ptolomais, and Ioppa now called Iapha, which was
then a famous city. And having ended this journey, he marched toward Persia
against NARSEVS King of the Persians and Parthians; who was the most powerful
King of the world, and whose predecessors and successors ever troubled the
Roman Empire. Narseus King Persia yielded to Probus.
But PROBVS (of whom we now treat) was so much feared and esteemed, as NARSEVS
durst not oppose against him; but by all means procured peace, restored what
he had usurped, gave him other great gifts, and yielded to such conditions as
PROBVS required. So as having no enemy against whom he might wage war, he
returned again into Europe, leaving the whole state of the East in peace and
under good government. Coming into Thracia, which country was dispeopled,
through the wars and spoil which the Goths, Sarmates and other barbarous
nations had made; and for that many nations which were wont to be enemies, had
now submitted themselves to do him service, and desired him to give them some
land to inhabit, where they might be his subjects; he gave unto them the
province of Thracia and the marches thereof; dividing fields by lottes amongst
them, where they should inhabit and till the earth. These were of many Tribes
and nations, as Vandals, Goths, Guntanes, and other people, whose number was
infinite. But this counsel proved afterward very dangerous, and prejudicial;
as hereafter you shall hear.

In this time was a general peace through the whole Empire, and there was no
King of foreign nation, that durst attempt any alteration. But as men's hearts
are commonly (even from their infancy) more inclined to evil then good
through the corruption of our nature, wanting foreign enemies, there arose
some domestical cumbustions; and those which were wont to make head against
foreign enemies, made themselves enemies.

There was in the East parts a Captain whose name was SATVRNINVS, who was both
valiant, expert in the wars, discreet and of great judgment, and in the time
of AVRELIANVS had been General of those frontiers, being by birth a
Frenchman. This man coming to Alexandria in Egypt about some matters of
importance which we know not; without his knowledge or imagination, the
Egyptians, as they were ever unquiet, rebellious and desirous of innouations;
by a common and general consent, hailed him Emperor; and called upon his name
Saturninus made Emperor against his will.
with so great obstinacy as he durst not refuse it, neither forbear to say
that he consented thereto. But imagining that through his absence this tumult
would have bin pacified, he departed from Egypt and came into Palestina. But
they never giving over what they had begun, and as those troops whereof he had
the command, did not only consent thereto, but were very glad thereof; He
himself standing in fear of PROBVS, clad himself in purple, which was the
imperial color (but some say crimson, which was the color of the imperial
robe) accounting it the safest way. But it is written, that when his Captains
and soldiers came to swear obedience, and to do him such honor as was
accustomed in such actions; SATVRNINVS entertained them weeping, saying unto
them, Let it not my brethren and companions in Arms be imputed unto me for
pride and presumption, what I now shall say unto you; for this day does the
commonwealth lose in me a necessary member; for I was the chiefest man in
restoring France. I being a free Captain recovered Africa from the Moors. I
pacified Spain, and did other things to the honor of the Empire; but what
avails it to have done all this? for with this days work all is lost. And
as his Captains and Coronels encouraged and entreated him to be merry, this
wise man, who well knew what it was to reign with tyranny, answered them,
saying; My friends, you know not what it is to reign. But I will make you
understand it The miserable condition of tyrants.
in my self: for from henceforth there will daily hang over my head,
threatening me and putting me in fear of my life, swords, gleaues, shields,
and on every side I see my self assaulted with halberts, lances, and other
weapons; and I begin to stand in fear of those which have the guarde of me,
and to suspect those which keep me company. I shall not eat any thing that
shall taste well, neither without suspicion. I can travail no way in safety.
I shall not undertake any war to my own liking, neither shall I bear Arms
for exercise, but forced: and although I did assure my self to the contrary,
yet truly it is impossible for any Emperor to please and content all his
subjects. For if he be an old prince; they will say that he is insufficient and
an unprofitable dotard: if he be young, they will say, he is rash and furious,
and has not wit enough to be a sovereign. And so there will never want
imputations to blemish him. Believe me my friends, in that you make me Emperor,
you bind me to death. But one thing does some thing recomfort me; which is,
that I shall not die alone. But seeing that you will have it so, I pray to the
Gods that the time come not wherein you will be as sorry for what you have
done, as I am at this present. These speeches are recited by FLAVIVS VOPISCVS;
who writes that he understood them by the report of his Grandfather, who was
present when they were spoken.

SATVRNINVS, although (as a wise man) he knew and foresaw into how great danger
he thrust himself (seeing he could not desist) was nothing dismayed, but with
great courage provided all things necessary for the preserving of the estate
which he had taken upon him. And notwithstanding that he was made a Tyrant
against his will, yet he desired rather to overcome, then to leave to be. But
as the Emperor PROBVS was no less wise and valiant then himself; so when he
was advertised what had passed, with the greatest Forces he was able to leuy,
he returned into Asia, ordering all things after a new manner with great care,
being very jealous of this war, in respect of the quality of the Captain and
Soldiers. Both Armies being come into one Country, they made of either side
cruel war, and the battles were very fierce and bloody; yet the Emperor
PROBVS sought to have come to some composition Wars between Saturninus and
Probus
with SATVRNINVS, promising to pardon him, and to entreat him well. And it is
supposed, that SATVRNINVS would willingly have accepted thereof, but his
soldiers would never yield thereto; holding themselves thereby to be in no
security, seeing they had forced him to take upon him the name of Emperor. But
in the end, SATVRNINVS being apparently overcome, he was besieged in a Castle,
and there was slain by the Soldiers against the Emperors will, who would
rather have forgiven him.

After this Victory, which was held so doubtful, PROBVS returned into Europe,
and the Soldiers and Legions remained to quiet, and in such obedience, as it
grew to be a common byword; that the Mise did not dare to gnaw for fear of
PROBVS. But as he was busy in this action (the success whereof was
doubtful); in France and Germany were two Captains, the one called BONOSVS,
who was the chief; and the other PROCLVS: who raising mighty Armies in France
and in Britannie (where PROBVS was ill beloved, for the Victories which he had
obtained there) and having also some Spaniards, besides the ordinary Legions
of their governments, they both took upon them the name of Emperors, and the
purple Robe. But for that it would be along Story, particularly to recount all
that passed; it shall Bonosus and Proclus called Emperors.
suffice to know, that PROBVS never rested: so as according to the small time
of his reign, which was but six years, it may seem a wonderful thing to
consider the wars and voyages which he made. But in the end, he found out
these Tyrants, and invaded them both; of which, the war against BONOSVS (as
they write) was very dangerous and lasted long: but in the end PROBVS had the
victory, and BONOSVS falling into despair hung himself. PROCLVS being
likewise overcome, fled into the Country, where the Germans (thereby Bonosus
in despair hung himself.
to win PROBVS love) delivered him: and so he had an entire and complete
Victory over all.

This PROCVLVS was borne in a place among the Alps near to Geneua, and
BONOSVS was a Britain, bred up in Spain; of whom they write, that he would
drink so much Proclus was slain by his own Soldiers.
wine, as ten great drinkers could not drink so much; and that therewith he
had two wonderful properties: the one was, that how much soever he drank, he
was never drunk; the other that when it pleased him, he could piss as fast as
he did drink, without containing any jot within his body: wherefore the
Emperor AVRELIANVS was wont to say of him, that Strange qualities.
BONOSVS was not borne to live, but to drink.

After that PROBVS had defeated these two great Captains and Tyrants, it might
have bin held reasonable, that Arms should have given him leave to have reposed
himself in Rome; for now his years and travails required no less: but it
happened otherwise; for the Nations and people which he left (as we have said) to
inhabit Thracia, notwithstanding that the Bastarnari remained in peace and
quiet: yet the Vandales and other Nations seeing the Emperor pestered in the
wars (trusting in their strength and multitude) resolved to make no longer
abode there, but to invade all the Provinces of the Empire, robbing and
stealing all they could lay hands upon: and their number was so great, that no
City or Country could make head against them, but they spoiled and burned all
wheresoever they came. Which, when the Emperor had well considered, imagining
that whatsoever he had formerly done for the good and liberty of the Empire,
was to no effect or purpose if he suffered this plague to go on, he resolved
to put himself in hazard, and to go in person into al those parts which these
people invaded. And for that (by reason of their multitudes) they could not
march together, he fought with them in sundry places: wherein many were slain
of eitherside, and the Emperor himself was sometime wounded, and in danger of
death. But in the end he overcame them all, and took such order, that he
compelled those which by flight escaped from the battles, to flee out of the
confines and frontiers of the Empire. And, very joyful and victorious, finding
now no Probus warred against the Barbarians.
resistance in the world, he came to Rome; whereinto he entered in triumph;
which truly was well deserved: for, in Rome there was a law that the triumph
should not be granted but for great victories obtained. Which being so, I see
not that either CAESAR or POMPEY could or Probus came into Rome in triumph.
did better deserve it, than PROBVS. For, if we consider the number of battles
and victories (although they be not at large described) which he fought and
wanne before that he was Emperor and those also after; I know not when we
should make an end of reciting them.

There was never a Province in the Empire when it was furthest extended, which
was not conquered anew or pacified, and brought into subjection by him. CAESAR
was much commended for expedition, surprising his enemies suddenly and
unprovided: PROBVS was no A comparison betwixt Probus and Julius Caesar.
less diligent and active than CAESAR; and although his enemies were provided
for him yet he overthrew them and put them to flight. It is said, that CAESAR
slew in diverse battails above a million of men: and PROBVS, in the first war
he made being Emperor, slew four hundred thousand; and France (wherein CAESAR
made war ten years before he could subdue it) PROBVS conquered in one year.
As for the other battles which he fought when he was but a Commander, I hold
the number of those which were slain therein, as innumerable as the wars were
dangerous and desperate. But if we come to the civil wars which CAESAR made
against the Romans; I conceive those which PROBVS maintained against three
tyrants with their old Legions, to be no way inferior. So as I know no
reason why we should not as much extol the actions of some of those Emperors,
as of POMPEY or CAESAR. But, not to swerve from the common opinion, against
which we may not contend, giving to CAESAR and such excellent men the first
place; yet it is reason we should also make an honorable mention of those
which were virtuous and valiant, and that we should preserve the memorial of
them for an example to posterity. Which wanted no other thing (as I said in the
beginning) but Writers; who might eloquently, and in a good style, have
particularly written their acts, which the others had: for, if of PROBVS, and
of some others of whom we have already treated, and are to treat hereafter,
there had been any which had eloquently written the Histories, relating all
their acts and valiant deeds in particular (their bold attempts, their
counsels, their orations, their aduertisements, their wonderful policies,
stratagems, and other matters of importance) which doubtless happened without
number in such and so great enterprises and battles; we should not only be
content to give unto these men the second place, but peradventure we should
contend for the first; considering, they were no less excellent in virtue and
bounty, than in Arms and valor.

But, leaving this disputation apart (for, in the end, the world will give
Sentence in the behalf of CAESAR, and of those famous men of ancient times) our
PROBVS entered Rome, triumphing Probus his triumph in Rome.
of the Germans, of the Blemij, and of many other Nations and Tyrants. His
triumph was most solemn; and his men of war entered with him: among which were
Germans, Spaniards, and other Nations which had served him in the wars, as
well as the Romans. There were also some excellent and great Captains: of which
the most noble were, LEONIDES, DIOCLESIANVS, CARVS, CONSTANTINVS, ANABALLIANVS,
MAXIMINIANVS, PISONIANVS, HERCVLEVS, CECROPIVS, and others; whereof some were
afterward Emperors.

This trumph being ended, the next day (according to the ancient custom) began
the feasts, games and sports; wherein were huntings of savage beasts; more, and
more strange, than ever before that time were seen in Rome: for which purpose
he caused, in a place called Circulus Maximus, a great Grove of wood and a
Mountain to be made, full of very great trees; set in such sort, that they
seemed naturally to have grown there. The place was so capable and so large,
that therein were hunted a thousand Ostriches, a thousand Stags, a thousand
mountain Goats, a thousand wild Boars, a thousand fallow Deer, and other
kinds of beasts: and the people were permitted to kill and take thereof at
their pleasure. Afterward there were killed with Lances three hundred Bears;
and, in a manner, as many Lions, of those of Libya and of Syria: which was a
spectacle representing more majesty and greatness, than delight or pleasure.

The next day came three hundred Sword-plaiers; which were men (as we have
already said) who slew one another to make the people sport: and those which
suruiued, gained reward and liberty.

These feasts being ended, the Emperor made certain laws, and took care for the
good government of the Empire; and all men lived in such peace and quietness,
that PROBVS used to say, that he would speedily take such a course, that there
should be no more need of any men of war. Wherefore, as also for that he would
never suffer his soldiers to be idle, but imploid them in labors and
necessary edifices, they began to hate him and to wish his death; as men which
had been accustomed to rob and steal, and to live licentiously. And having
taken order for all matters concerning a peaceable government, he determined to
go into the East, to subdue and wholly to subvert the kingdom of the Persians
and Parthians: for there now remained no other power that he needed to care
for, to confirm that peace which he resolved to settle through the Empire.
And undertaking this enterprise, with greater preparation, then ever was made
in any other (for now nothing let him) it seeming to his soldiers that it
was not good to have a Prince so valiant, in whose time they were compelled to
live in such subjection and were punished, and could not follow their old
course and former liberty, they resolved to kill him; and in secret many of
them conspired against him: So as when he passed through Slauonia, they
murdered him by treason; when he had reigned (after EVTROPIVS) six Proclus
slain by his own soldiers.
years and four months; which (as I said of AVRELIANVS) was a very short
space, for the accomplishing of such and so great acts and enterprises, as his
were. And some authors write that he reigned not so long. His death was much
lamented in Rome, both by the Senate and Roman people. The army stood not upon
the punishing of the offenders; for no man durst attempt the same: but they
erected to this invincible Emperor a most honorable Sepulcher, whereon was
engraven this Epitaphe.

Here lies the Emperor PROBVS, justly for his goodness called PROBVS; of all
the barbarous nations and tyrants a Conqueror.

This passed (as EVSEBIVS testifies) in the year of our Lord 285. He left
neither son nor kinseman that durst make challenge to the Empire: and so
there remained not any man that sought to eternize the memory of so great and
excellent a man.

THE LIFE OF CARVS, ONLY OF THAT NAME, AND ONE and fortith Emperor of Rome. And
of CARINVS and NVMERIANVS, his sons, which were also called AVGVSTI.
NOW were the soldiers again in possession of authority to choose Emperors.
For, as it appears by the process of this History, The men of war ever
hated those Emporors, which were chosen by the Senate.
they ever hated that Emperor which was chosen by the Senate. And although that
in diverse parts of the Empire there were Armies and ordinary Legions; yet that
Army wherein the Emperor was at the time of his death ever pretended to have
greatest right: and he that was chosen by them, seemed to have the best title,
and was held for right Emperor. And for as much as PROBVS was dead and buried,
as we have said, the soldiers began to consult about the election of a new
Emperor: and they all desired to make choife of such a man as might seem to
deserve the same; so as neither the Senate nor other Armies should have any
just cause to except at his election. And in the opinion of the greatest part,
CARVS (whom PROBVS had made Pretorian Prefect) was thought very sufficient, as
well for that he was a man of great worth, as for that he was of great
experience in government, by reason of the charge and offices which he had
held: and finally they chose him Emperor, and swear obedience unto him, to the
great good liking of Carus chosen Emperor.
the whole Army.

When his election was published in Rome, the Senate was nothing pleased
therewith: not in respect of himself; for of his good conditions and virtues
they were very well assured; but for that he had two sons, the eldest of
which expected to be his successor, whose name was CARINVS, who was a wicked
and most vicious man: but they durst not deny their obedience, and so approved
his election, through the desire they had to preserve the peace and quietness
wherein PROBVS had then left them. Whence, or of what country this Emperor
CARVS was, I find not written in any author. FABIVS CECILIANVS, which wrote
the History of his time (as VOPISCVS reports) says, that he was borne in
Slauonia, but by descent he was an African. ONESIMVS says, that he was born in
Rome, and that his father was a Slauon; nevertheless, he was held for a Roman:
which he shows in some letters that are by VOPISCVS mentioned. But AURELIUS
VICTOR, EVSEBIVS, and PAVLVS OROSIVS make him a Frenchman, born in Narbone. It
little imports whence he was: but as soon as he was chosen Emperor, he
made his two sons CAESAR'S, CARINVS and NVMERIANVS, with the name and
authority of AVGVSTI, and he received them as his companions in the Empire.
NVMERIANVS was valiant, wise, learned, a great Musician, and a Poet: But
CARINVS was wicked, dishonest, insolent, and given to all kind of vice.

Having ended these things, he presently began to make most diligent search for
those which had murdered PROBVS; whom he severely punished: which, together
with the love which PROBVS in his life time did show him, took away the
suspicion which some conceived that he had been consenting to his death. Having
done justice, and written his ordinary letters to the Senate, he marched with
his Army to make war against the Sarmates, who as soon as they understood
that PROBVS was dead, came with great fury into Pannonia, and with such pride,
as they threatened all Italy, and the rest of the Empire: where, after some
conflicts, he came to a battle, wherein he had the victory, slew of them
sixteen thousand, took twenty thousand prisoners, and put the rest to flight.
Carus his victory against the ^rmates.


After this victory, he understood that in the East, the Persians made some
alterations. Wherefore, to effect what PROBVS had intended, he resolved to
march presently thither, leaving to his eldest son CARINVS the government of
France and Spain, and NVMERIANVS he took with himself; and went with such
power and so great an Army, as he presently took all the country of
Mesopotamia, meeting not any man to make defense or head against him. And
passing further, he besieged the City of Thesiphonte, where the Persians
sallied forth to encounter him with a sufficient Army, between which (as
EVTROPIVS writes) was a must cruel battle; wherein CARVS overthrew them;
and following his victory, he took by force the famous Cities of Seleucia and
Thesiphonte. And as he was of a great spirit, and experience Carus overthrew
the Per^ans.
in the wars (if death had not surprised him) it was then conceived, that he
would have wholly ruined the power of the Persians: for at that time they were
at civil wars among themselves. But coming with his Army to the banks of
the river Tigris; through his travel and heat, he fell extremely sick.
Wherewith being much oppressed, there happened one day a great tempest of
thunder and lightning, and there fell a thunderbolt into the Emperors Carus
slain with a thunder^.
tent, wherewith some of those which were about him were slain, and among them
the Emperor himself, having reigned but two years, which he spent in
continual travail and wars, in the year of our Lord 287, in the beginning
thereof. Notwithstanding that CARVS was a great and mighty Prince, yet the
thunderbolt had no respect of him; and I see, that those good Princes had as
ill fortune as the most base and wicked. I have read the Chronicles of Kings,
and of other great Princes of many Kingdoms and Provinces: but I never heard
nor read, that the like deaths ever happened unto any as to the Roman
Emperors; at least so commonly: for it is certain, that no kind of death,
how vile or strange soever, but has bin inflicted upon some Roman Emperor.
For amongst them, some have bin slain by treason, and Sundry kinds of death
happened to the Roman Emperors.
commonly by the sword: some by thunderbolts from heaven, as CARVS: some were
burnt with fire, as we will tell you of VAIENS: Others were hanged, as before
we told you of BONOSVS, who was called Emperor in the time of PROBVS; and
before him, old GORDIANVS in Africa: others tormented and dragged along the
ground, as we told you of HELIOGABALVS and VITELLIVS: others were poisoned, as
some before named: others Captives and thrown into prison, like most base and
vile slaves, and so VALERIANVS dyed: others opened their veins and bled to
death, as QVINTILIVS and FLORIANVS: others were drowned, as DECIVS; and to
others happened other kinds of death. So as having not written the lives of above
forty or forty one Emperors, it seems that death has made experience in
them, that there be as many conditions of death, as of dead men: among which
may be numbered the deaths of CARINVS and NVMERIANVS, sons to the Emperor
CARVS, who were called AVGVSTI: from whose life we will presently begin; and
the process of the history will show others no less strange and fearful.

Of CARVS his two sons, which he made CAESAR'S with power and authority of
AVOVSTI; the younger, whose name was NVMERIANVS, was with his father when he
dyed: who as well for the worth and deserts of his father, as for his own, was
much beloved of all the Army and Roman people: wherefore by common consent,
as soon as his father Numerianus chosen Emperor.
was dead, he was chosen Emperor, and for such was generally obeyed. He was
married to the daughter of a rich and mighty man, whose name was ARRIVS APER.
This new Emperor greatly lamenting the death of his father, and imagining that
in that war at that time there was no more to be done, raised his Camp, and
began to retire: and for that he was diseased in his eyes, and could not endure
the light; he made himself to be carried in a close Litter, so as he could not
be seen. But as the desire to reign is the most violent of all other
passions; so his father in law ARIVS APER forgetting the duty which he ought
to his sovereign Lord, and the love to his daughter and son in law,
resolved to kill him, and by means of his great wealth and friends to procure
the Empire for himself: which he might easily bring to pass, for that he was
allowed to come to him when he pleased: so as by his hand (or some other man's
by his direction) NVMERIANVS was slain in his Litter; and to the end it should
not be revealed, they left him therein: and giving it out that he could not
endure to see any man, Numerianus slain by his father in law^
they carried him dead two or three days, practicing in the mean time what
they had proiected: but as the dead body began to smell, the treason was
discovered sooner then ARRIVS would; and there was so great a confusion and
sorrow in the whole Army, that every man took Arms and said, that they would
choose an Emperor which should punish so great a treason. But first of all
ARRIVS APER was brought prisoner before the Imperial Judgment seat: for it
was presently known that he had committed this murder.

The Army being in this confusion and tumult, by the common consent of all men
DIOCLESIANVS was chosen and saluted Emperor, who was the chief man in the
Army, and one of the most excellent Captains in the time of PROBVS: he was
(as it were) the Emperors Dioclesianus chosen Emperor.
steward, and had the rule and government of his household. He was borne in
Dalmatia of obscure parentage, in so much as some say that his father was a
Notarie: and others say, that he was the son of a bondsman. But he was a man
of a great courage, very wise, a great defender and lover of the commonwealth,
of a quick wit and understanding to make provision for any occasion that might
be offered, according to the time and season: and was of great experience in
affairs and charges of importance. He was also a man of high conceits, which
he put in execution; but with great wisdom and discretion.

DIOCLESIANVS seeing himself called by all men Emperor, with great courage
accepted the Empire: and clothing himself with the Imperial robe, he set him
in the tribunal seat; and being saluted AUGUSTUS, the first thing he did, was
to make inquiry, how NVMERIANVS came to his death, notwithstanding that he
already knew the same. The treason and practice being discovered unto him, he
made the wicked ARRIVS APER to be brought before him; and with his own sword
slew him; so much was he displeased therewith: And afterward Arrius Aper
slain by Dioclesianus.
he made those which were his accomplices and partakers to be slain. In this
manner was the death of the good Emperor NVMERIANVS revenged. CARINVS the
other brother, who was left CAESAR and was governor of France and Spain, was
very unlike unto him: for as this was noble, virtuous and given to all virtuous
actions and exercises; and besides all his other excellencies, we read, he was
the best poet of his time, and an excellent Orator: so was CARINVS dishonest,
luxurious, an adulterer, and given to all kind of vice: wherefore, he was
generally abhorred of all men; in so much that his own father hated him, and
being advertised of his behavior, said, he held him not his son, purposing
to deprive him of the Empire.

He then remaining in France, having put from him all the good and virtuous men
which his father left with him, conuersing altogether with such as himself,
understood of the death of his father, and of his brother, and also of
DIOCLESIANVS his election. And as (although wicked and vicious) he was valiant
and of great courage, without amending any of his evil conditions, but rather
with his liberty increasing the same; so he levied the greatest forces he was
able, and with great diligence made provision to make head against
DIOCLESIANVS, hoping to remain sole Emperor. Whereof when DIOCLESIANVS was
advertised, he with great expedition came out of the East into France against
him. And as of either side there was both great power and courage; so they had
sundry skirmishes, which were very fierce and cruel: but in the end, each of
them setting up his rest, they came to a battle, which was the last and most
cruel; wherein CARINVS was justly overthrown and slain. And in this manner
C^inus overthrown and slain.
remained DIOCLESIANVS at that time sole Lord and Emperor, which was in the
year of our Lord 288.

THE LIFE OF DIOCLESIANVS, ONLY OF THAT NAME, AND OF MAXIMINIANVS, THE TWO AND
FORTITH EMPEROVR OF ROME.
DIoclesianus, for his virtue, deserved the dignity of the Roman Empire: to
whom the government seeming heavy and burdensome, he took for his assistant
and companion Maximinianus; who carried himself with such love, loyalty and
so much reverence toward him, and he toward Maximinianus, as they seemed to
be rather two most loving brothers then Emperors. He made Constance and
Galerius Armentarius, Caesar's; to which he gave the charge of managing sundry
wars, which he could not himself follow in person: and having obtained many
victories, and triumphed together with his Caesar's and his Augustus; in the end
he resolved to leave the Empire, being grown old; and he persuaded
Maximinianus to do the like; wherewith he was well content, and never after
could be induced again to accept of that dignity and government;
notwithstanding that he was by many men much entreated. He was very cruel
against the Christians and destroyed many of their Churches, because they
should not have convenient means and places to assemble together. In the end
being very old, it is said that he killed himself with poison, for fear to be
put to some shameful death. An and unworthy truly of his glorious life.

THE original of DIOCLESIANVS, and the manner of his election we have above
expressed; together with his wisdom and valor: It remains now to declare
the success of his life, and acts, in such manner, as PAVLVS OROSIVS,
EVTROPIVS, and other ancient authors have left it in wrighting. Before which I
will tell you one thing of DIOCLESIANVS, which I do not use to observe in the
lives of other Emperors, for that I hold it a vain thing; although recorded
by those authors which I follow in this History: which was, the augurie or
forewarning that each of them had, that he should be Emperor before he was so.
Which I will set down for that it seems pleasing; and a little to withdraw
the readers mind from too much thinking of serious matters, of greater
importance. FLAVIVS VOPISCVS writes in the life of NVMERIANVS, son to the
Emperor CARVS, that DIOCLESIANVS being a poor soldier, and in his youth
serving in the wars of France, was lodged in a woman's house which was a
Magician or southsayer; or as we say, a cunning-woman, one of those which by
the Frenchmen were called Druides: Which woman was his hostess and did dress
his meat. And making his reckoning with her for his diet (which he did every
day) as he was very sparing of his purse, this woman said unto him; Thou art
very sparing with me DIOCLESIAN, and truly art too very a niggard. DIOCLESIAN
in jest answered her; Pardon me in that I am so sparing in my expenses, for I
am but a poor soldier: but I promise thee, that when I am an Emperor, I will
be very liberal unto thee. Quoth this woman unto him; Do not jest with me: for
thou shall be Emperor when thou have slain a Boar. DIOCLESIAN took A Druid
tells Dioclesian the he should (...)Emperor.
this for a jest: and, as he was of a very hautie mind, he never forgot these
speeches: and although that he always followed the wars, yet he gave himself
much to hunting, and to kill wild Boares; moved thereto by her words.
Afterward in process of time, AVRELIANVS, PROBVS, TACITUS and CARVS came to
be Emperors, and he had already killed and daily did kill Boares; and sometime
used to jest at the prophecy of this Druid, saying; I do daily kill wild
Boares, but others eat the flesh. At the last, when with his own hands he had
slain the father in law to NVMERIANVS, whose name was APER, which signifies a
Boar; it is written that he then said; Now is my prophecy expired and
accomplished: for I have killed the Boar which did prognosticate to me the
Empire: and so he held the Druids prophecy fulfilled. It is said, that he came
down from his throne of purpose to kill ARRIVS APER with his own hand:
although it seemed not fitting his greatness to do so vile a deed, yet he did
it to confirm the prophecy. It is so written by these authors: and although I
think not but that it happened so; yet I hold it but a jest: for this
Southsayer did not know what she said, and this which happened was but by chance;
and so much the more, for that DIOCLESIAN was not made Emperor when he had
killed one Boar, but after that he had slain many: and in the end he was made
Emperor when he had slain a man whose name was APER, which in English
signifies a Boar. And for that all the prophecies which I find written of
these Emperors are after this manner, I for bear to write them: for that they
bring no fruit with them, but rather hurt and danger, enticing Christians to
have regard to Southsayings; a thing truly very pernicious, which the infidels
observed through the instigation of the devil. As soon as DIOCLESIAN saw
himself free from the wars of CARINVS, beginning to take the government of
the Empire into his hands, an infinite number of people which were laborers and
pezants, rebelled in France, in manner of a communalty; the captains were men
fitting their humors, whose names were AMANDVS and HELIENVS: wherefore
accounting that war unworthy of himself, he sent thither MAXIMINIANVS, whom he
had already made CAESAR, for that he was a man of much worth and very valiant
in Arms, who (although with great danger) put to flight and slew a great
number of them, so as all places there were in peace and quietness. But other
wars and tyrants rising, holding himself alone insufficient for so great a
charge, he now made MAXIMINIANVS (whom before he had made CAESAR) AVOVSTVS,
Emperor his companion and equal with himself in the Empire, as some other
Emperors had done the Dioclesian chose Maximini anus for his companion in the
Empire.
like. And truly it was a wonderful matter to see, that they agreed so well
together: for MAXIMINVS was not only a good and loyal companion in the Empire,
but there was never any son more obedient unto his father, then he was to
DIOCLESIAN; and so in love and concord they governed the Empire a great space,
and obtained many noble victories against their enemies. When DIOCLESIAN had
made this choice, he took his way toward the East, for that there was a
certain Captayn in Egypt, whose name was ACHILLEVS, who had seized on that
kingdom, and was called Emperor, being mighty and of very great power: and
MAXIMINIANVS Achilleus called Emperor (...)Egypt.
went also into Africa, where all the legions and old soldiers were drawn
together in a mutiny, and so other nations with their Captains very orderly
rose with the countries, and enjoyed the rents and tributes; and these for
their continuance were called QVINGENTIANI or QVINQVAGENARII. These two
enterprises were held to be most important, wherein they had good success, as
we will presently declare. But before those wars began, there happened other of
no less importance: for a principal captain called CRAVSIVS, or (as others
say) CARAVSIVS, Crausius rebelled in Britanny.
rebelled in Britanny, possessed himself of that Island, and was called Emperor.
And NARSEVS King of Persia and Armenia, taking the benefit of the time, began
to war against the Empire, and invaded Mesopotamia. One IVLIANVS also in Italy
rebelled, and would have made himself Emperor: But seeing how small means he
had to maintain the same, he stabbed himself with his poiniard, and fell into
a fire; as AVRELIVVS VICTOR reports. Iulianus, rebelling in Italy, slew
himself.
For which occasions the two Emperors agreed that each of them should name one
to be CAESAR and his successor, which should be such a man, as should be of
quality able to help to preserve and defend the Empire; which they did: and
DIOCLESIAN chose one GALERIVS MAXIMINVS, who by his surname was called
ARMENTARIVS. This man was of so base a lineage, that they report him to be the
son of a Cowheard, and born in Dacia; but was a most valiant man, very wise,
and an excellent Captain; yet very severe, and of a churlish disposition.
MAXIMINIANVS named another called CONSTANTIVS, and by his surname CLORVS; a man
very virtuous, wise, a valiant Captain, and a Roman Gentleman, Constantius
Clorus made Caesar by Maximinianus.
born of high and Noble parentage. His fathers name was EVTROPIVS, and his
mothers CLAVDIA; Niece to the Emperor CLAUDIUS who had the great victory
against the Goths: and, to be the better assured of them, they caused them to
put away the wives they had, and to marry others. CONSTANTIVS did put away
HELEN, by whom he had already one son called CONSTANTINE, who afterward was
an excellent Emperor; and he married with THEODOSIA, the daughter-in-law of
MAXIMINIANVS.

When they had made this provision, divided the Empire among them, and levied
their Armies, the Emperor MAXIMINIANVS went into Africa; and DIOCLESIAN into
Egypt, against ACHILLEVS. GALERIVS ARMENTARIVS went into the East against the
Persians. CONSTANTIVS CLORVS CAESAR remained in France, to make head against
CARAVSIVS, who called himself Emperor in Britannie; and against the incursions
of the Northerly Nations. Which wars, although some of them happened at one
instant and together, I will relate in such manner as shall seem most
expedient. And to begin with the Emperors: I say, that DIOCLESIAN being arrived
in Egypt, ACHILLEVS attended his coming with a great and mighty Army: and
joining battle (notwithstanding that ACHILLEVS fought very valiantly)
DIOCLESIAN had the victory; and ACHILLEVS, saving himself by flight, recovered
the City of Alexandria: where, seeking to repair his forces, he was besieged
by DIOCLESIAN; and in the time of eight months (for, so long the siege lasted)
there happened many battles, skirmishes, and encounters: but in the end the City
was taken Alexandria taken by Dioclesian, and Achili^us was cast to the Lions.
by force, and ACHILLEVS by DIOCLESIAN'S commandment was cast to be devoured
by Lions and other wild Beasts. And so in all that Kingdom he used cruel and
extreme punishments, putting to death many thousands of men; but principally of
those which had bin leaders and motives of this rebellion, or had consented
thereto.

MAXIMINIANVS the other Emperor, who went into Africa against the Quingentiani,
in the beginning warred very doubtfully, and with great difficulty: but the
greatest part of that people fighting with his power, he vanquished, and
constrained the rest to sue for peace; and afterward went into diverse parts,
destroying the tyrants and thieves which were in those Countries: wherefore he
was called MAXIMINIANVS HERCVLEVS, for that HERCULES Maximinianus called Herculeus
traveled many parts of the world, doing the like. And DIOCLESIAN by a new
surname was called IOVIVS, of IVPITER; who, they said, did overcome and kill
the Giants. And so he and his companions (in his name) over came and slew the
tyrants. The other wars made by the CAESAR'S proved not so well at first: for,
CONSTANTIVS CLORVS, who was left to make head against CARAVSIVS; as CARAVSIVS
was valiant and wily, and possessed of all Brittannie, so could he no way
preuail against him, but was rather forced by the Germans that came down
against him, to conclude a peace with CARAVSIVS. And so CARAVSIVS remained
peaceable Lord of Britannie 7 years. Yet afterward his companion Constantius
made peace with Carausius in Britanny.
and familiar friend called ALECTVS, slew him, and took the rule of the
country to himself, which he held 3 years. But he at last was ouerthrown and
slain by ASCL^PIDOTVS, or ASCLOPIVS DOTVS, a Pretorian Prefect: and so Britanny
was again recovered, after it had bin usurped by rebels 10 years. When
CONSTANTIVS made peace with CARAVSIVS, he had a dangerous war with the Germans
and barbarous nations: with whom, among other battles, he fought one very
memorable; whrein, in one same day, he was ouerthrown, and Conqueror;
Constantius in great danger was ouerthrown and overcame both in one day.
which happened thus: Coming to a battle with them in the morning, near a city
of the Ligones or Cigones in Gallia Belgica, part whereof is now called
Flanders; his troops fought so ill, as they were constrained to turn their
backs, and to retire to the City: and CONSTANTIVS CLORVS was forced to do the
like. But when he came to the gates of the City, he found them fast locked; and
was in such a straight, that if they had not let down a rope* wherewith he
was drawn over the wall into the City, he had then been slain by the enemy.
When he was within the city he called the soldiers together, and made such a
speech unto them, as they were greatly ashamed at their dishonor: so as in the
evening within five hours after the first fight (the enemy mistrusting no such
matter) he commanded all the gates to be opened, and sallied out suddenly,
setting upon his enemies with such courage, that after a long fight they were
ouerthrown and cut in pieces, being few less then 60000 men.

In like manner happened many great accidents to CONSTANTIVS in those parts. And
while as DIOCLESIAN and MAXIMINIAN Emperors, and CONSTANTIVS CAESAR followed
these wars, GALERIVS began a war no less dangerous, against NARSEVS King
of Persia: against whom (as we have said) he went. For, besides that it
continued long, there were many men slain on either side, without any
advantage or hope of victory to either party, until at the last they came with
their whole power to a set battle near to the city of Carras; into which
GALERIVS CAESAR entered with lesser forces then he ought to have done or was
requisite: and fighting with greater courage then discretion, he was
overthrown, and losing almost his whole Army, he escaped by flight. Whereat
the Emperor DIOCLESIAN was so much grieved, that GALERIVS coming to his
presence into Mesopotamia, meeting him upon the way alighted from his horse,
and came to the litter wherein the Emperor was, to do him honor: but DIOCLESIAN
suffered him to go a great while over the fields on foot, without staying or
willing him to take his horse; blaming him, that he had with Galerius veproued
by Dioclesian.
so little discretion suffered himself to be overthrown in battle. In the
end, he gave him leave to depart, inoyning him to levy a new Army, and to
endeavor to recover his lost honor, and to defend his province. Which GALERIVS
(parting from him much ashamed) with all diligence put in execution; DIOCLESIAN
remaining with his troops in Mesopotamia in the mean time, to the end the
Persians should not invade it. And so GALERIVS with all speed A second battle
between Galerius and the Persians.
went into Europe to levy soldiers; and bringing with him the legions of
Slauonia, Dacia, and Misia, he returned into Asia, and went into the greater
Armenia, whither NARSEVS the King of the Persians, by whom he had been
overthrown, was already come, with whom he began the war again in very
good order, with good advice, and no less courage. The two Armies came so
near the one to the other, as by a mutual consent of their Generals they
joined battle: The one presuming on the victory past, and to preserve the
honor which they had gotten; and the other to recover their losses. And so the
soldiers for these reasons, fought Galerius his victory against the Persians.
with incredible courage and resolution; which made the battle very cruel
and bloody: But the Roman Army consisting of more choice men, and better
trained, obtained the victory; but not without great difficulty and danger.
The King escaped by flight, and GALERIVS following the execution entered his
camp; where he found great riches, and took his wives, his children, his
sisters, and many Noble and principal men of the Kingdom of Persia. And
marching forwards with his forces, he invaded his country, and did great
spoil therein, not finding any man that durst to make resistance against him.
And from thence he went into Mesopotamia to see DIOCLESIAN, where he was
received as in a triumph: and DIOCLESIAN himself went to meet him, and
entertained and embraced him cheerfully, doing him great honor.

All matters in the East being pacified, and the Persians and Parthians
ouerthrown; having therein spent many years, they returned into Europe, where
MAXIMINIANVS, called HERCVLEVS, Emperor and his companion, and CONSTANTIVS
CAESAR were, who were busied in the wars before recited; all being (in truth)
governed and directed by the wisdom of DIOCLESIAN: whose valor, policy, and
courage was such, as there was not any that durst disobay him, no not his
equal MAXIMINIANVS; so as they all seemed to be his sons and his Captains,
rather then Emperors and his companions.

These men held the Empire in peace in three parts, to wit, East, West, and
South: but the Northerly parts could never be thoroughly subdued, as well for
their fierceness, courage, and valor, as for that when they were ouerthrown and
put to flight, they withdrew themselves into most cold, barren, and
inaccessible places, which they could well endure being born under that
climate: so as the Roman Captains held it impossible to pass any further with
their Armies, contenting themselves to have chased them out of the bounds of
the Empire; but they would afterward return again with more fury then at the
first, and were ever troublesome and feared. Now the Scythians, the Goths, the
Sarmates, the Alans, the Carpi, the Catti, the Quades, and other Barbarous
nations rose against the Empire.
nations in great numbers assembling themselves, with a desire to rob and
steal, and to inhabit some more fertile soil, began to make war and did great
spoil in the territories of the Empire; against whom the Emperors and their
two CAESAR'S marched with their Armies: and dispersing themselves into sundry
parts they followed the wars, although not without loss and great difficulty,
the one helping and assisting the other. In the end they all obtained victory,
and the barbarous nations were repulsed, and many thousands of them were taken
prisoners: and afterward being set at liberty, certain Pro^ces, which by the
wars were dispeopled were given them to inhabit. DIOCLESIAN having obtained
this victory and many other, and having settled peace in the Empire by the
industry of himself, of MAXIMINIANVS his companion in the Empire, and of
GALERIVS and CONSTANTIVS who were CAESAR'S; now willing to enjoy the accustomed
reward of victories, he came to Rome, where he entered in triumph together with
the Emperor MAXIMINIANVS, and the two CAESAR'S aforesaid, Dioclesians ^umph.
where was made unto them one of the most stately triumphs that ever was seen
in Rome, wherein was an infinite mass of treasure of the spoil of the East,
of Egypt, and of other nations by them subdued: there were chariots full of
arms, and of vessels of gold, and silver; and there also wereled prisoners the
wife and children of the King of Persia, with many other Kings and Captains of
sundry armies of the Alanes, of the Catti and others, which was in the
eighteenth year of the reign of DIOCLESIAN: for so long was the time that he
had been busied in the wars, and in providing and giving order for such things
as were done therein. This DIOCLESIAN was so wise, so politic and so valiant in
the government of the Empire, as no Emperor either before or after him, held
the Empire in the like subjection: for MAXIMINIANVS obeyed him as his father,
and GALERIVS and CONSTANTIVS as their Lord, and so he was honored and
reverenced more like a King, then an Emperor; and he would have his subjects
adore him, and do him reverence kneeling upon the ground, after the manner of
the Kings of Persia. And as the custom of the Emperors in former time was,
when they were entreated by any eminent men to give them their hands to kiss,
they, raising them up, gave them peace with their lips on the cheek, and mean
men used to kiss their knees: but DIOCLESIAN commanded by a public edict,
that without any difference all men should kiss his foot prostrate upon the
earth; and for the greater reverence, he made his shoes to be set with pearl
and stone of great worth: And in the top of this his great prosperity, by the
instigation of the Devil, he resolved to persecute the Christians, and this was
the 11th general persecution of the primitive Church after NERO, and cruellest
of them all, and lasted longer then any other, for it continued The eleventh
Persecution.
10 years. The Christians had lived in rest and liberty many years after the
persecution of AVRELIANVS, and the number of them and of their Churches was now
so great, that in all the cities of the Empire and out of it there was a great
concourse of people, and their Churches were much frequented: with which rest
and tranquillity (as EVSEBIVS, who was a christian author of those times
reports) the ceremonies and discipline of the Church began to be corrupt,
and fervent devotion began to wax cold, envy and contention growing between
the Bishops. There was such discord among them, that (as he conceiueth) God did
justly suffer the persecution which then happened, which in truth was so
cruel, as no tongue is able to express the same: Wherefore well says the
same EVSEBIVS, who was present and saw the same, that he cannot thoroughly
express with words all that which he saw with his eyes. And both he and
PAVLVS OROSIVS write such things, which were of that quality, as there can be
no heart so hard, but will have compassion, and be grieved to hear what they
have written: So as it is wonderful to consider of the patience and constancy
of the persecuted, and of the rage and cruelty of those which persecuted them.

In general, DIOCLESIAN endeavored to destroy all the Churches and Temples of
the Christians, to the end they should not assemble to pray and to use divine
service, and he burnt all the books he could get of the holy scriptures, and
would not permit that any man of what condition soever, if he were a Christian,
should hold any office or Magistracy: and if he were Horrible cruelty used by
Dioclesian against the Christians.
already advanced to any, he should be deprived and held for infamous, if he
escaped with his life. The soldiers and men of war, being Christians, which
would not renounce their faith, were cassiered, and deprived of all military
honor, and some of their lives. The Bishops and Prelates were spoiled of that
which they had, and many of them slain and martyred; and a slave which was a
Christian could by no means obtain his freedom. This was common in all the
provinces of the Empire: but particularly in some of them was committed very
great cruelty, as in Phrygia, in Egypt, in Syria, and in other parts. Some
were fleyed alive, others were torn with iron combs: and so their skins being
rent, they were returned to the prisons,; where they were lodged upon tile
stones, and the sheards of broken pots, to the end that their rest should be
more cruel and terrible then their martyrdom. Honest and delicate women, but
strong and constant in Faith, were hanged up by the feet as naked as they were
borne, to the end that their life should continue for a space with shame and
double torment. Others had their ears, noses, lips, hands, fingers, and feet
cut off, having only their eyes left, for a greater ^orment, and martyrdom
unto them: For others, they with great force bowed down great arms and boughs
of Trees, and fastened the one leg to one bough, and the other leg to another;
and then letting loose the said boughs with the force thereof the bodies were
rent in sunder. Between the nails of the fingers and toes, which are very
sensible and tender parts, they thrust thorns and splinters of Canes. Upon
other men, being naked, they cast melted lead and tin, wherewith they endured
most cruel torments. Finally, there were used against the Christians such
torments and cruelties, as the like had never been seen nor imagined: and the
number of the murdered (during the time of this persecution) was infinite.

As DIOCLESIAN was in the height of this felicite obeyed and feared of all the
World, he resolved to do a notable act, the like whereof was never observed in
any other Emperor before his time: which was, to renounce the Empire and to
live a private life; considering (as some write) like a wise man, the
mutabilitie of all things in this life, which never continue in one estate; but
when they are grown to their height, naturally decline and fall; Taking
example by the great POMPEY, MARCUS ANTONIUS, HANNIBAL, and other great
Captains and princes, who having attained to the highest of all felicity and
prosperity, were afterward thrown down and brought low. Accounting himself
also insufficient for so great a charge, by reason of his decrepit old age, and
fearing to fall into contempt, he would first contemn all dominion and rule,
with so many cares and troubles; and so lead a quiet life in mean estate
without Dioclesian ^nounced the Empire.
care or disturbance. And he was not contented to leave the Empire himself,
but he persuaded, and (as we may say) in a manner compelled the Emperor
MAXIMINIANVS to do the like. Which between them was concluded and agreed upon
by letters and Embassies, in such sort, that both of them upon one day, having
governed the Empire the space of twenty years, in the year of our Lord three
hundred and seven, MAXIMINIANVS being in Milan, and DIOCLESIAN in Nicomedia,
renounced the Empire; and putting off their imperial robes and ensigns, they
came down from the thrones where they sat, and made themselves equal with
other particular and private men; First nominating and choosing for Emperors and
AVGVSTI, CONSTANTIVS CLORVS, and GALERIVS ARMENTARIVS; who Constantius Clorus
and Galerius Armentarius made Emperor^ by Dioclesian.
before were CAESAR'S. Which, DIOCLESIAN did so willingly and so unfeignedly, as
he afterward used to say; that he then began to live, and saw the beauty of
the sun. And it seems to be true: for after that these two had left the
Empire, as we have said, he would never intermeddle with any matter of
government whatsoever. But all his care was to plant and set a garden, and an
orchard which he had in Solonia a city in Dalmatia, where he was borne, and
whither he retired himself. And afterward in process of time being required
by his companion MAXIMINIANVS and his son in law GALERIVS, who then was
Emperor, upon some urgent occasions which happened, again to receive the
Empire, alleging that it was necessary and expedient for the common good; he
would not accept thereof; but answered, that if they had seen and enjoyed such
quietness and rest as he had, and the herbs and trees which he possessed in his
country, they would not have sent to have made any such request unto him: for
he had already travailed and done enough for the commonwealth; and that now
God had given him time to travail and to live to himself; and that he could
not put to account that he had ever lived, but since that he lived in peace and
rest in his own country. They replying, that he ought to have respect unto the
great acts which he had done, and not to lose the reputation of the victories
which he might have in his own time: He answered, That having settled his
felicity in the gifts of the mind, it was no vile or base thing, neither
ought it so to be adjudged to contemn temporal riches and rule, and to
profess an honest poor life; agreeing with the discipline and examples of the
sage and ancient Philosophers: and so finally he would not alter his
determination. It cannot be said, but that this wise Prince did well understand
how little worldly dominion and command is to be esteemed; seeing that with it,
it brings so much trouble, anguish and vexation. And I do partly believe,
that for some good deed which he had done, it pleased God (who leaves no
merit unrewarded) to give him that rest and judgment in this world; seeing
that in the other life, as a cruel Infidel, he was to pay for the cruelties
which he had committed against the Primitive Church; and in the end gave him
such a death as he had deserved. Some say, that he poisoned himself for fear
The death of Dioclesian.
of LICINIVS and of CONSTANTINE, who afterward were Emperors, who in their
Letters had threatened him, for that he would not come to their nuptials. Others
say, that he died mad, after that he had lived (as says AURELIUS VICTOR)
seventy and eight years. What death his companion MAXIMINIANVS died, I will
tell you in the lives of his Successors. Of two wives which DIOCLESIAN had, I
find not that there remained any other son or daughter but VALERIA, whom he
married to GALERIVS ARMENTARIVS when he made him CAESAR. Of MAXIMINIANVS
remained one son, whose name was MAXENTIVS, who afterward took the name of
Emperor; whom he had by a woman of Soria, called EVTROPIA; and one daughter
named FAVSTA, whom he married to CONSTANTYNE, son of CONSTANTIVS CAESAR, who
afterward was Emperor.

THE LIFE OF CONSTANTIVS CLORUS, THE FIRST OF THAT NAME, AND OF GALERIVS
ARMENTARIVS, THE THREE AND FORTITH EMPEROR OF ROME.
PResently after that DIOCLESIAN and MAXIMINIAN had resigned the Empire,
CONSTANTIVS and GALERIVS Constantius Clorus and Galerius Armentarius made
Emperors.
without any contradiction were obeyed and accepted for Emperors, accordingly
as the others had ordained; they being, as we may say, sons-in-law to the two
last Emperors: for, GALERIVS was married to DIOCLESIAN'S daughter; and
CONSTANTIVS, to THEODORA the daughter-in-law of MAXIMINIANVS.

This CONSTANTIVS was a very Noble, virtuous, courteous and valiant Gentleman,
both of condition and blood: And GALERIVS although he were but of a base stock
and lineage, yet was he nevertheless valiant, and a singular good Captain; but
therewith cruel, terrible, churlish, incontinent; but well proportioned, and
(as AURELIUS VICTOR says) of a comely and goodly constitution of body.
Notwithstanding that in conditions there was great difference betwixt them, yet
DIOCLESIAN through his great wisdom made them to live in peace and concord; so
as they no way disagreed. But, he being dead, they (as wise men) for fear to
fall out, agreed by lot to divide the Provinces of the Empire between them. To
CONSTANTIVS befell Italy, Sicilia, and Africa, with all the Provinces thereof,
together with France, Spain, Germany and Britannie: and to GALERIVS The Empire
divided between Constantius and Galerius.
was allotted Slauonia, Macedonia, Thracia, Thessalia; all the Provinces of
Graecia, of Asia, of Egypt, of Soria, and all the East, and the Islands therein.

This division being made, it seemed a great charge and a burden to the mild
condition of CONSTANTIVS CLORVS, To have the government of so many Provinces as
fell to his share: for, he rather desired to govern well, than to govern much;
and therefore renounced to GALERIVS the Provinces of Africa, and of Italy,
contenting himself with France, Spain, and the Isles of Britannie. Truly he had
reason, seeing that one of these Kings at this day is held for one of the most
mighty Potentates of the world: so as that part which CONSTANTIVS did hold for
the small time he lived, he governed very wisely and uprightly, to the great
good and content of the subjects; and was so highly esteemed and beloved, that
in his time there was not any war or rebellion in any of those Provinces. He
did much honor and favor the Christians, and would not consent that any
violence or displeasure should be done unto any of them. He died in England of
sickness, after that he had been (as witnesses EVSEBIVS) sixteen years The
Emperor Constantius Clorus died in England. Constantine chosen Emperor in his
fathers place.
CAESAR, and two years Emperor. And in his place his son CONSTANTINE (whom he
had by his first wife called HELENA, from whom he was divorced to marry with
the Emperor MAXIMINIANVS daughter-in-law) was chosen Emperor. The said
CONSTANTINE was also married to FAVSTA, the daughter of MAXIMINIANVS. And this
was the end of CONSTANTIVS. But his companion GALERIVS having accepted that
which he desired not (which was Italy and Africa) and considering also that
one man alone could hardly rule and govern so great an estate well; to the end
therefore that he might be assisted in the wars, and in all other accidents
that might befall him, he made two CAESAR'S, which were Seuerus and Maximinus
made Caesar's by Galerius.
almost equal in dignity to himself: the one was called SEVERUS, whom he set
in the government of Italy and Africa; and to the other, whose name was
MAXIMINVS, being (as says AURELIUS VICTOR) his sisters son, he gave the
government of the East; houlding to himself the Provinces of Slauonia, and of
Graecia, with supreme power, as soueraign Emperor above the GAESARS: so as by
four heads the world was gouernd: which were CONSTANTINVS and GALERIVS,
Emperors; and SEVERUS and MAXIMINVS, CAESAR'S.

After that DIOCLESIAN and MAXIMINIAN had renounced the Empire; the Pretorian
soldiers, who (as has been often said) remained near to Rome, discontented
with the government The Pretorian soldiers discontent with the government of
Seuerus, made Maxentius their Emperor.
of SEVERUS which ruled it (he being far absent from thence, going into
Slauonia to see the Emperor GALERIVS) assembling themselves in a great tumult,
chose MAXENTIVS for Emperor, who (as is said) was MAXIMINIANVS his son, who
renounced the Empire; whom he had by a base woman of Soria, called EVTROPIA:
the which bred a great confusion in the Empire, being then in peace; and there
ensued so great troubles, as can hardly be described. When the Emperor GALERIVS
understood heerof, he commanded SEVERUS CAESAR with all speed to take his way
toward Rome, where the new Tyrant MAXENTIVS was. Being encamped near to the
City, the greatest part of his Army (for, novelties are ever most pleasing)
went over to MAXENTIVS: which his father MAXIMINIANVS, being then in Lucania,
after he had renounced the Empire, understanding, through desire to rule, came
in great haste to Rome, under pretext to counsel and assist his son in the
government; and sent to DIOCLESIAN, desiring him to do the like; who (as we
have said) would not accept of his counsel, but lived in peace.

MAXIMINIANVS having received his answer, and finding himself to be much
esteemed, Maximinianus who had renounced the Empire, came to Rome under color
to give counsel to his son in the government of the Empire.
resolved to repossesse the Empire, and to dispossess his son; surmising,
that he being in possession of Rome, and that his sonne-in-law CONSTANTINE
reigning in Britannie, Spain and France, all would yield obedience to him. But
his imaginations had so ill success, that he not only mist of his purpose,
but was so hardly dealt withal by the Pretorian Cohorts (his son permitting
the same) that he was glad to fly out of Italy into France, where his son
in law the good CONSTANTINE had the government; who very honorably received
him, as his father in law, and as a man which had been Emperor. But he which
had set his thoughts only upon the Empire, and sought by all means how he
might attain thereto, like a wicked and disloyal father in law purposed to
have slain his son in law CONSTANTINE: but it Maximinianus practiced the
death of his sonin-law Constantine. The Emperor Maximinianu^ slain in Marseller.
pleased God to discover his treason, to the end that he should receive
punishment for the cruelty which he had used against the Christians: for
flying from CONSTANTINES Court he was overtaken at Marseilles; where he sought
to have embarked himself, and there was slain: and so MAXIMINIANVS made an
unfortunate end, his son MAXENTIVS remaining Emperor and Tyrant in Rome, as
is aforesaid.

When GALERIVS ARMENTARIVS, who was the right Emperor, understood of the ill
success and death of SEVERUS CAESAR, whom he had sent against MAXENTIVS; he
resolved in person to go against him with the greatest power he was able to
make: and, to the end he might leave a good guard in the Provinces of Slanonia,
he made an excellent Captain called LICINIVS, CAESAR; who was a man of mean
condition and base parentage, being but the son of a poor Labourer of Dacia;
but very wise, and an excellent Captain in the wars.

This being done, and having taken such order as was requisite, he departed
with his Army toward Italy, directing his journey for Rome: but by the way
he was advertised, that his own soldiers did treat among themselves of
abandoning him, and of going over to MAXENTIVS; and that certain companies of
soldiers in Italy, which until then had held for him, had done the like.
Whereupon, fearing to be overthrown, he returned to the place where he left
LICINIVS; repenting also that he had made him CAESAR, for that he saw he was of
greater power and authority than he desired he should have bin. GALERIVS being
so returned, there grew in his flank an impostume; so noisome and pestilent,
that no medicines or remedies whatsoever were of force to cure it: and it becam
so corrupt, that there fell a number of worms from it: which did put him to
such intolerable pain, that he was ready in despair to have killed Galerius
incurable disease, and infirmity.
himself. Seeing himself to die in this manner, he made some of his Physicians
which had him in cure, to be slain, because they could not cure him. And now
at the last, without any true repentance, he began to think that this happened
unto him for persecuting the Christians: and therefore in great haste,
consulting with CONSTANTINE who reigned in Britannie, France, and Spain, he
commanded all laws and edicts whatsoever made against them, to cease, and to
be abolished; and to that effect sent his Letters and Decrees into all the
Provinces of Graecia, and of the East, where MAXIMINVS (who was CAESAR for him)
governed; which, EVSEBIVS (an Author of great truth, and an ey-witnes) sets
down verbatim. And, besides this, he made many Christians to be brought into
his presence, whom he desired and entreated to pray to God for his bodily
health; for, he remembered not the health of his soul, but would have
continued an Infidel still. Wherefore either they would not make so unjust a
supplication to God for him, or else it pleased not God to hear their prayers:
for, within few days after, he died of that his incurable disease; yet some
Authors say, that he killed himself. The death of Galerius Armentarius.


This his death happened in the year of our Lord 312, he having reigned six
years; the first two in company with CONSTANTIVS, and the rest with the
CAESAR'S. Being dead, all things remained in this estate: MAXENTIVS, who
tyrannously was called Emperor, held Rome and all Italy. CONSTANTINVS, who
indeed was Emperor, held France, Spain, Britannie, and part of Germany.
LICINIVS, whom GALERIVS had made CAESAR, remained in possession of Slauonia,
and of the Provinces of Gracia, and presently made himself to be called
Emperor: and MAXIMINVS enjoyed all the East, with the dignity and name of
CAESAR. Among all which, only CONSTANTINE seemed to have just title, for that
he was the son of CONSTANTIVS, and had married the daughter of MAXIMINIANVS;
both which had been Emperors.

THE LIFE OF CONSTANTINE THE GREAT, FIRST OF THAT NAME, AND FORTY FOVRTH ROMAN
Emperor; And of MAXENTIVS, and of MARCUS LICINIVS, which in his time were
called EMPERORS.
THE ARGUMENT.
THE Empire was divided among diverse Princes, and each governed his part with
equal authority: but Maxentius reigning in Rome as a Tyrant, behaved himself
in such sort, that Constantine bare Arms against him notwithstanding that he
was allied unto him, and joined battle with him, less confident in the force
of his Army, then in the vision which he had seen, that under the sign of
the Cross he should overcome; which he ever after bore for his device. He
likewise overcame Marcus Licinius, who also governed a part of the Empire. He
greatly favored the Christians: and while he lived, the persecution of the
Christians ceased, and the Prelates of the Church were had in great veneration,
and made rich. He did put a son of his own to death, whose name was Crispus,
by the instigation of his wife Fausta, whom he afterward also slew, being
grievously reprehended by his mother Helena for the death of his son. He
would have rooted out the heresy of Arrius: but death intercepted him, which
took him out of this life when he was very old: he died a Christian, as he had
Christianlike lived, leaving the Church in great honor and rich, whereto he
had of his bounty given many great and rich gifts.

IAm of opinion, and do verily believe, that it cannot be otherwise, but that
the Reader shall see himself in a great confusion, and will not without some
trouble comprehend the subject of this History; by reason of the multitude of
Emperors and CAESAR'S, which concur at one instant: so as if it be a hard
matter to remember their names only, how much more then will it be to
understand the actions of every of them particularly? It is true, that the
Roman Empire was then so great, as no The great^s of the Roman Empire.
one man alone was able to govern the same; neither was it possible that many
should rule it: for in reign and command (as I have elsewhere said) equality
and company cannot be endured. And from hence arose so much discord, murder,
and other strange accidents, which then could not thoroughly be understood,
neither can now be so clearly described, as they may be distinctly conceived
as they past. Wherefore, it shall be needful that the curious Reader remember
well what is past, to the end he may the better comprehend that which follows.

The Tyrant MAXENTIVS being as Emperor in Rome, CONSTANTINE in France, In what
sort the Roman Empire was divided.
LICINIVS in Slauonia and Graecia, who also called himself Emperor, and
MAXIMINVS CAESAR in the East; The life and behavior of MAXENTIVS in Rome was
such, as he was therefore extremely hated of all men: for he was a cruel
homicide and a murderer of Noblemen, libidinous, an adulterer, dishonest,
covetous, and above all a persecuter and destroyer of the Church of God.
Finally, in all his actions he was a Tyrant, a great Sorcerer, and a friend to
Southsayers, Enchanters, Charmers, and such like. For which, the virtuous and
most Maxent^s a great e^chanter.
noble CONSTANTINE (being in France) was very sorry: and being called by the
Senators of Rome and other Noblemen, he resolved to levy an Army against
MAXENTIVS, notwithstanding that he was brother to his wife FAVSTA, as I have
said. But the better to preserve his own Empire, he made MARCUS LICINIVS, who
commanded Slauonia and the other provinces aforesaid, his friend, giving to him
his sister CONSTANCE to wife, in the city of Milan, where they two met for
that purpose, and made great feasting. Whither was invited (but would not come)
the old Emperor DIOCLESIAN, who yet lived in his voluntary poverty.
Wherewith CONSTANTINE and LICINIVS being discontent, wrote unto him sharp and
threatening letters, alleging that he favored MAXENTIVS; wherefore (as The
death of the Emperor Dioclesian.
some write) he took poison wherewith he killed himself; and others say that
he died mad.

After the feasts were ended in Milan, the good CONSTANTINE coming with his
Army into Italy against MAXENTIVS, who (although he were a wicked man) was both
valiant and hardy: and raising also the greatest and best forces that he was
able, went to meet him, trusting in the enchantments and charms which he had
made, and in the masters which he had with him, which for that purpose killed
innocent children, making with their blood a thousand charms and other
vanities: wherewith he held the unlearned and unbelieving people so amazed,
that the greatest number of his friends gave credit thereunto; and his enemies
stood in fear to give him battle. Wherefore, and also for that in truth he
had a great Army and very expert, principally the Pretorian soldiers which
first made choice of him; the war grew Wars between Constantine and
Maxentius.
to be very doubtful, and there were some encounters and battles between
them, wherein for the most part CONSTANTINE had the victory. But MAXENTIVS
reinforcing his Army, and using his devilish arts, came finally to Rome, where
he procured all possible favor: and making greater preparation to offend his
enemy; by the counsel of a Magician woman, or rather a witch, he resolved to
sallie forth and to give CONSTANTINE battle, who with his forces was come
near to Rome. Who understanding what MAXENTIVS meant to put in execution;
considering the great loss that might ensue, and standing in fear and doubt
of the issue of the battle, as well for the great number of the enemies, as
for MAXENTIVS enchauntments wherewith he amazed the world; he was in great care
and perplexity: And as he gave great credit to the Christians, and was their
protector and defender (notwithstanding that yet he was not baptized) but had a
firm and steadfast hope in JESUS CHRIST; EVSEBIVS, CASSIODORVS, and others
write, that there appeared unto him one of the greatest miracles that ever was
seen in the world: which was, That he saw in the heavens a great cross, of the
color of fire, like unto that whereupon our Savior suffered his passion; and
therewith he heard this voice, In hoc signo vinces. By virtue of this sign
thou shall overcome. A miracle appeared to Constantine when he prepared to
fight with Maxentius.
By means of which sign and miracle, God gave him so great confidence, as he
presently assured himself of victory: and therefore caused the sign of the
cross to be made in his imperial standard; and ever after used to bear it
wrought in some jewel or otherwise in his right hand, and on his forehead: and
finally, from thenceforth his device was continually the cross, and he made it
to be set in all his ensigns.

CONSTANTINVS then putting his hope and trust in the voice which he heard from
heaven, and MAXENTIVS his belief and confidence in his devils and
enchauntments, joined battle near to a bridge over the river Tiber, called
Pons Miluius, which was somewhat more then a mile from Rome; whither MAXETIVS
very courageously came in the foreward of all A fight between Constantine and
Maxentius.
his Army. The fight being begun, and he ouercharged by CONSTANTINES
vauntgard, before which was carried the cross, he fled: and entering upon the
bridge which he had commanded to be made upon Barks and Boats near to the
other, both he and his horse fell into the river, where he was drowned: which
bridge he himself had caused to be made, to the end therewith to have deceived
his enemy. Wherefore to him may be well applied the saying of the Maxentius
flying was drowned in the river Tiber.
Psalmist, Lacum aperuit, and effodit eum, and incidit in foueam quam ipse
fecit.

CONSTANTINE having obtained this victory in the seventh year of his reign
(accounting from the death of his father) without any loss or slaughter of his
people; the Senators and people of Rome, with their wives and children came
forth to receive him, as the Prince who Constantine accompanied into Rome by
the Senate and whole Roman people with great joy and gladness.
had freed them from servitude; and they gave him the title of Father of the
country, and restorer of peace and liberty. In this manner was he attended
into Rome, with incredible joy and feasting, every one singing his praises;
yielding generally, sundry congratulations, with mirth and gladness. But he
attributed nothing to his own power or policy, but all to God only. And in
the right hand of all the Statues and Images, which in Rome by decree of the
Senate were erected to his honor for his victory against MAXENTIVS, he caused
to be engraven the sign of the cross, with the words which he heard from
heaven, In Hoc signo vinces. And then he commanded by public edict that no man
should be condemned to the death of the cross: which until his time was used
and held for an ignominious death. Setting all matters in good order and peace
in Rome, making holy and just laws and statues, and to show himself Decrees
made by Constantine in favor of the Christians.
grateful for the benefits which he had received; he did much good to the
Christians, bestowing many favors and gifts upon them, building them Churches
and houses of prayer, endowing them with rents and necessary means for the
maintenance of the Priests and Ministers thereof, with ornaments and
necessaries for divine service. And he and his brother in law LICINIVS, the
other Emperor, by common consent sent their general edicts and decrees through
all the provinces and cities subject to the Empire, commanding that the
Christians should be eased from all grieuances, made free, and received into
honors and offices of dignity and authority; in which decrees were contained
the great praises of our Lord, reciting the victories which CONSTANTINE had
obtained under his banner with the sign of the cross. Which decrees being
sent into the East, where MAXIMINVS CAESAR bare the sway, were obeyed by him,
as the Emperors commandment, but much against his will^ for he was wicked and
a most cruel enemy to the Catholic Church: and so although he contained
himself for a season, yet afterward he returned to his devilish disposition.

CONSTANTINE living in this felicite, being Lord of all the provinces of Africa
(I mean of that part which was subject to the Empire) of France, Spain,
Germany, and also Italy, with the Islands of Britannie and Sicilie; in all
which countries he maintained peace and justice (for the wisdom and police of
this prince was exceeding great, and no less was his courage and valor) in
such sort that as he was most valiant and venturous in Arms, so was he very
wise and politic in peace; and made new laws, against the new slanders and
inventions of the wicked. He also took great care and pain to reduce all Arts
and Sciences to their ancient perfection, greatly honoring such masters as
were excellent, who then were greatly decayed and diminished, and he gave them
more honor: he also exercised himself in most honorable exercises, reading,
writing, and inditing, and in hearing the Embasses and complaints which were
brought to him from sundry provinces; and to all men was affable, mild,
courteous and liberal; preserving in all things the bounty and sincerity of
his mind.

Being in Rome, as some reckon in the year of Lord 314. and as other say 316.
some say more, some less (for which computation I take no great care, seeing
it little imports the truth of the history) he was there instructed by Pope
SYLVESTER in all matters concerning the Constantine instructed in the Christian
says by Pope Syluester.
Christian faith: which he (as some writers affirm) received with great
feruencie; and with his son CRISPVS, whom he in the beginning of his reign had
made CAESAR, was baptized in Rome, having first made for that purpose a most
sumptuous Font, which (as PLATINA affirms) is at this day there to be seen:
yet some others affirm, that he was baptized but a little before his death.
But whenever, it has greatest appearance that it was solemnized in Rome. But
we will leave this controversy until another time. He living thus in quiet
in Rome, Maximinus calling himself Emperor, revoked the privileges given to
the Christians.
MAXIMINVS CAESAR, who ruled in the East, seeing himself rich and mighty,
held it for a disgrace to be inferior to LICINIVS or to CONSTANTINE; and
therefore taking upon him the name of AUGUSTUS and Emperor, and reuoking the
privileges given to the Christians, he began to declare himself an enemy,
especially to LICINIVS, who commanded nearest unto him: and knowing that
LICINIVS provided for him; trusting in the multitude of his men of war, he
marched toward LICINIVS: but before they fought any general battle, they
made most cruel war both by sea and land in many parts: and after many
conflicts, at the last they came to fight, Army against Army, wherein
MAXIMINVS was overthrown: and the battle was so cruel, as the greatest part
of his men were slain, and those A battle between Maximinus and Licinius.
which escaped yielded themselves to LICINIVS. MAXIMINVS himself escaping by
flight, changed his habit, to the end that he would not be discovered, until
he might come to some place of safety. And (as EVSEBIVS writes) imagining
himself to be deluded by his Magicians, and the false Priests of his devilish
gods, he put many of them to death, and began to entreat the Christians very
well; and sent abroad his decrees, wherein he commanded that they should be
suffered to live at liberty, and to build Temples, and to do what they
thought good. Which this wicked man did, more for that he hoped that God would
therefore give him victory, and so he might be revenged of his enemies, then
for any belief he had in him: for what he did was not willingly, but with a
dissembling heart, and through desire of revenge: for this wicked man thought
that Christ should assist him with his mercy, who upon the cross prayed to
his father to forgive them which had nailed him thereon. Having once again
levied the greatest and best forces he could, with an intent to return to
fight with LICINIVS, it pleased God to frustrate his purposes by his death,
afflicting him first with the most cruel and grievous disease that ever was
heard of; wherein through the intolerable pain which he felt in his guts and
intrailes, he did bite his own hands, and did cast himself desperately from
his bed to the ground: and this torment continuing many days, so as he could
neither eat, drink, nor sleep: at length his eyes started out of his head;
and so he died mad and in despair. Through his The death of Maximinus.
death the Christians enjoyed an absolute peace and quietness through all the
provinces of the Empire: and CONSTANTINE and LICINIVS remained absolute Lords
and Emperors, and so continued in great peace and tranquillity for a season:
LICINIVS went presently into the East, where he slew VALENS, a Captain whom
the Army there had made Emperor after Valens slain by Licinius.
the death of MAXIMINVS: and that tyrant being slain, and he in possession of
the country, he punished the Sorcerers, the Inchaunters, and the ministers of
MAXIMINVS cruelties; and he also caused his sons to be slain whom he had
made CAESAR'S. EVSEBIVS, who was an eye witness, recites, what great liberty
the christians obtained through the death of MAXIMINVS; and how they built
Churches and beautified the same, and in how great account and reverence
CONSTANTINE held the Bishops and Prelates; And likewise the gifts, rewards, and
revenues which he bestowed upon them.

The Empire being governed in this manner; in those times one ALEXANDER a
Captain in Africa rebelled and usurped the name and title of Emperor; against
whom CONSTANTINE sent from Rome an Army: which coming to a battle, ALEXANDER
was overcome and slain. So as all remained under the command of CONSTANTINE
and LICINIVS Alexander rebelled, and taking the name of Emperor, was
overthrown and slain by Constantines forces.
only. And although their dignity and Empire was equal, yet was the
authority and valor of CONSTANTINE far greater, and he much more esteemed
and better beloved of all men then LICINIVS, and for the most part remained in
Rome, doing justice to all men indifferently; particularly honoring and
enriching the Church of God, hearing and reading the holy scriptures, and in
this manner remained in rest for a space. But the Devil, who never cease to
induce men to do evil, and to sow discord and enmity amongst them, made
LICINIVS to alter his mind, who in his heart favored not the Christians, and
drew him to persecute them. The first thing he did, was to cast out of his
house and service, and so, out of all offices Licinius persecuted the
Christians.
and places of charge, any one whatsoever that was a Christian; and afterward
he committed such cruelties against them as had seldom been seen: which he
did (as some write) thereby to pick occasion of discord and war with
CONSTANTINE, whom he envied for his great authority and goodness. He also
sought many means to make him away either by poison or treason; wherein
failing of his will, he resolved openly to fall out with him: whereto
CONSTANTINE suffered himself to be induced, more as a true Christian, for the
defense of the Christian faith, then for his own particular honor or interest:
for LICINIVS, now ruined the temples and churches which he himself had before
commanded to be built; and without either fear or shame, commanded all those
Christians to be slain which would not commit idolatry, and adore his idols:
whereupon many being weak and inconstant renounced Licinius made those to be
^aine which would not commit idolatry.
their faith, and others joyfully received the crown of Matyrdome.

Each of these two Emperors mustring up his soldiers and men of war, they
having reigned twelve years in peace together, there began very cruel wars
between them: and as CONSTANTINE ever bare the cross in his ensign and
standard, it pleased God that most commonly his people prevailed. And both
these Emperors coming into Hungary with his forces, there drew near one to
the other, the good CONSTANTINE having a fit opportunity (for LICINIVS, was
encamped near to the side of a lake) in the night gave him a camizado: and
notwithstanding that LICINIVS fought very well and made great resistance, yet
in the end his forces were overthrown, and his camp was entered; and he
escaping by flight, came to the city of Bizantium, which ere long after was
called Constantinople. Whereto relieve Licinius overthrown and put to flight
by Constantine.
himself and to recover greater authority, he made one of his Captains whose
name was MARTIANVS, CAESAR, who was master of his offices, or high steward of
his house; and raising the greatest power that he was able both of foot and
horse, he prepared himself for a second battle: But in the mean season
CONSTANTINE seized on the provinces of Dacia, Misia, Macedonia, and others
which were under LICINIVS his government.

LICINIVS having gathered his Army to a head, again renewed the war, which
(as EVTROPIVS and AURELIUS VICTOR write in his life) was very variable and
cruel, until that by the intercession of CONSTANTIA sister to CONSTANTINE,
and wife to LICINIVS, there was some truce and peace taken between them: but
through the envy and malice of LICINIVS it held not long: and they both again
returned to Arms, warring with greater malice and power both by sea and land
then before. And both these Emperors coming again to a bataile, in the
province of Bithynia, in Asia the less, whither LICINIVS had withdrawn
himself (having lost all that he held in Europe) it was extremely bloody and
cruel; but in the end CONSTANTINE had the victory, and LICINIVS escaped by
Licinius the second time overthrown.
flight: And yet afterward through the entreaty of his sister CONSTANTIA,
wife to LICINIVS, CONSTANTINE granted him his life, he yielding himself into
his power; but he confined him to the city of Nicomedia in the same province:
where afterward fearing he should rebel again as MAXIMIANVS had done, or as
some think, for that LICINIVS Licinius put to death ^y Constantines
commandment.
began to practice with some to take Arms, he was put to death by
CONSTANTINES command, and with him MARTIANVS whom he had made CAESAR, in the
fifteenth year of his reign, and the threescore of his age, and in the year
of our Savior Christ three hundred and seven and twentieth.

This Emperor LICINIVS was of a most wicked and cruel disposition, being
dishonest, incontinent, covetous, and also most ignorant, as he who had no
Learning; and (which is worse) did abhor and detest it, affirming that
Learning was a public plague: whereas to the contrary (to whom is it not
evident) that without Learning, or learned Council, there never was yet any
King that either did or could rightly govern and minister Justice?
Nevertheless, he was very valiant, and followed the wars all his whole life
time.

The whole Empire remaining under the command of the good and Christian
Emperor CONSTANTINE alone, the world enjoyed a most happy time: for so great
was his goodness and wisdom, that generally every where he ministered justice
mixed with clemency; so as there was universal peace and quietness. And by
all his subjects he was beloved, and much honored, and by barbarous and
strange Nations greatly feared: and above all, the Christian faith was held in
great reverence, and embraced every where. It is wonderful what EVSEEIVS does
write in the end of his Ecclesiastical history, and SOCRATES in his
Tripartite History, of the favors, graces, privileges, benefits, and gifts,
which CONSTANTINE bestowed upon Bishops and the Churches, and generally upon
all christian people, abolishing all the laws which his predecessors had made
against their liberty: and he commanded by public edict, that there should no
more temples be built to the honor of the false gods and idols which the
Romans adored. But he commanded through all the Provinces of Benefits bestowed
by Constantine upon the Church and churchmen.
the Empire: that the Bishops commandments should be obeyed; and that to those
which had not whereof to live, there should be assigned goods and rents to
maintain them during their lives. And he not only took care for the
Christians which lived in Countries subject to the Empire: but understanding
that to those Christians which lived in other Provinces subject to the King of
Persia was used force and oppression, he sent his Ambassadors to that King,
requiring him to command that fault to be amended; persuading him to honor and
believe in JESUS CHRIST: So as by his means CHRIST was adored, and the Gospel
freely preached through the whole world; and under this good Emperor the
Christians endured not any oppression, or suffered persecution: and so there
were many holy and learned Doctors.

CONSTANTINE living in this great power and prosperity, was worthily surnamed
the Great, and in all Histories he is called CONSTANTINE the Great. Besides
this, other honorable names and titles were given him by the Senate of Rome:
as, the restorer of mankind, Titles of honous given to Constantine.
the enlarger of the Roman Empire, the founder and preserver of perpetual
peace and safety, and so he was generally honored and beloved of all men, as
much as possibly a man could be.

Some Authors write, among which EVTROPIVS is one, that CONSTANTINE through
his great power and prosperity blemished his virtues, waxing proud and cruel;
and they tax him also for being too desirous of glory and honor: whereof
AURELIUS VICTOR also makes mention, and proves the same by the death of his
son CRISPVS, whom he had made CAESAR, and of his wife FAVSTA, who as we have
said, was MAXENTIVS sister; and of many other noble and eminent men. But it
cannot certainly be said how it fell ou^, thereby to condemn or excuse this
Emperor: for as a man, he might fall into such sins; and yet afterward
acknowledging his error, might ask mercy at Gods hands for his offenses.

True it is, some say, that he put his son CRISPVS to death, because that his
wife FAVSTA, and mother in law to his said son, had complained to him that he
would have ravished her; whereas to the contrary she had dishonestly sought it
of him, procuring his love and dishonest Constantine did put his wife, his
son, and his N^phew to death.
company; whereto, he as a loyal and dutiful child would not consent. The
truth whereof being afterward known, CONSTANTINE caused her to be slain:
which he did with great reason; although he were deceived in the death of his
son. Others say that she as a mother in law, practiced the death of CRISPVS,
because he should not be preferred before the other sons which she had by
CONSTANTINE. But I am of opinion that these executions were not but for some
offenses and just causes which moved him thereto, although they were not
published and made known to the world.

PAVLVS OROSIVS reciting the deaths of his wife, of his son, and of his
Nephew, says that the causes were secret and unknown, which moved him. And
truly a man can presume no otherwise, considering how wise and how good a
Christian this Prince was. And so SOZOMENVS does excuse him, as relates
CASSIODORVS in his Tripartite History. EVSEBIVS and RVFEINVS in their
writings, and the same CASSIODORVS, only declare his virtues, and blame him in
nothing. Saint GREGORY calls him Emperor, of holy memory. Saint AMBROSE
speaking of the death of THEODORUS says, that CONSTANTINE was worthy of great
praise, who with the Empire left the Christian faith for aninheritance to his
successors: So as what such men commend, I dare not reprehend or condemn.
Holding it then for certain, that he was a good man, returning to his
History, I say, that after that he reigned alone, their failed not wars: for
the Sarmates invaded the Empire, Wars against the Sarmates.
and he in person with a mighty Army marched against them; and overthrowing
them a in battle, he forced them to obey, and to be quiet. The like he
afterward did by the Goths, and other barbarous nations. Which when he had
performed, and having made his three sons CONSTANTINVS, CONSTANTIVS, and
CONSTANS, CAESAR'S, and also his Nephew DALMATIVS: for some reasonable
considerations, holding it more convenient for matters of the East and to be
near at hand, which was his greatest care; he determined to transport his
imperial throne and seat from Rome into Bithynia in Asia, or into some other
part of that Constantine reedified the city of Byzantium, now called after his
name Constantinople
country: and having considered thereof, and thought upon sundry fit places;
he resolved in the end to reedifie the city of Byzantiu^, which is in Thracia:
and meaning to call it new Rome, he beautified it with edifices, priuilidges,
and other riches, more then any other city of the world. And as Saint IEROM
says in his additions to EVSEBIVS, he enriched and adorned that city with the
spoils of all the rest. For all the worthy and notable monuments which were
in Rome, as statues, pillars, colosses, and all other things which were
singular and excellent, of gold stone or metal, he made to be taken from Rome
and to be carried to that city: Whereto notwith handing that he gave the name
of new Rome; yet was it then, and now to this day is called Constantinople,
after his name: and so it became one of the greatest and most noble cities of
the world: and he went thither, and there settled his imperial throne and
state, leaving his sons in France, Spain, and Italy, which provinces he had
given them to govern.

The Empire being in this prosperity, the heresy of the Arrians, through the
suggestion of the devil arose in the City of Alexandria in Egypt, which denied
the eternity of the son of God with the Father, alleging that he was not of
the same substance with him. This heresy did then, The (...)of the Arrian
heresy.
and a long time after, trouble the quiet estate of the Church. The head and
inuentor of this heresy, was one ARRIVS a Priest in the said city of
Alexandria, who was a man which outwardly made great show of holiness, and
lived morally, well. At the same time was Bishop of Alexandria one ALEXANDER, a
man of great holiness and learning: But as he was gentle and of a mild
condition, so he endeavored in the beginning to have cured ARRIVS of that
heretical infirmity, with soft and gentle medicaments; praying and admonishing
him to leave his error and misbeliefe, with holy speeches and exhortations;
but being proud and insolent, persisting in his heresy, he induced many others
to follow his errors: and this pestilence increased and extended it self so
far, that many were infected therewith: and all the possible diligence that
ALEXANDER could use, did nothing avail to suppress the same; notwithstanding
that ARRIVS was by him excommunicate out of the Church. Whereupon ALEXANDER
advertised the Emperor thereof: and the mischief grew to be so great, as it
required a great remedy; and so by order of the same Emperor, a general
Council was called in the City of Nicea, which is in the province of Bithinia
in Asia, where there assembled three hundred and eighteen Bishops. And
CONSTANTINE himself in person was present in the same council: finally,
ARRIVS, The Nice^ Coun^ll.
and his wicked sect, was therein condemned by all the Bishops, excepting
seventeen which held with him. Whereof eleven afterward (as says RVFFINVS)
made show of recantation: and ARRIVS together with the other six were
excommunicated and banished; to all which the Emperor consented and approved
the same, submitting himselfy to the judgment of the holy council. And so the
opinion of ARRIVS was held for a wicked heresy: but he persisted in his error,
and had disciples and followers. And notwithstanding that the Emperor took
great pains to redress it, yet he could not by any means effect the same.
This evil did a long time trouble the Chuch, and extended it self even into
Spain and other provinces; in so much as it seemed impossible to find any
redress for so great a mischief: but afterward in process of time, it
pleased our Lord of his infinite goodness and mercy, to cure the same.

Among many other things which CONSTANTINE did in this council, one was very
notable. As among so many Bishops, although many of them were holy and good
men; so their wanted not envy and contention among those which were not such:
for some held erroneous opinions; and others which were in suit and at debate,
accused one another to the Emperor, exhibiting their complaints and
informations unto him in writing, entreating him to punish the of fenders; The
Emperor received the accusations, and concealed the same, so as no man saw
them: afterward calling those Bishops which thus complained before him, he
made a brief speech, saying; Fathers, Bishops and Prelates, it has pleased
God to ordain you for Prelates and Priests, and has given you power to judge
of me, and I may justly and orderly be judged by you, but you cannot be judged
by me: wherefore I refer your suits and debates to the divine judgment, and
to the judgment of the Church and council. And seeing that you are set before
us in the place of God, it is not fit that I judge of you, but should leave you
to the judgment of God, of whom it is written, Deus stetit in synagoga deorum,
in medio autem deus discernit, God stood in the synagogue of the Gods, and God
alone among them is judge. Wherefore setting apart all this malice, discord and
contention, apply your selves diligently to that which appertains to the
Christian faith, and to the Church, and for Gods sake forget these rancors and
private injuries. These speches are written by RVFFINVS and CASSIODORVS, and
are also seen in the Decrees, wherewith the good Emperor exhorted those
Bishops to concord and friendship, without interposing himself between them
as their judge, and so was that most holy and Christian council dissolved.
About the same time or little after it, the holy woman HELENA, mother to the
same Emperor CONSTANTINE, went to Jerusalem (I mean to that which is new
builded: for of the old Jerusalem there remains not one stone upon another)
to seek the cross whereon our Savior CHRIST suffered his passion. And
commanding a Temple to be thrown down, which by the Gentiles was builded in
that same place to their The finding of the Cross.
Goddess VENUS, there were found three crosses, but not in such manner as that
it might be well perceived which was the cross of CHRIST* for the
superscription was taken away, or else the letters could not be read, and the
one was like the other. And HELENA being in this confusion, and with her
MACARIVS, which at that time was Bishop of Jerusalem, they carried the three
crosses to the house of a great Lady, which in that city was then at the
point of death, sick of a great and incurable disease; where (as it is
written) the right cross was miraculously discovered. SOZOMENVS in his
Tripartite history writes wonders, concerning the same. The feast of the
finding of the cross is celebrated by the Church of Rome with great
solemnity, upon the third day of May. And HELENA, having found what she so
earnestly fought, caused in the same place where it was found, a most rich and
sumptuous Temple to be built: Helena caused a Temple to be built in the same
place where the Cross w^ found.
and taking the cross asunder, the one half she left there enclosed in a
silver chest, and the other half she carried with her to Constantinople, where
it was kept by CONSTANTINE with great reverence. She carried unto him also the
nails wherewith CHRIST was nailed to tke cross, the one of which he always
wore in his helmet or caske; and of another he made a bit for his horse,
agaiast such time as he should enter into any fight or battle; and the other
nail, it is said, that bearing it about him, and being in a great storm at
sea, he threw it into the sea to assuage the tempest. How true or false I will
not argue. This history and the finding of the cross, besides RVFFINVS and
CASSIODORVS already alleged, Saint AMBROSE writes at large in the oration by
him made to the honor of the Emperor THEODOSIUS.

CONSTANTINE having now happily reigned about thirty years, in the later time
whereof he wholly applied himself to root Idolatry out of the world; and to
build Churches, which he dedicated to CHRIST JESUS and his Saints; and to
extirpate ARRIVS his heresy, which yet had some root: but in the end he was
was forced to levy an Army to go against the Persians and their king, which
invaded the Empire. And marching thitherwards, in the 66. year of his age, and
the thirtith of his reign (although that herein is some small difference among
authors) he was taken with a grievous sickness; and to the end he might recover
health, he caused himself to be carried from Constantinople, with intent to go
to Nicomedia, which is a city in Bithynia, to certain Bathes of hot water:
but before he could come thither, his disease so increased as he died, humbly
recommending his soul to JESUS CHRIST, The death of Constantine the Great.
in whom he constantly believed. And so holily died this holy and great
Emperor; leaving behind him three sons, CONSTANTINVS, CONSTANTIVS, and
CONSTANS; whom he constituted and ordained for his heirs and successors in
the Empire, together with his nephew DALMATIVS; and two daughters, the one
named HELENA, which was afterward married to IVLIANVS who was Emperor: and the
other CONSTANTIA who married with GALLVS. Some suspected that CONSTANTINE was
poisoned. He died in the year of our Lord 342.

Although that we shall somewhat exceed ordinary in this discourse, yet I
account it time well spent to treat of some doubts, which grow in the life of
CONSTANTINE. The first is, for that some say this holy Emperor was not
baptized, until a little before his death, and that he was then baptized by
EVSEBIVS, Bishop of Nicomedia; and that all the rest of his time he lived
without baptism: alleging a reason why he did so, for that he hoped to have
been baptized in the river Jordan, wherein our Savior CHRIST was baptized by
S. JOHN. But I account the opinion of those to be most certain, which write
that he was baptized in Rome by the hand of Pope SYLVESTER, after the death of
MAXENTIVS. For it is hardly to be believed, that there could be such devotion
found (as CONSTANTINE showed in his works) in The opinion of the Author
touching the baptizing of Constantine.
a man which was not baptized; and therefore it carries no color of truth.
Writers do also prove, that he was baptized with his son CRISPVS, and that
he caused his son to be slain long before he died, as by us has been
already declared: so as it appears that he could not be baptized with his
son, being already dead. And whereas it is written in a little book, that
CONSTANTINE was infected with a leprosy, and that he was cured with the blood
of certain little children which he caused to be slain for that purpose;
PLATINA holds Constantine was falsely taxed to be a Lepar.
this for a fable and a forgerie: and none of the ancient writers neither
modern that are of any credit, write any such matter. Some also write, that
CONTANTINE was baptized in his later days, and that he seemed to be inclined
to the Arrian heresy. But he was deceived which wrote so: for that was his his
sons error, who was also called CONSTANTINE: and that which was written of
his son (being deceived through the name) was imputed to the father, of whose
true faith, life and death there ought no doubt to be made; neither in their
histories treating of his life, do they make any doubt, as OROSIVS, EVTROPIVS,
S. GREGORY, RVFFINVS, and CASSIODORVS testify: Of which S. GRGORIE calls
him, of holy memory. S. AMBROSE in an oration which he made at the death of
THEODORUS, The error of some betwixt Constantine the Great and Constantine his
son touching the faith.
gives him the title of holy, and highly extolleth him because he left the
Christian faith, for an inheritance, with the Empire. And the Greek Church does
celebrate his feast as a Saint, upon the twentieth day of April. And so do
also defend his faith and holiness both in life and in death, ANTONIUS
SABELLICVS in his Aeneades; PLATINA in the life of Pope MARCUS; POMPONIVS LETVS
in his abbridgement of the Roman history; and BAPTISTA IGNATIUS in his epitome
of the Emperors; and S. ANTONIUS in his Historials: and generally all the
modern authors, besides the ancient already named. And whereas it is written
that he recalled ARRIVS from exile; if he did so as some write, yet according
to the same authors, he was induced thereto by a certain Priest, and at the
entreatie of his sister, but principally through a writing sent to him by
ARRIVS, wherein he declared what opinion he held concerning the faith; seeming
by his words to be conformable to the decreee of the Council; and the Emperor
not comprehending his deceit in those words, released him from banishment.
Nevertheless he referred the examination of the cause to a new council of
Bishops, which was then assembled abour the building of the Temple at
Jerusalem; without approouing his opinion in any respect. And it happened that
ARRIVS died in this demand, accor The death of Arrrius and ^ow.
dingly as his sins and heresy had deserved: for it pleased God that he died
suddenly, and his bowels came forth at his lower parts. Many of these Authors
affirm, that this happened in the time of the Emperor CONSTANTINE the son, and
not of the father. They being both of one name causes this confusion and doubt
in the History. So as it may be set down and avouched for certain, that the
Emperor CONSTANTINE at what time soever he was baptized, sure it was in Rome
many years before his death: And he died holding and believing the holy
Catholic faith. And as an holy and true Christian he never consented unto, nor
believed any point of ARRIVS his heresy, as some charge him, being deceived by
the name of his son, who was infected with the venom of that wicked heresy.

Now concerning the donation, which some say that CONSTANTINE made to Pope
SYLVESTER and to his successors, of the City of Rome and of all Italy, when
he went to Constantinople; notwithstanding that all authors agree that he gave
great gifts, and builded many Temples; yet of this so notable a donation, I
find not that any author of that age does testify or auerre any such matter.
PAVLVS OROSIVS, EVTROPIVS, S. JEROME, or THEODORETVS which lived near to that
time, and wrote the rest, make no mention thereof. Wherefore it is to be
doubted, whether there were any such donation.

It is true that there is a text in the decree, which recites this said
donation of Rome and of Italy and other oriental Provinces: But that text is
held for Apocrypha; neither is it found in GRATIANS ancient originals. But
finally, this is a question which I cannot determine, and therefore I will not
thrust my sickle into another man's harvest, neither will I be judge herein,
seeing that I am but only an Historiographer. Yet to one thing I will not
forbear to make answer, in some sort to satisfy the malice of our times. I
say, that they have no reason to tax the Emperor CONSTANTINE, as some have
done, pretending that he has been the cause of much evil, in that he
enriched the Bishops, Prelates and Priests, for that before his time they
followed the true rule and form of a Christian life; all living in the
perfection of the Gospel, imitating the poverty of CHRIST and of his
disciples. To the first, let it be that this were true; the good and holy
meaning of CONSTANTINE was much to be commended, and therein he did well and
acceptably before God. To the other, it is not certain that before the time of
CONSTANTINE the Clergy had no temporal goods: for it seems to the contrary
in the Chapter Videntes 12. quaestione 1. wherein it is expressed that the
ancient Fathers, considering that it was not so profitable to sell the goods
and to distribute the money in commune, as the Christians did in the beginning;
as it was to keep those heritages and possessions, to the end that by means
of the fruits thereof, the Ministers then being might be maintained, and their
successors might do the like after them: And coming to the ground of the
matter, although that our Lord JESUS CHRIST and his holy Apostles and
Disciples, commended poverty, preferring it before riches, as chastity before
wedlock, for the full perfection of the holy life which he had chosen; it does
not therefore follow that he would that Bishops, Priests and Ministers should
have no temporal goods of their own: for if he had meant so, it is to be
presumed that he would have ordained it, and so it should have been observed
even to this day. And if they shall say to me, that before the time of
CONSTANTINE, they lived without rents or revenues, and yet there were many
holy Bishops, as CLEMENT, LINVS, CLETVS, IGNATIUS, POLICARPVS, MARCELLVS, and
such others which lived in poverty, contenting themselves with a little in holy
exercises: I answer, that all these holy men were not altogether without
goods, but that they and their Churches had some possessions. And I also
affirm that it is certain, in the beginning, about the first propagation of
the Gospel, as the name of Christian was odious and hateful to the Emperors
and Princes of those times, principally the Bishops and Priests: so it behooued
them of necessity to be contented with that which they had, and to maintain
themselves as they were able. And whereas it appears that commonly they then
lived more devout, more holy, and in greater humility, then after that the
Emperor CONSTANTINE became Christian, and the Church obtained liberty, and
that the authority thereof was confirmed with riches; Yet it is certain, that
after that time there were also very many holy men. And although that
afterward there was not generally so great sincerity and holiness of life, as
before: yet neither the Emperor, nor the riches he gave were to be blamed, but
the evil disposition and conditions of those which had the use thereof, and
did abuse the same. For it is not to be believed, that those ancient holy men
in the beginning of the Primitive Church, would, by reason of riches, forbear
to have been holy and devout; neither am I assured that those which afterward
were proud and insolent, would have been holy and devout, notwithstanding that
they had been poor. It is true, and I acknowledge the same, that voluntary
poverty is a state of great perfection, and that great riches oftentimes
minister occasion of pride and wickedness: but hereof men themselves are the
cause; for we are naturally inclined to evil: but to put the same in
execution, the rich have greater power then the poor. Therefore neither riches
nor poverty are the occasion: for neither are all rich men wicked; neither are
all poor men good: which would be so, if riches only be the occasion thereof.
For neither riches nor poverty in their own nature are good or evil: but
rather, as says S. PAVL; All things are clean to the clean. Neither ought
riches to be contemned, because that some wicked man does abuse his wealth:
For, if that Argument were of force, so were likewise to be condemned and
despised the strength of the body, beauty of countenance, sharpness of wit,
and quickness of understanding; and a man should desire to be ugly, feeble,
dull, ignorant and of little discretion: for those which be strong, fair,
beautiful, quick-witted, and of great capacity and understanding, may do
more harm and use greater deceit, then the deformed, decrepit and ignorant.
And if a man shall judge according to the occasion only; poverty brings with
it little care, and great distrust, and therewith men become envious, greedily
covetous, malefactors, coveting and stealing other men's goods: yet I will not
deny, but that in riches is the greater danger. But in both, the fault is in
us, and not in the goods, which of themselves are neither good nor evil, but
are as is he who has the use of them. And so not to swerve any further from
our History, I conclude and say; Let us forbear to blame CONSTANTINE, and
blame those which have abused and misspent the goods which were given by
CONSTANTINE. And let those which are so zealous of the general reformation of
the Church, reform their own Consciences, and amend their own lives and
abuses; and let them with tears pray unto God to amend the rest. For if every
man in particular would do thus and amend one, all would presently be amended.
But truly most men take care for the government of Empires and States, even at
home in their houses: but of their own houses and Consciences they take little
care. And to the end that they think not, that all the mischief consists in
the Church goods, let them know that after that the Churches were rich, and
that the Prelates were of great power and authority, there were therein a S.
LEO, a Pope, a S. GREGORY, S. AMBROSE, S. JEROME, S. AVOVSTINE, S. BERNARD,
and an infinite number of other Bishops which possessed riches, and despising
them were poor in spirit, which is acceptable before God.

THE LIFE OF CONSTANTINVS, CONSTANTIUS, AND CONSTANS, Brethren; Sons of the
Emperor CONSTANTINE the Great, and five and fortith Emperor Of ROME.
THE ARGUMENT.
THE Emperor Constantine being dead, the government of the Empire remained in
the hands of his sons, Constantius, Constans, and Constantinus: But as commonly
it happens in matters of State; so after that the Provinces were divided, they
imagining them to be unequally shared, fell together by the ears among
themselves: and two of them being dead, the government of the Empire rested
wholly in Constantius, who had no less to do to defend himself against
domestical tyrants, which sought to usurp his estate, then to offend for
rain Princes, thereby to preserve the Roman Empire. After many accidents of
war, he overcame Magnentius; and the last battle between them was so
bloody, and the execution so great, that in a manner it weakened the forces of
the whole Empire: but finally, Magnentius was driven to such extremity that he
slew himself. He made his Cosen-Germane Gallus, Caesar, giving him his sister
Constantina to wife, who behaved himself so wickedly in his government, that
Constantius was forced to cause him to be slain: in whose place he made his
brother Iulianus, Caesar; who going into Germany against the high Dutch, had so
good success in all his enterprises in the wars, that the soldiers of
France constrained him perforce to take the Ensign and name of Emperor. Which
when Constantius understood (who then was in war against the Persians) he
ordered that war in the best manner he could, and came with a mighty Army
against Iulianus: but falling grieously sick by the way, he died, and made
Iulianus his successor, leaving the Empire to him, whom he was going to deprive.

HOW necessary and good the reign of the Emperor CONSTANTINE was, and how
great his bounty and valor was, plainly appears, seeing that immediately
with his death the universal quiet and peace was disturbed, the favor and
respect of the Church was diminished, and the administration of justice was
likewise perverted and troubled. The good Emperor CONSTANTINE left behind him
when he died three sons, and two daughters. Constantine his children.
His sons names were CONSTANTINVS, CONSTANTIVS, and CONSTANS; his daughters
were called HELENA, and CONSTANTIA. The sons presently after the death of their
father were Emperors: for in his life time he had made them CAESAR'S, together
with his nephew DALMATIVS; and he also left them by his testament heirs to the
Empire. The daughters were afterward married to Emperors; as in the process
of this History we will declare: which in truth is very abrupt, as well for
the variety and difference among authors, as for the great discord and wars
which grew between these three brethren, and through the tyrants and usurping
Emperors which arose in their time. Let the Reader endeavor to read
attentively: For I will do my best to write it as plainly and clearly as I
shall be able.

These three Brethren divided the Roman Empire among them in this manner: TO
CONSTANTINE, who was the eldest Brother, was allotted Spain, Britanny, France,
and that part of Germany which was subject to the Romans. TO CONSTANS, the
second Brother, there fell Italy, and all Africa, with the Island Sicilia, and
the rest between them, together with Slauonia, Constantine his three sons
divided the Empire between them.
Dalmatia, Macedonia, Achaia, Morea, and all Graecia. The third Brother, which
was CONSTANTIVS, possessed the Province of Thracia where the City of
Constantinople stands, with all the East Provinces of Asia the less, Soria,
Mesopotamia, and Egypt. And in the dominion of this CONSTANTIVS, by his consent
and accord, his cosen DALMATIVS governed as CAESAR. SEXTVS AURELIUS VICTOR
says, that he reigned also in Armenia, and in the borders thereof, and that
ANNIBALLINVS was therein established CAESAR.

And so in this manner began the Empire to be governed by three Emperors, and
one CAESAR which was DALMATIVS: whereof ensued great discord and war, for
that either of them would take place before other, and be Lord of the whole.
And, on the other side, the Roman Empire was so great, that no one man could
well govern it alone; and so very few held the whole in quiet possession: and
therefore it declined, as all kingdoms and dominions which are far extended
and enlarged, will do: for, neither man's life, force, nor humane policy, are
able to manage and govern that which is of too great an extent.

In the beginning of their Reign these Brethren lived in peace, for joy to see
themselves so great Lords: and DALMATIVS, who in the East assisted CONSTANTIVS,
began to make show of himself to be a most excellent Prince, in his actions and
virtues imitating CONSTANTINE the Great: wherefore by the good he was much
beloved; but feared of the wicked, and envied by CONSTANTIVS himself, who was
the cause of his death. CONSTANTIVS Dalmatius loved by the good and feared by
the wicked. Dalmatius slain by the soldiers through the practice of
Constantius.
permitting it, or being accessory thereto, he was upon a day in a mutiny
slain by the soldiers which he had levied against the King of Persia: and so
the Empire remained absolutely betwixt the three Brethren.

Soon after this, CONSTANTINE (who was the elder Brother) began to find
himself grieved, alleging that he had the least part in the division of the
Provinces: for, he possessed but France, Spain, part of Germany, England, and
Scotland; his other Brethren houlding so many Provinces. And therefore he sent
Ambassadors unto them, requiring a new division: and as their parts seemed to
them to be but little, they would not yield to his request. Whereupon he
mustered up his men and levied an Army, resolving to take that perforce, which
they would not allow him by their free will, and with a great power invaded the
Frontiers of his brother CONTANS his Empire, to whom befell Italy and Africa.
At that time CONSTANS was in Dacia (which is Transiluania and Walachia) making
war upon the Goths and Sarmates, who had made incursions into the limits of
the Roman Empire: and he understanding what his Constantine warred against his
brother Constans.
brother did, sent a Captain with men of war into Italy, who with such power
as he was able to raise, made Head against CONSTANTINVS, near to the City of
Aquileia. But CONSTANTINVS, little regarding his brothers forces, unadvisedly
resolved to fight: and being entrapped in an ambush laid by his enemies,
fighting unknown, his horse being killed under him, and he falling to the
earth was slain, having enjoyed his Empire but three years, being of the
Constantine slain in Italy.
age of 25. years, in the year of our Lord, 343. Which as some imagine happened
unto him for his sins: for they write of him, that he favored the heresy of
ARRIVS. And CASSIODORVS, RVFFINVS, and THEODORETVS in their Ecclesiastical
histories write, that upon the death of CONSTANTINE the Great, father of these
young men, those which were infected with the heresy of ARRIVS, took courage
audaciously to maintain the same, contrary to the decree of the holy Council:
and by their illusions they persuaded CONSTANTIVS thereto, who ruled in the
East parts, and many Arrian Bishops sought to suppress and disposesse the
Catholics; against whom CONSTANS the other Emperor and brother made great
resistance, who was of the Catholics opinion. And particularly the holy Bishop
ATHANASIVS was persecuted, who was the chief man in the Nicene Council, and
in that persecution were sent into exile, both he and others, which suffered
great injury and infamy. There were also many councels and assemblies held by
the Heretics, and others by the Catholics, wherein were many contentions.
Finally, the Catholics were greatly troubled and molested, by reason that many
revolted from the faith, and joined with the heretics: which I forbear to
write, because it requires much time to relate the same; and also, for that I
rather write the lives of Emperors, then any Ecclesiastical History, whereof I
must of necessity make often mention hereafter.

CONSTANTINE the elder brother being slain by his brother CONSTANS his
soldiers, CONSTANS took possession of all the Countries his deceased brother
was seized of: and so he became Lord of all the West, and of Africa, whereof
already he was in possession. After this, presently ensued another dangerous
war against a kind of people called Franques, a people of Germany, inhabiting
near the river of Rhine (as AGATHIAS writes): which Franques rebelled, and
seized on a great part of Gallia; from which the Frenchmen vaunt themselves to
be descended; and of Galli were called Franci; and Gallia, Francia. And, to
make their original seem to be of greater antiquity, they allege that those
Franques descended from those which escaped from Troy, and that they came to
inhabit Germany with one of HECTOR'S sons, whose name was FRANCVS: but heerof
we will speak more hereafter. These Franques came to blows with CONSTANS; and,
after cruel wars and much slaughter between them, they From whence the French
affirm to have their original. Constans made the Franks subject to the Empire.
were vanquished, and made subject to the Empire. And although CONSTANS were
much troubled with these wars, yet afterward he lived some years in peace and
prosperity,; but very weak and impotent of body, both in his feet and hands, by
reason of the gout wherewith he was oftentimes much afflicted. His government
in the beginning was good and pleasing to all his subjects: but afterward he
became vicious and negligent in the execution of justice, and by means of his
infirmity grew unwieldy and ill disposed; and therefore ill-beloued by the
Prouincials and Subjects of the Empire: so as certain wicked men, making
benefit of this occasion, practiced his death. The chief authors of this
treason were CRESPIVS and MARCELLINVS, his own captains, who agreed to make
MAGNENTIVS Emperor, a man of base condition and mean parentage, although
through his courage and valor in the wars he won great reputation: and they
found the soldiers very willing and ready thereto; for, they hated CONSTANS:
and, giving the imperial robe to MAGNENTIVS, they sent to kill CONSTANS, who
mistrusted Magnentius chosen Emperor.
no such matter. In the manner of his death Authors vary: but in conclusion
he was slain in a certain place called Helena, near to the Pirenean mountains
which divide France from Spain, in the 13th year of his Reign, and the thirtith
of his age, in the year of our Lord 353, according The death of the Emperor
Constans.
to S. IEROM'S computation.

Whilst matters passed in the West after this manner, in the East with the
third brother and Emperor CONSTANTIVS, who ruled all: that part of the Empire,
things prospered not Constantius overthrown in 9 several battles by the
Persians.
so well, especially in the wars: for he had great and dangerous wars with
the King of Persia: and having fought with him nine several times, he was at
every time overthrown, with the loss of many of his people. In the end, they
fought one most cruel battle: and the victory being apparent of the
Emperors side, his soldiers used the matter so ill, as those which were held
for conquered, became conquerors: and so CONSTANTIVS lost this battle also,
as Constantius overthrown in the tenth battle by the Persians, for that he
knew not how to use the victory. Great earthquakes in the East in the time of
Constantius
he had done many others, in such sort that the King of Persia recovered
certain great Cities in Mesopotamia. Moreover in the same parts of the East,
there happened many earthquakes wherewith certain Cities were destroyed, and
swallowed into the earth: which by true Christian authors was attributed to the
just judgment of God, for that this Emperor did maintain the heresy of
ARRIVS, and persecuted the true Christians. But returning to our new Emperor
MAGNENTIVS, it happened in this manner: that having murdered CONSTANS, as we
have declared, the Army which was in France obeyed and received him gladly,
and all Spain presently did the like, together with Italy and Africa in like
manner: whither he determining to come, made his son whose name was
DECENCIVS, CAESAR; to leave him in the government Decencius made Caesar by
Magnencius.
of France and Spain with their confines. But in Hungary, Austria, Slauonia,
Dalmatia, and part of Graecia, the ordinary legions which were in those places,
chose an old and valiant Captain for Emperor, whose name was BRITANNIO or
VETRANIO; who was a man highly beloved of the soldiers, for his great wisdom
and valor in the wars; and for the victories which he had obtained in the
defense of those Provinces against the barbarous Nations. Of BRITANNIO you
shall hear more hereafter.

About the same time, when it was known in Rome that CONSTANS was dead,
NEPOTIANVS presuming on his neernesse of blood to the deceased Emperor (for, he
was the Emperoror Nepotianus, taking the title of Emperor, was slain by
Magnentius his captains.
CONSTANTINE'S sisters son) assembling together a company of Fensers,
Swordplaiers, and such others, proclaimed himself Emperor. But as his beginning
had no sound foundation; so had he an unlucky end: for, within twenty nine
days after that he had with great difficulty enjoyed the title of Emperor, he
was slain by MAGNENTIVS his Captains. And so MAGNENTIVS remained Emperor
(although a Tyrant) of Italy, Africa, France, and Spain, in concurrence and
disgrace of CONSTANTIVS in the East, who in truth by just title was sole
Emperor.

CONSTANTIVS, being advertised of the death of his Brother CONSTANS, and of
the success of MAGNENTIVS, was greatly perplexed, seeing himself oppressed
with war against the Persians; and, on the other side, bound to revenge the
death of his Brother, and to root out so mighty an enemy as MAGNENTIVS, who
grew great in a very short time; and BRITANNIO also, who was not slightly to be
regarded. But, after many consultations, it was concluded to settle all matters
of the East in the best order he might, and to pass into Europe Gallus made
Caesar by Constantius.
against MAGNENTIVS. Whereupon he determined to make his cosen germane GALLVS,
CAESAR; who was brother to IVLIANVS, of whom we shall speak hereafter: Both
which were sons to a brother of CONSTANTINS the Great, named CONSTANTIVS; whom
his father CONSTANTIVS had by a second wife; and, the better to be assured of
this new CAESAR, he married him to one of his own sisters, whose name was
CONSTANTIA. And leaving this GALLVS in the East, having first concluded a kind
of truce or peace with the King of Persia, he came into Europe against
MAGNENTIVS, with the greatest power he was able to levy; and by the way
purposed to have fought with the old Captain BRITANNIO, whom we said to be
called Emperor in Austria, Hungary, and Slauonia. But BRITANNIO Britannio
yielded himself to Constantius.
would not make any resistance: for, laying aside his imperial robes, he came
into Thracia to meet him; and, humbling himself before CONSTANTIVS, said unto
him, that he renouncing the Empire, yielded himself into his hands; to the end
he should dispose of him at his pleasure. CONSTANTIVS very joyfully accepted
his humility; and, lifting him up from Constantius accepted Britan nio for his
fried and called him father.
ground, embraced and honored him much in speeches; and, calling him Father,
set him at his own table: and they two supt that night together. And, being
informed of all matters by BRITANNIO concerning MAGNENTIVS, he kept on his
journey; and sent BRITANNIO to a City in Bithynia in Asia, and gave him rents
and revenues sufficient for the maintenance of his estate: whither he retired
himself with many his friends and Familiars, and lived there six years after in
great rest and tranquillity.

CONSTANTIVS, passing forwards, drew near to Italy, where MAGNENTIVS lay in
wait for him: and the war began between them, not only with great power
and numbers of men; but also with great hatred and malice: for besides that
they both fought for the Empire, they had sent letters and messages the one to
the other, which had much incensed them both. And so the wars began to be
very cruel, and there ensued some battles wherein fortune showed herself
variable; MAGNENTIVS having sometimes the victory, and sometimes CONSTANTIVS,
as CASSIODORVS reports in his Tripartite History. But, after many conflicts,
each of them setting up his rest, they fought a great battle near the City of
Mursia in Spain, which was one of the most cruel and bloody that has been
seen; and the Roman Empire A eruell battle betwixt Magnentius and Constantius.
lost therein the best men of all the ordinary Legions: for, it continued the
greatest part of all the day, and part of the night. There were slain of both
sides four and fifty thousand men, all valiant old soldiers; wherein
CONSTANTIVS obtained the victory, and MAGNENTIVS escaped by flight.

It is very strange what some Authors write concerning this battle; that
MAGNENTIVS Army did consist but of thirty and odd thousand men, and
CONSTANTIVS had in his Army threescore and ten thousand: and of those which
were ouercom, there died four and twenty thousand; and of them which overcame,
thirty thousand. Whereby it appears, with what resolution, force or
obstinacy, MAGNENTIVS and his men did fight, who slew as many of their enemies
as they themselves were in number: and there remained but six thousand of them
living.

MAGNENTIVS being overthrown fled into Italy (as EVTROPIVS and AURELIUS
VICTOR do write): where reinforcing himself the best he could, he resolved to
have returned again to try his fortune, and once again to fight with
CONSTANTIVS; having first in vain sought to come to some composition of peace,
seeming to be contented if CONSTANTIVS would suffer him to possess but
Thracia only. Finally, coming to another encounter, he was again overthrown;
and, fleeing from the battle, shut himself up in the City of Lions in France:
where, being advertised that his soldiers practiced to deliver him alive into
the hands of CONSTANTIVS, he slew himself with his own poiniard, leaning
against a wall (as says Magnentius, being overthrown the second time, slew
himself.
AURELIUS VICTOR) and so ended his Empire which he had tyrannically usurped,
together with his life; being of the age of fifty years.

When his son DECENCIVS (whom he had made CAESAR, and Gouerner of France)
understood of his death; being out of hope to make head against CONSTANTIVS,
and to defend his government, he hung himself. CONSTANTIVS having happily
ended so dangerous a war, all the Provinces which had held for MAGNENTIVS
(without any resistance) Decencius, hea ring of the death of his father, hung
himself.
submitted themselves to his will: and he being very joyful came triumphing
to the City of Milan; where for a certain space he made his abode.

Whilst these matters befell CONSTANTIVS in the West, his cosen GALLVS (whom
he left for CAESAR, and Gouerner general of the Provinces in the East)
administered no point of justice, neither defended that estate with such valor
as he ought to have done. For, it is written, that SAPOR King of Persia
overthrew him in battle, and in the rest he used extreme cruelty: And Writers
particularly affirm, that in the City of Antioch he did put to death the
greatest part of all the Nobility there. And of the Jews of Judea, and of
Palestina, for that they had attempted to rebel, he most cruelly made many
thousands of either sex, and of all ages, to be slain. He commanded the Cities
of Tiberias, Diospolis, Caesarea, and others, to be set on fire; which, Saint
IEROM does report in his additions to EVSEBIVS. When CONSTANTIVS understood of
these and other matters (which, AMMIANVS MARCELLINVS recites at large, being an
ey-witnes: which Author wrote the life of CONSTANTIVS, IVLIANVS and IOVIANVS,
Emperors of those times, very truly and distinctly; but with the most ragged
style that ever I read in any Latin Author: yet it was great pity that so many
of his Works were lost) he, being desirous to prevent the disorders whereof I
have made mention, and standing already in some fear of GALLVS, sent some
secretly to kill him; which was easily effected, having first sought some other
remedies. And so for that time CONSTANTIVS remained Constantius made his cosen
Gallus to be slain.
sole Emperor without any CAESAR or companion in all the Roman Empire: and from
Milan he provided and sent Captains and Gouerners to all parts. And, because he
was of light belief, and took pleasure in factions (an ill thing in any man,
but in Princes most dangerous) and to commit cruelties, and to inflict
punishments, there were daily offered new occasions: by reason whereof, he used
great cruelty, and put many to death; which, MARCELLINVS describes at large.

Among other accidents, a valiant old Captain, whose name was SILVANVS, who at
that time was General against the Germans, was accused to have practiced some
matters against his Imperial Majesty. Which accusation (all Writers affirm)
was through the envy which they bare him for his victories and good success:
and this credulous Emperor, as it seems, did also envy him, and intended to
cause him to be slain. Whereof SILVANVS being advertised (as he was very much
honored for his age and bounty, and for the great honor which he had won in
sundry wars and battles; but principally in the wars of CONSTANTINE the
Great, against LICINIVS) and finding no means to assure his life; forced more
through fear than his own voluntary choice, he resolved to rebel, and to take
upon him the title of Emperor. Which he did, showing first to his soldiers his
disgrace, and how he was odious to CONSTANTIVS; and how that for the service
which he and they had done, he had commanded him to be slain. Which being
understood, they all with one voice hailed him Emperor, Siluanus chose Emperor
by his soldiers.
swearing and promising to protect and defend him. These news did greatly
trouble CONSTANTIVS, who was yet in Milane: and at the very instant that he was
advertised hereof; without discovering it to any man, making show as though he
knew nothing, he compounded with a certain subtle and valiant Captain, named
VRSICINVS: who besides his familiars and necessary servants took with him
ten Companions extraordinary men and very valiant; with which he undertook
to kill SILVANVS, under this pretext and policy:

CONSTANTIVS wrote certain Letters unto SILVANVS, wherein making no show to
have understood ought of his rebellion, he fained he would depart from Milane
and have him with him, with many honorable words willing him to repair to him
and to deliver up the charge which he held, to the Captain whom he had sent.
VRSICINVS made great haste on his way; to the end, that through the shortness
of the time, it might be the better believed, that all his proceedings had been
unknown to CONSTANIVS. As he with his companions came near to the Army, among
which one was MARCELLINVS the writer of this History; SILVANVS thinking no
other but that this man was sent to be his successor, and then being no time to
debate the matter, made no account thereof. VRSICINVS seeming careless A
stratagem used by Vrsicinus, thereby to k^ll Siluanus.
and simple, so cunningly handled the matter, conferring with certain captains
his friends, and others which were discontented with SILVANVS, that by means of
some gifts which he gave, and great promises which he made, they resolved to
kill poor SILVANVS. Whereupon, assembling together a good number of soldiers,
they went one morning to his Palace; where killing his guard, they entered
perforce; and SILVANVS, fleeing into a Church of the Siluanus slain in a ^urch
of the Christians.
Christians, was therein found and slain. And in this manner ended his Empire
with his life, having usurped the same only 30 days.

This plot being ended to the good liking of CONSTANTIVS, there followed other
troubles and combustions: For the barbarous Nations of high Germany came down
to make war in the Empire: and as all things were yet very much out of order,
by reason of the death of SILVANVS, they did much harm by taking certain
Cities, and by robbing and spoiling the Country. Which when CONSTANTIVS
understood, considering with himself that if he went thither in person, the
whole Empire was without any defense; and imagining also that a General was
not to be trusted with that war, he resolved to choose his cousin germane
IVLIANVS, and to make him CAESAR, who was brother to GALLVS, of whom we have
spoken heretofore, and had been CAESAR in the East, and slain by his
commandment; both which were the sons of CONSTANTIVS, brother to CONSTANTINE
the Great, before spoken of.

This IVLIANVS was a young man of whom there was great hope: for he was of a
good constitution of body, of an excellent wit, inclined and given to study,
and therewith very well learned. IVLIANVS was made CAESAR and adopted by
CONSTANTIVS, with great Iulianus made Caesar by Constantius.
solemnity in the City of Milane, where CONSTANTIVS then made his abode: yet
some say, that it was at Athens, in Graecia: and the better to confirm the
friendship and alliance* he married him to his sister HELENA. Other matters
also passing, which for breuity I omit, IVLIANVS went toward the Army which
was in Germany; where all things succeeded so well with him, that he not only
recovered the losses received, but also made great spoil and slaughter of his
enemies.

CONSTANTIVS, leaving the West in charge with IVLIANVS, resolved to pass into
the East, where there was no less danger and need of his presence: for, the
Persians, being ancient and daily enemies to the Romans, as the offspring and
successors of the Parthians, never ceased from inuading and making war upon
the frontiers of the Romans; robbing and spoiling the Territories of the
Empire. And in his way he purposed to go to Rome, where he was received with
great joy and magnificence. But he could not stay there above thirty days:
for, besides other news from the East, he understood that the Sarmates, a
fierce and barbarous nation (which were the Russians, Muscouites, Polonians,
and some others) had entered and run through Misia (now called Bulgaria and
Seruia) and with other nations were comn into Hungary. Wherefore he presently
departed, and committed the charge of the Sarmatian wars to MARCELLVS
PEBERVS, an excellent Captain of great experience, and himself passed through
Slauonia toward the East. And notwithstanding that he had a great Army, yet
he was Marcellus Peberus sent by Constantius against the Sarmates.
not free from fear: for, as this Emperor ever prevailed in all his civil
wars, and against Tyrants; so against the Persians he was ever unfortunate:
wherefore he practiced to come to some composition of peace with SAPOR (the
second of that name) King of Persia; who then reigned, and refused not to give
ear to an Ambassador which motioned the same. Whereof SAPOR, growing beyond
all measure proud, wrote a most hautie Letter to CONSTANTIVS; which, with the
answer thereto, MARCELLINVS setts down. Wherein he required, if the Lib.
(...)The tenor of a Letter written by Sapor King of Persia to the Emperor
Constantius: and an answer thereto. The effect of Constantius letter to Sapor.
Emperor would have any peace with him, that he should first resign into his
hands the Provinces of Mesopotamia and Armenia, which had been subject to his
Ancestors (so great was the power and presumption of the Kings of Persia, that
they would not grant peace and truce to a Roman Emperor, except he would give
them two of the best Provinces of the world).

To this Letter, CONSTANTIVS sent him another for answer; which was a notable
Letter and very discreet, which for breuity I do not insert. Wherein he held
the gravity and majesty of a Roman Emperor; and, reprehending SAPOR for his
pride and ambition, he not only denied what the other required, but did also
put him clean out of all hope to have any peace with him: and so afterward
there began a very cruel war.

At such time as these matters passed in the East, IVLIANVS, who remained in
France, CAESAR, and General against the Germans, after some other victories
subdued his enemies in a very great and bloody battle: and, having obtained
this notable victory, by a general consent of the whole Army he was called
Emperor and AUGUSTUS; and they made him equal with Iulianus was by the Army
made Emperor and Augustus.
CONSTANTIVS.

These news within few days were brought to CONSTANTIVS in the East;
wherewith he was so much disquieted, that he was once resolved to have
abandoned the wars there, and to have marched with all his Legions against
IVLIANVS. But, afterward altering his determination, he resolved to send
Ambassadors unto him; and, thinking with good words to win him, he sent to
persuade him to content himself with the title and dignity of CAESAR, and to
Constantius sent an Ambassador to Iulianus.
renounce the name of Emperor and AUGUSTUS. With this embassage he sent a chief
man, whose name was LEONAS; who, for that he came from CONSTANTIVS, was
honorably received in the Army, and audience was given him. He having
delivered his Embassage, and the Emperors Letters being read, the Army not
only refused to yield thereto, but they all with one voice confirmed what they
had done, calling IVLIANVS Emperor and AUGUSTUS: only they obeyed CONSTANTIVS
in putting FLORENTINVS out of the office of Pretorian Prefect, which was given
to NEBRIDIVS. Touching the rest, IVLIANVS answered CONSTANTIVS in humble
manner, with the best words he could, promising Iulianus answer to Constantius.
to be to him a loyal and an obedient companion; desiring him that he would
not depose him from his dignity, seeing that he had accepted thereof against
his will, being thereto compelled by the Army. And heerwith he returned to
make war against the Germans with greater force and circumspection than before.
And foreseeing it was very requisite to tame and subdue those nations,
imagining that he should have war (which he could not avoid) with CONSTANTIVS;
he advised his Captains and Troops to make haste, and to assail their enemies
before they were by them assailed: whereupon there ensued between him and the
Germans some notable battails and encounters; which I cannot relate without
altering my ordinary course of brevity.

After that CONSTANTIVS understood that his Ambassadors could not obtain what
he required, he resolved to make war against IVLIANVS, presuming on his great
power, and the good fortune which he had ever had against other Tyrants.
Wherefore he sought means to confirm the peace and friendship, which then was
in question between him and ARSACES King of Armenia, and other Kings of the
East; to the end they should not ioin in league and confederacy with the King
of Persia, his chiefest enemy: against whom he left such forces as he thought
sufficient to defend the country, and to continue the war. After this he came
into Europe; and, traveling from Antioch in Syria to the City of Tharsus, by
the way he felt himself somewhat ill of a light Fever: but yet notwithstanding
he held on his journey, thinking that his exercise would have helped him by
diuerting the humor; and therefore he caused himself to be carried in a
Litter, making small journies. But, coming to the foot of Mount Taurus, he felt
himself much oppressed with his disease; the Fever increasing upon him in such
sort, that he seemed to be all on fire. And so, knowing his infirmity to be
mortal, and that his death approached, he made his Will; wherein he nominated
IVLIANVS (his enemy, and a tyrant) for his Constantius last Will and testament.
heir and successor: so the man, whom in his life time he would not admit for a
companion, at his death he chose for his heir; having in this action (as a
good Emperor) great regard to the common good and quiet of the Empire.

This Emperor reigned four and twenty years; seven with his brethren, and
seuenteen alone, although in contention with the tyrants aforenamed; and in his
fathers time he was CAESAR The death of Constantius.
thirteen years: wherefore some say, that he reigned in all eight and thirty
years. He was when he died (as says EVTROPIVS) five and forty years old: yet
all Authors agree not heerupon. This Emperor was reckoned among the indifferent
Emperors: for, notwithstanding that he was endowed with some singular gifts,
yet was he not altogether free from vices. For, as he was courteous, mild, and
of a pleasing conversation, liberal and affable to his servants, and very
temperate in eating and drinking, and would take great pains, and delighted and
desired much to speak well (yet naturally he was neither very sharp-witted, nor
eloquent) and was an excellent Archer, and delighted greatly therein: so was
he otherwise very credulous, and delighted to hear men speak evil of others.
Which moved him to commit many cruelties: for, he was by nature mistrustfull,
and ever feared treason, and therefore trusted few men: so was he likewise
much given to women.

With these vices and virtues he well preserved and defended the Roman Empire;
and died, according to S. IEROM'S computation, in the year of our Lord 364.

THE LIFE OF IVLIANVS, ONLY OF THIS NAME, CALLED APOSTATA, AND SIX AND FORTITH
EMPEROVR OF ROME.
AFter the death of CONSTANTIVS, which happened as is before declared, his cofen
germane IVLIANVS remained sole Emperor of the whole Roman Empire; who in the
others life time enjoyed the title of AUGUSTUS. This IVLIANVS was by birth such
as we have specified in the life of CONSTANTIVS; and in valor and sufficiency
was one of the best Emperors that ever was; as presently we will make manifest.
All which good graces he corrupted and defaced, by renouncing the Christian
faith whereof he had before made profession, and by turning to the idolatry of
the Gentiles: wherefore he was commonly called IVLIANVS APOSTATA: whereof, some
Authors say, one LI^ANIVS an Idolater and a famous Rhetorician was the
occasion. Which, besides the reasons which may be heerto annexed, is a notable
example for all Princes, and men of all estates and conditions whatsoever, that
they not only with all diligence seek out masters for their sons, which may
be expert in those sciences wherein they purpose to instruct them; but that
principally they be virtuous, honest, and sound men in religion: for learning
without virtue is little worth. And it is most certain, that what children
learn in their youth, is so imprinted in their understandings, as they never
forget the same. And those exercises and qualities wherein they are bred up in
their tender age, become proper and natural, and are never left by them in
their whole life time; whereof the masters which have charge of the children
are the principal cause. And although we might produce many good and fair
examples, yet this present shall now suffice, returning to IVLIANVS, in whom
his masters infidelity took so deep impression, that it well appears, what
prejudice he thereby received: for, in the rest he was so complete and so
rare, that in goodness, bounty and courtesy, they compare him with TITUS; in
clemency, with ANTONIUS; To whom Iulianus was compared.
in his fortunate stratagems at wars against the Germans, they make him equal
to TRAIAN; in temperance and modesty, to MARCUS AURELIUS: and in knowledge and
learning, to the ancient Philosophers. He was endued with a singular memory,
and was very studious, and therefore learned in many Arts and Sciences; and was
eloquent and well spoken, no less by the gift of nature then by Art. He was
most temperate in his diet and sleep: and most chaste and free from all fleshly
passion and dishonestie. He was so valiant and hardy in Arms (although but
of a small constitution of body, and delicately limmed) that he was therefore
noted and reproved to be more hardy and aduenturous, than for a General or
Emperor was fit or convenient. Of glory and renown he was greedily covetous;
which is a vice wherein great spirits do oftentimes offend. With his friends he
was very pleasant and bountiful, and loved to do justice indifferently to all
men; which he strictly observed in the time that he was CAESAR, and in the
small time that he enjoied the Empire. He was likewise adorned with many other
virtues; which, EVTROPIVS as an ey-witnes, AURELIUS VICTOR, and AMMIANVS
MARCELLINVS, do record. But, with all this, he was an Infidel, which was
great pity; and his understanding was blinded by the persuasion of his master
LIBANIVS, Iulianus an Idolater by the persuasion of his schoolmaster.
who was a Gentile and an Idolater.

Those things which passed in the time that he was CAESAR and Emperor, are very
largely and particularly described by AMMIANVS MARCELLINVS, as by him which saw
and understood the same: for, they happened in his time; and he also followed and
served him in the wars of Persia. But I will relate only that which happened
when he was Emperor, and that briefly; for, he reigned only two years:
wherefore, I hold it not fit in a Reign of so small continuance to spend much
time.

Being advertised of the death of CONSTANTIVS (which news were brought to him
in France, whence he was about to go to meet him; and the other, as we have
said, was coming toward him with the same resolution) in great haste he
marched to the City of Constantinople, which ever since the death of the
Emperor CONSTANTINE was the Head of the Empire; where, by all means possible he
sought to win the love and good will of the people of all nations; which the
better to bring to pass, he used this policy: First, he caused the Temples
of the Iulianus made the temples of the Idolaters to be opened.
Gentiles to be set open, and suffered them therein to commit their
superstitious idolatry, and to adore their idols. And although he abhorred, and
was an enemy to the Christians, yet at that time he persecuted them not with
deaths and tortures; and in contentions between the Christians and the Arrians
he was neuter, showing himself inclined to neither party: wherefore he was not
very hateful to any; and the barbarous nations standing in fear of his great
fame (for, by reason of the German wars he was grown very famous) abstained
from making war, or from troubling the Empire; and so sent their Ambassadors
to him to treat of peace and friendship, which he granted.

In this manner he began to govern the Empire with as great prosperity and
contentment of all men, as ever any man had done. But, as (...)his heart he
was an Idolater; so he resolved to find some means to supplant the true
Christian religion, induced thereto by the devil and his own wickedness: And,
the better to effect the same, he practiced a means never before used by A
means used by Iulianus to persecute the Church without bloodshed.
any other; which was, To show himself pitiful and not cruel, perceiving that
by means of torments inflicted upon the Martyrs, the holy Christian faith was
greatly increased: and therefore he determined to take a contrary course (as
RVFFINVS, S. IEROM, and CASSIODORVS, report) which was, to induce them by
gifts, favors, flatteries, and by bestowing on them offices and dignities, to
the end they should renounce the Christian faith, and do sacrifice to his false
gods. And as the same authors affirm, there were some, and they not a few,
which A new device found out by Iulianus to persecute the Church.
being covetous and ambitious, through desire to grow rich and to be honored,
denied the christian faith.

And this was one of the greatest persecutions that ever the Church endured,
as well in respect of those which abandoned the same, as for that IVLIANVS
perceived that by this mean he could not thoroughly accomplish his desire;
although as is said, he put none to death, neither used any violence to any. He
therefore made laws and general decrees, that no Christian Decrees made by
Iulianus against the Christians.
should be master of any arts or sciences, neither should there study in any
Schools but such as would adore his Idols, to the end that through the desire
of learning, they should become Idolaters, or else at the least should remain
idiots, and without learning, and so be insufficient and unable to preach the
christian faith. He likewise ordained that no Christian should have any charge,
or hold any office of justice, neither should be a Captain in the wars,
neither enjoy any other dignity. Finally, he used all the inventions and
means he could devise to make war against JESUS CHRIST, without shedding any
christian blood: which I hold to be the invention and subtlety of the Devil,
to take the crown from the holy Martyrs, which they obtained through the
persecution of the sword.

Using this pitiful cruelty against the Christians (as a man of courage and
valiant in Arms) he resolved to make war against the Persians, who only had
not showed any humility, or acknowledged his superiority. Wherefore he went
into Asia with a great Army: with which and the ordinary legions having passed
through Asia the less and other provinces, he entered Mesopotamia, which (as is
said) was the Lady, for whom the Romans and Persians did ordinarily contend:
and after some light encounters and skirmishes, he seized upon the city of
Cercasio which favored the Romans and was enobled by the Emperor DIOCLESIAN
with walls Julian his enterprise aoainst the Persians.
and bulwarks; and from thence he passed to Zaita, where he was advertised
that the King of Persia was near at hand with his whole power: whereupon he
marshalled his troops, with a great desire to come with him to a battle. But
his enemy at that time durst not fight with him, but sent him many Ambassages,
entreating pardon, and promising him a great part of his countries. To whom
this valiant Emperor would give no audience: but seeing that he refused the
battle, the more to provoke him, he entered his country by sundry ways,
taking many cities in Soria, some by force, and others yielded themselves
without any resistance; committing great spoils in all that country, until
at last the Persians for very shame were forced to fight, which battle was
very cruel. Before which, this blind IVLIANVS (as OROSIVS and S. JEROME
recite) of very malice and hatred which he bare to the Christians, whom he
called Galileans (as says THEODORETVS in his history) made a vow to his gods,
that if he obtained Iulianus his vow to the gods.
the victory, he would do sacrifice to them in the blood of those Christians
which would not worship idols. And it pleased God in his secret judgment to
give him victory at that time, thereby to reward him in this life for the
moral virtues wherewith he was endued, to the end that perpetually he should
be punished in the other world, for his damnable infidelity.

He seeing himself victorious, and finding no resistance, marched to the
famous city of Thesiphonte; and finding no forces that durst stop his passage,
he determined to return to winter in Mesopotamia: but upon the way his people
endured great penury and want with thirst and hunger, as well for that his
Army was exceeding great, as also for that his enemies did often assault and
molest them. And notwithstanding that the Persians would never come to any
equal fight, but gave camizadoes, with light skirmishes, suddenly charging,
and then running away, after the manner of the Arabians in these days; yet
therewith his Army was exceedingly much toiled and tired. And in this manner
it pleased God (who with his death would stop the execution of so many
innocents which he purposed to have sacrificed) that a Persian fugitive, who
was the guide to his Army, trecherouslie led him and his Army into a place
where many of his enemies lay in ambush; where being charged, he was
constrained to fight, and in the fight pell mell being unknown was stricken
with a lance through the arm into the body: with which wound losing his
senses, he fell upon his horses neck, and so his people took him, Iulianus
deadly wounded.
and carried him into a tent, wherein with some medicines which they applied
unto him, he came again to himself; and recovering strength, he called for his
horse and Arms: for he would again return to the battle. But afterward
feeling his force to fail him, they The proud speeeches uttered by Iulianus a
little before his death.
write, that with extreme pride he used these words against our Savior CHRIST,
It suffices that thou CHRIST of Galilea have overcome, for so he was
accustomed to call him. After this, seeing that all those which were about him
began to weep, he reprehended them, saying; You do ill to weep for that Prince
which dies in the favor of the gods: and so he discoursed of the immortality
of the soul as long as he was able to speak, until that his blood being
wholly spent, he died; which in truth was great pity, that there should be such
accursed Iulianus died talking.
blindness in a man in whom there was so great valor, and so many good and
virtuous parts. He died in the seventh year after he was made CAESAR, and in
the third year of his Empire, being 31 years old, in the year of our Lord
(according to Saint IEROM) 366.

THE LIFE OF IOVIANVS, ONLY OF THIS NAME, AND SEVEN AND FORTITH EMPEROR OF
ROME.
MVch was the death of IVLIANVS lamented by the whole Army: for, he was much
beloved by all his men of war. But the Church and all Christians rendered thanks
to our Lord God, who in his mercy had delivered them from the yoke of so great
a servitude. There was so great a confusion in the Camp by reason of the death
of this Emperor, that they were in danger to have bin overthrown by the
Persians: besides that, they were much distressed through want of victuals. And
the enemy, understanding of the death of the Emperor, never left to molest them
on every side with such continual sudden assaults and alarmes, that they were
not able to endure them. Wherefore, the chief Commanders of the Army assembled
themselves together to choose an Emperor which might govern them. After much
contention and diversity of opinions, they agreed to choose one (as says
EVTROPIVS) whose name was MARCELLINVS. But finally they concluded to name a
very famous man called IOVIANVS, who was the son of a Nobleman called
VARRONIANVS, an Hungarian, or an Inhabitant of Hungary: who, leaving the
wars which he had long followed, and to avoid the tumults and troubles which
he saw in the Empire, retired, and gave himself to his rest and quiet in
certain possessions which he held in Hungary. But his son IOVIANVS came to
the Emperor CONSTANTIVS Court, and followed the wars: who, for that he was
valiant, and a goodly Personage, was greatly esteemed by IVLIANVS; and, whilst
he was CAESAR and afterward Emperor, this man was the chief Commander of the
ordinary Troops which went with the Emperor.

This IOVIANVS was of an excellent wit and sound judgment, given to study,
and therewith well learned. He was tall of stature, and well proportioned, and
a faithful Christian; Praise of Iouianus.
in so much that when IVLIANVS commanded, that no Christian should be a
Captain, neither should have any charge or office in the wars; IOVIANVS
pleasantly said, that he made greater account of the faith whereof he made
profession, than of any dignity or honor that he enjoyed; and so gave up his
charge. Being afterward chosen Emperor, RVFFINVS Iouianus his profession.
and THEODORETVS write, that seeing IVLIANVS had drawn the men of war of his
Army to commit idolatry, and to do sacrifice to his gods; he in a public
Oration which he Iouianus chose Emperor.
made to them, said, that he (although he might) would not (being a Christian)
be an Emperor of Infidels. And so he resisted, and absolutely refused the
Empire. But all men were so well pleased with his election, that, after they
had approved the same, they cried out aloud, saying; We are all Christians. And
for his sake those which were not so, resolved to become Christians, upon
condition that he would accept the Empire.

In this manner, with incredible joy and gladness, they swear obedience unto
him, and gave him the Imperial Ensigns. Whereupon he presently ordered and
reinforced the Army; which could not be done without great difficulty: for,
SAPOR understanding of the death of IVLIANVS (who, for his noble acts and great
courage, was generally feared of all men) made small account of this new
Emperor; but, gathering together the greatest forces he was able, gave so
fierce a charge in the Emperors Army, that the Romans were likely to have bin
wholly defeated: and the Persians apparently had the better. IOVIANVS marching
with great trouble and danger, for that the ways were craggie and mountainous;
The first day he followed his journey: and, making an Alt in a vallie, his
Army was presently compassed about on every side by the Persians; who assailed
and skirmished with them after their manner.

The next day he came to the City of Carras, where IOVIANVS and his soldiers
remembering that in ancient time MARCUS CRASSVS was in that coast overthrown
and slain by the Parthians; holding it for an ominous presage, they accounted
themselves lost, if the enemy ever gave them battle. The principal cause of
which fear was by reason of their weakness through the hunger which they had
endured, and at that instant did endure, through want of victuals: for, as two
so great Armies marched so near together, no provision could be made that
could suffice to sustain them. But in all these extremities IOVIANVS never
fainted or was discouraged, neither omitted to use all diligence in guiding,
defending and animating his soldiers, till they came to the river Tigris,
their dangers still increasing: where King SAPOR sent him Ambassadors, giving
him to understand, that, considering the weakness of his Army and his own
force, he was most assured of victory; yet, if he would render him the
Provinces he required (which were many) he would be content to hold
perpetual peace with the Empire. IOVIANVS, seeing the present necessity
wherein he was, took counsel heerupon with the chiefest men in his Army: and,
after 3 or 4 days consultation, a peace was concluded for thirty A peace made
betwixt the Per^ans and the Romans for 30 years.
years; IOVIANVS leaving to King SAPOR all the Provinces beyond the river
Tigris, and some Cities in Mesopotamia; with further condition, that the
Emperor should not aid or assist ARSACES King of Armenia: which peace or truce
(as EVTROPIVS writes, whose history ends with the life of this Emperor; and
many other Writers) was held for very shameful and dishonorable to the
greatness of the Roman Empire, for voluntarily giving to the enemy part of the
Provinces thereto belonging, and for decreasing the bounds and limits thereof.
But, for that Princes actions are ever diversely judged of, PAVLVS OROSIVS and
other Writers excuse him; alleging, he made such a peace as was requisite,
considering the time; and albeit it were not honorable, yet at least it was
profitable and needful: for, he was in manifest danger to have lost his whole
Army, and the greatest part of the Provinces that he rendered. Heerof every man
may judge after his fantasy; but thus it was: IOVIANVS, having concluded this
peace, went into Soria; where he commanded by public proclamation, that all
those Bishops which were exiled for resisting and contradicting the heresy of
ARRIVS, or any other unlawful occasion, should be recald and restored; and
principally the great ATHANASIVS. He likewise revoked and made void all the
prohibitions and decrees made by IVLIANVS against the Christians; and ordained
that they should be admitted to any dignity, office, charge, magistracy or
study, as they were wont to be in the time of the Emperor CONSTANTINE the
Great. He likewise caused to be paid to the Churches those rents of corn and
other things that CONSTANTINE had given them, and which by the commandment of
IVLIANVS were sequestered; which is written by THEODORETVS and RVFFINVS.
IOVIANVS, having laid so godly a foundation to his Empire concerning the
Christian faith, giving in all things good signs of a good and just Prince,
and providing for all matters in the East as to him seemed most needful, began
his journey toward Constantinople, showing himself every where as he passed in
all his actions a just and a gracious Prince; so as all men conceived great
good hope of him. But this, and all his noble resolutions, and other
Christianlike purposes, were interrupted by death: for, the iniquity of the
people deserved not so good a Prince; which happened thus: He coming to a place
which was called Dudastana, in the confines of Bithynia, and Galatia, in Asia
the less, the weather being very cold (for it was in the winter) they did set
in the chamber where the Emperor should lie that night, a great pan with
kindled coals, which coals were wet: and as the officers of his chamber were
gone to take their rest, the chamber door being locked, and he asleep; the
vapor of the fire waxing gross and thick, and filling every thing with
smoke, and The Emperor Iouianus smoothered in his bed with smoke.
finding no place to euaporate, stopped the Emperors breath, in such sort as
he was smoothered sleeping, and in the morning was found dead; all men
imagining this to be the cause of his death. Yet some were of opinion that he
died by eating of Mushrumpes, which are held venomous. And others coniectured
that he ate so much meat at supper, as his natural heat could not digest the
same, and so through the cruditie thereof he was suffocated. But howsoever it
was, all men were very sorrowful for his death, he having held the scepter of
the Empire only eight months; being, according to some writers, of the age of
forty years: and after some other, thirty and odd.

Whosoever desires to know more of this Emperor, as well in war as in peace,
let him read the authors above named, and particularly AMMIANVS MARCELLINVS,
who was with him in all his adventures; and the Tripartite History of
CASSIODORVS in his seventh book, and RVFFINVS in the tenth book of his
ecclesiastical History: and EVTROPIVS, although he be brief was an
eie-witnesse. And here ends his History. Many things may be gathred of the
life of this Emperor, by reading the first book of the epistles of Saint
AMBROSE, and the fourth book of THEODORUS.

THE LIFE OF VALENTINIANVS, THE FIRST OF THAT NAME, AND OF HIS BROTHER VALENS,
THE Eight and Fortith Roman Emperor.
THE ARGUMENT.
VAlentinianus being the son of a rope maker, for his virtues deserved to be
made an Emperor; even as his father mounted from making of ropes to the
highest martial dignity. He having taken upon him the imperial dignity,
chose his brother Valens for his companion, and shortly after made his son
Gratianus, Caesar. In their time the world was troubled, with so many
prodigious earthquakes, remoouing of the sea, strange raines, and so much
war as there has seldom been read of the like. Nevertheless, these wise
Emperors provided excellently for all these troubles and dangers; and not
only overcame barbarous Kings and strangers which were their enemies, but also
subdued domestical tyrants, among which was one whose name was Procopius, a
kinsman to Iulianus the Apostata; who taking the ensigns of Emperors, was so
resolute as to come to fight with Valens. Valentinianus was a great friend to
the Christians, yet Valens was to the contrary: and being earn^st to give
answer to certain Ambassadors, he was taken with an Apoplexy which bereaved
him of the use of his tongue only, leaving al his other senses sound; whereof
within short space he died. Whereupon Valens remaining in the Empire, with his
Nephew Gratian, as the manner of Uncles is, he began to make small account of
his Nephew: and favoring the sect of the Arrians, gave himself to
inchauntments, nigromancies, to persecute the Christians, and to martyrize many
of them. For which his wickedness God punished him; for he coming against the
Goths (to whom he had done good) in a piece of service, was by them
overthrown: and flying wounded into a farmers house in the country, the house
was fired by them; and he burning therein, made such an end as his evil life
deserved, receiving such punishment at Gods hands, as such obstinate heretics
are worthy of.

IT pleased God of his goodness, to give to the Christian and virtuous Emperor
IOVIANVS, a successor (although he left neither son nor kinsman) which was
like unto him in faith, goodness, and virtuous conditions: and this was
VALENTINIANVS: who although that he were but of a mean Parentage, and came of
a poor father; yet he was a faithful Christian, and endued with excellent
virtues. His fathers name was GRATIANVS, The descent of Valentinianus.
borne and bred in Hungary, in a City of the Cimbales, a man of mean
Parentage, as says AURELIUS VICTOR; and as he and PAVLVS DIACONVS affirm, was
very poor, and by his trade a rope-maker: But he was of so great strength, as
upon a day five soldiers striving with all their might to take one of those
ropes which he sold, out of his hands, they were not able to do it. Wherefore
seeming to be strong and a very able man for the wars, he was counseled to
follow the same; which he did: and having no less courage of mind then force
of body, he profited so much in Arms, through the notable exploits which he
performed therein, as offices were bestowed upon him; and so ascending by
dgrees, he became Pretorian Prefect.

By these means his son VALENTINIANVS, of whom we purpose to treat came to be
bred up in the wars, and therein wan great honor. Being Captain of the
companies called Scutarij, which were targettiers, so called, for that no
others did bear targets, but they; IVLIANVS the Apostata commanded him to do
sacrifice to his gods, or otherwise to give up the office which he held (as he
did by others, and as we said by IOVIANVS): but he as a good Valentinianus
gave up his office of Captain rather then he would do sacrifice to Idols.
Catholic and not as a fained Christian, voluntarily surrendered his office and
Captainshippe, to continue in the Faith of CHRIST. And the good and Christian
IOVIANVS coming to the Empire, drew unto him all such, as he was; by means
whereof VALENTINIANVS was in his service when he died, in the same place and
office which he forsook in the time of IVLIANVS. As soon as IOVIANVS was
dead, the first and chiefest care that VALENTINIANVS took, was, to prepare his
body to be sent to Constantinople to be buried; and the second and next was, to
consult who should be the next Emperor. The chief commanders marched with the
Army to the City of Nicea, which is the head and Metropolitan of the
Province of Bithynia: where determining to nominate an Emperor, there were some
which made account to have been so; and among many, one was named, which was a
Tribune called EQVITIVS; who (as MARCELLIN^S reports) was afterward for his
currish and harsh conditions deposed. But finally after long co^ltations,
VALENTINIANVS was chosen, Valentinianus chosen Emperor.
by reason of his goodness and valor, being at that time absent, having
remained certain days journey behind the whole Army; and being sent for, and
come, they all swear obedience unto him, with great joy and contentment. For
truly he was (as all men w^e) a goodly personage, very valiant, and
magnanimous; very wise and temperate, a lover of justice, eloquent, and of a
good grace, honorable and virtuous, and a man who knew how to make himself
beloved and respected of all men. Having accepted the Empire, and beginning to
provide for such things as might be needful for the good government thereof;
it seemed good to the captains and soldiers of the Army to give him a
companion and an equal in the Empire, to be an assistant to him in the
government; which the Emperors of their own accord did often use to do.
VALENTINIANVS being advertised hereof, commanded the Army to be called
together; and with a bold and sudden resolution, among other matters spoke
unto them in this manner:

Gentlemen and Soldiers, it was in your hands and at your pleasure, when I was
not Emperor, to give me the government and command of the Empire; but now that
I have the government A speech used by Valentinianus to the Army.
and am in possession thereof, it is no part of your charge, neither ought you
to entermeddle therein: for that is my charge only, and the care thereof
appertains to me to command and govern the commonwealth. And as for a
companion, when need shall require, I will take care for one. These speeches
are written by THEODORETVS and other Authors make mention thereof: which made
such an impression in the soldiers hearts, as from thenceforth they all took
care to obey his commandments, not daring to speak a word concerning any such
matter. But when he came to the City of Constantinople, which ever since the
time of the Emperor CONSTANTINE, was the head of the Empire, imagining it to be
a matter very requisite, he made his brother VALENS his companion and equal
with himself in the Valentinianus made his brother Valens his companion in the
Empire.
Empire: which truly he ought not to have done, for that he was infected with
the Arrian heresy, as hereafter we will declare. And having made this
election, they divided the Empire between them, so as VALENTINIANVS took
charge of the Provinces in the West, and VALENS of those in the East. And
matters standing upon these terms, they both fell sick of a burning fever, so
grievously, as all men thought they would have died; but afterward recovering,
there happened unto these brethren so many wars and such troubles, as they
both had enough to do. For the Saxons and Scots which are northerlie Nations,
came in great The Empire infested by foreign Nations.
troops to make a conquest of the Isle of Britannie, and the Germans came
again down into France: and the countries of Hungary and Austria were
invaded by the Sarmates and the Catti: Into Thracia came certain companies of
Goths to rob and steal. The King of Persia brake the truce, invaded
Armenia, and afterward Mesopotamia. Whereupon by reason of these combustions
and others which were feared, and some already begun, VALENS took his way
toward the East, and VALENTINIANVS toward Milan: And into Hungary they sent
SEVERIANVS, a valiant Captain; and so they provided and placed in diverse parts
excellent Captains and Governors. To recite all that past in particular, would
be a long work: but in sum it was thus; that in the first three years of the
reign of VALENTINIANVS, he had very cruel wars with the Saxons and Germans:
which in the end, after many battles, he overcame and subdued. In the third
year of his reign, he made his son GRATIANVS his Valentinianus made his
son Emperor and Augustus.
companion, Emperor, and AUGUSTUS. And in Rome by reason of the death or
deprivation of TVRCIVS APRONIANVS (for the History declares it not, or I am
forgetful) he placed a Noble man, named ORPHITVS. As a good Christian, he
honored and favored the Christians, their Temples and Churches: which his
brother VALENS did not in the East; but lying for the most part in the city of
Antioch, suffered the idolatries and superstitions of the Gentiles, and likewise
the rites and ceremonies of the Jews. But the Arrians and Heretics he Valens
permitting Idolatry, and the ceremonies of the* Jews, was an enemy to the
Christians.
extremely favored, only he molested and was enemy to the true Christians:
and above all, gave himself to diuinations, sorceries, and prohibited
Astrology; which CASSIODORVS, IOANNES MONACVS, otherwise called ZONARAS, and
RVFFINVS treat of at large.

These two brethren governing the Empire, although after diverse manners, making
head against the incursions of strange and barbarous nations, which infested
the same; a Noble man called PROCOPIVS, borne in Sicilia, and near kinsman to
IVLIANVS Apostata (who beginning by mean degrees, came to be Captain general
of the Imperial Armies in the East) rebelled in Constantinople: and with the
favor and assistance of certain Captains, and some other Procopius was
called Emperor.
men of war (taking the Imperial ensigns) he proclaimed himself Emperor;
which greatly troubled the two Emperors: for they knew that he daily grew
greater, and that his forces continually increased, and that he had sent for
succors to the Goths, and other strange nations.

The Empire being thus troubled, there also followed in those days so general
and terrible an earthquake, that an infinite number of houses, and sundry
cities fell down. For in Sicilia An universal ^arth-quake.
and in many other Islands, whole countries perished, and the sea overwhelmed
and drowned many towns and cities, ouerflowing the natural bounds and limits;
and above all, it was most terrible in the province of Bithynia, in Asia; so as
the city of Nicea was therewith wholly ruined. And in many other provinces
bordering upon the sea, the sea altering his course, in The city of Nicea
destroyed by an earthquake.
some places discovered and left dry land, where before was nothing but sea;
and in some other places made sea, where before were green fields and
pastures; as PAVLVS OROSIVS and other authors write, principally MARCELLINVS,
who was an eye witness, and S. JEROME also. Whereof the Cosmographers of our
times should take notice, and not so much blame and marvel at the ancient, if
they find not described and set down in their books the seacoasts, the
capes, points, havens, and entries into the sea, to be such as they described
them then to be: for these and many other natural changes have been the cause
thereof; besides the error which may be in the letter and painting of the
books, or in the phrase, through their fault which wrote and translated them.
A little while after this earthquake (S. JEROME writes) that there rained
from heaven, like as at other times it uses to snow, an infinite quantity of
wool, Wool fell from heaven like snow.
as perfect and as fine wool as the sheep bears. But returning to our
history; This attempt of PROCOPIVS so much troubled VALENTINIANVS and VALENS,
that VAIENTINIANVS was in doubt whether he should go against him in person, or
leave it to VALENS; whom it seemed more to concern, as well for the neernes to
him, as for that those parts were under his jurisdiction. And being resolved to
go in person, he was constrained to alter his resolution, for that certain
strange nations made new invasions in the Empire, as well in Germany as in
Britannie, and the cities and provinces in these parts by their Ambassadors
required succor. Whereupon he determined rather to relieve those which were
friends to the whole Empire, and to the common estate, then his own in
particular: and publishing his intent, he returned to make war against the
strangers, sending an excellent Captain with a very good Army against
PROCOPIVS, to make head against him, and not to suffer his power to increase:
and he himself went to the wars of Germany, wherein he did many worthy
deeds of Arms against the Saxons, the Burgonians, and other nations: whose
force was so great, that although they were overcome by him, and reduced to his
obedience; yet until this day the remembrance of them continues, and they
inhabit those parts. On the other side, VALENS, as a man which had the lesser
charge, marched toward PROCOPIVS, and he came to meet him in Asia the less,
or in Phrygia, near to a City called Natolia, where they fought, and
PROCOPIVS was ouerthrown and fled. But before this battle, VALENS had sent
Procopius overthrown.
a Captain whose name was JULIUS, with a very good Army, against those Goths
which came to the aid of PROCOPIVS, he having spread a r^or that VALENTINIANVS
was dead in France, and those Goths were overthrown by JULIUS. PROCOPIVS, as
is aforesaid, escaping from the battle, used all possible means to reinforce
his Army, that he might return again to fight: but he not only failed of
his purpose, but was by his own Captains which fled with him, thereby to
obtain pardon and grace with VALENS, apprehended and delivered into his hands.

Some write, that VALENS as soon as he had hi^ made his head to be stricken
off: and others The death of Procopius.
say, that bowing down two trees by force, on^eg was bound to the one Tree,
and another to the other, and the Trees being let loose, he was torn in
pieces: and so ended he his life, parted and divided in two parts, who had
caused so great parts-tak^ (...)division in the Empire. PROCOPIVS when he died,
was of the age of 41 years, he was of a great courage and goodly constitution,
but that he went somewhat stooping. It is reported of him that he was ever very
sad, and was never seen to laugh, and that he always did meditate on
melancholy matters; and so had an unfortunate end, as one which was disloyal,
and a Traitor to his sovereign Lord.

After that VALENS had obtained this victory, he severely punished those that
had favored and assisted PROCOPIVS: and because that Chalcedonia, which is a
City in Asia the less, over against Constantinople, had taken part with him,
he caused all the town walls to be thrown down, and made even with the
ground, which before were very fair. When PROCOPIVS Valens razed the walls of
Chalcedonia.
was dead, a Captain and near kinseman of his, named MARCELLVS, being in the
City of Nicea with certain companies with him, and with 3000 Goths which he
had caused to come thither, took upon him the name of Emperor: but he was
soon set upon, taken and slain by another Captain, whose name was EQVICIVS,
Governor of Slauonia. This so important an enterprise being by VALENS brought
to a happy end, he then endeavored himself to persecute the remainder of those
soldiers, and to provide for other accidents in the East: which, for that they
were many and of less importance, I will omit. But in matters concerning our
religion, as an Heretic and a wicked man, he committed so many outrages,
exiled so many, and did so great harm, as it would require a long time to
describe. His brother VALENTINIANVS following the wars aforesaid, obtained
sundry victories, some in his own The Picts and Scots.
person, and some under the leading of his Captains. In great Britanny, by a
Captain of his whose name was VALENTINE, he overcame and subdued the Picts and
the Scots, from whom the Scots at this day are descended, and the Kingdom of
Scotland in that Island took name.

THEODOSIUS, of whom we will speak hereafter, obtained some other notable
victories in Germany, whom VALENTINIANVS sent also into Africa: for therein
rebelled The victories of Valentinian.
a mighty Captain whose name was TIRMVS, whom THEODOSIUS overthrew in
battle, and took prisoner, leaving the country in quiet. But
notwithstanding that he had so good and happy success, yet the Roman Empire
was so odious and hateful to all strange Nations, as they never desisted as
long as they had any opportunity to invade and molest the same. Whereupon the
Sarmates, a barbarous people, of whom we have often made mention heretofore,
rebelled and entered Hungary: against whom VALENTINIANVS (being greatly
offended) went himself in person; and having overthrown them in battle they
sent their Ambassadors Valentinianus against the Sarmates.
unto him: and the Emperor being in an earnest discourse with them, it is
reported that he was so moved, and cried out so loud, as with the force
thereof the blood gushed out at his mouth in such abundance, that he died
within few days after. Others write, that he was taken with an Apoplexy,
wherewith he lost his speech only, all his other senses remaining perfect.
Finally, of the one, or other, he died within a short space, nothing auailing
any Physic that could be administered unto him, he being of the age of fifty
years, in the twelfth year of his Reign, and according to S. JEROME his
computation in the year of our Lord 379.

This Emperor is accounted among the good and virtuous Emperors, and with
great reason: for besides his valor and sufficiency, he was a very just
Prince, and a great enemy and a punisher of vice, especially of briberie and
covetousness. When he died he left two sons, and three daughters, which he had
by two women. His eldest sons name was GRATIAN, whom he had by his lawful
wife, named SEVERA; him before his death he made Emperor AVOVSTVS. His other
sons name was VALENTINIANVS, who afterward was Emperor also. And his three
daughters, IVSTA, GRATA, and GALLA, he had by a Gentlewoman called IVSTINA: of
which, one, which was GALLA, was afterward married to THEODOSIUS, who in
process of time came to be Emperor. It is written, that this IVSTINA, mother
to these three sisters, was the fairest woman of complexion, of the most
excellent constitution of body, the comeliest personage, and was endowed with
more commendable parts, then any woman then to be found in the world; so as she
was brought to the Emperors Palace to his wife the Emperesse for a miracle in
beauty, where he had by her these three children, as PAVLVS DIACONVS
reports, by the consent and permission of his wife the Emperesse.

We have related the chief of all that passed in the time of VALENTINIANVS,
Emperor in the West, and of his brother VALENS in the East. VALENTINIANVS dying
in such manner, as we said, he left his son GRATIANVS for Emperor of all
that which Gratianus remained Emperor in the place of his father.
he possessed, and made him Emperor in his life time. And VALENS seeing
himself freed, and at liberty, from the respect and duty which he ought to
his brother VALENTINIAN, making small account of his son GRATIAN, began to
favor and support the Arrians, and to persecute and oppress the true
Christians. Amongst other things, St. JEROME writes, Valens favored the
Arrians.
that he commanded all the Monks and Hermites in Egypt, and other parts, that
(leaving their Monastical life) they should become Soldiers, and follow the
wars: but before that he could bring them to it, he put many thousands of
them to death, and did many other cruel Valens made the Monks and Heremits to
leave their cells, and become soldiers.
deeds, for which God gave him such an end as he deserved. To the contrary, his
Nephew GRATIAN was a good Christian, and was likewise a good Poet, and an
Orator, a very virtuous, temperate, honest and courteous Prince, and endued
with many noble qualities; but he was condemned to be very remiss in matters
of government. But concerning the Christian Religion, he favored and
supported the Christian Churches in Phoenicia, and other Provinces in the East,
as his father had done before him. By means of whose death the high Dutch took
heart and courage to come down, and make war within the bounds of the
Empire, with great multitudes of men: and he with a far lesser number went to
fight with them, near to a City called Argentine or Colleine; where
recommending himself to JESUS A great victory obtained by Gratian against the
Germans.
CHRIST, he fought a most cruel battle, and obtained the victory: and as
PAVLVS OROSIVS reports slew of them above 40000. men. S. JEROME says 30000.
When the young Emperor GRATIAN had obtained this victory, he resolved to make
his brother VALENTINIAN his companion in the Empire, who was his brother by the
father, and son to the fair IVSTINA; which he performed with great solemnity.

The Empire being in this estate, VALENS living in Antioch in Soria, and
GRATIAN and this his young brother VALENTINIAN in France, VALENS as he was
given to diuinations, enchantments, nigromancies and such other like vanities,
made certain figures to be Valens gave great credit to inchauntments and
sorceries.
cast; and the devil willing to show him that after him there should reign
one, whose name began with this Greek letter, th, which in Latin is th, he
therefore caused to be slain that most excellent Captain THEODOSIUS, and
others whose names began in that manner.

These things being past, as God in his secret judgment had ordained that the
Roman Empire should generally decline (as not long after it did) it pleased
him in his divine wisdom to permit that there should first happen some great
and particular calamities, which should be as signs and forewarnings presaging
the great and general miseries which afterward ensued, and continue even
until this day. For a beginning, and foretelling of the commune and general
calamity, which in process of time afterward followed, it pleased God to
permit (for VALENS his infidelity) that in those days in the Northerly parts
of Scythia, between a people called Hunnes, bordering upon the Rifean
mountains, and the Goths which with them divided their frontiers, and were
their near neighbors (both most valiant and fierce nations, as in this
history hereafter shall appear) great wars arose: and after many battles
and slaughters between them (which make nothing to our purpose) all beginning
about the parting of fields and dividing their bounds and limits, and other
ancient quarrels, as usually happen between nations which are so near
neighbors; in these controversies, the Goths were finally overthrown in a
great battle by the Hunnes, and driven out of their own country by force:
and being a huge multitude of people (compelled through necessity, as
overcome, and desiring to live in peace) they sent to entreat the Emperor
VALENS by their Ambassadors, that it might please him to receive them for his
servants and vassalls, and to give them some lands, which they might till and
inhabit. The Emperor simply granted their request, assigning unto them a great
country beyond the river Danubius, and certain fields in the Province of
Misia, which at this time is called Bulgaria and Seruia (as PAVLVS OROSIVS,
Countries assigned by Valens for the Goths to inhabit.
and PAVLVS DIACONVS and others do report) and there for a certain time they
remained in peace and rest: and it was thought they would so have continued,
had not two of the Emperors Captains (which divided the fields amongst them,
and remained there as their guard and overseers) begun to use them cruelly,
like tyrants, doing them daily great wrongs and injuries, as though they had
been rather slaves then subjects. Whereupon they converted their obedience and
humility into rebellion and desperation; resolving to bear Arms, and to take
perforce that which those men denied them. And so raunging themselves in good
order (leaving that which was appointed for them) they marched forwards,
destroying, robbing and spoiling all wheresoever they came.

Entering into Thracia, they took some strong holds and Cities, until they
came near to Constantinople, where VALENS then was: for as soon as these
troubles began, he was aduetised thereof: and departing from the City of
Antioch, he came by great iourneyes to Constantinople, out of which he
afterward sallied with a great and very well ordered Army, to make head
against the Goths, which from ancient time had been ever much feared, and were
still famous. And although they understood of the Emperors coming, yet they
were therewith nothing dismayed, nor doubted to meet him, but rather sought to
fight with him. Which VALENS A battle between Valens and the Goths.
refused not; so as there was a cruel battle between the two Armies;
wherein, at the first encounter, the Roman horsemen behaved themselves so ill,
that disbanding, they left the squadrons of footmen naked without any defense;
which the Goths horsemen perceiving, charged the Roman Infantry; and
compassing them about on every side with an infinite multitude of Archers,
brake through them, and constrained them to fly: and so the Goths had an
entire victory, and did great execution in the Imperial Army. VALENS, flying
thence wounded with an Arrow, would have hidden himself in a Farmers house
near to that place: but being found, the Goths set the house on fire, wherein
he was burnt. Some write that he died fighting, The death of the emperor* Valens
and that seeing the horsemen fly, he alighted; and putting off his Imperial
robes, placed himself in a squadron of footmen, and there being unknown, was
slain. But I hold the first opinion for most certain, for so do the most and
best Authors affirm. One of which is Saint JEROME, in whose time these things
happened: so as he died a death conformable to the course of his life.

The Goths having obtained this victory, marched forwards, and besieged the
Imperial City of Constantinople, where ensued that which we will hereafter
declare. The Emperor VALENS died in the fiftith year of his age, and the
fifteenth of his reign; of which, he had reigned above eleven in the company
of his brother, and the rest with his nephew GRATIANVS, which was in the year
of our Lord JESUS CHRIST, three hundred, fourscore and two, after S. IEROMES
computation, who in that year ended his History, which PROSPERVS afterward
prosecuted. I have not read that this Emperor left any children behind him.

THE LIFE OF GRATIANVS, ONLY OF THAT NAME, AND OF HIS BROTHER VALENTINIAN THE
SECOND, AND NINE AND FORTITH ROMAN Emperor.
THE ARGUMENT.
THE whole burden of the Empire resting upon Gratianus, he was advertised that
the Goths daily increased their power, and were grown so audacious as to
assault the City of Constantinople: wherefore he made provision to go against
them, and made one Theodosius a Spaniard General of his Army, who overthrew
and subdued them, and reduced the Empire to the ancient dignity. Wherefore
Gratianus made him his companion in the Empire, assigning unto him the East
part: and he remaining in France, purchased the evil will of his men of war,
by showing himself too much affected to the Alanes, and to other strange
Nations, whose fashions in attire he often used to wear. In which time one
Maximus, rebelling in Britanny, made himself a tyrant; and Gratianus, seeing
himself forsaken by his Legions, returned into Italy: in which journey Maximus
by a stratagem, caused him to be slain^. He had been a very virtuous and good
Emperor, if he had applied himself to the government of the Empire: for
otherwise he was endued with many good parts, and lived little more then 28.
years.

AFter the death of VALENS which was so ill and unfortunate, as we have
declared, the government of the whole E^pire, East and West, remained in his
nephewe GRATIANVS, his brother VALENTINIANS son, who before ruled the Western
Empire, and in his brother, young VALENTINIAN, whom he had made Emperor;
although by reason of his young years no great account was made of him. The
Goths following the victory which they had obtained against the Emperor
VALENS; Constantinople besieged by the Goths.
without any stay, became masters of all the country round about, and (as I
said) besieged the imperial City of Constantinople, wherein was the Empress
DOMINICA, wife of the unfortunate VALENS; and they assaulted it with great
fury and very resolutely, burning all the suburbs which were very great. And
so they invested the City, until that the widow Empress (as writes
CASSIODORVS) used such diligence in encouraging and animating the soldiers
which were within it, with good words, gifts, and ready money, which she
distributed amongst them, as they fought so valiantly, that the Goths received
great loss and could not enter the City; and so it was defended by the
diligence of this woman, and the valor of the besieged. The Goths, dividing
themselves into several troops, became Lords of the Provinces of Thracia,
Dacia, and their confines. Here historiographers make large descriptions of the
original and country of these Goths; and by what means, and when they came
forth of their country; wherein they are so tedious and so contrary in
opinions, the one to the other, that I purpose to eschew that labor, for that
it little imports; neither can the truth be fully set down. But it is true,
they were a people which came out of Scythia in Europe, according to most
writers; but whether they were borne there or came from some other country The
Goths, and whence they eame.
(as some say they did) it imports not much: neither the difference in their
names in calling them Ostrogothes or Visogothes; for herein is no greater
difference, but that the Ostrogothes were more easterly, and the Visogothes
more westerly: but generally both the one, and other were called Goths, and so
I purpose to call them, as often as I shall have occasion to mention them,
which will be very often: for in truth the greatest wound, and chiefest loss
the Roman Empire received, and the beginning of the fall thereof, was through
their occasion. Wherefore The occasion of the fall of the Empire was through
the Goths.
these people may justly be held and esteemed for the most valiant in Arms of
all other Nations in the world; seeing that they (although with much toil and
by fighting many battles) were able to tame and subdue that people and
Empire, which was the tamer and subduer of all other Nations.

GRATIAN understanding of the death of his Uncle VALENS, and of all the
accidents which ensued; and being also advertised of the power of the Goths,
and how they daily became Lords of more lands of the Empire; and how that
following their example, other northerly Nations called Hunnes and Alanes, no
less valiant in Arms then the Goths (as it was reported) made preparation to
enter the Roman Empire, and to do the like: he resolved with the greatest Army
he was able to raise, to go into Hungary to stop their passage. And forasmuch
as in so great an extremity, in his own person he was not able to provide for
all occasions; he determined to make choice of the most sufficient man that he
might find to be General of his Army, to whom he might commit the charge and
care of the war against the Goths; which was both of great importance and very
dangerous. There lived at that time in his country in Spain, one THEODOSIUS,
the son of a noble Captain whose name was also THEODOVIVS; whom, as we have
told you, VALENS caused to be slain. This THEODOSIUS after the death of his
father, holding himself to be in danger, retired himself into his country;
being as well for the nobleness of his ancestors, and his fathers name and
worthiness, as for his own valor, and his exploits in Arms, the most
renowned and of greatest account of any man in his time. Whereupon the Emperor
GRATIAN, in great haste sent for him, and wrote his letters unto him, wherein
he made him Captain general of all the Empire; and within a little Theodosius
made general of the Imperial Army.
while after, Emperor AUGUSTUS, and his equal in the Empire, he being of the
age of three and thirty years.

PAVLVS OROSIVS, and PAVLVS DIACONVS say, that this Emperor did wisely in
choosing a Spanish Captain, to free the Empire from servitude; as in former
times they had been preserved from the like danger, having followed the same
counfell: as the Emperor NERVA elected the good TRAIANE who after him was
Emperor, seeing himself old, and the Majesty of the Empire in contempt. And
the said Authors write, that he did it with great reason; for that the said
TRAIAN did extend the bounds of the Empire more then any other. This THEODOSIUS
did wholly vanquish the Goths, and recovered from them, all the Country which
had been lost. And during his life time he made them serve as vassalls, and
the Roman Empire stood free and recovered her reputation by him, though with
much toil and danger; so as the Roman Empire was never more honored, nor
better defended then when Spaniards were Emperors. And if men will give no
credit to books, let them look into the present estate of the Empire, and
they shall see that for these 200 years it was not in that authority and
greatness as it is now that CHARLES 5t. King of Spain is Emperor. But you
must understand that MEXIA was a Spaniard borne.

When THEODOSIUS had received the Emperors letters, and accepted of the charge
offered unto him; with the greatest speed he could, he went into those
countries where the Goths were; who knowing of his coming gathered themselves
together to fight with him. And THEODOSIUS being very desirous thereof, having
first levied a sufficient Army, and taken such order, and made such provision
as was most requisite; with great care and circumspection drew near unto them:
And after that he had tried his soldiers in some skirmishes and encounters, he
came to give them battle; which was one of the most cruel and bloody that
ever was. But THEODOSIUS carried himself so discreetely and valiantly, as well
in fighting, as in encouraging and directing his men, that he obtained the
victory, and made an incredible slaughter of the enemy; and afterward of the
remainder which escaped, until that he had driven them all out of that
Province; so as there remained not any enemy there. Leaving his Army in good
order, he went to do his duty to the Emperor GRATIAN in Hungary, where he
then lay, in the City of Sirmie. Who for so noble a victory (after that he
had well considered of his virtues and worthiness) made him Emperor and
AUGUSTUS, and his equal and companion. Yet some say, that he did this in the
beginning, before the battle. But howsoever, he shared the Empire with him;
giving to THEODOSIUS, Constantinople and Thracia, with all the Provinces of the
East, in like manner as VALENS held the same; reserving to himself Italy, and
all westwards, wherein dlso reigned his young brother VALENTINIANVS.

This being ended, GRATIAN presently returned into Italy, and from thence into
France; and THEODOSIUS went to make an end of his wars against the most feared
and redoubted nations of all the world, which were the aforesaid Goths, the
Alanes, and the Hunnes; all people of Scythia. We read that ALEXANDER the
Great, would not go to make any conquest of these people: for they were feared
of all the world.

The Alanes took their name of a river in Scythia called Alane. AMMIANVS
MARCELLINVS says, that these were called in ancient time Massagetes. The
Hunnes are also Scythians of Scythia in Europe, inhabiting beyond the bogges of
Meotis, all which were most fierce Nations: and although that all the northerly
nations were such, yet were these more then any of the rest; as in this
History hereafter will appear: And these (they say) are those which at this
day are called Tartarians. This people being again entered into Hungary,
THEODOSIUS went to fight with them, sometimes with one Nation and sometimes
with another. All authors write, that he fought many cruel battles with
them, and in them all had the upper hand: so as he slew an infinite number of
them: and those which escaped the sword, he made to fly out of the confines
of the Empire. And to the end he would not ouer-tire his men of war, being
humbly required of peace by ATHANARICVS King of the Goths, offering himself
and his people to do him service; he granted it. And coming Athanaricus King
of the Goths sued to Theodosius for peace. Athanaricus his coming to
Constantinople, and his speech concerning the Roman Empire.
victorious to the City of Constantinople, which was his imperial seat, he
brought ATHANARICVS with him; and was received with great solemnity, joy and
triumph. Where (they write) that ATHANARICVS did so much wonder to see the
power of the Emperor, the solemnity and greatness of his court, the
sumptuousnes and magnificence of the buildings of the City, and the riches of
the furniture of his house and service, as he said, that truly the Roman
Emperor was god of the earth, and represented the God of heaven; against whom
no man ought to be so hardy, as to lift up his hand, or heart, except he would
presently be condemned to death.

Within few days after that this valiant King ATHANARICVS came to
Constantinople, he was taken with a grievous sickness, whereof he died, after
that he had been tormented therewith, the space of 3 months; whom THEODOSIUS
sumptuously buried and bestowed great cost The death of Athanaricus.
upon his obsequies. Some Authors, as IORNANDES and others, say, that this
peace with the Goths, was made by GRATIANVS; for THEODOSIUS fell so grievously
sick, that al men thought he would have died, and that in this season the peace
was granted to ATHANARICVS more for fear then for any good will: and that
THEODOSIUS, recovering health, would not break what GRATIANVS had concluded.
AURELIUS VICTOR, PAVLVS OROSIVS, and others report it after the first manner;
but this difference is of small importance. The Goths which served ATHANARICVS
in his house and army, having had trial of the goodness and bounty of
THEODOSIUS, desired to continue in his service; and afterward served him
faithfully and valiantly, in such wars as happened. In this time, through the
grace and mercy of God, GRATIANVS and THEODOSIUS being true Christians, the
Catholic Church was favored and protected by them. Yet some write, that
THEODOSIUS was baptized after that he was Emperor: But before that time he did
reverence and believe the Christian faith. SOZOMENVS, after CASSIODORVS,
affirms it so, which to me seems hardly to be believed. But howsoever it
was, THEODORETVS writes, that as soon as he came to Constantinople, having
overcome and subdued all the barbarous nations; he applied himself to the
reformation of the Church, and to the subversion and rooting out of the Arrian
heresy, which was dispersed over all the East parts. And upon this occasion he
used means to assemble a great number of Bishops at Constantinople; and
although that that the evil was not thoroughly cured thereby, yet that which he
did, was very profitable. CASSIODORVS sets down THEODOSIUS decree, wherein he
professed and protested that he believed the same faith, which was preached by
the holy Apostles; and which was published in the Nicene Council. He sets
down also, how that THEODOSIUS banished certain Bishops from Constantinople,
for that they were of the devilish and abominable sect of the Arrians. In the
West, there was no need of any such care or diligence; for this Arrian
pestilence had not so much infected those parts: as we have already declared in
the lives of the three sons of CONSTANTINE the Great. CONSTANS which reigned
in that part, took great care to preserve and defend the ancient Catholic
faith; and after him IOVIANVS and VALENTINIANVS. So as, as well in matters
concerning Religion, as also the wars and civil government, THEODOSIUS
showed himself a worthy Prince, and was so much feared The King of Persia
sued to Theodosius for peace.
and honored by all Nations, as the King of Persia (notwithstanding that he
had slain the Emperor IVLIANVS, and obtained so many victories) in great
humility, sent his Ambassadors to Constantinople, entreating a perpetual
league and peace with THEODOSIUS: And he seeing with how great submission that
King sued for peace, granted it.

THEODOSIUS, living in this prosperity; the better to assure the succession of
the Empire to his posterity, made one of his sons whose name was ARCADIVS,
his equal and companion: notwithstanding that he was but a child, and very
young. In this mean while lived GRATIAN in France, from thence making provision
and sending direction to all parts; as in^o Africa, Spain, Britanny and
Germany: and as he was a man very remiss and soft spirited (as the most part
do write of him) he waxed much more, after that he had taken THEODOSIUS for
his companion; depending much upon his diligence and valor: so as he became
ill beloved of his soldiers. And this dislike increased; for that he (seeing
that THEODOSIUS Gratianus ill beloved by ^is ^en of war.
had entertained the Goths which served ATHANARICVS into his pay and wages)
drew to his service certain companies of Alanes, and respected and honored
them so much, as he sometimes apparelled himself after their fashion, and made
them his guard; wherewith the Roman and Italian soldiers were much discontented.

In Rome and all Italy the Empire was of no absolute authority: for therein
was the young VALENTINIAN, brother to GRATIANVS; who for that he was very young
and of little discretion, a Noble man called PROBVS had the charge of the
government, who had been Consul, and was then Prefect of the City. These
matters gave occasion to the Legions which were in Britanny to presume to
rebel, and to choose an excellent Captain, whose name was MAXIMUS for
Emperor; and as PAVLVS DIACONVS writes, against the will of MAXIMUS. But
afterward having accepted the name, he resolved to proceed: and so with
Maximus chosen Emperor by the legions in Britanny.
all expedition possible, he went into France; and for as much as GRATIAN was
ill beloved of his Army, the greatest part of his men of war forsook him,
and calling MAXIMUS Emperor, went to his camp. Whereupon GRATIANVS finding
himself unable to fight with him, purposed to retire into Italy, where his
brother was. MAXIMUS being advertised thereof, used such means as GRATIANVS
fell into his hands. Which was after this manner: He caused a rumor to be spread
abroad, that GRATIANVS wife was coming to see her husband with a good troop
of soldiers, and to go with him into Italy, and he sent some messengers
before with counterfeit letters, which advertised him thereof. After this, he
sent a valiant and subtle Captain called ANDRAGATHIVS, to the end he should
put himself in a horselitter, with some chosen soldiers, and go to meet
GRATIAN, faining to be the Empress, and so take him and kill him.

This cunning Champion performed what his Lord had committed to his charge, and
at Lions in France, in passing the river Rhodanus, he came to join with him;
some going before and telling him that the Empress was near at hand. The
goodness and sincerity of GRATIANVS were the occasion that he suspected
nothing, neither discovered the deceit, until he came so near, that he saw
it with his eyes, where being compassed about with ANDROGATHIVS his soldiers,
he was there by his commandment slain. In this manner ended Gratianus slain
by Andragathius, through the procurement of Maximus.
the life and reign of the Emperor GRATIANVS, being of the age of nine and
twenty years; fifteen years after that his father made him Emperor and his
companion; whereof eight years were in his fathers time, more in name then
effect; and of the other seven years, three were with his Uncle VALENS who was
slain by the Goths, and the rest with THEODOSIUS whom he chose for his
companion, and with his brother VALENTINIAN; who for that he was a child was
not regarded. He died (after PROSPERVS his computation) in the year of our
Lord three hundred, fourscore and seven. This Prince was endued with many
excellent virtues: for he was valiant, noble and discreet; and above all, a
Catholic and a very devout Christian: but he had a fault, which was, that he
was too soft spirited, remiss, and negligent, taking little care for the
government: which (as is said) was the principal cause of his ruin. And
truly this is a great and dangerous fault in Kings and Princes: for as their
principal charge and office is to govern and rule, and they therefore are
called Reges; failing to perform their office and duty, they make themselves
hateful, odious, and unworthy the power and dignity which they enjoy.

THE LIFE OF THEODOSIUS, THE FIRST OF THIS NAME, AND FIFTITH EMPEROVR OF ROME.
THE ARGUMENT.
AFter that Gratianus was dead, the whole burden and care both of peace and
war, appertaining to the Empire, rested upon Theodosius. The first enterprise
he undertook, was in Italy, against the tyrant Maximus, who caused the Emperor
Gratianus to be slain. And besieging him in Aquileia, he made him die like a
Traitor, together with a son of his. And having triumphed in Rome, he
restored the Empire to Valentinian. Returning to Constantinople within short
space after, he understood that Valentinian was slain; and that only two (to
wit) Arbogastes and Eugenius, usurped the Empire. Whereupon returning again
into Italy, he fought with these two tyrants, and overcame them both, more by
miracle and by the especial grace of God, then through his power or any humane
wisdom. After this victory, the whole charge of the Empire, both East and
West, rested upon him alone; but he calling his son Honorius, invested him in
the Empire of the West, and to Arcadius he left the Empire of the East: But
because they were both children, and very little, he gave them two tutors, men
no less valiant in Arms then politic in peace. After this, happening to be
excommunicate and absolved by S. Ambrose Bishop of Milan, for certain cruelties
committed in Thessalonica, falling grievously sick, he dyed at the age of
fifty years.

SIX years reigned THEODOSIUS in company with GRATIANVS, when he was slain
by the commandment of MAXIMUS, who as a tyrant and usurper proclaimed himself
Emperor: And by reason of GRATIANS death, all the care and trouble both for
war and peace rested upon THEODOSIUS; who was very sufficient, and well able
to support the same. For although that young VALENTINIAN was in Italy, yet he
had neither power nor courage to revenge the death of his brother GRATIANVS;
but knowing that MAXIMUS came with a great Army, and was already entered Italy,
he abandoned it, and went to Constantinople to entreat aid of THEODOSIUS: Who
taking compassion of the two brethren, the one slain by treason, and the other
wrongfully dispossessed of his Empire; of his natural and accustomed valor,
resolved to go into Italy to revenge the death of the one, and to restore the
other to his estate, by pursuing and destroying this new and mighty tyrant.
Whereupon leaving his son ARCADIVS in Constantinople, taking VALENTINIAN with
him, he prepared for his departure, raising the greatest and best forces he was
able, and began to march through Gallia Cisalpina, which is now called
Lombardie, where MAXIMUS already was in the city of Aquileia, having made
ANDROGATHIVS General of his Army to make head against THEODOSIUS.

This ANDROGATHIVS was a politic and a valiant man in the wars, and he which
slew the Emperor GRATIANVS; who with great care and diligence had taken all the
streights, rivers, bridges and passages, whereby THEODOSIUS might pass: and
afterward changing his mind, thinking that THEODOSIUS peradventure would have
passed his Army by sea, he drew his forces from the mountains, and from those
places which he had left them in guard, and embarked them aboard a great
number of ships and barks, purposing to overthrow him, and to take him prisoner
upon the water. The valiant THEODOSIUS, being advertised heerof, marched by
great journies; and, finding the passages open, entered with his troops into the
Plains of Lombardie, and besieged the City of Aquileia, where the usurping
Emperor was, before ANDROGATHIVS could overtake him: and compassing the City
round about, those which were within it, of mere fear having guilty
consciences, delivered him into the hands of THEODOSIUS, without staying for
any assault or fight; and he justly caused him (as a Traitor and Rebel to his
Prince) to be put to death. The like was afterward done by a son of Maximus
and his son Victor put to death by Theodosius.
his whose name was VICTOR, whom his father had created Emperor, to avoid the
perils and troubles that might ensue. When ANDROGATHIVS who was his General,
being upon the sea with a very mighty navy, understood of the taking and
death of MAXIMUS, he was so over comn with sorrow and despair, that he cast
himself ouer-boord out of his Galley, and Androgathius drowned himself in the
sea.
there was drowned; and his people, wanting a Leader, yielded themselves to
THEODOSIUS. And so, without either death or bloodshed; God gave him a very
great victory; and from France, Britannie, Germany, and Spain, came
Ambassadors unto him, yielding him their obedience, with great humility and
devotion.

Having performed this enterprise, he went with young VALENTINIAN to Rome, the
principal Theodosius triumphed in Rome.
Head of the Empire; where they were received with a solemn triumph (as
RVFFINVS and CASSIODORVS report) whither he sent for his young son ARCADIVS from
Constantinople, where he left him to the end he might be known and honored in
Rome: where he continued certain days, reforming the abuses and disorders
there; and he inflicted great punishments, and did great justice upon certain
evil and wicked persons. And, as he was a devout and good Christian, so he
took great care to reform the abuses of the Church. And, finally, setting all
things in good order, he returned to Constantinople to govern the Empire of the
East; and to VALENTINIAN he left all the West, leaving him an Army and power
sufficient to defend the same: which is no small argument of his goodness and
loyalty, that being of power able (if he had desired to have made himself only
Monarch and Lord of the whole) yet he held it for greater honor To reconquer
the Empire, and to restore it to him to whom in right it appertained, than to
hold the same himself. THEODOSIUS being returned to Constantinople, VALENTINIAN
went for France, that he might be near at hand if any occasion should be
offered: where living in prosperity and void of care, a Captain of his, called
ARBOGASTES, practiced his death; who was a man of a hautie courage, politic,
venturous, and of great power by reason of the place and authority which he
held near about the Emperor; whom PAVLVS OROSIVS and PAVLVS DIACONVS call Comes
or Earl: for in those times we find that name and dignity, and before that
also; and these were those which were Gouerners and Captains of Provinces, and
sometimes were the Emperors companions, to whom were committed matters of
greatest importance: In like manner as the ancient Consuls, when they went to
make a conquest of any Country, had with them Legates, which is as much as
Lieutenants. This ARBOGASTES resolved with himself to kill VALENTINIAN, thereby
to advance an Emperor of his making, although it prospered ill; not daring to
vsurp it himself, for that he was of base parentage, a stranger born, and an
Infidel, and for other causes which in the History are not mentioned.
Finally, he practiced with one EVGENIVS, who of a Grammarian and a Rhetorician
Arbogastes practiced to kill the Emperor Valentinian.
(being for that cause well beloved and esteemed) came to bear Arms, and to
follow the Court, and was now highly regarded and of great account; promising
him to kill VALENTINIAN, and to make him Emperor; giving him to understand,
that it was a matter possible, and easy to be done. EVGENIVS accepted what
this wicked man offered; and ARBOGASTES used such means, that he corrupted the
Eunuchs that waited in VALENTINIANS chamber, and agreed with them to strangle
him in the night, and give it out in speech that they found him dead in the
morning; and they did so. VALENTINIAN, being in the city of Vienna in France,
sleeping in his bed, was by these Eunuchs strangled; and they published abroad,
that he had hanged himself, eighteen years after that his brother had
nominated him Emperor. The manner Valentinian strangled by his Eunuchs.
of his death was kept so secret, that it was bruited abroad that he had hanged
himself; so as PROSPERVS, in the addition which he made to EVSEBIVS book of
Times, writing his death, says, that he died in that manner.

Presently, when as his death was known, before the treason was discovered,
ARBOGASTES nominated and made EVGENIVS Emperor. What these two men did, being
of greatest authority, was generally approved by all men; and by means of their
reputation, and thorough Eugenius made Emperor by Arbogastes.
their cunning, large promises, and great gifts, they levied a great number of
men of war, as well Barbarians as Romans, and so became Lords of all the
Provinces: And although EVGENIVS bare the name of Emperor, yet all was ordered
and disposed accordingly as it pleased ARBOGASTES.

Within short space THEODOSIUS was advertised of this fact; for which he was
very sorry, and therewith much troubled, seeing how dangerous a war lay
before him: but, accounting it a great dishonor and a shame to suffer such an
action to pass unpunished, with the greatest expedition and diligence that
could be he mustred up his men of war, and with all possible speed departed
from Censtantinople, leaving his son ARCADIVS there; and HONORIVS also, whom
he then made Emperor, appointing him to be equal and companion with his
brother. But, as a good and devout Christian, the first provision he made,
was, To fast and pray, that it might please God to give him victory against
those Infidels and Tyrants; recommending himself to the prayers of a Monk which
was accounted a very holy man, whose name was JOHN, dwelling in the City of
Thebes in Egypt: who sent him word that he should have the victory, but should
die in Italy, and never return to Constantinople.

THEODOSIUS being comn to the confines of Italy; the Tyrants had so great
forces, and had taken so good order for all matters concerning the wars, that
all passages were stopped in the Alps, and at the foot thereof EVGENIVS and
ARBOGASTES attended with their whole Army; so as THEODOSIUS was much troubled
and distressed, as well after he had passed those passages and mountains, as
when he was entered into Lumbardie, where he found himself enclosed about with
enemies, which on every side stopped the coming of any victuals to his camp; they
having, besides this, a greater number of men than he had, and no less
experienced and valiant in the wars than his were. But the valiant Emperor,
using the best means he could in all things, as a faithful Christian expected
and hoped for his best relief from God, to whom with tears he made his
continual supplications. Truly, the danger and extremity wherein he was, and
the multitude of his enemies was so great, that all Writers affirm he had been
utterly lost, if God in a battle that ensued had not showed a manifest and
apparent miracle. The night before the battle he spent altogether in prayer,
without either eating or sleeping: and the next day, seeing himself charged on
every side, he set his men in very good order to fight; and with great courage
and resolution attended the coming of his enemies; where presently in the
beginning a Captain of theirs called ARBICIVS came over to his side with his
whole charge, which was a good sign of his good success: and the battle
beginning, where Romans fought against Romans, they fought at even hand, most
cruelly killing and wounding one another. The other battalions and squadrons,
which were auxiliaries of sundry nations, being of THEODOSIUS his side, had the
worse; so as at the first charge ten thousand Goths which were in his pay
were slain: which when he saw, he lifted up his eyes to heaven; and, with a
true faith and steadfast hope shedding many tears, prayed to the Lord that he
might not be overthrown in so just a cause.

At that Instant a Captain of his, called BARBARIVS, with a great troop of
soldiers came to the rescue of certain squadrons which in show were
overthrown; and he came with such courage, that they which were in a manner
vanquished recovered strength and heart; in such manner, that without retiring
they fought most valiantly for the victory: but the enemies were so many, that
it seemed impossible for them to defend themselves. At that Instant it pleased
God to send them succor from heaven; which was, that suddenly there arose so
violent a wind and tempest, as the like thereof had never been seen by any man
then living; which, without annoyance to the Emperors people, did beat in their
enemies faces with such force, that it bereaved them of their sight; so as they
were not able to march forwards: and the wind was so strong and forcible, that
all the arrows, stones, darts and lances, which they shot and hurled, A
miraculous tempest.
were thereby born back again; and they which threw them were therewith
wounded, in such manner, that it most plainly appeared to be miraculous, and
the especial gift of God. Which the most Christian Emperor perceiving,
rendering thanks to God for the same, encouraged and animated his people, so as
within short space he obtained a complete victory. For his Agreat victory
obtained by Theodosius.
enemies soldiers took no other care, but how they might save themselves by
flight: but EVGENIVS persisting obstinate in his treason, was taken fighting,
and brought to THEODOSIUS, Eugenius slain in the presence of Theodosius.
who commanded him to be slain: yet some write that he killed him, himself.

All writers affirm, that ARBOGASTES, seeing himself overthrown, fled from
the battle, and finding no certain place of refuge, with his own sword cut
his own throat. So as THEODOSIUS obtained a most glorious victory, followed
the execution, and had the spoil Arbogastes did cut his own throat with his
own sword.
of his enemies Camp. Of this battle and the strange accident that happened
therein, we have for testimony, not only Christian and godly authors, more
then a few, as well such as lived at that time and near unto it, but also one
CLAVDIANVS a Heathen Poet of that age, who recites the same in heroical verse
most excellently, in the third and fourth Consulship of HONORIVS the son of
THEODOSIUS.

After THODOSIVS had obtained this victory, there was no man either in the East
or West that durst oppose himself against his power; so as all the Princes of
the Empire sent him their Ambassadors to congratulate his victory: and many
barbarous nations did the like, and so he became absolute and only Lord of
the whole Empire. And seeing himself free from wars, he came to Milan,
whereof S. AMBROSE was Archbishop: where he remained all the rest of his life
time, applying himself to civil government; whereof in the wars he never
left to have all possible care. Being thus in Milan, acknowledging himself to
be but mortal, and knowing how unsound and diseased he was in body, he
purposed to provide for matters to come: wherefore he sent to Constantinople
for his son HONORIVS; to whom (by the assent and good will of all men) he
assigned after his days the Empire of Italy and of all the West; and to
Theodosi^s made his sons Arcadius and Honorius Emperors.
his other son ARCADIVS, the Empire of the East; and into Africa and the
provinces thereof, he sent a man of great wisdom and experience called GILDVS
to govern the same, and he himself took care and had the oversight of the
whole. With such prosperity was the world governed (as PROSPERVS writes) the
space of three years: for so long time lived THEODOSIUS in Milan, in company
with the great Doctor S. AMBROSE, with whom there happened a notable matter;
which because it is an example of humility, I mean to declare in a more large
manner then ordinary, which is also written by THEODORETVS, PAVLVS DIACONVS,
RVFFINVS, and CASSIODORVS.

THEODOSIUS being in Thessalonica, a very rich, populous and a Noble City in
the province of Macedonia, there happened a great tumult among the people,
against the Magistrates and governors thereof; and their fury and presumption
grew to be so great, as they slew the Judges and all those which took part with
the Emperor in the government. Which when THEODOSIUS understood,
notwithstanding that he was very virtuous, yet did he much desire to execute
his wrath against him, and not without just cause: but he did therein so far
exceed the bounds of reason, as he made his soldiers put to death seven
thousand persons of the common sort, making no difference between the guilty
and innocent. Which punishment was held for rigorous and very cruel; although
the offense were very great, chiefly against a Prince so just and so much
admired in all his actions. Amongst those which reproved him for this fact,
the holy Doctor S. AMBROSE then Bishop of Milan was one; and the Emperor
afterward coming to that city, and being received as to his estate
appertained, the next day he meant to have gone to the Church to have done his
devotion, and to pray, as of custom he used, nothing thinking of what he had
done at Thessalonica, whereof it was thought he had long before repented. But
S. AMBROSE, to the end that his punishment should be as public as his offense,
with great authority and boldness set himself in the Church door, and told
the Emperor that he should not enter there; making a learned oration unto
him, wherein with the authority of a Bishop, he opened unto him his fault and
offense; excommunicating him, and forbidding him to come into the Church. All
which speeches the Emperor heard with great patience, and returned to his
palace, obeying the excommunication and prohibition, and so remained eight
months without coming any more to the Church; at the end whereof, a private
servant and Captain of his (whose name was RVFFINVS) finding the Emperor
melancholic, and discontented for that he was so long excommunicated, offered
to go to S. AMBROSE to get him absolution, persuading him to come to the
Church, and he would go before to obtain his leave. The Emperor, although he
much doubted thereof, did so. But RVFFINVS was not only denied of his request,
but was highly reprehended by the Bishop, as a minister and counselor of the
Emperors cruelty: which when he perceived, he sent to advertise the Emperor
thereof, and to advise him not to come, for at that time he should by no means
be received. The Emperor met with the messenger upon the way, and hearing
what message he brought, answered; Yet truly I will go to see what penance my
Pastor will lay upon me for my offense. And so went forwards until he came to
the Church door, and went not in, but came where S. AMBROSE was: whom he
requested to absolve him, and to permit him to come into the Church there to
hear divine service. When S. AMBROSE saw the Emperor, and heard what he said,
imagining that he came of purpose to go into the Church, which he was resolved
to withstand until he were absolved, or had done some open penance for the
great cruelty which he had commanded to be done, he asked him wherefore he
came so as a tyrant, contemning and violating the laws? Whereto the Emperor
mildely answered: I come not to break the laws, neither thy commandment,
neither will I pass over the threshold of this door: but I come to request
thee to loose the bands wherewith thou have bound me, and that thou will pray
to God to forgive me my sins, and not shut the doors of his Church against
me, which God opens to all sinners which heartily repent. What repentance
have thou showed (quoth the Bishop) for so hanious an offense? and with what
salve have thou healed so mortal a wound? Thou (quoth the Emperor) art to
instruct me, and to show me what I ought to do, and thou shall see that I will
accomplish what thou shall prescribe. The Bishop seeing the Emperors mildnes,
thinking it a sufficient penance for him to be excommunicated from the Church
the space of eight months, with fair and charitable speeches said; Thy
penance THEODOSIUS shall be this, that (seeing that to follow thy own will,
and to A pen^nce laid upon the Emperor Theodofius by Saint Ambrose.
execute thy wrath, thou did commit so cruel a murder) thou shall
presently proclaim and establish a Law, that no man, whom thou shall adiudge
or condemn to dye, or any thy successors, shall be executed within thirty
days after that thou have pronounced the sentence of death against him. At the
end of which thirty days, thou shall be again demanded, whether thou do
hold thy commandment for just: for by that time being free from passion, thou will judge of thy self whether thou have justly judged or no. When THEODOSIUS
heard this, he presently commanded that law to be written, and made it to be
proclaimed: and he himself observed it during his life, whereof much good
ensued.

This law being made, the Emperor came into the Church; where making his
prayers, and doing his devotion, he received the Sacrament, and from
thenceforth loved the Bishop very dearly, and used his counsel in many
matters: For as he was hasty and choleric, this law was a bridle to restrain
him from being too extreme in punishing offenders. THEODORETVS recites one
example thereof: which was, that the Citizens of Antioch having committed a
great offense, and made a great uproar in the City, THEODOSIUS commanded great
punishment to be inflicted upon the malefactors; which was not presently
executed, by reason of this law: and and afterward he altered his opinion;
which he attributed to the counsel of S. AMBROS* whom he loved so much, that
to enjoy his company and counsel, he stayed in Milan, and there made his
abode the remainder of his life. From thence he sent to Constantinople for his
son HONORIVS; who came to Milan. Soon after THEODOSIUS fell so extremely
sick, that after care taken for his souls health, he disposed of the Empire,
ordaining his son HONORIVS to have the government of Rome, and of all the
provinces of the West: and ARCADIVS to rule in Constantinople and the East. And
for that these his two sons were very young, and not of fit years to
govern, he left with them as their tutors and governors, two very sufficient
men both for war and peace, the one called RVFFINVS, and the other Theodosius
made Stilico and Ruffinus tutors and overseers to his two sons Honorius and
Arcadius, and Gildus to be their Lieutenant in Africa.
STILICO; RVFFINVS to be with ARCADIVS in the East, and STILICO with HONORIVS
in the West: and into Africa and the provinces thereof he sent GILDVS, to
govern the same as Lieutenant to the two Emperors, to whom he gave that
charge. After that he had set all things in order, his disease so much
increased, as he could not endure it any longer: wherefore recommending his
soul to God, he departed out of this present life, as SEXTVS AURELIUS VICTOR
says, who here makes an end of his history, and the most part of other
authors, in the fiftith year of his age, and the eleventh of his reign;
accounting from the death of GRATIANVS, reigning alone, and with GRATIANVS
other six years: so as in all he reigned seventeen years; and in the year
of our Lord, three hundred, ninety and seven.

This Emperor, according to all authors that write of him, was of constitution
of body, countenance, and gesture, very like to the Emperor TRAIAN, as by
TRAIAN's statues and pictures, which in that time were remaining, might easily
be conceived, and might be imagined by that which was written both of the one
and the other: And they write, that he was not only like unto him, and did
resemble him in body and gesture; but that he did imitate and excel him in
virtue and good conditions, and had the same qualities, and was naturally so
inclined; Theodosius likened to Traiane.
saving that if TRAIAN were spotted with any vice, THEODOSIUS was free from it.
It is written that TRAIAN was a little too much given to the drinking of wine:
but we read that Theodosius his conditions and qualities.
THODOSIVS was most temperate, in eating and drinking. TRAIAN was very desirous
of triumphs, glory and honor; THEODOSIUS despised them and held them for
things of no moment: but he ever sought to obtain the victory, and in all
battles and skirmishes was both valiant and politic, ever giving thanks
and honor unto God as a good Christian. In conclusion, THEODOSIUS was of
admirable valor, force and courage, very politic and expert in the wars,
of an excellent wit and judgment in civil government, a lover of justice
and equity, merciful, pitiful, and of a most noble inclination, although
somewhat hasty and choleric against malefactors; but he was presently
pacified and easily entreated. And to moderate this passion, besides S. AMBROSE
his law concerning matters of death, he used of custom (knowing his own
hasty disposition) not to determine of any thing, until that he had repeated
over the four and twenty letters of the Greek Alphabet: for in that space
his wrath would be tempered. He was much honored and beloved by all men,
especially by such as were honest. He was exceeding liberal, continent, and
shamefac't, very circumspect and careful, indifferently well learned and seen
in history. He much desired to know the acts of the ancient, and greatly
honored learned and wise men. He was well spoken, and of a pleasant and merry
conversation, framing himself with great discretion to the quality of those
persons with whom he discoursed, maintaining the majesty of his estate and the
authority of his person; and had also other excellent virtues too long to
recite. THEODOSIUS when he died left two sons (of which we have already
spoken) and one daughter. His sons ARCADIVS Theodosius his children.
and HONORIVS were Emperors: both which he had by his first wife whose name
was FLAGILLA, an excellent and a most religious woman; his daughters name was
PLAC^DIA GALLA, which he had by his second wife, who was the daughter of the
Emperor VALENTINIANVS the first.

THE LIFE OF ARCADIVS AND HONORIVS, ONLY OF THAT NAME, AND THE ONE and FIFTITH
Roman EMPEROVRS.
THE ARGUMENT.
THE Empire being under the government of Theodosius his two sons, and so
under the Tutors ordained by him, that is, Ruffinus and Stilico, which ought to
have taken care for the young men, and to have governed them as fathers: they
not only neglected the care of the youths committed to their charge (nothing
caring they should be acknowledged for Emperors) seeking to make themselves
absolute Princes: but they both came to an evil end. For Ruffinus, who was
Arcadius his Tutor in the East, his treason being discovered, had his head
strickenoff, and set over one of the gates of Constantinople. And Stilico, who
was Honorius his Tutor in the West, notwithstanding that he went against the
Goths, yet he temporized, that he might bring his treason to some effect;
which being in the end discovered, he was slain by Honorius his commandment:
which was the beginning of the utter ruin of the Roman Empire, which was in a
manner wholly destroyed by the Goths. In which time, Arcadius, who had very
peaceably enjoyed his Empire the space of certain years, dyed in
Constantinople. But sundry barbarous Nations ouer-ranne all Honorius his
Empire, he lying in Rauenna, making small show to be an Emperor; being very
negligent, when there was need of great care and diligence. Nevertheless,
giving charge of the wars to sundry of his Captains, he freed his estate
(except Spain which was conquered by the Goths, Uandals and other strange
Nations). In which time he fell sick and dyed in Rome, without leaving any
heirs of his body (for he had no children by any wife) when he had held the
Empire in a manner eight and twenty years.

TRuly I fear that such as shall read this History, will reprove me for
spending more time about the life of THEODOSIUS, then I use to do in writing
the lives of other Emperors; but he that shall duly consider his virtues and
excellencies, will judge that I have been rather too brief, then otherwise.
Wherefore holding the time and labor herein spent for well employed, let us
come to speak of his sons: in whose History I can use no greater brevity,
then in that of their father, considering the great and sundry accidents which
happened in thirty years; for ARCADIVS reigned little less: and so likewise
from henceforth we shall be constrained to write more at large, according to
the alterations of estates and other matters, whereof we shall have occasion to
speak.

THEODOSIUS left the Empire in such subjection, so peaceable, and in such quiet
to his sons ARCADIVS and HONORIVS, that if the wickedness of their tutors had
not altered and troubled it, they might easily have governed and supported the
same. But they which were put in trust to see all well ordered, were the cause
that the Empire was molested, in such manner, as it plainly appears they
were the occasion of the total ruin of the Empire, or at the least, the
beginning thereof. For as soon as THEODOSIUS was dead, GILDVS who was
Governor of Africa, and of the Provinces there, and RVFFINVS and STILICO in
their E^h of those men which Theodosius left for Tutors over his sons, sought
particularly to make himself an Emperor.
governments, each of them practiced to get the Empire for himself, and to
dispossess the sons of their sovereign Lord; and each of them showed his
resolution, as soon as he had opportunity. ARCADIVS with his Governor RVFFINVS
went to Constantinople, whither he commanded his fathers dead body to be
brought to be buried with great solemnity. HONORIVS remained in Italy, with
STILICO: and so they began to reign without any contradiction or opposition,
in the same order as their father had left them. As soon as GILDVS, governor
of Africa, understood that THEODOSIUS was dead, he took no longer care to
conceal his intent, but presently showed it openly in his actions; and
beginning to make himself Lord of all that country, not with the title of
Comes or Earl, as until then he The title of Earl to whom it was given.
held it (which as PAVLVS DIACONVS writes, was then given to Governors of
Provinces) but as absolute Lord thereof, without acknowledging any subjection
or duty to HONORIVS, or to ARCADIVS.

This GILDVS had a brother whose name was MASTELZERIVS, a very good and loyal
Christian, who to the uttermost of his power resisted his brothers proceedings.
But GILDVS was already so mighty and of such power, that MASTELZERIVS, whom
some call MASTELZEZ was driven to fly into Italy, and so he remained sole and
absolute Lord of all Africa. And GILDVS understanding that his brother was gone
to the Emperor (like a Gildus put two of his brothers sons to death.
cruel tyrant) made two of his sons which were his Nephews and left in
Africa, to be slain, nothing regarding how near they were to him in blood.
MASTELZERIVS came into Italy; and making relation to HONORIVS, or to say
better, to STILICO, of what had happened (whose wisdom and courage was very
great, although grounded upon disloyalty) had an Army given him, and all
things thereto needful; and so was sent against his brother, as against a
common enemy. And MASTELZERIVS as well to perform his duty, as to be revenged
Mastelzerius went with an Army against his brother Gildus.
of the death of his sons, with the greatest expedition he could make,
departed toward Africa, although with small forces, trusting in the equity of
his cause, in the friendship he had in that Country, and above all, in the
help and power of God, which he daily implored with tears, and most devout
prayers. And as PAVLVS OROSIVS reports, coming to an Island called Capraria,
near to Naples, he carried with him from thence certain devout religious men
which lived there; in whose prayers he reposed greater trust than in the
strength of his whole Army: with which he made so many fastings and prayers,
that it seemed God heard him; for, he prevailed without any battle or
bloodshed, which happened in this manner:

Coming upon the Coast of Africa with the small Forces which he brought, with
great courage he went to Land, and entrenched his Army, and fortified the
same, and sent abroad to give notice of his arrival, and of his power in all
places; from whence he thought his friends and soldiers would have comn to
join with him: but his brother came against him with threescore and ten
thousand men, very well appointed. MASTELZERIVS, seeing himself in this
distress, was no way discouraged, neither made any doubt of the victory;
assuring himself that to obtain the same it lay in the hand of God, and not in
the multitude of men and horses. Having a resolution to pass by a certain
Port, thereby to avoid his enemy and brother, but considering with himself how
hardly it was to be performed (as PAVLVS OROSIVS writes) he made his prayers;
and, praying, fell asleep and dreamed, that within three days he should
obtain the victory. Heerupon, MASTELZERIVS remained there until the third day;
and then with invincible courage sallied out of his trenches against his
enemies, who thought of no such matter, but rather daily expected to have had
him in their hands; and, they coming forth against him, he went toward them
before his troops, aduising and persuading them to yield obedience, and not to
bear Arms against him: for, he was sent thither by the Emperor, their soueraign
Lord. And as an Ensign-bearer would have charged him, and those that were with
him, he stepped to him; and, wounding him, smote his colors to the ground: with
which only blow it pleased God that he subdued and pacified all the rest:
for, there was not any one that made any resistance; but all the Ensign-bearers
and ordinary soldiers came over Mastelzerius victory against his brother
Gildus.
to him, and yielded their obedience; and the soldiers of that Country fled,
and so did his brother: whereby he had the victory, as we may say,
miraculously; for, so all men accounted the same.

This GILDVS, seeing himself abandoned by his soldiers, fled to the sea side;
and, imbarking himself aboard a ship, set sail, thinking to have escaped: and,
having sailed some space, it pleased God that the wind came contrary, and he
for ought he could do was driven to take Land; where he was taken, and by his
brothers commandment had his head stricken off, in requital Gildus taken and
be headed by his brothers commandment.
of the cruelty which he had showed to his sons, and for his treason against
his Lords; MASTELZERIVS remaining without controulment victorious, and Master
of his brothers Camp. But afterward seeing himself mighty (as, of custom, in
prosperity men grow insolent) having no such fear of God before his eyes as he
ought to have had, he purposed and attempted to have the Empire of Africa to
himself, without any regard of the Emperor HONORIVS, who had sent him thither;
which his disloyalty his Captains could not endure, and Mastelzerius slain by
his soldiers, and the cause.
therefore they slew him. These two brethren being dead, Africa remained for a
space in quiet subjection to the Emperors. These wars aforesaid are
excellently well written in verse by CLAVDIANVS.

While these matters passed in Africa, ARCADIVS was not idle in Constantinople:
for, his Gouerner RVFFINVS, unwilling any longer to conceal his wicked
purposes, sought by all Ruffinus, Arcadius Tutor, solicited the Goths to invade
the Empire.
means to bring ARCADIVS into some distress, that he might vsurp the Empire;
and to that end solicited the Goths and other Nations to war against the
Empire. Which being discouerd, ARCADIVS procuring it, though but a boy, he was
slain by some companies of Italian soldiers; who, striking off his head, set it
over one of the gates of Constantinople. This RVFFINVS, as some say, was born
in Britannie. Others say, that he was a Frenchman, a man of great The death of
Ruffinus.
judgment, and an excellent Captain; but disloyal and ill-disposed. His goods
ARCADIVS gave to an Eunuch of his called EVTROPIVS, who was very private with
him. Against this RVFFINVS (declaring his doings) the aforesaid CLAVDIANVS
wrote two books in heroical verse; and by his death ARCADIVS remained at
liberty, and Lord of his Empire in the East with greater quietness than his
brother HONORIVS: for, STILICO, who governed in the West, was far more
cunning and subtle than RVFFINVS, and was very valiant, and a most expert man
of war; and as he had as wicked or a worse intent, so he knew better how to
cover the same, as well by his wit, as the great power which he enjoyed. For,
besides that he Stilico, father in-law to Honorius.
was HONORIVS his Gouerner or Tutor, he was twice his father-in-law: for,
HONORIVS had his daughter to wife, having first been contracted to another
daughter of his which died unmarried.

This STILICO was by birth a Vandall; and, having purposed to make a son of
his called EVCHERIVS Emperor, by his great (although malicious) wit he
concealed the same, Stilico's practices and treason against Honorius.
until time of better opportunity: whereto he thought, that the best and most
assured way was, To bring the Emperors into necessity, distress and danger, to
the end that he only might be the mean to repair and recover all losses. For,
he had so proud a heart, and so great power, that he was persuaded, that as
often as it pleased him he was able to redress all matters; and that the need
which the Emperor should have of him, would open the way to his purposes. And
to that end, by devices and secret practices, he solicited many nations to
make wars upon the Empire; as, the Alanes, whose Original I think we have
described: which, according to PTOLOMY, The Alanes, and their Original.
was of Gotland; and, after MARCELLINVS and PLINY, was of Sarmatia in Europe,
who at that time inhabited part of Germany: and the Swevians, a most fierce
people of the same Germany, and the Vandals born also therein; called Vandals,
after the name of a River so The Original of the Vandals.
called in Scythia, from whence they first descended, as is above mentioned;
which by PLINY and PTOLOMY are called Vandalines: and those Burgundians, which
we now call Burgonians, of which, CORNELIUS TACITUS says, that they were of
the same Vandals, and all one nation. They were called Burgundians; for that,
in times past being driven out of Germany by DRVSVS and TIBERIUS NERO in the
time of AUGUSTUS CAESAR, they were constrained to dwell in the fields, and
suburbs of cities called Burgi or Burghs, and thereof took their name of
Burgunds or Burgundians; but they were very famous by many authors. He, having
moved these nations, and procured them to make war, sometimes by letters from
certain persons which promised to aid and assist them, and sometimes by causing
wrongs and violences to be offered them, the more to incense them, used yet
another policy; which was, that the Goths, called Visogothes, which (as we
have said) for the space of 21 years had served in the Emperors pay, and had
served faithfully ever since that the Emperor THEODOSIUS had received them
into his service, after the death of ATHANARICVS their King; he found a means
to cassiere them, and that they should be ill-intreated, and had in contempt.
Which they took for such a disgrace, and in such scorn, that they presently
determined to mutine; and, doing so, chose a Noble man of their own nation for
their King, whose name was ALARICVS, and began to invade the countries of
Hungary and Austria. Alaricus King of the Goths.


Matters standing in these terms, STILICO his drift was, that the Goths, as
men which knew and had good experience in Italy, should go make a conquest
thereof; and, as the other nations (as, Vandals, Alanes and Suevians) should
invade France, he should have the charge to defend Italy: and HONORIVS, being
thus distressed, should defend France in person; where he should be either
slain or overthrown, or at the least be so oppressed, that he ouercoming the
Goths, which he held to be easily done, would make himself Lord of Rome
which was the head of the Empire, and afterward would do the like by all the
rest; which happened not as he expected: but of his treason arose the
destruction and total decay of the whole Empire, and of himself also. Eight
years were expired since the death of THEODOSIUS, and that HONORIVS and
ARCADIVS reigned, when STILICO and another Nobleman called AVRELIANVS, were
chosen Consuls; and the Visogothes, which were put out of pay, began to make
open wars in Hungary and Austria; and, this war in the beginning seeming to be
of small The wars of the Goths.
importance, their force and power in short space increased in such manner,
that all the world stood in fear of them. Eor (as PAVLVS OROSIVS an Author of
that time, PAVLVS DIACONVS, and others write) as soon as the Goths were in a
mutiny, a certain King, called RADAGASIVS joined with them, with two hundred
thousand other Goths; all, fierce Radagasius, King of the Goths.
men of war. But it is true, that they write not how or from whence came so
great a number of of men; neither what this King RADAGASIVS was. It seems
that then it was a thing so publicly known, that no man was ignorant or stood
in doubt thereof, and therefore needless to be repeated; by reason whereof we
are now ignorant thereof: but they most constantly affirm, the number of the
men of war to be such as is already specified.

ALARICVS and RADAGASIVS coming together, without finding any resistance or The
cruel wars which the Goths made in the lands of the Empire.
forceable to offend them, ouerran and spoiled all Thracia, Hungary, Austria,
Slauonia, Dalmatia, and the Frontiers thereof; in such sort, as it seemed that
devils, and not men, had passed that way: for, they left nothing standing but
the earth and the air; which, S. JEROME, who lived in that time, writing to
PAVLVS and EVSTACHIVS, plainly expresses in these words: The brute beasts have
also endured the wrath of the Lord in this war: for, the cities being laid
waste, and the people thereof put to the sword, the like is done by the very
fields; so as they lie bare, desolate, and desert; whereof the Provinces of
Thracia and Slauonia, and the country wherein I was borne bear true record:
whereby it seems that nothing remains but the earth, the air, the bushes
and the woods; for all the rest is spoiled and destroyed. After these in humane
spoils, ALARICVS and RADAGASIVS resolved to come into Italy, dividing their
Armies into sundry troops: for it was impossible that so huge an Army should
be able to march together. When these news were known in Rome, there fell so
great a terror among the Citizens; and generally over all Italy, as they all
held themseues for lost and dead men.

RADAGASIVS being arrived in Italy, and having passed the Apennine mountains,
came Radagasius came into Italy.
to the mountains Fiesole in Tuscane. There came in the behalf of the Empire,
against RADAGASIVS, two Captains which served the Emperor HONORIVS: the one of
which was Vldinus and Sarra Captains for Honorius, against Radagasius.
called VLDINVS, and the other SARRA, with a great number of Goths and Hunnes
in the Emperors pay, which made head against RADAGASIVS, and stopped the
passages in the mountains against him, and cut off his victuals, whereof he
stood in great want, considering the greatness of his Army. These Hunnes and
Goths which came to the aid of the Romans, PAVLVS OROIVS, who, as we may say,
was an eye witness, and also PAVLVS DIACONVS and The Hunnes aided the Romans.
others write of their coming: but they write not how, or from whence they
came; although it be already declared from whence they were: but nevertheless
they were a great defense of Italy; so that the Lord abated the pride of
RADAGASIVS, through hunger, thirst, and the want of necessaries. But herein
Authors disagree: for PROSPERVS says, that RADAGASIVS Radagasius and all his
Host defeated.
was overthrown and taken prisoner, STILICO leading a great Army against him.
But PAVLVS OROSIVS, and PAVLVS DIACONVS, after they have spoken of the two
Captains VLDINVS and SARRA, say that RADAGASIVS and his Army were ouerthrown
through pure hunger and thirst, without any battle, and that they were taken
prisoners like sheep. But howsoever it happened, for it might be that there was a
battle also; the truth is, that he and his Army were overthrown in this
Journey, and all taken prisoners by HONORIVS his Soldiers: in such sort, that
S. AUGUSTINE who lived in that time, whose reports are to be believed, in his
book de Ciuitate Dei, affirms, that in one only day RADAGASIVS lost above
one hundred thousand men; and all Authors affirm, that a great number of them
dyed of A strange and wonderful accident.
hunger: and that there was not a Soldier among the Romans but had a drove of
Captives, as if they had been sheep; and that they were so cheap, that for a
piece of gold, which is now worth but a ducat, a man might have bought a whole
company of them. There fell so great a mortality and sickness amongst them, that
within short space they in a manner all died. And their King and Captain
RADAGASIVS was likewise taken prisoner and put to death by HONORIVS: The death
of Radagasius.
whose virtue and valor is much commended in this action, by PAVLVS OROSIVS;
but (as by the Histories it appears) he seemed to be of very little worth, a
very negligent and careless Prince, chiefly in matters concerning the wars,
and at that time lay in Rauenna Rauenna.
where he held his Court, which in those days was a great and principal
City. His brother ARCADIVS lay in Constantinople, from whence he sent aid and
succors to his brother. This fear being past, within a little while after
ALARICVS entered Italy, who was a man of Alaricus came into Italy.
greater judgment and courage then RADAGASIVS, and his soldiers better
trained, and of greater experience; against whom STILICO courageously opposed
himself, and the war began between them in the marches of Rauenna; where
ALARICVS was ouerthrown in battle by STILICO: for in those days, STILICO for
valor and policy in the wars, had not his Stilico the most excellent Captain
of his time.
equal in the world. But his purposes being such as we have said, he would
never wholly vanquish ALARICVS; but sometimes would make show to be careless,
and leave open the ways for him to pass: so as ALARICVS perceived that
STILICO had no meaning to overthrow him; and this war continued between them
(as some Authors write) the space of three years.

About the same time, the Alanes, Hunnes, Vandales and Burgonians entered the
territories The coming of the Alanes, Hunnes, Vandales and Burgonians.
of the Empire, making war upon the banks sides of the River of Rhine, whereof
a new fear seized the hearts of the people. When ALARICVS understood these
news, he sent to HONORIVS to have peace, and some country in France, wherein he
and his people might inhabit, promising to defend that province against those
Nations, and therewith aduertising him that STILICO did cunningly prolong the
wars against him. The Emperor beginning to be jealous of STILICO, and
notwithstanding that he was also certified by others of his treason: yet for
the present he dissembled the matter, and agreed with ALARICVS, granting him
his request; A league between Alaricus and Honorius the ^mperour.
and taking security of him, sent him into France. Whereof it was imagined, that
two great benefits would have insued; the one was, the peace and quiet of Italy
through his absence; the other, the defense of France, wherein the Vandales,
Hunnes, Alanes and Burgonians were already entered; which all men affirmed to be
above two hundred thousand men. But STILICO his treason spoiled all: for
notwithstanding that he did that which HONORIVS commanded, in suffering
ALARICVS and the Goths to begin their journey in peace, and gave them such
Alaricus going for France.
things as were needful, accordingly as the Emperor had appointed; yet as a
man which altogether repined against peace, and chiefly that to ALARICVS should
be committed the defense of France, he resolved to break and scatter all those
troops; and had such means to effect it, as I will tell you, whereof ensued
his own total destruction, and the ruin of the whole Empire: which happened in
this manner.

ALARICVS, free from any suspicion (according to the agreement) went for
France: but STILICO secretly practiced with a Captain in his Army which was a
Jew, whose name was The Treason of St^lico,
SAVL, that he with his company, faining some displeasure, or particular
quarrel, upon an Easter day (when the Goths mistrusting nothing being
Christians celebrated divine service) should then set upon them, and kill as
many of them as he could: for by these means he was assured that the wars
would begin again, and therewith would his power and authority also begin,
which with the peace was at an end. The Jew put this secret practice in
execution, and the Goths being suddenly set upon, received great loss: but
he presently paid for it; for the Goths, in great haste putting themselves in
Arms, fought with him; and there was SAVL slain with the greatest part of his
soldiers. ALARICVS being herewith highly offended, returned against STILICO
his Army: and STILICO faining to stand in great fear, made show not to dare to
fight, but sent to the Emperor for new succors; who being advertised of what
STILICO thought to be most secret, and what had happened concerning the Jew
SAVL, and standing in great fear of STILICO, sent certain persons to the
Army, who finding opportunity should kill both him and his son: which was
performed accordingly, and his treason The death of Stilico.
was discouerd, and the cause wherefore they were put to death. But herein,
although the Emperor HONORIVS used a good policy, yet he was careless in
providing for the rest: for he sent not any such General to command his Army
as the case required. So as King ALARICVS either believed that the injury
which SAVL had done him, was by the Emperors consent, or else he knew and saw
his time and opportunity: and thereupon finding no resistance, marched directly
with his whole Army toward Rome, the head and Empress of the world. And
making most cruel war by fire and sword, he drew near unto it, in the year
one thousand, one hundred and threescore, after the foundation thereof: but the
Romans standing upon Alaricus retur^ed against Rome, besieged and took it.
their guard, he could not take it at the first assault; wherefore he besieged
it, which siege continued two years. Of the besieging of Rome, and how ALARICVS
took it in the end, many authors write: but in what manner it was taken, and
what exploits were done during the time of the siege, they write so briefly as
in a manner they say nothing thereof. But that it was taken; PAVLVS OROSIVS in
his seventh book, PAVLVS DIACONVS in the life of HONORIVS, IORNANDES in his
History of the Goths, S. AUGUSTINE in his book De Ciuitate Dei, S. HIEROME in
his epistle ad Principium, as a matter which happened in his time, auerre the
same: and so does S. ISIODORE in his History of the Goths. PROCOPIVS, a Greek
Author, and others of later time, as I could gather out of their writings,
say, that ALARICVS marching with his Army toward Rome, with a resolution to
do that which afterward he did; as to a Christian, although fierce and
cruel, there came a Monk which very boldly (ALARICVS giving him audience)
admonished and counseled him to desist from his enterprise, and to consider
that he was a Christian, and that for the love of God he should moderate his
fury, and not seem to rejoice in the slaughter of men, and the shedding of
humane blood; and fith that Rome had not done him any offense, he should not
go thither. To whom they say, that ALARICVS made this answer: I let thee
understand, man of God, that I go not of my own will and desire against the
great City of Rome: but I assure thee, that there daily appears unto me a
man, who does urge and importune me thereto; saying, Get thee to Rome A vision
appeared to Alaricus.
and destroy it even to the ground. Whereat the religious man being greatly
amazed, durst say no more. This I find written in the Annals of
Constantinople annexed to the history of EVTROPIVS: whereby it plainly
appears, that the affliction of Rome was the especial punishment of God.
PAVLVS OROSIVS affirms the same; saying, That as God drew just Lot out of
Sodom, when he inflicted so great punishment on that City; so drew he Pope
INNOCENT out of Rome when ALARICVS came to besiege it; who went to Rauenna to
see the Emperor HONORIVS. Yet PLATINA writes, this misfortune happened in the
time of Pope ZOZIMVS: but it may be that it began in the time of the one, and
ended in the time of the other. S. HIEROME lived also in those days out of
Rome, being then gone to do penance in Bethlehem.

But returning again to the matter, ALARICVS held the city of Rome, strictly
besieged; where between the besieged, were many skirmishes, and many men were
slain in those two years space; and the famine was so great in Rome, as they
endured it with so great patience and constancy, that Saint HIEROM says, that
when the city was taken, there were few men therein that could be slain or
taken prisoners, for that extreme hunger had consumed them, Famine in Rome in
the time of the siege.
and had constrained them (in horrible manner) to eat the flesh the one of the
other; so as the mother did not spare the child which she held at her breast,
but through hunger, lodged the same again in her womb, from whence not long
before it issued. These are the words of Saint HIEROM. But in what manner Rome
was taken, authors agree not: for PROCOPIVS says, that ALARICVS seeing he
could not take it by force, resolved to use some stratagem; and faining that he
would raise the siege, made a kind of truce, and secretly sent into Rome three
hundred prisoners in which he reposed much trust, having first instructed them
what they had to do; setting them at liberty and promising them great rewards.
The which one day at a certain hour; making show as though they went to see
the city, metal together at a port according to their appointment, which port
they took and held in despite of those which had the guard; and the Goths
running thither upon a sudden, entered there and surprised the city. Others
The taking of Rome.
affirm, that by the commandment and policy of a woman, which was a great
Lady of that city, a port was given to the Goths, at which they entered. And
that she did this of pity, to see the great famine which raged within the
city, imagining that the enemies could not do so great hurt in Rome, as the
Romans did to themselves, as we have said. Some authors there are, which say,
that the city of Rome was taken by force, for that those which were within it,
were notable to man the walls, or to make any longer resistance. But howsoever
it was, all authors affirm that ALARICVS before he entered the same, commanded
on pain of death, that no man should be so hardy, as to touch any of those
which had withdrawn themselves into the Churches and temples, chiefly of Saint
PETER and Saint PAVL Apostles; which was afterward Placidia sister to the
Emperor Honorius taken prisoner.
duly observed. But all the rest of the city was robbed and spoiled, and many
thousands of people slain, and many taken prisoners; among which was a sister
of the Emperors, whose name was PLACIDIA, whom ATHAVLPHVS one of the
principal men among the Goths, and near kinsman to King ALARICVS took, and
had in his keeping; and afterward married her. The next day after they had
taken the city; in disgrace and disdain of the Empire, and to make themselves
merry, they chose one ATALVS for Emperor of Rome, and the same day they
carried him up and down the streets in the habit of an Emperor; and the next
day they made him serve like a slave, Three or four days the Goths remained
in Rome: which Rome set on fire by the Goths.
being past, setting fire in sundry parts of the city, their King ALARICVS
and they departed.

All this while the Emperor HONORIVS was in Rauenna, so careless, that when
the news was suddenly brought to him that Rome was lost (nothing remembering
the city whereof he was Emperor) he thought that they had told him of a
Frenchman, whom they called ROMA, which was one of those which were maintained
by the Emperors to fight man to man, after the manner of Gladiators in Rome:
whereat the Emperor greatly marueiled that he should be so soon dead or
taken; for it was but a little while since that he saw him fight with others:
whereby it plainly appears how careless he was. This was the first time
that Rome, after that it grew to be mighty, was taken by Barbarous Nations:
for when the Gauls took it, it was of no such account; being in the
beginning but of small strength and power.

After this time that ALARICVS took it, the Roman Empire daily declined, and
the City When the Roman Empire began to decline.
of Rome was oftentimes taken and destroyed: whereof we will declare the most
notable accidents, to the end that the Reader may know and judge how weak, and
of what small power the Empires and mighty Kingdoms of the World are; and how
that Rome which was the The death of Alaricus King of the Goths.
Queen and Emperesse of the universal World, in time became a slave to all
the Nations thereof. ALARICVS departing from Rome would have sailed into
Sicilia: but a tempest returned him into Italy, and he dyed in the City of
Cosenza; and the Goths after that he Athaulphus made King of the Goths in
place of Alaricus.
was dead, chose ATHAVLPHVS for their King, who (as we said) married with
PLACIDIA, the Emperor THEODOSIUS his daughter. Which ATHAVLPHVS as soon as he
was King returned toward Rome, with a determination to have wholly destroyed
the same, to have rooted out the name thereof, and to have left it desolare;
which his cruel resolution he altered Athaulphus would have destroyed Rome, but
forbear through the entreatie of his wife Placidia.
at his wives intercession, who with tears entreated the same. When ATHAVLPHVS
departed with his Army from Rome, it is not written whether he placed therein
any governor, or left it at liberty to the Emperor. For his wife PLACIDIA
was a mean to bring HONORIVS and ATHAVLPHVS to some agreement, and concluded a
truce between them. And ATHAVLPHVS consummating his nuptial rites with her,
which until then were not solemnized, he went out of Italy: and marching with
his Army through France, to the city of Barcelona in Spain, and taking the
same and the territory thereof, he stayed there a certain space. What end he
made, you shall hear hereafter.

During the time of these troubles in Italy, ARCADIVS lived in peace in
Constantinople, and in the eastern parts free from troubles: for authors write
not of any wars of importance which troubled him, or of any adversity that
befell him; for it pleased God to lay his scourge upon the provinces of the
West only: and so having reigned thirteen years, in the one and thirtith of
his age, he died in Constantinople. Others say, that he held the Empire a great
while longer; The Emperor Arcadius died in Constantinople.
alleging that he died after the taking of Rome: but PROSPERVS and others
affirm, that he died before. Some say, that it was in in the year of our Lord
four hundred and ten: others say, four hundred and thirteen. He seeing
death near at hand, and that he could not live, and that his son THEODOSIUS
whom he left behind him for his heir, was but eight years old, he took a
dangerous course; but it proved very profitable, which was: That leaving his
son CAESAR, and his successor, he ordained by his last will HISDIGERDVS King of
Persia and of Parthia for his tutor; who at that time was a friend and in
league with the Empire; notwithstanding Arcadius made the King of Persia tutor
of his son.
that the house of Persia was ever a capital enemy thereof. When the King of
Persia understood what ARCADIVS had ordained, he accepted of the government
and of the protection of the child, and speedily sent one ANTIOCHVS an
excellent man, and a great soldier, to Constantinople: who with the good will
and consent of HONORIVS, who was not a Antiochus a Persian, governor of the
young Emperor Theodosius.
little glad of the friendship of Persia, governed the Eastern Empire, with
great fidelity, and discretion; and so maintained the same in peace and
justice, until that young THEODOSIUS, son to the Emperor ARCADIVS, came to
age. ARCADIVS being dead, whether before or after the sack of Rome, the name
of Emperor rested in HONORIVS, and in his Nephew young THEODOSIUS.

A relation of what happened after the death of the Emperor ARCADIVS.
ALl things being in such confusion, as the Goths, Vandals, and other nations
invaded and made a conquest of the territories of the Empire; and the Emperor
HONORIVS lying Gratianus rebelled and took the title of Emperor in England.
in Rauenna, taking no good order for the same: In the I Will of Britannie also a
great Lord borne in the same Island, whose name was GRATIANVS rebelled, and took
upon him the title and ensigns of Emperor, with the consent of some of the
men of war in the same Island. But his presumption had an evil end: for
within few days after, the same men of war slew him. But The soldiers slew
Gratianus and in his place made Constantine Emperor.
they setting all duty apart, determined to make an other soldier among
themselves Emperor, whose name was CONSTANTINE, who was a man of greater
courage and of more wit, then GRATIANVS; who drawing all the Army out of
England, went into France, with a conceit to have made himself Lord thereof;
and to that end, made peace with the Vandales, Sueuians The Vandales, Sueuians,
and Alanes took their way toward Spain.
and Alanes, which already were in France marching toward Spain: for the
Burgonians made their abode in that part which is now called Burgundy.

This peace between CONSTANTINE and these three nations could not well be
concluded: for CONSTANTINE drew to him many soldiers of France; and growing
mighty made a full account to become Lord of Spain also, before that those
Barbarians should be able to come thither. Whereupon he sent certain
governors, with a competent number of soldiers thither, and many towns in
Spain were resolved to obey his commandment; holding it better to serve him,
then those nations which were marching thitherwards. But two Didimus and
Verodianus oppose themselves against Constantine.
Noblemen, rich, and of great authority, whose names were (as says PAVLVS
DIACONVS) DIDIMVS and VERODIANVS borne in Valentia, withstood them, and found
means to drive them out of Spain. And thereupon with the aid of their
kindred, friends, and acquaintance they went to the Pyrenaean Mountains, with
a resolution not only to defend the passages against CONSTANTINES Army, but
also against all the other nations before mentioned, using all means to
retain Spain in the obedience and service of the Emperor HONORIVS; which
they continued a long time, although with great trouble, effusion of blood, and
danger.

CONSTANTINE, holding himself herewith greatly affronted, assembled together a
certain number of the most active and, best tried soldiers that he had, and
made his son CONSTANS their Commander, who by some authors is called
CONSTANTIVS; whom for this purpose, he took out of a Monastery wherein he was
a Monk, and making him CAESAR, sent Constantine made his son Constans
Caesar, and sent him into Spain.
him against the two brethren. His people were of such power and so expert in
the wars, as they overthrew, and slew the two Spanish brethren, and entered
Spain, which was the ruin thereof: for the men of war which came with
CONSTANS, after they had spoiled the country, and had used all kind of
hostility, returned to the Pyrenaean Mountains; and driving the Spaniards
from thence which guarded the passages, took upon them the defense thereof, and
were well able to have performed the same. But CONSTANS going to Arles a city
in France to speak with his father, who then lay there, those which had the
guarde in the Mountains came to an agreement with the Vandales and the other
strange nations, and sold to them the passages; suffering those Alanes,
Sueuians, and Vandales to pass into Spain: who made such ha^ocke Strange
nations sacked Spain.
and committed such spoils, as can hardly be expressed: especially near unto
the Pyrenaean hills where they found greatest resistance. From thence they
marched into the maine land to the city of Valentia (against which they bare
an old grudge) which city they ruined, and the country round about it, and
then went to the city of Astorga, which they entered by force; and passing
further made great spoil in all Galicia. Afterward crossing through Castile,
they came to the city of Toledo, which by reason of the situation and natural
strength thereof, and the valor of the inhabitants, they could not take;
notwithstanding that they besieged it for a certain space, but were constrained
to raise their siege, with shame and dishonor, from that city which for wars
and fears of Arms has ever been famous in that country. By whose example
many towns in Spain continued their allegiance to HONORIVS; notwithstanding
that he sent neither soldiers, captains, nor relief. This people did much
harm in the territory of Toledo: and passing forwards they marched a long the
river Tagus, still spoiling the country until they came to the city of
Lisbon, in Portugal, which in those days also was very famous: and giving Lis^
an assault thereto, it was so well defended by the inhabitants, that they
could not take it, but came to a composition: where they receiving a great
quantity of treasure they raised their siege, and returned the same way they
came, making war on every side. And by reason of a great famine and
scarcity in the country (as OROSIVS writes) they laid down their Arms for
a space, and fell to tilling of the land, as inhabitants of the country;
dividing what they had gotten amongst those nations, and their captains or
Kings, being Vandales, Sueuians, and Alanes.

The Empire being in this estate, ATHAVLPHVS and the Goths possessing Narbona,
Barcelona, and the marches thereof, which in name were confederates with
HONORIVS, the tyrant CONSTANTINE and his sons enjoyed the rest of France. The
young Emperor THEODOSIUS being a child, was bred up in Constantinople, under
the protection of the King of Persia, and of Antiochus, whom he had sent. But
of his house and person a very virtuous and honorable Anthemius was governor
of the young Emperor Theodosius.
Noble man took charge, whose name was ANTHEMIVS, who was his Pretorian
Prefect. This child was bred up in all learning, and became a virtuous prince
and a good Christian. His Uncle HONORIVS, who then lay in Rauenna, bethought
himself how he might make the Western Empire, as free from the slavery of
these tyrants and barbarous nations, as the East; and to that end he made a
worthy man, whose name was CONSTANTIVS, General of his Honorius made
Constantius general of his Army.
Army against those tyrants and Barbarians. Which CONSTANTIVS until then was
an Earl, borne in Rome, descended of the Noble and ancient Romans; who like
a perfect Roman, with a picked and selected Army, entered France; and fighting
with the Emperor CONSTANTINE the tyrant, overthrew him, and besieged him in
the city of Arles, and at length getting him into his hands, smote off his
head. And it fell out so happily Constantius put the tyrant Constantine to
death.
that within few days after that the death of CONSTANTINE was published, young
CONSTANS the son of the said CONSTANTINE, whom his father had made CAESAR,
was slain in the city of Vienna in France, by the hands of a captain of his
whose name was GERONCIVS. And the same GERONCIVS, who also sought to have made
himself a tyrant, and to have created one MAXIMUS a friend of his Emperor,
was also slain by those soldiers which in England rebelled with CONSTANTINE;
with a resolution to return to the service of HONORIVS. GERONCIVS being dead,
they dispoiled MAXIMUS of his Imperial robes, and sent him in exile into
Spain. In this manner was France freed from these tyrants, by this worthy man
CONSTANTIVS; and the Army Constantius his victories.
reduced to the service of the right Emperor HONORIVS. After this, HONORIVS
speedily sent Captains and soldiers into Britanny, which held for
CONSTANTINE, from the first beginning of his tyranny; who reduced the same to
obedience and subjection. In France, a man of great parentage and authority in
that Country (as PAVLVS OROSIVS, and PAVLVS DIACONVS affirm) sought to make
himself Emperor; but he was presently slain: and in the like manner another
brother of his, called SEBASTIAN; both which rebelled (as it seemed) without
any occasion or reason, but only that they desired to die with the name and
title of Emperors.

CONSTANTIVS General for the Emperor HONORIVS, being thus powerful in
France, ATHAVLPHVS King of the Goths, who lay in Barcelona, and was Lord of
all the country round about, and had there lived in peace and quiet the space
of three years, at the The designs of Athaulphus.
entreaty of PLACIDIA to whom he was married, which was HONORIVS sister; began
to stand in some fear of the power of the Emperor and of his General
CONSTANTIVS, knowing that they had fortified the Alps, to the end he should
no more return into Italy: Whereupon he resolved to attempt to make himself
Lord of all Spain; and persuaded a Roman Captain, whose name was ATTALVS, to
take upon him the name and title of Emperor, Attalus called Emperor.
and to go with a fleet which he would give him, to seize upon the Country
of Andaluzia, which was then called Betica; and to do the like, if he should be
able, in Africa; and he would also make war in his own person. ATTALVS,
very unwisely, accepted his offer, and presently sent into Africa an Army with
Judges and Governors, as though he had been the peaceable Emperor thereof;
and began to make war in Spain. Against whom, HONORIVS sent a wise and a
valiant Captain called HERACLIANVS: who, driving all ATTALVS his Judges and
Governors out of Africa, leaving the Country in peace, with a Navy came to
seek him himself; and, finding him, fought with him in a battle by Sea, and
overcame him. And he, fleeing to the coast of Spain, was taken by the
Spaniards, and sent to CONSTANTIVS, who was General for HONORIVS, who was then
in France; who presently Heraclianus overthrew and took Attalus prisoner.
sent him prisoner to HONORIVS; and HONORIVS made his hand to be stricken off,
and sent him in exile into the Isle of Lippari, near unto Sicilia. To
HERACLIANVS for the victory which he obtained against him, was given the
Consulshippe and the Government of Africa. But as in prosperity, pride and
ambition increases, and men are then far more insolent, then in time of
adversity: So this HERAGLIANVS, seeing himself favored and in great
authority, thought that he might also be an Emperor. And as he was in
possession of Africa, PAVLVS OROSIVS writes, that taking another Captain for
his son in law and companion in his rebellion, whose name was SAEINVS, a most
subtle fellow and very valiant, Heraclianus rebelled in Africa.
he assembled (to go into Italy against HONORIVS and to make a conquest
thereof) the greatest Navy of all manner of ships that I ever read of. For
OROSIVS affirms, that he gathered together (if there be no error in the
figures) four thousand and seventy sails of all sorts little and great;
which without comparison was the greatest in number that ever was seen An
incredible great Navy by Sea.
upon the Sea: For we do not read that XERXES or ALEXANDER ever armed so
great a Navy.

With this great fleet, fraught with soldiers, arms and victuals, he came to
the coast of Italy, and set his men on land, to march directly to Rome, being
many in number, but not so well experienced and trained as were the Romans; who
by HONORIVS his commandment Heraclianus came into Italy.
attended their coming, led by a good General called MARINVS, with the title
and dignity of an Earl: who had raunged his Romans in very good order, with a
resolution to die or to overcome, and not to suffer themselves to be besieged,
as they were by ALARICVS. HERACLIANVS, who thought to have amazed the world
with the name and number of his fleet, and that he should have found no
resistance, was so discouraged when he saw MARINVS Heraclianus his shameful
flight.
his Army, that he presently fled to the Sea; and embarking himself aboard
one of his ships, returned by flight into Africa with that only ship; from
whence he came with so many as is before said.

After that HERACLIAN was arrived, and his base cowardice discovered, the
ordinary Garrisons upon a day mutined and slew him. And his son in law and
companion SABINVS, The death of Heraclianus.
altering his resolution, fled to Constantinople to entreat the young Emperor
THEODOSIUS, nephew to HONORIVS, to take compassion of him: from whence within a
little while after he was brought to HONORIVS, and having his life granted,
was condemned to perpetual exile. So through the wisdom and good fortune of
HONORIVS, all these tyrants were defeated which rebelled against him, the which
we have already related in as plain manner, as I could possibly; which truly
was not without great toil and difficulty: for matters which past both in the
time of ARCADIVS and of HONORIVS were so many and so diverse, and often so many
accidents happened together, and Historiographers treat of them so confusedly,
that in writing them, I am much troubled, as well in collecting and
abbreuiating them, as in relating them, in such sort as the readers may
understand and comprehend the same; and to recite them in order as they passed,
one before another, which has been my principal care from the beginning; and,
by the grace of God, shall be, until I have ended.

All the victories and above recited good fortunes of HONORIVS, after so many
calamities and wars, which he had in his time, Authors attribute to the care
which he had of the Christian faith and religion. For in those times through
the diligence and endeavor of a Captain of his called MARCELLINVS, with the
assistance of his great Captain CONSTANTIVS, he procured concord and unity in
all the Churches of Africa, and of other Provinces; wherein were many Schisms,
and erroneous opinions concerning the Christian Faith. And truly S. AUGUSTINE
was a good mean to bring this to pass, who at that time was Bishop of Hippo
in Africa; which the Emperor CHARLES the fifth in his journey and conquest of
Tunis took from the powerful and cruel tyrant BARBAROSSA, but his son
PHILIP the second within few years after again lost the same.

HONORIVS then seeing himself free from those tyrants, and the most part of
the Provinces of his Empire in peace, and obedient, resolved to drive the
strange and barbarous Nations out of those Countries which they held in Spain
and France about Narbona; thinking it best to begin with the Goths, which were
the most powerful and warlike people of all the other Nations, and possessed
such part of Spain, as is aforesaid: for these being defeated, he held it an
easy matter to make an end of the rest. King ATHAVLPHVS, as he dearly loved
his wife PLACIDIA, much desired peace with HONORIVS, and so by all means
sought the same: Which when his soldiers perceived, who were of a far
contrary opinion, they so hated him that they slew him; but Authors set not
down in what manner. And they presently chose a great man among themselves for
their King, whose name was SEGERICVS; and The Goths slew their King Athaulphus
Seg^icus king of the Goths slain by h^ soldiers. Walia King of the Goths.
for that they suspected him as they did ATHAVLPHVS, they handled him in the
same manner, as they did their last King. Having slain these two Kings, they
chose one WALIA for their King, conceiving that he would be a great enemy to
the Romans, with whom they desired to have cruel wars; they having the
Emperors sister PLACIDIA in their power who at that time was a Widow, whom
they entreated very honorably and honestly.

This WALIA beginning to govern his kingdom he held it for necessary and sound
counsel to have peace and friendship with HONORIVS: but taking warning by
his predecessors (to satisfy his people) he rigged up a great fleet, which he
sent to make a conquest of Africa; which held for HONORIVS: and as it pleased
God so to work for HONORIVS, without his assistance, such a tempest took them
upon the Sea, that the whole fleet was in a manner lost and cast away. Which
misfortune, together with the news of the coming of CONSTANTIVS, General of
the Emperors Army with great power, did much temper the fierceness and fury
of the Goths; And WALIA took so good order with them, as of their own accord
and consent, a treaty of peace was made with HONORIVS, which was Honorius made
peace with Walia King of the Goths.
concluded upon condition, that PLACIDIA should be rendered to the Emperor, and
that WALIA and his forces should faithfully aid CONSTANTIVS, to drive the
Vandales, Alanes, and Sueuians out of Spain, who had already made themselves
Lords of the greatest part thereof. This being concluded, hostages were given
in the behalf of WALIA, and PLACIDIA was delivered, whom HONORIVS afterward
gave to wife to CONSTANTIVS, Constantius made Caesar and sent General into
Spain against the Vandales.
in reward of his services and victories obtained by him; and making him
CAESAR, he proclaimed him for his successor. And then began CONSTANTIVS his
wars in Spain against the Barbarians; King WALIA assisting and serving there
in with his Visogothes, as we will presently declare.

While these things (whereof we have spoken) were acting, the Barbarians were
in possession of the greatest part of Spain; especially the Vandals, who had
conquered a great part of Betica; from whom that Country took the name of
Vandaluzia: and afterward, in process of time, Andaluzia so called after the
Vandals.
leaving out the letter V, it came to be called Andaluzia. And the Suevians and
Alanes held Merida, and a great part of Lusitania (which is now Estremadura)
and part of Portugal: and in Galicia and Leon they had enjoyed a great part
from the beginning, and had divided these Countries among them by lot.
CONSTANTIVS the Imperial General being com into Spain, and with him the
Goths, according to the agreement, the first war they made was against the
Alanes, near to the City of Merida; where was fought between them a very cruel
battle: wherein the Alanes were overthrown, and CONSTANTIVS had the victory;
and the King of the Alanes, called ACHACE, was slain in battle. This victory
obtained by CONSTANTIVS, Constantius his victory against the Alans
struck so great a terror into the hearts of the rest of the barbarous Nations,
that they presently in great humility sued for peace, and sent to entreat
HONORIVS to grant them truce, and some place in Spain wherein they might live.

While these accidents happened in Spain, HONORIVS went to Constantinople to
visit the Eastern parts, where his Nephew the young THEODOSIUS commanded, who
was now comn Honorius went to Constantinople.
to riper years: and, being at liberty free from his Tutors, there fell out
some controversy between him and the King of Persia. And it happened, that as
CONSTANTIVS was busied in the wars of Spain, and HONORIVS out of Italy; an
eminent man, born and inhabiting in Rome, being of the ancient Nobility, named
TARTALLVS, assisted by a great part of the Roman Tartallus rebelled in Rome.
people, and by many Towns in Italy, rebelled, and took the name and title of
Emperor, and began to levy soldiers: but the loyal Subjects which held with
HONORIVS, fighting with him, he was by them overthrown and slain. But,
disloyalty and treachery was then so much in use, that another whose name was
ATTALVS did the like; who, putting on the Imperial Robes, and taking the
Ensigns, was called Emperor, and began to levy great Forces in Italy.
Attalus rebeld, and took upon him the name of Emperor.


When the Imperial General CONSTANTIVS, being in Spain, heard these news,
after the victory aforesaid, putting the Vandals, Suevians, and Alanes in good
hope to obtain what they desired, and giving it out that he went into Italy to
confer thereof with the Emperor, the better to keep them in peace in his
absence; he left Spain, and came into Italy: the like did the Emperor
HONORIVS, who had been advertised thereof in Constantinople. When the coming
of HONORIVS and CONSTANTIVS was known in Rome, the people grew into a Honorius
and Constantius return into Italy
great fury; and, apprehending the Tyrant ATTALVS, sent him to Rauenna to the
Emperor HONORIVS, whither CONSTANTIVS was already comn with his wife PLACIDIA;
where ATTALVS, by HONORIVS his commandment had his hand stricken off, and was
banished to Constantinople: wherein, HONORIVS in the opinion of the world showed
too great At^lus banished
patience and clemency.

HONORIVS being in Rauenna, whither his brother-in-law CONSTANTIVS CAESAR was
already comn, and having consideration of his worthy services, and how
profitable he had been to the Empire, made him with very great solemnity to be
called AUGUSTUS, Emperor, Honorius made Constantius his com panion in the
Empire.
and his equal and companion in the Empire of the West, and made a long set
Oration in praise of his virtues: and there the two Emperors by mutual
consent, to the end that WALIA king of the Goths should continue in their
service, consigned unto him the City of Tholosa in the Kingdom of France, with
all the Country near adjacent, called Aquitania, which they then named
Basconia, and is now called Gasconia.

After the Feasts, and Coronation of CONSTANTIVS, HONORIVS went to Rome to
pacify some tumults which were there: and the new Emperor CONSTANTIVS,
resolving to go into Spain to make an end of the war which he had begun,
commanded soldiers to be mustered. Surely, the valor and wisdom of this
excellent Captain and Emperor was such, that, if God had permitted him life,
he had freed Spain from those barbarous Nations: but death staid his journey,
so as he never came thither. Whereof when HONORIVS was advertised, The death
of Constantius.
he was extremely sorry, and in his place sent into Spain a famous and valiant
Captain called ECIVS, who took charge of the Army which CONSTANTIVS had
levied; and, marching thitherwards, by the way he overthrew the Burgonians
which attempted to have entered Ecius made General in Spain against the Van^,
and the rest
France. The like he did by the Franks, who afterward entered and inhabited
there. And being comn into Spain, his principal care was to find out the
Alanes: which after their overthrow by CONSTANTIVS, did not choose them any
King, but joined with the Sweuians, who were Lords of all the Country about
Lisbon. But, as soon as they knew that CONSTANTIVS was dead, they returned to
Merida,; and the Vandals and Sueuians were now grown so proud, that they would
neither require nor accept of peace; but came to aid the Alanes, and began to
make war against such Cities as held for the Emperor. ECIVS being comne into
Spain, seeing that all made head against him, and having no sufficient Army to
encounter them, protracted the time for certain days, and levied more forces;
which by HONORIVS (without reason) was imputed to him for cowardice, and he
sent the Earl CASTINVS to be General and his Successor, displacing ECIVS from
his charge. But CASTINVS, perceiving Castinus succeeded Ecius in his charge.
how the world went, approved the judgment of ECIVS; and in the same manner
prolonged the wars, until that BONIFACIVS, who was Gouerner of Africa (whom
we read, Saint AUGUSTINE for his virtue to have much loved) came into Spain to
his aid, bringing very Boniface came into Spain in aid of Castinus.
good troops with him: and they two together began the war, and obtained many
notable victories against the Barbarians; and so handled the matter, that it
was held for certain that they would have freed the Country. But this command
is such a thing as can never be well shared: for, these two excellent Captains
fell at such variance, that BONIFACIVS would not stay any longer, but returned
to the government of Africa (as PROSPERVS, and PAVLVS DIACONVS have written;
yet EVTROPIVS differs from them) and CASTINVS remaining alone, the Emperors
party began to grovve vveak in Spain.

While these matters passed in the West, HONORIVS his nephew, THEODOSIUS,
Emperor in the East, being now of sufficient age, was freed from his Tutors;
and, as he was a good Christian, his chiefest care was for the service of God,
and for the defense of his holy Church. Whereupon he fell at variance with
BARRABANVS King of Persia, who succeeded ISDEGERDVS who had been his tutor (as
is before said) for that he was given to understand that BARRABANVS persecuted
the Christians which lived in his dominions, whereof THEODOSIUS had admonished
him, requiring reformation: but seeing he could not obtain it, he sent
ARDABVRVS an excellent Captain against him, who fought a battle with NASIVS
General of the Persians, and therein overthrew him, and made great slaughter
of his men, and Wars between the Emperor Theodosius and Barrabanus King of
Persia. Theodosius his victories.
afterward entered the Country, and did great harm and spoil therein. And by
another way THEODOSIUS sent another Captain called GRATIANVS against A^AMANDER
King of the Sarazins, who came in aid of the King of Persia: this King was
likewise overthrown in battle by GRATIANVS, and a very great multitude of
his people slain, and he himself escaped by flight. And in another place
another Captain called ARSOBVIDA overthrew the Persians also: so as this war
was made to the great advantage of the Romans, and with loss and prejudice of
the Persians, until that BARRABANVS ceassing to persecute the Christians, a
peace was treated and concluded between him and THEODOSIUS. This happened in
the time that I told you that the Emperors party began to wax feeble and
weak in Spain: which weakness increased by reason of the death of HONORIVS;
who, as PAVLVS DIACONVS writes, died of an infirmity in Rome, having reigned
The death of the Emperor Honorius.
sole Emperor of the West about fifteen years after the death of his brother
ARCADIVS, with whom he reigned other 13 year; so as in all he reigned 28
years, besides 2 with his father. HONORIVS left no heirs of his body: for by
two wives which he had, which were the daughters of STILICO, he had never any
child. And a little before he died, he fell so far at dissension with his
sister PLACIDIA, as she went to Constantinople to her Nephew the Emperor
THEODOSIUS, with her two sons which she had by the Emperor CONSTANTIVS, of
whom we have already treated: her sons were named HONORIVS, and
VALENTINIANVS: this VALENTINIANVS was afterward Emperor: He asied in the year
of the Incarnation of our Savior Christ 427.

HONORIVS (as before is mentioned) was a virtuous man and a very good
Christian, very nobly minded, and very pitiful. He did one notable thing,
which was the part of a charitable Honorius put down the Sword players called
Gladiators.
and good Christian, which was, to abolish the Gladiators or Sword players,
which (as it is written) did use in Rome upon pleasure most cruelly to kill one
another. He much loved his ease: and so we see, that in his own person he
never followed the wars; and in his government was very negligent. But in
the end by his Captains he so much prevailed, that excepting Spain, he
brought all the rest of his Empire to quiet subjection in his life time,
although after great rebellions, wars and troubles. A few years before his
death died the great Doctor S. HIEROME, The death of S. Hierome.
being of the age of fourscore and twelve years, in Betheleem in Iewry, where
Christ was born: who departing out of this life, went to enjoy the life
everlasting.

THE LIFE OF THEODOSIUS, THE SECOND OF THIS NAME, AND TWO AND FIFTITH ROMAN
EMPEROR; and of his Cosen germane, VALENTINIAN the Second.*
THE ARGUMENT.
AFter the death of Honorius, Theodosius lawfully succeeded in the Empire; who,
perceiving that many went about to make themselves Tyrants of the Western
Empire, resolved to make his cosen, Valentinian, Caesar in those parts: who,
within a small time after, making himself Lord of all Italy, was by the
consent of Theodosius, and of the people, called Emperor. All the while these
two Emperors lived, there were such cruel and bloody wars made by the
Barbarians (as, Hunnes, Goths, Uandals, and such like nations) that the whole
world seemed to have been turned vpside down. But, above all other, the wars of
the Hunnes was most dangerous, and of longest continuance: for they, having
conquered Hungary, would have gone into France. Against whom, Valentinianus
continually sent fresh supplies, under the leading of his General Ecius. But
Theodosius his Empire in the East was in far better rest and quiet. For, the
Western Empire was continually infested with cruel wars: whither Theodosius
never left to send new supplies of Captains and soldiers. By reason whereof,
Attila King of the Goths, thinking to find the Empire of Constantinople
unfurnished of men of war to defend it, invaded the same: whereupon
Theodosius recalled those Captains which he had sent into Sicilia to the aid
of Valentinianus, and encountered the Goths, during the time of that war;
which on the Goths side was managed very coldly, by reason of some suspicions
and iealousies among themselves; Theodosius falling sick died of the plague,
when he had reigned 42 years; whose death was lamented by the whole Empire:
for, he was a very good man, and much beloved in his life time.

GReat in truth were the accidents and wars, as well prosperous as
unfortunate, which have befaln in the Roman Empire in the space of four
hundred years (little more or less) whereof we have written, as the Reader
may easily judge. But notwithstanding that we have sometimes seen it in
distress, troubled, and in danger to have been lost in the whole, or in part;
yet in the end, although those calamities continued for a space, we have seen
how it has bin delivered from those dangers, repairing them by some means: so
as we may say, that it has bin cured of those infirmities wherewith it was
oppressed, and recovered the losses which it sustained, until the time whereto
we are now comn. But, through the secret judgment of God, from henceforth
matters succeeded not so well: but the losses multiplied, and their forces
diminished. And although that sometimes, through the valor of some excellent
Emperors and their Captains, the Empire did strive to recover her ancient
Majesty, and was both honored and feared, yet it could never attain to the
former: and this also was very seldom. So as from henceforth, at sundry times,
and by diverse The declining of the Roman Empire.
accidents, the Emperors lost whole Provinces and Legions; and in them began
Kingdoms and particular States; and of those Countries which the Empire lost,
arose great and mighty Monarchies: and as Principalities and Kingdoms
multiplied, so great and more strange were the The Original of the Kingdoms.
accidents which happened, which I cannot relate, neither am I bound thereto:
for, my purpose and intent was, Not to write a general History, but only of
the Emperors, and that briefly. Wherefore, as briefly as I shall be able, I
will lay open the groundwork, and hold on my way; writing such things as shall
be of greatest importance in the History of the Emperors, leaving that of
other Kings and Kingdoms, which in process of time shall present themselves to
others, which either already have, or hereafter shall take that charge upon
them. For, this which I have already taken in hand, will be enough for my small
ability; which I pray God I may be able to bring to any reasonable good end,
to the honest satisfaction of those which shall read the same.

By the death of HONORIVS, the whole Roman Empire did belong to his nephew
THEODOSIUS, then sole Emperor; who at that Instant was in Constantinople, and
held the Eastern Empire, as by that which is already said may easily be
understood; although that in the time of HONORIVS there be no notable mention
made of his doings, as well for his few years, as for that the Empire of the
East was in better rest and quiet than the Western, which then was infested and
turmoiled.

When it was publicly known that HONORIVS was dead, some which meant to
continue their allegiance, held for THEODOSIUS, as reason and duty required:
but the greatest Potentates The alterations and changes that happened through the
death of Honorius.
began to make themselves Lords of the Empire, or of part thereof. In Africa
was BONIFACIVS (as we said) Gouerner of that Province; who in the beginning
held himself Neuter. In Spain the Vandals, Sweuians and Alanes, thinking that
CASTINVS (who was General for the Empire) should not be able to withstand
them, began upon a sudden to be discontent with that which they held; and so
took Arms, and would have more. The Goths, who were Lords of Barcelona,
Narbona, Tolosa, and all the Countries round about, by the leave and permission
of HONORIVS, as his allies and friends, took the same resolution as the rest
did. And the Burgonians in like manner which dwelt upon the Rhines side, and
the Franques which had been driven out of France, resolved to return thither
again. The Hunnes also, a most The Huns entered Hungary.
fierce Nation, whose Original was in Scythia, as that of the Goths, desirous
to leave their barren Country, departed thence in great numbers, and came to
the confines of Pannonia inferior, which now is called Hungary: so as into all
those Nations, and into sundry others, the death of HONORIVS did put new
thoughts and conceits, although they did not presently put them in execution:
of all which, as it shall be most fit for my purpose, I will hereafter make
particular mention.

The state standing in these terms; as THEODOSIUS provided not suddenly for
his coming into Italy, or to send some Noble Personage with his power and
authority, there was an eminent man in Rome whose name was JOHN, who by means
of his dignity and riches, was of great power: He, by the counsel and
direction of CASTINVS (although in secret) who (as we have said) was an Earl
and General in Spain, rebelled, and took the name of Emperor: and ECIVS, whom
HONORIVS deposed from the government of Spain, was also of his council, and
favored and assisted him in his proceedings.

This Tyrant JOHN having made himself Lord of Rome, and of the greatest part
of Italy, a great part of France holding for him already, and all that part of
Spain which was under the command and government of CASTINVS; the same ECIVS
and CASTINVS, as they were both enemies to BONIFACE governor of Africa, seeing
that he took not part with JOHN, persuaded him to declare him for an enemy:
yet they discovered not themselves as then, the better to bring the other to
confusion. Wherefore CASTINVS fled from Spain into Africa, with a great fleet
and a great number of soldiers, spreading a rumor that he fled thither for
fear of the Vandales, from whom in no part of Spain he could live in
safety. Under color whereof, and writing very loving letters to BONIFACIVS,
setting his men on land, he seized on many cities on the coast of Africa, and
so lived for certain days in counterfeit Castinus came against Boniface in
Africa.
peace and friendship with BONIFACIVS; yet BONIFACE was not free from
jealousy. Hereof there are at this day epistles extant, written to him by S.
AUGUSTINE, who then was Bishop of Hippo, and the answers thereto; discovering
the suspicion. And CASTINVS afterward manifesting his ill meaning, S.
AUGUSTINE sought means to reconcile them: but his godly endeavor taking no
effect, they fought a battle, which although it were Castinus ouerthrown in
battle by Boniface.
very cruel and bloody, CASTINVS was overthrown and fled to his ships, and
with such of his soldiers as he could gather together, he returned with shame
and dishonor into Sapine. Which when JOHN the usurping Emperor understood,
he sent for him with an intent to leave him for his Lieutenant in Italy; and
assembling together the old Captains and soldiers which remained since the
time of HONORIVS, with the greatest power that he was able to levy, and a very
great fleet, he made preparation to pass into Africa. Some authors write,
that he went thither in person, and that after many battles he was slain by
BONIFACIVS. So writes BLONDVS in his book of the declining of the Roman
Empire, and GVIDO of Rauenna, and ANTONIUS SABELLICVS in his Aeneades, and
other modern authors: who in my opinion are deceived; or at the least, I know
not what ancient authors they follow therein. Whereof that which I find
written, is, that THEODOSIUS being advertised of the great combustions in the
Western Empire, and not daring to leave the East, thought it his safest course
to nominate his cousin germane VALENTINIAN, CAESAR, who was the son of
Theodosius made his cosen Valentinian, Caesar.
PLACIDIA, sister to the two Emperors ARCADIVS and HONORIVS, and wife to that
worthy Captain and Emperor CONSTANTIVS. After some accidents which happened,
with such troops as he thought good, he sent him into Italy with his mother
PLACIDIA, whose virtue and wisdom was sufficient to govern the whole, until
the young CAESAR came to age fit for the government. Before this, the usurper
JOHN sent his Ambassadors to THEODOSIUS, requesting him to allow of his
election, and to be pleased to accept him for his companion in the Empire.
Whereto THEODOSIUS answer was; To command his Ambassadors to be apprehended as
Traitors and rebels. And he sent commandment to ARDABVRIVS or ANDABVRIVS, an
excellent Captain of his, that with the greatest power Theodosius sent
Andaburius against John the tyrant.
that he could, he should take his passage by Sea into Italy, before PLACIDIA
and her son, and should seek to defeat the tyrant JOHN. ARDABVRIVS
presently put this charge in practice: but there befell him such a storm at
the Sea, as his ship was driven from the rest of the fleet, and arrived
where he was taken and carried prisoner to Rauenna. His son ASPAR within few
days after being advertised hereof (who also came in the same fleet) after
that the tempest ceased, and that the Seas were calm, set his men on land; and
used such means, that Andaburius taken prisoner by John the tyrant.
passing through certain lakes or boggs, which are, or were, near to Rauenna
(where the usurping Emperor JOHN then was, and held his father prisoner: Which
was held for a matter impossible, and so it is written for a wonder) he by
force entered the City, which nothing suspected any such mishap; where he did
not only set his father at liberty, but took the Emperor John the tyrant put
to death by Aspar son of Andaburius. Phreculphus tome 2. book 5. chap. 7.
Procop. book 4. of the wars of the Vandals. Cassiodorus book 22. cha. 18
JOHN the usurper prisoner, and smote off his head.

In this manner writes Bishop PHRECVLPHVS in his History of the death of the
Tyrant JOHN, who wrote the same above seven hundred years since; with whom
PROCOPIVS agrees, an Author of above a thousand years continuance; CASSIODORVS
in his tripartite history declares it at large; and PROSPERVS and IORNANDES
of little less antiquity; and also PAVLVS DIACONVS. And although they all
briefly pass it over, yet they auerre that he died in Italy, and not in
Africa. And PLATINA, CVSPINIANVS, and other diligent modern Authors, follow
them therein: whereby it is to be presumed, that they were deceived which wrote
that he was slain by BONIFACIVS in Africa; although it be not to be doubted,
but that he went into Africa, and was there overthrown. And, holding this for
the most certain, let us proceed to the rest, wherein in a manner all agree in
the taking of Rauenna; and that after they were entered, ASPAR and his soldiers
inflicted cruel punishments. Five years did JOHN enjoy the name of Emperor
before his death; and was commended for his virtue and good parts by some
Authors; so as they condemn him not for any thing, but only for making himself
a Tyrant in usurping the Empire: whereof the greatest fault is laid upon
CASTINVS and ECIVS, who persuaded him thereto.

This victory being obtained, within short space after came PEACIDIA with her
son VALENTINIANVS the new made CAESAR, into Italy; through whose coming, and
the The coming of Placidia and Valentinian into Italy.
death of the aforesaid JOHN, in a short space there followed a great
alteration: for, being com to Rauenna, and understanding that CASTINVS came
from Spain with such forces as he was able, to put himself into Rome with
ECIVS who held the same against VALENTINIAN, PLACIDIA sent ARDABVRIVS against
him, or (after some others) BVRGVNDIVS, and it may be both; who fighting a
battle, CASTINVS was overthrown; and, escaping from the fury, his own
soldiers mutined, and deliuerd him to the Emperors General, who sent him to
Rauenna. The like happened to ECIVS in Rome: for, the soldiers and citizens
mutined, and apprehended him; and he was brought prisoner also to Rauenna. This
is that ECIVS whom some call ACIVS, so much commended by the Writers of those
Times for one of the best Captains in the world: and in truth so had he already
showed himself in all his actions; but he performed much more afterward. And
of no less esteem was BONIFACIVS, who governed Africa. ARDABVRIVS was very
famous for his victories, as we have said, against the Persians: and so was
CASTINVS in like manner. These Captains being brought prisoners, and the need
of such men in the Empire considered, as well in Spain against the Vandals and
the rest, as in France against the Goths and Burgundians, who already invaded
that Kingdom, and against the Hunnes which were in Pannonia; After many
allegations pro and contra, PLACIDIA undertook to procure her son VALENTINIAN
to pardon them their lives: and so CASTINVS, after some few days imprisonment,
was banished. And ECIVS, having put-in security Ecius made General against the
Hunnes and Goths.
for his fidelity, was made General of the Army in France against the Goths,
who took such order, that the Huns came no further forwards: for, he had great
friendship among those nations, and was born in those parts; and, during his
disgrace with HONORIVS, lived among them.

VALENTINIANVS, being in full possession of all Italy, was with the good will
of all men, and by the consent of his cosen THEODOSIUS, called Emperor and
AUGUSTUS, and for such obeyed and received by the Senate and people of Rome:
and the Earl and General ECIVS, without delaying any time, undertook his
charge of General of the wars in France. And at that time when he came into
France (as PROSPERVS and DIACONVS write) THEODORICVS, by the death of WALIA,
was King of the Goths, and had besieged a principal City then called Archilla,
after the taking of many other towns. But as soon as ECIVS came The wars that
Ecius made in France against the Goths.
with his Army, he began the wars in such manner, that to the loss of the
Goths the City was relieved; and they, raising their siege, retired themselves
into their Countries: and he every where made such head against them, that
they could not take any other places either in France or Spain. In the same
time in the I Will of Britannie, which then was unfurnished of such garrisons as it
was wont to have, were great wars and combustions: for, the Scots, a fierce
nation (of whom we have already made mention, and after whose name part of
Britannie is called the Kingdom of Scotland to this day) with other people
called Picts or Pictauians, whose Original was of Sarmatia The coming of the
Scots into Britanny.
in Europe, robbed and ouer-ran all the Land, and made themselves Lords of a
great part thereof. Wherefore such of the Inhabitants of that Island as
continued subject to the Empire, sent to ECIVS for succor; certifying him,
that if relief came not within a short space, the whole Island would fall into
the hands of the enemy.

When ECIVS understood those news, he presently sent one Legion of his Army
under the leading of a Captain whose name was GALLIO, into Britanny: and he,
joining with the Inhabitants which sent for aid, fought oftentimes with the
Scots and Picts; and obtaining the victory, compelled them to leave that
country in peace and quiet: and so they continued, till that ECIVS (standing in
need of succors to make head against the Burgonians who already had passed
the Rhine, and began with great fury to invade France, being feared to have an
intent to pass into Italy) drew that Legion out of Britanny, and left it in
the borders of Paris in France, to guard that Country; and left another Legion
near to Tarragona in Spain, under the command of a Captain called SEBASTIAN, to
defend the same against the Goths: and he with the rest of his Army went to
the wars against the Burgonians; with which he oftentimes came to blows, and
over came them in some battles. But the Britans, being abandoned by that Legion
which ECIVS sent for out of that Island were so distressed, that if VALENTINIAN
had not sent commandment to ECIVS to send back that legion which he had drawn
out of Britanny, they had been in great distress: but, that legion coming to
their aid, they were sufficiently able for that time to defend and support
themselves in the Emperors service.

While these things passed in Britanny, France and Italy, BONIFACE grew daily
more mighty Boniface rebelled in Africa.
in Africa; who although that he yet showed not himself to be against
VALENTINIAN, but rather seemed to be of his party ever after that he was
troubled by the Usurper JOHN: yet he seemed to be a friend, in such sort, that
he would not leave any part of that which he held. Which, VALENTINIAN and
PLACIDIA perceiving, resolving to sound his intent, they sent to command him to
leave his government to a Successor whom they would appoint, and to come to
them: which, BONIFACE openly refused, and levied soldiers to defend himself
against the Emperor. It is true that some Authors write, that he was deluded by
ECIVS: who sent him word, that if he came into Italy VALENTINIAN would put
him to death; whereof he advertised him as a friend: and he likewise told
PLACIDIA, that BONIFACE would not come, but would rebel; so as they affirm,
that more for fear than for any ill intent, he made himself a Tyrant; of which
opinion is PROCOPIVS. But howsoever the matter went, VALENTINIAN sent presently
two Captains against him, the one called MAHORCIVS or MABORCIVS, the other
called GALLIO or GALBIO; he, who (as I said) went to aid the Britannes with a
Legion: who being arrived in Africa with great power, BONIFACE, Maborcius and
Galbio, captains against Boniface.
who was an excellent man of war, with a very good Army attended their coming;
and, knowing where they landed, went to meet them: and seeing his power equal,
they came to a battle; wherein BONIFACE through his great valor and policy
got the victory, and the Emperors Captains were overthrown and slain,
together with a great number of their soldiers: A battle wherein the tyrant
Boniface prevailed.
and so BONIFACE becam mightier, and a greater Lord than before.

The loss of this battle, and of men of war, greatly increased the strength
of the enemies to the Empire: for, first the Goths followd the wars in Spain
with greater force than before, as well against the Emperors subjects, as
against the Vandals and other Nations inhabiting other parts of that Country.
And the Burgonians began to make a more resolute resistance against ECIVS, than
before they had done. And, above all, the Franks or Francons (a people of
Germany) coming from Franconia (after some Authors) so called after their name,
as truly writes AGATHIVS (although of their Original there be many fabulous
opinions) seeing that ECIVS had enough to do against the Burgonians and the
Goths, and that the Emperor VALENTINIAN had lost his Army in Africa, and that
his cosen THEODOSIUS was busied about matters of the East, they resolved to
invade France: out of which a little before they had been expelled by the
Vandals, Alanes and Sueuians, in the time of the Emperors HONORIVS and The
coming of the Francous or Frenchmen into France.
ARCADIVS; and also by ECIVS, as we have said, when HONORIVS sent him into
Spain. But now, taking the benefit of the time, they came with a very great
power, and entered the Province called Senonensis, and the countries about
Orleance and Paris, and presently took The success of the French.
those countries: MARCOMVNDVS having been before this time their Leader; and
afterward his son FARRAMOND was the first King of the Franks: whom CLODIVS
succeeded, who at that time was their King. And in process of time their power
increased so much, that Gallia from them took the name of France; and the King
thereof is called King of the Franks Gallia called France.
or Frenchmen.

Of these Frenchmen (who in truth were a warlike and valiant Nation) some
French Historiographers recite certain fables; saying, that they descended from
the Troianes, from one of HECTOR'S sons called FRANCVS, and that from him they
took their name. Others say, they had this name for certain franchises,
privileges and immunities they enioied in the time of VALENTINIAN the First.
All which is fabulous and untrue: for, neither had HECTOR any such son, neither
descended they from the Trojans, neither is there any memory of those Franks
but from the time of the Emperor AVRELIANVS, who overthrew them about the The
antiquity of the French.
year of our Lord 260, little more or less. Neither obtained they this name in
the time of the Emperor VALENTINIAN: for, he reigned long afterward, and they
(as I said) were so called 200 years before. But they were then a new people; of
which, CAESAR, STRABO, PLINY, CORNELIUS TACITUS, POMPONIVS MELA, nor PTOLOMY,
made any mention; neither were they then of any name, or known: which if it
had bin otherwise, it had bin impossible but some of those Authors, if not all,
would have left some memorial of them. The Franks might begin to be known a
little before AVRELIANVS time: the rest is wind.

And it is to be understood, that the Kings which in our time reigned in
France, are not descended from this people: for, in the House of France there
have been two or three alterations and The Kings of France des^nded not from
the Francons.
changes. The first was about the year of our Lord 750: at which time King
CHILDERICVS or CHILPERICVS was deposed by Pope ZACHARY, that Kingdom having
continued 330 years in the line of the Franks. And PEPIN, father to CHARLES the
Great, being a Germane born, was chosen King: and so the Franks then lost the
royal Scepter. And in King PEPINS posterity it afterward continued 238 years,
until the year of our Lord 990: at what The changes which have happened in the
royal house of France.
time JEWS the son of LOTHARIVS then reigning was poisoned; and, for that he
had no sons, they sought to have made his brother CHARLES Duke of Lorrain,
their King. But a great and mighty man, whose name was HVGO CAPVTIVS, and born
in that Country, hindered the same; and was of such power, that he took CHARL^S
prisoner, and enjoyed the Kingdom: and in his posterity the Kingdom
continues till this day, the next in blood inheriting for want of heirs males.
So as we are not to hold the Kings of France to be of the lineage of the
Franks, seeing they come not, neither are they descended from them. Heerin do
all good and true Authors agree.

But to return to our history; I say that the Frenchmen entered with such
force and fury, as they took all that that they invaded: which ECIVS
considering, and the wars which the Goths made in Spain, notwithstanding
that he had oftentimes overthrown the Burgonians, Ecius granted pea^ to the
Burgoni^
and was in hope shortly wholly to have subdued them, yet he resolved to
grant them peace: which they humbly sued for, to be the better able to give
succors to other places where need required; but especially to come against
the French, for they were a mighty and valiant people.

In this time whilst that ECIVS was thus troubled to defend the Roman Empire
against so many nations, the new Emperor VALENTINIAN, being still in hope to
recover Africa, with a greater resolution then at any time before, commanded
soldiers to be levied in Italy and Sicilie; and with the aid of men and
ships which his cousin the Emperor THEODOSIUS sent him from Constantinople, he
sent an excellent Captain called SISVLPHVS, against BONIFACE in Africa; who by
PAVLVS DIACONVS is called SIGISVLDVS. And he brought Valentinian sent an army
against Boniface the tyrant in Africa.
such an Army and used such means, that taking land in Africa near unto
Carthage, he grew so strong in that country, as BONIFACE durst not abide his
coming in Carthage, but went into Mauritania Caesariensis, and the marches
thereof, which now contains the kingdoms of Bugia, Argier and Oran, and the
countries bordering upon Spain. And yet not holding ^selfe there in safety,
he sent to treat with GENSERICVS King of the Vandales, who then was in the
province of Betica, called after their name Vandaluzia, to the end he should
come from Spain to relieve him, and he would give him towns and cities to
possess, if he would help him to recover what he had lost.

This embassy came to GENSERICVS when he stood more in need of help, then
able to send any: for the Goths who had many times invaded Spain, taking the
benefit of the time when as all things were turned vpside down, THEODORICVS
being their King and leader, and not contenting themselves with what they held,
and was given them in Spain, entered, making a conquest of the country, with
an intent to make war particularly against the Vandales; wherewith GENSERICVS
was so oppressed, as he was out of all hope to be able to defend himself.
Whereupon, more of necessity, then for any good will, he accepted the offer
made by BONIFACE: and abandoning the province of Vandalozia, he passed the
streights of The Vandales abandon Spain, and sail into Africa.
Gibraltar, as well with his men of war, as of peace, women, children, goods,
and cattle, and seized on the best part he could, of all Mauritania; and
having entered under the name and title of succor, he made himself absolute
Lord, robbing and spoiling the cities and towns with great cruelty. And this
people thus abandoning Andaluzia, was the occasion that THEODORICVS and his
Goths took a great part thereof, and so the Goths continued Kings of Spain,
until the time of the Emperor CHARLES. And although that at sundry times
they had wars and battles with the Alanes, and Sueuians, yet in the end the
power of the Goths prevailed: From this THEODORICVS the first, is descended
the root and stock of the Kings of Spain until this day. The Vandales being
barbarous and misbeleeuers (for they were of the sect of the Arrians) held not
promise nor league with BONIFACE in Africa, who had drawn them thither; but
taking the cities upon the coast which he had given them, they entered and took
the rest in despite of him: wherefore he was constrained through necessity, to
become enemy to those which he had drawn thither for his succor and relief,
seeing they took all. But as he was hated by the Emperor VALENTINIAN, and
could hope for no succors from any where else, as wise and as valiant as he
was, he was not able to make sufficient resistance against The Vandales made
themselves Lords of great part of Africa.
all; but, being too weak, was driven to flee from place to place. But the
Province of Carthage and all the countries thereabout, were valiantly defended
by the General SISVLPHVS, whom the Emperor VALENTINIAN sent thither against
BONIFACE. GENSERICVS King of the Vandals being so mighty in Africa, and finding
SISVLPHVS of power able to make head against him, and fearing (as a wise man)
the mutability of Fortune, sent to entreat a peace with VALENTINIAN, upon
condition that he should suffer him to enjoy that which he had taken from
BONIFACE, seeing that he was not possessed thereof himself.

The Emperor VALENTINIAN considering that ECIVS was much troubled in France
against the French, new inhabitants there, and that there was little assurance
of the truce with the Burgonians; with a desire to recover that which was lost
in Spain (for, he was advertised that his General SEBASTIAN, who was there in
his service against the Alans and Sueuians; Valentinian grants peace to the
Vandal^ in Africa.
had obtained certain victories against them, and that they were joined with
the Goths, so as he was unable alone to defend himself against all) he
resolved to grant the Vandals in Africa that peace they required: and, taking
security and great promises of their King GENSERICVS, the peace was concluded
between them: and VALENTINIAN, relying more on that peace than he ought to have
done, sent for SISVLPHVS, commanding him to come into Italy with Valentinian
was ill advised.
his Army, not leaving any garrison to keep Carthage or Africa. For, his
meaning was, with his whole power to have reinforced ECIVS his Army, and to
have driven out those Nations which were entered France, and to have recovered,
or at least to have preserved, that which he possessed in Spain. SISVLPHVS
being arrived in Italy, GENSERICVS King of the Vandals, as an ambitious
impudent Infidel, went presently to Carthage, and entered the same by force of
Arms; five hundred, fourscore and five years (as PROSPERVS reports) after that
Censericus, king of the Vandals, violatd the peace.
SCIPIO subdued it to the Roman Empire. The like he afterward did by all the
rest; and in the end came to the City of Hippo, wherein S. AUGUSTINE was
Bishop, and therein also (as says POSIDIVS, a Disciple and Familiar of S.
AUGUSTINES) was BONIFACE, who had retired himself thither; and, houlding it
besieged the space of 14 months (God having first taken away S. AUGUSTINE,
being when he died of the age of 76 years) he took it, and put BONIFACE to
death. Heerin PROCOPIVS differs from other Authors; who writes, Gensericus slew
Boniface. The death of S. Augustine.
that he raised his siege without taking the City: and, concerning BONIFACE,
PROSPERVS and PAVLVS DIACONVS relate it after another manner; saying, that he
had his pardon, and went into Italy, where he died of a natural death.

After the taking of Hippo, the power of GENSERICVS daily increased, in such
manner, that he made a full conquest of all Africa: and so the Vandals remained
for a long time absolute Lords thereof. Wherein this cruel King committed so
many cruelties against the Bishops and Priests which held the true faith, and
would not become Arrians as he was, as the like had seldom The cruelties used
by Gensericus King of the Vandals against the true Christians.
been seen; most cruelly putting many of them to death, and banishing others.
The like he used toward all kind of people, committing incredible insolences
and robberies, as many credible Authors affirm; whereof VICTOR wrote a
particular Book, which he entitled the Vandalicall Persecution; whereto I
refer the curious Reader: which Book is newly imprinted and annexed to
EVSEBIVS his Chronicle, and to the tripartite History. After this accident
happened in Africa, VALENTINIAN had daily aduertisements, that the Huns, who
already were become Lords of Austria and Hungary with the marches thereof,
made preparation to come down into France; and to that end had raised a great
number of men of war (TO TILA a most fierce proud man being their King):
against which their designs he daily sent new forces Totila, King of the
Hunnes.
to ECIVS, who followed the ordinary wars of France; by means whereof, ECIVS
could not send any succors to those of the I Will of Britanny, who newly had sent
to him for aid against the Scots and Picts: for which cause the Romans and
Britannes which inhabited Britanny, despairing of any other help, called to
their aid, and solicited with fair promises, the Angles then called Saxons, a
people of Germany, inhabiting near to the seaside: who being allured thereto,
The Britains called the Saxons to their aid.
partly for pay, and partly through the fertility and fruitfulnes of that
Country, came into Britanny under the leading of their Captain HENGISTVS (as
says BEDA); who, assisting the Inhabitants, in such manner subdued their
enemies, that they rebelled no more. But they, afterward growing strong and
ambitious, did the like in Britanny as the Vandals did in Africa; and making
war upon the Country, and subduing the Britannes, made themselves Lords of all
the The Angles or Saxon^ took the I Will of Britannie.
Land, excepting that which is now the Kingdom of Scotland.

In this manner the Empire lost this Island, and the Angles remained Kings
thereof; and afterward it lost the name of Britannie, and by them was called
Anglia, and now England, which Britannie called England.
is as much to say, as the land of the English; and so from henceforth we will
call it. And their power so much increased, that in the time of AVGVSTVLVS, as
we will hereafter declare, they banished and drove the Britannes wholly out of
that country, so as some came over into France, and inhabited that country
which is now called Britannie, where before that time dwelt Britannie in France
why so called.
the Turones and Veneti, which through their coming thither is called
Britannie; But a great number of the Britannies fled to the mountains toward
the North-west now called Wales, where they maintained themselves against all
Inuaders. Thus the dominion of that Island rested in the Kings of the Angles or
English, and has continued in them with great alterations, wars and
troubles, which import not me to recite. Of all which, besides BEDA, and other
ancient and modern authors not a few, POLIDORE VIRGIL, an author of our time,
has written a history, of the beginning and success of all matters in
Britannie or England.

But to return to our story of GENSERICVS King of the Vandales; I say, that
being unsatisfied with Africa, he rigged up a Fleet and sailed into Sicilie,
and took great part thereof, robbing and spoiling the Country: And truly he had
taken all the rest of the Island, if that VALENTINIAN (notwithstanding that he
was very tender and delicate, and in person did nothing, neither would follow
the wars) had not (as it cannot be denied) taken great care and used all
possible diligence to provide what was needful, so far as he was able: who
presently sent commandment to SEBASTIAN, his General in Spain, to transport
himself with the Gensericus w^nt to make war in Sicilia.
greatest power that he was able, into Africa and to make seizure thereof,
while as GENSERICVS was busied in Sicilia. GENSERICVS was aduertized of this
preparation; and understanding that without delay it should be put in
execution, resolved to leave Sicilia, and to return to defend Africa which was
of greater importance, and concerned him more: and so Sicilia escaped out of
his hands. And SEBASTIAN forbear to go into Africa. But he seeing himself of
greater power then before, and that his Lord was oppressed with wars and
crosses (wherein those men are seldom faithful, which in prosperity show
themselves most serviceable) and purposing to make himself Lord of all that
which the Emperor possessed in Spain, was the cause that the Empire lost the
same, and he without obtaining his desire, lost both his life and honor. For
moved by this ambition, as I said, he treated with THEODORICVS, The treason and
death of Sebastian, General for the Emperor Valentinian in Spain.
and the Goths, and with the Alanes also, that they should come to a peace
with him, and that they should divide the country amongst them, without
yielding any acknowledgement to VALENTINIAN. Wherewith in outward show they
seemed to be very well pleased, and yielded to his propositions, which they
observed for certain days: but afterward upon a safe conduct they slew him;
and he being dead who was wont to defend the country, they took all Spain,
excepting some small part of Galicia and Biscai; which by reason of the
inacessible steepnes of the mountains and the valor of the inhabitants,
defended themselves for a season.

During these events in Spain and Africa, ECIVS never desisted from warring
against the French, Burgonians and other nations in France: and VALENTINIAN,
leaving all things in the best order that he could in Italy, took his passage
for Graecia, and went to Constantinople to see Valentinian w^nt to
Constantinople, and married with Eudoxa the Emperor Theodosius his daughter.
his cousin the Emperor THEODOSIUS; whose Empire as it pleased God was then
better in peace and in more quietness then the West. At this meeting
VALENTINIAN married with EVDOXA, THEODOSIUS his daughter, and then presently
returned into Italy, to provide for the defense of that which remained, and to
recover what was lost. Whereat the Emperor THEODOSIUS much greuing, sent him
two Captains called ARIOBINDVS and ANSILA, with good troops of soldiers, to
the end that they should reconquer Africa; Ariobindus and Ansila Captains sent
by Theodosius.
being much discontented with GENSERICVS King of the Vandales, for the breach
of the peace, and for the great cruelties which he had committed in that
Country.

These Captains and soldiers sailed into Sicilia, from thence to pass into
Africa: but they so detracted the time and prolonged their departure in such
manner, as they spoiled the whole Island of Sicilia, and it pleased not God that
they should proceed on their journey. For ATTILA a mighty King of the Hunnes,
which of long time had purposed to make himself Lord of the Empire, having
besides Hungary, had made a conquest of many Cities in Germany, drawing to him
for pay and by fair promises and subtle means, an infinite number of people,
part of which were called Turlingi, Tungri, Ostrogothes, and Marcomanni, and
other barbarous Attila invaded the Greek Empire.
northerly Nations, which like swarms of Bees came to him in that time: which
(as PAVLVS DIACONVS recounteth) determined to invade the Empire of
Constantinople, knowing that the best and greatest part of the men of war
thereof, were gone with the two Captains aforesaid into Sicilia. At this his
entry he took many Cities in Thracia, and in Slauonia; and made so great
spoil in that Country, as the Emperor in great haste sent for ARIOBINDVS and
ANSILA, who with a great Army (as I said) were in Sicilia, to the end that
they should come and defend the Country; together with other great forces which
he had commanded to be levied. And so he began the war, and to oppose himsefe
against the force and fury of ATTILA; whereto this was a great help, that at
that instant there began to grow some suspicion and jealousy between ATTILA
and his brother BEDA, and envy and emulation between the Kings which came with
him; by reason whereof, the war was not so terrible as before, although they
still did much harm. THEODOSIUS Emperor of the East being in this care, and
at wars with the mighty ATTILA, and his Cousin VALENTINIAN in such trouble,
as is before said, that the Vandales and their King held Africa, the Goths and
Alanes Spain, his General ECIVS in France, held war with so many nations,
and therein passed so many adventures, as they would be too long to recite.

THEODOSIUS applying himself in Constantinople, with great care and diligence
to send Theodosius the Second died of the plague.
greater relief and forces against ATTILA, was stricken with the plague,
whereof quickly he died. Whose death was generally lamented: for he was a good,
pitiful, very virtuous and Christian Prince; as it plainly appears by many
letters, which at this day are extant, written to him by LEO Bishop of Rome,
who lived in his time. It is written of him, that he was very devout and
religious, and spent much time in prayer; and that he fasted two days in the
The religion and virtue of Theodosius^
week, and much honored the Church and the Clergy.

Finally, he left nothing undone which a Christian was bound to do, neither
what was convenient for an Emperor. He was very studious and addicted to
letters, and to Philosophy, and made great Libraries, principally of the holy
Scriptures. He was so pitiful, that being one day reprehended for giving so
many malefactors their lives, he answered* I would to God that I could raise
again those which I have put to death. In conclusion, he was accomplished An
example of clemency.
with all virtues, and free from all vices, so as he was not subject unto any:
only he was noted to be somewhat mutable and hasty. He was married to
EVDOXIA, a very godly and discreet woman, the daughter of LEONCIVS, whom he
married for her virtue only: she was called, before that she was married to
him, ATANAIS, and with her marriage her name was changed. For this his goodness
and virtue, it pleased God that his reign continued two and forty years:
fourteen or fifteen being a child, under the Protection of the King of
Persia, in the time of his Uncle HONORIVS, as is already written; and seven
and twenty with his cousin VALENTINIAN, and for the most part he enjoyed the
Empire of the East in peace and quiet; and died being about fifty years old:
for in a manner as soon as he was borne, he inherited the Empire. He departed
this world, according to MATTHEW PALMERVS computation in his additions to
EVSEBIVS his Chronicle, and after PROSPERVS, in the year of our Lord, four
hundred, fifty and three; and after some others, four hundred and fifty; and
after the most common opinion, in the seven and twentieth year of the reign of
the Emperor VALENTINIAN, who then reigned in Italy, and lived in the city of
Rome.

THE LIFE OF VALENTINIAN, THE SECOND OF THAT NAME, AND THE THREE AND FIFTITH
ROMAN Emperor; and of his Brother in Law, MARTIANVS.
THE ARGUMENT.
VAlentinian remaining alone in the Empire of the West, tired with manywarres,
and seeing that Attila molested the eastern parts; to please his sister
Pulcheria, and to the end that those parts should not remain without an
Emperor, he gave the charge thereof to an old man called Martianus, who was a
man of great judgment, and very wise. In which time Attila resolving to give
over his enterprise against Constantinople, the siege being long and very
difficult, he came toward the western parts, with a determination to pass
into France and into Italy: Against whom Valentinian made Ecius his General,
who was still his General in France; having first concluded a peace with
Gensericus King of the Uandales, wherein to the new Emperor old Martianus
entered. This Ecius daunted Attila much, and made him know (to the great loss
of his men) how valiant a man he was; so as he compelled him to fly. For which
victory Valentinian began to have Ecius in jealousy, that he had an intent to
have made himself Emperor, and to that end had some intelligence with Attila,
seeing that he did not wholly ruin him when he might: wherefore he caused him
to be slain, which was the cause of the ruin of Italy, and of the Western
Empire. For Attila (understanding that Ecius was dead) returned into Italy,
which Valentinian inioied in peace: and being invaded, none of the Emperors
set his hand to relieve it, being unable to levy any sufficient Army to
withstand the enemy. Whereupon having taken Aquileia, and coming toward Rome,
at the entreaty of Pope Leo, he spared that City, and so leaving Italy, he
returned into Hungary: where marrying with the sister of the Emperor
Valentinian, upon his wedding day he gorged himself so full with wine and
meat, as in the night (nature being unable to support so great acharge,
casting up abundance of blood) he died in his bed. Whose death yielded son^
liberty to the Empire, notwithstanding that the West remained in a manner
ruined, whereof grew the greatness of the Empire of the East, and of
Constantinople. And one year after the death of Attila, Valentinian was also
slain by a soldier, whose name was Tansillus, both to take revenge for the
death of his Captain Ecius, as urged by the hatred of one Maximus, whose wise
Valentinian had forced, when he had reigned Emperor thirty years.

TRuly I know not whether the reading of that which I have already related and
am presently to write, shall make the reader so much to wonder, as it does me
which write the same. For mine own part, I A consideration of the calamities
of these times.
dare justify, that no wars, alterations or changes of Kingdoms, of all
that ever I have read in ancient or modern Histories, seem worthy of so
great admiration as those of these times, whereof we are now to treat. Neither
do I remember that I ever admired more at any thing then at these; considering
the great and many calamities of so many provinces and cities, the battles
and effusion of blood, the alterations and falls of estates, the diversity of
people and nations which flocked together in them. And above all, I do most
wonder at the infinite numbers of people which came out of the northren parts,
so as it seemed the earth did flow with armed men. And likewise to consider,
what rage, fury, pride or ambition (for I can give it no other name) might
move so many sundry nations, to abandon their own countries, to ruin and
conquer the world* not being urged, or moved thereto by any offense or injury
received. But it was the just judgment and permission of our Lord God, whose
counsels are unsearchable, and whose providence cannot be perceived by the
light of any humane eye. Let us give humble thanks unto his divine majesty,
that although, for our sins, he suffers wars and combustions in these our
times; yet they are not so general, neither so miserable and cruel, as those
which they endured in that age, as the reader may plainly perceive by that
which is already, and hereafter shall be related, which passed in this manner.

The state of Italy and of the West, where VALENTINIAN reigned, standing in
such manner, as is said, THEODOSIUS dying in Constantinople, leaving never a
son to succeed him, and but one sister, whose name was PVLCHERIA, a wise and
worthy woman, who as she Pulcheria sister to Theodosius.
bare a great sway in the government, and considering the wars she had with
the Goths, and in what state the whole Empire of both East and West stood, she
endeavored to procure that some excellent man, both in peace and war, might
be chosen Emperor, whether he descended of imperial blood or no. And it
seemed that there was not any man, in whom more noble and excellent parts did
concur, then in an old Captain called MARTIANVS: who although he were but of
mean parentage, yet with his age he was of great experience, and a very
valiant and excellent Captain.

PVLCHERIA, and those which were of her counsel having taken this resolution,
concealed the death of THEODOSIUS for certain days, until they had taken such
order as was requisite concerning the election of MARTIANVS. And
notwithstanding that he was old, PVLCHERIA took him for her husband, to give
the greater assurance and authority to his Empire, and so he was joyfully
received by all men for their sovereign Lord and Emperor. Martianus chosen
Emperor of Constantinople.
And VALENTINIAN likewise, who then resided in Rome, was well pleased
therewith; as well for his deserts, as also for that it was done by PVLCHERIA,
of whose virtue and worthiness there was a general good opinion. ZONARAS an
ancient Author, whom some call JOHANNES MONACVS, writes (as JOHN CVSPINIAN
relates) that PVLCHERIA married with MARTIANVS to give the greater authority
and reputation to his Empire: but first she took security of him, that they
should both live chaste; for she was a maid, and had resolved to keep her
virginity inviolable: and that MARTIANVS accepted thereof, and they both
observed the same, which is a notable example. As soon as MARTIANVS was A
notable example of chastity
made Emperor of the East, the first thing he did, was to make provision to
reinforce the Army which THEODOSIUS had left, and to send against ATTILA fresh
soldiers and a new General. And writers affirm, that if ATTILA had continued
the war which he began against Constantinople, he had without doubt come to
confusion, by reason of the mutinies and contentions which began among his men
of war: which that politic and mighty King comprehending, Attila translated
his war from the East into the West.
and also for that (as they say) a great Captain of his counseled him to
leave that conquest, and to go from thence to make wars in the rest of
Germany, and afterward in France, Spain, and Italy, where VALENTINIAN ruled:
knowing that the Empire was divided and usurped by diverse nations, and
therefore was very easy to be conquered; He resolved therefore to go into
Hungary, where by treason he slew his brother BEDA, who together with him was
equal King, for that he suspected that BEDA was the cause of the dissension
and Attila slew his brother Beda by treason.
discord; to the end to make himself absolute Lord: so great was his pride,
cruelty and ambition. After this, giving good pay to his old soldiers, and
raising new, he grew to be so mighty, that the Kings and Captains of the
Ostrogothes, the Heruli, and other Nations which in the beginning came to aid
and assist him as a friend, did now serve and obey him as their Lord. And
Authors affirm, that he raised an Army of five hundred thousand men which were
soldiers levied Attila his great power and army.
by him, and adventurers (so great was his fame and reputation at that time):
with which Army coming out of Hungary, Austria and the confines thereof,
which were in his subjection, together with many other countries which he had
taken in the last troubles, wherein the Empire was brought so low, he
presently began to make a conquest of Germany, and took the most part
thereof, and the best cities, as Colein, Strausburg, Spire, Constance, Basil,
and many other, making all possible haste to come into France and Italy,
imagining that VALENTINIAN should not be able to protect and defend the same.
Wherewith (such was his pride) he pretended not to rest contented, but to make
himself sole Monarch of the whole world; through all which his name was greatly
feared: and so he entitled himself King of the Huns, of the Medes, Attila's
title.
of the Goths, and of the Danes, the terror to the world, and the scourge of
God.

PRISCVS an Historiographer writes (who, being Secretary to the Emperor
VALENTINIAN, was sent Ambassador to him into Scythia, before his coming into
Hungary) that he Attila's ^odily constitution.
was but a little man of stature, and had a large broad breast, a great head,
little eyes, but very quick, a very little thin beard, and some gray hairs, a
flat nose, and was of a very swarth complexion; and that in his going and looks
he showed the pride and greatness of his mind. He greatly delighted in the
wars, and was both politic and valiant, although he did not often use to
fight in person; but reserved himself for greater occasions. He was mild and
easy to be pleased by those which humbly required pardon, and submitted
themselves unto him; and held and maintained his faith and word, and defended
those which yielded themselves into his protection but, with all this, he was
most proud, and desirous to make himself Lord over all others. VALENTINIAN the
Emperor of Rome, understanding ATTILA his success, with his resolution and
desire, of whom he had long stood in fear, did the uttermost of his power to
make head against so great force and fury. The first provision he made, was,
To conclude a peace with GENSERICVS King of the Vandals, who was now King of
all Africa, to have his back in safety from so mighty an enemy. This peace was
very acceptable to GENSERICVS; and, Valentinian made peace with Gensericus,
King of the Vandals, and of Africa.
as to a thing which he greatly desired, he gladly yielded: for, at that time
there was great dissension and rebellion among his Captains and men of war.
This peace was concluded betwixt them, upon condition that the King should
resign certain provinces and cities to VALENTINIAN; and MARTIANVS the new
Emperor of the East was included in the same.

This being ended, ECIVS, who followed the ordinary wars in France, was made
General against ATTILA, for that he was the best and most expert Captain in
his time; whom Ecius made General against Attila.
ATTILA had not forborne to have corrupted with many fair promises, putting him
in mind of former friendship: but, for all he could do, he gave no ear to him.

ECIVS, understanding that ATTILA with his Army had already passed the river of
Rhine, and knowing himself to have no sufficient Army to make head against
him, notwithstanding Ecius sought the fr^endship of Theodoricus King of the
Goths, and of Spain.
that many new supplies were comn to his aid, he therefore by all means and
devices sought the friendship of THEODORICVS, whom some call THEODOREDVS King
of the Goths (who possessed the greatest part of Spain, and a great part of
France, who was a mighty Prince and very valiant, and at that time lay in
Toulouse) to induce him to aid and assist the Romans: who frankly promised,
and faithfully performed the same; which the Emperor VALENTINIAN had also
before attempted. And although that ATTILA by his Letters had sued to the
contrary, promising him assurance of his estate; yet he (conceiving that,
ATTILA prevailing, he would as well seek to defeat him afterward, as he did
now the Romans) raised his whole power, and drew near to ioin with ECIVS; and
made the Alanes and Sueuians, who lived in Spain, to do the like. And, with the
like persuasion, ECIVS concluded a peace with MEROBEVS The kings which joined
with Ecius against Attila.
King of the French, and with GVANDARICVS King of the Burgonians, who of
custom were his ordinary enemies; and with the Saxons and other Nations: all
which, more for fear, and through the hatred which they bare to ATTILA, than
for any good will to the Romans, resolved to take part with ECIVS; whose
wisdom and discretion was so great, that they all willingly joined with him:
yet for all this, ATTILA entered France with such power and furythat without
finding any resistance he took the greatest part thereof before that ECIVS was
in order to fight with him. But while that he made this spoil and conquest in
France, the Kings and people aforesaid joined with ECIVS in the fields called
Catalanes, on the borders of Th^louse: so as he had one of the greatest and
best Armies that ever was seen, as well for number, as goodness of men, and
his party was held to be of no less power than that of ATTILA. Wherefore the
one army drew near to the other, and between them began a most cruel
war: wherein (as IORNANDES affirms) dyed fourscore and ten thousand men,
before they came to a general battle, whereof we will speak presently;
either party desiring it, but chiefly ATTILA, who held his power invincible,
and so all nations attended the issue thereof: for it seemed that on the
victory depended the command and Empire of the whole world. And to say the
truth, at this encounter were gathered together the best, and the greatest part
of martial men of all Europe, being almost a million of people: wherefore it
shall not be amiss that we describe this battle more distinctly then we do
others; seeing that it cannot be said, that there was ever seen any that was
greater or more bloody. First then, there fought there in proper person above
ten mighty and warlike kings of the one side, and of the other. Of ATTILA The
wars between Ecius and Attila*
his party was ARDARICVS, king of a people called Gepidi, and ANDARICVS,
VALAMIR, and THEODOMIR, brethren, and kings of the Goths, or Ostrogothes, and
the King of the Marcomanni, and others whose names I find not written, and the
people already named which were without number.

Of ECIVS his party, was THEODORICVS (who was of greater power then any of the
rest) king of the Goths, Visogothes, and of Spain, and his son THORISMVND,
MEROBEVS, King of the Francques, GVANDARICVS King of the Burgonians,
SANGVIBANVS King of the Alanes, and the Captains and kings of diverse other
nations, which took his part, besides the Roman Legions and Captains of the
Empire. But ATTILA made small account of all these: For he had formerly
overthrown the greatest part of them; so as nothing made him to fear or doubt
of the victory, but only the discretion and valor of ECIVS, who was their
General. Wherefore, as he was an Infidel and superstitious, he commanded his
soothsayers and wizards to be called together, to the end that using their
enchantments and sorceries, they should tell him what success he should have,
and how he should speed in the battle: and they sacrificing their beasts,
told him, that he should lose the victory, but that the greatest Captain among
his enemies should die therein. Whereto giving credit (although that it grieved
him to think that he should be overthrown, imagining that ECIVS should die)
he sought and procured it: For, he made account that if ECIVS were dead,
although he lost the day, yet he would raise new supplies, and prevail against
the rest, and so he disposed himself to fight. And as ECIVS and his partakers
desired the same, the two Armies came so near together, that there rested
nothing but to come to blows, and so they fought: which as PROCOPIVS,
IORDANVS, ALABIVS, PAVLVS DIACONVS, and others write, was in this manner.

Both parties being desirous to fight, the one Army being in the morning by
break of day in sight of the other, both Generals commanded to marshall and
raunge their troops, and to order their battailions, for to charge their
enemies; but as their numbers were infinite (notwithstanding all the diligence
and expedition that could be used by either party) it was past noone How
Attila set his Army in order.
before they could set their men in order. ATTILA with all his carts and wagons
which he brought for his carriage, made a kind of fort or sconce upon the side
of a hill, wherein he put the women and disarmed people of his Army, and of
his whole Army made three battailions, reserving to himself with his
Scythians and Hunnes, the maine or middle battle. And ARDAR^CVS King of the
Gepidi with his countrie-men, and many others in whom he reposed greatest
trust, led the battle on the right hand: and to ANDARICVS, VALAMIR, and
THEODOMIR, brethren, kings of the Ostrogothes, with their own people and their
friends, he gave the charge and leading of the battailion on the left hand.

And in this order he marched against ECIVS: who had somewhat prolonged the
time, by reason of a great mistrust which he had conceived of SANGVIBANVS King
of the Alanes, doubting that he would have gone over to ATTILA: for he was
advertised that there had been some treaty between them; wherein ATTILA granted
to resign to him a City, wherein he had lien, and which was taken from him.
Wherefore ranging his Army into three How Ecius marshalled his troops.
squadrons also, in the middle squadron, he set the said SANGVIBANVS, placing
in the auaunt, and arierward of the troop, the most valiant men of the Roman
Legions, to the end that he should not choose but fight. And to THEODORICVS with
his son THORISMVND with his Goths and Spaniards, he gave the leading of the
squadron on the right hand; to the end that they should encounter the Gepidi,
which were a mighty people. And he took to himself the leading of the left
wing, taking with him MEROBEVS, King of the French, with his people, and the
Burgonians, whose King with the greatest part of his forces were slain in an
encounter which happened the night before this battle. With these troops he
placed himself against the Ostrogothes (the right wing of the enemy) changing
it in this manner, for that he imagined, that if the Visogothes which were of
his side, should have been placed against the Goths which were of the other
side (for that they were countrie-men, and neighbors) they would not have
charged with such fury as he desired. In this order these two migktie Armies
marched the one against the other, with incredible courage and assured
confidence, the one to overthrow the other. And so there began between them,
the most cruel A battle fought between Ecius and Attila, the most cruel
that ever was fought in the world.
and bloody battle that ever was. For, although it may be said, that in other
battles there has been so great a concourse of men, as they could not well
be numbered; yet they were not such men, as these which now fought; or that it
was so obstinate and cruelly fought, with the slaughter of so many men and
effusion of so much blood as this was, I do not remember that I ever read. For
therein fought the Flower (for valor and courage) of almost all the Nations of
the World: As, the Romans, the Scythians, the Hunnes, the Goths, the French,
the Germans, the Spaniards, the Gauls, the Burgonians, and of each of these a
very great number: So as in my judgment, this may be recorded for the greatest
and most fierce battle that ever was. The first attempt was to get a little
Hill between the two Armies, which either of the two Generals thought requisite
to be taken, thereby to have the advantage of the other. ATILA sent certain
troops to take that Hill: but to that effect, thither already THORISMVND, son
to THEODORICVS, was come with his people, which were Goths and Spaniards; so
as these by this Hill, and all the rest presently gave the charge: and the
slaughter, the cries, and the sound of the blows with swords and lances, was
such, as it seemed the firmament had rent in sunder; so as no man could do any
other but fight. And they all fought with such fury, as there was not any
advantage seen from none till night, for so long it endured. What particular
exploits were therein performed, cannot certainly be known: for the
Historiographers (which treat thereof) affirm, that among so great a multitude
of people, it could not be seen nor judged how things passed; for every one
applied himself to strike, and to kill, and there was not any squadron or
troop that stood still, to look on. But it is certain, and they all affirm
the same, that a little Brook, which ran where this cruel battle was
fought, grew so high with the blood of those which were slain, as it used to
do after some great rain had fallen. And the streams of blood were so great,
as they carried the dead bodies down the valley. A strange sight.
This ought not to be held for incredible, seeing the number of the dead was so
great, as all authors agree it exceeded the number of one hundred and
fourscore thousand men; and they all lay dead in a small circuit of ground.
For in this fight there was no retrait, nor running away, but all dyed
fighting. In this manner, in the heat and fury of the fight, the night came
upon them, and parted them, but with great and apparent advantage on ECIVS his
side; for ATTILA his troops began to give ground, notwithstanding that he
used all possible means to have maintained the fight. And THEODORICVS, King of
the Goths and of Spain, charging too far in amongst his enemies, was
slain. Some say, that his horse fell with him, and so Theodoricus King of the
Goths slain.
he was trodden to death by his own men; and that his son THORISMOND falling
into the like danger, was rescued by his people. ATTILA, perceiving the defect
and weakness which was in his people, in the best order that he could retired
to his fort or sconce, which he had made of his carts and wagons, and therein
fortified himself that night, with those which repaired to him from the
battle (for some were fled other ways) there expecting the next days
fortune. ECIVS went up and down the fields, as the Lord thereof, gathering his
people together and setting them in order; to the end, that their disorder
should not encourage the enemy: for by reason of the multitude of people, and
the darkness of the night, it could not certainly be said who had the victory;
and so they passed that night without any certain knowledge whether THEODORICVS
were alive or dead. The next morning by the break of day the victory was
apparent: for ATTILA durst not come forth of his camp; and so ECIVS A great
victory obtained by Ecius against Attila.
and his soldiers had the spoil of the field, and were Lords thereof. The
Armies were so near together, as notwithstanding that ATTILA held himself for
overthrown, yet he neither durst neither could retire: wherefore, he resolved
to fortify his camp and to defend himself therein. And as THORISMVND found
his father dead in the field, he with his Goths and Spaniards was so extremely
enraged, as he purposed to have assaulted ATTILA in his camp, to revenge the
death of his father, by his ruin. For all Writers affirm that he might have
done it, if ECIVS would have consented thereto, and have given him such aid as
he might have done. And they also write, that ATTILA was in such despair, when
he understood that they meant to assault him, seeing the small forces he had
to defend him, that he resolved rather to kill himself then to com into his
enemies hands. But the wise and valiant captain ECIVS, knowing both the
ambition and power of THORISMVND, THEODORICVS his son, and how mighty the
Goths were, was in great doubt, that they having wholly defeated ATTILA and
his Army, would have converted their Arms against the Romans, who would have
been unable to defend themselves against them: and therefore it was most
profitable (the time considered) to give ATTILA means to escape, to the end
that the Goths and French should not be freed from the fear of him. And to
that end, without discovering his conceit, he counseled THORISMVND, that
setting all other matters aside, he should go to take possession of his
kingdom of Spain, before that the Alanes, the Sueuians, or any other Nations
should cause any alteration, or rebel against him: And that before this, he
should not attempt any other enterprise; for it was uncertain whether he
should be able to bring his purpose to effect. THORISMVND deeming this to be
the counsel of a father, and a friend (as indeed it was profitable for him)
accepted his advice, and without any delay presently departed toward his
countries; as well those which he held in France, as those in Spain. And ECIVS,
for the consideration aforesaid, forbear to assault ATTILA'S Camp: and so he
and the kings which were with him had means to escape, and abandoned what he
held in France. But the counsel of this great Captain (although that to this
effect it seemed profitable) afterward fell out clean contrary: for it was
the cause of his own death, and of great miseries (as hereafter shall be
declared) to the Roman Empire.

ATTILA being in this manner gone out of France, by long iournies, as a man
vanquished, went with his Army into Hungary, and the countries there adjacent,
of which he was in peaceable possession; where relieuing his people, he rested
certain days. From whence (they say) the Hungarians are descended, deriuing
their name from the Hunnes and another nation called Catti or Gatti; and so
they were called Hungary, and Pannonia is now called Hungaria; although that
neither in Hungary, neither in other Provinces are observed the limits and
bounds which in ancient times they held. For as there have been great changes
and alterations in the names; so have there been likewise as great in their
limits and confines. But seeing this concerns me not, without producing any
example, this shall suffice for an advertisement to the Reader.

ECIVS (having obtained so great a victory, leaving all that which in France
the Romans enjoyed, and ATTILA had possessed, and the French and Burgonians in
amity, and friends) he came to Rome, where the Emperor VALENTINIAN expected
the issue of the battle. This victory freed all Italy from fear, and
purchased to ECIVS the greatest honor possible; he entering Rome with great
solemnity and incredible joy of all sorts of people: within few days after (as
the most of the Authors which I follow do write) VALENTINIAN began to suspect,
Ecius ^ad in suspicion by Valentinian.
that he had an intent to have made himself Emperor, and that he had
intelligence with ATTILA; The suspicion growing (as he said) for that ECIVS
after the battle did not wholly ruin ATTILA. And as EVTROPIVS particularly
relates, VALENTINIAN was so highly incensed against ECIVS by MAXIMUS a
Gentleman of Rome, as he caused him to be slain. Which (they say) MAXIMUS did
to the end to be revenged of VALENTINIAN The death of Ecius.
(as afterward he was) for rauishing his wife; which injury he dissembled,
and made no show to understand, until that he had opportunity to effect that
which afterward he put in execution, which was to kill the Emperor; which he
never durst attempt so long as ECIVS lived. ECIVS being slain at this time
(although that PAVLVS DIACONVS seems to be of opinion that it was afterward)
with him ended the whole force and power of the Western Empire; whereof PROXIMVS
a discreet and Noble Roman gentleman gave VALENTINIAN to understand. Who
being demanded by the Emperor (as PROCOPIVS The saying of Proximus to the
Emperor Valentinian.
writes) whether he had not followed the best and most profitable counsel, by
putting ECIVS to death, answered: whether the Emperor has put ECIVS to death
with or without reason, I dare not determine; but this I dare affirm, that by
killing him, thou have with thy own left hand cut off thy right. Sure, he was a
true Prophet, as the History hereafter will make manifest.

While these things passed in the Western parts, the Emperor MARTIANVS
reigned in great prosperity in Graecia and the East: for he was a very wise
man, and a lover of peace; and so he maintained and preserved the same with the
Persians and other Nations, without losing any jot of of his confines: but
rather in all treaties, had ever the advantage, and got ground. He sent aid
and men of war to serve VALENTINIAN in the wars with ATTILA: so as MARTIAN
lived in prosperity and well beloved. But returning to our Western History
(thus it went) As soon as ATTILA understood that ECIVS was dead (the fear of
whom made him to contain himself within Hungary and Germany) he resolved
without any delay, setting all other matters apart, to come against Italy,
which only being in peace, held for VALENTINIAN. And coming down with a very
mighty Army, with some of those Kings before named, which after that he was
driven out of France, he had joined with him, he descended with great fury,
taking by the way all the Cities and countries as he passed, putting all to
fire and sword. And in this manner he entered poor Italy, through the Province
of the Venetians now called Friuli, robbing and spoiling all places: where
there came against him a Captain Attila his coming into Italy. Forum Iulij.
sent by VALENTINIAN with a great and mighty Army, with which ATTILA fought a
very cruel battle: but the Imperial General and Army were overthrown,
with great loss and slaughter of men; and so ATTILA marching forwards, took
many Cities: which put all Italy in such fear, that the inhabitants in no
part thereof, held themselves in safety from the power and rage of ATTILA. And
this his coming and the fear of him, was The beginning of the city of Venice.
the cause of the first beginning of the mighty and famous City of Venice,
which in those days begun to be built (according to the most part of the
best Historiographers) by people which flying from the rage of ATTILA, reduced
themselves to dwell in certain little Islands, with their wives, children, and
goods, where that City now stands, imagining that there they might live in
safety: and there fortifying themselves in the best manner they could (for
ATTILA his Army did consist of land-men only) afterward they resolved to
continue there, notwithstanding that the fear was past, and began to set
orders concerning their government and justice. And having good success, they
grew in process of time to such greatness, that in a manner they became
absolute Lords of the Sea, and gat many Islands, kingdoms and Noble Cities, and
are until these our days the honor and credit of all Italy, and preserve
their liberty Some are of opinion that it is called Venetia of these words
Ve^ite qua, used by those which were first there, to induce the rest which were
on land to come thither.
inuiolate, calling their City Venetia, after the name of the Province from
whence they came, which was the maine Land upon the shore side near to Venice:
which, for that it appertains not to my History, I will pass over with
silence, referring the Reader to BLONDVS, SABELLICVS, and other Authors which
treat thereof at large.

ATTILA, having taken all the country behind him, besieged the City of
Aquileia, which at that time was of great power; whereinto, besides the
inhabitants, and such as were borne therein, entered many Romans, and other of
the Emperors soldiers which escaped from the battle wherein their General
was overthrown: and they so valiantly defended the same, that ATTILA besiged
it three years, and could not take it, holding it for a great dishonor The
siege of Aqui^a.
to raise his siege before he had it: in which time he did much harm in all the
country round about, with his men of war, and there were many conflicts
between the besiegers and the besieged.

During the time of this long siege, GENSERICVS king of the Vandales made
himself peaceable Lord of all Africa. And the French with MAROBEVS their king
grew mighty in France, and enlarged their Dominion, and the Burgonians in the
country now called Burgundy did the like. And the Goths, Alanes, and Sueuians
in like manner in Spain, and in such part of France as is before said. And the
Emperor VALENTINIAN never came to relieve Aquileja, and as little did
MARTIANVS the Emperor of Constantinople, either through cowardice,
retchlesness, ill government, or want of power sufficient for such an
enterprise, standing in fear of ATTILA and his power, who at the end of three
years that he had held the same besieged (resolutely assaulting it upon a day
with his whole Army without any intermission, withdrawing such as were weary
and tired, and setting others in their places) he took it by force; and having
sacked it, and put all to the Sword which he found therein, he made it to
Aquileia taken and razed by Attila.
be cast to the ground, not leaving any one house or building that might be
inhabited, it having been one of the richest and most Noble Cities of that
time: for Aquileia, and Rauenna, after Rome, were the greatest and most
populous in that age.

ATTILA, having thus like a savage barbarian ruined Aquileia, he marched
forwards with great expedition, and within very few days, took many excellent
Cities and Towns; among which, were Mantua, Brescia, Cremona, Bergamo, and all
their confines. The like he did by Milan Cities taken in Italy by Attila.
and Pauia, and other neighbor towns: and went to the City of Rauenna, which
for that the Emperors held their courts there, was the most famous City in
all Italy, which yielded to him without any assault. From thence he marched
into Tuscane, with a determination to have made no stay until he came to Rome,
and wholly to have ruined the same, and so in speeches he gave it out. At that
time LEO the first of that name was Pope, who at the request of the Emperor
VALENTINIAN, accompanied with many Senators, went to ATTILA, entreating him for
pities sake to spare Rome, and not to destroy that City: which entreaty he
made with such discretion and wisdom, and it pleased God to give such
efficacy to his words, as notwithstanding that ATTILA was the most cruel and
inexorable Prince in the World; yet the Popes supplication did so much prevail
with him, that he not only gave over his journey to Rome, but resolved to
depart out of Italy, and to return to his ancient seat in Hungary,
requiring first a great sum of money to be levied upon the City for a sign
and acknowledgement of Sovereignty. And the state of Rome was now come to this
point, as they durst not make denial of any thing that ATTILA required at
their hands; and (withal) they held it for a very great good hap, that ATTILA
would forbear to put his cruel determination in execution.

Some Authors have written (whether truly or fasly, I dare not maintain) that
all men wondering at this sudden alteration of ATTILA his purposes, and some of
his favorites asking him the cause thereof; he answered, that he durst not deny
the Popes demand: For, whilst he stood talking with him, he thought that he
perceived two old men standing behind A great miracle, if true.
him, with unsheathed swords in their hands, threatening to kill him, if he
failed to perform what he required; and that he therefore durst do no other,
which was held for a miracle.

After this agreement ATTILA returned into Hungary, where he was held for the
greatest and most powerful Prince of the World, and was so much feared, that
MARTIANVS the Emperor of Constantinople sent to sue for peace, and therewith
sent him presents and money to obtain the same. And he to the contrary sent
to the Emperor VALENTINIAN, requiring him to send him his sister HONORIA for
his wife; threatening, that if he sent her not he would again return into
Italy, and destroy Rome. Whereto VALENTINIAN agreed by the consent of his
sister; For she, by means of an Eunuch, had written to him, and received
letters from him, procuring him to require her to wife whatsoever happened; which
she did, for that her brother constrained her to live a maid, locked up to her
disgrace, and to the dishonor of the Emperor her brother: and he fearing
ATTILAES displeasure, sent him his sister, Attila had Valentinians sister to
wi^e.
according to his request, and he took her to wife, together with others which
as a Barbarian he held. This his marriage was the cause of his death: For he,
holding a royal feast, and banquet at his wedding, drank and ate that day so
much: that waxing drowzie, and being overcome with sleep, he laid him down,
musling or groueling upon his face, and nature being oppressed with what he had
eaten and drunk, such abundance of blood gushed out at his nose, The death of
Attila.
and with such vehemence, that in the space of an hour he was choked
therewith, and so he ended, shedding his own blood, who had caused streams
and rivers of humane blood to flow; and had slain a greater number of men, and
used greater cruelty then any King or Captain that ever was before him.

The death of ATTILA gave liberty to some Kings and Nations which were under
him, and had served him in all his wars, and there ensued great wars
between them and his sons. The end of the Empire in the West.
But the Empire could never recover the Provinces and Countries which it had
lost in Germany, in France, in Spain, in England, and in Africa; although that
in France and Spain it held some part: yet it so much declined and fell to so
mean estate, as from henceforth we shall write of the Emperors and such
accidents as happened in Italy, as additions annexed to the Empire of the East,
principally naming the Emperors of Constantinople, wherein consisted the
strength and power of the ancient Empire. For, after five or six Emperors, and
some of them tyrants (as we will shortly declare) AVGVSTVLVS being the last of
them; for the space of three hundred and thirty years the western Empire was
wholly lost, and that which in Italy remained was subject to the Emperors of
Constantinople, who ruled the same by their Governors (called Exa^chi) until
the time of Pope LEO the third, in which time through the negligence and
baseness of the Greek Emperors, the Imperial seat was transported to the
West, as when time comes we will specify.

The next year after the death of ATTILA, the Emperor VALENTINIAN was slain
in Rome, by the secret practice and treason (as it was afterward known) of
MAXIMUS: and The death of the Emperor Valentinian.
he which executed this murder was a valiant soldier, who had served that
brave Captain ECIVS, whose name was TRANSILA, who did it in revenge of the
death of his Captain, And so ended VALENTINIAN after that he had reigned
thirty years; five and twenty in the company of his father in law
THEODOSIUS the lesser, and five with MARTIANV^ the Emperor of Constantinople,
who by reason of his death remained sole Emperor, which happened in the year of
our Lord (af^ most writers) four hundred six and fifty. He left not any son
that might succeed him, but two daughters by his wife EVDOXIA.

THE LIFE OF MARTIANVS, ONLY OF THAT NAME, AND FOUR AND FIFTITH EMPEROVR of
ROME.
PResently upon the death of the Emperor VALENTINIAN in Rome, as PROCOPIVS,
PAVLVS DIACONVS and some others do write, MAXIMUS for that he was a Roman
Citizen, of high parentage, nobly descended, and of great authority in the
City, presently usurped the name of Emperor; and was possessed of Maximus
vsurpe^ the name of Emperor.
Rome and of all Italy. And the better to assure his tyranny, he used such
means, as (more by force, then any free consent) he married with EVDOXIA,
which had been VALENTINIANS wife, and daughter to the Emperor THEODOSIUS the
lesser. To whom after that he had her in his power, thinking thereby the better
to win her love, he discovered and confessed that he had caused her husband
to be slain: with this addition, that he did it languishing for the love of
her; which did nothing assuage her coffeehouse, but rather so much incensed
her, that she resolved to be revenged on him by any means howsoever. And
imagining that from Constantinople, or from the Emperor MARTIANVS, she should
not have any redress, she secretly wrote to GENSERICVS King of the Vandales,
who then reigned in Africa, very effectually recommending her unto him, and
earnestly entreating him to set her at liberty, and to deliver her from the
power of MAXIMUS, who was a tyrant and a traitor. GENSHRICVS to take the
benefit of the time, and in hope to make himself Lord of Italy, or at least to
have the spoil thereof, employing his whole power, raised the greatest Army
he was able; and using all possible expedition sailed into Italy, being so
strong as Authors affirm, that he brought with him three hundred thousand men
in his Army: against Gensericus came into Italy with 300000 men. The death of
Maximus.
whose power MAXIMUS was neither able, neither durst make any resistance,
notwithstanding that he attempted as far as he could: wherefore being
altogether hopeless and in despair, he resolved to fly, and to abandon Rome;
but by the way he was slain by a Roman captain called VRSVS.

When GENSERICVS arrived on the coast of Italy, there was so great fear in
Rome, as all the principal citizens abandoned the City: wherefore Pope LEO
seeing the calamity likely to fall upon it, resolved to hazard his life for the
same. And knowing how great cruelty GENSERICVS had used against the Bishops in
Africa, as an Heretic (for he was an Arrian) before that he came to Rome, he
went forth to meet him, and in great humility entreated him for the Honor of
Christ to mitigate his fury, and to content himself with the wealth of Rome,
without spoiling and sacking the Churches and Temples. But this cruel king
forbear not to march to Rome, and to enter it with his whole Army, and robbed
and spoiled without any difference as well the sacred, as the profane. Being
in Rome thus busied, in the space of fourteen days, he departed from thence,
carrying with him infinite wealth, and rich prisoners; and so Rome being the
head of the world, and Queen of all Nations, was spoiled, dishonored, and
Rome sacked by Gensericus.
sacked by the Vandales, having already at another time been spoiled by the
Goths, as above is mentioned: a wonderful example, to move a man to make
little account of the power and riches of this world. Leaving the City thus
wasted (notwithstanding that at the entreaty of Pope LEO he commanded that no
edifice or buildings should be set on fire, neither any man to be The Empress
Eudoxia, and her two daughters carried into Africa.
slain or tortured) he led with him from Rome the Empress EVDOXIA, and her
two daughters which she had by VALENTINIAN, which he afterward carried with him
into Africa. After that GENSERICVS departed from Rome, he did the like in many
other Cities in the marches thereof, as he had done there: and destroying the
City of Capua, for that it made some resistance, he went to Naples, and
besieged it, thinking to have won it by assault. But the inhabitants so
manfully defended it, that he was driven to raise his siege, and so returned
into Africa laden with the spoils and wealth of Italy; where he married one
of the Emperor VALENTINIANS daughters, which he brought with him from Rome to
his son TRASIMVNDVS, who succeeded him in his estate.

This befell in the sixth year of the reign of MARTIANVS, being the next year
after the death of VALENTINIANVS. GENSERICVS with his Army having left Rome,
and being departed out of Italy, the principal Senators and Roman Gentlemen,
which through want of forces and of an Emperor, had abandoned the City,
presently returned; and by common consent, chose for Emperor of Rome, Italy
and Sicilie (for now in a manner all the rest of the state was usurped) an
ancient Noble Roman Gentleman, both for age and blood, of the order and
dignity of Senator, whose name was AVITVS: which when the Emperor MARTIANVS
Auitus chosen Emperor by the Romans.
understood, as a gentle and religious Prince, he was very glad thereof, and
allowed and ratified his election, in hope of better order to be taken in the
Government; and so it seemed that there was good hope to have preserved the
Empire in that state wherein it then was. But all was disturbed through the
death of MARTIANVS, who was poisoned in Constantinople, by the practice and
device of ARDABVRIVS, and his father ASPAR, who were his Martianus poisoned in
Constantinople.
Captains: which happened in the year of our Lord 459, he having reigned seven
years. This MARTIANVS was a virtuous and a just Prince, and preserved and
enlarged the Eastern Empire.

THE LIFE OF LEO THE FIRST, BEING THE FIVE AND FIFTITH ROMAN EMPEROR; AND OF
THOSE WHICH IN HIS TIME TOOK UPON THEM THE NAME OF Emperors.
THE ARGUMENT.
WHen Martianus was dead, some which had been the causers thereof sought to
have usurped the Empire: wherein failing to effect their desires, they made Leo
Emperor, being a Greek borne, who in the beginning of his Empire bare
himself so valiantly, that there was not any enemy so hardy, as to make war
against him. But in the Western Empire many tyrants arose, and many Emperors;
which for that they lived not long, were the cause of great alterations and
combustions: and the Uandales adventured to come into Italy, against whom Leo
sent a good and a worthy fleet, under the conduct of a Captain called
Basiliscus, who encountering them, overthrew them. In the mean time Leo in
Constantinople was driven to fight against some who sought to have usurped: who
being overcome and slain, he had great difficulty to rescue Rome, which was
saeked and spoiled by many under the name of Emperors; which for that they
lived not long, or were deposed from that dignity by others which were more
mighty then they, were the causers of very great troubles in the Western
Empire, in the midst of which tumults ensued the death of the Emperor Leo in
Constantinople, when he had reigned seventeen years.

PResently when MARTIANVS the Emperor of Constantinople was dead (whose death
was greatly lamented) the principal men began to consult about the choosing of
a new Emperor: and ASPAR, who wrought the last Emperors death, sought to have
been his successor; but he prevailed not, for as much as he was of the Arrian
sect: for as the Catholic Christians were the stronger side, so they would not
consent to his election. But seeing that he could not obtain the Empire for
himself, he bare a great sway in the election of another, which was an
excellent man both in peace and war, a Tribune, whose name was LEO, a Greek
borne, and the first that ever was Emperor of the Greek Nation, and as most
Authors write, was born in the City of Bessica. But ASPAR first made this
bargain with him, that when he should be in full possession of the Empire, he
should then make his son, ARDABVRIVS, CAESAR; although it succeeded not. This
being concluded, LEO was chosen and obeyed for Emperor: and governing the
Empire in good order and with good success, in the beginning thereof he wan
great credit and reputation; so as neither Africa, Asia, nor Persia, durst to
stir against him: but in the West, in Italy, and in Sicilia, there were
great alterations, and many were Emperors more in name, than in power or
authority comparable to the Ancient. And that old and mighty King GENSERICVS
never desisted from infesting Italy, coming himself in person, and sending his
fleets to rob and spoil the Country; so that (as EVTROPIVS relates) he ruined
and laid waste many Cities, and in the end became sole and abolute Lord of all
Sicilia. In the first year of the Reign of LEO, AVITVS died in Rome, who (as we
said) reigned there; The death of Auitus.
and the Roman Army, being then near to Rauenna, chose and nominated for
Emperor a good man of war, whose name was MAIORANVS: whereto the Emperor LEO
gave his consent.

This MAIORANVS was a good Prince, and an excellent Captain, for the time he
reigned: for, he took great care, and used great diligence in defense of Italy
against the Vandals and GENSERICVS their King: and to that end he raised a
great Army, and remained for the most part of his time upon the seaside, to be
the better able to send relief and succor where most need required. This
prospering well with him, and seeing himself mighty and strong in men and
munition, he resolved to have sailed into Africa, in hope and with intent to
have reconquered the same; but he could not accomplish that good work: for,
death surprised him when he had The death of Majoranus, chosen Emperor.
reigned three years and odd months. Some say, that he died of a disease:
and others say, that the same Army that chose him slew him. In place of
MAIORANVS rose up another Emperor, which was an eminent man called SEVERIANVS;
who, besides the ordinary wars Seuerianus chosen Emperor.
against the Vandals, was troubled with another against the Alanes: who, with
GEORGE their King departing from Spain, where they had of long time inhabited
together with the Goths, resolved to come into Italy, thinking to have
conquered the same, and to have made themselves Lords of certain places in
Lumbardy: against whom, SEVERIANVS commanded an Army to be levied, and made a
valiant man called RITHINER General thereof, who was by lineage a Goth, but now
made a Citizen of Rome, and received into the degree and dignity of a Roman
Gentleman. The King of the Alanes coming with the Roman General neerto the
City of Bergam^, to a battle which of either party was very cruel, in the end
the Alanes were overthrown, and their King slain.

After this victory and other accidents which happened of less moment,
SEVERIANVS died The death of Seuerianus.
in Rome, when he had governed the Empire in Italy almost four years: and in
his place was chosen a very excellent man of war, sent thither by the Emperor
LEO to succor and protect Anthemius chosen Emperor.
Italy against the Vandals, who was called ANTHEMIVS, and was sonne-in-law to
the late Emperor MARTIANVS, LEO'S Predecessor. There presently arose against
ANTHEMIVS (intituling himself Emperor) a Captain whose name was GERVANDVS, who
was Prefect Geruandus was called Emperor.
and Governor of the Province of Narbone; which was all that remained subject
to the Empire in France. But ANTHEMIVS speedily sent his Captains against him:
and, being by them taken, he was condemned to perpetual exile; and ANTHEMIVS
established in his place a friend of his which was a good Captain, called
BELIMER, to govern the Country of Gallia Narbonensis. This rebellion was
scarcely ended, when in Rome another prime man arose, and would also have
rebelled, called PATRICIVS: but ANTHEMIVS pacified that matter with as great
facility as the rest.

During all these alterations, and the death of Emperors in Italy, the Emperor
LEO governed Graecia and the East very valiantly, and in peace. But the old
and politic GENSERICVS, King of the Vandales in Africa, seeing the alterations
and troubles which daily happened in Italy, resolved with himself to invade
it, and to make himself absolute Lord thereof; which was a thing that he long
desired, as a man who had tasted the sweetness of the wealth and riches of Rome.
Whereupon he mustred up his valiant Vandales, and the country Inhabitants
Gensericus, King of the Vandals, came again into Italy.
of Africa and other Nations; and armed and rigged the mightiest Army and Navy
that he ever before had levied. Whereof when LEO was advertised, and knowing
that ANTHEMIVS had not power sufficient to defend himself against GENSERICVS,
and that if ANTHEMIVS sped il, his estate was not assured (at the least
Slauonia, and those Countries which bordered upon Italy) he resolved to employ
his whole power against GENSERICVS, in defense of ANTHEMIVS; who of his side
made all the provision of men and Arms that possibly he was able, for the
defense of Italy, and had rigged up an excellent fleet for the Sea. When LEO
had prepared his Army and fleet, he made one BASILISCVS, a great man in his
country, General thereof, who was his brother in law, being brother to his
wife the Emperesse, and was also brother in law to ANTHEMIVS: for ANTHEMIVS had
married his sister. BASILISCVS, with his great fleet departing from Graecia,
safely arrived in Italy; and joining with the fleet which ANTHEMIVS had
prepared, they went in quest of GENSERICVS, who with no less a fleet was come
upon the same coast.

These two Nauies being come within sight one of the other, and GENSERICVS
knowing his enemies soldiers to be far more ready and expert in Sea
services then his were, would gladly have avoided the fight; but he was so
charged by BASILISCVS, that he could not choose but fight: and as the battle
was fearfully begun, so was it cowardly maintained. And he seeing his
disadvantage, would have gone out of the fleet, whilst the ships were fighting
one with an other, and did attempt to have done so: which the rest of his
fleet perceiving, they all presently turned their backs, and he was
apparently overthrown: where he lost many of his Gensericus overthrown in a
battle by Sea.
ships and much people; and so very shamefully fled into Africa. Whom
BASILISCVS pursued, and took land but two hundred and fourscore furlongs from
Carthage: and (as PROCOPIVS reports) if he had presently gone thither he had
easily taken the same. And GENSERICVS being without forces (as he then was) he
might have taken all that province: for already on the other side toward the
East, another Captain whom LEO had sent, whose name was HERACLIVS, had taken
the city of Tripoli, and other towns: but through ignorance, or as some say,
BASILISCVS being corupted with a great sum of money by GENSERICVS, he
forslowed the wars, and was content to retire his Army into Sicilia, and
there to recover what GENSERICVS possessed. Whilst as the Emperor LEO'S
Captains and soldiers performed these services, he himself was not idle in
Constantinople: for ASPAR and his son ARDABVRIVS had caused great
combustions. And as they were chief in making him Emperor; so were they of
great power and authority in his Court, and in the government of the Empire:
besides that both the father and the son had ever been eminent men, and very
powerful. This ASPAR, perceiving that BASILISCVS the Emperors General
prospered well in all his actions, began to fear to fall from that dignity
which he then enjoyed; imagining that the Emperor being out of fear of
GENSERICVS, would make small account of him: and to avoid this, he resolved
whilst as BASILISCVS was in the wars, to importune and urge him to nominate
and make his son ARDABVRIVS, CAESAR, according to his former promise when he
was chosen Emperor; which he had hitherto deferred, by entertaining them with
some apparent reasons. But now ASPAR (as a mighty man) so audaciously
importuned him to hold his word, as taking hold of the Imperial robe which the
Emperor then ware, he said, LEO thou ought to perform what thou have
promised me; for he that wears this robe ought not to lie. Whereto the
Emperor answered: And much less ought he to Speeches uttered by Aspar to the
Emperor Leo, with his answer.
endure that any man use violence or force him.

ASPAR, perceiving the Emperors determination, resolved to make his son
CAESAR by force; and accounting himself of sufficient power to effect it, gave
him the name of CAESAR: and leuying such forces as he was able, the war began
between him and the Emperor. Some Aspar made Caesar by his father Ardaburius,
by force.
say that LEO nominated him CAESAR, and that the Catholic Christians would not
yield thereto, for that ASPAR and his son ARDABVRIVS were both Arrian
heretics: whereof ensued great tumults. But howsoever the matter went, it is
certain that they took Arms against their Sovereign, and that their men of
war fought one party against other. Wherefore in great haste LEO sent to
recall his General BASILISCVS from Sicilia, to the end that with his Army and
fleet he should come to his aid: but before that he could come, the Emperor
was in great danger, and likely to have been utterly lost and ouerthowne.

But being come with his Army, notwithstanding that there were many skirmishes
within the city of Constantinople, and that in appearance it seemed the matter
went in a manner at even hand (for ASPAR and his son were excellent men of
war, very rich and of great power) yet in the end LEO his party prevailed,
and the two tyrants were taken and put to death by Aspar and his son
Ardaburius, slain by the commandment of the Emperor Leo.
the Emperors commandment: and so was he freed from this danger and
servitude.

But there presently ensued other troubles with the Ostrogothes, which had
accompanied ATTILA in his wars. For BALEMIR and THEODOMIR Kings of those
Goths, with all their whole power, after many battles fought between them
and the sons of ATTILA (which I write not, for that it appertains not to
our history) resolved to make war in the East Empire: and beginning in
Slauonia, they put the Emperor LEO to great care and trouble. But he, as a wise
Prince and a lover of peace (seeing that there was no other remedy) gave them
Hungary and Austria, and taking hostages and great assurances of them,
concluded a peace; which at that time was very necessary and profitable for the
Empire, although nothing honorable. He also granted unto them Seruia, Missia,
and Walachia.

In the mean season, after the overthrow of GENSERICVS, the Emperor ANTHEMICVS
lived in peace in Italy. But as there is no constancy in humane estates, and
that in the time of most prosperity, there many times happen the greatest
disasters and calamities; RITHINER, who (as we said) overthrew the Alanes and
slew their King near to the City of Rithiner rebelled against the Empero^
At^emius in Italy.
Bergamo, being grown proud and vaineglorious, by reason of so famous a
victory, forgetting the favors which ANTHEMIVS had bestowed upon him (first in
marying him to his own daughter; and then making him Governor general of
Gallia Cisalpina, now called Lombardy) resolved to rise and rebel against his
father in law, and sovereign Lord; by either of which he was bound to have
been a faithful and loyal servant; and to that end resolved to come with the
greatest force that he was able, against the Emperor ANTHEMIVS: whereupon, all
Italy was in Arms, either for the one party or for the other. But Pope
EPIPHANIVS used the means to bring them to a peace: which he caused to be
confirmed upon certain conditions, and with exceeding great oaths. But the
wicked RITHINER (within a little while after) brake all, and with his Army came
to the walls of Rome, making war against all such as took part with the
Emperor.

ANTHEMIVS was then unfurnished of any sufficient Army to take the field; and
therefore contenting himself to defend the City, suffered it to be besieged,
expecting the succors which came to him out of France. For BALEMIR (whom as we
have said, he had made Governor of Gallia Narbonensis) understanding in what
distress he was (as a loyal and grateful servant) resolved to come with the
greatest power he was able to levy, to relieve his sovereign Lord and to
raise the siege. And the Emperor LEO understanding what past in Italy, and
knowing how small means and power ANTHEMIVS had to defend himself, being
informed also of the treason of RITHINER, with all speed he sent into Italy a
Captain whose name was OLIBRIVS, with a good Army against him; with
authority, when he should see time fit for it, to take the name of Emperor.
Which when ANTHEMIVS understood, thinking by this mean to be freed from the
siege, wherewith the City was distressed, he agreed that the other should be
called Emperor, and willingly allowed his name and title.

But before that OLIBRIVS could come, BALEMIR arrived with such succors, as he
brought with him out of France: and seeking to enter Rome, and to join with
ANTHEMIVS, RITHINER got between him and the City, in such manner, that
whether BALEMIR would or would not, they came to blows, and there was between
them a cruel battle, wherein Balemir overthrown and slains by Rithiner.
the loyal Captain (through the secret judgment of God) was slain by the
traitor: whereupon, the people of Rome being out of hope of this succor (and
as OLIBRIVS which came from Constantinople was in Rauenna, so far from Rome)
they so cowardly fainted, as RITHINER entered the City by force; and being in
possession thereof, put his Lord and father in law the Emperor to death, and
sacked the whole City, excepting two streets wherein he was lodged. And so
this was the third time that Rome endured wants and much trouble in defending
Rome taken and sacked the third time by Rithiner, wherein the Emperor Anthemius
was slain.
it self, and violence and spoil after it was taken. So that (as it has been
seen, and hereafter will often appear) this World knows not how to give any
good thing, but takes it away again; neither how to advance, but to the end to
pull down again. Rome had commanded and subdued the whole World, and had
reigned over all the habitable known Nations of the earth: it had tamed and
deprived great Kings and Commonwealths of their Kingdoms and Dominions, and
had enriched it self with the spoils and wealth (in a manner) of all the
Nations and Cities of the World. Nevertheless, through the divine providence
of God, in process of time it was taken and spoiled by the same people and
Nations which it had subdued, and brought under their yoke. And those Nations
came to Rome, took it, and made spoil thereof, as if they had come to fet
home, and to have that restored to them, which in former time was taken from
their Ancestors; which the Reader may plainly perceive by that which is
already written, and shall be written hereafter: which will show how often Rome
has been entered and taken by force, and how often it has been sacked and
spoiled, and endured such like disastres and calamities.

But to return to our History: RITHINER being Master and Commander of Rome,
and of the rest of Italy, with the power and name of Emperor (excepting
Rauenna, and the marches Rithiner made Emperor of Rome, and his death. Olibrius
made Emperor, and his death.
thereof, which was defended by OLIBRIVS) three months only he enjoyed this
sovereignty: after which, he fell into an extreme sickness, whereof he died in
terrible pain. And as soon as he was dead, OLIBRIVS was proclaimed Emperor in
Rome, who then was in Rauenna: and coming thither, and giving but the signs
and show of an excellent good Governor, within four months he died of his
natural death. And as Rome had lost her power and authority: so had the
Emperors thereof little health, and short life. For, who-so shall make a
computation thereof, shall find, that whilst LEO reigned in the East, there
were in Italy (by good and bad titles) one and other, six or seven Emperors.

Presently after the decease of OLIBRIVS, the Senate of Rome, considering the
losses and tyrannies past, would have used their authority in choosing an
Emperor by voices, and by general consent, with good advice and consideration;
but they could not bring their purpose to effect: for, being ouerswaied by
GVANDIBARVS (a Captain who then was in Rauenna) they made choice of one
GLIZERIVS a Senator of Rome, who was in Rauenna with him. Yet his Empire lasted
but a while: for, the Emperor LEO, understanding that his election was by
Glizerius made Emperor, and deposed.
force, sent against him a Captain called NEPOS, with the title and name of
Emperor; who, being assisted by the Romans which against their wills had sworn
obedience to GLIZERIVS, deposed him, and made him against his will to take
Monastical Orders, and gave him a Bishopric: but he took the Empire to
himself; which was the occasion of many commotions and troubles in Italy. For,
GVANDIBARVS, who had advanced GLIZERIVS, took his suppression for a great
disgrace and an indignity done to himself: wherefore he levied an Army, to the
end to have restored him. But Pope EPIPHANIVS used such diligence, and took
such pains in the matter (who, as we said, made the peace between BALEMIR and
ANTHEMIVS, although it continued not long) that he made a stay thereof,
procuring peace between them: so as they laid down their Arms; and for that
time NEPOS remained in peace in Rome. But, as he lived in that estate, he was
advertised that HENRY King of the Goths (who then reigned in Toulouse in
France, and in the greatest part of Spain) made wars upon those Countries
which were subject to the Romans; and had taken certain Towns; so as it was
feared that he would have proceeded further. NEPOS, to show his power, levied a
very good Army; and, making one ORESTES, a private friend of his, General
thereof, commanded him to take his way toward France. But ORESTES, departing
with very great forces, took no care for going that journey according to his
commission, which had been more for his honor; but rather, Orestes, being sent
by the Emperor Nepos with an Army into France, made his son to be called
Empero^.
as soon as he came to Rauenna (having first sounded the good will of his Army,
so far forth as he thought expedient) made his son to be called Emperor, whose
name was AUGUSTUS; whom the Romans called AVGVSTVLVS (for, that name they gave
him when he was a child) and so he is called by all Historians. And having
brought this to effect, he resolved to return to Rome against NEPOS; who, as
he had employed all his men of war and whole power in that Army, was not of
force able to stay his coming, neither to make any defense or The Emperor
Nepos, abandoning Rome, fled into Dalmatia. Augustulus made Emperor. The death
of the Emperor Leo in Constantinople.
resistance against him. Wherefore he abandoned Rome, and the hope to be any
longer Emperor, having been so but a little while; and fled into Dalmatia,
which was under the jurisdiction of the Emperor LEO: and so AVGVSTVLVS
continued in Rome in possession, and with the name and title of Emperor.

While the affairs of Italy stood in this estate, the Emperor LEO died in the
City of Constantinople, having reigned (as writes PAVLVS DIACONVS) seuenteen
years with great valor and honor, as an excellent Prince, in the year of our
Lord four hundred, threescore and sixteen; who left not behind him any son
to inherit, but two daughters, the one called ARIADNE, and the other, LEONCIA:
the one was married to ZENO, who afterward was Emperor; and the other to
MARTIANVS, son of ANTHEMIVS, who (as we have said) had been Emperor of
Italy: yet some say, that ARIADNE, who was wife to ZENO, was not his daughter,
but his sister, and that he instituted a son of hers before his death for
Emperor, and his Successor. His death was condoled by all, and many lamented
the same with tears.

The Emperor LEO being dead in Constantinople, and AVGVSTVLVS reigning in Rome,
the general estate of all the Provinces that were wont to be in subjection to
the Empire, stood in this manner: The Goths, with their King called by some
EVRIGVS, and by other HENRICUS, held Toulouse, and that part of France which
borders upon Spain, and the greatest part of Spain it self. The Sueuians in
Gallicia, and in part of the Kingdom of Leon, held wars with the Goths, and
to the Empire remained some haven towns on the coast of Arragon, Carthagena,
and Tarragona, and some others also. The Alanes which remained in Spain, dwelt
together with the Goths in a part of Spain toward Italy: and after the names
of these two nations, that province was called Gotalonia, which now through
corruption of speech is called Catalunia. In France ralgned the French, in
Paris and in all the countries round about it, and in other countries with all
that which we now call Flanders and Picardie, whose king was called HEDERICQVE.
The Burgonians held the two Burgundies, and the Empire held no more but
Narbone, and some land thereto near adioining, which continued but a while in
the Emperors jurisdiction. In England reigned the English Saxons, and in
Scotland the Picts and Scots. In Hungary, Austria, and Missia, Seruia, and
Walachia, the Ostrogothes, with their King TODOMIR, and his son THEODORICVS,
by permission of the Emperor LEO, bare the sway. In Africa were the Vandales,
and their very old King GENSERICVS, many times spoken of: who died within a
little while after, and his son HONORICVS succeeded him. The most of the
provinces of Germany were usurped by the successors of the Hunnes, called
Heruli, Turingi, and others which came thither with ATTILA: and between all
these nations and countries and their Kings were great wars, each of them
coveting to enlarge his territory and dominion. All the Eastern provinces
were in peace subject to the Empire, and to the Eastern Emperor, who then was
LEO, nephew of that LEO of whom we but now discoursed.

THE LIFE OF LEO, THE SECOND OF THAT NAME, AND SIX AND FIFTITH ROMAN EMPEROR;
And of his Father ZENO.
THE ARGUMENT.
THE Emperor Leo being dead, his Nephew, whose name was also Leo, took
possession of the Empire; to whom it seemed a matter unreasonable, that his
father, whose name was Zeno, should live as a private man, and be an Emperor:
wherefore he renounced the Empire unto him, and crowned him with his own hand,
and within short space after dyed. Zeno being then made Emperor, the w^dow
Empress being much displeased that he should enjoy so great a dignity,
procured Basiliscus a Captain of his own, to rebel against him; who making
himself Emperor, compelled Zeno to fly into Isauria in Asia: but he continued
not long in that misery; for Basiliscus being hated for his pride, behaved
himself so, as Zeno was restored to the Empire. Whilst as he lived in the
East in peace, the Western Empire and Rome were so turmoiled, that Orestes
father to the Emperor Augustulus was taken prisoner in Pauia, and there slain.
And Augustulus (for fear) left the Imperial ensigns, the Empire and Rome to
the discretion of Odoacer, who was afterward dispossessed by Theodoricus King of
the Ostrogothes. And Zeno having been somewhat troubled with wars in the
East, and having obtained victory against two tyrants, which were Aspar and
his son Ardaburius, which rose against him, dyed of an ordinary death in
Constantinople, when he had reigned sixteen years.

IAm of opinion that the Reader has sufficiently understood, in what estate
the Empire remained, when the Emperor LEO died in Constantinople: wherefore I
hold it needless to make any repetition thereof. I say then, that as soon as
LEO departed out of this life, his Nephew without any contradiction was
acknowledged and obeyed for Emperor, whose name also was LEO. For as I said,
his Grandfather had chosen and so appointed him to be, before his death, and
he held the Empire the space of certain months: at the end of which he did a
thing which seems strange, and breeds admiration. Which was, that of his
own accord and voluntary free will (holding it a hard case, that the father
should be subject and inferior to the son) he renounced the Empire, and gave
it to his father ZENO, and crowned him with his own hand, and presently did
him homage. For fathers in their life time to Leo refused the Empire, and gave
it to his father Zeno.
give to their children their kingdoms and dignities, is a thing we have
seen, and often read of; and it seems that there is reason to induce them
thereto: but seldom has any man ever heard, that the son would dispossess
himself of a kingdom or Empire, to give it to his father. For it has rather
happened to the contrary, that the son has bereaved the father thereof by
force in his life time; yea and sometimes has wished and practiced his fathers
death, to be his heir, and to succeed him. Therefore I say, that this
accident is very strange, and the reverence and obedience of this son much to
be noted.

But it succeeded in this manner, that ZENO was crowned and obeyed for Emperor
in Constantinople, and his son LEO remained in his former estate. To the
contrary hereof, in Italy ORESTES made his son AVGVSTVLVS Emperor, not
desiring or procuring it for himself. LEO having renounced the Empire and
given the same to his father (as IORNANDES and other authors say) died within
few days after. But PAVLVS DIACONVS reports it after another manner: for he
says that the father sought his sons death, from which he was delivered by
making himself a Priest, and so lived certain years. But howsoever it was,
there is no more mention made of LEO, and his father ZENO began to rule the
Empire. Going in progress to visit the same, being in Chalcedonia, the widow
Emperesse, his wives mother, who remained in Constantinople, repining to see
ZENO Emperor, whom her husband LEO never accounted worthy of the Empire (as
IORDANVS writes) induced her brother BASILISCVS, who (as we said) overthrew
GENSERICVS in a battle at sea, to take upon him the name of Emperor. And as
by reason of that victory and the affinity which he had with the late Emperor
LEO, he was very mighty and highly esteemed: so was he both able and willing
to make himself Emperor, and for such was received; and they swear obedience
unto him in Basiliscus made himself Emperor against Zeno in Constantinople.
Constantinople. Which as soon as ZENO understood (whether it were through
baseness of mind, or to avoid the wars and the effusion of blood which
would have ensued) he took no care to make any head against him, but retired
himself into Isauria, which is a very strong and guardable province in Asia
the less, where he assured himself to live in security. Whereof BASILISCVS
waxing proud, and very joyful, and holding himself now safe and past all
danger, he made his son MARCUS, CAESAR. But his pride and joy continued but a
while: Marcus made Caesar by his father Basiliscus.
for as he was infected with the Nestorian heresy, so he began to persecute
and afflict the Church and Catholic Christians; by means whereof (as IORDANVS
and PROCOPIVS report) he grew so hateful, and was so abhorred by all sorts of
people, that those Captains which he sent against ZENO, returned against
himself, and by the general consent of all men Basiliscus the tyrant
dispossessed, taken prisoner and banished, died in exile, together with his
son and sister.
ZENO was restored, and reestablished in the Empire; and he with his son
MARCUS and VERINA his sister, were taken prisoners, and being banished died in
exile. In this manner remained ZENO mighty and in peace, having bin
dispossessed of the Empire the space of eighteen months: where we will leave
him, and return to speak of AVGVSTVLVS the Emperor of the West, or to say
better, of Italy.

Whilst these things passed in the East, we told you how that ORESTES had
exalted his son, and made him Emperor against NEPOS, who held his Empire in
Rome, and that NEPOS Augustulus made peace with Gensericus King of the Vandales
in Africa* Augustulus Emperor in Rome.
had abandoned Italy, and AVGVSTVLVS remained there: and seeing that in Italy
no man durst oppose himself against him; by the advice and counsel of his
father he made peace, and entered in league with GENSERICVS King of the Vandales
in Africa, who was now grown old and worn with bearing arms, and even at
deaths door. By reason of which league, he held himself to be in great
security: for of ZENO he made no account, seeing the discord between him and
BASILISCVS. But his trouble and ruin sprang from whence he least mistrusted
it; for the Heruli and the Turingi, a people of which we have made mention, and
which had served in the wars under ATTILA the mighty King of the Hunnes, and
which at that time inhabited along the river of Danubius, in the furthest
consines of Hungary, took for their Captain a man of their own nation called
ODOACER, with a resolution to come into Italy, Odoacer king of the Heruli came
into Italy.
and to make a conquest thereof; seeing that no man had any right thereto, but
he who was of greatest* power, and could best fight for it. And it was the will
and pleasure of God, that as Italy had sent Captains to the conquest of all
parts and nations of the world, so should Captains and men of war come from all
parts and nations of the earth to make a conquest thereof. Leaving apart other
accidents which by the way befell ODOACER; he being approached to the Borders
of Italy, ORESTES, the father of AVGVSTVLVS, sallied forth to encounter him,
with an excellent Army which the father and son (having intelligence of his
coming) had levied.

The two Armies being comn within sight one of the other, both the Generals
would have Orestes, father to Augustulus, marches against Odoacer.
fought: but certain companies of ORESTES his soldiers went over unto ODOACER.
Which when he perceived (reposing no firm confidence in the rest which
remained) he retired in the best order he could toward Ticinum, which is now
called Pauia, a City in Lumbardy; and ODOACER pursued him. But ORESTES, having
no sufficient Army to take the field to fight with him, suffered himself to be
besieged in that City. And notwithstanding that he did as much as was possible
for his defense, yet the assaults given were so terrible, that the City was
entered by force, after that he had defended it many days, and ORESTES taken:
on whom, and the soldiers which were with him, ODOACERS soldiers executed
extreme cruelty. And from thence ORESTES was carried prisoner to Placencia;
where, by ODOACERS Orestes taken and slain by Odoacer.
commandment, he was put to death.

After that ODOACER had obtained this victory (as AVOVSTVLVS his Empire had but
a weak foundation, and less equity of his side) all things went against him,
and prospered with his enemy: and so with small difficulty, and as little
resistance, ODOACER took all the cities of Italy, and presently proclaimed
himself Lord and King thereof.

When AVGVSTVLVS understood that all the towns and people took part with
ODOACER, Augustulus abandoned Rome to Odoacer.
he departed from Rauenna, where he then kept his Court, to go to Rome: but by
the way, before he came thither, being out of hope, he voluntarily put away
his Robes and Imperial Ensigns, abandoning Rome, and fled; contenting himself
with the hope of saving his life, when he had reigned two years a peaceable
Emperor: and so he afterward ended his life in poverty and misery (as it is
to be presumed); for, the Historiographers make no more mention of him. Rome
being abandoned by AVOVSTVLVS, ODOACER without any resistance possessed himself
of all Italy, which he enjoyed foureteen years in great prosperity: after
which we will Odoacer made himself Lord of all Italy.
tell you who were Lords thereof. And so in this AVGVSTVLVS ended the Empire
and dominion of Rome; which afterward had no Emperor for the space of three
hundred and thirty years. This happened in the year one thousand, two hundred,
nine and twenty, after the building Anno 1229 after the building of Rome. Anno
529 after that Julius Caesar made himself monarch of the Roman Empire.
of Rome; and in the five hundred, nine and twentieth after that JULIUS CAESAR
made himself Tyrant and Lord thereof; and in the year four hundred, seventy
and seven, after the birth of our Savior CHRIST.

In these times (as PAVLVS DIACONVS and BLONDVS write) there arose a Nobleman
in England, by lineage a Roman, descended from those which in ancient time had
dwelt in that Island, whose name was AMBROSE; who joining with the Britans, the
ancient Inhabitants of that Country, against the Angles, fought many battles
with them: but in the end he was overthrown and slain. Whereupon, many of
those Britans resolved to abandon that Island, and in Barks and Ships (such as
they could get) embarked themselves, and sailed over The Britans abandoned
England, and went over into Britanny in France
into that Coast of France which for that cause is now called Britanny; where in
those days dwelt a people called Veneti, Cenomanni, and others: where,
sometimes by leave, and with the good will of the Inhabitants, and sometimes
without it, they inhabited and possessed themselves of that Country; and have
continued there ever since with so good success, that the name thereof and
their language continues there until this day, and is one of the best
Provinces of all France: wherein have been mighty Princes; but, by means of
sundry alterations, the French King is now Lord thereof.

After this, the Emperor ZENO reigned in Constantinople, and ODOACER in Italy,
some years peaceably; so as there happened not any thing in the Empire worth the
writing* but in the end fortune turned her wheel in such manner, that ODOACER
justly lost all that which he had wrongfully gotten; and one Tyrant was
bereaved of what he had taken from another Tyrant: which happened in such manner
as we will set down. THEODORICVS, son of THEODOMIR King of the Ostrogothes, who
in the time of the Emperor LEO the First had lien in hostage in Constantinople,
when his father and uncle made peace with LEO, who granted unto them Austria,
Hungary, and Missia, to inhabit; at this time his father THEODOMIR being
dead, THEODORICVS succeeded him in the Kingdom: whereof when the Emperor ZENO
was advertised, he sent Ambassadors to him; giving him to understand, that he
was very glad of his succession; and therewith requested him to come to his
Court, for the great desire he had to see him, and to do him honor: which
THEODORICVS gladly performed, remembering the honor and good entertainment
which in former time he had received in Constantinople. Whither when he came
(besides that he was very solemnly received at his first coming) Theodoricus,
King of the Goths, came to the Emperor Zeno's Court.
he was afterward very honorably entertained by the Emperor ZENO; who gave
him Ensigns of Arms, and other honors and dignities, assigning to his people
pay and perpetual pensions: and so was THEODORICVS beloved and esteemed by the
Emperor and his whole Court. And, living in this manner with great contentment
for a certain space; his people that came with him, and those which remained
behind also in his Country, being accustomed to the wars, and to rob and
spoil, and now grieved with living idle in peace, continually persuaded him,
that (imitating those from whom he was descended) he should seek to make some
conquest, and not to spend his life in banqueting and feasting: but
principally they counseled him to sue to the Emperor to give him leave to make
a Conquest of Italy, which ODOACER had taken and usurped; and they told him so
many things thereof, that in the end he resolved to follow their counsel: and,
finding a time and place convenient, he made a fair speech to the Emperor,
entreating him to grant him what is before-said; which, Bishop IOHNANDES writes
at Theodoricus made suit to the Emperor to give hi^ leave to conquer Italy
from Odoacer.
large in his Book of the Original and Acts of the Goths.

When ZENO had heard his discourse, and understood his meaning, he was very
sorry for it: for, he desired ever to have had him near to himself, and not to
have suffered him to have departed; as well for the love he bare him, as for the
fear and doubt which he ever had of the Goths. But seeing his resolution,
after counsel taken with the Senate, he was of opinion that he might well
grant him (as he requested) the conquest of Italy; considering that the Empire
had lost it, and that it was now in the power of ODOACER; wherefore it were
better that a King which was a friend and a confederate should possess the
same, than another; and if he did not accomplish his conquest, yet it was a
means to weaken both their forces; of which the Empire stood in fear, having
been oftentimes molested by them.

When the Emperor had made this Grant, and confirmed the same by public
instruments, THEODORICVS took his leave, and went into Hungary and into Missia,
where his people inhabited: there he gathered together the best and choicest
men of war he was able for this enterprise, and began to march forwards with
his Army; but by the way he was hindered and encountered by certain Kings and
barbarous people which were the remnant of ATTILA his troops: so as by that
time he came into Italy, he was well trained in the wars, and his soldiers
were accustomed to vanquish. ODOACER, who some days before was advertised of
his coming, had levied a very great Army, and had assembled together the
people of that country; whom he persuaded to aid him, and to defend themselves.

When THEODORICVS was arrived in Italy, he encamped himself by a rivers side
called Theodoricus entered Italy, and Odoacer went to encounter him
Sonzu, near to the ruins of old Aquileia, to refresh his Army in those
fertile fields. As soon as ODOACER heard of his coming (as he lay in wait for
him in those Marches) he drew so near with his Army, that in short space they
came to a battle (which THEODORICVS with great courage offered, and ODOACER
refused not: for, it seemd that both the Commanders desired the same); which
was one of the most cruel and bloody that has been seen: for, A battle
betwixt Odoacer and Theodoricus. Odoacer was overthrown by Theodoricus.
the Commanders and soldiers of either side were very valiant; and the one
fought to win a Kingdom, fame and honor, and the other fought to preserve
all these. The Fight lasted a great part of the day; and, after great
slaughter, and effusion of much blood on either side, THEODORICVS obtained the
victory, and ODOACER was fain to flee when he had done all that was possible
for him to maintain the Fight. And although ODOACER lost this battle, yet he
lost neither courage nor hope to defend himself: but, gathering together the
remainder of those which escaped from the battle, he raised new forces; and,
again taking the Field near to the City of Verona, returned to fight with
THEODORICVS, who followed him thither: and the two Kings came the second time
to battle, which was no less cruel than the first; for, this was the last of
ODOACER'S hope: but he was again overthrown; for, those supplies which came
to his aid forsook him, and he lost great part of his Army fighting; and
afterward Odoacer overcome the second time by Theodoricus.
in his flight passing the river Po, many of his people were drowned.

In this flight ODOACER never stayed till he came to Rome: where he thought to
have gathered a new head, and there to have resisted his enemies; but they
would not receive him: for, seeing that he had been twice overthrown, they
had no hope or confidence in him; but sought to gratify THEODORICVS, so as the
City was in Arms: wherefore ODOACER returned, and with the best forces he was
able to gather together, put himself into Rauenna. THEODORICVS for that time
forbear to pursue him; but went to Milan and took it, with other cities in that
quarter: whereupon, many cities in Italy sent to him to yield their obedience,
and many companies of soldiers came to serve him in his wars. In the mean
season ODOACER Wars in Italy between Odoacer and Theodoricus.
fortified himself with arms, men, and victuals, thinking at the least to
have been able to defend himself in Rauenna, which at that time (after Rome)
was the principal city of all Italy. THEODORICVS being in a rediness to
besiege it, there followed so sudden an alteration, as he neither could,
neither durst to stay before it: for by the procurement of one of ODOACER'S
Captains, who was either a president or admiral of some part of Italy, many
Captains, towns, and people again took part with ODOACER; and they grew to
so great a head, that THEODORICVS was in such fear, as he put himself into
Pauia, and many days passed before that he drew his Army again to field, so
as neither ODOACER came to seek him, nor he ODOACER. Within few months after,
they made frontier wars: and THEODORICVS, recovering forces, committed his
Mother and Sisters to the keeping of EPIPHANIVS Bishop of Pauia, and went to
Rauenna (wherein ODOACER lay) and laid Theodoricus besieged Odoacer in Rauenna.
siege thereto: but ODOACER so manfully defended the same, that in three
years space (for so long the siege lasted) he not only made head against
THEODORICVS, but made so many sallies upon him, and gave him so many alarmes,
as he never suffered his Army to rest. But in the end wanting victuals, and
out of hope of any relief, having first tried all means both to offend and
defend, and seeing it auailed not, he resolved to yield to THEODORICVS, upon
condition that he should give him assurance of his life, with promise to allow
him some place in Italy, wherein he might live; which promise was ill
performed: for he commanded both him and his son to be slain: and so ended
the life and reign of ODOACER, which cannot justly Odoacer slain by the
commandment of Theodoricus.
be termed, cowardly.

ODOACER being dead, the remainder of his Army of Heruli, which escaped from
the battle, were entertained by THEODORICVS, and he gave them pay, and in
short space made himself Lord of all Italy, finding not any resistance;
afterward he went to Rome, where he was received with great joy and
solemnity, as well for the fame and good report which they had heard of him,
as for that he was sent thither by the Emperor ZENO. And this moreover did
greatly help him to get the good will of the city; that at his very first
coming thither, he caused a great quantity of wheat to be distributed amongst
the citizens, whereof they then stood in great need: And so he remained Lord
of Rome, and of all Italy, calling himself king Theodoricus went to Rome and
made himself Lord thereof and of all Italy.
thereof, as ODOACER had done, thirteen years before.

This THEODORICVS was a very virtuous, just, and a most excellent Prince and
governor, and made himself very mighty, and much beloved and feared: but
above all, he was very wise and circumspect in preserving his estate. And to
the end to make himself the more mighty, he procured alliance with all the
kings then in Europe: for he presently treated a marriage with ANDEFREDA the
French Kings daughter, which he solemnized with great feasting and triumph. And
of his own three daughters, one he married to SIGISMVND King of the Burgonians;
and another to ALARICVS King of the Visogothes, and of Spain; and The alliance
and league made by Theodoricus.
his third daughter called AMALASIVNTHA, he married to a Prince of Germany
called EVTHARICVS; and his sister ALMAFREDA he married to HONORICVS King of the
Vandales and of Africa, who was GENSERICVS his heir and successor. So as with
all the Princes near unto Italy, he made some affinity and league of
friendship, and held that kingdom, which with such honor he had conquered,
with no less honor, the space of thirty years.

Whilst these things passed in Italy, ZENO the Emperor of Constantinople and
of the East, had somewhat to do with the Bulgarians, who ever since the death
of ATTILA had inhabited What befell the Emperor Zeno in Constantinople.
Germany, and had made an incursion into the province of Thracia, and done much
harm in that country: but they quickly returned to their habitation. In
Constantinople also happened a great fire, which burnt a great part of that
city. There befell unto ZENO also another great disaster, plotted by a
favorite of his, who was steward of his palace, whose name was YLLOS, The
treachery of Yllos against the Empress Ariadne.
which was thus: This YLLOS made the Emperor believe (though unjustly) that
his wife the Emperesse, whose name was ARIADNE, daughter to the Emperor LEO,
lived dishonestly; and so ZENO being deluded, commanded her secretly to be
slain. And he to whom the charge of the execution was committed, revealed the
secret to a young gentlewoman of the Empress chamber; who presently advertised
her Lady thereof. And she at the very instant without any delay, fled from the
palace in the closest manner she could, leaving her in her chamber, which had
advertised her thereof, and went to the house of ACACIVS then Bishop of
Constantinople. The Emperor the next day, assuring himself that his
commandment had been effected, clad himself in mourning attire, faining that
his wife had died naturally. But presently the Bishop, came unto him: who with
great authority severely reprehended his lightness and hasty resolutions;
aduertising him of his wives innocence; and that her accusation was untrue.
Finally, he handled the matter so well, as he persuaded him of the truth, and
reconciled By what means the Empress was delivered from death.
him to his wife, and made a perfect peace between them. But the Emperesse
ARIADNE, after that she understood that it was YLLOS which had accused her, as
a woman would be revenged, and commanded a certain man, whom she held fit for
that purpose, to kill him; who the better to bring his purpose to effect, lay
in wait for him: and purposing to have stricken him upon the head, his blow
failed, and it happened unto him as to S. PETER: for missing his head, he smote
off one of his ears, and so he escaped. And daring not to remain in the
Emperor ZENO'S Court, he resolved to commit a greater treason then the former;
which was to go into Asia, and there to rise and rebel, with a great part of
the East: which he might easily do, for he was very cunning and of great
account; and ZENO for his conditions was in those parts very ill beloved. But
he speedily sent a good Army against him under the leading of a Captain
called LEONCIVS: but this YLLO used such means and persuasions to LEONCIVS, as
he did the like: and so of one tyrant there arose two, which made themselves
Lords of a great part of Asia the less. But within few days after, the
Imperial Army which had Leoncius conspired with Yllos, and both were slain
by their soldiers.
conspired with them, after that the soldiers were grown rich by spoil and
booty, repenting their errors, and to obtain pardon, upon a day mutined and
slew them both, and brought their heads to Constantinople. And so was ZENO
freed from this trouble and revolt, and lived the remainder of his time in rest
and peace: notwithstanding that he put certain Noblemen to death without any
just cause. All these things being past, in the seventeenth year of his reign
ZENO died of a natural death in Constantinople. It is written of him that he
was exceedingly ill The death of Zeno.
favored and deformed, and of a loathsome aspect and gesture. He is not
reckoned among the good Emperors; and it is also said of him, that he would
sometimes be drunk. He died in the year of our Lord four hundred, fourscore
and fourteen.

THE LIFE OF ANASTASIVS, THE FIRST OF THAT NAME, AND SEVEN AND FIFTITH ROMAN
EMPEROVR.
THE ARGUMENT.
ZEno being dead, Anastasius was chosen, who was greatly favored by the
Empress: to whom she was married, at the end of forty days after the
Obsequies of her dead Husband. This man, finding all things in peace, in the
beginning of his reign did many good deeds: but he suddenly altered his
condition, and being spotted with the heresy of Eutiches or Euticetus, which
made a quaternitie of the Divinity, he began to grow hateful to God and men;
and many countries rebelled against him. Against which putting himself in
order to fight (although that he overcame many of the Rebels) nevertheless he
was once brought to such an extremity, as he was driven shamefully to buy his
peace with money; and afterward the Persians, rising against him, gave him
many crosses in sundry battles: but finally he made a truce with them, and
during the time of the truce, he was slain by a thunderbolt from heaven.

ZENO had not any son that might succeed him in the Empire: wherefore, after
his death some of the chiefest Lords procured themselves to be chosen; among
which was this ANASTASIVS: who although he were not of any Noble Family, yet he
was a man of great reputation, and well beloved. By reason whereof, and also
for that he was in great favor with the widow Empress, he was chosen
Emperor, with the aid and assistance of Anastasius chosen Emperor.
an Eunuch, called VRBICIVS, who was of great authority in the Court. And
ARIADNE did not only procure his election aforesaid, but within forty days
after the obsequies of her dead husband were solemnized, and his body intombed,
she married with the new Emperor: and by this mean obtain^d ANASTASIVS the
Empire. In the beginning whereof, without any contradiction, but with the
general contentment of all men, he was obeyed: and he not only found the
Empire in peace, but there was peace also in Italy, France, Spain, Grermanie,
and Africa; they governing those kingdoms as their own, who were successors
to them which first usurped and took them from the Empire; notvvithstanding
that shortly after there arose great vvarres betvveene them. THEODORICVS, who
was called King of Italy, made choice of the city of Rauenna for his royal
seat; which was by him enobled with sumptuous buildings: and in his absence
he commanded the like to be made in Rome, and did much good through all Italy,
directing all things like a good and an excellent Prince; in so much as the
people praised God for him, and held themselves happy, in that they had so
good a man for their Lord and governor.

But returning to our new Emperor; as soon as he was crowned, he commanded
by a public decree that all such debts as were due to his chamber of
accounts, or as we say, his exchequer, until that day, should be pardoned,
and not be recovered from the debtors; which amounted to a very great sum. He
began also to give offices and places of charge to such persons as were of
vvorth, and sufficient for them, and not for money (as the custom was) by
reason of late wants. By means whereof and of other apparent signs of a good
prince, in the beginning of his reign, he was very well beloved. But this
lasted but a while: for he was infected with the heresy of EVTICHES; who held
an abominable opinion of the person of The heresy of Eutiches.
CHRIST. And for as much as nothing can be of any assurance, or acceptable
without faith; this Emperor began to grow secretly hateful to God, and
publicly odious to men; and so although that he died old, yet he died an evil
death: And in his life he was never free from tyrants which rebelled; and other
wars and troubles. The first which rebelled, were the people of Isauria (a
very valiant nation in Asia the less) the occasion whereof was, for that he
took, from them, that pay which his predecessor ZENO had promised, and given
them, when he subdued the tyrant ILLOS, who (as we said) falsely defamed the
Emperesse. This nation making choice of a valiant and expert soldier, whose
name was LILINGVS for their Lilingus rebelled in Isauria against Anastasius.
captain; made cruel wars upon the lands of the Empire, for the space of
six years. In which time, betvveene the soldiers of ANASTASIVS and of
LILINGVS, there happened some battles, and many conflicts and skirmishes;
until that LILINGVS dying, the Isaurians being scattered, and lost through
want of a captain, were cruelly punished, and many cities were ruined, and
laid waste, as relates IORDANVS the Bishop: who although briefly, yet he
expresses the greatest part of that history.

There arose also against ANASTASIVS, another captain in Cilicia, at the same
instant, Athemidorus, Sabianus, Mundo, and Pompey, Tyrants.
called ATHEMIDORVS, but he was soon brought to ruin. In Slauonia and
Dalmatia, rebelled two mighty men and very rich, called SABIANVS and MVNDO:
and near to Adrianople another whose name was POMPEY: and within the city of
Constantinople, were certain tumults and insolences committed, wherein many
men were slaines. By reason of all which rebellions, ANASTASIVS was much
perplexed; and being in great fear, he came to some compositions (little to
his honor) and lost sundry towns. Being freed from this trouble, he had
another civil war, which was of great importance and long continuance,
against a valiant soldier, a Scythian borne; but trained and broughtt up in the
wars of the Romans, and in the Emperors house, and court: he was high
constable, or commander of his men of war, and was called VATILIANVS; who
either of ambition and desire to be absolute, or for some displeasure or
coffeehouse (which historiographers write not) rebelled against ANASTASIVS;
and with threescore thousand men, which he levied, of Hunnes, and other
nations, began cruel war against him, both by sea and land; so as sometimes
he came within three miles of the imperial city of Constantinople. Against
whom the Emperor raised a great Army, and made his nephew HIPATIAS General
thereof; who before he could come to fight any battle, Hypatias made General
against Vatilianus.
by a wile was taken prisoner by the Hunnes, and delivered into the power of
VATILIANVS: After which, the Emperors other captains were overthrown; so as
the war continued six years: and in the end thereof, the Emperor bought his
peace of VATILIANVS, for a great sum of money which he gave him, and so was
delivered from the peril, although not from the disgrace and dishonor of buying
peace. In this war (as writes ZONARAS) called IOANNES MONACHVS (as relates
JOHANNES CVSPINIANVS) ANASTASIVS Proclus, an excellent Philosopher.
was greatly assisted by the skill and industry of PROCLVS, an excellent
philosopher and Mathematician, who was most skillful in inuenting instruments,
engines and stratagems. Amongst other matters, they report one thing of him,
which seems incredible, which I dare neither affirm, nor deny, but will
recite it for a wonder, let the reader believe what he lists; yet I say that
the secrets of nature are so great, as we ought not to hold all for impossible
which we cannot comprehend how it may be brought to pass. That which I say,
these authors write for certain, which was, that as we now see certain
glasses, which being set in the sun, with the reflection of the beams thereof
will set tow or flax on fire, and such like other dry stuff near at hand: so
did this PROCLVS make a very great many of these glasses, which wrought
Wonderful burning glasses.
effect with such force as being set upon the high turrets of the walls and
bulwarks, they set on fire and burnt whole fleets of ships in the harbor,
with all the people that were in them; and in like manner any other engines
that were erected against the walls, wheresoever they were (if the
sunne-beames might reuerberate from those glasses) wherewith the enemy was
greatly annoyed, which was done in the same manner as we now see tow set on
fire. Whilst these things passed in the Empire of Constantinople, there were
great wars between the King of France, and Spain, and THEODORICVS King of
Italy: which for that they are long to recite, and nothing to my purpose, I
omit.

But returning to our Emperor, who seemed now to be at some rest, being freed
from war with VATILIANVS; there happened another war with the Persians,
which was of as great importance, and no less perilous, the cause whereof was
this. At that time in Persia reigned a King both mighty and valiant, whose
name was CAVADAS; who by reason of Cauadas king of Persia.
wars and other expenses, stood in need of a sum of money, therewith to
pay a certain King which was his neighbor to whom he was indebted: which by
embassage he requested the Emperor ANASTASIVS to lend him, as to a friend and
confederate (as he then was). But ANASTASIVS taking counsel upon the matter,
was advised not to grant it, for that it was a mean with his own money to
join in league of amity and friendship, those which were the ancient enemies
of the Empire: and that therefore the best course was to take away the mean
from the Persian, to be able to make payment; to the end that they might make
war one against another, and so waste and consume themselves. And in this
manner it was concluded, in the best for that might be, to excuse the matter,
without granting what the King requested. The King of Persia having received
this answer, was so extremely enraged therewith, as he resolved to make war
against the Roman Empire: and putting his determination in execution, leuying
a great Army, and making great preparation for the wars, he personally
entered the limits and confines thereof, and made cruel wars, and encamped
himself before the city of Amida, which was then a great and a famous city
in the province of Mesopotamia, as writes PROCOPIVS, before which were many
conflicts: but in the Wars with the Persians.
end the Persian took it, and held the same for some space. As he lay before
this city, ANASTASIVS raised the greatest Army that ever he had before;
which he divided into four parts, and sent the same under the command of four
Generals, against CAVADVS: Anastasius his Generals against the king of Persia.
Ariouindus, Patricius, Celer, and Hipatias.
whose names were ARIOVINDVS, who then was Praetor in the East; and CELER, the
Captain of the Emperors guard; and another was called PATRICIVS borne in
Phrygia; and the fourth was HIPATIAS, who was the Emperors Nephew, as is
before said. And with these went other great men: as IVSTINVS who afterward
was Emperor, and some other noble and and expert men in the wars.

These Armies marched by several ways, and directed not their course to
relieve Amida; but to make war in sundry parts of CAVADAS his kingdoms. He
being advertised of their coming, went to meet with ARIOVINDVS; who behaved
himself so cowardly, as not daring to fight, he retired very shamefully, and
left his campefull of many rich things, and of great value, which were taken by
the Persians, who had them in chase, and pursued the Imperial Army. The other
two Generals, to wit, PATRICIVS and HIPATIAS, joining their forces together,
being near the enemy, began the war, without any certain knowledge where
the King was, after the retreit, or rather flight of ARIOVINDVS; and they by
chance met with eight hundred horse of his, the King being but a little behind
them with a very mighty Army: who putting themselves in order for their
defense, were all slain and cut in pieces, without any news learned of them
by the Romans: and they having no sight of CAVADAS his troops, pitched their
tents upon a rivers side; the current whereof ran directly that way as
CAVIDAS came, and so they began to victual and refresh themselves, of their
weary journey; and went into the water, and did fetch water out of the said
river. And as CAVADAS and his Captains saw the water come down troubled,
bringing therewith other things which seemed to be lately thrown into it, they
suspected as it was; whereupon CAVADAS in all haste commanded his Army to
march in otder ready to fight. Which came so suddenly Cauadas his victory
against Anastasius his Captains.
upon the Imperialists, that before they could range themselves in order, they
were broken and overthrown: and the most part of all these careless Captains
were slain, except some which escaped by flight. And without question if at
this time the Hunnes had not come down out of Scythia Asiatica, and with great
power had not made war upon the Persians, which diuerted CAVADAS his thoughts
into other parts, and made him return into his country, to take order for the
defense thereof, he had after this overthrow done great spoils in the Empire.
But he upon this occasion retiring himself, there came in good time the fourth
Captain called CELER, with his Imperial Army, who began in better order and
more advisedly to follow the wars: and gathering together those troops which
ARIOVINDVS had left (for he himself was commanded by ANASTASIVS to come to
Constantinople) and joining with PATRICIVS the Captain which escaped, they
besieged the City of Amida, which the Persians had taken; and after a long
siege, they gat it by a wile. This most cruel war continuing two years,
with great slaughter and loss to either side; and the Persians being A truce
with the Persians for (...)years.
much distressed by the Hunnes, and other nations which with them entered their
countries, a truce was concluded with the Empire for seven years. Afterward,
the time of the truce being expired, ANASTASIVS commanded a city to be built
in Mesopo^amia, which he called after his own name, Anastasia: wherewith the
Persians were much displeased. But they were so oppressed by the Hunnes, as
they durst not break with the Emperor, and so the peace continued during the
life of ANASTASIVS, wherewith he was well content: for in the wars he had lost
both many men and much reputation; and being (as we said) infected with the
heresy of EVTICHES, he reigned in great trouble. In the end when he least
thought thereof, The death of the Emperor Anasta^ius, slain by a thunderbolt.
when he had reigned seven and twenty years, a Thunderbolt fell from heaven
which slew hi^, in the year of our Lord, five hundred and nineteen, leaving
not any son that might succeed him.

THE LIFE OF IVSTINVS, FIRST OF THAT NAME, AND EIGHT AND FIFTITH EMPEROVR of
ROME.
AFter ANASTASIVS IVSTINVS EVROPALATES succeeded in the Empire. And truly it is
a wonderful thing to consider from how base an estate, and from how poor a
The parentage and course of life of Justinius before he was Emperor.
beginning he mounted to so high a dignity; and of the ways and means
whereby he attained thereto. Which for an example of the strange adventures and
variable accidents in this life, I hold worthy to be related in such sort as
it happened. This IVSTINVS was borne in Thracia (yet some say, that he was of
Slauonia, or Dalmatia) of poor and simple parentage; so as from his infancy he
was bred up in keeping of beasts. But as it pleased God in his secret
judgment, to ordain him to reign and rule, to some good end; he inspired him
to leave that base kind of life: so as at the age of seventeen years he went
to the wars, with a resolution to continue in the exercise of Arms. And he
proved so worthy a soldier, that within short space he purchased the name of
Valiant, and fought oftentimes with great dexterity and courage, with his
enemies in single combats man to man; and in all occasions made good proof of
his person. Wherefore within short time he was made a Captain, and within a
while after an Earl; which (as is already said) at that time was, and still is,
a great dignity. In that estate was he when ANASTASIVS died, being now well
grown in years: And as presently after his decease the Lords began to consult
whom they should make Emperor; a great Courtier named AMANTIVS, who was an
Eunuch, and had bin the Emperors Steward, and was now the best monied man of
his time, sought by all means to make a great and mighty man, called
THEOCRETIANVS, who was his great friend, Emperor. And for as much as the Army
and men of war bare greatest sway in Amantius sought to get the Empire for
his friend Theocretianus.
the election (for, now nothing was done in such order as it behooved, but by
force and for benefi^) he therefore determined to buy the good wills of the
Captains and men of war. And to this effect he purposed first to win
IVSTINVS, and to use him for a mean to persuade the rest; and conferred with
him concerning the same. And, coming to a composition, he gave him a great
sum of money, to the end he should divide the same among the Captains and
men of war where he thought good; conditionally that THEOCRETIANVS might be
chosen Emperor.

When IVSTINVS had gotten this money into his fingers, he forgot to deal for
THEOCRETIANVS, but secretly sought to buy their good wills for himself; and
carried the matter The means where by Justinius got the Empire.
so cunningly, that when AMANTIVS thought that the soldiers would have made
his friend Emperor, he found that they had nominated and would have IVSTINVS.
And in this manner they presently swear fidelity and obedience to him, by the
general consent both of the Senate and Army: for besides what is already said,
he was well beloved, and held for a virtuous man, and a good Christian.

AMANTIVS seeing himself deluded, although for the present he could not refuse
to yield him obedience, yet shortly after he practiced the death of the new
Emperor, and conspired with THEOCRETIANVS, who pretended to have bin chosen
Emperor; and with another called ANDREAS, and with MISSAHALE and ARDABVRIVS
(all which were of the Emperors chamber) to the end they should kill him as
soon as any opportunity were offered. But it pleased God that their treason was
discovered; and, it being proved, IVSTINVS commanded AMANTIVS, ANDREAS and
THEOCRETIANVS, to be slain; and the rest to be perpetually banished. And, the
better to assure himself in the Empire, he used a mean that VATILIANVS, who
rebelled against ANASTASIVS, came to Court; whom he made ordinary Consul, and
General of all his men of war, and bestowed great gifts and honors upon
him. But, for all this, he (as ungrateful, and a Traitor) within few days
practiced with some others against the life and estate of IVSTINVS: which being
discovered, he was upon a day The treason and death of Vatilianus.
slain in his Palace, together with PAVLVS and CELERIANVS, who were
confederates and accomplices with him in his treason.

IVSTINVS being freed from this danger, and seeing himself in peace in the
Empire, being a good Christian, and knowing how far the Arrian heresy had
extended it self over the world, resolved to use therein all the remedy that
possibly he could: whereto he was likewise persuaded by Pope HORMISDA, who from
Rome sent GERMANVS, Bishop of Capra, to confer with him of matters concerning
the faith. Whereupon IVSTINVS sent his decrees throughout all the East,
commanding that no man should be accepted into the Church for Bishop or
Justinius the Emperor persecuted the Arrians.
Priest, that should be of the sect of ARRIVS. At what time IVSTINVS did this
good deed, TRASIMVND King of the Vandals died in Africa, who was an Arrian
Heretic; and his son ELDERICVS possessed his Kingdom, whom he had by the
Emperor VALENTINIAN'S daughter. This man, following his faithful mother, and
not his heretical father, as soon as he was established in the Kingdom,
recalled from exile all the Catholic Bishops which his father had banished
(as is aboue-said), and reformed all the Churches. But the Emperor and this
King having done so good a deed, THEODORICVS, who ruled in Italy, being of
great power, and for that he was (as the most of the Goths were) an Arrian
Heretic, was therewith much displeased; resolving, if the Emperor did not
revoke his decree, to use through all his dominion all manner of cruelty
against the Catholics. But first he constrained Pope JOHN, who succeeded
HORMISDA, to go to Constantinople, and with him THEODORUS and AGAPETVS (men who
had been Consuls) to treat with the Emperor, to the end he should presently
restore those Arrian Bishops which he had deposed; otherwise that in his
dominions he would put to the sword all such as did not believe as he did.

Pope JOHN and the other Ambassadors being arrived at Constantinople, were very
honorably received; and the Pope with tears entreated the Emperor to be
pleased, notwithstanding that his suit was unjust; yet to avoid the excessive
cruelty which was expected, for the present, to Theodoricus King of the Goths
defended the Arrians.
permit the Arrian Bishops to be restored. The Emperor to eschew this cruelty,
granted his request: and so the wicked Bishops were restored to their Churches;
and the Emperor did Pope JOHN great honor, and those which came with him. In
the mean time, whilst they were in Constantinople, THEODORICVS King of
Italy, made SIMACHVS, and BOETIVS SEVERINVS to be slain, who had been
Consuls, and were very Noble and excellent personages, very devout Christians,
and excellently learned in all Arts. And not herewith content, having been
until then a good and a just Prince; having Pope JOHN and the other
Ambassadors which came with him from Constantinople in suspicion, by reason of
the great honor done unto them by the Emperor, he commanded them to be
apprehended and cast in prison; where they all three died of hunger and cruel
usage. After which cruelty, it pleased The cruelty of Theodoricus, and his
death.
God that within ninety days he died suddenly, leaving a Nephew of his,
called ATHALARICVS for his heir: for he had not any son. And for as much as
his Nephew was but eight years old, his mother took upon her the government of
the Kingdom, as a woman who was very wise and valiant.

Returning to IVSTINVS the Emperor; It grieved him much for that which
THEODORICVS had done: but he was not of powerable to redress the same; for,
besides the wants and necessi^ies wherewith he was oppressed, the Persians made
wars against him, which was a Nation, of all others, most feared by the
Romans. But for the small time that he lived, he had good success in those
wars, and his Captains obtained some victories; SCITA and BELISARIVS being
his Generals. Of which two, BELISARIVS (who then was very young) proved
afterward to be one of the best Captains in the world, and which conquered
more countries, and obtained more victories, then any other man in his time: as
we will hereafter briefly declare. IVSTINE, living in this prosperity, seeing
himself old, and without any son to succeed him, resolved to make
JUSTINIAN, who was his Nephew and his sisters son, CAESAR; and to adopt and
nominate him for his successor; and so presently made him his companion in the
Empire. And within four months after, falling sick, he died in the City of
Constantinople, when he had reigned eleven years, or (as some Authors write)
but The death of the Emperor Justin
nine. I find little more written of him, then by me is rehearsed. He died in
the year of our Lord, 529; and, as some say, 28.

THE LIFE OF IVSTINIANVS, FIRST OF THAT NAME, AND NINE AND FIFTITH EMPEROVR of
ROME.
THE ARGUMENT.
AFter Justinius, without any contradiction, succeeded Iustinianus, who amongst
his first attempts, made one against the Persians, under the leading of
Belisarius; whom with variable fortune of the wars, in the end he overcame:
Yet he made a peace with them afterward. After this, there followed a civil
war in Constantinople, wherein Justinian was likely to have sped but ill; but
by means of Belisarius, he was freed; notwithstanding there died therein many
thousands; which being ended, he returned to make a conquest of Africa, which
of long time had been usurped by the Vandales; and getting it, he came again
to Constantinople, where Justinian prepared him a triumph. But it was not long
before the Emperor sent him into Italy against the Goths, where after many
changes of fortune, and treaties of peace, and of truce, having taken the City
of Naples (wherein as it seemed consisted the principal hope of the Goths) he
took his way toward Room, where he peaceably entered, and defended the same,
with great valor, against Vitiges King of the Goths; whom Belisarius at last
took prisoner. After this victory Justinian recalled Belisarius, to employ him
against the Persians, which was the occasion that Italy again fell into the
hands of the Goths, particularly Rome, which by Totila was burnt and
destroyed: and that for no other defect, but for that it could not be relieved
by Belisarius, who then was sick. Who as soon as he had recovered his health,
took it again from the Barbarians. And returning to Constantinople, the state
of Italy was very happily governed by Narses an Eunuch. In which time
Justinian having applied himself to reform and abridge the Laws; when he
had reigned nine and thirty years, departed this life, no less replenished
with years then full of glory.

AFter the death of IVSTINVS, IVSTINIANVS was without any contradiction
received and obeyed for Emperor; being of the age of four and forty years. He
was a powerful and a good Prince, and such a one, as might well be compared
with the best in ancient time, for his good government, both in peace and
war. The wars and conquests which happened in his time (which was little
less then forty years) were so many, and so noble, that I cannot express
the same as I would, and they deserve; following my accustomed brevity. I will
therefore write as I may; notwithstanding that the length of the time, and the
variety of accidents, will compel me to exceed my prefixed limits.

As soon as IVSTINIANVS saw himself confirmed in the Empire, he was not
contented to preserve that which he inherited from his Uncle; but (bearing the
mind and having the judgment of an ancient and good Emperor) he began to
desire, and therewith to practice, to enlarge the Empire, and to reduce the
same (if it were possible) to the ancient majesty and dignity. The first
occasion of wars that was offered, was against The beginning of the
(...)between the ^mperor Justinian and the Persians
the Persians; who in the time of his predecessors, had broken and violated the
peace, invaded the bounds of the Roman Empire, and usurped certain countries
and Provinces thereof: in so much (as PROCOPIVS writes) that for the space of
fifty years before the reign of JUSTINIAN, in all the wars the Imperialists
commonly had the worst, and all conclusions of peace were made to the advantage
of the Persians.

The cause of this war between the Emperor JUSTINIAN, and CAVADAS King of
Persia, was in truth the emulation and hatred which these two Empires, and the
Lords thereof, had of ancient time borne, and still did bear the one against
the other, which was continually nourished and increased, as by that which we
have written may plainly appear. But the occasion and principal cause was
this, IVSTINIANVS, as soon as he was Emperor, sent BELISARIVS, an excellent
Captain, into those frontiers, with direction, in a certain city, which was
on the borders of Persia, to build the strongest and most inexpugnable Castle
that could be devised, for that City was one of the entries and passages of
greatest importance: which order BELISARIVS presently put in execution. Whereof
when CAVADAS was advertised, he was highly offended, and presently sent
Captains and men of war, to require BELISARIVS to give over the work, which
if he would not do; that then they should throw down what he had built.

These men being come to the place where this Castle was a building, there
passed many words, and some deeds between them: and for as much as the
builders were not of force sufficient to make resistance against the Persians,
the Emperor sent thither two Captains, brothers, with some companies of
soldiers. These being arrived, and the Imperialists persisting in their
building, and the Persians in hindering the same, they came to fight a
battle, wherein the Imperialists being fewer in number, were by the Persians
defeated and ouerthrown, and many were slain, others were carried away
captives, and the building was laid level with the earth. When JUSTINIAN
understood of this overthrow, he presently made BELISARIVS General of all his
forces in the East; who as a wise and valiant man, with all expedition raised a
very Belisarius made General^ against the Persians.
mighty Army; and taking to him another Captain caled HERMOGENES (whom the
Emperor with a good supply had sent unto him) he took his way toward the
City of Duras, in Mesopotamia, which at that time was the frontier of the
Persians; where began a cruel war between the one and the other Nation. But
as JUSTINIAN, seeking to employ his time in recovering some other Provinces
which the Empire had lost, desired peace with the Persians, he sent an
Ambassador called RVFINVS, to CAVADAS King of Persia, to treat of a peace (if
upon honorable conditions it might be concluded).

This Ambassador being comn into the Borders where the King was, before that
he was to come to his Court certain motions were made of peace: and as they
treated thereof, the Imperial Generals were given to understand, that the
Persian Army came to seek them, and was within half a days journey, and had
for General thereof a great man called PEROZAS, who was a Mirranes; which was
the name of a Magistrate, of great dignity and authority in Persia. Perozas,
General for the King of Persia.
Whereupon BELISARIVS set his troops in order; and the two Camps came to lodge
near one to the other: and so they continued the space of two or three days,
ranging themselves every day in order of battle; either party expecting when
the other should charge. Upon one of those days certain Archers of the one and
other side began to skirmish: whereupon, the squadrons moved and brake the
one upon the other; and fought in such manner, that it was a very cruel and a
bloody battle, which lasted till near night: wherein the Romans in the right A
battle with the Persians, wherein Belizarius had the victory.
wing had the worse, and the better in the left; and every Captain did his best
to obtain the victory: but in the end the Romans prevailed, and made great
slaughter of their enemies; and PEROZAS the Mirranes escaped by flight.

BELIZARIVS, having obtained this notable victory, within few days after
recovered some places in Mesopotamia, which the Persians had usurped; wherein
also passed sundry doubtful conflicts and encounters. In the Kingdom of
Armenia, wherein the Persians held many places, SITTAS being General, and
DOROTHEVS Praetor, the wars were followed Sittas, General for Justinian in
Armenia, ouercam the Persia^s.
with the like good fortune; and the Imperial Army, obtaining victory,
recovered most part of what was lost. The wars standing in these terms, and
kindled every where, RVEINVS (who we said went Ambassador to the King of
Persia) upon safe conduct came to his Court, and had many treaties and
discourses with him; but no peace could be concluded: and CAVADAS, resolving
to prosecute the wars anew, to be satisfied for the losses which his people
had received; by the counsel of ALAMANDER, a valiant old Captain of his (who
in times past had gotten many victories against the Romans) he made EZARETHA,
General of his Army, Ezaretha, General of the Persians.
a man both valiant and of great experience, and a Persian born. With whom,
BELISARIVS, together with SITTAS the other General, after some encounters,
came to a battle; which was one of the cruellest and greatest of all that
happened in those wars.

This battle was fought near to the River Euphrates, and much against the
opinion of BELISARIVS; who, knowing that the enemy had the advantage, would
not have fought: but his troops against his will prepared themselves. Whereupon
he, seeing their resolution, marshald and encouraged them against the Persians,
which were already in order. And the fight began with so great fury and
obstinacy on both sides, that for the greatest part of the day it appeared not
whether party should have the victory; until such time as the Imperialists,
being unable any longer to endure the toil thereof, for they were fasting, being
Easter Even (Christians of our A cruel battle.
Age may see how inuiolably fasting days were observed in those times) they
disbanded, and began to scatter. Whereupon the Persian horsemen charged
BELIZARIVS his horse-troops with such force, that the Romans brake, and began
to flee, and the like did the other squadrons of foot. Which when BELIZARIVS
perceived, after that he had used all means to stay them, and to have renewed
the Fight, and could not preuail, he alighted from his horse, and placed
himself in a squadron of footmen, which kept together whole and unbroken; and,
encouraging them with his presence, they all resolved rather to die than to be
overthrown. And EZARETHA and the Persians, which followed the chase of those
which fled, seeing that squadron to remain whole, returned with great fury,
thinking easily to have had the execution of them: but they failed of their
purpose, for they kept themselves so close together, that they could not be
broken; and fought so valiantly, that they did the Persians more harm than they
received from them; and so til night held their ground, and kept themselves in
such order, that EZARETHA and his men were fain to leave them: but they had the
ransacking of their tents, and so returned to their Camp. BELISARIVS in very
good order withdrew himself to a little Island, which the river Euphrates makes
in that place; whither the greatest pa^ of his soldiers which fled, were
already retired. And there the next day he again set himself in order, and
gathered together his soldiers: but the Persians, houlding themselves for
victorious, had the spoil of the Field. After this journey EZARETHA removed his
Camp to another quarter: for, there he had received greater loss than
BELISARIVS; insomuch that CAVADAS King of Persia, understanding what number of
men were lost in that battle, held not himself content, nor for well served
in that victory. And dying shortly after, his son COSROES succeeded him in
his Kingdom: with whom, after many embassies and treaties, a peace was
concluded; Cauadas King of Persia dying, his son Cosroes succeeded.
and BELISARIVS reconquered other Countries, which other nations held in the
East. Thus much honored and victorious, being sent for by the Emperor
JUSTINIAN for the wars in Africa, SITTAS remaining General, he came to
Constantinople; where he was received in triumph with great solemnity.

This being past, within few days after there fell so great an uproar and
tumult in the City of Constantinople, that it was likely to have gone ill with
IVSTINIANVS: for, this tumult in the A great tumult in Constantinople
beginning, growing from the factions of the common people, came to that point,
that IPATIVS and POMPEY brethren, the chief men of that City, with the favor
of the people which took their part, they being the Emperor ANASTASIVS sisters
sons, rebelled against JUSTINIAN; and IPATIVS took the Ensigns and name of
Emperor: and the war was so Ipatius rebelled in Constantinople, and was slain
by Justinian.
cruel within the City, that 30 thousand persons were slain. But in the end
IPATIVS was taken and slain, and IVSTINIAN'S troops remained victors: wherein
BELISARIVS did him great service above all others. Afterward (punishing such
as were offenders, and confisking their goods) the conspiracies and troubles
were all appeased; and JUSTINIAN lived more in peace, and in better estimation,
than ever before. But soon after followed the wars of Africa; the occasion
whereof grew through the dissension between GENSERICVS his nephews, the first
King of the Vandals that ever reigned in Africa, which happened after this
manner: YLDERICVS, one of the nephews of GENSERICVS, succeeding in that
Kingdom, being in contention with another who was his cousin germane, and
nephew also to GENSERICVS, The occasion of the conquest of Africa against
Gilimer, King thereof.
whose name was GILIMER: both which pretended to have title to the Kingdom,
upon what occasion for breuity I will omit; This YLDERICVS grew to be so
negligent, that GILIMER (who was both wise and valiant) took him prisoner, and
against all reason made himself King and Lord of all Africa; under this title,
that the other was incapable and insufficient for the government. Wherewith the
Emperor JUSTINIAN was very much displeased: for before that he was Emperor he
held friendship with YLDERICVS, who was now deprived of his Kingdom.
Whereupon, after that he had required GILIMER by his Ambassadors to render the
Kingdom to his cousin YLDERICVS, which he refused to perform, he resolved to
make a conquest of the Kingdoms of Africa, and rigged a mighty Navy, and sent
his Noble General BELISARIVS upon that service; and to that effect commanded a
great army to be levied: with which BELISARIVS embarking himself, accompanied
with many Belisarius went to the wars of Africa.
excellent Captains in five hundred sail of Ships, and fourscore and twelve
Galleys, he began his voyage toward Africa. Wherein, a great man born in that
Country, whose name was PRVDENTIVS, had taken Arms against GILIMER in the City
of Tripoli, on the behalf of the Emperor JUSTINIAN; and another Captain in
Sardinia, whose name was GODAS, had done the like. So as when BELISARIVS
arrived in Africa, he found some which took his Belisarius being ^rriued in
Africa, King Gilimer came against him.
part: and having landed his Army near to a City called Tittimuth, marching
along the seacoast he took his way toward Carthage: and his Navy did the like
by Sea.

When the Tyrant-king GILIMER understood of the coming of BELISARIVS, with the
Army which he had in readiness he departed from that City wherein he first
entitled him self King, and sent commandment to his brother called AMATA,
whom he left in Carthage for the guard of the City, and of YLDERICVS the
deposed King, that he should presently Amata, brother to Gilimer.
kill him, and such other prisoners as were in his power; and then with his
whole force he should sallie out, and take the Field against BELISARIVS, and at
a certain time appointed should fight with him; for that he at the same Instant
would charge him in the Areregard. He sent another Captain all the day long to
trouble him on the one side, and to tire his people with continual alarms. To
be brief, there passed many things in that journey worthy to be noted: and,
coming near to the City of Carthage, AMATA, beginning to fight at such time as
his brother had appointed, was slain by BELISARIVS his Vaunguard: And GILIMER,
without having intelligence thereof, with his troops so resolutely charged in
the Arereguard, that the Imperialists began to retire in such manner, that if
GILIMER had not made an Alt (as PROCOPIVS affirms) that day be had gotten the
victory. But when it was told him that his brother was dead, he caused his
troops to stand. And BELISARIVS his soldiers, understanding of the good
success of their Auantguard, which was far before them, being by him
animated and encouraged, returned to fight with such fury, that GILIMER was
wholly overthrown and scattered, and many of his people slain, and he by
flight saved his life; and his soldiers, A battle wherein king Gilimer was
ouerthrow^
which escaped from the battle, straggled into diverse parts: upon which,
greater execution had been done, if night had not overtaken them.

The next day after this battle, BELISARIVS marched with his Army toward the
City of Carthage; where he arrived in the evening, and found no resistance;
for, they opened their ports, and made great lights to have received him: but
he would not by night come into an enemies City, leaving it until the next
day, and then entered with great quietness, without any Belisarius entered
Carthage with victory.
spoil or murder committed by any of his soldiers; he having so commanded:
for, his authority and reputation was such, that no man durst do the contrary.
The Vandals, which were in Carthage, withdrew themselves to the Temples and
Churches; and BELIZARIVS, granting them their lives, commanded them to come
forth upon his word, which he held inuiolably. Possessing himself of that
City, he commanded the walls thereof to be repaired, which were in many places
decayed; which was the occasion why GILIMER did not retire thither. BELISARIVS,
being in Carthage, sent a Post, a chief Captain called SOLOMON, to the Emperor
JUSTINIAN, to give him to understand of all that had passed. And GILIMER, who
escaped from the battle, recovered certain fields of Getulia, called Bulla,
which are four days King Gi^imer escaped from the battle.
march from Carthage: where (as a man no way dismayed) he gathered together his
troops that were scattered, and levied others: and he also sent in great haste
to recall his brother ZAZON, who then was in Sardinia; whither he had sent him
against GODAS, which (as we said) was in Arms in that Island against GILIMER:
whom ZAZON had overthrown and slain, and recovered the I Will. But ZAZON, seeing
the message from his brother, left all, and came with Zazon, brother to king
Gilimer came to his aid with succor.
his forces to join with him. GILIMER, after that his brother was comn, having
recovered a sufficient Army, took his way toward Carthage to besiege
BELISARIVS, or to give him battle if he would come forth and fight: but
BELIZARIVS for certain days would not take the Field, until he had thoroughly
repaired the walls of the City, and taken order for the rest. Which being
done, he took the Field with his Army; drawing near to GILIMER, who attended
his coming.

The next day one Army having sight of the other, each of the Commanders set
his people in order: and the Fight on either side began with such fury, that in
the first charge ZAZON, GILIMER'S brother, was slain, and certain other
principal men of the Vandals; which struck such a fear among them, that they
began to faint: and BELISARIVS charging with his squadron, they turned their
backs, and fled to their Camp, which they had very well fortified; and GILIMER,
unable to stay them, did the like. BELIZARIVS, gathering together his forces
The second battle and victory, obtained by Belisarius against Gilimer.
both of foot and horse, the very same day in the evening made toward
GILIMER'S Camp, with intent to have assaulted it, and to have made a complete
victory. When King GILIMER saw the battailions march, knowing that he was not
able to defend himself, with some few servants which followed him he fled: and
BELISARIVS with little resistance, by reason of the Kings absence, got their
Camp: his soldiers, putting to the sword all they found were able to bear
Arms, took all the women and children captives; and in the Camp they found an
infinite quantity of gold, silver, money and jewels: Which (as PROCOPIVS
affirms) was one of the greatest and richest spoils that ever was seen or
taken. For, the Vandals, having no place or refuge which they accounted safe,
carried their gold, silver, money, and all their treasure, with them: so as
within one hour they lost all they had stolen and gotten together in Africa in
95 years. For, so long had they been in possession thereof. The Vandals held
Africa 95 years.


The next day, BELISARIVS, to let slip no occasion, dispatched an excellent
Captain called JOHN, with a good troop of horse to pursue GILIMER; he himself
purposing to do the like. And, leaving good order for all things in Carthage,
and a sufficient garrison, he followed with some of the choice men of his
Army. King GILIMER, riding without any stay, retired himself into certain
inaccessible mountains and rocks in the Province of Numidia, called Papua; in
habited by a people called Maurusij, who were great friends to the Vandals. But
before he came thither, he was in danger to have been taken by JOHN; and he
escaped out of his hands The flight and pursuit of King Gilimer.
when he was very near unto him. But it was his ill hap that one of his
soldiers, shooting at a bird, and missing it, slew his Captain; who, being
shot through the throat, fell down dead: and by that mean had GILIMER
opportunity to escape, and to take the rocks and mountains; where he staid not
long ere BELISARIVS came. But forasmuch as it seemed a long work to take those
rocks where GILIMER was, by force; he left one PHARAS a Captain with sufficient
forces to compasse-in GILIMER; so as by no means he could escape. And he
with the rest of the troops returned to Carthage, and in his going and
coming, took many Gilimer besieged by Pharas.
Towns; and much people, with great joy and contentment came to do him
service, glad to see themselves freed from so great servitude, and so restored
to the liberty of the Empire.

Being come to Carthage, for the full accomplishment of his victory, he sent a
Captain to take the Isle of Sardinia, and sent other Captains into
Mauritania, and into diverse other parts, in all which he had most happy
success: for the Vandales in all places (for the most part) were ill beloved.
So as in little more then four months, BELISARIVS reconquered all Africa,
Belisarius conquered all Africa in little more then four months, which had
been held by the Vandales ninety six years.
after that the Empire had lost the same the space of fourscore and sixteen
years. And truly it was a wonderful thing: for all that people were Arrian
heretics, and for such the same JUSTINIAN records them, in his book de
officio Pretoris: wherein although that he says, that there were one hundred
and fifty years expired after that Africa was lost, it does not therefore
gainsay the ninety and six, as I have reported: for that was written nine years
afterward, and he speaks according to the day of the making of that law. But
the truth is, that they possessed Africa but ninety six years. PHARAS, which
remained behind, to besiege King GILIMER, begirt him in on every side, in such
manner, that GILIMER seeing no other remedy, after many letters which past
between them, yielded himself upon security of his life: which assurance
BELISARIVS sent unto him, and to certain his kinsemen which were with him. And
PHARAS as soon as he had him in his possession, came with him to Carthage to
BELISARIVS, who entertained him very honorably. And so BELISARIVS Gilimer
brought prisoner to Belisarius.
ended his victories and enterprises: which truly was an admirable thing, and
worthy of great consideration, if we call to mind the valor and power of
those Vandales, and the great victories which they had obtained against the
Romans, of which we have touched some. BELISARIVS presently sent to give the
Emperor JUSTINIAN notice of the success and issue of the wars, and to
entreat him to give him leave to make his repair unto him, and to bring
GILIMER with him. Whereto JUSTINIAN answered, that he should do therein what
best pleased him, either to continue in the government of Africa, or to repair
to him at his pleasure. But BELISARIVS to clear himself of certain
whispering mutterings, unjustly raised against him, chose rather to go to
Constantinople, and left SOLOMON before named for General and Governor of
Africa, with a good part of his Army; who afterward Belisarius left Solomon
governor of Africa.
had wars with the Maurusij; which rebelled, and he subdued, although with
great danger and trouble.

BELISARIVS followed his journey, leading with him the King and many of his
kindred, men and women prisoners, with infinite jewels, treasure and riches,
which was the greatest and best part of all that the Vandales had stolen from
Rome, Spain, Africa, and other Provinces, in almost a hundred years before.
Being come to Constantinople, the Emperor commanded him Belisarius his triumph.
to be received in triumph, with all the ceremonies and solemnities, which the
Roman Consuls in old time, and the Emperors afterward triumphed in Rome.

The History of JUSTINIAN must of necessity be longer then that of many other
Emperors; as well for that he reigned a long time, as also for that the
accidents which happened in his time, were great and famous, and the feats of
Arms done in that time, noble and excellent: wherefore it shall not be fit to
forbear to make mention thereof. I do also know, and (as I think) have said
it, that Readers take pleasure in reading of great battles, strange
adventures, conquests of countries, and alterations of Kingdoms and estates:
wherefore the Histories of peaceable Princes, and of happy times, without
wars and disasters, are nothing so pleasing, as are those which treat of
slaughters, ruins of estates, alterations of kingdoms, notable victories,
insurrections, factions, tumults, rebellions, and finally great accidents
whether good or evil: for which reason fabulous books are read, and do
commonly give content, for that they kill and cut in pieces thousands of men,
batter Cities, and feign things in a manner impossible. Herein, following the
advice of HORACE, I have determined to take care as well to please, as to
profit the Reader (when I may) with the truth; relating sometimes the great
deeds of Arms, without concealing the examples of peace also, and the good
conditions and virtues of peaceable and mild Princes, reproving and condemning
vice and sin, by detesting and abhorring those which committed the same; for
to that end Histories are written, and are to be To what end Histories are to
be read.
read; that reading vicious and wicked actions, the Readers may fly them, and
follow those which are good and virtuous. And by the variable adventures and
accidents may become more circumspect, and frame the rule of their lives
according to such things as may befall them.

But returning to our purpose, BELISARIVS rested not long in Constantinople,
before that JUSTINIAN gave him the charge of the wars, and conquest of
Italy, and Sicilie, against the Goths, and THEODATVS who at that time was
Lord thereof: which enterprise was held to be of^no less importance and
danger, than that of Africa: and the success thereof showed it afterward to
be far greater, in regard of the great battles and slaughters which followed.

The beginning of this war (briefly) was such, as in the end of the life of the
Emperor IVSTIN was by us related. For, the great and redoubted King THEODORICVS
being dead, his Nephew ATHALARICVS (for that he had no son) succeeded him in
the Kingdom of Italy, being of the age of eight years. Wherefore his mother
AMALASVNTA had the government of the Kingdom; who began to rule with infinite
wisdom, and to bring-vp her son in virtuous exercises, and in the study of
learning and good letters. But it was not long before that contentions and
factions arose between her and her sons kindred; and particularly the malice
and envy grew between her and THEODATVS, cosin-germane to ATHALARICVS.
Whereupon she, seeing her self oppressed, gave the charge of the bringing up of
her son to certain principal men of them: and, leaving Rome, she came to
Rauenna, where she still had great authority in the government. The enmity
increasing between her and THEODATVS, who was a man of great power, and openly
had made himself Lord of the Province of Tuscane; either of them, to weet,
AMALASVNTA and THEODATVS, sought the friendship and assistance of the Emperor
JUSTINIAN, and promised to give him entrance into Italy.

As matters stood on these terms, the young King ATHALARICVS died; wherewith
AMALASVNTA was greatly troubled and very heartily sorry, for that she was a
widow envied, and ill-beloued of the chief men among the Goths. Afterward,
studying what course was best to be taken, she resolved to come to an agreement
with THEODATVS, and to make him King of Italy; persuading her self, that he for
so great a benefit could not choose but be her faithful Theodatus, uncle to
Athalaricus, procured the kingdom of Italy for himself.
friend; and that she should still hold the authority, and he the name and
title of King. She having resolved heerupon, procured certain treaties and a
meeting to be had: where, after long discourse and great promises, bound with
solemn oaths, made by the one and other party, she proclaimed him King of
Italy; and he joining his power with her forces (which were greater than his)
without difficulty obtained the Kingdom, and all men obeyed him. But this
device proved ill with AMALASVNTA, neither was it any sound course for her:
for, as soon as THEODATVS saw himself an absolute Lord, and in possession, he
began to rule, little to her liking; Theodatus apprehended Amalasunta, and
caused her to be slain.
and within few days commanded her to be apprehended, and in the end to be
put to death, like an ungrateful and wicked Christian.

JUSTINIAN being advertised hereof, was highly displeased (for he took part
with AMALASVNTA) and detesting so vile a fact, holding this for a good
occasion, through the desire which he had to recover Italy to the Empire, he
resolved suddenly to make open war against THEODATVS, in hope to make a
conquest thereof by arms, which before he sought by wiles and secret
practices. And to that effect he chose BELISARIVS for General of his army,
who then came triumphing and victorious from Africa. JUSTINIAN at that time had
an Ambassador in Italy, called PETER, who went thither to treat of peace
between AMALASVNTA and THEODATVS, with whom THEODATVS labored to come to some
conditions of peace, for he greatly feared the power of JUSTINIAN: and whilst
that he was busy hereabouts, BELISARIVS arrived with a Navy and an army in
Sicilia, for that he held it expedient first to take that Island: and suddenly
landing his men, he presently took the city of Catania, and within few days
after marched toward Saragossa, and with the like fortune entered, and took the
same, and did the like by many other towns and cities.

Then he marched to Palermo, where he found greater force and resistance, for
it defended it self certain days, and many men were slain of both sides:
but those which were within it fearing their ruin, yielded themselves to
BELISARIVS, and so did all the rest of the Island. Belisarius took Sicilia.
Such was his expedition and good hap in the wars. And for as much as he
(for his fame) was greatly feared, THEODATVS seeing what had happened in Sicilia,
standing in fear of him, treated with this Ambassador PETER concerning
certain conditions of peace; wherein he renounced his right to Sicilia: and
that in Italy in all decrees and proclamations to be made JUSTINIAN should be
first named, and that every year THEODATVS should send him a golden crown, in
token of subjection, and other things which PROCOPIVS sets down at large.

PETER being gone with this message, fear so much increased in THEODATVS, that
he sent upon the way to recall the Ambassador which he had sent with PETER,
whose name was RVSTICVS; and made him to swear, that he should not reueal his
resolution until that he came into the presence of the Emperor, and saw
whether he would accept of the first offer or no; and if he did not, that then
he should offer the whole Kingdom of Italy to JUSTINIAN, Theodatus offered to
render the kingdom of Italy into the bands of Justinian.
upon condition that he should give him some lands and possessions in Graecia
or else where, to live in. And to that effect he wrote a notable Letter to the
Emperor, with his own hand. When JUSTINIAN had heard the first offer made by
THEODATVS; as he was a valiant Prince, and of an hautie courage, he would not
accept thereof: whereupon, the Ambassador discovered the second, wherein he
offered him Italy: wherewith he was exceeding glad, and wrote a gracious
Letter to THEODATVS, and therewith sent Ambassadors to confirm the agreement,
and to command BELISARIVS, that, making an end in Sicilia, he should pass over
into Italy, and possess himself of the forces thereof: but the accord was not
so concluded. For, in the mean time that these Ambassadors went and came,
THEODATVS his Captains had obtained a notable victory, and had slain MVNDVS and
his son MAVRICIVS, who were IVSTINIAN'S Captains in Slauonia, and had defeated
the Imperial Army.

By reason of his victory, THEODATVS grew so proud, that he not only refused
to accomplish what he had offered; but, faining himself much displeased with
some speeches used Theodatus refused to perform his promise
to him by IVSTINIAN'S Ambassadors, he caused them to be apprehended. This also
increased his presumption: for, at that Instant BELISARIVS was gone out of
Sicilia into Africa to rescue SOLOMON, whom he had left there. For, a Captain
called ESTORZAS mutined with the greatest part of the Army; and, making himself
Lord of the Country, put to death the Judges and Gouerners thereof. But
BELISARIVS, arriving in Africa, took such order, that within very few days he
overcame them in battle, and used extreme punishment in the Country; and so,
leaving all in peace and quiet, returned into Italy, the affairs whereof he
found in such estate as is before said.

At this time (as PROCOPIVS writes) there was seen so prodigious a sight in
the Sun, that the like has never been heard of: which was, that the greatest
part of one whole year the Sun The sun gave very little light for the space
of almost a year.
gave so little light, that it was but equal or little more than the light of
the Moon; the sky being clear and without clouds, or any other thing to shadow
the same. And so, without any apparent occasion, it was obscured all that time:
which, as it was afterward conjectured, was the occasion of the famine and want
of grain, which generally ensued through all the world, and did prognosticate
the wars and effusion of blood which followed in Italy.

JUSTINIAN, seeing the inconstancy of THEODATVS, and being greatly displeased
with the death of his Captains in Dalmatia, and the imprisonment of his
Ambassadors in Italy, with great wisdom, and the courage and resolution of a
worthy Prince, providing for both occasions, sent into Dalmatia and Slauonia
for his General, a valiant Captain called CONSTANTIVS; who recovered much of
that which was lost, and renewed the war in that part. And, as for the
affairs of Italy, he commanded BELISARIVS speedily to enter it with the
greatest power he could. Who, with his accustomed expedition and courage, left,
in the fortresses and strong holds of Sicilia, such garrisons as he thought
good, and transported his Army into Italy Belisarius came with great power
into Italy.
at the straight of Messina, and began to self on the places and towns near
the seaside, not finding any Army to hinder him; and so he conquered all the
Coast to the City of Naples: wherein THEODATVS had put a great garrison of
Goths, who valiantly defended the same. Where passed many conflicts: and the
Besieged sent secretly to crave relief, but in vain; for, in the end they were
taken by force, and the soldiers had great spoil, and made great slaughter of
the Goths. But BELISARIVS, the next day assembling his Army, took such order
with the soldiers, that they set all the Inhabitants of the City at liberty,
and restored to them the greatest part of the goods which were taken from them;
contenting themselves with the spoil of their enemies only, sparing the
citizens: to whom they protested, that the cause of their coming was, To set
them at liberty. Great was the fear which the taking of Naples struck into the
Goths: for, they held it impregnable. Wherefore all the chief men and Captains
amongst The Goths, discontented with Theodatus, chose Vitiges for their King.
them, seeing the small provision that THEODATVS made, and assuring them that
BELISARIVS would not continue long in Naples before he came to Rome; One
inuiting another, they met at a place near unto it: and, after long debating
and consultation upon the matter, they did choose a wise and valiant Captain for
their King, who by name was called VITIGES, to the end that he should presently
take order for the leuying of men of war, and the defense of the country
against BELISARIVS. Which which when THEODATVS understood, who then was in
Rome, holding himself to be in no security, he fled thence toward Rauenna:
but he was overtaken upon the way by a Captain called OPTARES, whom VITIGES
sent to pursue him; and so was slain by his commandment, when he had reigned
three years King of Italy. THEODATVS being dead, VITIGES called a council:
and being of opinion that he Theodatus slain by the commandment of Vitiges.
had not power sufficient to attend BELISARIVS in Rome, neither to sally forth
to fight with him in the fields, resolved to go to Rauenna, and there raising
sufficient forces, return to give him battle. And he was the rather induced
thereto, for that he stood in doubt of the French, which had declared
themselves for the Emperor. Being thus resolved, he left for governor of Rome
a Captain whose name was BADERES, with four thousand mercenarie soldiers in
garrison: and encouraging the citizens to defend themselves, he took his way
toward Rauenna.

BELISARIVS, leaving a good guard and garrison in Naples, marched with his
Army toward Rome; where the inhabitants knowing of his coming, resolved that
they would not stand upon their defense, but opened the ports and let him in:
and they so agreed together, as the Goths could not hinder it, but held it
their best course to be gone. And it so happened, that in one day, and at one
instant, BELISARIVS entered at one port, and they sallied out at another.
Belisarius entered Rome.
Who after that he had made a most excellent speech to the Senate, and
encouraged them to embrace their liberty, he presently applied himself to
repair the walls and to fortify the city; bringing in victuals and
provision from all parts: For all the country round about was at commandment.

In the mean while, the new King VITIGES, (who was neither idle, nor a coward)
left nothing undone that might increase his power against BELISARIVS. First he
concluded a peace with the King of France, to the end he should not be his
adversary, and gave him those lands which THEODORICVS held in France, thereby
to be the better assured of his friendship: and sending for his ordinary
captains and soldiers which he usually held in France, he commanded them to
come and join with him. And from Germany and other parts he procured all the
aid he possibly could. Finally, he used such means, as he raised in Rauenna,
and the marches thereof, one hundred and fifty thousand men, of foot and
horse; good soldiers, Vitiges levied an Army of 150000 men of foot and horse.
and the most of them very well armed.

With this Army he began to march toward Rome, wherein BELISARIVS was; but
not with any such force as might suffice to take the field, or to fight with so
great an enemy. Whereupon King VITIGES (nothing doubting of the victory) grew
so proud, as he not only took care that BELISARIVS should not fly and
abandon Italy, but by the way he ever asked, whether BELISARIVS were fled or
no: and rejoiced infinitely when it was told him that he fortified himself in
Rome; and that it seemed, he meant to abide his coming. But the valiant
BELISARIVS was far from that which VITIGES supposed, for he was resolved
rather to die, then to abandon what he had gotten. But seeing his small power,
in respect of his adversary, he sent to BLESSVS and CONSTANTIANVS, Captains
which he had sent into those marches, that they should presently return to
Rome with their troops, where he was with his, and had fortified and
furnished the city; with a resolution to defend the same, and to stop the
enemy, if he purposed to go forwards, to recover what he had gotten in
Campania, Pulia, and Calabria. But VITIGES held on his way directly toward
Rome, imagining that it could not be held: and at his arrival there happened
so great an accident, that although I know it will somewhat detain me, yet I
will describe it.

BELISARIVS, at a bridge over the river Tiber, about a mile from Rome where
VITIGES Vitiges marched toward Rome against Belisarius.
should pass, had caused two very strong towers to be built, and placed
therein a very good guard to entertain the enemy: but VITIGES being comn with
his Army, those that had the guard at the bridge, one night were in such fear,
that without any fight they presently gave up the place; and the same night
VITIGES began to pass over a great part of his Army. The next morning,
BELISARIVS, suspecting no such matter, sallied forth of Rome A strange
encounter.
with a thousand choice horse, and came toward the bridge, to the end to choose
a fit place to lodge his people, for the defense and stopping of the passage:
but, being comn somewhat near unto it, he suddenly met with VITIGES
men-at-Arms, who that night had past the river by the bridge: wherewith
BELISARIVS was so much despited (imagining the guarders of the bridge to be
lost) that with less discretion than he ought, he charged VITIGES men with so
great rage and fury, that there followed a cruel Fight; so as VITIGES his
Vauntguard retired to the battailion wherein he himself was: whence he charged
with so great a troop of Goths, that BELISARIVS his company was held for lost;
and he in his own person did wonders, slaying and wounding many of his
enemies; and charged so far in amongst them, that all Authors which write
thereof affirm, that he discharged the part of an excellent man at Arms, but
not of a good and discreet General. For, he put his person in such danger,
that he was held for dead; and so it was presently reported in Rome by some of
his people which fled. He being in this distress, wherein he lost many of his
friends and servants, being unable any longer to maintain the Fight, his people
began to retire a main gallop, and he did the like, after they had slain 1000
of the Goths. And many of VITIGES his horsemen pursued them even to the very
gates of Rome, which were shut: and those which held the guard there would not
open them, fearing, to let-in the enemy. And for that with the noise and
callings, they knew not BELISARIVS by his voice, whom they accounted for dead;
he, having fought the greatest part of the day, was driven to lean to the wall;
and, ranging his soldiers into a squadron, made head against the enemy, and
so continued fighting, without any meat or sustenance, till it was night: in
the which he did a valiant, though a dangerous and desperate, exploit; which
was, A desperate attempt.
that he charged the Goths with such fury, that they all believed (through the
darkness of the night) that great troops had sallied forth of the City: and in
this doubt they began to retire toward their Camp, BELISARIVS still charging
them in the ariereguard, til he found a free place, and then returned; and,
coming to the Port, was known and received into the city with his people,
although many, fewer in number than they sallied. And so he escaped this
perilous conflict, with a great number of arrows sticking in his horse and
armor; and had some blows and cuts with the sword, but none of them touched his
flesh: which was held for a wonder by those which saw in how great danger he
had been.

The next day VITIGES arrived, and ouerran the fields of Rome; and, being
unable to besiege the City round on every side, by reason of the greatness
thereof, he dividing his Army, invested it with six Camps: and forasmuch as
it would be too long to recite the conflicts which passed in that siege, they
were so great and strange, I will leave them all. Only let this suffice, to
understand, that it was one of the most terrible and bloody sieges that ever
was before any city: Rome terribly besieged and assaulted by the Goths.
for, it continued one whole year and nine days; and the first seven months
of that time, VITIGES and his Goths (who were valiant men) never ceased to
batter and assault the City on all parts; where they did and received much
hurt. And BELISARIVS and his people Vitiges besieged Rome.
never suffered their adversaries to rest, neither forbear to sallie forth and
to fight with them in field; so as in skirmishes and sallies Writers affirm,
that they slew above 40000 of the Goths: in which time he did maruels in Arms,
as well for valor and hardiness, as for wisdom and policy, as an excellent
Captain.

The Emperor JUSTINIAN was not careless of this siege, but sent relief and
succor both of men and munition to BELISARIVS; and supplied him with certain
Captains and companies of horse and foot, with corn and other victuals,
which without great trouble and danger could not come to Rome. But this was
not so sufficient, but that they endured extreme famine. Yet that
notwithstanding, he managed things so wisely and valiantly, as VITIGES seeing
Rome hardly besieged.
himself and his Army tired, and weakened, sought to make a truce with him,
which was concluded for three months: but it continued not so long, for
VITIGES through the cunning Vitiges took truce with Belisarius for three months.
and treachery of some, demanded to have leave to come in, and to see the
city, within the time of the truce: whereupon the wars were renewed. And
BALISARIVS sent commandment to a Captain of his called JOHN, who was Marshall
of his Army, that he should make cruel wars in the marches of Rauenna,
whither he had sent him with above two thousand horse, and certain other
soldiers before the time of the truce, imagining that he harrying that
quarter, VITIGES would rise from before Rome. This Captain sped so well in his
enterprise, as he took the city of Arimino, and other places. And VITIGES
standing in fear to Vitiges raised his siege from before Rome.
lose Rauenna, raised his siege from before Rome, and returned to defend the
rest. But in his retreit BELISARIVS charged him so furiously in the arierguard,
as he slew a great number of his men. And so with shame, dishonor, and loss of
his forces, VITIGES returned to the country of Rauenna, and very resolutely
besieged Arimino, wherein this Captain JOHN was.

BELISARIVS, to avoid loss of time, leuying such forces as he could get,
stayed not any longer: but whilst he went to Naples, and fortified that City,
he then presently took his way toward the city of Rauenna: and so the wars
were renewed in diverse parts of Italy. And to BELISARIVS came a Captain sent
by JUSTINIAN, called NARSES, an Eunuch, with a great supply of soldiers. This
NARSES afterward was General, and an excellent Narses sent by the Emperor to
the aid of Belisarius.
man: with whom, and those which he had already, BELISARIVS relieved JOHN, who
was besieged in Arimino; and with some loss of men constrained VITIOES to
raise his siege. Before and after which, in Gallia Cisalpina, now called
Lombardy, Milan, Bergamo, Nauarra, and other Cities, took part with BELISARIVS;
whither he sent some Captains, and there followed great conflicts and battles,
as well with the Goths, as with THEODORICVS King of France, who came with a
resolution to have made himself Lord of that Country, while they were busied in
these wars. BELISARIVS, after many great adventures, fought a battle with
VITIGES, who had drawn together his whole power to that end. And, to use
brevity, BELISARIVS getting the victory, VITIGES, fleeing to Rauenna, was
therein besieged: which A battle: Belisarius victor.
siege lasted many days, and there were many treaties of the one and the other
side; so far forth, as to offer to make BELISARIVS King of Italy. But he
continuing his siege, and the City being taken, VITIGES was delivered into his
hands; with whom in a manner all Italy came Belisarius took King Vitiges
prisoner. Belisarius left* Italy by the Emperors commandment.
under his obedience.

The affairs of Italy standing in this estate, by the commandment of
JUSTINIAN, BELISARIVS was to depart from Italy (which he ought not to have
done): for, the Emperor meant to employ his person in his wars against the
Persians, leaving Italy in subjection; although that afterward through his
absence there followed great alterations and combustions. For, although that
JOHN, BESA and VITALIS (all valiant men, and of great esteem) remained for
Commanders and Gouerners in his place, yet there was no comparison between them
and him: for, he was a most excellent Captain. This great Captain BELISARIVS
departed from Italy, carrying with him King VITIGES, and the Queen his wife,
with many of his kindred, and other Belisarius c^rried King Vitiges and his wife
prisoners to constantinople.
principal men of the Goths, prisoners; and was received into Constantinople
with exceeding honor and much joy: And he was so beloved and esteemed, that
all men, both inhabitants and strangers, went to see him as a wonder of the
world, extolling his virtues and noble acts; which for the breuity of my style
I am not able to express. This was also a great help thereto, in that he was
a man of a most pleasing countenance, tall of stature, of an excellent
constitution, Noble of condition, mild, courteous, and endued with many other
rare and heroical virtues.

Within few days after that BELISARIVS was gone out of Italy, some Cities
rebelled, and chose YDIBALDVS for their King, a valiant Captain, and of great
authority among the Ydibaldus was chosen by the Goths for king of Italy, and
aft^r him Araricus.
Goths; who began to grow mighty by means of the evil government, and the
powlings and extortions, used by the Emperors Captains in the Country. He
leuying an Army (which until then he durst not do) presumed to fight with
VITALIS, and overthrew him in battle, and began to be feared by the
Imperialists. But, because he slew a nephew of VITIGES, one of his guard slew
him, when he had reigned little more than one year. In his place was chosen
ARARICVS (whom PAVLVS DIACONVS and IORDANVS call ARARIVS) who was also slain
within five months. And then they chose TOTILA for their King; who wrought
Totila made king.
the misery and destruction of Rome, as I will presently tell you, when as we
have declared how and upon what occasion BELISARIVS was drawn out of Italy by
the Emperor JUSTINIAN, which before we spoke not of; which passed in this
manner:

COSROES King of Persia, seeing that BELISARIVS (whom he chiefly feared) was
busied Cosroes, king of Persia, made war in the Empire.
in the wars of Italy, sought some occasions, whether fained or just, to make
war upon the territories of the Empire; and, entering some Provinces, took
certain Imperial Cities. Whereupon JUSTINIAN, who very circumspectly provided
for all parts, besides the ordinary garrisons sent an Army into the East, and
for General thereof a valiant Gentleman named SITTAS, Captains sent against
the Persians, Sittas, Bucen and Germanus.
who in a battle was overthrown and slain. And JUSTINIAN sent another called
BVCEN, a very rare man at Arms; and also a nephew of his called GERMANVS, and
other Captains and soldiers: so as the war was very cruel and bloody between
COSROES and them; which I have not time to relate. But the Imperialists could
not make sufficient resistance against the Persians: and so COSROES entered far
into the Empire; and, leaving Mesopotamia on the The Persians took many cities
in the Empire.
right hand, marched toward Syria and Cilicia, and by assault took many good
Cities. Wherefore JUSTINIAN, holding no man sufficient for that war but
BELISARIVS, sent for him out of Italy: at what time he had brought it all
under subjection, excepting some few Holds and Castles in Lombardy, wherein
the Goths had fortified themselves.

BELISARIVS leaving Italy, and arriving at Constantinople, within few days
after was sent into the East, against COSROES the mighty King of Persia: And
with his coming the Imperialists took heart, and he revived the war with
such discretion and courage, as there was a Belisarius sent against the
Persians.
present alteration in all things: and having obtained some victories against
certain of COSROES Captains (for he himself durst not fight with him) he
recovered much of that which was usurped By means whereof the affairs of the
East went daily from well to better, through the presence and good government
of BELISARIVS. But in the mean season (which were two years) the estate of
Italy waxed worse: for as we said, TOTILA, being made King of the Goths,
followed the wars with so great courage and in so good order, as having
overthrown and stain some of the Emperor IVSTINIAN'S Captains, the Goths
wanne such reputation, as all the towns took part with them, excepting such as
were held by garrisons. And TOTILA marched through all Italy, without finding
any resistance, and besieged the Totila his good success in Italy.
great city of Naples: which after many exploites both by sea and land, he
took, and many others in that quarter; and prospered so well in his
enterprises, as it seemed, that in short space he would (without speedy
redress) make himself Lord of the whole. Which when JUSTINIAN perceived,
grieuing more for Italy, then for all the rest, he commanded BELISARIVS, that
leaving the affairs of the East in the best order he could, he should make his
repair unto him; and he as a servant accustomed to obey, did so. Leaving his
people in the East, and coming to Constantinople, without any stay he was sent
by the Emperor into Italy; whither he went Belisarius by the Emperors
commandment returned into Italy.
with so great haste, that he could not lead with him above fifty thousand
men: for it was thought that he should have found sufficient forces there; and
was made to believe that the Emperors party was not brought to so great
extremity as it was. But he found all quite contrary, in so much as it did
partly seem that his coming did more harm then good: for being wished for,
and expected by his friends, and feared by his enemies, seeing him come with so
small forces, the one were dismayed, and the other took courage: and so in the
beginning his enterprise was very doubtful and tedious. putting himself into
Rauenna, to fortify and defend the same, within few days he took such order,
as notwithstanding that he could not keep the field and beard the enemy (for
that he was too mighty for him) yet the Goths nevertheless did rather lose
then get. Wherewith TOTILA being much displeased, and desirous to make wars to
the uttermost, assembled all his whole power, and sent Captains and companies
to Rauenna against BELISARIVS. And he with his whole Army went to Rome, which
was so Totila befieged Rome.
slenderly provided for, either with men or munition, that it seemed it could
not long be defended.

BELISARIVS understanding hereof, and remembering with how much trouble and
extremity he had defended that city in former time, and seeing that he had
not forces to keep the field, neither could put himself into it by land, was
much displeased and sorrowful, and wrote an earnest letter to the Emperor
JUSTINIAN, desiring him to send him men and money; resolving to put himself
into Rome by sea from Rauenna, where he then was. And passing over into
Dalmatia, and thence to Durasso, he found captain JOHN, whom JUSTINIAN had
sent with a good Army, wherewith he was of opinion to be able to fight with
TOTILA. But the relief of Rome he held necessary to be provided for, with
greater expedition then could be made with that Army: for if TOTILA should
take it, he feared that all Italy would revolt. Wheresore he resolved to go
thither by sea, and to put himself into Rome by the river Tiber: (for the
city called Porto in the mouth of Tiber, held for the Emperor, and Ostia on
the other side of the river held for the Goths) and that Captain JOHN should
cross the Sea with his Army, and coming into Calabria, should march by land,
to relieve him.

This being thus concluded, BELISARIVS sailed, and arrived at Porto in the
mouth of Tiber; and having no sufficient power to march by land, by reason of
TOTILA his great Army, he speedily rigged a great number of Barks and
Fregates, which he fraughted with men and Belisarius passed up the river Tiber,
with a determination to relieve Rome.
munition, and so passed up the river. And notwithstanding that TOTILA had in
the narrowest place of that river drawn chains, and made a bridge, and two
Castles at the ends of the bridge, guarded with a great number of soldiers, by
this means to stop his passage; yet BELISARIVS followed his course up the
River: and coming to the bridge, he and his people in such sort charged those
which guarded the same, that they brake and scattered them and passed through;
and Rome had been presently relieved, and every thing had had good success,
had there not befallen a strange mishap, which troubled and altered all.

BELIZARIVS had left his wife and family (which wife he loved so much, as in
his other wars he ever carried her with him) in the port before named, at the
entry of the River, with a Garrison which held the fort, and a good Captain,
whose name was ISAAZ, with express commandment that he should not sallie
forth without the walls, but should keep the fortress. But ISAAZ hearing the
news of BELISARIVS his victory, and being desirous to do some notable
exploit of himself, sallied out of the town with his Garrison, to charge
TOTILA his soldiers, which lay there against him: and although that at the
first he disordered them and made them retire, yet in the end he was
overthrown by them and taken prisoner. Whereof BELISARIVS was presently
advertised by some which sled, and the report went (without any author) that
the Town was taken, and that his wife was in the enemies A great misfortune
which besell Belisarius
hands. Which when he understood, he was so grieved and enraged, that without
expecting any furthernewes, he returned down the River, with a determination
either to die, or to set his wife at liberty; imagining that if he sped well,
he might speedily return to the rescue of Rome. But being come to the port, he
found the place at his devotion, and that his wife was well and at liberty,
although the Captain were lost. Whereupon he took greater displeasure to see
himself thus deluded, then at the first evil news; and the same night after
his arrival at the port, through extreme choler and grief which he had taken,
or some other unknown occasion, he was so extremely taken with a fever, that
he fell down for dead, and his disease daily increasing, he was oftentimes at
the point of death. In this mean time, which was for the space of many days,
TOTILA did so straightly besiege the City, that they within died of hunger,
and did eat dogs, cats, rats, and other things which seemed impossible. And
Totila took Rome.
TOTILA in the end, having the City in his power, sent his Ambassadors to
JUSTINIAN, offering to be his servant and good friend, and to preserve and
keep the City, if he would grant him peace; if not, that then he would raze
it and make the most cruel war he could. JUSTINIAN answered that his
General BELSARIVS was in Italy, to whom he referred all matters.

TOTILA was so enraged with this answer, that he resolved to ruin Rome, and
so he did: For he made the Capitol it self to be burned, and the best part
of all the City, and the third part of the walls he caused to be thrown
down, and commanded the inhabitants to abandon the City, upon pain of death,
and to go to live in some other place. And Totila burns and destroyed Rome.
so he left burned, desolate, and waste, that City which had commanded the
World, and which had been the greatest, most frequented, and best peopled of
all others. Then he marched against JOHN, who with the Army sent by JUSTINIAN,
came through Calabria, toward Rome, who showed himself so very a coward, that
he durst not attend him in the field, but put himself into Otranto, the
furthest place of all Calabria. And so TOTILA without any resistance took all
Calabria, Abruzzo and Lucania, which until then held for the Emperor
JUSTINIAN.

In the mean time, BELIZARIVS recovered his health, and performed one of the
most Belisarius entered Rome to the end to fortify and defend the same.
desperate attempts, that ever he had done at any time before; which was with
those troops which he had, to go and put himself into Rome, with a
resolution to repair, reedefie and defend the same; and so he did. And so
first sending his wife to Constantinople, he presently went to Rome (as
desolate as it lay) and caused with all expedition, trenches to be dug, and
rampires to be made, where the walls were thrown down, and all the victuals
that possibly could be gotten, to be brought thither, and made a City of that
which lay waste. Through the fame hereof, many Citizens, that could get to him;
for the love of their country came, and put themselves thereinto with him.
Whereof as soon as TOTILA was advertised, by long iourneys without any
intermission, he returned again, assuring himself presently to enter it, and
there to take BELISARIVS: But BELISARIVS so valiantly defended the same, that
to his great loss, TOTILA was driven to raise his siege. Whereby it may be
imagined, Totila besieged Rome, and therein Belisarius.
how well he would have defended it before it was ruinated, and he repaired it
with new ports and rampires. In the mean season captain JOHN in Calabria and
Pulia gathered the Citizens of Rome together and sent them thither, in whose
City BELISARIVS remained; and having fortified it, and left a good Garrison
therein, with an excellent Governor called CONON; he went to join with JOHN,
and other Captains, to pursue TOTILA: where many things happened too long to be
recited. But the King of Persia again making wars in the East; JUSTINIAN
resolved to send BELISARIVS thither, although that afterward Belisarius was
sent for out of Italy.
he went not, for peace was concluded between them. Upon this occasion
BELISARIVS again went out of Italy, although not with so great good fortune,
and victories, as at the first, yet with no disgrace, neither with any less
honor, for he never failed in any thing, to do what behooved him, or what he
was able; and so in sum went to Constantinople, where he remai^ed all the
remainder of his life. After he had lived there certain years, AGATHIVS
writes, that the Huns came down into Thracia, even very near to
Constantinople, robbing and spoiling the country. And BELISARIVS being now
old, was sent against them, and overthrew them in battle; and had not
JUSTINIAN sent for him to return, he had wholly ruined them.

Within few days after that BELISARIVS was departed out of Italy, TOTILA
returned to Rome, and again besieged it, and after a long siege and great
extremities and famine endured Totila besieged and took Rome.
by the besieged, through the negligence of JOHN who should have relieved it,
and the treason of some others, the fierce barbarian took it, but the taking
of it at this time was quite contrary to the last: for now he did not any
harm, but sought to repair and repeople it, and gave great gifts,
privileges, and exemptions to the inhabitants, to the end they should return
and dwell there. Afterward he took many other places, and passed over into
Sicilia: and for that he could not easily make a conquest thereof, he left
four captains with many men of war therein, and returned into Italy. And if
NARSES a captain whom JUSTINIAN sent, had not come thither, he had within
short space made himself absolute Lord of the whole country. This NARSES was
a famous Captain, valiant, and of great experience, and very private with the
Emperor JUSTINIAN; and therefore rich, and of great authority; who came Narses
came general in Italy against Totila.
into Italy with a great Army, levied of sundry nations, as Hunnes, Heruli,
and other warlike people. Amongst which there came to his service, a people
called Longobardi, who then dwelt in Hungary; and he marched by land along all
the coast of the Adriaticque sea, now called the gulf of Venice, until he
came to Rauenna; notwithstanding that at his entry into Italy, he had some
encounters and conflicts with some of TOTILA his Captains, where there came to
join with him some of those Captains and companies, which BELISARIVS had
left. Staying but few days in Rauenna, he took the field with his Army,
directing his course for Rome. But TOTILA who was not any way a coward,
attended his coming upon the way; A battle between Narses and Totila,
wherein Totila was slain.
and presenting him battle, they fought, and in the fight TOTILA was slain,
and his people scattered and overthrown. Which victory was the occasion that
NARSES easily reconquered all Italy: for after this fight, he held on his
journey and besieged Rome. And notwithstanding that the Goths which TOTILA
left there in garrison, did defend it well, yet NARSES took it by assault, with
great loss of the defendants. And departing from thence, he took all the towns
and cities round about.

After the death of TOTILA, the Goths made a great man amongst them whose name
was TEYAS, their King, who took all TOTILA his treasure which lay in Pauia; and
sought Teyas made King of the Goths.
to get men and aid against NARSES, and sent to entreat relief of the
French, who would not intermeddle in that war. But TEYAS seeing that NARSES
took cities and towns, without finding any man to fight with him, departed out
of Lombardie with all the power he could make, and marched toward Campania,
where NARSES stayed for him. They both lodged their Armies upon a river side:
where after some notable skirmishes, they came to a battle, A mo^ cruel
battle wherein Teyas was slain.
which was one of the most cruel that had been fought in all that war. For
historians report wonders wrought by this TEYAS, King of the Goths in his own
person; but in the end being ouer-borne by NARSES his men, he was by them
slain, just at twelve of the clock at noone, at which time he had fought
about six hours; and yet notwithstanding his death, the battle ceased not,
until that dark night parted them, without appearance of any victory of
either side: and reposing themselves as well as they could that night, the next
morning the Goths in despair, and the Imperialists despited, to see that a
people without a Captain should so defend themselves, returned again to
fight, without ceassing; and the Goths taking the benefit of the side of an
hill, defended themselves. But in the end toward night they sent their
Ambassadors unto NARSES, offering to render all that they held in Italy,
conditionally that he should give them leave to live in it, without any armor
or weapons. Which request NARSES granted, for that he would not fight with a
desperate people, and for the great loss which his Army had already received:
and so they delivered what they possessed, and some of them continued in
Italy, subject to the inhabitants, in such manner, that within a very short
space the name of the Goths was wholly extinct, rooted out and forgotten,
although not presently after the victory: for some Captains and companies which
remained in Gallia Cisalpina, now called Lombardy, and in the Province of
Traspadana, now Piemont, began to fortify; and they craving Traspadana,
Piemons.
aid and succors coming out of France and Burgundy, the war was renewed,
which lasted welneere one whole year, and therein passed great battles: but
in the end NARSES obtained both the field and the victory, and was absolute
commander of all Italy. And it pleased God to make him the instrument to root
out, and to extinguish the name of the Goths and Ostrogothes in Italy, 18
years after the beginning of this war; and threescore and twelve, after that
Agathius treats of this war in a particular Book. Narses drove the Goths out
of Italy.
THEODORICVS first entered and made himself Lord of that country. But to the
contrary, the Visogothes in Spain grew daily more powerful, and the name of
the Alanes and Sueuians extinct, the Goths only remaining. At that time
reigned ATHANAGILDVS in great prosperity in Spain, and ruled that kingdom
the space of 22 years. These enterprises being ended, NARSES applied himself
to the uttermost of his power, to the reedifying of Rome: and for as much as it
was extremely ruinated and lay waste, and many of the Citizens absent, he
caused the inhabitants to reduce themselves to one part thereof; and so he
took the best order he could, both for the government of the same, and of
Italy also. This NARSES was a man of great judgment, a good christian, very
zealous in Religion, and desirous of the good of the commonwealth, and besides
all this, was one of the most excellent captains of the World. By reason
whereof he held the government of Italy as long as the Emperor JUSTINIAN
lived; who during all the time of these great wars, made his continual abode
in Constantinople, providing men and money for the wars in all parts; as well
for those of Italy as in the East, where he had dangerous wars against
COSROES King of Persia.

There happened in the time of JUSTINIAN (besides the wars and conquests before
specified, and many others, which for brevity, and for that they were of no
great importance, I omit) earthquakes, famine, and other great calamities. For
in his reign the times were so variable, The valor and prudence of the
Emperor Justinian.
and there happened such strange accidents, as the like had never been. And he
(as I said in the beginning) was as an excellent prince, and exceedingly
careful for the wars; providing captains, soldiers and money, without taxing
or oppressing his subjects, with incredible magnanimity and bounty. By means
whereof, he preserved the Empire of the East, and reconquered the Provinces of
Africa, wholly subuerting and expelling the Vandales out of those countries,
and did the like by the Goths in Italy. And concerning his Government in time
of peace, he was no less careful; so as it seemed he never had applied
himself to any thing else: for as the laws and statutes made by other
Emperors his predecessors, were so many, that a man could hardly read them;
and so variable and intricate as it seemed that many of them did contradict one
the other; he reduced them all to a conformity and brevity; drawing out
Justin abbridg'd the laws.
of them that only which was necessary, and made other new. And in this
manner he abbridged all the laws of the ancient Magistrates, Judges and
Lawyers, which contained about 2000 books, and reduced them to fifty, called
the Digest; and compiled the 4 books of the Institutions, commonly called
Instituta. And the laws and decrees of all the Emperors and CAESAR'S, which
were dispearsed abroad in very many books, he reduced to twelve; called
IVSTINIANS Codex. And he made another book entitled, The Volume, wherein he
included three of those twelve books aforesaid. To bring these things to
effect he held about him Codex Iustiniani.
great learned men: but the principal ministers and authors thereof were, JOHN
PATRICIVS, and THEOPHITVS, and DOROTHEVS, but chiefly TRIBVNIANVS; all singular
Lawyers and Philosophers. Besides all this, JUSTINIAN was very ^ious in
Architecture, and built many great and sumptuous edifices. But he was taxed
wi^h this vice, that he willingly gave ear, and was a friend to bake-biters,
and such as spoke ill of others, and was very reuengefull against such as any
way offended him. He was also no^ed of ingradice, and covetousness, and that
by all ways and means he sought to increase his rents, and treasure; but he
afterward spent it all frankely and bountifully in the wars, and upon his
soldiers.

Being now very old and having no son that might succeed him, he chose his
Nephew IVSTIN, for his companion in the Empire; which IVSTIN, was his daughters
son. They Justinian made his nephew Justin, his companion in the Empire.
write of him, that in his old age, he was infected with the heresy of those,
which believed, that the flesh and body of CHRIST was impassible. Which
heresy is to be supposed proceeded through want of judgment, whereof he was
bereaved some days before he died. Finally, after so many noble acts and many
others, which for brevity cannot be expressed, the good Emperor JUSTINIAN
being above 80 years old, left this for a better life, when he had reigned
Justinian died in the year 568
39 years, in the year of our Lord, 568, and was greatly lamented and deplored
through all the whole Empire.

THE LIFE OF IVSTIN, THE SECOND OF THAT NAME, AND THREESCORE ROMAN EMPEROVR.
THE ARGUMENT.
Upon the death of Justinian, his daughters son Justin took possession of
the Empire; who was far unlike to his Grandfather, both incondition, and in
his vigilant care for the government: for he left the administration thereof to
his wife Sophia. He had wars with the Persians, but they were soon ended,
and he particularly applied himself to the affairs of Italy, which for the
Empire was governed by Narses: For, Justin in the East, gave himself to
pleasure and sensuality. This Narses, having to his great glory performed many
worthy enterprises, was ill rewarded by Justin, and his wife Sophia: But the
injuries done unto him were the occasion of so great miseries, as poor Italy
shall ever have cause to lament them. For Narses calling Alboinus King of the
Longobards into Italy, and afterward desiring to have stayed them (whon he
could not) he was the cause of the ruin thereof: For they made themselves
Lords of the greatest part thereof, and possessed the same above two hundred
years. In time of which war, Justin died of the Gowte, when he had reigned
eleven years.

IT was so hard a matter to abbreuiate, and to relate, the accidents happened
in the time of the Emperor JUSTINIAN; and I was so much troubled therewith,
they were so many and so notable, that I do not only feel my self eased of
that burden, and do likewise rejoice in that I have brought that work to an
end, but am also of opinion that from henceforth I shall be less troubled: And
although I be in some danger to be deceived therein, nevertheless I rejoice in
this hope; wherein (with the grace of God) I will proceed. JUSTINIAN being
dead, his daughters son IVSTIN the second without any difficulty obtained the
Empire: for (as we have Justin obeyed for Emperor.
said) his Grandfather in his life time made him his companion and proclaimed
him his successor; his mother (as we said) was IVSTINIANS daughter. His father
was a great Nobleman in the country of Slauonia; he himself was of a quick
and active wit, and both apt and sufficient for any thing; but ill conditioned
and unworthy of the Empire, proving far unlike his Grandfather. For, as
PAVLVS DIACONVS writes, he became covetous and tyrannous, a robber and a
despiser of the poor, and above all, he was retchlesse and negligent in
matters of justice and gouemement; and thereof left all the charge and care to
his wife the Empress, whose name was SOPHIA, Sophia wise to the Emperor Justin.
whose wit was incapable thereof, neither had she conditions or virtues
deserving the same. At his first coming to the Empire, this SOPHIA, to win the
love and good will of the people, counseled IVSTIN, out of his Exchequer, to
pay the debts of such poor men as were unable to make satisfaction without
their undoing, which he did: wherefore in the beginning of his reign he was
generally well beloved.

There also happened war between him and HORMISDA King of Persia, who through
Hormisda king of the Persians.
the death of COSROES succeeded in that Kingdom: whither he sent a Nobleman
called MARTIN for General, and there passed great matters, but principally a
cruel and bloody War and peace with the Persians.
battle, wherein the Imperialists prevailed; and finally they returned to
treat of peace; and that was confirmed, which was made in the time of the
Emperor JUSTINIAN. So the East remained in peace, and IVSTIN passed his time
without care in pleasure, giving himself over to vice and sensuality. So as
of him there is no notable matter to be written, but of the affairs of Italy:
which happened in this manner. In the fourth year (as some write) of the
reign of the Emperor IVSTIN, and the tenth or twelfth of NARSES his
government in Italy, after the great victory obtained through his wisdom
and policy against the Goths; some malicious men envying his great honor and
dignity, and the great riches which he had gotten in former wars, reported
and wrote to IVSTIN much evil of NARSES; and as in Court (an usual thing)
there wanted not some that envied him, and were glad thereof, so they found the
favor to be heard; and IVSTIN through want of judgment, and the Emperesse
SOPHIA being light of belief, were persuaded that what was told them of him
was true. So without respect or regard of the dangers and troubles wherewith
he had conquered Italy, they resolved to depose him from his government, and to
send him a successor, which was one of the greatest indignities that could be
done him. And it pleased God to permit so great an ingratitude to be punished.
For SOPHIA was not content to embase NARSES by depriving him of his Narses
deposed from his government of Italy. Longinus sent to govern Italy.
government, but she also disgraced him in her speeches, saying, that she would
have him come to spinne amongst her women at Constantinople. And a principal
man called LONOINVS, was presently sent to take his place and to succeed him.

When NARSES understood of this, his courage could not endure so shameful a
disgrace, without great disdain. Wherefore being no less grieved with the
words used by SOPHIA, then with what they had done; it is written that he said:
That, seeing that she meant to make him to spinne, he promised to twist her
such a web, as she should never be able to untwine: which he well performed, as
hereafter shall be said. And understanding that LONGINVS was come to Rauenna,
he durst not go to Constantinople, but came from Rome (where he then lived) to
Naples; where he was so much beloved and honored, as he held himself to be
there in security. From thence as a man disgraced and in despair, he by often
letters and otherwise, solicited ALBOINVS King of the Longobards, who was his
friend, and had sent men to aid him in his war against the Goths, and at
that time made his residence in Hungary, that he should come into Italy, and
make himself Lord thereof; and that he would assist and direct him in what he
had to do in that conquest. And ALBOINVS afterward followed his direction.
These Longobardi, as some say, were so called, for that they ware long beards.
Their original and the place of their breeding (as PAVLVS DIACONVS writes The
Lombards what people they were.
of them) was in an Island in the Germane sea, then called Scandinauia: from
whence they being many, and accounting their Country too little for them (as
many other Northerly Nations had done) with two Captains, the one called AYON,
and the other THATON, left their Country, and went to seek some place wherein
they might inhabit, either by peace or war.

These Captains being dead, they chose one AGELMOND for their King, and
afterward had other Kings, and diverse wars at sundry times with variable
success, against the Goths, the Vandales, and other nations; until that
after many years they became Lords of Hungary; from whence their King ALBOINVS
sent men of war (as we said) to the aid of NARSES against the Goths;
whereof grew the occasion that he called him into Italy, to the end that he
should make himself Lord thereof; who resolved to go thither, as well for the
proffer made to him by NARSES, as for that he had heard of the fruitfulnes of
that soil, not only by common report, but also by the particular relation,
made by those whom he had sent to serve NARSES in those wars. Whilst that
he mustered up his soldiers, and made such preparation as for so great an
enterprise was requisite, LONGINVS the new Captain and governor of Italy,
settled a new form and order of government, which continued a long time after:
which was, that coming into Italy he took the name and title of Exarch,
which is, General or supreme governor. And resting in Raue^na, careless of
seeing Rome, in every city of Italy he placed a governor called Dux: whereof (as
I imagine) sprang the beginning of the title Ex^chus the name of a supreme
Governor.
and dignity of a Duke, which now is used throughout all the World. And so
each of them governed a City, and not as in former times, when every Province
had some principal man of great authority for their particular Captain or
Governor. In Rome for the greater honor The original of Dukes.
was placed a Governor called Praeses, who was (as we say) a President or Lord
Deputy. And so the Authority of the Senate, and dignity of the Consuls, was
wholly lost and extinct, so as they were never after in that manner as in
ancient times: for NARSES and his companion The last Roman Consuls.
BASILIVS were the last Consuls.

This form of government being established, and ALBOINVS king of the
Longobards being in a readiness to take his journey toward Italy, it followed
that Pope JOHN the third, with the general consent of all the Roman people,
who infinitely loved NARSES, went from Rome to Naples, where he then was; and
persuading him to return to Rome, prevailed so much as he brought him with
him, where he was received with great love and joy, they pretending to protect
him, and to keep him there amongst them. Whereupon NARSES repented that ever
he had called ALBOINVS, and again wrote to him, to take no care to come into
Italy, alleging many difficulties. But as ALBOINVS was resolved, and knew the
small force that was in Italy, with the government of LONGINVS, and the little
discretion and care of the Emperor IVSTIN, he would not be dissuaded from his
intended enterprise, but The death of Narses.
hastened his coming. Before which, NARSES died in Rome, where he left great
treasure hidden, which afterward was found; and his body was carried to
Constantinople. And at the same time died Pope JOHN who brought him from Naples.

King ALBOINVS departing with a great Army of Longobards from Hungary,
together with a great number of Saxons and other Nations which he had levied,
and were joined with him, through the desire they had to dwell in Italy, all
which might amount to the number of two hundred thousand men, with their wives,
children, herds of Cattle, and moveable goods, such as they could carry,
would not abandon Hungary, but left the Hunnes, which lived in that country,
and were the remainder of the great Army of the fierce King ATTILA (of whom
heretofore we have made much mention) to guard it. Which Hunnes (as the
Longobards prospered well in Italy) remained owners and possessors of the
country, which after their name is now called Hungary, which before was
called Pannonia, as some say; yet some others affirm Pannonia wherefore called
Hungary.
(as is before noted) that a certain people called Hungri, came from the
frozen sea, and together with them the Hunnes dwelt in Pannonia, and so after
these two Nations it was called Hungary. But howsoever it was, until this day
it is so called, and the successors of the Hunnes have possessed it, and
valiantly defended the same against the Infidels, until our time, that for our
sins SOLIMAN the Turkish Emperor took the greatest part thereof.

ALBOINVS passing with his Army toward Italy, came into that Province which
now is called Friuli: where he took many Cities, and used no small cruelty,
and much more would The coming of Alboinus and the Lombards into Italy.
have done, if he had not been somewhat pacified by the prayers and entreaties
of PAVL the Patriarch of Aquileia, and of FELIX Bishop of Treuigi. But being
desirous to enter further into Italy, and to leave that to safe keeping which
he had gotten, he left therein for governor and to guard the passages into
those countries, a valiant Captain which was his Nephew called SISVLPHVS, and
he proceeded in his journey: It was the will of God, that he found small
resistance in Italy, for it was then afflicted, both with famine and
pestilence. By reason whereof LONGINVS, the Governor and Exarch before named,
was not of power to levy any sufficient Army to fight with ALBOINVS, and
therefore held himself in Rauenna, where he drew together the best men and the
greatest number he was able, with a resolution to make frontier wars by
fortifying the Towns, and putting good Garrisons in them; which he
principally did in Cesarea, which at that time was a very noble City, near to
Rauenna, whither he drew the greatest number of soldiers he could possibly
levy, and fortifyed Patauia, and therein put a Garrison, which is now called
Padoua, and is under the government of the Venetians. The like he did by
Cremona and Mantua, and in other of the strongest Cities, imagining if he could
hold those countries, ALBOINVS would pass no further; and if he did, he should
be greatly anoyed by them in his Ariereguard. Which was no ill device, if in
that Province there had been any Army to have made head against ALBOINVS and
his forces in the field. But LONGINVS had neither heart nor power to do it:
and ALBOINVS holding it for a long piece of work to batter and assault all
those Towns, took another course, with drawing himself from them, for that
he would not be forced to stay before any of these Towns: but went and
assaulted Verona and Vicenza, wherein were no Garrisons; which with others,
yielded without resistance. From whence passing over the river Adda, he took
his way toward Milane, where the Citizens (induced thereto by the persuasion
of HONORATVS their Bishop) Alboinus took Milan and other towns.
gave up the City, to free themselves from slaughter and sack.

After this, other places did the like: for the famine was so great, and so
general, as without any force the towns yielded, being unable to victual
themselves for a siege; excepting those places which were victualled by
LONGINVS: amongst which in that quarter were Pauia and Briselli, now called
Vercelli, which by the said LONGINVS were sufficiently furnished with all
things needful. ALBOINVS resolved to besiege them: and having been now six
months in Italy, he besieged Pauia: but it defended it self so valiantly,
that the siege continued three years. In the beginning of which time,
perceiving that it would be a long siege, remaining before it with such part of
his army as he thought sufficient, he sent the rest to make war in other
parts of Italy, and to make a conquest thereof: and they all sped as he
desired: for they took many Towns, Cities and Castles in Italy. And the
President or governor The wars of the Lombards in Italy.
of Rome fearing to be besieged, and seeing the great scarcity and famine
which was in the City, sent to desire relief of men and victuals of the
Emperor IVSTIN, who commanded a great quantity of wheare to be brought from
Africa to Rome, and some soldiers also. Wherewith the city was well relieved,
and the Longobards at that time came not thither, neither durst they invade
Rauenna, nor the cities adjoining: for they were all very well fortified and
garrisoned by LONGINVS. But in other places they made themselves Lords of a
great part of Italy, in so much that between Bologna and Milan there were few
places of strength, but within three years war were brought under their
subjection: and so they afterward possessed all that province above two
hundred years, with variable fortune, as hereafter we will relate; and by
them it was called Lombardy, and is so still unto this day. About the end of
this time ALBOINVS took Pauia: and seeing himself mighty, he took his way
toward Verona, Gallia Cisalph^na called Lombardia by the Longobards.
whither he had caused his wife Queen ROSAMVND to come, with his treasure and
wardrobe; and there holding his Court he gave himself to feasting and
banketting, and was slain by treason, by the order and consent of his wife,
whose father he had slain, and in a The death of Alboinus.
banquet gave her to drink in her fathers scull: for revenge whereof she
worthily practiced his death.

ALBOINVS dying in this manner, after many incounters and battails, the
Longobards chose for their King a great man of blood and of worth amongst them,
called CLEPHIS, or Paulus Diaconus lib. 2. cap. 24. Clephis king of the
Lombards.
CLEVE, who proved a most cruel Prince; and renewing the wars, committed
great crueltirs in those cities which held of the Empire, in the province of
Venetia: for in those days the city of Venice, which in the time of ATTILA
began to be inhabited, was greatly increased by those which (to escape the
cruelty of the Lombards) went to dwell in those Islands, and were now of force
able to defend themselves; and this city began to be famous and of great The
prosperity of Venice.
account, and has coutinued and increased until this day: so as it is now one
of the most famous cities in the world. At this time the Emperor IVSTIN who
lived viciously, careless and negligent, in Constantinople was taken with so
grievous pain of the gowte in his feet, as he died thereof. And some days
before his death, by the consent of his wife SOPHIA, by whom he The death of
the Emperor Justin
was wholly governed (for that he had no son) he made an excellent Nobleman,
CAESAR, whose name was TIBERIUS: and having exhorted him very effectually to
yield obedience unto SOPHIA, having swaied the Imperial scepter 11 years, he
died, in the year of our Lord 579: and after some, 576.

THE LIFE OF TIBERIUS, SECOND OF THAT NAME, AND THREESCORE AND ONE ROMAN
EMPEROVR.
SVch were the conditions of the Emperor IVSTIN in his life time, that when he
was dead, no man lamented or mourned for him, except his wife SOPHIA, who
through her husbands in sufficiency governed and commanded all, and had a
conceit to have continued it; meaning to have married with TIBERIUS, who
presently upon the death of IVSTIN was created and crowned Emperor. But, as he
was a virtuous The virtues of Tiberius.
man, just, pitiful, mild, charitable, and endued with such virtues, as in a
good and Christian Emperor were requisite, he would not have her to wife; all
whose conditions he knew to be quite contrary; and with whom even in the life
time of IVSTIN (as some write) he was at some controversy. TIBERIUS when he
was created CAESAR, made distribution of much of the Imperial treasure to the
poor; and afterward at his Coronation named for Emperesse a great Lady whose
name was ANASTASIA, with whom he was secretly married. Whereupon SOPHIA at the
same feast practiced by treason to have had him slain, with The treason of
Sophia.
a determination to have made one JUSTINIAN, another of IVSTINIANS nephews,
Emperor. But, as it pleased God, the good TIBERIUS escaped this treason, and
others also which SOPHIA practiced; and his Coronation was held with great
solemnity: and the treachery of SOPHIA being discovered (she craving mercy)
he pardoned both her and JUSTINIAN. But many days passed not before she
attempted the like, in a house of pleasure whither TIBERIUS went for his
recreation. At this time he caused her to be apprehended, and despoiled of all
her riches. But as he was mild and pitiful, he pardoned her her life, and
gave her maintenance, and made her to be served with great respect and honor;
but he took from her all her old servants, placing others to attend her by his
appointment; he again pardoned JUSTINIAN: for he knew that he was induced to
all that he did by SOPHIA. And he was afterward greatly beloved by TIBERIUS,
and served him faithfully, as PAVLVS DIACONVS writes.

These were the private and domestical accidents which in the beginning befell
TIBERIUS. In the general estate of the Empire, he ever maintained justice, and
reigned valiantly. Africa, and all the provinces which the Empire held in Asia
and in Europe, peaceably obeyed him. But the wars in Italy against the
Lombards, and in the East against the Persians, did put him to much care and
trouble. In the wars of Persia he had good success, whereof we will first
speak briefly. For as soon as TIBERIUS came to the Empire, he sent his
Ambssadors to King HORMISDA, to confirm the peace in such manner as his
predecessors held the same before him. But HORMISDA, who saw himself rich and
mighty, would not accept thereof, but made war upon the Frontiers of the
Empire. TIBERIUS speedily sent a Wars with the Persians and their King Hormisda.
mighty Army against him: but at that time they fought not. For, there was a
truce concluded for a time: which being expired, a cruel war began chiefly
in the Kingdom of Armenia; where the Roman General and Army came to a
battle with HORMISDA: which Fight was very cruel, and of long continuance.
Nevertheless, the Romans had the victory, and A battle wherein the Persians
were ouercomn.
HORMISDA saved himself by flight; and therein were taken the greatest and
richest spoils that ever were gotten from the Persians: all which were given
to the men of war, excepting the Kings treasure, and the vessel of gold and
silver for his service; which (as PAVLVS DIACONVS says) was carried to
TIBERIUS in Constantinople upon twenty Elephants (which had not other loading)
with a great number of prisoners; to whom the Emperor commanded rich and
gallant apparel to be given, and then to be set at liberty, to return to their
Country. And in the mean time the Imperial Army entered the Countries subject
to the Persians; and, burning and spoiling the same, returned with victory.
But within a small time after, HORMISDA levied the greatest forces that he was
able, and made a very valiant and expert man of war, General thereof: for,
by reason of his last overthrow, he made a law, that the Kings of Persia
should never be present in any battle; and so he again renewed the war
against the Empire, to recover his lost honor. Against whom the Emperor sent a
new General, a valiant and wise Earl named MAVRICE, who afterward was
Emperor; who with the like good Maurice made General against the Persians.
fortune sought to fight with the Persians: and, leuying infinite numbers of
soldiers on either side, they fought a great part of the day, until that,
after many thousands of the one and other side were slain, the victory showed
it self to be of MAVRICE his side: and he recovered certain A battle wherein
Maurice had the victory.
places, and conquered others from the Persians; so as HORMISDA was constrained
of necessity to conclude some peace or truce with the Emperor. And MAVRICE came
with victory to Constantinople: where he was solemnly received by TIBERIUS,
who married him to his own daughter, in reward of so noble a victory.

Whilst these things past in the East, the affairs of Italy prospered not so
well: for, CLEPHIS, the new King of the Lombards, made cruel wars against those
Towns and Countries which held of the Empire; and all things happened so
according to his desire, that he took many cities: The state of Italy against
the Longobards.
and, being desirous to repose himself for a while, he sent his Captains and
their companies toward Rome. And they took all the Cities in the marches
thereof; and Rome it self was besieged by them, and was in great danger to have
been entered by force. So that (as Authors affirm) if CLEPHIS had lived but a
little while longer, he had made himself Lord of Rome and Rauenna, which were
the two eyes and fortresses of all Italy. But his designs were made frustrate
by death, like to other Kings and Captains, who have been as great and greater
than ever he was; whose death was practiced by the treason of his own
people. After his decease the Lombards would neither choose nor have any more
Kings at that time: but there arose thirty principal Thirty tyrants of the
Lombards
men, or (to speak more properly) thirty tyrants; who invested themselves in
thirty of the best Towns which they held in Italy. And so every of them
governed his Town and the Territory thereof. And each of them likewise made
wars apart by himself; sometimes the one aiding and assisting the other against
the Empire. And as the Emperor TIBERIUS was busied in making provision for his
wars against the Persians, and did not sufficiently provide for Italy, these
Captains of the Lombards had opportunity to extend their power there, and took
many other Cities, coming before Rome and Naples. In which war they committed
such cruelties, robberies and insolences, as the like had never been seen. So
that from Rome to the Eastwards there remained little more subject to the
Empire than the Kingdom of Naples, and the City of Rome, with some Towns in the
marches thereof; and the City of Naples fell also into the hands of the
Lombards: but we cannot certainly say, whether at this time or afterward. Yet
Rauenna held for the Empire, and some other strong houlds near unto it; which,
through the wisdom and foresight of LONGINVS, were defended. And there also
held for the Empire of either side of the river of Po, Como, Cremona, Mantoa,
Padoa, Bologna and Vercelli: and the Lombards at this time had all the rest.
Thus the war was managed on either side with great cruelty: for, the Lombards
as they were barbarous, and had not yet well received the faith of CHRIST, robbed
and spoiled all, as well sacred as profane, without any difference. Whereto,
besides what is already said, this was a great furtherance, that in the time of
this combustion TIBERIUS fell so sorely sick, that he could not apply himself
to the government of the Empire; and his infirmity never left him till he died.
Wherefore the Romans, oppressed by the Longobards, motioned a treaty of peace;
and a truce was concluded between them for a certain time. Which truce the
Lombards granted, for that the kings of France (wherein at that time reigned
three brothers) being much grieved to see the Lombards grown so mighty in
Italy, sent a great Army against them, which was already entered Lombardy. And
they also the more willingly granted the truce, for that the Saxons, which
until then had aided them in their wars, had now left them and were
returned. TIBERIUS being sick in Constantinople (as we said) as a good Emperor
desirous as well to provide for the time to come, as he had done for the
present and past; nominated for CAESAR and his successor his son in law
MAVRICE. And afterward leaving all the Empire entire and in peace, as he
inherited the same (the state of Italy only except) in the seventh year of
his reign (although some say less) he died, in the year of our The death of
Tiberius.
Lord, five hundred fourscore and five; and after some others, five hundred
fourscore and nine. His death was much lamented by all estates, for his great
virtue and integrity, and for that he was liberal and bountiful to all men.

THE LIFE OF MAVRICIVS, ONLY OF THAT NAME, AND THREESCORE AND TWO ROMAN
EMPEROVR.
THE ARGUMENT.
THE Empire being come to Mauricius, son in law to Tiberius, he showed
himself to be of a very vile disposition, and particularly sinned in
covetousness, notwithstanding that in Martial affairs he was very wise and
politic. He sent Captains and men of war into Italic against the Lombards,
accordingly as Pope Pelagius had requested, with whom after long war, in the
end a truce was concluded: he afterward brake the peace with the Persians, and
the war had this issue, that after many routes and overthrows equally given
and received, of the one side and the other; the new King of Persia, to
suppress a Tyrant which rose against him, became a friend to the Emperor of
Constantinople. After which peace, bending himself to the affairs of the
West, he governed the estate with indifferent good fortune, through the valor
of the Exarcht, which he sent into Italy: yet in this time God sent many
plagues and scourges into the World, as inundations and ouerflowings of waters,
famine, and Pestilence, which happened more in Rome then in any other country.
Besides which miseries, it was besieged by the Lombards: and Maurice for the
hatred which he bare to Gregory (who then succeeding Pelagius, was Pope) would
not relieve it, so as to abase the Pope, he was content to lose all Italy,
which God afterward severely punished. For his own soldiers rebelling
against him, made a private Colonel, whose name was Phocas, Emperor, who
coming toward Constantinople with an Army, made Maurice to fly: and he
being unable to levy such forces as might defend him, taken by tho soldiers
of the new tyrant, was brought back to Constantinople, where having first seen
the death of his wife and children, by the hands of an executioner he had his
head stricken off; all which he endured with great resolution when he had
reigned twenty years.

MAVRICIVS peaceably obtained the Empire, by the death of his father in law
TIBERIUS, whom he nothing resembled in his virtues, for he was both vicious
and covetous; yet in the affairs of the wars, he was very provident and
diligent: and as he was both valiant and politic in martial actions, so he
made choice of singular Captains for the wars which were many, very great
and dangerous. Whereof great part happened at one instant, notwithstanding that
they were in sundry parts and Provinces. Wherefore to deliver that in few
words which I have gathered together, it is requisite I should write each
several accident apart: which I will perform in the best manner I can, so as
in the end of all, the whole may be understood. Beginning then with the
affairs of Italy, I say that the truce made with the Lombards, was not of
their part thoroughly observed, but that daily from one city or other, there
were robberies committed, and some encounters and bickerings. Wherefore as
LONGINVS was but of small power, and the Romans were in great fear to be
besieged; Pope PELAGIVS the second wrote a Letter from Rome to GREGORY whom he
had sent to Constantinople, informing him of the state of Italy, and of the
great danger and necessity wherein it was, and gave him especial charge to be
an earnest suitor to the Emperor, to send relief and men against the Lombards;
which he procured with such efficacy, as the Emperor MAVRICE (notwithstanding
that he was much troubled with the wars of Persia, whereof we will speak
hereafter) provided a new Exarch and governor for Italy, who was a good
soldier and a wise man called SMARAGDVS, with a good number of soldiers; and
sent for LONGINVS to return. SMARAGDVS came by sea to Rauenna, and with him
Saint GREGORY. His Smaragdus bame Exarch ^to Italy.
coming, for the fame and good report which was sp^ed of him, gave great joy
and hope to the Imperialists in Italy; and he presently took order for
martial affairs. And forasmuch as* near unto Rauenna, a valiant captain of
the Lombards, called FEROALDVS, held a city called C^, and had made, and still
did make cruel war against those of Rauenna; he resolved to use all means
to dispossess him thereof; and to drive him quite from thence. And to this
effect he sent to DOCTRVLA an Imperial captain and governor of the city of
Vercelli, that leaving a competent garrison in that city he should come with
his forces to join with him: who making provision of boats and baikes,
purposed for his better security, to pass down the river of Po, to the end
that being arrived at Aspene^ico, which is at the mouth of the river, he might
sail from thence by sea to Rauenna. But FEROALDVS had intelligence hereof;
and with the greatest power that he could make, came likewise with barks to
stop his passage down the river: where they came to blows, and DOCTRVLA by
means of the aid which came to him from Rauenna had the victory, and FEROALDVS
was overthrown and fled by water to Classi, which the new Exarch SMARAGDVS in
the mean time had besieged and battered, so as it was ready to have yielded
when FEROALDVS came; who then hindered the same, by encouraging the besieged.

But as soon as they understood that he was overthrown by the enemy and came
thither by flight, they resolved to yield, and did so. SMARAGDVS entered the
city; where all the Lombards which were found therein, were put to the sword,
and in like manner their governor FEROALDVS, in revenge of the like cruelties
committed by them.

This victory obtained by SMARAGDVS, was so highly esteemed, as those of his
party resuming heart and courage, and their adversaries waxing fearful, he
recovered some cities and holds, the greatest part whereof yielded of
themselves. Which the captains of the Lombards considering (who after the
death of CLEPHIS continued as tyrants and would not choose them any King) they
resolved to make choice of one whom they all should obey, and under whom they
might live; for they were of opinion, that if they continued so divided, they
should be all ou^throwne and brought to confusion, as they already began.
Having resolved hereupon* they chose one of King CLEPHIS his sons, whose name
was ANTHARIS, a young Antharis chosen King of the Longobards.
man of great spirit, and who had purchased greater fame in the wars then any
other man of his nation; and so was much spoken of both among his friends and
enemies. The name of a King, and so valiant, as was ANTHARIS, caused a great
alteration in the estate; to whom all the captains and governors contributed
of their treasure, each of them giving him the one half of what he had, for
the maintenance of the wars, and his new estate. The first enterprise he
undertook, was against Vercelli, and DOCTRVLA the governor thereof, as well for
the late dishonor which he had done them, as for that the city at that time
was of great importance; wherefore he besseged it both by water upon the river
of Po with barks, and by land with great forces which he had raised; and
forced it in ^uch manner, as notwithstanding that DOCTRVLA did all that
possibly he was able to do, being out of hope to hold the place, he came to a
composition with him, and gave it up; and so he came down the river to
Rauenna; and ANTHARIS made great spoil in the city, destroying the best part
thereof, and raced the walls down to the earth, so as they were never after
repaired or made like as in former time they had been.

ANTHARIS having obtained this victory, resolved to go against FRANCILIONE,
who held the city of Como, and other fortresses in the Lake of Como, and had
very gallantly defended the same for the space of seventeen years. But in
the mean season motions were made of peace or truce, and either party was
glad to treat thereof. SMARAGDVS, for that he stood in fear of the King, who
was both young and valiant, and also for that he imagined himself to have no
sufficient power to make head against him, and the King being but newly come to
his government, holding not himself thoroughly settled and confirmed; the
better to establish himself therein, thought it best to conclude a peace, and
to bring-vnder some, to whom his election was nothing pleasing. All which laid
together, gave occasion that a truce was taken for a certain time, although
the Lombards never truly observed the same. During that time all Italy enjoyed
some rest, and SNARAGDVS sent to Rome for Perfect or governor thereof, a A
truce taken with the Lombards.
noble Knight borne in Constantinople, whose name was GERMANVS, with whom went
S. GREGORY, and they were received with great joy and solemnity: for GREGORY
for his Germanus goue^nour of Rome.
good life and conversation, was generally beloved and honored. So as with
their coming, and the good hope which was conceived of their new Exarch, they
thought to have a hand in recovering all that which the Lombards held, and had
usurped; and in the mean time, to enjoy the peace in rest and prosperity. But
it followed not according to their expectation: for God sent other
persecutions, as you shall hear. But us leave Italy in this truce, and
briefly speak of those wars which MAVRICE made by his Captains in the East
against the Persians, which for numbers of men, battles and great conflicts,
were far greater then those of Italy: for they were between two the most
mighty Monarchs which then were in the world, to wit, the King of Persia, and
the Roman Emperor.

MAVRICIVS then sent his Army, and for General a worthy Nobleman called
PHILIPPICVS, to whom he had married his sister. Against whom K. HORMISDA
raised Philippicus, General against the Persian^.
greater forces, and made a great man called CARDARIGA his General. With whom,
after some notable skirmishes and encounters, PHILIPPICVS came to a maine
battle, with power against power, which lasted above ten hours; the one
charging the other, in such manner that no advantage could be seen, But in the
end PHILIPPICVS and his troops had the victory, A battle (...)wherein
Philippicus had the victory.
and slew a very great number of the Persians, and took two thousand prisoners,
which he sent to the Emperor to Constantinople: and the rest escaped by
flight, and with them their General CARDARIGA. PHILIPPICVS, having obtained
this notable victory, marched forwards with his Army, and sent a good
Commander called HERACLIVS, with some selected troops, with direction to enter
as far as he might into the Persians country, he promising to second him.
Notwithstanding that CARDARIGA was overthrown, yet was he not discouraged,
neither omitted to use all the means and diligence which to a good General
did belong: and so gathering together such forces as he could, making, show
that he would reinforce his Army; with those small troops he had, passing
over certain mountains, in a very dark night he set upon PHILIPPICVS his
Arierguard; where in the fear was so great, that PHILIPPICVS, as though he had
not been victorious, shamefully fled all the whole night The shameful flight
of Philippicus.
long, with no small loss and slaughter of his people: in so much that the
Persians imagining their flight to have been fained (seeing how few they were)
dared not to follow the chase; and so rested until that the day light freed
the one from fear, and showed the other the advantage they had lost. But
HERACLIVS, whom PHILIPPICVS had sent before, followed his direction with better
discretion, and greater diligence: for passing over the river Tigris, with the
fame of the late victory, he took some cities, and did much hurt, and returned
toward PHILIPPICVS very rich with the prey and spoils of the victory.

This being past, and the Roman Army being gathered again together, the
Emperor commanded PHILIPPICVS, that leaving the Army with HERACLIVS, he should
make his repair to Constantinople; and PHILIPPICVS obeyed his commandment. In
his place was sent a valiant and expert captain called PRISCVS: who being come
to the Army, showed himself so proud and haughty to the Captains and men of
war, as they mutined against Priscus made General against the Persian^ in
place of Philippicus.
him; and he was generally so ill entreated by all men, that he was driven to
save himself by flight, having received such blows and knockes with stones,
as he was in danger to have been slain: and they amongst themselves chose
(against his will) GERMANVS for their General, who was a man of great account
in the Army. But at that time MAVRICIVS was so oppressed with the wars
against CAYANVS, and the Auares, and against the Slauons in Slauonia, in
Missia, and other provinces (whereof we will speak hereafter) as he could not
then punish so great an insolency: and therefore as soon as he understood
thereof, he held it for most expedient to send back PHILIPPICVS, for their
Governor and General, and that PRISCVS should return. And besides
PHILIPPICVS, he also sent another Nobleman of great estimation, called
ARISTOBVLVS, to pacify the mutiny and rebellion of the Army, by entreaty,
Philippicus restored to his charge.
gifts, or otherwise in the best manner he could: which he performed. And so
PHILIPPICVS again undertook his charge: and returned to war against MARVZAS
a new General of the Persians; who with a greater Army then any of those
before named, came against him. Which is an argument of the great wealth and
power of the Kings of Persia, who being so often overthrown, they still
returned with great forces, and that always when they desired peace, the
Empire willingly granted it. And in the end the Emperors were well contented
to defend their confines against them, and held it for a matter of great
consequence.

These two great Captains and Armies came so near together, that both parties
desired to give battle, wherein they fought so obstinately, as it was one of
the most cruel battles in the World: and both the one and other party
fought with such obstinacy and courage, that it lasted the greatest part of
the day, but the Persians were overthrown; not for that they were either
discouraged or ran away, but for that they were almost all slain. For in the
Annals of Constantinople I find written, that three thousand of them were
taken prisoners, and two thousand escaped by flight, and that all the rest died
fighting, and with them their General MARVZAS; so as their Camp was left to
the Romans, who found no man therein to make resistance. And so they spent one
whole year in frontier wars, at the end whereof King HORMISDA commanded a
very great Army to be levied.

PHILIPPICVS, presuming on his former victories, made no doubt to give them
battle; and the Persians refused it not, and so they fought near to the
City Marticopolis; and therein was PHILIPPICVS and the Romans overthrown, to
their great loss and confusion. For which the Emperor was very sorry, and
provided a new General for the East, and sent for PHILIPPICVS to come to
Constantinople, with direction to leave the Army with HERACLIVS, of whom we
made late mention, till that another General should com: which was performed.
Afterward ROMANVS was sent, and the King of Persia sent another, whose name
was BARAS. These two Generals being arrived with their new charges, either of
them sought to win honor against the other; and in diverse incounters, lost
many men, burned Towns, and did the greatest harm every where they could,
until at last they drew near, and fought in a ranged battle, wherein BARAS
and the Persians were overthrown, in the fields of Albania in Asia, which is a
very great Province in the East, bordering upon Armenia. HORMISDA was so
grieved for this loss, imagining that it happened through the defect of his
General, as thereby to disgrace him, he sent him a woman's Garment, and
commanded him presently to leave his government. Yet notwithstanding, he had
set matters in very good order, and had gathered together his scattered Army.
But he stood in such fear of his King, that the best remedy he could devise,
was to rebel against him; which he might easily effect, for HORMISDA was very
cruel, and therefore hated by his subjects. After this (upon the rebellion of
BARAS) VINDOIS, a man of great power (whose brother HORMISDA kept in prison)
conspired against him, with many others, which for his cruelty and
covetousness extremely hated him: and they took him prisoner, and made his
son COSROES their king. But his other son, with his wife, they put to
death, and plucked out his eyes; and afterward his own son caused him to be
slain: and so ended the reign and life of HORMISDA. But the cruelty which
the son used against his father, seemed so horrible and odious, that he
Hormisda king of the Persians put to death by his son Cosroes.
presently fell into as great hatred of all men, as his father had been in his
life time; in so much that going to fight with BARAS, who as I said rebelled,
the greatest part of the men of war which he led, forsook him, and went over
to BARAS. So as COSROES seeing himself abandoned, resolved to sue to his
enemies for relief, and fled into the territories of the Empire, Cosroes king
of the Persians sled into the Empire.
and put himself into the power of PROBS PATRICIVS, who had the guard of the
frontiers, through which he passed, where he was very honorably entertained.
Whereof when the Emperor MAVRICIVS was given to understand, he was very glad,
and sent unto him a very honorable Captain, whose name was NARSES, and a
Bishop, a man of great authority and his kinseman, offering him all favor and
aid for the recovery of his kingdom, and adopted and took him for his son.

NARSES, who went for General in this action, putting the same in execution,
commanded all the Armies and men of war which the Empire held in Asia, to be
drawn to an head: Baras overthrown in a battle by Cosroes.
and so he and COSROES went to seek BARAS, who with the courage of a valiant
Tyrant stayed for them, and fighting was overthrown, and by flight escaped
into certain mountains. After this noble victory, COSROES-recouered all his
kingdoms, and he and the Emperor continued great friends: and so ceased the
wars between the Empire and the Persians, which had continued six years.
This happened in the eight year of the reign of the Emperor MAVRICIVS.

Whilst the Emperor MAVRICE managed these wars in the East, Europe
continued not in ^stnor-peace; for besides the miseries and calamities of Italy
(as I will presently relate) the Hunnes which dwelt in Hungary, and in part of
Noricum, now called Bauaria (whom we but Noricum Bauaria.
now called Auares) after the name of a King of theirs who was called by that
name, then reigning over them a King called CAYANVS, who was both proud and
very valiant, and therewith very mighty, they and he concluded amongst
themselves to make war against the Empire: which they followed with such
resolution as it caused no small fear: for entering through the upper Missia,
which now contains the two provinces of Seruia, and Bassina, he found so
small resistance, as he came into Thracia, now called Graecia or Turkey, for
that therein stands the great city of Constantinople: against whom MAVRICE
sent an Army, and for General thereof Wars between Cayanus and
Commenciolus*
a valiant and prudent captain whose name was COMENCIOLVS. These two made
cruel wars, and after many skirmishes came to a battle, which I leave,
being too long to recite; wherein CAYANVS was overthrown with great loss of
his people, and so was constrained to retire. But within short space after, he
returned again with no less power then at the first, to war in the marches
of Slauonia, and MAVRICE sent thither his son THEODOSIUS, and his father in
law GERMANVS, with other Captains; who had so good success, that although
Cayanus and his people driven out of Hungary.
they lost in some encounters, yet they not only drove them out of that which
they had formerly usurped, but also wholly rooted them out of all Hungary. But
MAVRICE either for fear or retchlesnes forslowed those wars, and losing
opportunity (which is seldom recovered) the inconveniences ensued, which we
will describe. For a kind of people called Slauons, a nation inhabiting far
in the north, which until that time had never been heard of, sent their
Ambassadors to the Hunnes Auares (moved thereto, by the news which they had
heard from them) and offered to come to their aid, as in deed they afterward
did, joined with The Slauons came to make wars in the Empire.
them, and did much harm in the lands of the Empire, and out of it, as
hereafter we will relate in few words.

Let us now return to Italy, which we lost in peace and at truce with the
Lombards: wherein it happened, that as neither party concluded the peace for
any ^emorse of conscience, or for the fear or love of God or their neighbors;
but for their own advantage and private interest, and to awaite a fitter time
and oportuni^ie for the wars (as for our sins it often happens) and as it
was not pleasing to God, neither made according to his will, so it pleased not
him to maintain the same: for he sent his wrath and scourge upon Italy, and
chiefly upon A wonderful deluge in Rome and all Italy.
Rome, ad to a place which mostneeded amendment. The first was with rain,
which fell in the month of September and October, for the space of many days
continually without ceasing, in such so it, that the water was so high, as the
riuees and lakes of Italy ouerflowed and drowned an in^nite number of people
and carteill; and the river Tiber waxed so high, that all the fields which were
not hilly and mountainous, were overflowed with water; so as all men feared
that it would have proved another general deluge; particularly in Rome, where
the river Tiber did swell so much* that in some part it was as high, and in
some other it exceeded and ouerflowed the ^es of (...)city; and tho wat^
entered in such manner into it, that it spoiled and defaced the greatest part of
the buildings near to the ruler. The flood afterward ceasing, the fields
remained so slimie, so muddie and so soft, that they could not be tilled nor
sown; by reason Italy and Rome plagued with ra^, famine and pestilence*
(...)all famine ensued through all Italy. And in like manner through the
excessive moisture, the earth and the air were so corrupted, as the plague
began, which raged in such manner* that many towns were left desolate, and
dispeopled; and where they died least, two thirds of the people perished. But
in the city of Rome (as all writers affirm) was the greatest (...)of: for in
the beginning it took away Pope PELAGPVS the second, in whose (...)(against his
will and perforce) (...)as chosen Saint GREGORY: who seeing the wrath
(...)(...), (...)many devout prayers to God, and many sermons and orations to
the people, The Letanie ordained to be said in the Church by Saint Gregory.
exhorting them to amendment of life, and repentance for their sins, to the
end that it might please his (...)to with hold his punishment from them. And in
this extremity he ordained (...)(...)* which is to this day used in the Church.

Finally, (...)mercy took ^ity on them, and the plague ceased, and the earth
began to be more cheerful, and to change color, and to bring forthfruit. But
yet this favor which the Lord bestowed on them, auailed not to establish any
peace or amity among those which escaped this plague: for, the Lombards, having
gotten supplies of men of war, without any respect of the fear or love of God
(the time of the truce being expired) renewed the wars with greater fury than
at the first. And forasmuch as the Land had been punished with so great
calamities, and lay waste and dispeopled, it was an easy matter for them to do
great harm among the Imperialists. First, their King ANTHARIS in person went
against FRANCILION, who commanded in the City of Como, with two other strong
fortresses in the Lake of Como: and besieging him the space of six months,
being no longer able to defend the City, he gave it up, and went to Rauenna;
that City having valiantly defended it self with much honor the space of twenty
years.

The taking of this City greatly enriched King ANTHARIS: for, FRANCILION had in
that time gathered together and had in it much treasure. Departing from thence
with great honor and wealth, he took other places. Whereupon the Emperor
MAVRICE, at the entreaty of Pope GREGORY, and the Exarch SMARAGDVS (who daily
solicited him for aid and relief) sent to CHILDEBERT, who at that time reigned
King of France, a great sum of money, to the end he should enter Italy with
some great power, in his behalf: and the King of France promised to do so, and
began to put it in execution. Who coming into Italy, the fame of his coming
began to work great effect; and some Captains of the Lombards revolted to him.
But CHILDEBERT imagining, that, if the Emperor again recovered Italy wholly to
himself, he should hardly live in safety in France; he therefore, coming to a
composition with ANTHARIS, returned into his Country, without intermeddling in
other men's quarrels. At his return died ANTHARIS, King of the Lombards: and the
principal men of that Nation, falling at variance among themselves about
choosing of a new King, at last agreed that he should be King whom TEODELINDA
(which was the last Kings widow) should take to husband; and she made choice of
AGISVLPHVS, Gouerner of Taurino, now called Turin: and so he was made King, who
was as valiant a Prince as any his Predecessors had been before him.

At that time the Emperor deposed SMARAGDVS from the government of Italy, and
sent thither for Exarch a Knight called ROMANVS (of whom we made mention in the
wars of Persia) with some companies of soldiers for the defense of Rome, and
to make war in other places. ROMANVS, coming in the mean time, whilst the
new King AGISVLPHVS was busied with some of his Captains, who houlding certain
Cities rebelled against him; provided and furnished, with men and victuals,
Padua, Mantua Cremona, and the rest of the Cities which were in greatest
danger: and, setting all things there in order, he came to Rome; from whence
afterward, with those forces which he brought, and those also which before his
coming were in the City, he departed to recover the Towns and Castles which the
Lombards possessed in that Quarter: many of which he did win by force, and
others voluntarily yielded themselves.

Whilst the Exarch was busy about these things, the Pope sent three very
learned men into England; who with their preaching converted the King and the
Inhabitants thereof to the true faith, which until then was not thoroughly
received among them. The like care he took for Italy, and for all the other
Provinces: and TEODELINDA (the wife of King AGISVLPHVS) being a devout
Christian* he persuaded her and her husband to cause their people to leave
their idolatry; which he obtained: and afterward he entreated him to
surrender to the Church the goods and revenues which he withheld from it.

About this time grew great contention between the Bishops of Rome and of
Constantinople about Contention betwixt the bishops o^ Rome and of
Constantinople for the supremacy.
the supremacy: for, JOHN Bishop of Constantinople alleged, that to him did
appertain the Papacy, and to be Universal Bishop of the Church seeing that
Constantinople was the head of the Empire. Against which, the Bishop of Rome
opposed himself with all his power; alleging himself to be CHRIST's Vicar,
and Head of the Church: so as there passed many things of the one side and the
other about this matter. In this mean time died ROMANVS the The Exarch Romanus
dying, Gallicanus was sent in his place.
Exarch; and another was sent in his place, whose name was GALLICIANVS or
GALLICANVS, who was a virtuous man and very valiant: and he presently applied
himself to redress many things which ROMANVS had perverted and put of order.
And although he much desired war, yet through the counsel of the Pope he
took truce: which being expired, he carried himself so valiantly in the wars,
that he took the City of Parma by assault from the Lombards, and therein took a
daughter of King AGISVLPHVS, whom he had by his first wife; and grew to be so
strong in field, that AGISVLPHVS durst not give him battle. Whereupon, seeing
himself ouermatcht, he sent to the Slauons for aid, who were already joined
with the Auares: and GALLICANVS leuying new forces died in Rauenna, and
SMARAGDVS was again sent thither to be Exarch; who came into Italy with so
small forces, that his coming did rather encourage, than dismay or daunt, the
enemy: which proceeded from this; The Empeperor so deadly hated the Popes
presumption, that, rather than to endure the same, he was content to lose all
Italy.

And to this his dislike was joined the trouble which the Slauons, who came to
his enemies aid, did put him to: for CAYANVS the fierce and proud King of the
Auares (the Slauons and their king MVSACIVS being come into Germany) joined his
forces with his enemies, and some Frenchmen came also to them, and entered the
bounds of the Empire. The Emperor sent against them one PRISCVS, a captain of
great account, with a mighty Army, to stop their passage over the river
Ister, now called Danubius; who warred so advisedly and with so great valor
and discretion, as most times that he fought with them he obtained the
victory. And one Musacius King of the Slauons taken prisoner by Priscus,
General of the Emperors forces.
night he gave the Slauons a Camizado, and took their King MVSACIVS prisoner,
and slew a great number of them. There afterward happened many things in that
war, which would be too long to relate: for CAYANVS King of the Auares, as he
had many men, and those very expert and accustomed to the wars, besides the
multitude of the Slauons, never ceased to make cruel war against the
Emperor MAVRICE; yet sometime they took truce, which lasted some space: and
PRISCVS and he met and spoke together concerning an agreement. After all this,
CAYANVS with his Auares and Slauons entered Dalmatia, and did great harm,
robbing and spoiling many towns there. But PRISCVS coming to relieve them, he
retired Cayanus invaded the Empire.
to his loss, and altring his course took his way toward Thracia: and
marching without stay, came within few days journey of Constantinople. And as
the report and fear is usually greater then the danger, so he struck so
great a terror into the citizens of Constantinople, as they were of the mind
to have abandoned the city, and to have passed over that arm of the Sea into
Asia, as the Annals of Constantinople do testify. But the Emperor MAVRICE
(as in truth he was valiant) commanded all the people to be put in Arms, and
the gates of the city to be shut, and order to be taken in all things that
were needful, using infinite diligence; and gave direction for the defense of
the countries through which CAYANVS was to pass. But all this needed not, for
at that instant there fell so pestilent a mortality in CAYANVS his Army, that
A great plague in Cayanus his camp, whereof seven of his sons died in one day.
in one day seven of his sons (for he had many) and a great number of other
people died of the plague: wherefore he was constrained to return into his
country: And the Emperor sent for General another Captain, whose name was
COMENCIOLVS, who joining with PRISCVS, obtained certain victories against
CAYANVS. But he was of so haughty a mind, and therewith so politic, that
notwithstanding that he was overthrown, yet within very few days he ever
reinforced his Army, in such sort that he put his enemies in greater fear,
then at the first; and in the end at the request and entreatie of the Lombards
which lived in Italy, he resolved to war in Slauonia, drawing near unto
Italy: where, although that he found some resistance, yet the Slauons which
came with him seized upon a great part of that country, and remained there:
and in process of time it left the name of Illyricum, and after their name
until this Illyricum called Slauonia.
day is called Slauonia; and so from henceforth we will call it. From this
nation (as BLONDVS, VOLATERRANVS, and others affirm) the Bohemians and
Polonians are descended: for part of them took those countries, and upon
sundry occasions took these names. The origin of the Bohemians and Polonians.


As matters stood upon these terms, the Lombards in Italy and their King
AGISVLPHVS, knowing how much the Emperor hated the Pope, resolved to besiege
Rome; which they did with a very great Army, and the Pope was therein besieged
above one whole year, and by his industry only the city was defended, for
from the Emperor came no relief at all: whereupon he wrote him certain
letters, which are yet extant, out of which is drawn great part of this
history. But notwithstanding all this, the Emperor MAVRICE would not relieve
him, but rather wished his destruction: but yet both he and the city escaped,
and at the years end ACISVLPHVS raised his siege and departed.

It is written, that upon a day about noone, in the city of Constantinople, in
the open market place of that city, there appeared a man to the Emperor in the
habit of a Monk, holding a sword Prodigious visions appeared to the Emperor
Maurice, prognosticating his death.
in his hand, who speaking with a loud voice, said, The Emperor MAVRICE shall
die by this sword: and this man presently vanished amongst the people, so as no
man could say whence he came, nor who he was. This is written by Pope GREGORY,
which you may believe if you will.

They also say, that in his steep he saw a soldier whose name was PHOCAS, who
murdered his wife and his children, and afterward slew him also. With this
dream he was so much troubled, that he presently commanded his sone in law
PHILIPPICVS to be sent for, who was charged by him to have had a determination
to rebel against him; and he (not without great fear) came to him. The
Emperor, after he had desired him to pardon him for the false accusation
wherewith he had slandered him, asked him whether he knew any man of account
in the Army called by the name of PHOCAS: whereto he answered, that he knew a
Centurion in the Camp of that name, whom he had a little before made Pouruoier
for the Camp. MAVRICE again demanded, what manner of man he was: Quoth he, He
is a choleric, licentious young fellow; but therewith fearful, and a coward.
Whereto they say, the Emperor (being much troubled and in despair) replied: If
he be a coward, of necessity he must be cruel, and desirous to shed blood:
and so, shedding many tears, he told PHILIPPICVS what he had dreamt; who was
therewith also much troubled. In the mean time there came messengers unto him,
which he had sent to certain religious persons to desire them to pray for him;
who in some sort did recomfort him, persuading him to be of good cheer: for,
God would have mercy on his soul. But yet he never ceased to bewail his
sins, and lived in continual sorrow and contrition. And PHILIPPICVS
persuaded him to use some great liberality to his Army and men of war,
thereby to win their love, and the better to live in safety from them. But he
followed not his good counsel: and so within few days after, his death was
practiced, in such manner as follows.

He commanded his brother PETER, whom he had made General of his Army,
against the Slauons in Slauonia, that to avoid charge and expenses, in any
case he should winter in the same province, and lodge his Army in such
villages and other places, where he might most annoy the enemy. Whereto
notwithstanding that PETER answered to the contrary, and entreated that he
might not do so, alleging that the Army should sustain intolerable trouble
and extremity in those mountains; yet he continued so obstinate in his
command, as PETER of force must obey, although against his will: and the Army
took this in so ill part, that without any respect of duty and allegiance
they mutined; and choosing the aforenamed PHOCAS for General, they marched
against PETER, who was lodged about a days journey from thence, and he fled to
the Emperor. BLONDVS writes that the Captains which fled, were THEODOSIUS,
the Emperors son, and GERMANVS his father-in-law. But I heerin follow the
Commentaries of Constantinople, and ZONORAS, which seem to be more conformable
to the truth: for, they write, that the whole Army sent an Embassage to
THEODOSIUS, willing him to come unto them, and they would make him Emperor; and
if he would not that then GERMANVS should come: but, they refusing, or not
daring, to accept their offer' the Army chose the same PHOCAS for Emperor; and
he took his way toward Constantinople. Phocas chosen Emperor.
Which when the Emperor MAVRICE understood, calling to him his son
THEODOSIUS, and GERMANVS his father-in-law, with COMINCIOLVS, PHILIPPICVS, and
other great Captains, he began to take order for the defense of the City, and
to levy soldiers, and to make preparation for the wars. But, as this revolt
happened through the permission and ordinance of God: so the people mutined in
such manner, that nothing could be done to any purpose; and there were many
great tumults in the City. And among the people, and the Emperors own kindred
also, some laid the fault of what was befaln, upon others; and some were in
hope to be Emperors if MAVRICE lost the Empire: and others took part with
PHOCAS the new Tyrant or Emperor.

During this confusion and hurly-burly, PHOCAS, as fast as he could march,
came to Constantinople, accompanied with all the men of war: and MAVRICE, who
(until then) had ever bin so mighty against all nations, having now no
sufficient power to defend himself, fled out of the City, and took shipping in
a small Bark, with his wife and children, and passed over the The Emperor
Maurice fled from Constantinople
Straight called Saint GEORGE his Channel; and, entering into the City of
Calcedonia (which is on the other side) was there overtaken and apprehended by
PHOCAS his soldiers, who was already comn to Constantinople. And, being
brought back again, PHOCAS commanded him to be put to death: but he first made
his two sons, three daughters, and his wife the Emperesse, for his greater
torment, to be slain in his presence; which he saw and endured with admirable
magnanimity: and, as a faithful Christian, recommending himself to God, he
called upon his holy Name, many times repeating these words; Iustus es Domine,
and rectum iudicium tuum. And The death of the Emperor Mauricius.
so he patiently suffered death, and had his head stricken off.

He died in the 63. year of his age, and the twentieth of his reign, and in
the year of our Lord (after most writers) 603. Some write that when he fled
from Constantinople, he sent his son THEODOSIUS to the King of Persia, there
to be kept, and that afterward he was delivered into the power of PHOCAS. And
so ended and was extinguished the whole house and lineage of the Emperor
MAVRICE. There were also put to death, by PHOCAS his commandment, the Emperors
brother, PETER, and other principal men. In the time of this Emperor there
were wars between the Kings of Spain, and France, and between the Saxons
and the Sueuians, between the French and the Auares, and some others: which
for that they concern not my history, I omit. In this time also the Turks
began to be known in the world: for it is found written, that they made wars
in Asia against the Persians. Then also began the name of the Bulgarians to be
known in Europe, a fierce people, of whom we will speak hereafter.

THE LIFE OF PHOCAS, ONLY OF THAT NAME, AND THREESCORE AND THIRD ROMAN
EMPEROVR.
AFter the manner as I have before declared, was the Emperor MAVRICE put to
death: who, as he was valiant, wise, and venturous in the wars, if he had bin
bountiful and liberal, he had been accounted for a good Prince, and had
longer enjoyed the Empire. For all authors affirm, his covetousness and sparing
to have bin the cause of his death, I mean of his corporal death: for the
ways and judgments of the Lord are unsearchable and incomprehensible. And to
say the truth, covetousness is one of the most dangerous and hateful vices
wherewith a Prince can be infected: for besides that it makes him ill beloved
and odious to his subjects, it is the fountain and root of greater evils in
those which are rich and mighty: for from thence grow violences, wrongs,
rapine, briberie, extortion, cruelty, intolerable taxes, and impositions, no
reward for service, condemning the innocent, absoluing the guilty for money,
coveting other men's goods, unjust war, and shameful peace. Finally, in Kings
and Potentates covetousness is the mother of all evils, and a vice which makes
their reign and government short and miserable; as may be proved by many
examples. And to the contrary, liberality has been the occasion that many
(notwithstanding that they were wicked) reigned longer then others. And
forasmuch as I have not time to make any long digression, I conclude that the
covetousness and miserable sparing of the Emperor MAVRICE, made PHOCAS so
mighty, as to be able to bereave him both of his Empire and life. And the same
vice was afterward the cause of his death also: as we will show you, as soon
as we shall have related what happened in the Empire. When the Emperor MAVRICE
was dead, there was none that durst lift up his hand against PHOCAS, and
therefore he was generally obeyed of all men (excepting NARSES* the general
commander in the East, before named.) This NARSES when he understood that
PHOCAS had caused MAVRICE to be slain, he with an Army went into a city of
Arabia, called Edissa; with a resolution to yield him no obedience, but with
the aid of the Persians to make himself strong against him.

But PHOCAS was crowned in Constantinople by the Patriarch thereof with great
solemnity, and great joy and gladness of the people, who are ever desirous of
innouations: And as they suddenly desire them, so they as suddenly abhor them.
And the like happened in Rome upon the news of his election: for the Romans
hated MAVRICE, for the enmity between him and the Pope whom they loved. As
soon as Pope GREGORY understood that PHOCAS was made Emperor, he wrote unto
him a notable epistle, which until this day is extant; wherein he admonished
and counsels him what he ought to do, to be a perfect Emperor.

The first thing that PHOCAS did, was to send into all the provinces and
nations of the Empire, privileges, exemptions and kind letters, with new
garrisons and soldiers where need required: all which he did with such
expedition and in so good order, that he made himself well beloved of his
subjects, and respected and feared by strangers: but both in the one and in the
other it continued but short space. And to GERMANVS who was Praetor and governor
in the East, he sent commandment presently to go and besiege NARSES who
rebelled against him. In the mean season, AGISVLPHVS King of the Lombards (who
in the troublesome time wherein PHOCAS was chosen, and before his election, had
taken the cities of Cremona, Mantua, and Volturnia, and therein had done
irreparable harms, as well in the walls and buildings of the city, as among
the citizens, the inhabitants, and their goods) for fear of the new Emperor
concluded a truce with SMARAGDVS the Exarch, and with Pope GREGORY, and with
all Italy, for one year. And from thenceforth to be the better able to live in
security, he sought to match his eldest son ADOALDVS with the daughter of
THEODOBERTVS King of France. And so PHOCAS reigned in great prosperity the
first year; until he began to discover his base condition, and little worth,
together with his extreme covetousness, and negligence in all things; by means
whereof he became little regarded and esteemed by all men, whereof ensued
wars and troubles. In the second year of his reign died Pope GREGORY, and
SABINIANVS succeeded him, who also took truce for another year with
AGISVLPHVS, which was afterward prolonged for other three years more, by
Ambassadors sent by AGISVLPHVS to the Emperor PHOCAS. And in the second year
also of the reign of PHOCAS, began the war against the Persians, which in
all men's judgment was War with the Persians.
least to be feared, considering how greatly COSROES King of Persia, stood
bound to the Emperor MAVRICE, and to the Empire, for restoring him to his
kingdom. The cause of of this war is written so diversely, that I therefore
leave to set it down: in the beginning whereof, GERMANVS the General in the
East, levied an Army to make head against him, and they fought a battle,
wherein GERMANVS was overthrown, and the greatest part of the Imperial Army
slain: he being wounded escaped by flight, and within eleven days died
thereof. When PHOCAS understood of this loss, he then granted the peace,
which we spoke of, to the Lombards, and procured the like with the Bauares,
with the Hunnes, and with the Slauons. With great diligence and little
discretion, he sent the greatest part of his power into Syria, for the wars
in the East, under the conduct of very good Captains; and commanded LEONCIVS,
and MAGNATES, who were two of them, to make war upon NARSES; who upon the
faith and security given unto him yielded himself: but PHOCAS breaking his
faith and promise, made him most cruelly to be burnt. His Army in the East had
yet another battle Phocas violating his faith made Narses to be burnt.
with COSROES, and was again overthrown with great dishonor and confusion.
Whilst the Emperors Captains lost these battles, there grew very great
tumults and factions in Constantinople, and in many other cities in Asia; which
rose of very light and frivolous occasions. Which were, that as in ancient
time, in Rome, and afterward in Constantinople, they used certain sports and
games of running with chariots, and on horse back, after a kind of turneying,
as heretofore in the life of DOMICIANVS we have declared: so now some clothing
themselves in green, and others in gray, the common people which saw the same
(as their manner is) affected some the one color, and some the other; and this
so much increased, that (as in times past there had been great scandales, and
murders done upon the like occasions) so it pleased God to permit, that in the
time of PHOCAS, the matter grew to that extremity, as there were infinite
slaughters and murders committed, in Syria, in Egypt, in Graecia, and in many
other provinces: which the Emperor by his letters and commandments was not
able to prevent. For notwithstanding that he was very cruel, and did
wrongfully put many to death; yet was there small account made of him; for all
men knew the baseness of his mind, and his disordinate vices, and covetousness,
and how that he applied himself to nothing, but to his pleasure amongst women,
and to seek new means to increase his tributes, and to heap up money: by
reason whereof every where were tumults, confusions, and riots; and the princes
and nations bordering upon the Empire knowing this, determined to seize upon
such part thereof as they could. CAYANVS with the Bauarians and Hunnes, coming
from Noricum (by them called Bauaria) and from the countries of Hungary and
Austria; after they had enlarged their teritorie, concluded to make war upon
the Lombards (which was the only thing that kept the Empire in peace) and
fighting a battle with a great Army, and a Captain of them, the Bauarians
obtained the victory. After which CAYANVS took by force a city called Forum
Iulij, which he wholly destroyed, and having done much harm and taken great
spoils in the province of Venice, he returned to his kingdom. Then the
Slauons who before had made themselves Lords of a great part of Illyricum, in
this time took all Illyricum, and Dalmatia, which now contains all the coast
and country from Friuli to Durasso, by them called Slauonia. In this mean
time, COSROES King of Persia was not idle, but entered with a mighty power into
Mesopotamia, and took it all, and part of Syria, where, in battles and
conflicts, he wholly defeated the legions and Roman Mesopotamia, Armenia, and
Cappadocia taken from the Romans by the Persians.
Army. On the other side, his men of war made themselves Lords of Armenia,
and Cappadocia, and did much hurt in other provinces of the Empire. Whilst
these things passed in these parts; In Africa, which of long time (even since
the death of the Emperor JUSTINIAN) had been in peace, and in the service and
obedience of the Empire; HERACLIVS whom some call HERACLIANVS, who for the
Emperor PHOCAS was governor thereof, seeing his pusillanimitie and evil
government, began to leave his service and to do what best pleased himself,
without any respect or regard to his decrees or commandments. And to the end
the mischief should be general, in the city of Antioch in Soria, the
Infidels rose against the Christians, and slew a great number of them, together
with the Patriarch of that city; upon whom PHOCAS commanded great punishment
to be inflicted. Finally, in all the provinces there was great disorder and
little justice, and those provinces which bordered upon the enemies were
spoiled, and a great part of them lost. And the matter came to this issue, that
one of these two things of necessity must ensue; which were, that either the
Empire must be rent in sunder, and wholly lost, or else PHOCAS must die.
Whereupon the principal Captains, Hard conditions for an Emperor.
and his chiefest friends, seeing it expedient for the common good, and the
estate of the Empire, conspired against him, and resolved to kill him. Among
which was his greatest fauourit PRISCVS, who by letters agreed with HERACLIVS
(who governed Africa and rebelled, and to whose daughter PRISCVS was married) to
kill him, and make his son HERACLIVS which was his wives brother, Emperor.
There were also confederates in this treason (if it may be said to be treason
to kill a tyrant and a traitor) PATRICIVS, and other principal men. And as
PRISCVS was in great credit with PHOCAS, so he fained to reduce his father in
law HERACLIVS to his service; and under this pretext, he first brought his
brother in law HERACLIVS to Constantinople, for a pledge and assurance of his
fathers loyalty. This treaty was double: for his father was presently to come
to Constantinople, with the greatest power that he was able to make, under
color to pass into Asia, against the King of Persia; and according to this
rumor he did so, and came with a very great Army, and suddenly landed in
Thracia, which coast is now called Romania. And his son who remained in
Constantinople with the favor and in company of PRISCVS, and many others,
entered the palace and slew PHOCAS; and then Phocas slain by Heraclius which
after him succeeded in the Empire.
presently arrived his father with his forces, and according to the agreement
between them, young HERACLIVS was made Emperor, and generally obeyed. In the
manner of PHOCAS his death, authors which write thereof make some difference:
but they all concur in this, that he was slain through the conspiracy of the
Captains, and great men before named; in the eight year of his reign, and of
the incarnation of our Savior CHRIST six hundred and eleven, without leaving
any son to succeed him in the Empire.

THE LIFE OF HERACLIVS, ONLY OF THAT NAME, AND THREESCORE AND FOVRTH ROMAN
EMPEROVR.
THE ARGUMENT.
HEraclius having slain the tyrant Phocas, without any contradiction was made
Emperor; who ^ound the Empire very weak and in great combustion. In the
beginning of his government, the city of Jerusalem was taken by Cosroes King
of Persia; and the cross of Christ which was left there by Helena mother to
Constantine the great, was carried away. He obtained victory against John
Campsinus a Captain of his, which rebelled against him, and made himself a
tyrant over part of Italy; by another of his Captains whose name was
Elutherius, who by reason of this victory grew so proud, that he also dared to
rebel, and to call himself King of Italy; but he was presently slain by the
same Captains which took his part. And having concluded a peace with the
Bauarians, ^e made his son Constantine, Caesar, and his companion in the
Empire; and leaving him (for that he was very young,) under good keeping in
Constantinople, he went against Cosroes, who had taken from him a great part of
the Empire. To which war he went himself in person: and having given his
enemy two great overthrows, he constrained him to fly. When he had expelled
Cosroes, and recovered many countries of the Empire, he made peace with Cosroes
son, who rose against his father, for an injury received from him; which
peace was a great help to the Empire, and very hurtful to Cosroes: but by
means thereof, the son bereaved the father both of his kingdom and life. In
these times began the sect of Mahomet, against which Heraclius in the beginning
made no resistance, making no account thereof: but afterward he began to fear
the same when he could not suppress it. This Emperor made a great exchange
from virtue to vice; so as when he grew old, he became superstitions, an
heretic, and libidinous, giving himself to pleasure, as a young man, when it
had been more requisite and more honorable for him to have lived gravely, as an
old man; and took to wife a young woman, giving himself more to carnal
delight, then for his years, and the dignity of so mighty an Emperor was
fit. But falling into the dropsy, he died suddenly, when he had reigned
twenty years.

AS the life and conditions of PHOCAS were odious to the world, and his reign
so unhappy and unfortunate, that the Imperial scepter and dignity was likely
to have wholly fallen and to have come to ruin; so all men reioiced at his
death. And forasmuch as HERACLIVS was the actor and executioner thereof, they
very peaceably and joyfully received him for Emperor; who was a man fortunate
in the wars, and obtained many noble victories, and possessed the Empire many
years, although that in the end many things happened contrary, for his sins
and little constancy in the Christian faith; as in his history w^ will
relate, as briefly as possibly we may. PHOCAS and those of his party being put
to death, HERACLIVS was with great joy and solemnity crowned in
Constantinople, by the hands of SERGIVS, Patriarch thereof; his father
HERACLIVS being there present, with PRISCVS and other great men, who had bin
confederates in the conspiracy against PHOCAS. And upon the same day he
solemnized his marriage with a great Lady, whose name was EVDOXIA, who
afterward in the second year of his reign died in childbed, of a son
called CONSTANTINE: and he married for his second wife wi^h a niece of his own
called MARTINA, which also bare him a son called HERACLIVS.

This Emperor HERACLIVS found the Empire in such combustion, and so rent in
pieces, as it seemed impossible to continue. The affairs of the East were in
such case, as we told you, In what state Heraclius found the Empire.
where COSROES had defeated all the armies, and entering into the Empire, daily
took towns and forts. In the province of Arabia Petrea, which bordreth upon
Egypt and Judea, the Sarazins rebelled, with whom accursed MAHOMET afterward
made himself very mighty. CAYANVS and the Bauarians which inhabited Bauaria,
Austria and Hungary, seeing the At what time Mahomet began to grow mighty.
Empire so weakened, come into Thracia, and made wars there. In Illyricum or
Slauonia, the Slauons were of great power: and in Italy, although there was
peace with the Lombards (for they were defeated and weakened by the overthrows
which they had received from the Bauarians and Slauons) yet there wanted not
combustions and tumults: for PHOCAS before his death had bereaved SMARAGDVS
(oftentimes before named) of his Exarchat and government, and had sent thither
another Captain called JOHN; who coming to Rauenna, with his wife and family,
and a great number of Judges and officers for all Italy, PHOCAS was by that
time dead; and JOHN being more earnest in demanding tributes, and other
exactions then he ought to have been, the people were therewith so much
incensed as they slew him: and so Italy remained without a governor. And at
that time the Church of Rome being without a Bishop by the death of Pope
BONIFACE, and by reason of discord among the Clergy, that seat being void the
space of eight months, a Captain which lived in Naples, called JOHN
CAMPSINVS, who governed that city with the territory thereof, determined to
rebel and make himself Lord of Pulia, Calabria, Campania, and of a great part
of that country, which at this day is the kingdom of Naples; imagining that
the new Emperor should have enough to do to defend or to recover the rest, and
so he might make himself King of Italy.

HERACLIVS coming to the Empire so torn and dismembered; to encounter with so
many extremities, in the beginning used not such diligence, as was requisite,
neither had he power or means. For as all Authors write he found the Empire
so disarmed and unfurnished of men of war, as there were neither old
soldiers, neither experienced legions left, but they were all slain and
scattered. Nevertheless he began to make Captains, and to levy men of
war, and sent CRISPVS with such forces as he could get, together with such as
his father brought him out of Africa, into the provinces of Asia the less (now
called Turkey) to guard and defend the same, seeing they were not able to give
battle to the Persians: and he caused his father to return into Africa,
which was all that the Empire peaceably enjoyed, together with Sicilia and
Sardinia; and he himself remained in Constantinople, procuring peace with the
Bauarians and their King CAYANVS, by all possible means, as well by gifts as
entreatie. But these things were so long adoing, that COSROES King of Persia,
as master of the field, taking some Cities by surprise, and others by force,
came conquering all Syria, and from thence into Palestina, and so to the City
of Jerusalem; not the old Jerusalem, for that (as is already said) was
destroyed and laid waste by TITUS and VESPASIAN, but to that which the Emperor
ADRIAN new builded, in the same place, or at least near unto it, as already is
declared; which then was a great and an excellent City. And entering it by force
he used great cruelty, and did The City of Jerusalem taken by the Persians.
much harm to the Christians; so as therein (as it is written) were slain
80000 persons; and taking the wood of the cross of Christ, which HELEN mother
to CONSTANTINE the Great had left there, and carrying it thence with him, he
set it with great reverence upon the top of his chair, or royal Throne, made
of fine Gold, set with many Jewels and Pearls. He likewise carried with him
prisoner ZACHARIAS the Patriarch of Jerusalem, who was an excellent Prelate.

This taking of Jerusalem, some Authors write to have happened about the end of
the reign of the Emperor PHOCAS: but the most certain and true opinion is,
that it befell in the time of HERACLIVS, wherein I place the same. CRISPVS who
was sent by the Emperor, and then was in the province of Cappadocia in Asia the
less, endeavored to levy soldiers, and to provide (so much as in him lay)
for the defense of those Countries, against the great power of the Persians:
but it auailed not at that time. And for as much as it was bruited that the
Persian meant to go into Egypt, and thence to make a conquest of Africa;
HERACLIVS father to the Emperor being then in the City of Carthage, leuying a
great number of men of war, departed thence, marching along the Sea coast, to
go into Egypt to make head against the Persians; where we will leave him, and
tell you first what ensued after that JOHN CAMPSINVS rebelled with the City of
Naples, and all that Province.

The Emperor being much moved with his audaciousrebellion, sent a Captain
into Italy, whose name was ELEVTHERIVS, with a good number of soldiers; which
captain was of a great and noble family, and very wise and expert in the
wars. He as soon as he arrived Eleutherius sent by the Emperor against John
Campsinus.
at Rauenna with his fleet, was received end obeyed there; and understanding
who they were which had conspired in the rebellion and insurrections past, he
punished some of them, using greater clemency then severity. And therewithal
he speedily assembled such forces as remained in the government of Rauenna;
with which, and with those which he brought with him, he purposed to take his
way against CAMPSINVS, who lay in Naples; and by the way went to Rome, where he
was well entertained and honored by DEVS DEDIT, who then was Pope. And
marching toward Naples, CAMPSINVS considering that by prolonging the wars he
daily lost, and the Emperors party increased; with the greatest and best power
that he was able to make he took the field, and near to the city of Naples
they two fought a cruel Campsinus ouerth^owne and slain by Eleutherius.
battle; but ELEVTHERIVS obtained the victory, although very hardly; for
CAMPSINVS fought valiantly, and died fighting.

After this battle, ELEVTHERIVS with small difficulty recovered all that
CAMPSINVS had usurped, and returned with victory to Rome: and for his better
security, and to bring to effect such things as he had proiected (which we
will presently tell you) he practiced to prolong the peace with AGISVLPHVS King
of the Lombards, which was concluded for other ten years. And he procured and
levied money, wherewith he paid and contented his soldiers and men of war:
for which his doings so valiantly and so speedily accomplished, the Emperor
HERACLIVS sent him the authority and title of Exarch and Governor of all
Italy; where with he came to Rauenna, which was the seat of the Governors,
leaving all Italy in peace and in quiet subjection (Lombardy excepted, and the
rest which the Lombards possessed) by means whereof he grew so proud and so
ambitious, as without the fear of God, or respect to the Emperor, knowing
himself to be greatly beloved by his soldiers, he rebelled against his
sovereign Lord, and took upon him the title of King of Italy, and presently
departed with his Army from Rauenna toward Rome, meaning to make himself
Lord of all the country. But it Eleutherius rebelled and called himself king
of Italy.
pleased God to give him speedy punishment: for the same Captains which
advanced him, and upon whom he had grounded his disloyalty; the same I say, to
show themselves loyal to the Emperor, within few days journey from Rome slew
him, when he nothing suspected any such matter; and the Army approved his
death, and they altogether returned to Rauenna, and sent Eleutherius slain,
and his head sent to the Emperor.
his head to the Emperor to Constantinople; who being advertised of what had
passed, was very well pleased with what they had done. Then he sent for a new
Exarch, a Noble Constantinopolitane, called YSANTIVS, who was very well
entertained. And at the same time died the valiant AGISVLPHVS king of the
Lombards, and his son ODOALDVS being a child of The death of Agisulphus king
of she Lombards
tender age, was made their King; and the wise and Christian Queen THEVDELINDA
his mother, took upon her the government, and governed that kingdom very
wisely and discreetly, and observed and renewed the peace made with the
Italians, and the Imperialists; and so Italy remained for some space in rest.
But in the war against the Persians, matters happened to the contrary: whereof
we will make a brief relation, and what end it had.

HERACLIVS the Emperors father, who was Governor of Africa, marching with great
power toward Egypt, to make head against the Persians; being very joyful; and
of great power, by the way died of an infirmity. By his death all was out of
order and came to nothing: for The death of old Heraclius.
there was not any man amongst them capable of the government, or fit to lead
an Army. This happened in the sixth year of the reign of the Emperor HERACLIVS;
who all that time remained in Constantinople giving himself to pleasure and
ease. When the King of Persia understood of the death of HERACLIVS the
governor of Africa; with the greatest haste he could make, he sent a very
mighty army into Egypt; and as that kingdom was unfurnished of men of war,
and the Persians became victorious, so in few days they made themselves
absolute Lords thereof: and the same year passing further, they conquered
Africa even to the city of Carthage; for no city neither people were of power
able to make head against them. Which HERACLIVS understanding, he sent
Ambassadors to King COSROES, with mild words entreating him for peace,
desiring him to desist from shedding so much blood, and to The insolent answer
of the king of Persia to the Emperor Heraclius.
rest satisfied with what he had done. To this Embassy the Infidel made
answer, so hautily, and with such pride, that among other things he sent him
word, that he would grant no peace to HERACLIVS, except he would renounce the
Faith of JESUS CHRIST, and adore his Idols. With this answer the Ambassadors
returned, and the Persians the year following (prosecuting The City of Carthage
taken by the Persians*
their wars) besieged the City of Carthage, and took it, with the marches
thereof, and leaving governors and Garrisons in that country, returned into
Asia most richly laden with spoils.

HERACLIVS having observed how much of the Empire he had lost, resolved with
himself to go in person to recover the same, or to lose the rest; whereto the
Bauarians and their King CAYANVS, were a geeat hinderance. But to the end that
the reader may the better understand the matter, let him know, that these
Bauarians (in former time called Hunnes Auares) of a long time called their
Kings CAYANI, as the Egyptians called their Kings PHARAONES, and as many other
nations gave their Kings ordinary and peculiar names. I say then, that CAYANVS
returned with his forces to infest the country of Thracia, which till then had
free passage. And this was the cause that the Emperor HERACLIVS was detained
two or three years, after that which happened in Africa; until at length he
sought all ways and means to come to a peace with CAYANVS, although to his
dishonor and with loss of reputation. Finally, it was concluded and confirmed
with great oaths and promises: and so leaving Heraclius made his son
Constantine, Caesar.
all Italy and Graecia in peace, he resolved to march against the Persians,
and to that end he named and ordained for CAESAR and his companion in the
Empire, his son CONSTANTINE, to make his abode in the city of
Constantinople. And forasmuch as he was very young, he appointed SERGIVS,
Patriarch of Constantinople, and BONOSVS a wise and noble gentleman, for his
governors and tutors. Which being ordained, preparing the greatest power and
munition that he was able, with many prayers and solemn processions, he
departed from Constantinople with great solemnity; and embarking himself with
his people, he passed over into those provinces which were under his obedience
in Asia, and entertained into his pay many other nations. And forasmuch as his
soldiers were but newly raised, he thought it not fit presently to march
until that they were better practiced and trained. Which being done, calling
upon the Lord for aid, he entered into his enemies countries. This his journey
was so much bruited and observed by all the nations of the world, as there was
no man but had an Heraclius in Asia.
especial eye thereto.

COSROES K. of Persia, being well informed, how valiant and good a captain
HERACLIVS was and how resolute an army he led, resolved not to give him
battle, but retired himself within his country, and made all the victuals to
be withdrawn and carried away, and the trees to be cut down, and laid
athwart the ways where he supposed the Emperor would pass. And on the other
side, he sent an huge army of very expert old soldiers, under the leading of
a captain called SAVARAGVS, or SALVARVS (for in the^e names the authors ever
vary) to the end that he should charge the Emperor, either on the flank or on
the back, who with great resolution and in good order marched against King
COSROES; and by the way recovered and won many cities. But holding it for no
assured course to leave so great an army behind him, he took another way,
and sought out SARAVAGVS; and having passed the great mountain Taurus, the two
armies approached the one near the other, not far from a river: before which
time there passed many conflicts and other accidents between them, which I
cannot possibly set down at large. The conclusion thereof was, that they came to
blows: and as the Persians of long time had been victorious, and made small
account of the Romans (I always call those Romans which were of the Emperorus
army: for although that the seat of the A battle between the Romans and
the Persians, with the success.
Empire was in Graecia, yet the Emperors ever took a glory to be called
Roman Emperors, and their armies, the Roman armies) and as the Imperialists
holding themselves for disgraced and dishonest, had a great desire to be
revenged (the presence and great valor of the Emperor being a great help
thereto) both the one and the other fought with so great courage and
obstinacy, as the battle continued long, and was very cruel. And although
that in the beginning it was very doubtful, yet in the end the Emperor
obtained the victory, and made great slaughter of his enemies. With this
victory the Imperialists were so much encouraged, as they abandoned the fear,
which until then had possessed them; and the Emperor was wonderful joyful to
see himself victorious. And forasmuch as winter drew on, he purposed to retire
himself, being laden with exceeding rich spoils, and many prisoners;
intending to return the next spring with greater force, which was in the
eleventh year of his reign.

But on the contrary side, COSROES was very sorry, and much grieved; and
imputing the fault to his General, deposed him from his charge, purposing to
have caused him to be slain, and made another General, called SAIN, or
SATHIN, a very valiant man and of great account: and gathering together the
remainder of the last Army, he commanded him to raise one far greater; and
that he should follow the war with a greater resolution and vehemency. The
Emperor who had not shaken off all care that was needful, although he would
willingly have accepted of peace, conditionally that he might have had that
restored which was taken from him (which he attempted, but could not obtain)
after that he had made his accustomed prayers to God, courageously returned to
the wars. And as this SAIN desired to excel his predecessor SARAVAGVS, and
to recover what he had lost, without delaying of time, he went to meet the
Emperor, and desiring to come to a battle with him, he drew his Army near
unto his; which wanted neither force nor courage to fight.

The next day in the morning (seeing themselves so near together) they began
to set their people in order: but their troops of either side were so great,
as they spent almost one whole day. Whereupon they took truce, until the next
day, to avoid fighting by night: so resolute A truce for one night between
the Persians and the Romans.
was either party, and so they slept in the same place, and in the same order
as they were set. The next morning by sun rising, the one Army began to move
toward the other; and there began one of the most bloody and cruel Battles
that had been seen, which continued most part of the day without any sign of
advantage or victory of either side, fighting at equal hand: but by that time
the Persians had so oppressed the Romans, as they began to show their weakness;
and the Emperor was in fear to have been overthrown: but it pleased God
miraculously to relieve him, for suddenly fell so much rain and hail, with so
terrible wind and tempest, beating upon the backs of the Romans, and in the
faces of the Persians, which did so much trouble them and put them out of
order, that in a very short space they were broken and overthrown, and turning
their backs ran away. The Emperor HERACLIVS remained with the victory, A
miraculous victory.
master of the field, when he had slain thirty thousand of his enemies in
the battle; although with no small loss of his own people; having obtained
two so great and notable victories against the Infidels. The Emperor sent to
make all this known in Constantinople* in Italy, and in all the other
provinces of the Empire; for which every where was made great joy: and in the
mean while he himself was not idle; but reinforcing his Army, and
encouraging his people, he recovered a great part of Syria, and Mesopotamia,
which he had lost; part in his own person, and part by his Captains, and he
still followed his victory, until that the great waters, by reason of the
winter stayed him and forced him to return, and to winter that year in the
province of Albania. COSROES King of Persia, as he was a mighty prince, and
his dominion great, so the loss of these two battles, was not such as to
bereave him of means again to make head against his enemy: for gathering
together his whole forces, he levied men of war, and issuing his treasure,
raised a greater and a more mighty Army, then any of the former; and made a
prudent and resolute Captain called RAZATENES General thereof: who being very
valiant, was not afraid to draw near to the way, where he knew the Emperor was
to pass the nex spring.

Finally, after many skirmishes and effusion of much blood, and such like
casualties of the war, HERACLIVS putting his whole trust in God, sought to
come to a battle, which the Persian refused not; so as with equal minds,
and in a manner, with equal force and Armies, two squadrons first began the
fight in the morning, and afterward others, and in the end all, and this
battle continued until about sunset: wherein the Imperialists in power and
courage surpassing the Persians, constrained them to turn their backs, and to
yield themselves for overthrown. The Persians the third time over thrown by
the Emperor and their general slain fighting.
And RAZATENES as a good Captain, failing in no part of his office, died
fighting, for that he would not live being overcome, after that many thousands
of men were slain and wounded of the one side and the other. In these three
great battles; and in many other of less account, it is written, that the
Emperor himself in person, showed great valor; especially in this last, where
he slew with his own hand, three men of great esteem which he encountered in
sundry places of the battle, besides others which he slew and wounded of
less account.

By means of this victory, HERACLIVS grew so powerful, and COSROES so weak,
and his forces were so much diminished, that daring no longer to defend that
which he had Cosroes abandoning what he had usurped fled into Persia.
usurped in Armenia, and Mesopotamia, he abandoned the same; and passing over
the river Tigris fled into Persia: HERACLIVS also passed that river, and
ouerranne the country burning and spoiling great cities. In this manner
conquering the kingdoms of COSROES, and COSROES not so hardy as to defend the
same, but by flight hiding himself; for his refuge and defense in his life
time he made his second son whose name was MEDARSES, against all equity and
reason, equal with himself in his kingdom; for he had an elder son, a man
of greater spirit, and of more discretion, called SIROES; and (as it often
happens to the wicked) by the same means whereby he thought to have defended
his kingdom, he lost it, together Cosroes made his second son equal with him
in his kingdom, whereby he lost the son together with his life.
with his life: for his eldest son took this injury done to him by his
father in so ill part, as he practiced to bereave him both of life and
kingdom. To which purpose he began by Letters and secret messengers, to treat
with the Emperor, entreating his favor, and to be at peace with him: in
requital whereof, when he should be established in the kingdom, he promised
to yield unto him what he should require, if it were in his power. In
conclusion, briefly to set down the Composition, they agreed upon these
conditions: That he should resign to the Emperor all those lands and
countries which his father and predecessors had usurped in the provinces of
Asia, and all that which they had gotten by conquest in Africa, and all the
treasure of his fathers royal house. And that he should resign the two
invincible fortresses, which the Persians held in the principal passages of
the river Tigris, with the cross, and the Patriarch which they brought from
Jerusalem, and that he should be a perpetual friend and allie to the
Emperor.

This league being concluded, SIROES was so magnanimous, and therewith so well
beloved, as within few days, with the aid and favor of HERACLIVS, and such
forces as he sent him, he gat both his father and his brother into his power,
whom he caused to be slain; and througly performed all that which he had
agreed upon with HERACLIVS; and so enjoyed the kingdom in peace, although of
less power then his father was. And HERACLVS returned, leaving all the
provinces of the Empire restored and furnished, and all the passages of the
river Tigris fortified, the most joyful and honored Prince that then lived in
the world. Being come to Jerusalem, he sent his Captains into Africa, which he
wholly recovered, and reduced the same to a quiet government. This was in the
sixth year after that he began the war in his own person, and the sixteenth
and seventeenth of his reign; although in these computations there be ever
some difference between authors. When he came to Jerusalem, he restored
ZACHARIAS the Patriarch thereof, and the cross which had been fourteen years
in Heraclius restored the cross to Jerusalem. The exaltation of the cross.
the power of COSROES, and came into the city bearing the same upon his
shoulders, with the greatest joy, feasting aad solemnity that could be made:
and this restitution of the cross was so highly esteemed, as it was afterward
solemnized every year upon the fourteenth day of September, which is called the
exaltation of the cross.

In those days the false Prophet MAHOMET, the deceiuer and seducer of the
greatest part of the world, with his illusions and tromperies, in the country
of Arabia drew many to his sect, The success of the false Prophet Mahomet.
and grew a mighty tyrant; whom HERACLIVS might then easily have defeated: but
making small account of him, he contented himself with the taking of a
certain people from him called Sarazins, which falsely boasted themselves to
be descended from SARA, ABRAHAM'S wife; who were also called Scenites, and lived
in the fields, as the Arabians do at this day: and giving them pay, the
Emperor sent them into other provinces, which at that time seemed to have been
a sufficient redress. Having taken order for his affairs in those quarters, he
returned to Constantinople, whither he came with the greatest triumph that
could be made. Herein is The Emperor Heraclius came victorious and triumphant
to Constantinople.
some difference: for some authors write, that before his going to Jerusalem he
returned to Constantinople* but it imports not whether were the first; but in
the end the Emperor came to repose himself in Constantinople, with very great
honor and reputation amongst his subjects, and was by all other Kings and
Princes at that time much beloved and feared.

In Italy all was in peace with the Lombards in those days, ODOALDVS reigning
with his mother THEVDOLINDA; and she dying, the subjects making no account of
him, for that he was a very child, denied him their obedience, and chose
ARIOLDVS, who was of the blood royal: and he maintained the peace with the
Empire in as ample manner as did ODOALDVS and THEVDOLINDA. HERACLIVS having so
good success in all things, as aforesaid, prosperity (as ordinarily it
works in many men) made him proud and careless, forgetting God, and those
works and exercises of piety whereby he had attained to that prosperity. For
in steed of prayer and contemplation, he gave himself to pleasure, to
augurie, southsaying and divination, prognosticating things to come, by
superstitious and unlawful Arts and means; and from one to another fell into
heresies: for being seduced by two wicked Prelates, Heraclius became an
heretic.
the one called PIRRHVS, Patriarch of Alexandria, and the other a Bishop called
CIRVS, he came to believe that there was a will only in Christ, and so
consequently he denied the two natures, divine and humane. Neither could the
admonitions and Letters of Pope HONORIVS avail to dissuade him from that
heresy, who banished PIRRHVS into Africa. It pleased God to permit, in his
secret and incomprehensible judgment, that MAHOMET began so to prosper and
preuail in his proceedings, that HERACLIVS began to stand in fear of him, of
whom in former time he made small account; for, he had daily news, that he
levied men of war, which came unto him as well out of Arabia, as out of
Persia; some deluded through his allurements and suggestions; others, to enjoy
the great liberty which he gave them to rob and steal: for, these were the
miracles wherewith in the beginning he planted his devilish sect. And it
followed that the Sarazins, which we said HERACLIVS had gotten from him, by
reason of the Emperors ill pay and entertainment, mutined, and went to MAHOMET
into Arabia. So as he went out of Arabia felix, where he first gathered head;
and, making himself Lord of Mahomet his success.
the three Arabiae, went into Egypt, and afterward into Syria, and into
Mesopotamia; and had so good success, that with those Sarazins, and such other
forces as he could get, he resolved to make himself King of Persia. Whereto,
this was a great help; for as much as that Kingdom was much wasted and
weakened, as well by civil dissension, as through the great slaughter made
therein by HERACLIVS: and besides this, the Inhabitants of mere lightness
revolted to MAHOMET.

There reigned at that time in Persia a great man whose name was HORMISDA,
allied to the fore-passed Kings: for, SIROES (who was HERACLIVS friend) reigned
but one year in that Kingdom; and after him his son ADHESSER likewise but a
year. By the death of which two, HORMISDA attained to the Kingdom; but not in
peace, nor without great tumults and contradictions.

At that time MAHOMET marched toward Persia with his Sarazins, and much other
people; against whom came HORMISDA: and they two fought a very great battle;
wherein HORMISDA was overthrown and slain. Yet some write, that MAHOMET was
first overthrown. This only battle, and the illusion and deceit of his sect
and superstitious religion, brought all Asia under his obedience, together with
all Africa, Babylon, and all the other Provinces subject to the mighty Kings of
Persia. And he wholly subverted that Empire; so as from that time forwards it
had not any title of a Kingdom: but all those Nations lost their names, and
from thenceforth were called Sarazins and Mahometists, after their false
Prophet and Leader; The original of the Sarazins and their success.
whereas in truth they ought to have bin called Agarenes, Ismaelites: for,
MAHOMET descended from ABRAHAM, by AGAR a bondwoman, and his son ISMAEL.

The Emperor, understanding of these victories, applied not himself to resist
the course thereof with such magnanimity as he ought to have done,
notwithstanding that he knew he returned into Syria and Palestina, with a
resolution to take Jerusalem: but he sent thither only to fetch from thence
the Cross of CHRIST, and to bring it to Constantinople: from whence afterward
in process of time it was brought to Rome. MAHOMET then came, and took many
great Cities in Syria, wherein he found small resistance; and, among them, the
City of Jerusalem, publishing himself every where to be the Prophet of God. Yet
some write, that Jerusalem was not taken by MAHOMET; but, by his Successors,
after his death: but it imports not greatly whether it were taken by him or
others.

Within few days after these victories, MAHOMET deceased, being of the age of
two and The death of Mahomet.
forty years: but, leaving disciples of his wickedness, his sect and
superstition died not, nor took any end; but continues until this day, and
will continue until it shall please God for his mercies sake to cure this
contagion. For, his Successor remained, a great Arabian Captain called CALIPHA:
and him others succeeded, who conquered Africa, and other Countries; as in
Calipha, Mahomets successor.
the process of this History shall be expressed.

While these things passed in the East; in Italy, notwithstanding that there
was peace with the Lombards, as it is often seen that foreign peace breeds
civil war; so MAVRICE CARTVLARIVS, who was President of Rome, making small
account of the Emperor, or of his Exarch ISANCIVS, rebelling made himself a
Tyrant. Against whom, ISANCIVS came from Rauenna, and after many adventures
apprehended him, with many other his confederates; and, carrying him to Rome,
smote off his head: and shortly after this, ISANCIVS died. And the Emperor
HERACLIVS sent a Nobleman, called THEODORE GALLIOPA, to be Gouerner of Italy.
But none of all these things could move the mind of HERACLIVS to levy any
Army against the Sarazins; he gave himself so much to his pleasure and
licentious living, marrying in his old age with his brothers daughter, who was
a young damsel, called MARTINA: and so it pleased God that upon a time he was
taken with the dropsy; whereof he died suddenly, when he had reigned thirty
years, in the year of our Lord 641. Others say, that he The death of Heraclius.
died of a disease called Priapismus, a strange sickness, and such as with
modesty cannot be expressed. He left behind him two sons, and one daughter,
which he had by his first wife. His daughters name was EPIPHANIA: one of his
sons was called HERACLIVS; the other, CONSTANTINE, whom he made CAESAR, when he
went to the wars in the East against the Persians. By his second wife he had
one son, a child of ten years old, called HERACLIVS also. And so ended this
Emperor: of whom it may be said, that two Emperors might well have been made;
one very good, and the other passing ill, considering the contrariety in his
actions.

At what time the Emperor HERACLIVS died, the Empire of the East was much
decayed: for, all the Provinces of Syria, Mesopotamia, Egypt and Arabia, were
in the power of the Infidels. In Italy, THEODORE GALLIOPA was Gouerner: and in
Lombardie, through the death of ARIOLDVS, ROTARIVS was King. The Slauons
possessed Illyricum: and the Hunnes and Bauarians held Hungary, Bauiere, and
Austria. In Spain reigned: he Goths: and the French prospered in France; and
in Germany sundry other Princes. So as the Empire contained Thracia, the
Provinces of Graecia, the Isles of Sicilia and Sardinia and the greatest part of
Italy in Europe; and in Asia, Armenia, Asia the less, Cilicia, Pamphilia,
Galacia, Bythinia, Cappadocia, and other Provinces, with all Africa: which I
have set down of purpose, to the end the Reader may the better understand what
shall be said hereafter.

THE LIFE OF CONSTANTINE, THE THIRD OF THAT NAME, AND THREESCORE AND FIFTH ROMAN
Emperor; And of his Brother HERACLIANVS.
IN the History of the lives of the two sons of the Emperor HERACLIVS, PAVLVS
DIACONVS and BEDA seem to dissent from other Historiographers; first placing
the Empire of HERACLIANVS, who was younger than CONSTANTINE, and son of his
second wife MARTINA: but I follow the opinion of other authors. The Emperor
HERACLIVS being dead and buried, there was no open coutradiction that might
hinder his eldest son, born of his first wife EVDOXIA, who died in child bed
of this CONSTANTINE (which CONSTANTINE had a young man to his son, called
CONSTANS) from obtaining the Empire; as well for that he was made CAESAR in his
fathers time, as also for that in right he ought to have it, being his fathers
eldest son, and of full age; and also for the hope which they conceiud that
he would prove a good Prince. He was then presently accepted and crowned with
great joy and solemnity; but to the great coffeehouse and grief of his
mother in law MARTINA; whose wickedness did so shorten the reign of her son
in law, as there can be no worthy action written of him, that he either did,
or that passed in his time; saving that he gave good signs and shows of a
good Emperor, and began to be beloved by his subjects; which increased the
hatred of that mischievous woman his stepdame; and he The Emperor Constantine
the third poy so^d by his stepmother Martina.
reposing his trust in her, she gave him poison in his meat, whereof he died
in the fourth month of his reign: and they also say, that it was done by the
direction and counsel of PETER the heretical Patriarch of Constantinople. The
Emperor CONSTANTINE being thus wickedly made away; the murtheresse MARTINA,
with such favor and aid as she procured, made her son HERACLIANVS Emperor,
brother to him whom she had poisoned* being of the age of eleven years; and
she took upon her the government: but this villainy could not long continue, for
the Nobility detesting so detestable a fact, rose against MARTINA and her son,
when Heraclianus succeeded his brother Constantine in the Empire.
he had reigned scarcely two years: in which time I find not any thing
written to have been done of importance; and therefore I cannot divine ought,
saving that in this year the Sarazins took the city of Cesaria, which they had
besieged the space of seven years; and therein slew seven thousand soldiers
of the Empire. The Senate and Nobility joining with CONSTANS, son of the
deceased CONSTANTINE, and Nephew of the Emperor HERACLIVS, made him Emperor;
apprehending MARTINA and her son HERACLIANVS: and so ended the unlucky and
unfortunate reign of those two brothers, which scarcely merit to be accounted
amongst the Emperors. When as the mother and son were apprehended, the mother
had Heraclianus and his mother Martina were thrown out of the Empire, he
having first his nose cut off and she her tongue.
her tongue cut out, and the son his nose cut off, and both were exiled into
the province of Cappadocia in Asia the less. Also PIRRHVS the Patriarch which
came from banishment out of Africa, and came to intrude himself into these
counsels, died likewise, as an heretical Wolf clad in shepherds raiment; and
in his place was chosen PAVL, who in the end proved like to his predecessor.
Which befell in the year of our Lord six hundred forty four.

THE LIFE OF CONSTANS, THE SECOND OF THAT NAME, AND THREESCORE AND SIXTH Roman
Emperor.
THE making of CONSTANS Emperor (whom some call CONSTANTINE) by the Senate of
Constantinople (which we may call Roman;) and the death of his uncle
HERACLIANVS, of whom Constans by some called Constantine.
we now left writing, was all at one instant: and the great wickedness used by
MARTINA in poisoning his father, made the reign of the son more firm and
assured. But CONSTANS proved not such a one as they hoped, and as indeed was
needful for the present estate of the Empire; for he was infected with the
Arrian Heresy: and concerning the affairs of the East, he contented himself
to make head against MAHOMET'S successors; by placing garrisons in the passages
of Cilicia, to keep them from entering into Asia the less; and so they remained
Lords of those provinces which they had gotten in the East. Pope THEODORE
vnderstandign that PAVL the new Patriarch of Constantinople held some erroneous
opinions of the Christian faith, wrote unto him certain loving monitory
Letters, persuading him to amendment, and to conform himself to the truth.
But when he perceived his labor to be in vain, he proceeded otherwise
against him, and depriving him of his dignity, he commanded him to be
banished: but the new Emperor would not permit it, but rather showed himself
to be of the same opinion; which made a general confusion every where; for the
head being sick, the rest of the members ill execute their office.

In Constantinople and in Graecia, the catholic Christians were much afflicted
with the new heritickes; for that the Emperor took their part; and in Asia,
they held wars with the Mahometicall Sarazins. In Italy, although there were
peace with the Lombards, through the good government of the Exarch THEODORUS,
and the care and endeavor of the Pope, yet the devil after his accustomed
manner sowed tares among the good seed; which was, that by the means of some
of his disciples, he persuaded ROTHARIVS King of the Lombards to lean to the
opinion of his ancestors, which was the Arrian heresy; and the more earnest
the catholic Christians were in resisting the same, with so much the greater
obstinacy he placed in every city an Arrian Bishop, where before had been
catholic Bishops. Pope MARTIN who A counsel held in the time of Pope Martin.
succeeded Pope THEODORE, against the new heresy held by the Emperor and some
prelates in the East, assembled a council of one hundred and five Bishops;
wherein they which held those opinions, were condemned and proclaimed
heretics, and he deprived the said Patriarch and sundry Bishops of their
prelacies and dignities: wherewith the Emperor CONSTANS was highly offended,
and did that which hereafter shall be declared. On the other side, the Pope by
all means sought a reformation in the Lombards, which he could not effect
during the life of ROTHARIVS; for he made war against the Imperialists, after
they had Wars between the Lombards and Imperialists.
lived many years together in peace: which war was very resolutely begun
with great preparation, by ROTHARIVS of his part* and by the Exarch THEODORE of
the other side. The Exarch coming from Rauenna drew his forces to an head in
the city of Bologna; for now the cities of Italy by reason of their long peace
and rest, were grown rich and populous; and ROTHARIVS levied no less an Army
in the city of Parma; and the one taking his way against the other, they came
to join near the city of Modena: where (as SIGI^ERTVS and PAVLVS DIACONVS
do report) after some encounters and skirmishes, they fought a very cruel
battle; wherein the Romans were overthrown, and seven thousand of them The
victory of the Lombards.
slain; and the Exarch THEODORE escaped by flight.

ROTHARIVS having obtained this victory, came to the coast of Genoa; and
assaulted and took many Cities, which until then he could not do, and so
marched victorious, until that THEODORE the Exarch gathering together those
which were scattered, levied a new Army; wherewith he entertained the enemy,
and victualled his frontier Garrisons. The Emperor CONSTANS understanding
hereof, took no care to relieve his Exarch, but being very much offended with
Pope MARTIN, he put THEODORE out of the government of Italy; and in his place
sent another called OLIMPIVS (as very an Heretic as himself) giving him
direction, to seek to bring all the Bishops in Italy to hold of his opinion;
and if that he could not bring it to pass, that then he should use his best
means to get the Pope into his hands, or to kill him. With which commission
and resolution being arrived in Italy, he departed from Rauenna, and took his
way toward Rome, under color to go visit the Pope; accompanied with many
Soldiers and men of war; first procuring an agreement and truce with the
Lombards. Being come to Rome he sought how to apprehend the Pope; but being
unable to effect the same, he agreed with a desperate bold Soldier to kill
him, which took no effect.

During the time that these things passed in Italy, the Infidels (MAHOMETS
successors) were grown so mighty, as they now contented not themselves with
Egypt, and those provinces which they held in the East; but preparing a great
Fleet in Alexandria in Egypt, they muaded Spoil made by the Sarazins.
the I Will of Rhodes, and took it, and afterward other Islands in those Seas; and
from thence came spoiling and robbing through all the Leuant Seas, even to the
I Will of Sicilia, wherein they took some towns upon the coast; and landing their
Army, there burnt and spoiled the country in the maine land: whereof when
OLIMPIVS the governor or Exarch of Italy was advertised, within whose
government Sicilia was contained; coming first to an agreement with the Pope,
he took his way toward Naples; whither he had commanded to be brought, the
greatest number of men and ships that could be gotten from all parts of Italy:
and finding himself sufficiently furnished, he went to seek his enemies,
resolute and in very good order: and they understanding of his coming,
assembled themselves, with resolution to fight with him, which he refused not:
And so, when as the two Nauies came within sight one of the other, they set
themselves in order, and each General animated and encouraged his people, and
the fight began with great fury, and was maintained with such resolution, as
many thousands of men of the one and other side were slain. Notwithstanding,
in the end the victory seemed to incline to the Imperialists; yet before they
could obtain it, they had lost so many men and ships, that although the Exarch
might have driven the enemies out of the Island, and have recovered what was
lost; yet he was so beaten and distressed, as it seemed not that he had
overcome. And (as Historians affirm) he endured so great toil, and was so
tired in the battle before and after The death of the Exarch Olimp^us.
it, as he fell so extremely sick, that within few days he died.

The Emperor CONSTANS understanding of this victory; Being then in great care
and suspense, forgetting to amend his lewd life, to leave his heretical
opinion, and to give God thanks for this victory, he grew very proud,
resolving again to procure the destruction of the Pope: and to that end gave
the charge of the government again to THEODORE, from whom he had taken the
same. In the end he sent THEODORE into Italy, with a secret charge, to do that
which he afterward performed, and I will discover: and for his consort and
companion Theodore sent into Italy.
therein, another aduenturous fellow whose name was PAVLVS PELLARIVS. In this
time died ROTARIVS King of the Lombards; and another called RODOALDVS succeeded
The death of Rotaris king of the Lombards, whom Rodoaldus succeeded.
him; who shortly after falling in love with a great man's wife, and being taken
with her, was slain by her husband; and ARRIOPERTVS succeeded him. All which
observed the peace with the Empire. And the new Exarch THEODORE coming into
Italy, and with him his friend and companion, was very well entertained
afterward in Rome: for from the first time of his being there, the people were
well content with his government. Remaining certain days in Rome with his
people, and concealing his purpose, he went one day to the palace, as though he
had gone to visit the Pope; and seizing thereon, apprehended him, and delivered
him to his Pope Martin apprehended and sent to Constantinople.
associate PVVL: who presently departed with him toward Rauenna, and speedily
took the Sea and went to Constantinople, where the Emperor held him for
certain days prisoner, and then banished him to Chersona in Pontus, which was
in the confines of the Empire; where he afterward Pope Martine died in exile.
died, when he had been Bishop of Rome six years. A little before this, died
the king of the Lombards ARRIOPERTVS, who (as I said) succeeded RODOA^DVS.

This ARRIOPERTVS left behind him two sons, which were but young, the one
called PERTHERITVS, and the other GVNDIBERTVS; between which (each desiring to
The death of Arriopertus king of the Lombards.
be absolute) there grew dissension and discord: and GVNDIBERTVS which was the
younger rose with Milan; the elder brother which ought to have been King,
remaining in Pauia, then the head of that kingdom. When this came to the
knowledge of one GRIMOALDVS, a great Captain of the Lombards, Duke and
Governor of Beneuent, and other towns; he leaving his son ROMOALDVS with a
good garrison therein, came to the city of Pauia; which he entered by force,
and drove out the young King PERTHERITVS, and took such order in all the rest,
Grimoaldus made kieg of the Lombards.
as the two brethren were driven to abandon their country; and he remained in
their place a mighty King.

The Emperor CONSTANS in Constantinople, surmizing that by means of the wars
which the Lombards made amongst themselves, he coming with any great power
might drive them out of Italy; this his desire he resolved to put in
execution, and to that effect made his son CONSTANTINE his companion in the
Empire, that he might remain in Constantinople. And The Emperor Constans made
his son Constantine his companion in the Empire.
so preparing a great fleet by Sea, and a great Army by land, he came into
Italy to the city of Tarentum; where landing his men, he marched therewith to
join with the ordinary companies which THEODORE commanded. GRIMOALDVS the
tyrant King of the Lombards (more like a wise and provident Prince, then one
that was any way fearful or a coward) had by that time levied all the power
that he was able to make, both to defend himself and to offend his enemy.
After many adventures in this war, the Emperor went to besiege RIMOALDVS the
son of GRIMOALDVS in Beneuent, and did put him and the city to great
distress: showing himself very valiant, he published that he came to restore
Italy to her former liberty, and that he would again make Rome the seat of
the Empire; alleging that it was greater reason to honor the mother, then the
daughter. Whether this were fained, or in earnest, I know not; but I am sure
the Kings soonne being besieged, sent to his father for aid, who (as I said)
The Emperor Constans (...)Italy.
was not careless thereof, but daily increased his forces, that he might be
able to fight with the Emperor. But he staying longer then ^IMOALDVS would (for
so was the son called) he wrote certain pitiful Letters to his father, by one
who was husband to her which had nursed him at her breast: whom the father,
meeting upon the way, sent back again to certify his son of what he had
seen, and to tell him that he came to visit him. This man, seeking to get
into the City, was apprehended by the Emperors soldiers: and being brought
into his presence, and examined, and his reports found conformable to that
whereof he was otherwise advertised, the Emperor being in great fear, resolved
not to abide his coming; desiring first to do some notable exploit, whereby he
thought to have taken the City; but it happened contrary to his expectation:
which I have thought good to relate for an example to others which are servants
and vassals to Kings and princes; which was thus:

CONSTANS, promising great matters to his Nurse, requested him to go to the
walls; and that, calling the besiged Prince, he should advise and counsel him
to give up the City, for that his father was not able to relieve him. And
heerwitnall he threatened the Nurse, that if he did not so, he would presently
cause him to be slain. The Nurse, seeing that there was no other way left for
him to encourage the Besieged, faining a desire to satisfy the Emperor,
promised to perform his command. Whereupon the Emperor, the next night
following, commanded him to be brought near to the wall, with a guard which
held him fast bound: and he, coming thither, called aloud to those within,
willing them to call ROMOALDVS to him, for that there was a man which much
loved him, desired to speak with him. ROMOALDVS, as soon as he was advertised
heerof, came to the walls, and with a loud voice asked who would speak with him.
His Nurse, knowing him well by his speech, and he him also, answered: It is
the Nurse which brings you an answer from your father; who wills you to be
of good cheer* for, this day he arriueth at the River Satrico, and within these
three days will be here with an infinite Army. I can say no more: for, I am
in the enemies hands, who already begin to murder The loyalty of a Nurse.
me: I recommend unto thee my wife and children.

Having said these words, those which were within the City were therewith
greatly encouraged: and those without were so much despited, that they
presently slew him, by the Emperors commandment: who, not daring to stay any
longer (to his great shame and dishonor) raised his siege from before Beneuent,
and took his way with his Army toward Naples. GRIMOALDVS, being comn with a
very great Army, sent an excellent Captain called VITOLA, with the best and most
choice men of the Army to pursue the Emperor: and he, marching a great pase,
ouertook him at the passage of a river called Caloro. The Emperor, being
already passed with the greatest part of his Army, VITOLA charged his
arieregard: and there began a fierce battle; wherein the Emperors people
(for that they could not be seconded by reason of the river) were overthrown,
and the most part of them slain: and so the Emperor was drinen to retire to
Naples both with loss and dishonor.

Being to depart from Naples to Rome, he commanded a Captain of his whose name
was SABVRVS, born in Naples, that he with twenty thousand chosen men should
stay behind to guard that City and Province: who more hardy than wise (the
Emperor being gone) with the Army aforesaid drew so near to the Lombards, that
the Kings son, ROMOALDVS, desiring his father to give him leave, came with
his forces to fight with him; in such sort, that with equal desire of both the
Captains the two Armies joined, with Ensigns displaied: and, after great
slaughter of men of the one and other side, the Lombards obtained the victory,
and following the chase slew SABVRVS the General, and many of his men. The
Emperuor with all his The victory of the Lombards.
troops was solemnly received into Rome, as well by VITILIANVS who then was
Pope, as by the Citizens and Inhabitants thereof; but he continued there but
twelve days: and when he had visited the whole City; not as an Emperor and
their Lord, but rather like an enemy, he commanded to be carried out of the
City all the best statues of Marble and Metal, of most excellent and curious
workmanship, and much gold and silver, and other rare things: all which being
brought aboard his Ships and Galleys, he commanded them presently to depart;
and he himself went from Rome to Naples, without making any provision against
the Lombards: by reason whereof, they became mightier than before.

The Emperor came to Naples, purposing to passe-ouer into Sicilia: and, being
past with much people, he went to the City of Syracusa, now called Sarragossa,
having (to no purpose) all his Army together in Arms, as though he had meant
to have done some great exploit; so as men greatly suspected it, and were of
sundry opinions. But he did it to no other end, than, under color to repair
the harms which he had received, with excessive greediness to gather the rents
and services of all the Provinces of the Empire; and to impose new taxes and
tolls in Africa, in Italy, in the Isles of Sardinia and Sicilia, and in all the
rest of his dominions: which as it usually happens unto all Princes which do
so without just cause or reason, he grew to be extremely hated through all the
Empire, and was afterward the cause of his death. He remaining thus in the I Will
of Sicilia, continually feasting and banketting, never leaving to require
loanes and imprests, and to lay new impositions upon the people, ransoming and
pilling them through out all the Island, and in Africa and Italy in like manner;
and being hated of all men, the Sicilians adventured upon a day (he being in a
bath) to kill him; by the direction and commandment of Constans slain by the
Cicilian^ in a Bath.
a Captain of his called MI^ENCIVS, or as others write, MEZENCIVS and
MAGVENCIVS, a bold audacious fellow and well beloved; more for the constitution
of his body (which was very comely, tall, and well proportioned) then for his
valor or no bilitie.

This happened in the seven and twentieth year of his reign* and in the year
of our Lord, six hundred sixty and eight. CONSTANS left behind him three
sons; CONSTANTINE who remained in Constantinople, for CAESAR and governor,
HERACLIVS and TIBERIUS. About this time in Italy dyed King GRIMOALDVS, whom we
but now said to have made wars with the Emperor: and he being dead, thither
came out of France, whither before he had fled for refuge, PARTHARIS or
PARTHERITVS King ARRIOPERTVS son, whom GRIMOALDVS had thrown out of Pauia,
and deprived of his estate; as we have already related.

THE LIFE OF CONSTANTINE THE FOVRTH OF THAT NAME, AND THREESCORE AND SEVENTH
ROMAN EMPEROVR.
THE Emperor CONSTANS (as I have said) was slain in Sarragossa in Sicilia:
and as soon as he was dead; MEZENCIVS who caused him to be slain, or (after
some) whom he himself slew; with the Mezencius made Emperor.
favor of those which assisted him in that action, took upon him the title of
Emperor, and for the present, all the rest of the people of Sicilia approved
and confirmed the same; more for the desire of innouations which are ever
pleasing, then for any good liking they had to his person. Whereof the Emperors
son CONSTANTINE was soon advertised, who then remained in Costantinople, and
held the name of Emperor, and had done so ever since his father departed
thence, and was therewith so much perplexed and in such fear, considering the
strangeness of the accident, as he for the time not only had not the heart to
do ought in revenge of his fathers death, but was also in fear to have lost
the name of Emperor, which he then held; and therewithal scarcely durst
maintain what he possessed in Graecia. The like in a manner befell THEODORE
the Exarch or governor of Italy: for notwithstanding that he had a good troop
of soldiers, well trained, and of good experience; yet he durst not seem to
be greatly grieved for the death of his sovereign LORD; neither to attempt
ought against MEZENCIVS. The cause was for that all the people greatly rejoiced
at his death; for he was generally hated for his covetousness.

In this confusion all things passed for some days; all men expecting the
success of the new tyrant; not daring to declare themselves either for the one
or other party; for he had with him many good men of war. But as his entry
was by treason, and grounded upon an ill foundation; and in him were neither
the virtues nor merits requisite in an Emperor; the Captains and men of war
began to murmur as what he had done, and to wish his death; which was speedily
published, and it gave all men occasion to take heart, and to seek revenge for
the treason and murder committed upon the person of the dead Emperor CONSTANS.
The first were the Italians; and so THEODORE the Exarch began to stir,
leuying and mustering forces, therewith to pass into Sicilia, as he did; and
the companies which were in the provinces of Africa did the like; whereto the
peace with the Sarazins and other nations, was a great help; for it seems,
that CONSTANS being in Sicilia so accompanied with men of war, they durst not
make war against him. These great forces coming into Sicilia against
MEZENCIVS, Mezencius slain.
and he being slenderly supported by his own people, was in short space taken
and slain; and many of his friends which were with him, were taken and carried
prisoners to Constantinople, to the young Emperor CONSTANTINE; who presently
after this victory began Constantine made Emperor.
every where to be obeyed and held for Emperor, and took upon him the
resolution and courage of a Prince. Some also write that he went into Sicilia.
And notwithstanding that afterward he proved a good and virtuous Emperor;
yet in his beginning he committed a most cruel fact, which was; to put to
death his younger brothers, thereby to live assured that they should not seek
to deprive him of the Empire: and some also write that he caused the tops of
their noses to be cut off: but the truth is, that he commanded them to be
slain; and so he became Lord of the whole Empire, without any difficulty.

But the Sarazins, Mahometists, and PHADALAS or SOPHIAS their King, seeing this
combustion, and the fit opportunity to invade the Empire, by reason of the
before recited accidents in Sicilia, and also for that it seemed that
CONSTANTINE was not yet firmly settled in his throne; they as closely and
covertly as might be rigged a mighty navy at Alexandria in Egypt; with a
resolution to invade Thracia, and Graecia: and if the dissension happened which
they expected, then to take those provinces: but afterward as matters proved
better in Constantinople then was hoped for; they altered their determination,
and invaded Sicilia, which was left ill The Sarazins made war in Sicilia.
provided of men of war: and they came with such force and power, as they
entered the city of Sarragossa, and some other towns; where robbing and
spoiling, they continued certain days: and it seeming to them an hard matter
to hold those places, carrying away with them an infinite number of prisoners
and great richesse of gold, silver, and other jewels; they returned to
Alexandria.

In the Constantinopolitane Commentaries I find this war written more at
large; where it is affirmed, that they first made war on the borders of
Thracia and Graecia, the space of many days, and took many places; and that
in the end being repelled thence by the Emperor, they went to Sicilia, so
writes ZONARAS: but after the first manner, writes PAVLVS DIACONVS, an Author
near to that time, and afterward others of less antiquity. I sometimes set
down the sundry opinions of Authors (although it shall not be needful always
to do so;) to satisfy the curious Readers, that they may not condemn my
History, finding therein any thing contrary or differing from that they shall
read in some others. But although that I do not always thus, let them rest
assured that I follow an Author, which writes it as I relate it; for in the
diversity of opinions, I follow that which seems to be most true and
probable, weighing all conjectures: and when I cannot or desire not to do so,
I briefly set down both opinions, as now I have done. That which to me
seems to be the most certain, is, that they first invaded Sicilia, and did
as I have related; and afterward raising greater power through their success
and victory, there ensued that which these Authors set down, which is, that
they a long time made war on the Coast of Graecia, and the confines of
Constantinople; where they took many places; out of which by the diligence and
valor of the Emperonr, they were driven by force: this war lasted full
six years.

All authors affirm that CONSTANTINE herewith not contented, sent a great
Army by land against the Mahometicke Sarazins, into the province of Soria,
which is the ancient Victory of the Christians against the Sarazins.
Syria, which fought with all their whole power, and the Christians obtained
the victory; and of the infidels were slain thirty thousand. And they were
brought to such distress, as their Prince or King, whose name was MAVIAS, sent
to entreat the Emperor for peace, offering very profitable and honorable
conditions; and thereby bound himself to pay yearly to the Mauias King of the
Sarazins sought to the Emperor Constantine for peace.
Emperor, a great number of pounds or marks of gold; and for the present, to
release many thousand prisoners, which he held captives: whereupon the peace
was granted and confirmed by CONSANTINE, to ease himself of that trouble;
that he might apply himself to the reformation of some other matters
concerning the Christian faith; for he was concerning what he ought to
believe, a very good Christian. This was concluded in the tenth year of his
reign.

But there presently ensued another trouble and a war equal to the former;
which was, that a certain people of the provinces of Scithia (the fountain of
many others before mentioned) Wars between the Emperor and the Bulgarians.
called Bulgarians; not those which I heretofore spoke of, but others, of the
same name and nation, came down into Thracia, being in number above one
hundred thousand persons; and they began to make war in the Empire, with a
desire to take some good country, wherein they might dwell and inhabit, as
many other nations before them had done. For the Northren countries are barren
and ill inhabited; yet by reason of the cold, men multiply and increase in
them exceedingly, as we daily see by experience, and PAVLVS DIACONVS notes the
same. The fury wherewith this people came, was so great, as they did infinite
harm; and they made themselves Lords of some especial countries; which being
made known to the Emperor (in whom there wanted not the courage of a valiant
Prince) he raised his forces, and in his own person went to defend his
subjects; and the war for some days was very sharp and cruel; and the
Bulgarians sought to fight with him in the plain field: which he (presuming
much of his people) as a valiant Prince, refused not; so as they sought with
banners displaied, which A battle between Constantine and the Bulgarians,
wherein he was overthrown and put to flight.
battle was exceeding terrible. But it seems that through some his ill
direction, or the great force of his adversaries, the Emperor was overthrown,
and many of his people slain, and he himself was constrained to use the
common remedy of those which are overcome, which is to fly, by that mean to
escape and to save his life. And as in the battle he had done what he was
able; so afterward gathering his people together, he retired with great good
order and discretion. But it pleased God that at what time, as it seemed, and
when it was feared, that the Bulgarians would have brought the Empire into
great distress, merely of their own accord they The Bulgarians sue to
Constantine for peace.
sent to the Emperor, and suing for peace desired him to give them some place
where they might inhabit, and they would become his friends, yea and his
subjects: whereto he gave ear (considering his present estate,) with a very
good will. And so treating of the matter for a certain The province of Serui^
given to the Bulgarians, and therefore called Bulgaria.
space, the province of the lower Misia was assigned unto them, and was (after
their name) called Bulgaria: wherein they have quietly and peaceably inhabited,
until that of late years they were subdued and conquered by the Turks; a new
scourge and plague to the Christians, after MAHOMET.

While these things passed in Sicilia, in Graecia, and in Asia, which was
during the space of ten years; in Italy although there were peace between
the Lombards and Italians, yet there Wonderful alteration of the elements i^
Italy.
failed not other miseries and persecutions: And there happened so great and so
many tempests and alterations in the air, as it seemed that the four elements
had conspired against mankind: for the winds were so furious and violent, as
they overthrew many buildings, and rent up many trees by the roots: and the
rain likewise was so great and tempestuous, as it destroyed all their tillage,
as well for bread-corne as all other kind of herbs and seeds: And therewith
fell an infinite number of thunderbolts, and fires from heaven, which slew a
great number of people: and the earth with these so great alterations became so
corrupt, as there ensued many contagious diseases. Wherefore the people
repenting them of their sins, made their prayers and supplications to God,
that it would please him to cease these so great calamities: but yet the
relics thereof remained a long time after.

At this time died Pope DEODATVS, and by reason of his death the seat was
void four months: making a new election in Rome, DONVS only so called, was
chosen Pope, who was held for a Saint, and lived two years and a half (as
says PLATINA). In his time THEODORE Archbishop of Rauenna wholly submitted
himself to the Church of Rome, whereas some of his predecessors, with the
favor of the Exarchs or governors had before him denied the same. Others
(amongst which is BLONDVS) affirm, that this happened in the time of his
successor AGATHVS, wholiued two years and a half: in which time, although but
short, he treated A Council held in Constantinople.
with the Emperor concerning a general council to be held, principally against
the heresy of the Monothelites, which was dispersed over all the Churches of
Graecia, which confounded the two Natures in CHRIST, Humane and Divine;
affirming that in him was but a will only. And so for this time the Greek
Church remained united with the Latin: but it pleased GOD afterward to suffer
it to come (as we now see) into the power and subjection of Insidels.

In this Council were many other matters handled concerning the reformation of
the Church and the Ceremonies thereof; and this was the sixth of those Councels
which for their excellencies were so renowned and famous, and among the rest
called Universal. Great was the reputation which the Emperor CONSTANTINE
purchased to have celebrated this Council in his time, and to have finished so
holy a work. Within few days after, Pope AOATHVS dyed, by whose authority it
had been called; and LEO the second borne in Sicilie succeeded him, who was
worthily advanced, being learned, eloquent and of a holy life: he ordained the
Paxe to be given in the Church, which is observed in the Church of Rome until
this day. He being dead, BENEDICT the second succeeded him: with whose election
the Emperor was so well pleased, as after he had confirmed the same, he
renounced the right and custom which the Emperors held to confirm the
election of Popes; to the end that from thenceforth, as soon as by the Clergy
they were chosen, they might use their authority, without any need of the
Emperors confirmation, or of their Exarchs or governors, as of long time they
had used.

CONSTANTINE living in this prosperity, had peace with the Sarazins; and the
Provinces of Africa, and the I Will of Sicilia were in quiet, and so was Italy:
for the Lombards being at variance and dissension among themselves, very
firmly maintained the peace with the Empire: and the estates of Graecia with
the territory of Constantinople, were all in very quiet subjection. But this
good form and manner of government, was disturbed by the Emperors death,
which shortly after ensued, when he had reigned seventeen years, and had
protected and defended the Empire which he inherited, with justice and equity,
reforming errors in the Christian Religion, as aforesaid. And thus it was,
that falling grievously sick in Constantinople, and the incurablenesse of his
disease being in short space bruited abroad through the World (as usually it
happens) in some parts his death was published before that he was dead:
whereof GIZET King of the Sarazins, whom they called AMVRATES, being
advertised, and believing the same to be true, with all haste ^euied a very
great Army both by Sea and Land, which he forthwith sent from Egypt, and
conquered Wars made by Gizet King of the Sarazins.
all the coast of Africa to Carthage: wherein, by reason of the Emperors
death, he found no sufficient resistance.

The wars of Africa proceeding in this manner, the Emperor dyed before he
was able to provide for the same, as he would have done if he had lived. He
departed out of The death of the Emperor Constantine.
this World in the year of our Lord, six hundred fourscore and six; his
wives name was ANASTASIA, by whom he had lawful Heirs; of which JUSTINIAN
and IVSTIN succeeded him in the Empire; as presently shall be declared.

THE LIFE OF JUSTINIAN, THE SECOND OF THAT NAME, AND THREESCORE AND EIGHT
ROMAN EMPEROVR.
THE ARGUMENT.
THis Emperor attained to the dignity being very young: in the beginning of
his reign he made wars against the Turks, and constrained them to sue for
peace: which for that he maintained not, it so happened that losing a battle in
the second war, he was driven to sue for peace: and returning home with
disgrace was deposed from his Empire, having his nose and his ears cut off:
and in his place Leoncius, a captain of his was made Emperor. Afterward
another of his Captains, whose name was Tiberius, rose against Leoncius, and
deposed him from the Empire, and condemned him to perpetual imprisonment, with
a determination to have put him to death with greater torment. Which Tiberius,
was likewise driven out of the Empire by Justinian: who with the aid of his
father in law the King of Bauaria, returned and recovered the Empire; wherein
using extreme cruelty against the favorites of Tiberius and Leoncius: finally
moving wars against the Bulgarians, wherein he had but little good success,
he was compelled to return home, to his great shame and dishonor. And
beginning to stand in fear of one Philippicus, whom Tiberius had banished, and
seeking means to kill him; Philippicus rebelled against him, and being made
Emperor came to abattaile, wherein both Justinian and his son Tiberius
miserably ended their tragedy, represented in this scene of the world with
such variety of fortune, as never any other Emperor was so much tossed and
turmoiled as he was: and he governed the Empire at both times six and twenty
years.

IT is a rule in Rhetorike, observed by great Orators, in the beginning of what
they purpose to treat of, whether in A rule in Rhetorike.
writing, or pleading; to procure the attention, and willing audience of their
hearers, or readers: which is principally done when they extol or magnify that
which they have to say; letting them know that it shall be very pleasing or
profitable: for with a desire to know some great matter, or moved with the
greediness of profit, or allured with the hope of the delight and contentment
which is promised, they attentively hear, or willingly read what is proponed:
yet the author must always be careful to perform what he does promise, and
that in his speech he come not short of the expectation held of him.

Coming now to write the life of the Emperor JUSTINIAN the second, son to
the Emperor CONSTANTINE the fourth; with an imagination to be found true in
what I shall say, and that he which shall read the same shall not be deceived,
I entreat the reader to be attentive. And although I tell not wonders and
marvelous things happened in the heavens and on earth: yet truly he which with
attention shall read the history of fifteen years succeeeding, shall see a
pleasant and strange Comedy, which Fortune, or (to say better) the world
represented in those times. The principal and chief parts whereof, we may
say, were acted in the person of JUSTINIAN; who sometimes as an Emperor, and
sometimes as a private man, came upon the stage: I may very well say so, seeing
that he was twice chosen and obeyed, Justinian his (...).
and twice also utterly deprived and bereaved of his Empire: so as it seemed
he went in and out, making a show upon the theater of the world: and with him
other two or three Emperors or tyrants, which were in his time: as LEONCIVS,
TIBERIUS, and PHILPPICVS: which like actors in a tragedy did nothing but put
off and on their maskes: for sometimes you should see them come in with a nose,
and sometimes noselesse: sometimes by force, and sometime by favor; the one
supplanting the other. Finally, I say that in my opinion, this history seems
to be like an old wives tale, or a fained fable, only to depaint some strange
adventures, or great misfortunes, it being for certain a most true history:
from which may be drawn a notable example of of the inconstancy and
uncertainty of the estate of this life, and lightly to account thereof; and to
the end that men leave to toil and to take such care for the obtaining of
riches and sovereignty; and that they grow not proud when they have attained
the same, neither be grieved or dismayed when they lose them, but always
account them for doubtful, without any firm continuance: considering what
peril and danger they undergo in getting them, and how little assurance they
have to enjoy them.

Coming now to our history, it passed thus: After the death of the Emperor
CONSTANTINE, as he held the Empire in good order and government in his life
time; so his son JUSTINIAN after his decease found no difficulty, but was
gladly received and obeyed of al men: and notwithstanding that he was very
young, being but sixteen years old, yet he began peaceably to govern his
Empire; saving that in Africa in the time of his fathers sickness, and after his
decease, the Sarazins became Lords of a great part thereof.

In the beginning of his reign he commanded great forces to be levied, for
the defense and recovery of Africa; and as to a new Prince, so many and so
good men of war made repair unto him, as the Sarazins stood in fear of him.
Wherefore VALDVLA their King and Captain which succeeded GIZITES (the authors
differ much in these names) sent to him for peace: and for as much as he
offered very large conditions, JUSTINIAN granted the same for ten years. The
first of which was, that he should restore all that which he held in Africa;
which was the City of Carthage, and all that which lies between that and
Egypt, near unto the Sea side, besides other contributions of money and
horses, which were to be paid unto him yearly: and this peace being
confirmed, there was generally peace through the whole Empire, without any
suspicion of war: yea and some Historians report, that there was an
universal peace through all the world: so as neither the Kings of France,
Spain, nor England; neither the Princes of Germany, or the Kings of the
Bauarians, of Slauonia, of Misia, of Bulgaria, neither the Hunnes which
inhabited Hungary, among themselves had any wars, or were at contention with
any others: The like was in the estates and Provinces of the East. Which peace
and concord JUSTINIAN through pride and evil counsel disturbed, by warring
contrary Justinian contrary to his league, made wars against the (...), and
what ensued,
to his promise and agreement made with the Sarazins which he began very
resolutely with great preparation: and after that he had sent LEONCIVS for his
General, he went in person and did much harm, and recovered some Countries in
Soria, and entered Mesopotamia; where the Sarazins reinforcing their troops,
and repairing their Armies, gathered together an infinite number of them, and
came to give him battle: which the young Emperor refused not; but yet after
great slaughter of his people he was overcome, and driven to fly, and to
abandon what he had recovered, being brought to such extremity, as he was
forced to sue and entreat them for peace: which after many treaties and demands
was concluded, and the Sarazins for that time remained in quiet. In this time
died THEODOR Exarch or Governor of Italy, and in his place was sent another
prime man called JOHN, and Pope CONON aforesaid also dyed: after much
controversy about the election of a new Bishop, for an Archbishop called
THEODORE, and another called PASCAL, sought to have been Popes, and with money
had bribed the Exarch JOHN, to assist them with his voice and favor; the
matter being likely to have come to blows, they all agreed to choose one whose
name was SERGIVS, borne in the City of Antioch in Syria, who was chosen and
obeyed for Pope: yet afterward there were some tumults about that matter,
which concern me not.

In those days died CVMPERTVS, who then was King of the Lombards, and there
succeeded a son of his called LIMPERTVS, of whom we have not made any
mention, for that they lived in peace with the Italians and the Emperors
subjects. The Emperor JUSTINIAN being returned out of Asia o^ Constantinople,
with great loss and disgrace for the war aforesaid; repairing his losses
received, and making new provision with little discretion and worse direction,
resolved to begin the war again: wherein he had no better success then in the
former: And this was against the Bulgarians which inhabited Misia, with whom
his father had made a perpetual league of amity; and JUSTINIAN (as a light
inconstant young man) War made by Constantine against the Bulgarians.
breaking the conditions, entered their Country with a great Army, with such
power and fury, as neither the Bulgarians, nor their King durst take the field
to give him battle; but retired, and abandoning many places, fortified
themselves in the strongest; which so much emboldened the Emperor, as he
prosecuted this war with less heed and circumspection, then so important a
case required: which when the Bulgarians perceived, recovering courage, they
assembled a multitude of men: and cutting off all victuals from the Emperors
Army, and stopping the passages of certain rivers, they brought him to such
extremity, that although he would retire, he found so great danger and
difficulty therein, as he was compelled to sue to them for peace, Constantine
sued to the Bulgarians for peace.
against whom, of his own mind, voluntarily and without reason he had made
war; which they granted, upon condition that he should restore to them all
the prisoner, and the Towns and other things which he had taken: And that he
should personally swear* well and faithfully to maintain the same, as well by
himself as by all his Princes and chief Captains.

JUSTINIAN returning from this journey, with no more honor then from the
first, caused a new Council to be assembled in Constantinople, to disannull
that which in the former had been determined, concerning certain points in
religion: The Pope being herewith discontented, sent his Legates to hold his
place there, and to see what the Council would treat of: wherein by the
Emperors authority there were some things handled against the resolution of
the last Council: whereof the Pope being advertised, he reproved and
disannulled what was there concluded; The Pope began to contend with the
Emperor. Pope Sergius disannulled the Council assembled by the Emperor,
Constantine.
and confirmed the last Council, and sent commandment to dissolve the
present. Wherewith the Emperor was so highly displeased, as he presently sent
ZACHARIAS the Commander General of all his men of war, to Rome, with
commission to apprehend the Pope, and to send him to Constantinople.

ZACHARY being arrived in Italy about this exploite, notwithstanding that he
dissembled the matter, yet was it soon discovered, and SERGIVS had so won
the hearts of the people, that all the companies which lay in Ravenna, and the
marches thereof, and in other parts of Italy, came with all speed to Rome,
with intent to have slain ZACHARY, and to have released the Pope, whom
ZACHARY had already seized on. When ZACHARY understood with what fury these
men of war came against him, despayring of any other remedy, heyeelded
himself to the Popes mercy, whom he then held prisoner: And the Pope
pardoning the offense, protected him, and hid him in his Palace; then sitting
in his Throne, holding a great state, he attended the coming of the Army
which came from Ravenna, together with the Roman people: who very earnestly
desiring him to deliver ZACHARY into their hands, he made an Oration unto
them, persuading them to moderate their displeasure, seeing that he had
pardoned the offense: whereto they all consented, and ZACHARY, being brought
into his presence, had leave to depart, although with much shame and disgrace.
And the Pope so cunningly handled the matter, that he brought the Emperor into
such hatred, and made him so odious to the people, as their whole study was
how to depose him from the Empire: and as they were all willing thereto, the
effect easily ensued.

JUSTINIAN having represented (as I said) the first act of the Tragedy, a
great Captain called LEONCIVS before mentioned, whom he had of long time held
prisoner, resolved to rebel against him: and having secretly conferred of the
matter with GALLICANVS the Patriarch of Constantinople, and with his other
friends; upon a day he suddenly came from his house, accompanied with many
armed-men; and gathering men together against the Emperor, Leoncius rebelled
against the Emperor.
he went to the Prisons, and set all the prisoners at liberty; and the people
very willingly accompanying him, he went to the Emperors palace, where he
easily apprehended him: And proclaiming himself Emperor, deprived the other
of his Empire; and he was crowned with great joy of the people, which ever
delights in novelties, but chiefly with the change of Princes, and great
Magistrates; for the present estate does never please them, they ever commend
that which is past, and still desire a new.

LEONCIVS was crowned, and JUSTINIAN had his ears and his nose cut off, and
some say his tongue also, to make him seem ugly and the more to be abhorred;
and having Leoncius made Emperor.
brought him to this estate, he banished him for ever, to the City of Chersona
in Pontus, the furthermost bounds of the Empire. Which befell him in the tenth
year of his reign, and in the year of our Lord GOD 696, yet some say more;
where let us leave him for some space* whilst that LEONCIVS may in the mean
time act his part of the Tragedy which we promised.

The great hatred which the people bare against the Emperor JUSTINIAN, was the
chief occasion that moved the Tyrant LEONCIVS to rebel and take upon him the
name and state of Emperor: for JUSTINIAN was brought into such hatred with the
people, that they would have accepted of any man that had dared to attempt to
have made himself Emperor; and much sooner of LEONCIVS, who was a valiant and
expert man of war, and had held great charges and offices. In the beginning
all things succeeded according to his desire; for JUSTINIAN had neither the
heart nor means, during his banishment, to restore himself; neither was there
found any resistance or contradiction in any other man in the Empire: and so
LEONCIVS began to enjoy his Empire in peace. But the Sarazins or Agarenes and
HADIMILECH their King, who already had a resolution to subvert and wholly to
ruin the Empire; seeing the dissension therein, and not holding the state of
LEONCIVS firm; with a great and mighty Army from Egypt (as at other times
they had done) they invaded the Provinces of Africa, and took many Cities and
strong holds therein: against whom LEONCIVS, with no small fear and care, sent
a singular Captain called JOHN; but he gave him The Sarazins invade Africa.
no such Army as he might be able to give his enemies battle; by reason
whereof, he was constrained by policy and stratagems, to maintain the wars;
so as he defended the Country for some time, daily soliciting the Emperor, to
send him such supply of soldiers, as therewith he might be able to fight with
them: and seeing that neither by Letters nor messengers he could obtain his
suite; upon a time when he thought his absence might be least prejudicial;
leaving his Army in the best order he could, and a very good Captain called
TIBERIUS ABSIMARVS for commander in his place; he took his way toward
Constantinople, to confer with LEONCIVS about the sending of some better
supply for the wars of Africa, and coming suddenly thither, he found not
that provision which he expected and was needful; and therefore was driven to
stay longer then was expedient; for the Emperor busying himself about other
matters of small moment, took least care for those things which were of
greatest importance.

The Army in Africa seeing his long absence, began to murmur against their
Captain, for so leaving them; and likewise against the Emperor LEONCIVS: and
from murmuring in speeches, they became so audacious, as to persuade TIBERIUS
ABSIMARVS, who was left for their commander, to make himself Emperor: and he
was presently created and obeyed by the whole Army. And as ambition and desire
to command is a thing which chiefly inflameth the hearts of men; so TIBERIUS to
his own ruin, accepted that which they offered him; as hereafter this
History shall make manifest. But as he was neither careless nor Absimarus
created Emperor.
a coward so he speedily, when he had taken upon him the title of Emperor,
resolved to get the possession and government thereof; and preparing with the
greatest haste that might be to take the Emperor LEONCIVS unprovided, he
departed from Africa, abandoning the same The loss of Africa.
to the Infidels, which was the cause that afterward it was wholly lost: and
he with a very good fleet brought his people to the coast of Graecia; where,
with the aid and favor of his friends and kindred which were on Land, he took
harborough, and came to Constantinople; wherein LEONCIVS had fortified himself,
thinking to defend the same: whereupon they came to blows, without any just
cause of either side; for, he which came to deprive the Tyrant, did it to the
end to be so himself: but in the end he prevailed, and TIBERIUS entered by
force, and became Leoncius deposed by Tiberius.
Lord both of the City and of LEONCIVS; although not without much trouble, and
slaughter of many men. And upon LEONCIVS he commanded the same punishment to
be inflicted which he had given to JUSTINIAN; which was, To have his nose and
ears cut off, and to be committed to perpetual imprisonment; with an intent to
have showed him greater Leoncius had his nose and ears cut off.
cruelty; LEONCIVS having reigned theree years only: which was about the year
of our Lord six hundred ninety and nine. After this manner LEONCIVS left the
Theater, and TIBERIUS played his part, during the time that LEONCIVS was in
prison, and JUSTINIAN banished; and until such time as JUSTINIAN returned to
the stage, which was as soon as TIBERIUS had acted his part.

In such manner as I have declared, TIBERIUS tyrannized the Empire, and as it
may be coniectured by Histories, had continued long, if he could have been
contented, and not have attempted more than was fit for him to have done; so as
he himself wrought his own confusion. The first thing he did after that he was
Lord and absolute, was, To command many of LEONCIVS his friends to be either
slain or despoiled of their goods; as Favorites of a Tyrant. And truly he had
reason on his side, if he had had authority to have inflicted such punishment,
and had not himself been guilty of the same crime, and been a Traitor and a
Tyrant to him to whom he had sworn fidelity, as to his Emperor; and also to the
Commander who left him in his place; punishing the treason wherein he himself
had been a partaker, and had approved the same. And this his holy zeal extended
it self so far, that a great familiar friend of his whose name was
PHILIPPICVS, and who had greatly aided him in his enterprise, and to bring him
to that estate, only for saying that upon a night in his sleep he dreamt that
an Eagle alighted Philippicus banished for a dream.
upon his head (imagining that to prognosticate him to be an Emperor) he was by
his commandment apprehended and banished into an Island, where he could have
no conference or society with any body; notwithstanding that he was a Noble
Gentleman, and of high parentage: from whence he afterward sent him to the
City of Chersona, whither the deposed Emperor JUSTINIAN was also banished. We
will tell you hereafter what happened to this PHILIPPICVS: for, he was one of the
Actors in this Comedy.

TIBERIUS, having executed these his cruelties, sent his brother HERACLIVS with
an Army to aid the Armenians, who in ancient time had been subject to the
Empire, and now rebeld against the Infidels; where he won a great battle, and
slew a great number of them: but it seems that he did not long enjoy the
victory; for, the Infidels in process of time prevailed, and their Empire
greatly increased. In Italy also there fell discord and dissension between the
Lombards and Italians, who had lived together a long time in peace. The cause
whereof was, for that TIBERIUS, through the death or absence of JOHN the Exarch
aboue-named, sent into Italy for Exarch or Gouerner, a Chamberlain of his
called THEOPHILATVS; wherewith all Italy was much grieved: for, the greatest
part thereof now pretended to be subject to Theophilatus Exarch of Italy.
the Pope; or at least hated the government and Empire of the Greeks.
THEOPHILATVS came not to Rauenna his Predecessors used to do, but landed in
Sicilia, from thence to come to Rome: which when it was published, all the
companies which lay in Rauenna, and in other places, came to Rome, attending
his coming; rather as an enemy, than as their General: and so being arrived,
if JOHN which at that time was Pope had not protected him, he had been slain.
But through his favor he had liberty to depart and go to Rauenna, being out
of hope to do what he had projected; for, in Rome they would not obey him.
Whereupon he procured the Lombards to make war against the Romans, or at least
against those Cities which the Romans held nearest to Rome; principally
Beneuent: whereof was Duke and Gouerner a great man called SISVLPHVS, who was
therewith much annoyed: but the Pope repaired all his losses with his riches
and treasure; and, buying peace, the estate of Italy recovered rest and quiet.
But our Lord would not permit TIBERIUS to rest in peace: for, wexing jealous of
the Emperor JUSTINIAN, which earlesse and noselesse lived an exile in
Ghersona, or, as some say, understanding that JUSTINIAN intended to procure aid
to recover the Empire, whereof he was Tiberius sought to put Justinian to
death.
dispossessed by the Emperor LEONCIVS, he began to practice his death; and to
that effect sent some to deal with the Inhabitants of that City.

JUSTINIAN being advertised hereof, and standing in great fear of his life, in
the best manner he could, took shipping; and sailing over the Sea called
Euxinum or Ponticum, landed Justinian fled to the King of the Bauaria^, with
whom he made alliance.
in Europe, and came to the King of the Bauarians, who was a very mighty
Prince; by whom he was not only well received, but was also married to his
sister or daughter. And he appointed him an house and estate, promising him all
aid and favor to restore him; so as there began to be a great alteration
throughout all the Empire, seeing that JUSTINIAN was now to return to play his
part upon the Theater of this world. TIBERIUS being advertised hereof, took it
to heart (as indeed he had reason) and imagining that he should prevail
little by force, he practiced Tiberius practiced with the King of the Bauarian
to deliver Justinian into his hands for money.
to see whether money would take effect, which commonly can do more then
either sword or lance; and to that effect dealt with CAYANVS (for as I said so
the Bauarians called their King) to deliver JUSTINIAN into his hands; for whom
he would give him a great sum of money. And this covetous and inconstant King,
greedy thereof, agreed with him upon the sum, and promised to accomplish his
desire: and being ready to have put it in execution, by chance JUSTINIAN had
intelligence thereof; and so alone pursued by him which was either his father
in law, or his brother in law, he escaped by flight. About one year after that
he had long wandered, he went to the King of Bulgaria, whose name was
TREBELLIVS; who Justinian saved by the King of the Bulgarian, by whose aid he
returned to Constantinople, and put Leoncius and Tiberius to death.
pitying his calamity, gave him great entertainment; and in short space made
so great provision of men and arms, as he took his way with him toward
Constantinople; where were many which desired his return, for the hatred they
bare to TIBERIUS. To be brief, in short time and with little difficulty,
although with some effusion of blood, he came to the Imperial city, and
entering it by force TIBERIUS fled: but being afterward overtaken and brought
back into his power, he committed him to that prison wherein LEONCIVS was,
whom he had deposed and cut off his nose and his ears: and making them both
to be first carried through all the public streets of the city, he caused
them openly to be slain, after that TIBERIUS had reigned seven years. Such
are the rewards which the world gives to those, who to bear sway and to
command, forget God. And so ended these two mighty Emperors, or more
properly, Justinian made Tiberius his brother to be hanged.
proud tyrants. And JUSTINIAN, not content to execute his wrath upon those two
alone, caused TIBERIUS brother to be hanged; and many of the friends to both of
them, to be either spoiled or slain: the Patriarch GALLICANVS, who conspired
with LEONCIVS against him, had his eyes plucked out. And they further report of
him, that as often as he would have Justinian made the Patriarch of
Constantinople his eyes to be put out.
wiped his nose (if he had had it) he caused some of those which had been
followers of his enemy LEONCIVS to be slain. And so the banished Emperor
JUSTINIAN recovered his throne and Empire; and returned again to the theater,
to act the rest of his tragedy, which was nine years after that he had been
cast out of it; in the year of our Savior JESUS CHRIST Justinian returned to
his Empire.
706.

Presently after that JUSTINIAN saw himself restored and settled in his Empire,
having executed such cruelties, as the like had seldom bin heard of, upon
those he supposed had offended him; he sent great and rich presents to
TREBELLIVS King of Bulgaria, who had helped him to recover his Empire, with a
very solemn and pleasing embassage: but as it shall hereafter appear, he
continued but a while so grateful. He also sent for his wife THEODORA,
daughter of CAYANVS King of the Bauarians, from whose Court he fled; who lived
in a certain place absent from her father: for as some write, she advertised
her husband of the treason which her father pretended against him. And she
being come, he made her to be honored as Empress and Augusta: and his young
son whom he had by her in the time of his exile, he caused to be chosen and
called Emperor. Other matters concerning his government and execution of
justice, were corrupt and out of order: for as the Princes were wicked, so were
the subjects; for such as is the head, such are the members: so that so far
as I can conjecture, these were the most miserable and lamentable times, that
ever the Christian Commonwealth endured since CHRIST was borne; GOD permitting
it for a punishment of the wicked, wherewith the world did then abound; and for
the greater reward of those which suffered amongst them: for besides the wars
and troubles of the tyrannizing Emperors, there was so little faith and fear
of God, that the Church lost then all the provinces of Africa; wherein, in
steed of Christ perfect God and man, MAHOMET is adored and worshipped unto this
day, without recovery. Which to relate in such manner as it passed, I neither
have time, neither find I it distinctly written: but that after that TIBERIUS
went thence with the name of Emperor, and deposed LEONCIVS from the Empire; the
Sarazins seeing the country abandoned, came out of Egypt, Arabia, and other
Provinces of the East, and made a conquest thereof; finding so small
resistance, that within the space of four years they became Lords of all the
Countries, from Egypt, The Infidels co^nquered Africa.
unto the Province of Mauritania Tingitania, and to that which now is Ceuta,
Tangiar and Arzila: wherefore we call those of Mauritania, Mauri or Moors and
Arabians, for that they came out of Arabia; being 170 years after that Africa
was recovered from the Vandales, and had served and been subject to the Empire.
And within ten years after, with the joy of their victory (DON RODRIGO then
reigning King in Spain) they being aided by a traitorous Earl called DON
IVLIAN, and others, they came over into Spain, and in threee years conquered
The conquest of Spain by the Infidels Moors.
almost all the country, slaying in battle King RODRIGO, and the most part
of the Goths, excepting some few which lived in the Mountains of Biscay,
Galicia and Ouiedo: from whenee afterward (although abandoned by the Christian
Kings and Princes) they have by little and little, not without great trouble
and effusion of much blood, recovered their country: and finally about 100
years since, the Infidels were driven out of all Spain by King FERDINAND and
Queen ISAEEL. So as if other Christian kings had done their parts as well as the
Kings of Spain, it is to be thought that Christendom had not been so much
diminished, but had again recovered what it then lost, and had been restored
to that greatness wherein it was in the time of some ancient Emperors. But
seeing it is the judgment of God, we will leave it to him, and return to our
History, which is of the Emperors only. JUSTINIAN being in Constantinople,
executing his cruelties against the friends and kinsfolks of TIBERIUS and
LEONCIVS, it so happened that the subjects to the King of Bulgaria, which had
been so much his friend, fell at odds with some of the Emperors subjects of
Thracia, a province of the Empire, wherein stands Constantinople, about
parting their bounds: which when he understood (forgetting the benefits
received) upon this small occasion he raised an Army against TREBELLIVS King
of Bulgaria, and entering his Country, ruined many places, and committed great
spoils: wherewith the King, being greatly moved, gathered such forces together
as he could, and came to fight with the Emperor; and they two fought a cruel
battle, wherein the Emperor was justly Justinian made war upon the King of
Bulgaria, and was overthrown in battle.
overthrown, and fled out of the Country of the Bulgarians: and so this war
was ended to his dishonor. But as God never made any thing without some
goodness; so this Emperor ever respected and reverenced the Church of Rome and
the Pope, namely CONSTANTINE who then was Pope, after the two JOHN'S, the sixth
and the seventh, which succeeded S^RGIVS, who went to Constantinople to see the
Emperor, and by the way met with JOHN TOZOCOPOS, who came to be Governor of
Italy; and coming to Rome would have taken up the Church rents and goods, but
he was resisted by the Popes ministers; some of which he slew: wherefore he
grew so hateful, as he was driven to go to Rauenna; where for the same cause,
or the hatred which they bare against the Exarchs and former governors, the
people upon a day mutined, and killed him. The Pope was with great honor
received by the Emperor, and when they had seen one the other, the Emperor
prostrated himself upon the Earth, and so much abased himself, as to kiss
the Popes foot, with wonderful show of obedience: for as it may be gathered
by this Princes doings, he was both fearful and reuengefull, which are vices
usually going together. Hence it sprang, that in his greatest prosperity, he
began to stand in fear of PHILIPPICVS, who lived in exile in Pontus, by the
commandment of the tyrant TIBERIUS; and for no other cause, but for saying
that he had dreamt of an Eagle. And JUSTINIAN desired also to be revenged of
the City Chersona, alleging for his reason, that the Citizens had abused him
when he lay there in the time of his banishment: wherefore he commanded a great
Army to be levied, and a Navy to be rigged, to go and ruin that City, and to
kill PHILIPPICVS, who lived there merrily and well content with his banishment,
if they would have suffered him to have been at rest. But it pleased God to
order matters in such sort, that what JUSTINIAN did to assure himself in the
Empire, was the cause of his ruin, and the loss thereof: for PHILIPPICVS
understanding that he came against him, and acquainting those of Chersona
therewith, who also expected their own destruction, he resolved to take upon
him the name of Emperor, and to die like a soldier fighting. Before which
there passed other matters, which I omit: but the conclusion is, that seeing no
other remedy, they all consented together, and the Army and Captains, sent by
JUSTINIAN against Chersona, forsaking him revolted to PHILIPPICVS, who by his
surname was called BARDANIVS. And he seeing himself fitted with power for his
purpose, instead of being assailed, resolved now to give the assault; and
therefore in great haste, with a very great power, he went toward
Constantinople, where JUSTINIAN expected him: for after that he understood what
passed, he had raised a new Army; and encamping himself about twelve miles
from the City, attended the coming of PHILIPPICVS: who as soon as he arrived
set himself in order of battle, and JUSTINIAN did the like; and they fought
the greatest part of the day very resolutely: but in the end the victory
remained with PHILIPPICVS, and JUSTINIAN was overthrown and slain in the
battle, and together with him his son TIBERIUS, being but a very child, with
much people Justinian and his son slain in a battle against Philippicus.
of either side. And so ended the cares and Empire of the most unfortunate
Prince JUSTINIAN; seeing that in his time were so many disasters and
calamities: whose life and acts were such as I have showed you. And if the
Reader have attentively observed what I have written, I guess he will not
hold me for a liar, in that which I said in the beginning, that the History of
his time, for the variety of changes which then happened, was as a fained
Comedy; or to say more properly, a Tragedy, considering the beginning and end
thereof. He died in the year of our Lord 712 little more or less, and in the
27 year after he first began to reign.

THE LIFE OF PHILIPPICVS, ONLY OF THAT NAME, AND THREESCORE AND NINTH ROMAN
EMPEROR.
THE Emperor JUSTINIAN being overthrown and slain, PHILIPPICVS called also
BARDANIVS or BARDANES, remained Emperor: of whom there is little to be written,
for that he enjoyed the Empire so little, and for that the Authors which I
follow, make small mention of him. And of that little which we know of him, the
first is, that as soon as he came to Constantinople, and was there sworn and
crowned, he began to hold certain doubtful opinions of the Christian faith;
as well concerning the Divinity of Christ, as some other matters, contrary to
the resolution of the sixth general council, holding with the Monothelites:
and hereupon he assembled certain Bishops in Constantinople, banishing CYRUS
the Patriarch thereof, and in his Rome placing a Monk called JOHN. And
therewith not satisfied, he wrote his Cyrus Patriarch of Constantinople
banished by Philippicus.
Letters and sent an Embassage to the Pope, requiring him to approve his
opinions. Which the Pope not only refused to do, but for answer, commanded
him upon great curses and excommunications to renounce the opinions which he
held: and in Rome, in the Cloisters, and the Porches of Saint PETER'S Church, he
commanded the Conclusions of the sixth general Council to be written, to the
end that all men might know and believe the same. Whereof when the Emperor was
advertised, he presently commanded that painting and writing to be rased and
defaced, and the like to be done to all the crucifixes, images, and pictures of
CHRIST, of our Lady, and of the Saints, which he affirmed were not to be
adored, or to be set up in Churches. But his commandments were little regarded
by the Pope, or the Roman Philippicus excommunicated by the Pope.
people; for by a general decree they proclaimed him a schismatic and an
Heretic: and the Pope further commanded that in their divine service he should
not be prayed for, neither should there be any mention made of his name in any
public act or proclamation; which was executed accordingly: by means whereof
he became odious and hateful to the people of Rome, and generally of all
Italy, wherein the Empire and government of the Greeks began to be of small
authority; by reason of the great power of the Lombards, and the great command
and Authority of the Popes. For as much as the Emperors were contrary to them
in some points of Religion, the people abhorred them, and denied to be their
subjects: but PHILIPPICVS, notwithstanding the Popes fulminations, would not be
diuerted from his determination; wherefore and for some other occasions,
certain principal men secretly conspired against him; the chief of which,
was one ANTHEMIVS; which succeeded in this manner. The Emperor resting
himself upon a Whitsonday even, after certain disports on horseback, used in
those times; the conspiratours violently rushing into his lodging apprehended
him, and carrying him thence to another place plucked out his eyes; and leaving
him blind and imprisoned, refusing to Philippicus being deposed, had his eyes
put out.
kill him, they deprived him of his Empire, when he had reigned but one year
and a half: and they advanced the same ANTHEMIVS to the Empire, and gave him
to name, ANASTASIVS. This happened in the year of our Lord, seven hundred and
fourteen.

THE LIFE OF ANASTASIVS, THE SECOND OF THAT NAME, AND THREESCORE AND TENTH
ROMAN EMPEROR.
IF the malice and liberty to sin in those times had not taken such root,
ANASTASIVS had been an excellent Emperor, and had well governed the
Commonwealth; for he was a virtuous and iustman, and of a deep understanding
and judgment: But by reason of the former government, the wicked were so
accustomed to the liberty of ill doing, as they could not endure to be ruled
by any one that should minister and execute justice. For, as in a body diseased
and so full of corrupt Humors, that the natural virtue is therewith oppressed
and overcome, being unable to resist the humor, no Physic can prevail or
work any effect, but is rather loathsome and cast up again: even so it
happened to ANASTASIVS, and to THEODOSIUS the third also, who was his
successor: for men were then so hardened and ^ousled in doing ill, and so
accustomed to escape without any punishment for the same, as it seemed an hard
and intolerable matter for them to endure their good government, for the small
time they lived in subjection: as in their places shall appear.

As soon as ANASTASIVS was Emperor, of two things he took especial care; the
first Anastasius his chiefest care.
and principal was for the Christian faith and religion, wherein some of his
predecessors had erred: the other was to take order for the defense of the
Empire, which he found ill guarded and out of order.

Touching the first, he sent his Letters and Ambassadors to the Pope, whereby
he protested to believe and to hold that faith which the Church of Rome
believed: and approving and ratifying the general Counsels, he commanded
all his subjects to hold and believe the same. And as concerning the Empire,
knowing that the greatest harm that it received was from the Sarazins
(MAHOMETS Disciples) who then had conquered all Africa; against them only he
resolved to employ all his whole force and power, seeing that he could not
obtain the peace which he had first procured. And thereupon he speedily
levied Captains and Soldiers, and made a man of great esteem (whose name was
LEO) General of his Army for the defense of the frontiers against Soria, for
from thence the Infidels invaded Asia the less. And for the Seas, he rigged a
very great fleet, and therein shipped his mighty Army with an intent to sail
into Egypt, and to make a Conquest thereof, attempting first, the City of
Alexandria. All which being set in order, and sufficient provision made of all
things necessary, the Emperor being very joyful, hoping that some great
exploite would have been done, the fleet departed from Constantinople and
sailed to Alexandria, where the fear wherewith the inhabitants were stricken,
was greater than the hurt they received: For, the Imperialists, having besieged
the City, through want of certain necessaries (either in deed or fained)
raised their siege, and returned to their ships, sailed to the Isle of
Rhodes, and some say to Phoenicia in Asia the less, to make provision of
Engines, and other necessaries, which they said were needful for the
battering of Alexandria and other Towns. Whereof when the Emperor had
intelligence he was greatly displeased, and reprehending his Captains, sent
them new provision of all things necessary, commanding them presently to
return to the war which they had already begun. But in that age military
Discipline was as much decayed and corrupted as other Sciences: and as I said
in the beginning, The people being accustomed to live licentiously after their
own fantasy, and being discontented with the government of a good Emperor,
the Army mutined, and agreed among themselves to leave their enterprise
against the Infidels, and to turn head against the Emperor ANASTASIVS. And
taking land in Asia the less, the greatest and chiefest part of the Army
marched over land: and imagining, that without an head and leader, the Army
could hardly be well governed, they made choice of one to be their Emperor,
whose name was THEODOSIUS, a man of mean parentage, but yet honest and of good
behauior, and well known to them all, for he had been treasurer or receiver of
the Exchequer, and of Theodosius chosen Emperor.
the revenues of the Empire: Who, for his good conditions, was well beloved of
all men, and him they chose and made Emperor against his will.

In my judgment he had reason to refuse it: For in truth the estate of the
Empire and the faith and obedience borne to the Emperors in those times was
such as not only those which were unworthy ought not to accept of the Empire,
but even those also which were capeable, and most sufficient and of greatest
power, had reason by all ways and means possible to eschew the same.

ANASTASIVS understanding of the Rebellion of his men of war, and how they
had chosen THEODOSIUS for their Emperor, made little account thereof (for he
disdained him for the baseness of his birth, and the small experience he had
in the wars) nevertheless he raised a great power, and went into Asia to
seek him: and meeting him near unto the City of Nicea, the principal City
in Bythinia, they fought a battle, wherein through the secret judgment of
God, ANASTASIVS was overthrown and taken prisoner, Anastasius taken prisoner
by Theodosius.
when he had reigned one year and three months only; yet some say three
years: And the new chosen THEODOSIUS obtained the victory, together with the
Empire; and ANASTASIVS being deposed, remained prisoner and in his power, whom
he made a priest. Which after the computation of ABBAS WESPERGENSIS, and of
MATTHEW PALMERIVS, was in the year of our Lord, seven hundred and seventeen;
PHILIPPICVS being yet living, whom ANASTASIVS had deprived of the Empire; so as
he was his companion both in estate and fortune.

It seems that in the time of this ANASTASIVS, the Infidels made an end of
the conquest of Spain.

THE LIFE OF THEODOSIUS, THE THIRD OF THAT NAME, AND THREESCORE AND ELEVENTH
ROMAN EMPEROR.
THEODOSIUS seeing himself such as he never thought to have been (obeyed, and
sworn Emperor, without any resistance or contradiction) went to
Constantinople: and as he was noble in bounty and goodness, so he lost no
jot of his good conditions, by being advanced to the greatness and height of
the Empire, but rather seemed to have increased the same. First he would not
suffer ANASTASIVS to be put to death, neither to be any way grieved in his
person; but only to be assured of him, he caused him to be made a priest, and
gave him exhibition, Theodosius made Anastasius to become a priest.
wherein he continued until the time of the Emperor LEO, when by persuasion
of a certain captain he sought to have recovered the Empire: which cost him
his life, as hereafter we will recount, if so it shall be expedient. THEODOSIUS
having set matters in order for the general, he particularly commanded the
images and pictures which PHILIPPICVS had caused to be rased and defaced, to
be repaired and new made; and in other matters concerning religion, he
commanded his subjects to observe and hold that which the councels had decreed,
and the Church of Rome maintained, and so made show of a pleasing Emperor. But
fortune nevertheless showed herself his enemy; for Leo whom his predecessor
ANASTASIVS had made General for the defense of Asia the less against the
Sarazins, and who yet had not done him any homage; under the pretense and
color to restore his master ANASTASIVS, joined himself with ARTAMASDVS another
captain, which in the confines of Armenia commanded the ordinary garrisons of
the Empire, and they both with all their whole power came against THEODOSIUS;
and coming to Nicomedia they apprehended a Leo entitled himself Emperor.
son of his which was there, and from thence marching forwards he began to
usurp the name of Emperor. Against this force and violence wherewith LEO came,
THEODOSIUS durst make no resistance; but upon assurance that he should not be
put to death, or receive other wrong in his person, he yielded himself into
his hands, and chose to live a religious life in a Monastery, and taking the
habit remained therein, before that one year was expired, after that (against
his will) he had been made Emperor: so as now with him there were three
Emperors Three Emperors lived at one time deposed.
which lived deposed. The first was PHILIPPICVS, whom ANASTASIVS had east in
prison, and had plucked out his eyes, whose end what it was I find not written:
the second was ANASTASIVS, whom (as I said) this THEODOSIUS made to take
religious orders and habit: and now the third was the same THEODOSIUS, who
yielding himself to LEO, Theodosius beca^e a Monk.
made choice rather of a religious life than to stand to his defense. Wherein
if voluntarily he did it, or at least endured it with patience, (as is most
likely) seeingthat he was made Emperor perforce and against his will, truly he
was in the right, and chose the better part and left the worse to LEO, which
was the Empire: which he most wickedly governed, as hereafter shall appear.
This was in the year of our Lord seven hundred and seventeen.

THE LIFE OF LEO, THE THIRD OF THAT NAME, AND THREESCORE AND TWELFTH ROMAN
EMPEROVR.
Whilst that these Emperors of a years standing, as Constables of Country
villages, or (to speak more properly) Tyrants, did strive to subvert one
another, they had no care to make head against the Sarazins and Infidels, which
daily increased, and grew more mighty, so that Christendom was now despised
and oppressed: for besides that which happened in the Empire, which now was of
small force in the Kingdoms of France and Germany, were also wars between
the French and the Burgonians, and likewise between the Frizons and the
Sueuians, and between the Saxons and the Bauarians, and other Nations too long
to be recited in this History. At which time CHARLES MARTEL in France (through
the fame of his noble acts) grew to be very much esteemed, and conquered and
subdued some, or the most part of all these said Nations. This CHARLES MARTEL
was Pretorian Prefect, or rather High The original of Charles Martell.
Constable of France, which was the highest dignity in that time next to the
King; who by reason of the insufficiency of King CHILDERICVS, who afterward
was deposed, and of his own great valor (although the other had the name) he
had the authority of King. And in Italy also were some iunouations, so as the
Infidels daily more and more prevailed: and having conquered the greatest part
of all Spain, they extended their power thence into France, and took
Catalonia, and afterward Narbone, and besieged Auignon; which was within the
bounds of the Gothish kings of Spain. But those countries being afterward
recovered by the Kings of France, they continued in their subjection. These
heathen Princes also conquered the Isles of Maiorica and Minorica, and other
Islands in that Sea, with the Isle of Sardinia. Presently after that THEODOSIUS
was deposed from his Empire, and that LEO the third of that name, was received
and established, being unworthy thereof; ZVLEMON (whom some call after another
manner) King and Captain of the Sarazins, and now Lord of Asia, of Africa, and
of Zulemon king of the Sarazins made war against the Empire.
Spain, making small account of LEO, or of the decayed and weakened Empire;
resolved with himself wholly to subvert the same; And to that effect used all
the means and devices possible, to levy men and provide shipping, to go or
send against the great City of Constantinople, together with all Thracia and
Graecia. The provision which he made was so great, that some authors affirm,
he had in his fleet three thousand sail of ships, and an incredible number
of men of war, which he sent under the conduct of two Generals, the one
called MASGILDVS, and the other SOLIMAN.

These Armies came into Europe, and passed the Straight of Constantinople,
without any resistance: for although that the Emperor LEO had intelligence of
their coming, yet was he not able to taise so great power as might suffice to
keep them from landing. Wherefore he thought it a better course to defend the
City; and so suffered himself to be besieged, rather than to abandon it to the
enemies, who made themselves Lords both of Sea and Land, and besieged the City
round both by Land and by Sea, for the space of three years continually. And
notwithstanding Constantinople besieged by the Sarazins.
that the Besieged valiantly defended it, yet it was thought for certain, that
it would have been lost, if in the Besiegers had been such valor and policy
as was to have been expected in such men: but, through a desire to rob, they
dispersed themselves so over the land, that they were thereby greatly
endamaged, and the City was the less distressed, and had the better opportunity
to provide such things as were wanting. And particularly some Captains with
part of this Army, seeing that no man made resistance against them, wandered up
and down the Country ouerall Thracia, killing and robbing until they came
into Bulgaria, which in ancient time was called the lower Misia: for defense
whereof, the King of that Country sent so Bulgaria whilome called lower Misia.
good an Army, that he not only defended his Frontiers, but overthrew his
enemies, and slew of them (as some Historians have written) two and thirty
thousand. But their power was so great, that all Christendom stood in extreme
fear of them, and held the Emperor LEO and all Graecia for lost.

At that time there was so much ambition and so little charity among
Christians, that they could not be induced to giue-ouer the wars and private
contentions among themselves: for, in Italy the Lombards in larged their
dominion, and took all such towns as they could get either by force or policy.
The Frenchmen and other Princes did the like; and even their own Captains and
servants failed them in this extremity: for, SERGIVS, who was Praetor or
Gouerner for LEO in Sicilia, houlding the Emperor for lost, with the consent of
some others chose one GREGORY for Emperor; and, making him to change his name,
they called him TIBERIUS: Gregory called and chosen Emperor.
what end he made I will tell you hereafter. Only the Bulgarians assisted the
Empire: for, in truth they had interest therein, considering the danger that
hung over their own heads if the Sarazins prevailed. And the Christians which
in Constantinople were besieged, made such prayers and supplications, that it
seemd the Lord took compassion of them, and protected them: for, no humane
power was sufficient to have resisted so great forces. Which, as Historians
affirm, was manifestly a divine miracle, that in so long time as the siege
lasted, the whole Empire had not been lost, comparing the garrison which was
within to defend the City, with the multitude and power of those which besieged
it: to whom, by Gods appointment, befell so many misfortunes and disasters,
that without any man's help they were ruined. First, in the time of the siege
died their King ZVLEMON, whom they also called AMVRATH; and about the The death
of Zulemon, King of the Sarazins. Aminthas Humar chosen king of the Sarazins.
choosing of a new King they fell at so great variance and dissension among
themselves, that they were disordred, and the Besieged greatly recomforted;
until at the last AMINTHAS HVMAR was chosen, who followed the war more
faintly and retchlesly than before: and there afterward followed such cold
weather, such storms, and so many plagues of famine and pestilence among them,
that the greatest part of them died, as well by Land as by Sea. Besides this,
there followed so many tempests and violent winds upon the seas, that in the
best and safest Tempest, famine and pestilence, fell in the army of the
Sarazins by sea and land*
harbors their ships were ouerset and cast away; in such sort, that the
Infidels were so much diminished and decaid, that the City of Constantinople
was not only freed and delivered from that siege, but also few of them escaped
with their lives from before it: for, of three thousand sail which they
brought thither in the beginning, so few returned with their people, that it
seems to be a matter incredible: and, besides those that were cast away by foul
weather at sea, the Historians write, that very many of their ships were burnt
by one man's industry. Finally, all that great multitude and number of men and
shipping, which seemed to have been sufficient to have over run the whole
world, and to have laid the same waste, in little more than two years was lost
and consumed: and LEO remained the sole absolute Lord of all that which before
he possessed; who showed not himself so thankful to God for his so great
benefits as he ought to have done. He had also no less good hap against
TIBERIUS a Tyrant, which rebelled in Sicilia, who in short space was brought to
confusion* for, the Emperor LEO sending from Constantinople the Captain of his
horsemen called PAVL, with the title and authority of Gouerner of Sicilia, and
with Letters to the Captains and soldiers there; PAVL by a stratagem got into
the City of Syracusa, now called Sarragossa: where he showed his authority to
those of the City and of the Army; and they all, knowing that the Emperor whom
they held for lost, was alive and at liberty, obeyed his command; and with such
favor received and entertained their new Captain, that they apprehended their
new King, and delivered him into the power of this PAVL, who put him to death:
and SERGIVS the Praetor of Sicilia, who was the Author and Paul put Gregory to
death*
Original of this rebellion, fled into Italy to the Lombards; and so that
Island remained in peace and obedience to the Emperor.

The Emperor LEO being freed from so great distress and oppression, ought
truly to have applied himself to the service of God, and to have rendered
thanks for the same, and to have relieved his poor subjects and vassals, of
the losses and harms by them sustained: but he to the contrary, under color
to recover the charges which he had been at, laid new impositions and taxes
upon the people, and took order that the Churches should have been ransacked;
against which Pope GREGORY, to the uttermost of his power, opposed himself.
By reason whereof (dislike growing between them) the Emperor sought to have
made away the Pope, or to have taken him prisoner; and to that end he sent
thither for Governor one MARINVS, Leo sought to kill or imprison Pope Gregory.
and afterward the Exarch PAVL, where there happened many accidents which I
omit; until that at last the Pope found relief where he never thought to have
had any, which was in LEVTPRAND King of the Lombards. After this, the Emperor
seeming desirous to beat peace with the Pope, requested him to cause the images
to be taken from the Altars, and to be put out of the Churches and temples, in
such manner as he had done in Constantinople: whereto the Pope making a
presumptuous answer, with great authority sent his Letters and Bulls through
all Christendom, excommunicating the Emperor, and commanding the images to
The Emperor Leo excommunicated by the Pope. The Popes ^lminations.
be honored and had in reverence. The pontifical command of this Pope
GREGORY, was of such authority, and the Emperor was thereby brought into
such disliking with the people, as most of the cities in Italy, and the men of
war in Rauenna took part with the Pope against him; and there was so great
debate and dissension in Rauenna, that they slew the Exarch PAVL, and desired
the Pope to depose the Emperor LEO, and to choose another in his place. This
dissension gave occasion and opportunity to the Lombards (contrary to the
peace) to take the city of Bologna, and many other cities and towns in that
quarter. Which the Emperor perceiving, The Emperor sought the Popes death.
he desired and practiced the Popes death or imprisonment, and to that end sent
a new Exarch or governor into Italy, called EVRISTIVS; who landing at Naples
(to be near to Rome) endeavored either by force or policy to execute his
commission, writing letters to many his friends in Rome and elsewhere, to that
effect: which put the Pope and his friends in great fear and perplexity,
seeing themselves of the one side oppressed by the Emperor, and on the other
standing in fear of the Lombards. Wherefore they sought by all means to be at
peace with them: which LEVTPRAND their King in consideration of his own
advantage and benefit, granted, and came to Rome; having occasion to pass by
it with an Army against certain Captains which rebelled in Spoleto and
Beneuent; so as the Emperors practice was the second time made frustrate, but
he had his will in throwing down and burning all the images: and for as much
as the Patriarch GERMANVS would not consent thereto, he deposed him from his
prelacie, and placed another in his room. Matters standing in this estate,
Pope GREGORY died, who was the second of that name; and another of the same
name borne in Syria, succeeded him, who commanded a general council to be
assembled in Rome, whither came many The kingdom of Antichrist erected. The
Emperor Leo excommunicated by the council held in Rome.
Bishops: and therein the use and veneration of images was again approved and
ratified, and the Pope proceeded against the Emperor, in such manner, that he
was excommunicate and Anathematized by the council. In that time happened many
terrible earthquakes, whereby many cities in Asia the less, and in Graecia,
were ruined: and the Sarazins came out of Syria into Asia the less, doing much
hurt, and took certain cities in Cappadocia. Before this, the Emperor made
his eldest son being a young man, whose name was CONSTANTINE, CAESAR, and
nominating him his successor, married him to the Kings daughter of Bauaria
called YRENI. Leo made his son Constantine Caesar and his successor in the
Empire.
This seems to have passed in the seventeenth year of his reign, all which
time with the rest of his Empire, which was in all four and twenty years, he
governed with greater rigor then beseemed a King or an Emperor: and
notwithstanding that he wanted neither valor nor policy to maintain himself
in the Empire; yet matters were carried with such violence and covetousness,
that in his time were great wars. In Italy the Lombards took many cities, and
besieged Rauenna: and the people within it, once again slew their Exarch or
governor. In Asia the less the Infidels entered the country, and robbing and
spoiling the same, carried away an infinite number of captives, and made
conquest of a great part of the country. And all the provinces The death of
Leo, Emperor of Constantinople.
thereof, with Graecia, Italy, the Isles of Sicilia and Creta, now called
Candia, which were in his subjection, were greatly oppressed with tributes,
impres^s, and other intolerable exactions; in such manner, that many reioiced
at his death: which happened in the year of our Lord seven hundred and one
and forty, he dying of a Dysenteria; and in his place remained his son
CONSTANTINE the fifth of that name, who was very like to his father. The house
and kingdom of France in these days greatly increased, throught the valor
and wisdom of CHARLES MART^L; who conquered and annexed to that Kingdom the
Countries of Freezland, Saxony, Austria, Burgundy, and other great estates.
The City of Venice was now very great and famous, and began to be governed by
Dukes.

THE LIFE OF CONSTANTINE, THE FIFTH OF THAT NAME, AND THREESCORE AND THIRTEENTH
ROMAN EMPEROR.
THE ARGUMENT.
COnstantine, being established in the Empire, made present preparation for the
wars against the Infidels in Egypt; but he was molested and hindered by
Artausus a Tyrant, who took Arms against him, and entitled himself Emperor:
wherefore he returned, notwithstanding that he was already arrived at
Alexandria, and took Constantinople by force, and punished the tyrant, although
not with such severity as his offense deserved. At that time, Aistolphus King
of the Lombards making war against Rome, Pope Stephen sued to the Emperor for
aid: but he provided no such Army as the importance of the case required;
thinking to pacify Aistolphus by Letters and Ambassages. Whereupon the Pope,
seeing the delay and little regard of the Emperor, called the French into
Italy to relieve him; and they, coming, twice freed the City of Rome from the
hands of the Lombards: wherewith Constantine (understanding what the Pope had
done) was displeased, and sent him an Embassage promising succors; which came
not in time: for, the French, being already passed the Alps, had compelled
Aistolphus to rend^r the Cities which Pepin gave to the Church of Rome. A
Council was called in Rome, and the Emperor was condemned for an Heretic
about the pulling down of Images: and at that time also ended the Kingdom of
the Lombards under Desiderius their King. And Constantine, making war against
the Bulgarians, fell sick of a kind of Leprosy, called Elephantia; and,
dying, left the Empire to his son Leo, when he had governed the same 35 years.

NOtwithstanding that LEO was but a bad Emperor, and therefore ill-beloued;
yet, as soon as he was dead, his son was received and obeyed, in hope that
he would have proved better than his father, or else for that in his fathers
time he was grown so mighty, that they durst not attempt to make choice of
any other. But he proved so good a scholar to his father LEO, that in all
things he excelled and surpassed him much, and lived longer than he; so as
these seem not to be the lives of Emperors which we now relate, in comparison
of those which are past: but, like as in great vessels wherein wine or some
other good liquor has been kept, as it consumes, so it becomes of a worse
taste, and in the bottom there remain some lees and dregs; so befell it in the
Eastern Empire, wherein had been very great and mighty Princes, whose
beginning was such as you have seen, and whose end we may say drew near, seeing
that within few years the title and dignity of the Empire was translated from
them to the French and Germans; notwithstanding that in Graecia there remained
Emperors a long time after.

Presently after that CONSTANTINE was crowned; to give some sign of a future
good Emperor, he provided a great Army and a Navy, there with to go in person
into Egypt: and Pope ZACHARY, understanding thereof, sent him two Ambassadors
to congratulate his coming Pope Zachary sent his Legates to Constantinople with
articles to be held and believed.
to the Empire, according to the custom of his Predecessors; dissuading him
from his fathers opinions, and exhorting him to believe as the Church of Rome
did: and he therewith sent him in writing the Articles which he would have him
to believe.

These Ambassadors stayed so long upon their way, that, when they arrived at
Constantinople, the Emperor was already departed with his fleet toward Egypt
against the Infidels, thinking to have surprised the City of Alexandria, and
afterward to have conquered the whole Country: for, in that Kingdom, and in
other Provinces which were but lately lost, lived many Christians, which
continued therein a long time; and in some Cities were Bishops, by the
permission of the Sarazins.

Within few days after the Emperor was embarked, an eminent man which
remained in Constantinople, whose name was ARTHAVSTVS, being assisted by many
which took his part, Arthaustus took upon him the name of Emperor.
rose with the City, and was called Emperor: whereof CONSTANTINE was speedily
advertised, even at such time as with his fleet he was comn within sight of
Alexandria in Egypt. Having certain notice thereof, without any longer stay he
returned toward Constantinople: and ARTHAVSTVS, who was in possession thereof,
put himself in Arms, with much people to defend the same. But CONSTANTINE,
landing, besieged the City, and, entering it by force, apprehended the Tyrant,
and commanded his eyes to be plucked out, and to be perpetually Constantine put
out Arthaustus eyes.
banished; which in my opinion was too small a punishment for so great a
treason: but then was used so much disloyalty, that it was not punished
accordingly as it deserved. This being soon ended (although not without
bloodshed) he heard the Popes Embassage, finding his Ambassadors there in that
confusion: which he answered with good words, but without performing what they
required; persisting in his opinion concerning the abolishing of Images, and
other points which his father held; and therewith he desired that the Church
of Rome should do the like: which put the Pope into a great agony, as well by
reason heerof, as of the tyranny and wars of the Lombards. And the Emperors
succors failing, it pleased God to send it from other parts; all which, from
the root and ground, passed in this manner:

At that time the Christian faith and religion flourished in the Kingdom of
France, principally among the Princes and great Lords thereof; wherein by the
death of CHARLES MARTEL, who as we said was high Constable of that Kingdom,
his two sons, whereof the one was called CARLOMAN, and the other PEPIN,
remaining in their fathers place, came to the government as absolute Lords of
the whole Country. Which Kingdom was then much greater than now it is
(although it be yet very great): for, besides that which the French now hold,
they then possessed a great part of Germany; as, Austria, Saxony, Flanders,
Burgundy, Sueuia, and other Provinces. The elder of these two brethren (which
was CARLOMAN) making no account of the world, wherein he had such part,
determined to leave it, and went to Rome to Pope ZACHARY, who gave him
Church-orders; and he became a Monk of the Order of S. Carloman becam a Monk.
BENEDICT, wherein he continued and died. His brother PEPIN remained alone in
the government of the Kingdom of France, and did many noble feats of Arms,
enlarging that kingdom against the enemies thereof; and he governed the same
so well, that there was no speech or mention made of King CHILDERICK.
Wherefore, forasmuch as in truth the King was a man of small discretion, and
altogether in capable of the government, Pope ZACHARY Pope Zachary deposed
Childerick King of France from his crown.
deposed him from the Kingdom, and confirmed and approved the election of King
PEPIN, as, THOMAS AQVINAS, ROBERT GACVIN, and PAVLVS EMILIVS, French
Historiographers, write. CHILDERICK became a religious man, and in him ended
the line and lineall descent of the Kings of France, extract from the blood of
the famous Francons: and the Crown passed to the line of this PEPIN, wherein it
continued almost two hundred and forty years, until such time as there
happened another change; as shall be declared when time and place shall
permit. This PEPIN was father to CHARLES the Great, who afterward was Emperor:
wherefore it behoues me here to make mention of him.

The state of France standing in this manner, in Italy died Pope ZACHARY, and
STEPHEN the second of that name succeeded him: in the beginning of whose
Papacy, AISTOLPHVS was King of the Lombards; and, as we may say, of all Italy:
for, his brother RACHISIVS, who was King, became a Monk of the Order of Saint
BENEDICT. This new King, seeing Rachisius, king of the Lombards renounced the
kingdom, and became a Monk.
the small care the Emperor took for the affairs of Italy; breaking the peace
whereto he himself was sworn, raised a great power (as a man that had
sufficient means) and cruelly harried the Land, and then besieged, battered,
and took the City of Rauenna, which of long time (excepting Rome) had been the
principal City of all Italy, and the seat of the Exarchs or Gouerners: and he
also won many other Towns, which until then had valiantly defended
themselves; so as there remained no more but the City of Rome and the
Territory thereof: for, in a manner all Pulia and Calabria were held by them.
Which when Pope STEPHEN the Second saw, he sent to give the Emperor to
understand thereof; plainly manifesting to him, that if he did not speedily
send relief, all Italy would come into the power of the Lombards.

The Emperor in this case made not such provision of an Army and men of war
as the necessity of the cause required, and sent but only an Ambassador to the
King of the Lombards; and other Ambassadors were sent by the King to the
Emperor, and long treaties and many speeches were spent about the matter: but
AISTVLPHVS, without respect of any person, sent to the Pope, requiring him to
give up the City of Rome into his power; if not, that he would King Aistulphus
his message to the pope.
then come and take it by force, and cut off the heads of all such as he should
find therein. The Pope seeing this; after long consideration and consultation
had about the matter, with the consent of the whole City, seeing there was no
other remedy, resolved to send to PEPIN King of France for relief; which was
done with the greatest secrecy that could be, he seeking by other means to
entertain King AISTVLPHVS with presents and promises. The King of France
willingly heard his Embassage, and promised to do what he required; and
therewith sent to the Pope, counselling him for his more safety to come into
France.

In the mean time returned the Ambassadors which were sent to the Emperor to
Constantinople; who brought no other relief, but direction for the Pope to go
in person to King AISTVLPHVS, and to entreat him for peace. The Pope, having
already fully determined of his journey, must of necessity pass through
AISTVLPHVS dominions, and therefore resolved to do both; and so departed from
Rome, accompanied with the Ambassadors of both the Kings, and of the Emperor,
and came to Pauia where the proud King AISTVLPHVS then lay; but could not come
to any composition with him: for, he required to have the dominion and rule of
Rome and the rest of Italy, and that they should yearly give him a certain
piece of gold for every head. And notwithstanding that they treated of peace,
yet he daily made preparation for the wars: so as the Pope, in the best
manner he could, took his leave of him, and by long journies came into France,
houlding his way toward King PEPINS Court; who commanded his eldest son
CHARLES, who afterward was Emperor, that as soon as he were com into France,
he should conduct and accompany him; and he himself afterward came three miles
from Paris, where he then held his Court, to meet him: and, alighting from his
horse, he kissed the Popes foot, and would ride no more, but led the Popes horse
by the bridle. And in this manner, with too great humility, he conducted him to
his Palace; where he was magnificently received, and royally entertained: and
there he confirmed King PEPIN'S election, and so anointed and crowned him King
of France.

King PEPIN, after many matters which passed about this business, resolving to
relieve the Pope, caused an Army to be levied: but he first sent Ambassadors
to King AISTVLPHVS, to treat with him concerning a settling of peace, offering
him reasonable and honorable conditions. Whereto he answered with greater pride
than befitted him: for, making small account of King PEPIN, he reposed his
chief trust in the multitude of his men. The peace being broken, and the war
resolved, PEPIN commanded his troops to march; whose Vauntgard, Wars between
King Pepin and Aistulphus King of the Lombards.
in passing the Alps, fought with AISTVLPHVS his forces which guarded the
passages: which being broken and scattered, the King passed with his whole
Army; and, AISTVLPHVS, staying in the Plains with the rest of his power, and
unable to make head against him, was forced to retire: whom King PEPIN pursued,
until he had shut him up in the City of Pauia, where (being Master of the
Field) he besieged him: during which siege, many rapines, robberies and
outrages, were committed. Pope STEPHEN seeing what ill was befaln,
notwithstanding that he apparently saw the victory, and that he himself was
the procurer of the Peace between Pepin and the Lombards.
war, yet he labored for peace, and dealt with AISTVLPHVS to that effect,
persuading him to resign what he had taken, and to bind himself by oath to
maintain the peace, and to give hostages and security for the observing of the
same.

AISTVLPHVS being thus besieged, and hearing these news, in outward show
praised God, faining great humility and thankfulness to the Pope; and extolling
him, he promised and swear to his most obedient son, and so a peace was
concluded: for King PEPIN pretended nothing, but restitution to be made to the
Pope, and the quiet of the Church of Rome: and as it seemed that he had
effected the same, taking with him forty men of account, which AISTVLPHVS
delivered unto him for hostages and pledges, for the performance of his
promise, he within a certain prefixed time, raised his siege from before
Pauia, and returned toward France, leaving a great Nobleman called VERNERIVS
to see the conditions performed: whereof the Pope holding himself assured,
departed also toward Rome; and AISTVLPHVS accomplishing some matters of small
importance, with fair words deferring the principal (which was the rendering
of cities and towns) temporized, until that King PEPIN was returned into his
country. Afterward contrary to his oath, he would perform nothing of what he
had promised, but went to Rauenna, and thither sent for the greatest part of
his forces; and continuing his pretended purpose, within a very small time
after, took his way toward Rome, where the Pope was; and encamping himself
before it, held it besieged the space of three months; Rome besieged by the
Lombards.
in which time (as all histories bear record) he did greater harm in the
fields and teritorie thereof, then had been done before in three hundred and
forty years, by the Visogothes, the Ostrogothes, the Heruli, the Lombards
themselves, or any other nation. In the beginning of this siege, what passed I
have not time to set down; but that the Pope sent his Ambassadors down the
river of Tiber, and thence by sea to king PEPIN into France who was then the
Popes only refuge, to entreat him to come to his relief; whom they found
busy in making preparation for his voyage, notwithstanding that they had not
requested him: but with their coming far greater haste was made. Whereof
when AISTVLPHVS had intelligence, he raised his siege from before Rome, and
came into Lombardy, with an intent to have stopped king PEPINS descent from the
Alps; where we will leave them for a while, to the end hereafter to make a^
end of the story. And let us now speak of Constantine, of whom this History
treats, whom we have not without reason forgotten: for in truth it has bin to
give light to the reader, to understand the cause and reason why the Pope
transported the Empire into the Western parts, and first into the house of
France; for which cause it was requisite to declare what is said, and what
shall be spoken hereafter: for although it be not directly of the Emperors,
yet it is very expedient for the history, and the cleerenes and order of what
we shall write hereafter. I say then that CONSTANTINE was not idle all the
while that these things passed in Italy, but attempted to make war against
the Infidels, sometimes in Egypt, and sometimes in Syria, but ever with ill
success.

His Empire was also much distressed and weakened, by reason of a great
pestilence, which fell among the inhabitants in those parts, which was so
terrible, that it was feared the land would have been dispeopled; which, as
HVGO FLORIACENSIS writes, began in Calabria, and from thence passed into
Sicilia, and afterward into Graecia, and to Constantinople, afflicting those
countries. So as it is thought and held for certain, that if there had not
happened to arise new and unexpected enemies against the Sarazins, the East
Empire had been in great danger to have been lost. But in the time of this
calamity the Turks descended, in a most huge multitude, out of Scithia
Asiatica; for being in a manner innumerable, and in a cold and barren country;
The origin of the Turks.
moved thereto through the fame of the wealth of Asia, they came into the
province of the Alanes, and afterward into the countries of the Colchi, and
from thence descended into Armenia; and lastly into Persia, and so into Asia
the less, spoiling and subduing those countries: in such sort that the
Mahometists could not attempt ought against the Christians, neither were of
power sufficiently able to defend themselves, and therefore concluded a peace
with them: and so the Turks remained Lords of a great part of those provinces,
and afterward received the accursed sect of MAHOMET, which they found in the
countries by them subdued.

The Sarazins being much troubled in this war, suffered CONSTANTINE to live
in peace. But the Turks did him much harm, for they took from him certain
provinces in Asia the less; and therein, and in the rest of Asia, continued a
long time after, mixed with other nations, having no rule or dominion, but
lived obscurely, until that about two hundred and fifty years afterward,
(as when time shall serve we will tell you) one amongst them whose name was
OTTOMAN, began the dominion and Empire which they hold this day. This nation of
Ottoman King of the Turks.
the Turks (setting a part all other opinions) had their original beginning
in Scithia in Asia: Of all the ancient writers, only PLINY in his sixth book,
and POMPONIVS MELA in the end of his first book, make mention of them, and
place them amongst the Sarmates in the confines of Scithia, over the Caspian
passages in the Hyperborean mountains; and they say that they lived dispersed
in the fields, by that which they could get by hunting; so as they were
unknown (yet some mention was made of them) until this their descent in the
time of CONSTANTINE the fifth; and so for almost other five hundred years,
there was no great account made of them. The opinion of those which say that
the Turks descended from the Troianes, is merely false, and shall not need
to be reproved, or impugned, for that it is ridiculous, and not to be regarded:
for what is before said is true. But returning to my story, I say that the
affairs of the East remaining in this estate, and the Emperor knowing that
AISTVLPHVS King of the Lombards had besieged Rome, and that the Pope had sent
to the French King for aid, and that he made preparation to come to relieve
him; being greatly grieved therewith, in great haste he sent two of his
favorites to the Pope, requesting him not to retain the succors of France,
for that he himself would assist him. But this took no effect, for as much
as they spoke too late, and also for that the Pope and state of Rome had no
good conceit or hope of him: so as the Emperors Ambassadors stayed not in
Rome, but went to the French court, where they sought to have diuerted the
King, and to have dissuaded him from going into Italy. But King PEPIN relented
not, but rather with a greater and better Army passed the Alps; in which
passage were many skirmishes, and many men were lost of the one side and the
other. But in the end AISTVLPHVS King Pepin came the second time into Italy.
durst not abide the battle: but setting al matters in the best order that
possibly he could, he retired himself into the city of Pauia, which was the
head and royal seat of that Kingdom; wherein King PEPIN again besieged him,
and he presently began to treat of peace, offering to render whatsoever he had
taken. The Emperors Ambassadors solicited, that Rauenna and all that government
might be restored to the Emperor, and the rest to the Pope: Whereto King PEPIN
answered, that he came to that war, only for the defense of the Church of
Rome, and that all that therein was conquered, should be her inheritance, and
no bodies else. Finally, a peace was concluded: and AISTVLPHVS, before the
siege was raised, rendered unto the Pope, Rauenna, and all the cities which in
those wars he had taken, in that Exarcha^e, or out of it; amongst which were
Bologna, Mantua, C^sena, Modena, Rezzo, Parma, Placentia, Ferrara, Fauencia,
and many other cities and towns, whereof King PEPIN made to the Church of Rome
a perpetual King Pepin his donation to the Church of Rome.
donation; as a thing by him conquered and gotten.

The Emperors Ambassadors seeing this (being out of hope) returned, and the
peace was confirmed. So as the government and dignity of the Exarches was
wholly ended and extinguished The Exarches abolished (...)Italy.
in Italy, the which had continued one hundred threescore and fifteen years,
and the Popes remained sole Lords of all those countries, and possessed the
same together with the city of Rome, and the rest. King PEPIN being returned
into France, King AISTVLPHVS which The death of King Aistulphus.
deferred the delivery of certain places, thinking to have effected some
innovation, was overtaken by death, the manner whereof is written diversely. And
after his decease one DESIDERIVS, a great man among the Lombards, was chosen
for their King; who was Duke of Hetruria, now Tuscane. And notwithstanding that
some great men persuaded RACHISIVS, brother to AISTVLPHVS, who of long time had
been a Monk, to take upon him the name and title of King, yet this took no
effect: and DESIDERIVS, with the favor of Pope STEPHEN, to whom he promised to
be a perpetual friend, remained King; and so the peace was established. Pope
STEPHEN applied himself to the government of his Church, and the estate
thereof* But when he was most busy about those matters, he was taken with an
infirmity; whereof he died, and PAVL the first of that name, a Roman borne,
succeeded him.

In the mean while that K. PEPIN made wars against the Lombards in Italy,
the Emperor CONSTANTINE endeavored to put the Images out of the Churches, and
made peace with The Emperor made peace with Hadalia King of the Sarazins.
HADALIA King of the Sarazins, to the end that he should induce the Christians
to do the like, which were in Armenia, Palestina, Soria, and in all the other
Provinces in his subjection, which were infinite, and continued in those
countries a long time after, and it is said that many live there until this
day. This Emperor is reported to have restrained the liberty of the Monks and
Prelates very much, without respect to their immunities and privileges;
amongst which he cut off the head of CONSTANTINE the Patriarch of
Constantinople, for opposing himself Constantine caused the Patriarch of
Constantinople to be beheaded. Wars between Constantine and Thessalius king
against him, and therewith suppressed certain Monasteries.

In this time there grew war and dissension between him and THESSALIVS, King
of Bulgaria; who entered Thracia, and did much harm, spoiling and wasting the
lands of the Empire; against whom CONSTANTINE levied an Army, and fighting
with him obtained of the Bulgarians, and the issue thereof.
the victory; and THESSALIVS returned by flight, with loss of many of his men:
for which disgrace, and for his evil carriage in the battle, his people rose
against him, and slew him; and chose another called SABINVS for their King:
who, to make the Emperor his friend, consented and agreed with him to deface
and cast the Images out of the Churches; wherewith his Subjects were so much
discontented, that, if he had not escaped from them by flight, they had slain
him: but he went to the Emperor, and was there protected; and the Bulgarians
chose another for their King, whose name was PAGANVS.

At this time, CONSTANTINE made his eldest son, called LEO, his companion and
successor in the Empire: this LEO was afterward absolute Emperor, and the
fourth of that name.

Whilst that CONSTANTINE was busied about these matters Pope PAVL in Italy
lived in peace with the Lombards and their King DESIDERIVS, according to the
composition made and established by King PEPIN of France; who within short
space after died, having The death of King Pepin. Charles surnamed the Great,
and his brother Carloman, succeeded their father.
bin one of the most excellent Princes of the world. After the death of PEPIN,
CHARLES and CARLOMAN his sons succeeded him, which divided the Kingdom
between them; and, by the death of CARLOMAN, it came wholly to CHARLES.

Presently after that King PEPIN was dead, Pope PAVL also died; whose death
caused a Schism in the Church of Rome: for, DESIDERIVS King of the Lombards,
sending a Captain of his with certain troops of soldiers to Rome, procured his
brother CONSTANTINI to be made Pope; who, without regard of the order of
election, took possession of the Palace, and held the papal state for the
space of one year: and others of a contrary faction and opinion, chose another
Pope, whose name was PHILIPPICVS; but, CONSTANTINE being of greater power,
PHILIPPICVS was deposed. But, as all was done by force and violence, so by the
like force it was determined: for, the people and clergy agreeing together
made choice of STEPHEN the Third, who was a Sicilian born, and compeld
CONSTANTINE to resign the Papacy, and put himself into a Cloister. Pope
Constantine deposed and made a Monk.


The first thing that the new Pope did, was, Again to set up Images in
Churches; and to that effect wrote to the two sons of PEPIN the deceased King
of France, to send to the Emperor some of the Prelates which were in their
Kingdom; which then was so great, that it extended it self from the Alps to
the Pirenean Mountains, and thence so far as to Hungary, and on the other side
to the sea: so as these two Brothers were Lords of all that which we now call
France, together with Flanders, Frieseland, Braband, and on both sides of the
river Rhine, of Austria, Bauiere, and other Provinces of Germany, besides what
rebelled in his time, which was a great part: all which, this CHARLES conquered
and pacified, although not without great travel, and made himself alsolute
Lord of the Whole. The Pope by their consent summoned a Council to be held in
Rome, where in the Emperor CONSTANTINE was again condemned; and all that he and
his father had commanded to be done in Constantinople, was reproved and
disannulled: The Emperor condemned by the Pope and his Council.
but this took small effect, for he little regarded it.

The Council being dissolved, DESIDERIVS King of the Lombards sought to have
caused some alteration in Rome and in Italy, by means of one ANFIARATA the
Emperors chamberlain, who then was in Rome: wherein although there were no
Gouerners for the Empire as in former time (for, it now seemed, that the Popes
had the sole government) yet was this ANFIARATA of great authority; who (with
the assistance of DESIDERIVS, which sought to procure the Emperor to have some
footing again in Italy, thereby to weaken the power of the Pope, and of the
French) apprehended certain Romans, and committed them unto prison.

Three years past in these matters; and, Pope STEPHEN dying, ADRIAN the first
of those which were so called was chosen: who at his first entrance released
those out of prison which The death of Pope Stephen.
were committed in the time of Pope STEPHEN by ANFIARATA. Whereupon King
DESIDERIVS, seeing how much the papal power by means of France increased,
sought to have made a league with him: which the Pope refused, alleging that
he would not believe him who had no better held his word.

At this time died CARLOMAN King of France; and his brother, who afterward for
his great acts was called CHARLES the Great, made himself Lord of that
Kingdom: and the widow Queen, wife of the deceased King, went with her sons to
King DESIDERIVS into Italy; who, being glad of her coming, received and
entertaind her very honorably, thinking to have raised some trouble and
dissension among the French; and to that effect practiced with Pope ADRIAN, to
make the eldest son of King CARLOMAN, King of that part of France which his
father enjoyed, with intent by that means to have set him and King CHARLES at
variance, whom hereafter we will call CHARLES the Great: whereto the Pope would
not be induced, and DESTDERIVS purposing by force to bring it to pass, began
to make war on every side. The first was against the City of Rauenna and the
marches thereof; and he took the Cities of Ferrara, Fauentia, and other
Towns: and the Pope by Ambassages and Letters entreating him to desist from
those wars, he threatened to besiege Rome it self, and took his way
thitherwards. Whereupon the Pope sent three Bishops to meet him upon the way,
and by them sent him a decree, wherein he charged him not to pass any further,
neither to presume to come within the bounds of the territory of Rome, upon
pain to be presently excommunicated. And notwithstanding that DESIDERIVS was a
very resolute man, and of an hauty spirit, yet as soon as he had received this
decree, without setting one foot further, he returned with his forces to the
City of Pauia; but the wars ceased not. For all which the Emperor
CONSTANTINE was nothing sorry, he so much envied the Popes greatness: and in
Constantinople he caused one STEPHEN to be slain, for defending the ambition
of the Romish Prelates. About this time he rigged a very great fleet of about
two thousand sail of ships; to transport his Army over the sea called
Euxinum, against the king of Bulgaria; which fleet was overthrown with so
great a Tempest, as the greatest part thereof was cast away and sunk.

The Pope knowing that by the Emperor he should not be relieved in his wars
against DESIDERIVS, sent to CHARLES the Great for aid, who with very great
forces took his way toward Italy: but he first required DESIDERIVS by
Ambassadors to make satisfaction for the harms which he had done, and to be at
peace with the Church: And seeing that he prevailed not, he marched forwards
with his troops; and DESIDERIVS engrossed his forces to stop his passage: but
being unable to compass it, he sent the wife and children of CARLOMAN to
Verona, fortified Pauia, and suffered himself to be there besieged. Wherein
The coming of Charles the Great into Italy
he was ill advised: for by reason thereof the greatest part of his governors
and Captains, seeing him thus distressed, losing all courage, sent to yield
their obedience to the Pope, and desired to be received for his friends and
vassailes; and giving up their holds, many of their people went to Rome, to
dwell and abide where the Pope should appoint. CHARLES the Great leaving an
uncle of his at the siege of Pauia, went against Verona; which he took without
any great Charles took Verona.
difficulty, together with his sister in law, and nephews which were therein;
and from thence went to Rome to kiss the Popes foot, and to hold the Feast of
Easter, where he was received with all the solemnity that could be devised.

At this his coming thither he confirmed to the Church and to the Popes of
Rome, the donation which his father had made, of Rauenna, and other lands; and
made another of many Charles his gifts to the Church of Rome
other places, amongst which is reckoned the Isle of Corsica, and all the coast
of Genoa, with the Cities of Parma, Ancona, Vrbin, and many other Towns, which
BIBLIOTHECARIVS sets down, besides Rome and the territory thereof; which
the Popes had already in possession, whether by the pretended donation of
CONSTANTINE the Great, or by the donation made by the said King PEPIN, or by
common consent or ancient prescription, I know not. So as to the Emperors
remained but only that part of Italy, which was called Magna Graecia, which is
part of Calabria, and of Pulia, and a great part of that which now is the
Kingdom of Naples. CHARLES the Great having been only eight days in Rome,
returned against DESIDERIVS; who, after six months besieging in Pauia,
yielded upon Composition, and Desiderius King of the Lombards yielded to
Charles the Great.
CHARLSS carried him with him, and banished both him and his sons into a
certain Island; and then took Milan, and all the other Cities in Lombardy,
which is the ancient Gallia Cisalpina, where he placed Frenchmen for Dukes and
Governors; and in other Duchies and Cities of that Kingdom, he placed Dukes of
the same nation of the Lombards, which became his subjects and did him homage;
and so Italy remained in his obedience and subjection, excepting those
Provinces and lands which were left to the Church, and those which the Pope The
end of the kingdom of the Lombards.
held in former time; but all in peace and quiet. And so ended the Kingdom of
the Lombards, which had continued 204 years in Italy.

CHARLES the Great having ended these exploits, returned with triumph and
victory into his kingdom of France: and within short space after there befell
him a very dangerous war, against certain nations in Germany, which rebelled
against him, namely the Saxons and other people in those quarters, which he
subdued, although it were long first, and with great travail, but with great
honor and the fame of an excellent captain. But for as much as it is tedious
to relate it, and also for that it happened before that he was Emperor, we will
speak no more thereof, to be the better able to relate what happened after he
was Emperor; as shall be said hereafter. The Emperor CONSTANTINE, who now had
reigned a long time, renewd the war against the King of the Bulgarians: which
began between them with great fury and violence; but it lasted not long: for,
he was taken with a kind of leprosy called Elephantia, whereof he afterward
died: but he first concluded a peace with the King of Bulgaria. After which,
his infirmity increased in such manner, that he died; leaving his son LEO, whom
he had by his first wife The death of the ^mperor Constantine.
YRENE (who already was in possession) for his successor, when he had reigned
35 years, in the year of our Lord 777.

THE LIFE OF LEO, FOVRTH OF THAT NAME, AND THREESCORE AND FOVRTEENTH ROMAN
EMPEROR.
IN the time of the Emperor CONSTANTINE, by his order and commandment, his son
LEO was chosen Emperor, and his companion; whom he had by the Kings daughter
of Bulgaria, with whom he was married, whose name was YRENE. And LEO had to
wife a woman born in Athens, whose name was also YRENE, which was the fairest
woman of her time; and for wisdom and policy, one of the most Noble and
excellent Ladies that ever was in the world. Wherefore without any
contradiction he was presently held and obeyed as Emperor, in the place of his
deceased father. In the beginning of his Empire he made show to be very devout
and affected to the churches, and to religious persons of whatsoever order,
seeking to advance them to dignities. And he likewise made preparation of men
and shipping against the Infidels, and went into Asia in person, and invaded
the Province of Soria; but his journey took small effect: for, within short
time after, he returned, with loss of some of his people, and of his own
reputation.

This Emperor LEO had also other wars with the Infidels, by his Captains;
wherein happened many accidents, but not of any account. In this manner he past
the first three years of his reign; and in the fourth with this show and
appearance of a good Prince, he practiced with his subjects, to choose a young son
which he had, called CONSTANTINE (as was his grandfather) Emperor. And in the
same year also; he, knowing that sundry of his Court were of the Romish Sect
concerning the worshipping of Images, he made many of them to be apprehended,
and openly disgraced, and deprived and deposed them from their dignities:
whereupon he began to be hated, and held for an evil Prince. But by his wives
means, and his own death which shortly The death of the Emperor Leo.
ensued, it was mitigated: for, he died of a carbuncle which arose in his head;
without leaving ought done by him worthy of memory, at least that I have found
written. This happened in the fi^t year of his reign, and in the year of our
Lord seven hundred fourscore and two. He was much condemned for the taking of
a Crown of Gold, and certain stones of great price, out of the famous temple
of S. Sophia, which by the Emperor MAVRICE were offered and dedicated to the
Image of our Lady in Constantinople, which he took from thence, and put upon
his own head.

In this time in France and Germany flourished CHARLES the Great, of whom (for
that he was afterward Emperor) I have made this mention, as well in matters
of war, as peace; who honored and favored valiant and hardy knights, and
letters also and learned men: he procured justice to be maintained in all his
dominions, and that his government should be just and upright. Whereupon he
created many Dukes and other dignities, and among them the twelve Peers of
France, which are so famous in all Histories. He also made and ordained the
parliament at Paris: afterward in the year 790, in the life time of
CONSTANTINE son of this LEO, he founded an University in the same City,
which has been famous and excellent, and is yet so unto this day: and another
in the City of Pauia, which was the cause that both chivalry and learning so
much flourished in his time.

In the time of the Emperor LEO, of whom we now leave to make any more mention,
the said CHARLES came into Spain; where he was by treason overthrown at
Ronceuaulx, and lost the flower of his nobility and Chivalry: by means of
ALONSO the Second, called the The battle of Ronceuaulx.
Chaste, aided and assisted by the Moors and Infidels which then lived in
Arragon, and in the territory thereof. In matters which preceded and succeeded
this battle and the causes thereof, and which passed therein, there is great
difference between the French and Spanish chroniclers, and among themselves of
either Nation. Wherefore, and for as much as the acts of CHARLES the Great
(before that he was Emperor) concern not my History, I therefore leave to
speak any more thereof. And also for that we know that FLORIAN DE CAMPO has
written thereof at large in his general History of Spain: of whose singular
diligence there is no doubt to be made, but that he has inuiolably observed
the truth, without omitting any thing worthy of memory, especially in a matter
so famous and memorable; and therefore referring the Reader to him, I will
return to prosecute my journey.

THE LIFE OF CONSTANTINE* THE SIXTH OF THAT NAME, AND THREESCORE AND FIFTEENTH
ROMAN EMPEROR.
THE ARGUMENT.
LEO being dead, his son Constantine (notwithstanding that he was but a
child) succeeded him, and through the wisdom of his mother, and the oath of
the men of war, was obeyed-This woman was so discreet, that she ruled the
Empire ten years, and was the cause of the Council assembled about the
controversy for Images, and agreement to be made between the Greeks and
Latin Churches. But the young man coming to riper age, bereaved her of the
government, and made her to live apart from him; and became so displeasing,
that his own people conspired against him, although the conspiracy took^ not
the wished effect. But he being ill beloved, certain of the principal men of
the Empire incited her to resume the government; and she setting aside the
love of a mother toward her son, apprehended him, and caused his eyes to be
plucks out, as he had done by many others. This was the cause that the Eastern
Empire was translated into the West; for the Pope seeing the East Empire to
decline, and that it was governed by a woman, he anointed and crowned Charles
the Great, Emperor, with whom Yrene sought to have been married: but it took
no effect, she being dissuaded by the Princes of Graecia; but she made a firm
and assured peace with him, which she not long enjoyed: for sundry valiant
men, which took in ill part to be ruled by a woman, conspiring against her, by
a wile apprehended, and deposed her from the Empire, giving the charge thereof
to a very Noble man, whose was Nicephorus.

WHen as LEO the fourth was dead, his son CONSTANTINE being little more then
twelve years old, was received for Emperor (notwithstanding his small age);
whereto his mothers wisdom and valor was a great help, and also for that
the subjects of the Empire were sworn to him in the life time of his father,
yet this could not be effected without difficulty; for some principal men
disdaining to be commanded by a child, and a woman, secretly practiced to make
NICEPHORVS Emperor, who was the young man's Uncle, and brother to his father LEO:
although that through forgetfulness, no mention was before made of him. But this
was not so secretly done, but that YRENE had intelligence thereof, and took
so'good order, that she apprehended and bauished those which were the Authors
thereof, and made their hair to be cut, which then was a great disgrace: yet
upon NICEPHORVS she inflicted no Punishment inflicted upon such as conspired
against the Emperor Constantine.
other punishment, but only made him take a Monastical habit; and so the
Empire remained in peace to her son. But notwithstanding that the young man
was Emperor, yet his mother commanded all, and (as all Authors write) very
uprightly and prudently; for she was a wise and a very excellent woman, and
above all was very much devoted to the Romish religion, whereof this may serve
for proof; for she seeing the discord between the Greeks and Latins about
the worshipping of Images, and other points in Religion wherein they disagreed,
endeavored very earnestly, that a general Council might be called; and her
industry took such effect (although somewhat long first) that a council was
assembled in the City of Nicen, in the Province of Bythinia, where other
councels in former time had been held; in which were three hundred and fifty
Bishops, and therein were handled many matters concerning the estate of
Council held in the City of Nicene.
the Clergy, and those were condemned for Heretics, which denied the
veneration of Images in the Church. So as during the government of YRENE, the
Images and pictures of CHRIST, and our Lady, and sundry other Saints in the
Eastern Churches were again set up; whereat the common people which ever
delighted in novelties, was very joyful; and so was THERASIVS the Patriarch of
Constantinople, which succeeded PAVL, who had sought and much desired the same.
And for that he could not obtain it of the Emperor, LEO, seeing himself
grown old and sickly, before his death, he left his dignity and made himself
a Monk: who going to visit the Empress YRENE, she demanded of him the reason
of so noble a change; she making an eloquent Oration, he told her, that he had
left the world, for that he could not resist the Emperor, and for that he
would not die separated from the Union and obedience of the Catholic Romish
Church, beseeching her to procure the said Union, which could not be but by a
general Council; for the effecting whereof, she should use her Authority, and
that for his part he would not live out of the Church, but continue in his
Monastery to do penance for his sins, the which he said was to discharge
his Conscience before his death.

It is said, that this THERASIVS was he which principally moved YRENE so
earnestly to solicit the calling of a Council; the resolution whereof
concerning Images, is contained in two verses, which then were made, and at
this day are placed in a Church in Venice, which in Latin are thus: Nam Deus
quod Imago docet sed non Deus ipsa,
Hanc vide as, sed mente colas, quod cernis in ipsa.
Which in effect is as much to say, as, That which this Image does show and
signify, is God; but the Image is not so: behold the same, but with the mind
reverence that which thereby is represented.

Having ended a matter of so great importance as that which I recited; in all
the rest of the time of her government, both before and after the Council
which were some years, she bare her self far more like a politic valiant
man, than a delicate and beautiful woman as she was: but her son
CONSTANTINE, who was now comn to man's estate, and like to his father, disliked
his mothers government, and in the end deposed her from the same, and from the
Council also, making her to live privately, without any authority, when she
had with great wisdom governed in his name the space often years, and
maintained the Empire with justice, in peace with all the world.

It is written, that in those days was found in Constantinople, in a very old
Sepulcher, a plate A plate of gold found upon the breast of a dead body in
Constantinople. A wonder, if true.
or leaf of gold upon the breast of a corpse, which therein had been buried;
wherein were written these words, CHRIST shall be born of the Virgin MARY: Thou
shall see me again at such time as CONSTANTINE and his mother YRENE shall be
Emperors. This was held for a great matter, and YRENE and her son made great
account of this Table: for, it seemed to be written before the coming of CHRIST.

The Emperor, being now at liberty, began freely to use those qualities whereto
he was naturally in clined; in such sort, that he became ill beloved, and they
again the second time conspired against him, seeking to make his uncle
NICEPHORVS, Emperor. But, as to Princes (whether good or bad) most matters are
commonly discovered: so this conspiracy was likewise revealed; and he, knowing
it, commanded some of those which had been practicers therein, to be
apprehended, whom he severely punished; and commanded his uncle NICEPHORVS to
be perpetually banished. After this, he put away his wife, who was a very Noble
woman called MARY; and, diuorcing himself from her, shut her up in a Nunnerie,
and married one of her maids called THEODORA, of whom he was enamoured; a woman
of no desert, but only that she was fair and very beautiful.

At such time as CONSTANTINE and his mother reigned in the East, CHARLES the
Great was King of France; so called for the great exploits which he had
performed: yet some Charles the Great, why so called.
are of opinion, that he was so called by reason of the great constitution of
his body; for, he was corpulent, very big limd and tall, and had not lived at
his ease, but had undergone great and dangerous wars.

In the beginning of the Emperor CONSTANTINE'S Reign, King CHARLES came in
person into Italy to see the Pope, and to pacify certain combustions raised by
some Dukes, who were desirous of innouations: which being quieted, he had
intelligence that the Duke of Bauiere (for, now they were no more called Kings)
rebelled against him, with an intent to exempt himself from his subjection; and
to that end had levied his forces. Whereupon, CHARLES resolved to go against
him in person, and by another way to send his son PEPIN upon the same
service; and so he began to make cruel war against him: whereof when the
Eastern Emperor CONSTANTINE was advertised, imagining that CHARLES, being
busied in those wars, would not be able to provide for the affairs of Italy,
he sent commandment into those Countries which he held for him, and some new
troops which he levied for that purpose, that they should make war against
the Pope and King CHARLES; which they presently put in execution: but the Dukes
of Beneuent and Spoleto, and of other Cities, made such speedy preparation
against them, that they were easily repelled and overthrown; so as from
thenceforth they lived quiet and at peace. And CHARLES had likewise so good
success in his wars against the Bauarians (although not without effusion of
much blood) that he pacified all that state, and reduced the Provinces to his
service.

From thence he went against the Slauons, which held the Provinces of Istria
and Dalmatia, by them called Slauonia; and in one Summer brought all under his
dominion. Afterward, raising a new power, he resolved to make a conquest of
Hungary and Austria, being the ancient Pannoniae, which the Hunnes Auares, had
of long time possessed, as is before said: And notwithstanding that this was a
very dangerous war, and that therein were many great and notable battles
(wherein all the Nobility, and the greatest part of the common people of those
Countries, died; so as the Land lay in a manner waste and dispeopled) yet in
the end, in the eightth year after the beginning thereof, he became absolute
Lord of all the Country. After these Charles the Great conquered Hungary and
Austria. Charles ward against the king of Denmark, and subdued the Saxons.
foresaid wars, he had wars with the King of Denmark: for, the Danes
harried the seacoasts with their fleets; and heerin (as well as in the rest)
this glorious Prince had the victory: and he afterward made peace with their
King, and resolved to make an end of subduing the Sexons; whose wars at
times, as they rebelled, continued thirty years, and he slew of them in one
battle thirty thousand: and in another, which he fought with them afterward,
he brought them wholly to obedience, and made them subject to the Empire, and,
for his better security, he led the principal of them with him into France. In
which conquests which I so briefly have recited, some battles were fought by
himself in person, and some by his son PEPIN: in all which, he won the name and
reputation of a most excellent Captain.

These things being past, in the year of our Lord seven hundred ninety and
five, Pope ADRIAN died in Rome: through whose death they chose Pope LEO the
third of that name; who presently after his election, sent great Presents and a
solemn Embassage to CHARLES the Great. In these times the Emperor CONSTANTINE'S
men of war did greatly annoy those of CHARLES the Great: for, after that he
lived apart from his mother, he became very cruel, and in his government
negligent and disorderly: wherefore he grew to be so ill beloved by his
Subjects, that some of the chief of them persuaded his mother YRENE to depose
him, and resume the government of the Empire into her own hands; whereto they
promised to assist her. The mother, who had a courage more like a reuengefull
man, than a delicate woman, preferring the displeasure which she had conceived,
before the love of a mother to her son, with the aid of those which took her
part in that action, upon a day by a wile seized on him, and caused Irene made
her sons eyes to be put out.
his eyes to be presently plucked out, as he had done to many others: which was
one of the strangest and most cruel and inhumane parts that ever woman played
in the world. And this being done, all obeyed her; and she alone had the
government of the Empire, which yet was very great: for, it contained, in
Europe, Thracia, and all the Provinces of Graecia, the Isles of Sicilia, Candia,
and those in the great sea called Archipelagus, and that part of Italy which
was called Magna Graecia, and all the Provinces of Asia the Less: all which
were governed by this valiant woman, with great policy and authority. Who when
she understood of the victories and great power of CHARLES the Great, desiring
to be at peace with him, and fearing his greatness, she commanded those Cities
which she held in Italy, and the Gouerners of them, to hold good
correspondence and neighborhood with those Cities which were under the Pope,
or King CHARLES: and, besides this, she sent her Ambassadors unto him, excusing
herself of that which had happened concerning her son, and made him many great
offers. Which, CHARLES gladly entertained: for, he was a mild Prince to the
meek, and rough and cruel to the proud and rebellious.

All Italy being in peace under the shadow and protection of CHARLES the
Great, where now was no memory of the Lombards which were wont to oppress it;
the devil, a sower of dissension, acted his part in the City of Rome: which
was, the Pope LEO sitting (as they say) in Saint PETER'S Chair, two Priests,
Cardinals of great account, called PASCAL and CAPVLVS, conspired against him,
and held so strong a hand among their accomplices, that they upon a day
apprehended him going in Procession; which they did with such an uproar and
tumult, that they had almost slain him; and handled him in such manner, that
(as most Writers affirm) they put out his eyes, and cut out his tongue, and so
they committed him prisoner to a Monastery of Saint ERASMUS; publishing
abroad, that they did it for the crimes by him committed, and the errors which
he maintained: and being there, as BIBLIOTHECARIVS and some others affirm, he
was miraculously restored to his sight and speech; and a chamberlain of his
used such secret means, or with the permission of his Keepers, that he was
hidden in a certain grave or sepulcher, and by night conuayed to the Duke of
Spoleto, who then was Lieutenant to CHARLES the Great in Italy (which offices
then were given for ever, or for term of life); by whose aid he went to King
CHARLES in Germany, to complain of the violence done unto him: whither already
messengers were sent by the other two, PASCAL and CAPVLVS, with informations
and accusations against him. But, notwithstanding, the Pope was solemnly
entertaind and honored by him: and, remaining there some few days, the King
promised to come in person to Rome; and appointed so many Prelates and
religious men to accompany him, as sufficed to bring him thither, and to
restore him to his seat and estate, with great processions which were made for
him: and the two Priests Cardinals aforesaid, which were so mighty, absenting
themselves, ever gave out in speeches, that they attended the coming of the
King.

King CHARLES the Great, having taken order for the affairs of France and
Germany, wherein he was a most mighty prince, determined to come into Italy;
and at his coming, by the hand of his son PEPIN, he pacified some tumults
there, and came to the city of Rome, accompanied Charles the Great came to Rome.
with many great Dukes and other princes his subjects; whither repaired out of
Italy and from other parts, many Bishops, prelates and other great men; and he
was received with such honor as to him did appertain; where kissing the Popes
foot he did him such other superstitions reverence, as the custom was. After
this, having continued eight days in Rome, he commanded all the prelates and
Princes which then were in the city to be assembled; and the Pope himself, and
all the rest being together, there were some which complained and accused the
Pope to the Emperor: and so the Emperor began openly to ask every man's
opinion concerning those accusations; whereto all answered, That no man ought to
judge the Head of the Church: which the King observing, he forbear to ask any
more questions. Then the Pope which hitherto had been silent, rose from the
place where he sat, and went into a pulpit which was there, and with a loud
voice said, That seeing of his life and behavior, no man would or had
authority to make inquiry, or to give sentence, yet the next day (following
the custom of his predecessors) he would purge and clear himself, as it
behooved: and therewith for that day the Consistory was dissolved: And upon the
next day, they all being assembled in like manner, he again went up into the
same place, and taking a book of the holy Evangelists in his hands, said with
so loud Pope Leo his speech in the Consistory in his own defense.
a voice as they all might hear him, that he swear by God, and those holy
Evangelists, that all that which his adversaries had laid to his charge, was
false and untrue, and that he had neither committed or thought any such matter
as they objected; but that they had of malice and envy slandered him: and that
he therefore publicly made this protestation, and confirmed by his oath,
seeing that to them all the manner of his life and government was well known.

Having ended this his protestation, his oath was allowed, and himself
commended; and the King commanded his accusers, PASCAL and CAPVLVS, to be
sought out and apprehended, and would have condemned them to death: but the
Pope was contented to spare their lives, so as they might be committed to
prison, and thence condemned to perpetual exile. Eight d^s after, the Pope
having first considered how much the Greek Emperors envied his greatness,
together with the small affection they bare to the worshipping of Images, and
other points wherein they were opposite, and separated from the Church of Rome;
and how requisite it was to have an Emperor which might maintain the provinces
of Italy in peace, which upon every light occasion were disturbed: but chiefly
to show himself grateful for the benefits which he and the Church of Rome had
received from him and the house of France, but above all for accepting his
protestation in his own defense, for a sufficient proof of his honesty; he
resolved to make CHARLES the Great, Emperor; and to translate the head of the
Empire into the West. Wherewith, as most writers affirm, he did not acquaint
the King, conceiving the greatness of his mind to be such, that he neither had
desired it, neither would have accepted the same. And having ruminated
hereupon; against the day of the nativity of CHRIST, he commanded all the
Priest Cardinals, and all the other prelates to come to a Mass, whither
CHARLES was also invited, and came, together with all the other princes; and so
about the midst of the Mass, the Pope then saying it, he turned about from
the Altar to the people, and with a loud voice said, That he did there elect,
create, and publish CHARLES the great, the most mighty and victorious King of
Italy, of the Germans, and of the Frenchmen, Emperor, and ever AUGUSTUS.
Which being done, he set the Imperial Crown upon his head, and all those
which were present consented thereto, with acclamations and applauses, saying,
To the most godly, ever AUGUSTUS, great and most victorious Emperor CHARLES,
God grant long Charles the great crowned Emperor and his son Pepin King of
Italy by Pope Leo.
life and victory.

This acclamation being ended, the Pope anointed him, and therewith anointed
and entitled his son PEPIN with the good liking and consent of his father)
King of Italy; which coronations were performed, with such feastings and
solemnity, as the discreet Reader may well imagine; upon the birth day of
CHRIST, which was the five and twentieth of December, in the year of our Lord
eight hundred; four hundred threescote and eight years from the time that
CONSTANTINE the great transferred the seat of the Empire into Thracia, to the
city of Constantinople, and three hundred and thirty years from the time
that AVGVSTVLVS was the last Emperor in Italy. And so CHARLES remained Emperor,
and the Empire was transported from the Greeks to the Germans; for although
that CHARLES was King of France, yet his original, lineage, and country was in
Germany, and so it appears by histories; and notwithstanding The original
of Charles the great.
that he was King of the French, he was borne in Germany, and the Frenchmen
also had their original and descent from Germany; and the kingdom of France
extended it self so far in the time of this Emperor, that the most of the
provinces of Germany were called by the name, and contained within the
Kingdom of France; so as there is no reason that any authors should say, that
the Empire was first transposed to the French, and afterward in process of
time to the Germans; the which is maintained by OTHO FRISENGENSIS, GODFRIDV^
VITERBIENSIS, WESPERGENSIS ABBAS; and others, although of less antiquity, yet
of no less diligence, as PLATINA, MARTIANVS, ROBERTUS GAGVIN, and most
diligently JOHANNES NAVCLERVS; and above all, BEATVS RENANVS, HERICVS MVCIVS,
in his notable books of the state of Germany, and CVSPINIANVS in the life of
the same CHARLES.

These matters being thus ended, the new Emperor returned toward his Kingdom
and countries; leaving his son PEPIN King in Italy, which he left in very
good order. In this his journey (authors write) that he did many graces and
favors to the city of Florence, and Favors bestowed by Charles the Great
upon the city of Florence.
that he commanded the decayed walls and buildings thereof to be reedefied,
and many other fair edifices to be erected; and that he procured gentlemen to
come and inhabit the same. The fame of this his election being spread over the
world, the manly Empress YRENE, which ruled the Empire of the East, sent
Ambassadors unto him, desiring peace with him, and (as some write) to treat of
a marriage between them, seeing that they both were single: and although that
the treaty of marriage took no effect (for the Princes of Greece persuaded
YRENE to the contrary) yet a peace was concluded between the two Empires: The
Empire of Gracia containing that which it then held in Asia, which I have
already mentioned; with that country which now is the Kingdom of Naples, or
the greatest part thereof; the Isles of Sicilia, Candia, and the rest; with
Albania, part of Slauonia, and all Graecia and Thracia, the city of Venice and
the dominion thereof, which is not lightly to be regarded, remained friend to
all, and subject to none. Venice ever a free city.
This being concluded, YRENE the Empress enjoyed not the same long after: for
in the end, as she was a woman, men of haughty spirits, holding it for
baseness, disdained to be commanded by her, and found means that a man of high
degree, great power, and of noble parentage, whose Nicephorus made Emperor of
Gracia in place of Yrene.
name was NICEPHORVS, should rebel against her, and take upon him the title of
Emperor: which took effect, so as by a stratagem she was taken, and
dispossessed of her Empire.

THE LIFE OF CHARLES THE GREAT, AND THREESCORE AND SIXTEENTH ROMAN EMPEROR;
and OF NICEPHORVS in Constantinople.
THE ARGUMENT.
WHen as Charles the great was made Emperor, he was of the age of fifty and
eight years: and returning into Germany, he wholly converted the Saxons to the
Christian faith, and made an accord with Nicephorus Emperor of the Greeks:
which afterward was broken, for that Nicephorus aided the Venetians, against
him and his son Pepin; but Charles finally making peace with the Uenetians,
left them in that liberty, wherein they have maintained themselves until this
present, and came to a full peace with Nicephorus. He divided the Empire
between his three sons, and commanded Pepin to go to Corsica and Sardinia,
to defend the same against the Infidels which went thither to inhabit. And
under the command of Charles his son he overcame many other Nations, Rebels,
and Infidels, and became so great as the King of the Mahometists sought his
friendship. Two of his sons dyed, to wit, Pepin and Charles, so as his whole
hope remained in Jews, whom he made his successor; And being now very old,
departed out of this world, overcome with a pain in his side, having governed
the Empire fourteen years; and his kingdom, seven and forty.

COnsidering the great pains I have taken in writing this History (I take God
to record) that I stand in more need of some rest, and to be eased of so great
a burden, by abbreuiating the History, and leaving out as much as may be
without confusion, then to redouble my toil, through the occasions which now
present themselves. I say this, for that the Pope in this time had transferred
the Empire to CHARLES the Great; and it has ever since continued in Germany:
And in Graecia also remained Princes, which in like manner were called
Emperors, and pretended good right; so as we may say that the Empire and the
title thereof was divided, and came to be two Empires and to have two
Emperors. But I find my self in a great confusion, to think how this matter
may be handled: for, first to write of one, and then to return to write of the
other, as did BAPTISTA IGNATIUS, in the short epitomie which he wrote of the
Emperors; it seems to be inconvenient to bring one of them to an end, and
then to make the Reader turn back again seven or eight hundred years in
the history. And to write one or two lives of the Empire, and then as many of
the other, as did JOHN CVSPINIAN, that likes me as ill: for it greatly
confounds the history, and so in a manner neither the one nor the other can
be understood; and to relate all together at large (for the many occasions
which are offered, and the diversity of the times and places) I see not how it
can be. To treat only of the one (as some have done) and wholly to leave out
and forget the other, I also hold it for an injury and cruelty. To let sink
and die in oblivion a matter of so great importance as is the dominion of the
Greek Emperors, which continued so long afterward: or to leave the successors
of CHARLES the Great, in which at this day the Empire remains, were to leave
the right way which leads to the place whither I am bound, and to take
another whereby I should never attain to my iournies end whither I am to
travail. Wherefore seeing that I cannot go both ways; after some
considerations, I have resolved to take for my principal subject and history
of the Empire, that which the Church of Rome approved and then established,
which is that of Italy and Germany, in the person of CHARLES and his
successors; recounting their lives and acts with such order as I have observed
in those which are already past; and by the way of discourse ever to make some
mention of the Greek Emperors, as occasion shall be offered whereby he that
shall read this history, may understand the success of both Empires, under
the name and title of one only.

Having resolved upon this course, let us return to our CHARLES the Great,
whom we left newly made Emperor; and to NICEPHORVS who tyrannically usurped the
Empire of Constantinople, by deposing the Emperesse YRENE. I say then that
CHARLES was fifty eight years old, when (as I have related) he was by Pope
LEO the third crowned Emperor in the city of Rome; and had reigned three and
thirty years the mighty King of France and Germany; all which time he had
spent in the wars, against rebels and Infidels (whereof in Germany were many)
with great felicity and victory, taming and subduing diverse nations and
provinces. CHARLES being come into Germany, wholly subdued the Saxons, and
reduced them to the Charles the great subdued the Sa^ons.
faith, wherein as the other nations of Germany, they ever were inconstant and
stubborn. NICEPHORVS who then reigned in Constantinople, knowing his great
power; after that he had settled himself in his throne, and was well assured
of those whom he had dispossessed, and had most cause to suspect, and had
banished YRENE; he sent Ambassadors of great account to Nicephorus sent an
embassage to Charles the Great.
CHARLES the Great, very lovingly desiring him to hold him for his brother and
friend. The Emperor CHARLES who was a benign Prince, knowing how mighty the
Sarazins were, and the great danger that all Christendom should incur
through discord between the two Empires, concluded a peace with NICEPHORVS;
and with his Ambassadors sent others of his own, to confirm the same: which
was established in the same manner and with the same conditions, as it was made
with the Empress YRENE; the city of Venice remaining friend to both parties
without any subjection to either. There was also a peace concluded between him
and GODFREY King of Denmark, which some call DACIA: whereupon the said GODFREY
departed out of his kingdom, roially accompanied, to see and speak with the
Emperor although that this interuiew took no effect; for his people
dissuading him, counseled him not to see him: nevertheless the peace was
made, and took place.

After this, it followed that for some matters which the Venetians attempted
against the Empire of CHARLES, in the behalf of NICEPHORVS Emperor of
Constantinople (yet some affirm that it was through the false information of
FORTVNATVS Patriarch of Grado) CHARLES the Great commanded his son PEPIN King
of Italy, to make wars against them: which he began very resoutely, and took
the cities and fortresses which they held in the maine land, and besieged the
city of Venice it self both by sea and land; to the relief whereof the
Greek Emperor NICEPHORVS sent a fleet. Of these wars of Venice ancient
authors do write so diversely, that a man can hardly say which was the truth:
for some say that Venice was wholly taken; and others say that but some Islands
thereof, and that the place which is called Rio al^o defended it self:
howsoever it was, the war continued many days, and CHARLES granted peace
and liberty to the Venetians, to live after their laws and customs, for that
he was to renew the peace with the Greek Emperor, which he had broken by
reason of the Venetian wars. Some write that the Emperor received a great
affront in these wars: but howsoever, the Venetians won much reputation to
have valiantly made head against him.

CHARLES living in this prosperity, made his will and testatment: wherein he
divided his Charles his and testament.
kingdoms between three legitimate sons which he had, to wit, CHARLES,
which was his eldest son, PEPIN, and JEWS; wherein he made his son
CHARLES King of the greatest and best parts of France and Germany; PEPIN he
made King of Italy and Bauaria, and other provinces; and JEWS of Prouance,
and of that part of France which bordereth upon Spain, and other provinces.
Which his testament he sent to be ratified by Pope LEO; and shortly after gave
to his sons the names and titles of Kings: but all succeeded after another
manner; for God otherwise disposed thereof at his pleasure. This testament I
have seen written by some authors. It afterward happened that a great fleet
of Infidels which inhabited Spain, with the aid and assistance of the
Africans, invaded the Isles of Sardinia and Corsica: for the defense whereof the
Emperor CHARLES sent commandment to his son PEPIN* that he should send
thither a Captain, whose name was BVCAREDVS; who took so good order as he
drove the Infidels out of those Islands, and slew five thousand of them in one
bataile. And with no less good success, he undertook another war with the
Dukes of the Bohemians, and of the Polonians, which is part of the ancient
Sarmatia, who infested the countries under his dominion; against which he sent
his son CHARLES, with great forces of Burgonians, Saxons and Germans. And
the young CHARLES imitating his father, warred valiantly and with discretion:
and coming first to a battle with the Bohemians and LEO their Duke, he
overcame them, and slew LEO; although that therein passed many days, and there
was an intermission in this war: and in the end he had the like success with
the Polacres, so as they all became subject to his father. For which his
victories he was so much feared and renowned through the world, that a great
King of the East, and AMVRATH the greatest of all the Mahometists, sent their
Ambassadors with rich presents to him, desiring peace and friendship; and
Ambassadors sent to Charles the Great.
the like did all the Kings Christian.

Whilst as these and such like matters happened unto CHARLES the Great,
NICEPHORVS Emperor of Constantinople, showed himself to be very covetous,
imposing new taxes and tributes upon his countries and subjects; having ever a
desire to disturb the Empire of CHALES the Great (which he never forbear to
do) endamaging his countries, by robbing and spoiling the same, and secretly
favoring his enemies, whereby he gat little honor, and less profit: for this
envy and malice being fixed in his heart, he not only left to make wars
against the Infidels, as he ought to have done, but knowing that they would
war with him, he bought his peace of them; and to his great shame and
disgrace bound himself to pay them yearly a great sum of money; and for that
instant sent them great gifts and presents, having his purpose wholly bent
against the Christians: which cost him his life, as presently shall be declared.

CHARLES living in this tranquillity, GODFREY King of Denmark made war
against him, who was a mighty Prince, and commanded a large dominion; and with
great forces came into Friseland and into Saxony, where he did great harm.
Against whom the Emperor addressing himself (although now old and unwieldy)
speedily departed with a great Army, and by the The death of the King Denmark.
way news was brought him, that the said King was dead, and his Army
returned; which was held for great news, considering how great wars were
expected. And, upon the same day, news came also, how that his son PEPIN, who
in great prosperity reigned in Italy, was dead The death of Pepin, King of
Italy.
in the City of Milan: for the which he was sorry, and returned to the City of
Aken, or Aix; whither Ambassadors came to him from HERMIGVS King of Denmark,
which succeeded GODFREY, humbly desiring peace: the like came from NICEPHORVS,
Emperor of Graecia; and the like petition also came from AMBVLAT, a King of
the Moors, who reigned in a great part of Spain: to all which, he made
gracious answers; and, granting their petitions, gave hearty thanks to God, for
that he was generally so well esteemed. But, after this prosperity, a great
calamity and scourge ensued; which was, that it pleased God to take away his
other son called CHARLES, who lay on the Borders of Germany, for the defense
thereof: so as now his whole hope rested in his third son JEWS.

NICEPHORVS the Emperor of Graecia, being assured of CHARLES the Great, and
having bought his peace of the Infidels, took his son STAVRATIVS for his
companion in the Empire; determining to make war against his neighbors the
Bulgarians, whose King was then called CRVNVS, with whom he fought some
battles; wherein he had the victory, and slew many of his enemies. By reason
of these victories he grew so proud and insolent, that, making small account of
his enemies, he managed the wars with little care or discretion: which this
CRVNVS perceiving, he raised the greatest and best power that he was able to
make, and the most secretly that might be, marched by night, and, before that it
was day, assaulted the Emperors The death of the Greek Emperor Nicephorus.
Camp; who being unable to set his people in order, they were defeated, and the
Emperor was there slain; and his son STAVRATIVS, being sore wounded, escaped by
flight: and so ended the life and Reign of NICEPHORVS. At this overthrow great
treasure was lost, and much of the Greek Nobility then perished: which happened
in the year of our Savior CHRIST eight hundred and five, he having reigned
nine years. His son STAVRATIVS, coming to Adrianople, and saluted and sworn
Emperor, was so ill inclined, and so insufficient, Stauratius, succeeding
Nicephorus, was depo^d by Michael who succeeded him.
and therewith (above all) so deformed, ill favored, and churlish in
behavior, that there was not any man pleased with his succession; so as within
four months after he came to the Empire, he was dispossessed thereof by his
brother-in-law MICHAEL; who, apprehending him, put him into a Monastery: and
this MICHAEL, remaining peaceful Emperor, was a virtuous man, and a good
Gouerner; but so inclined to peace, that afterward, through his excessive fear
of war, he lost his Empire, as we will show. Now, as soon as he was chosen
Emperor, he with all expedition sent his Ambassadors to the old Emperor CHARLES
the Great, desiring friendship and peace with him; which was concluded in such
manner as it was with his Predecessor NICEPHORVS. And CHARLES the Great, being
now very old, desiring to take order for the estate of the Empire, called a
most solemn Parliament in the City of Aquisgran or Aken, where he made his son
JEWS to be entitled CAESAR, and his Successor; and his nephew BERNARD, son
to PEPIN, King of Italy, with the consent of Pope LEO, who until then lived.
And, this being performed, the rest of his time he spent in alms-giuing,
enriching the Churches and Clergy, releeuing the poor; and reforming abuses,
he ordained good laws and statutes. The year following, the Infidell-Sarazins
of Spain and Africa, invaded Sardinia and Corsica; wherein they made cruel
war, and did the like on the Coast of Italy: but yet (though not without great
trouble) they were repelled and scattered by the Emperors Captains, and by his
nephew BERNARD King of Italy. It followed, that MICHAEL Emperor of
Constantinople, being assailed by CRVNVS King of Bulgaria, against his will was
forced to take the Field, and to fight with him; and in the first battle got
the victory: but fighting again the second time, he was overthrown, and
therewith lost both the day, and the courage to rule; so as he voluntarily
renounced the Empire: or (as some say) a principal Captain of his, called LEO,
rebelling, and he not daring to make head against him, deposed himself from the
Michael, Emperor of Constantinople, deposed himself from his Empir^
Empire, and went into a Cloister, having reigned not fully three years. And
this LEO, who was son of a Gentleman called PARDVS, was made Emperor: and
presently, in the like manner as MICHAEL had done, he sent his Ambassadors to
CHARLES the Great, to establish and confirm the peace concluded with his
Predecessors; which was performed.

In the mean time that LEO was chosen and crowned, CRVNVS King of Bulgaria,
following the victory which he had obtained against the Emperor MICHAEL,
marched with his Army the direct way toward Constantinople, whither the
Emperor LEO had drawn his forces, and had raised new; and CRVNVS came so near
unto the City, that he might well see the same. Which disgrace LEO could not
with patience endure (being a very valiant man) but took the field with all
his forces, in very good order, and made head against his enemy; who with the
joy of the late victory attended him: and there was fought between them a
cruel battle, which lasted a great part of the day, and many men were slain
of either party. And therein happened a notable accident seldom seen in
other encounters, which was, that in the fury of the fight the Emperor and the
king chanced to meet; and either knowing his adversary, there charging one the
other, the Emperor carried himself so well, as he overthrew the King dead to
the earth; so that within a while after, the Bulgarians began to retire, and
presently to Crunus King of the Bulgarians slain by the Emperor Leo.
run away, in such manner that LEO had a full complete and noble victory,
together with the spoil of their Camp; and so returned to Constantinople with
great joy. The Bulgarians being now contented to defend their own limits, the
Greek Emperor remained in peace, as CHARLES the Great did in Germany. But as
all things in this world have an end; so ended the good fortunes and great
power of CHARLES the Great, together with his life: for being The death of
Charles the Great.
then of the age of threescore and eleven years, he was taken with a pain in
his side, whereof within the space of seven days he died, in the year of our
Lord eight hundred and fourteen, when he had reigned Emperor fourteen years,
and seven and fortith King of France and of Germany; and of Italy forty two.

During his whole life he had much reverenced the Church and employed his
authority to advance it, and bountifully imparted his treasure to enrich it:
but this great abundance in so plentiful a peace, made Churchmen to grow
dissolute. The Emperor CHARLES being well instructed in religion, knowing how
much it did import that learning and good life should shine in those which were
to instruct others, he called five Councels in diverse parts of his dominions:
at Mentz, at Rheines, Tours, Chalons and at Arles: and by the advice of these
Assemblies he set down orders for the reformation of the Church, in a book
entitled, Capitula Caroli Magni; a reverent testimony of the singular piety
of this great Prince.

This noble Prince was endued with so many excellent virtues, that we read of
very few in ancient histories that excelled him, so as justly he may be
compared with any of the most excellent whosoever; for in martial discipline,
in valor, and dexterity in arms, I know not any that has exceeded him: he
obtained so many victories, fought so many battles, and suddued so many
fierce and warlike nations, before, and after that he was Emperor, as any of
the most famous that ever was. He was tall of stature, very well proportioned
in all parts, passing strong, of a fair and grave countenance, valiant, mild,
pitiful, a lover of justice, liberal, very affable, pleasant, well read in
history, a great friend to Arts and Sciences, and sufficiently well seen in
them, and a man which above all honored and rewarded learned men. He was very
charitable and a great alms giver; and so good an harbourer of strangers, that
in Syria, in Africa, in Egypt, and in other provinces of the Infidels, wherein
Christians lived, he found means to have hospitals, and alms houses, for such
as were poor; and in his kingdoms, and even in his court, he harbored and
relieved strangers and pilgrims. Concerning his faith and religion, he was
very zealous; and the most of the wars which he made, were to enlarge the
Christian faith. He superstitiously honored and obeyed the Church of Rome, and
the Pope Bishop thereof, and other Bishops and prelates, and commanded his
subjects to do the like; whereof besides histories, some chapters in the
Decretals, bear record. He was likewise very devout, and spent great part of
the time in prayer, and hearing divine service. In his diet he was very
temperate, and a great enemy to all riot and excess; for at his table were
never served above four or five dishes, and those of such meat as best
pleased his taste; which he used to the same end that God created them: which
was for his sustenance, and not for a show and pomp, as now adays is used; in
such sort that them eats which naturally are but to please the taste, or at
the most the savor or smell, they will now have them to satisfy all the other
senses; and likewise finding new inventions, the greatest part of their life is
spent at the table; and so they eat of a greater number of exquisit meats,
dressed in such manner and with such sauces, that it is hard to know what taste
they have, so as they seem strange and rare: and sometime meat is made of
such things as were not created of GOD to such purpose, no more then he made
Goats to draw carts, or to till the earth.

Our CHARLES was not as some are at this day; for as he was rich and mighty,
so he was temperate and virtuous; and maintained his body with what was
needful and wholesome. His ordinary exercise was hunting, when he had
leisure, in time of war; and in time of peace, he gave ear to such as did
read histories to him; and sometimes he heard music, wherewith he was much
delighted, and had good skill therein. He was much condemned for having many
base sonties and daughters, but this was in the time of his youth; for
afterward it is to be supposed, that he contented himself with his wife: and
for remedy of this imperfection, although he was three or four times a
widower, yet he ever married again the daughters of mighty Kings and Princes.
Finally, to make an end of that whereof I have treated at large, he was an
excellent Emperor, and feared and loved God, and died, as I said, very old
and honorably; in peace with the Kings of Spain, England, Denmark, Bulgaria,
the Greek Emperor LEO, and with all the Princes of that time. His body was
buried Where Charles the Great was buried.
in a sumptuous temple, which he caused to be built in the city of Aquisgrane
or Aix.

The authors from whom I have drawn this relation, and where the Reader may
read the rest, concerning CHARLES the Great, and the other Emperors, and the
histories of those times, are those which ordinarily I use to allege, since
that the most ancient authors have failed; to wit, the Annals of
Constantinople in the twenty third book, where they make an end, BLONDVS in
his second book of his Decades, ZONARAS a Greek author, SIGISBERTVS, and the
Abbot WESPERGENSIS, and MATTHEW PALMERIVS, all three in the process of their
Chronicles; PLATINA in the life of the Popes, CVSPINIAN, BAPTISTA IGNATIUS,
BENEVENTANVS DE ROMALDVS, JOHN CARRION, JOHN EVTICHIVS, RAPHAEL VOLATERANVS, al
these in their Emperors, VINCENCIVS an Historiographer in his Mirror. Besides
the which it shall be necessary to see, and so may he do which shall be a
curious Reader, the French Historiographers, in matters which concern the time
of CHARLES the Great, which are PAVLVS EMILIVS a singular author, ROBERT
GAGVIN, and MARTIN, OTHO FRISINGENSIS in the fifth book of his histories,
wherein he treats at large of CHARLES the Great, and likewise RICHARD of
Saint Victor, and the Archbishop TVRPIN.

THE LIFE OF JEWS, THE FIRST OF THAT NAME, SVRNAMED PIUS, AND THREESCORE AND
SEVENTEENTH ROMAN EMPEROR: in whose time LEO and MICHAEL reigned in
CONSTANTINOPLE.
THE ARGUMENT.
Jews being come to the Empire, confirmed the peace with the Emperor of
Graecia, and made war in Dacia; from which it was requisite that he should
return in person, for redress of certain accidents which happened in Italy;
which he easily pacified by means of his Nephew Bernard, then King of Italy.
This Emperor renounced all authority to confirm the Popes election. Bernard
King of Italy rebelled; but being overcome, he was led prisoner into France by
his Uncle Jews, who gave to his eldest son Lotharius that government. He
overcame some Tyrants which rebelled against him, and confirmed to the Church
the donation made by his father. There happened unto this Emperor one pitiful
accident: which was, that his own children rebelled against him, and deposed
him from the Empire: but they afterward repenting, restored him to his estate.
In which time befell a very great disaster and ruin to Rome and Italy; for
the Mahometists understanding of the discord between Christian Princes, and
standing in no fear of Michael the Greek Emperor, having prepared a good
Navy, scaled Ciuita Uecchia, and robbing and burning, came to besiege Rome:
from whence (so soon as they saw succors come out of Lumbardy) they returned.
They also did much harm in Sicilia. After which ruin, Jews, falling sick of
a grievous infirmity, dyed within forty days, having first set in order the
state of the Empire.

IN such manner as I have related in the history of CHARLES the Great, his
son JEWS was by him in his life time nominated, and chosen Emperor.
Wherefore when as his father was dead, he was by all men peaceably held and
obeyed for such, and proved a virtuous Prince; and for his virtue and goodness
was called PIUS. The first thing he undertook, was to come to the city of
Aken, where he held a general Diet or Parliament; and took order for all
things, concerning the peace, and government of the Empite, and the kingdoms
which he inherited; Peace between the Emperors Jews and Leo.
whither came Ambassadors from LEO Emperor of Greece, to ratify the peace
made with his father: for the better assurance whereof, he sent Ambassadors
with those which came, to the end that LEO should confirm the same in
Constantinople. He resolved also, as a new Emperor, and greedy of honor, to
make war against the Danes, in the behalf of EROALDVS, and RANFREDVS, two
Kings which were friends and subject to the Empire, and were deposed from their
kingdoms by the sons of GODFREY. For this enterprise he made great
preparation, sending for his nephew BERNARD King of Italy, as is before said:
and for the better defense of his countries he left his 3 sons, to wit,
LOTHARIVS, PEPIN, and JEWS. LOTHARIVS which was his eldest son, he made
governor of Bauaria, and the marches thereof; and to PEPIN he left the
government of Aquitania, and other places thereabout: in the other provinces,
he confirmed the Dukes thereof, and in all he set very good order. Departing
with his Army, and being come into Saxony, the weather grew so cold, as during
all that winter he could march no further: so as he was constrained to winter
in a city in Saxony called Parburnia, or Parburina; for the cold was so
extreme, as the seas in all that coast were frozen, and the war was
afterward made by his Captains.

JEWS returned into France, by reason of other accidents which happened: for
it fell out that in Rome, some great men seeing Pope LEO old and sickly,
conspired against him. Against whom he proceeded, determining to have done
justice upon them; for which cause there was a tumult in Rome, and in some part
of Italy: whereof when JEWS was advertised, he sent commandment to King
BERNARD, speedily to go thither, to prevent rebellion in those parts: And
BERNARD did so with all possible expedition, and fully pacified all matters in
Rome, and in all Italy. Within few days after, Pope LEO died, having been
Pope one and twenty years and in his place was chosen STEPHEN the fourth, who
presently after his election went into France to the Emperor; and finding him
in the City of Arles, was honorably received, and he with very great
ceremonies and solemnities, crowned and anointed JEWS The Emperor Jews
crowned by Pope Stephen.
Emperor, and then returned to Rome.

The coronation and solemnities being ended, there ensued some rebellions in
the Dominions of JEWS; for the Gascons, and other people their neighbors,
rebelled; for that JEWS had taken from them their Duke and Governor, called
SIGVINIVS: for it seems that then Dukes were made governors of Provinces,
and that they for the most part, continued their whole life time in their
governments, or at least a very long time; from whence afterward came the
great houses of Germany, and other parts: some by the Emperors gift; and others
by force, making themselves tyrants; which in process of time were ratified,
and confirmed in their dignities. These aforesaid gouernements were also given
with the titles of Earledomes, From whence the title of Dukes and Marquesses
are derived.
and Marquesses, as it appears by Histories: For, there was given unto them a
mark of land, or land (contained within certain bounds or marks) to govern;
so as they derived their titles in such manner as did the Dukes. At this time
another king of certain Islands in the North sea, taking part with the King of
Denmark, made war also against the Emperor JEWS: upon these two occasions
JEWS raised new Armies. The matters of Gascony were ended in few days with
little difficulty; but the wars with the Danes were more doubtful; for in
the beginning the Saxons and the Imperialists had ill success; but at last the
Emperor provided such Captains and Soldiers, as they not only obtained the
victory, but restored EROALDVS to his kingdom, who lived in subjection to the
Empire, having been before deprived.

This happened in the third year of the reign of the Emperor JEWS: in the
beginning of which, news came that Pope STEPHEN was dead, who had been Pope
but seven months, whom PASCAL the first succeeded, and executed his authority
in the Popedom, without the Emperors confirmation, being thereto urged by both
estates of Rome, ecclesiastical and secular: whereupon he sent to excuse
himself to the Emperor; for Pope Adrian and the clergy had granted that
pre-eminence to his father CHARLES the Great, and to his successors, which was
observed until this time; which authority JEWS renounced, as it appears
by the chapter Ego Ludouicus in the distinction 63. JEWS accepted this
excuse, and ordained that from thenceforth the Imperial authority should be
observed in this manner, viz. that as soon as the Pope was chosen, he should
give the Emperor to understand thereof, as to a friend de^oted ^o that Church;
but not that he should stay until the Emperor had confirmed his election. Yet
notwithstanding, the Popes afterward used to sue to the Emperors to approve
their election, until the time of JEWS nephew to this JEWS, who
voluntarily left this custom: which had continued from the time of ADRIAN the
second, as shall be declared in time and place, if our memory fail us not.

Whilst these things passed in France, in Germany, and in Italy, LEO (as I
have above said) r^ling the Empire of Constantinople, and through his victory
obtained against the King of Bulgaria, living some space in peace and
prosperity, and highly esteemed; waxed so proud, and therewith so severe and
cruel to his subjects, as he purchased their hatred; whereto this was a Leo
cast the images out of the Churches of the Greek Empire.
furtherance, in that he sought to put down the images in their Churches, as
some of his predecessors had done. And it afterward happened that one MICHAEL,
a man of mean parentage, whom he had advanced and preferred to great estate,
and had placed near about himself, and then held in prison, with a resolution
to have cut off his ears, was of power with the favor of many men of great
reputation which took him out of prison, and assisted him herein, to murder
the Emperor LEO, and to seize upon the Empire; when he had reigned seven years
and certain The Emperor Leo murdered.
months. He left behind him four sons, which afterward had diverse
adventures; but none of them obtained the Empire. In this manner MICHAEL gat
the Empire of Constantinople, wherein we will leave him, to make a conclusion
of the history of JEWS the Emperor Michael succeeded Leo in the Greek
Empire.
of the West. And thus it passed, that having until then had good success in
his affairs; in the parliament which he lately had commanded to be held in
Aken, among other matters, which therein were ordained, one was, that his
eldest son LOTHARIVS was made his companion The Emperor Jews made his son
Lotharius his companion in the Empire.
in the Empire, and his second son PEPIN King of Aquitania, which contains
Languedoc, Gascony, Vienne, and Aniow: and his third son JEWS was made King
of Bauaria: and these three brethren presently took upon them the government of
their principalities.

But (as nothing in this world is permanent) after this there befell some
troubles and wars between the Emperors and the Danes, who began to rebel:
through which occasion, by the counsel and persuasion of certain wicked
persons, whereof some were prelates, his nephew BERNARD, King of the greatest
part of Italy, rebelled also, and denied the duty of superiority, Bernard king
of Italy rebelled against his uncle the Emperor Jews.
which he owed to his uncle JEWS; and lenying an Army, held the Alps and the
passages into Italy, thereby to defend himself. Whereof when the Emperor had
advertisement, adjudging him in the Parliament for an open enemy, he departed
toward Italy, and by the way levied men of war: whither when he came he was
of such power, that BERNARD durst not stand to his defense, but yielded
himself into the Emperors hands; who after that he had pacified the state of
Italy, returned into France, and leading BERNARD with him prisoner would that
his doing should be determined by justice, as so great an offense required; and
he, Bernard King of Italy being condemned to die was executed.
was condemned to death, and so was executed: others write, he cast him into
prison and put out his eyes. And JEWS in BERNARDS place made his son
LOTHARIVS king of Italy, whom before he had made CAESAR, and his companion in
the Empire: and he departing thitherwards, at his arrival was there anointed
and crowned by Pope PASCAL. After this little dangerous war, there followed
another against the Duke, or Governor of little Britanny (a Province of France)
who also rebelled, with the people of that Province, intitling himself an
absolute King, and not subject to the Emperor; and his courage was so great,
that he levied an Army, and came with him to a battle, wherein this tyrant
whose name was VIOMARCHVS was overthrown, but not without great difficulty
and essusion of blood; but the Emperor had the victory. After which, ensued
the death of his wife the Empress called HERN^GAR, for whom he was exceeding
sorrowful; but yet he shortly after married the second time. After this, the
Emperor JEWS lived two or three years in peace; at the end whereof, a Duke,
Governor of Hungary, moved with a desire to reign, rebelled and began to war
in Austria, which in ancient time was called the upper Pannonia, and in
Dalmatia and Slauonia likewise; against whom JEWS raised a great Army, and
the tyrant being in sundry Jews pacified the tumults in Hungary.
skirmishes and battles overthrown, submitted himself, and the Emperor
granted him his life; and so those Provinces remained in peace.

After this, certain Romans came to complain to the Emperor against Pope
PASCAL, pretending that he had caused certain principal men to be slain, for
that they were his followers and desirous to do him service: whereof the Pope
excused himself by his Ambassadors: which the Emperor not only accepted, but
much favored and honored the Papal Sea. And for as much as there arose sundry
doubts and questions, which of the Towns and Cities of Italy appertained to
the Empire, and which to the Pope; the Emperor JEWS made a new donation to
the Church of Rome, ratifying the charters of his father, and grandfather;
which RAPHAEL VOLATERANVS writes in the third book of his Geographie, as A
new donation to the Church of Rome, made by the Emperor Ludouicus Piu^.
having seen the Original in the Popes library, in the Vaticane; the tenor
whereof, as he sets it down, is as follows, at whose peril I write the
same.

In the name of God Almighty, the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost; I
JEWS the Emperor, do grant unto thee PETER the Apostle, prince of the
Apostles, and for thee, to thy Vicar, the Lord PASCAL the highest Bishop, and
to his successors for ever, the City of Rome, with all the jurisdiction
thereof, and lands and marches thereabouts, the confines, cities, ports and
places upon the Tuscane and Mediterranean Sea, Ciuita, Vecchia, Valneo, Reggi^,
Viterbo, Sauona, Papulonia, Rosello, Perugia, Maturano, Sutri, Nepe, and
toward the country called Terra di Lauoro, Amenia, Seguia, Settentino, Alano,
Patrico, Frusino, with all the lands and places in their subjection, and also
all the government of the City of Rauenna, accordingly as my father the
Emperor CHARLES of holy memory, and also our grandfather PEPIN, in time past
granted the same to Saint PETER the Apostle, that is to say, Rauenna, Bonio,
Emilli^, For^populi, Forli, Faenza, Imola, Bologna, Ferrara, Comacchio, Ad^ia,
Ceruia, and in the Marca, Pesero, Fano, Senigaglia, Ancona, Ausino, Numana,
Esio, Fossombrone, Feltro, Vrbino, the territory of Val^ense, Caglio, Luceolo,
Ogobio, and also in Terra di Lauoro, Asola, Aquino, Arpino, Theano, Capua, and
all the lands therein appertaining to our jurisdiction, to wit, the dukedomes
of Beneuent, Salerno, and Calabria the superior and inferior, and that of
Naples, of Spoleto, Tuderto, Ori^alco, Narnia, and all that jurisdiction; and
also the Islands in the Sea called the inferior, Corsica, Sardegna, and Sicilia.
All which lands and Cities, PEPIN our grandfather of holy memory, and
afterward our father CHARLES, by their prerogative in writing, gave and
granted by their Ambassadors, ATHERIVS and MAYNADVS Abbot^, of their own
frank and free will, sent to Saint PETER and his successors, and we also do
grant and allow the same. Moreover we will and declare, that the power and
authority to choose the Pope, is, and shall remain free to the Roman Council
and College, to be made without any schism or discord; and that after that he
is chosen and consecrated, for the preservation of love and friendship
between us, he shall send his Ambassadors to me, and to my successors which
shall be Kings of France, as the custom was in the time of my great
grandfather CHARLES MARTELL, and PEPIN my grandfather, and of my father
CHARLES, and this our will and grace which we do, we give in writing, and
confirm with an Oath, and send the some to Pope PASCAL our Lord, subscribed
with our own hand, by THEODORE the Legate of the Holy Church of Rome. Signed,
Ego Ludouicus.

This donation was likewise attested by the Emperors three sons, ten
Bishops, eight Abbots, fifteen Earls, one Secretary, a chamber-keeper, and
a doore-keeper. The which donation the same Author VOLATERANVS, affirms to
have seen confirmed by the Emperor OTHO the third, in the year of our Lord,
nine hundred seventy and two, in the time of Pope JOHN the twelfth.

Of this donation (although not so much at large) mention is made in the
Decretall, in the chapter Ego Ludouicus, in the distinction 63. In which
chapter is expressed, the city of Rome, with all that Dukedom, which then
contained all the lands, towns and cities upon the sea side, and the Hauons
thereto appertaining, with all the other towns and cities of Tuscane: but
their names are not set down, neither the Islands above named.

This donation being made, the Pope within few days after died, having been
Pope eight years; and EVGENIVS the Second was chosen, after that there had been
a schism, wherein two were chosen, who were persuaded by mutual consent to
renounce their election, and in their steed was chosen EVGENIVS, in the year of
our Lord eight hundred, four and twenty, and in the eleventh year of the Reign
of the Emperor JEWS. At the same time the Emperor with three Armies invaded
Britanny in France, which again rebelled, and with the effusion of much blood
subdued the same. In like manner, the year following, he defended the Kingdom
of Hungary against the King of Bulgaria, which made war there, and compelled
him to sue for peace. He also sent an Army to the relief of BERNALDVS Earl of
Barcelona, against the Infidels of Spain, who made cruel wars upon him. And
so the Emperor JEWS lived ever (although not without some troubles) in
prosperity and with good success.

In the mean time there were no less wars and troubles in the East Empire,
wherein the Emperor MICHAEL reigned; a wicked and misbeleeuing Prince, who held
absurd and wicked opinions, fasting the Saturday with the Jews, and denying
the resurrection of the dead: and it pleased God, that the whole time of his
Reign was infested with wars and troubles, and the Infidels eclipsed both his
honor and Empire. First, he had very dangerous wars with a great Lord called
THOMAS; who taking part with LEO, whom MICHAEL had put to death, being in Asia
he drew together much people, and, with the aid of the Infidels, took many
Cities; Thomas rebelled against Michael the Emperor of Graecia.
and, coming into Europe against the new Emperor MICHAEL, took many cities in
Graecia, and besieged the City of Constantinople wherein the Emperor was, and
did put him so to his shifts, that he hardly escaped from being either taken or
slain. But, being thus distressed and in despair, he resolved to try the last
and most perilous remedy; which was, That he, arming the greatest number of
soldiers he could get, sallied forth, and with such fury assailed his
adversaries upon the sudden, that he slew a great number of them; in such sort,
that within very few days THOMAS was driven to raise his siege, and to
retire: And it followed also, that his fleet at sea was overthrown by the
Emperors Navy; so as his power every where began to decay.

Shortly after this, the King of Bulgaria came with an Army to aid the
Emperor: whom THOMAS The Bulgarians came to aid the Emperor of Constantinople.
resolved to encounter, before that he should join with him; and coming to a
battle THOMAS was overthrown, and the Bulgarians returned to their country,
rich, with the spoils of their victory. Whereupon the Emperor adventured to
take the field: wherein his force so much increased, that THOMAS not daring to
fight with him, suffered himself to be besieged in Adrianople; where after
many chances of war, he fell into the Emperors hands, by whose commandment
he was put to death: and pardoning some, and punishing others, he Thomas a
rebel put to death by the commandment of Michael, Emperor of Constantinople.
subverted all his enemies, and his people returned to their obedience.
Nevertheless, the Infidels in the wars and enterprises past became so
hardy, that they every where invaded the territories of the Empire, spoiling
and taking many places: principally there came a great fleet of them into the
Iln of Candia, wherein they made great slaughter, and obtained a notable
victory by sea against the Imperialists. They likewise came into the I Will of
Sicilia, and took a great part thereof, as JOHANNES MONACVS, BLONDVS, and
SABELLICVS do write.

The Emperor JEWS was required by Pope GREGORY the fourth (EVGENIVS being
dead, after whom VALENTINIAN was chosen, who enjoyed the Papacy but forty
days, and after his decease this GREGORY was made Pope) to relieve Sicilia:
which JEWS having other occasions, refused; alleging, that the Emperor
MICHAEL ought to defend it, for that Sicilia was of his Empire. By reason
whereof the state of the East Empire at that time endured many calamities, and
MICHAEL the Emperor of Constantinople living in great trouble, continued but a
while, as hereafter we will declare. And although that for that time the I Will of
Sicilia was relieved by the Venetians, who then were very mighty by sea; yet
that had not sufficed, if a mighty man called BONIFACE, Earl and Gouerner of
the Isle of Corsica, with the aid of a brother of his, and other great men in
Italy, had not levied a good Army, and sailing over into Africa, made so
cruel wars in the marches of Carthage, overthrowing the Infidels in four
battles, as they were constrained to recall their Army from Sicilia (as they
did in the time of SCIPIO the Africane, and HANNIBAL of Carthage). By this mean
was the I Will of Sicilia freed from the Sarazins: for, constrained by this
necessity, they abandoned what they had gotten, and returned into Africa.

The Emperor LVDOVICVS PIUS living in great honor and prosperity, it pleased
God The Emperor Jews his sons co^spired against their father.
to lay some affliction upon him: for his own sons, upon whom he had
bestowed kingdoms and provinces, conspired against him, and began to refuse to
yield any obedience; and leuying soldiers, raised armies against him. The
causes moving them thereto, or as they falsely pretended, Historians relate
diversely. Some say it was, because he so tenderly loved his young son called
CHARLES, whom he had by his second wife, his eldest son LOTHARIVS, fearing to
be disinherited, sought the ruin of his own father. Others say it was, for
that he retained into his service a valiant Spaniard called BERNARDODEL
CARPIO, nephew to King ALONSO, of whom Spanish Historians write wonders: of
whom he made so great account for his valor in the wars, that in all matters
of importance he was wholly led by his counsel. Others say that his wife
IVDITH, who was a woman very ill conditioned, only ruled and bare all the sway
with him: so as charging him with these defects, and others as untrue and
unjust as these, they opposed themselves against their father. Some great
Prelates interposed themselves to pacify so dishonest a controversy: and,
seeking to reconcile them, this mild Emperor loved his sons so tenderly, and
was so desirous of peace, that, to grace his sons, he repudiated his wife
(although much against his will); and, bestowing many great rewards upon
BERNARDODEL CARPIO, he discharged him. But the true cause was ambition and
arrogance; which increasing in them, this fained agreement endured not long:
for, the sons, by the consent of certain great men which joined with them,
apprehended their father; and, bereauing him of the robes and ensigns of
Emperor and King, and generally of all government and authority, The Emperor
Jews deposed, and put into a Monastery by his sons.
put him into a Monastery: which he endured with such exceeding great
patience, that when (being prisoner) he saw any of them, he never uttered any
evil speeches; but wild them to take heed, that those their private friends
and favorites did not one day deceive them; and to remember what duty and
obedience they ought unto him being their father. Finally, there passed many
treaties about this matter; and he lived one whole year deposed, and as a
prisoner: at the end whereof, his sons acknowledging their error (although
some write, against the will of his eldest son LOTHARIVS) restored him to his
former estate, and he forgave them: and as for the rest of their confederates,
he was content in giving them a very light punishment.

The Emperor JEWS being restored, his second son PEPIN (whom he had made king
of Aquitania) deceased, and left one son called after his name. This
domestical and civil dissension between the Emperor and his sons, was very
prejudicial to all Christendom: for, the Sarazins of Africa, being of great
power and very mighty, and making small account of MICHAEL the Emperor of
Constantinople, seeing the Emperor JEWS to be prisoner, and Italy abandoned,
they with an exceeding great Navy, and a great number of men of war, came into
Italy, and at their first landing took Ciuita Vecchia; and, dispersing sundry
companies of horse The Sarazins came into Italy, and besieged Rome.
and foot into diverse parts, they spoiled and burnt many Towns in Italy.
And, not content therewith, they besieged the City of Rome it self, and
battered the same for many days space; whereby Pope GREGORY the Fourth, and
the Inhabitants thereof, were much distressed, and many of them were slain. And
although that VINCENTIVS, VILVACENSIS, GINARDVS, and some other
Historiographers, say, that they entered and took the City, yet it was not so;
for, the City defended it self: but they took all the Suburbs called Vaticane,
and The Vaticane in Rome taken and sacked by the Sarazins.
burned the Church of Saint PETER. Which, coming to the knowledge of GVIDO, an
excellent Captain, Marquess of Lombardy, and Gouerner thereof for the Emperor;
being thereto moved by Letters from the Pope, and sundry other considerations,
he raised a great power, and took his way toward Rome: which when the
Infidels understood, being laden with the riches and spoils of Italy, they
raised their siege; and, doing all the harm they could, went to Ciuita Vecchia,
where they embarked themselves, carrying with them an infinite number of
captives and great wealth, and returned into Africa: and in their way they made
what spoil they could in Sicilia.

At such time as Italy endured this calamity, the Emperor MICHAEL died in
Constantinople, when he had reigned nine years; and (as it had not of long
time before been seen in that The death of Michael, Emperor of Constantinople.
Empire) his son THEOPHILUS succeeded him; who although that in conditions
he was a better Emperor than his father, yet was he no better affected to the
Pope, nor to the adoring of Images: for which cause he put many to death. What
bef^ll him we will hereafter briefly declare.

But returning to the affairs of Italy, which was freed from the danger and
oppression of the Infidels; Pope GREGORY the Fourth died, having been so above
fifteen years. This Pope The Feast of all Saints ordained by Pope Gregory the
fourth.
instituted the Feast of All Saints, which is celebrated in the Church unto
this day. After the decease of this Pope, a Cardinal called SVVINESFACE was
chosen: and for as much as it was a very unseemly name for so high a dignity,
by a general consent it was changed, and he was called SER^IVS the Second.
This was the cause why it has been ever since Pope Swinesface, afterward
called Sergius the second.
until this day held for a custom, that the new chosen Popes leave their old
names, whereby they were called before, and take the name of some of their
predecessors. Within few days after the death of the Pope, in the same month
JEWS the Emperor of Rome and King of France fell sick and died; so as within
the space of four days died three the most famous heads of the world, viz.
two Emperors, MICHAEL, and JEWS, and Pope GREGORY. JEWS before he died,
made his youngest and well-beloued son CHARLES, King, and Lord of Austria. And
LOTHARY, who was Emperor Elect, remained his heir general of all the rest,
excepting Bauaria, whereof his other son JEWS was King. And so ended the
life and Empire of LVDOVICVS PIUS, in the year of our Lord, eight hundred and
forty, when he had reigned full twenty six years, and had lived sixty four
years; SERGIVS The death of the emperor Jews.
SVVINESNOVT being then Pope in Rome, and THEOPHILYS son of MICHAEL, reigning
Emperor in Constantinople.

THE LIFE OF LOTHARIVS, FIRST OF THAT NAME, AND THREESCORE AND EIGHTEENTH ROMAN
EMPEROR; AND OF THEOPHILUS, Emperor in Constantinople.
AFter the death of LVDOVICVS PIUS, the Western Empire descended to his eldest
son LOTHARIVS: and jointly therewith his father left unto him those kingdoms,
Kingdoms left to Lotharius.
which he and his father CHARLES the Great, possessed in France, in Germany,
and in Italy, excepting those Provinces which were given to his brothers JEWS
and CHARLES, which were Bauiere and Austria, with some others thereto
adjoining. As soon as the father was dead, these two sons, discontent with
their portions, determined to take Arms against their elder brother LOTHARIVS;
and LOTHARIVS in like manner pretending all to be his, for that he was the
first borne, meant therefore to depose them: whereupon there presently began
between them a very cruel war, either party being aided by sundry Dukes
and great personages. Some writers affirm, that these two brethren LOTHARIVS
and JEWS, who were sons of one mother, held together in this war against
CHARLES, who was the Emperors son by his second wife. But there is no reason
why it should be so: for it seems not likely, that CHARLES alone could have
power sufficient to make head against the other two; and also for that
LOTHARIVS sought to be Lord of the whole, allowing neither the one nor the
other. And it afterward plainly appeared, that LOTHARIVS in the peace which
they made, entered not as a partaker, but as absolute and alone* where I follow
the most common and most likely opinion, which is, the LOTHARIVS warned against
the other two. JEWS and CHARLES came out of Wars between Lotharius and his
br^.
Germany, with many valiant men, against the Emperor LOTHARIVS; who in like
manner out of France, Germany and Italy, levied the greatest and best Army that
of long time had been see^ so as all Authors which write thereof affirm, that,
since the wars between ECIVS and ATTILA, there had not been drawn together
in Europe she like number of good men of war. The hatred and envy between
these brethren was so great, that they could not avoid a battle, which was
fought near to a little Town called Fontano: and as the Captains and soldiers
of either party were valiant and expert in Arms, the Fight was the more cruel,
and one of the most bloody that has been seen, and wherein most men were
slain, and most blood spilt; and it lasted a great part of the day; the victory
ever showing it self doubtful, inclining sometimes to one side, and sometimes
to the other, until that toward the evening, the Emperor LOTHARIVS his
forces, being unable to endure the fury of their adversaries, began to faint:
wherewith, courage increasing of the one side, and failing on the other,
LOTHARIVS and his people were driven to flee, and JEWS and CHARLES remained
with the victory.

All those which write of this conflict, affirm, that therein were slain the
greatest part of all the Nobility and flower of the French Nation; and that in
number more men died, than in any other that in France has happened ever since
the battle which was fought between ECIVS and The Nobility of France slain in
a battle.
ATTILA, King of the Hunnes, in the fields of Catalonia; as before we have
related. LOTHARIVS escaped thence by flight to the City of Aken; and houlding
himself to be there in no safety, he by sundry ways came to Viene in France,
where he again gathered head, and levied new forces out of Italy and other
parts; and his brethren resolved to pursue him. And notwithstanding that from
the Pope came the Archbishop of Rauenna, and many other Prelates voluntarily,
to treat of peace between them, yet it auailed not: but LOTHARIVS would the
second time try the fortune of the wars, and his brothers sought no less; so
as they fought: and he was again overthrown (and the Archbishop of Rauenna
also with him, who came as an Ambassador of peace, and was that day in LOTHARY
his Army with three hundred horse, which he brought with him out of Italy) and,
in despite of himself, was constrained to slay, the greatest part of his people
being first slain. Lotharius overthrown the second time.


After these cruel battles between these brethren (which, as it is to be
believed, GOD permitted for a punishment, for the contumacie and disobedience
which they showed toward their father) and after they had much diminished their
forces, they gave care to a peace; and the said Archbishop of Rauenna, and many
other Prelates, brought them to an agreement: wherein the Emperor (as a man
forced and ouercomn) lost much. The conditions were, that the kingdoms should
be divided between them: which division so much decayed the power of France,
that it never after recovered that greatness which until then it held; the
accord was made in this manner. That JEWS should be Lord and King of all that
part of the Kingdoms and Provinces The division of the kingdom of France
between Lotharius and his brethren.
which lie over the Rhine, in the East side of France, containing all Germany;
to weet, Hungary, Bohemia, Morauia, Frisia, Bauaria, Saxony, Sueuia, and all
the rest, and should be called King of Germany: And that CHARLES, the youngest
brother, should be called King of France, and should be sole Lord thereof,
excepting Gal^ia Narbonensis, now called Prouence: and that those Lands which
lie between the Rhine and the Maze (which ever since that time are called
Lotharingia or Lorrain, after LOTHARIVS) and part of Burgundy, should be
subject to the Emperor LOTHARIVS, together with Lombardy, and all that part of
Italy which was in his subjection, with the title and dignity of Emperor.

This peace being made with LOTHARIVS against his will; he, reinforcing his
Troops, took his way toward Italy, and so to Rome: where, after some
jealousies between them, Pope SERGIVS crowned him Emperor; and his Son was
chosen his Successor. Yet some Writers say, that only his Son was crowned:
but this in my opinion seems to be most likely. But Lotharius crowned Emperor
by Pope Sergius.
let us leave both the Father and the Son (for, in truth LOTHARY was of small
power after that he was ouercomn, and yet lived in greater peace than those
times permitted) and we will say something of the Emperor of Constantinople,
THEOPHILUS, and of the losses which ensued in Christendom by reason of the
wars between these three brethren.

The Greek Emperor THEOPHILUS dissented not from his Predecessors in points of
Religion; and, concerning his government, he took very good order, and
maintained himself well in his estate; yet somewhat noted of cruelty. In the
East he had great and cruel wars with the Sarazins, who made incursions into
his Dominions in Asia the less: in which war two Captains did him especial
service: the one was called MANVEL, and the other PHEEVS; the Emperor himself
in person went to this war, wherein the victories were variable, sometimes of
his side, and sometimes against him. Being in this manner busied, and our
Emperor and the house of France (which then was the only defense and refuge of
all Christendom) being weakened and diminished, by reason of the said watres,
and dissension which happened; the Moors of Africa with a great Navy came into
Italy, and into Sicilia, and landing in many places, took sundry Towns.
Lastly, a mighty King of Africa, called SAEBA, with a great sleete of ships
and Galleys entered Italy: And knowing that the Coast near to Rome was well
Garrisoned and fortified, he assailed Otranto; and that place being taken and
sacked, he did the like by other Towns on the same Coast: and returning from
thence, he sailed into the Adriatique Sea, now called the Gulf of Venice, and
took and spoiled many places.

The Emperor of Gracia THEOPHILUS seeking to prevent this danger, sent a good
Captain called THEODOSE, with a great fleet, to which the Venetians joined
theirs, which they had already rigged for the same purpose, (containing
threescore galleys): This Infidel king of the Moors was nothing terrified to
come to blows with THEODOSIUS, but they fought a most cruel battle, wherein
the Christians were overthrown, and the Venetian fleet fell into the hands of
their enemies. But THEODOSIUS escaped by flight. The Mahometists became so
haughty by reason of this victory: and it caused so great fear in Italy, that
if God had not sent relief, the Infidels in short space might have made
themselves Lords thereof: for presently after this overthrow, they assaulted
Ancona, took it, and burnt it, with sundry other Towns upon that Coast. And
their power was then so great, that neither the Emperor LOTHARIVS, nor the
Pope, were able to make head against them, but contented themselves to keep
and defend what they had in possession: Neither was the Emperors brother
CHARLES King of France, able to set any fleet to Sea, or yield any relief:
for the Normanes North-men.
(a most fierce Nation) made wars upon him, robbing and harrying his
Countries, with whom he fought many battles.

Of these Normanes I find no ancient Authors that make any mention; whereby I
conjecture that it was then some new name of the people and Inhabitants of
those Countries which rose in that manner: yet SABELLICVS, and NAVCLERVS, and
some others affirm, that they came from Denmark. When all other succors
failed, it pleased God to send a remedy: forthere happened so great a Tempest
upon the Sea, that the greatest part of King SAEBAS fleet A fleet of the
Infi^els cast away in a tempest
was sunk and cast away: and those which escaped, returned into Africa, torn,
and sore weather-beaten: and so Italy for that time was relieved, and restored
to liberty: but yet afterward they again infested it.

At this time died Pope SERGIVS, having been Pope little more then three
years, and then succeeded LEO the fourth, in whose time PLATINA affirms this
shipwreck of the Moors Navy to have happened: but most say as I have written.
In the beginning of Pope LEO his papacy, THEOPHILUS Emperor of the Greeks
died in Constantinople: who before his death feeling himself deadly sick, and
that he could not escape, and considering also that he should leave his son
MICHAEL very young; and that THEODOSIUS the Captain before named, was rich and
very mighty, he resolved with himself, first to dispatch him out of the world,
to the end that he should not usurp the Empire when he was dead: which was a
very good resolution, and sign of a good Christian in a man so near his end.
First, he caused The death of the Emperor Theophilus and his good resolution.
Michael succeeded his father in the Empire.
him to be detained in his Palace: and feeling his sickness so to increase
upon him that he could not live, he made his head to be stricken off, and within
few hours after died. After his death, his son. MICHAEL was made Emperor,
and for as much as he was very young, his Mother THEODORA the Empress (as
heretofore did YRENE Mother of CONSTANTINE) took upon her the government, and
ruled the Empire for her Son MICHAEL, and not ill, as it is written: but as
he increased in years, so there grew in him a desire to govern alone, and his
Mother became more ambitious: in such manner, that the young man setting all
respect apart, compelled his Mother to go into a cloister, and so he remained
sole absolute Lord.

Within a little while after, the Emperor LOTHARIVS remaining in Lorraine, and
Pope LEO in Renie; the Infidels grown proud by reason of their late victories;
and coveting the The Moors landed in Ostia with intent to have taken Rome.
wealth of Italy, repaired up the remainder of their fleet, and building
other vessels, returned to make a conquest thereof, with greater power and
resolution then at the first: And after some spoils done in some other places
they sailed directly to the port of Ostia, where setting their Army on Land,
they marched toward Rome, with an intent to have taken it, and afterward all
the Country: which as they hoped, so the poor Inhabitants feared. But it
pleased God they were repulsed, and deceived in their expectation.
Nevertheless, they came and besieged Rome, and gave a very great assault unto
it: but it was so well provided and furnished, and those which were therein did
so valiantly defend the same, that losing all hope to get it, and understanding
that succors were coming; robbing and burning the Vaticane with great
cruelty, they raised their fiege: first burning and profaning Saint PETER'S
Church which was there, the Moors burnt the Vaticane and Saint Peter's Church in
Rome
and where it stands at this day. And for as much as the Moors raised their
siege from before Rome without taking it, the French writers attribute the
honor thereof to CHARLES king of France, who (they say) came to relieve it, and
for fear of whom the Moors departed; and leaving their attempt against it,
setting their Army in order, they took their way toward Naples, burning and
spoiling all as they went.

In the mean while, Pope LEO sallying forth of Rome; with the aid of the
Emperor LOTHARY, and his Son, whom in his life time he had made his
companion in the Empire and in the kingdom of Italy, who sent him great
supplies; he raised a sufficient Army, wherewith he went to seek his enemies,
which laden with great riches and spoils, were come near to the port of Ostia;
where the Pope considering how mighty they were, if they should remain in Ita^e
(as they gave out they would) and how much the Country were ruinated, if they
should embarke themselves with their prisoners and riches, and the Emperor
staying longer then they would he should have done, he resolved to use the
sword: and encouraging his soldiers, he charged his enemies, and fought with
them a sharp and bloody battle, wherein many were slain of either party.
But in the end it pleased God that the Christians had the victory: and a great
slaughter was made of their enemies, and a great number of Captives were
released, and A battle fought between Pope Leo and the Infidels.
all that they had taken, recovered, and the greatest part of those which fled,
were overtaken and carried to Rome in great triumph.

Those which remained in the harbor at Ostia, understanding of this overthrow,
hoising their sails, with all the haste they could, returned into their
Country: And so was Rome freed from the great calamity and miserable
servitude which it feared. Great was the joy which The victory of Pope Leo.
was conceived through all Christendom for this victory, and the Pope was
highly extolled, who speedily returned to Rome: where with the consent of the
Citizens he resolved to compass in with a wall, all those Suburbs called
Vaticane, wherein are Saint PETER'S Church, and the Popes Palace, to he end they
should no more endure the like, as they now twice had suffered. To the
performance whereof, the Emperor LOTHARIVS and his brethren JEWS king of
Germany, and CHARLES the Bauld, King of France, sent much of their Treasure:
and the work began with such expedition, that notwithstanding it was very
great, and the walls full of Turrets: yet in the space of five years it was
perfected and fully ended: and so that part was made a City, and called
Ciuitas Leonina, after the name of Pope LEO.

The year following the Emperor LOTHARY went to Rome, to see and speak with
the Pope, for that he was falsely informed that he purposed to have reduced the
right title of Emperor to Constantinople, whereof the Pope gave him full
satisfaction: and so contented, the Emperor returned into his Country. And
seeing himself now old, and that his Empire had ever been unfortunate, as well
for that he was overthrown and dispossessed by his brethren, as The Emperou^
Lotharius divided his Empire between his three Sons.
for other accidents in Italy, imputing it to his sins, especially for the
disobedience and little regard which he had showed to his Father; he resolved
to put himself into a religious house, and to leave his Empire to his Sons;
and putting it in execution, he made a division thereof in this manner: to his
eldest Son JEWS, he gave that which he held in Italy, and to the second,
whose name was LOTHARIVS, he gave the Province of Lorraine, and other Lands,
which in the division were allotted to him in France, and in Germany, about the
river of Rhine; and to CHARLES his third Son, he gave that part of France,
which is called Gallia Narbonensis, and now Prouence and Languedo^, which fell
to his share in the peace which he made with his brethren when he was by them
overthrown.

In these estates as well as in others were afterward great alterations, which
I have no time to relate: this done, he became a Monk in the fifteenth year
of his reign, in the year of our The Emperor Lotharius renounced the empire
and became a Monk. Pope Ioane.
Lord, eight hundred fifty and six, and so he lived, and within a while died,
MICHAEL continuing yet Emperor of Constantinople. And shortly after died Pope
LEO the fourth, whom succeeded JOHN an English woman, as Historians affirm;
who disguising her self in apparel; and changing her name, being excellently
well learned, was chosen Pope, and having two years lived in the Papal
dignity, died suddenly in Partu; and her succeeded BENEDICT the third.

THE LIFE OF JEWS THE SECOND OF THAT NAME, AND THREESCORE AND NINETEENTH
Roman Emperor.
WE have already said, that the Emperor LOTHARIVS, voluntarily and of his own
free will, imparted to his eldest son JEWS the name and dignity of Roman
Emperor; of whose life, and for some time after, Historians have written very
little; and in that little is a great confusion amongst them: which has put me
to much trouble, for that I have been so careful and have used all diligence
to write the truth. The difficulty is, in that this JEWS and his Uncle king
of Germany were both of one name, by reason whereof Authors attribute the acts
and doings of the one, to the other, being deceived therein and which is worst
of all, there are some which of the reign of this Emperor JEWS write
nothing at all, of which BLONDVS is one, notwithstanding that in all the rest
he has showed great diligence, ending with his father* so as presently after
LOTHARIVS, they place CHARLES the Ba^ld, king of France, whereas to the
contrary they should first write the life and reign of this his son JEWS*
But I will follow the most approved Authors, and (in the best manner I shall be
able) will bring the truth to light, and will rather choose to say but little,
and that certain, then to please with many forged accidents. In the beginning
of the reign of this JEWS there happened a very prodigious thing; which was,
that in the City of Brescia in Lombardy for three days it rained blood, so
fresh and so perfect, as if it had been of a Bull, or of some other beast
lately It rayned blood in Bresc^a in the time of the Emperor Jews the Second.
killed. First of all, this Emperor was very zealous and devout in Religion;
much affected to the Romish Church, and the ministers thereof (for he knew no
other) and was very pitiful, mild, sincere, unspotted, of a good condition,
and of his word and promise very just. After the decease of Pope BENEDICT,
NICHOLAS the first being chosen, the Emperor went to Rome, to confirm his
election; where the Pope and he conuersed together very lovingly. It afterward
followed that a great fleet of the Moors of Africa came into Italy: but the
Emperor gathered together so good forces against them, that (with small hurt
done) they were repulsed: for which his care and diligence he was highly
extolled. And notwithstanding that this Prince was so well inclined yet*
(...)Duke of Beneuent rebelled, with Capua, and some other Cities; and denying
to be subject unto him, held for the Emperor of Constantinople. And whereas
Italy in times past had been subject to those Emperors, they had now lost it,
as being unable to defend the same; yet Pulia and Calabria were of long time
after vndertheir government. Against this Duke, the Emperor JEWS levied an
Army, and in person went to suppress the rebellion: But ADVLGI^VS being
unable to defend himself against him, sent to make his excuse; alleging, that
what was done, was against his will, and that he had purposed to come to his
service and did so; and JEWS received and pardoned h^: and then went to such
places as rebelled* which he easily took, excepting Capua, which stood upon
defense; but in the end craving pardon, they yielded. From thence he went to
Beneuent, where ADVLGIFVS received and lodged him, in outward show, as his
sovereign Lord, and whom he loved; by whose persuasion and counsel (for he
seemed to speak from a loyal heart) the Emperor discharged his Army, and
retained few more then the officers of his house: but within few days after,
ADVLGIPVS (as a disloyal traitor) sought to put in execution what he had
projected: and getting together certain Armed men, he suddenly rusht into the
Emperors lodging with intent to have slain him; and had done so, but that
being perceived, the Emperor and those few which were with him, so valiantly
defended themselves, that they gat out of Beneuent, and went to Rome; from
whence by the Popes counsel, he sent such an Army, that the Traitor was
constrained to forsake the Country, and to fly into Sardinia: and so JEWS
remained in peace, Emperor in Italy.

In the mean season, whilst he was thus busied in Italy; MICHAEL reigned in
Constantinople, in Graecia, and in part of Asia, who deposed his mother from
the government: but he proved careless and vicious, and applied himself only
to feasting, sports on horseback, and other pastimes, his estate and house
being ruled by favorites: and in the wars which he made in Asia against the
Infidels, he was twice shamefully overthrown; yet PETRONAS a Captain of his
obtained a noble victory. In the end, one of his great favorites, called
BASILIVS Basiliu^ ^lew Michael, and made himself Emperor of the East.
(a man of base lineage and condition, whom he had advanced to great power and
dignity) killed him by treason, and gat the Empire to himself; for already
in MICHAELS days he was made CAESAR. This happened in the 13 year of his
reign, and in the year of our Lord, eight hundred seventy and six. Yet the
Empire of MICHAEL was fortunate in one thing, which was, that the King of
Bulgaria, and many other people which believed not in JESUS CHRIST (at the
least in such sort as they ought to have believed) in his time were wholly
converted.

In these days also France escaped not free from wars, between CHARLES the
Bauld, uncle to this our Emperor JEWS, and the Normanes; a most fierce
nation: neither was The Normaus invade France
JEWS the King of Germany without wars against other nations, which I am
not bound to relate; neither such as happened in other Kingdoms, but only such as
are for our purpose. I say then, that within certain years, LOTHARIVS King of
Lorraine, brother to the Emperor died; and his Uncle CHARLES King of France,
would have made seizure on Lorraine, and all The death of Lo^harius King of
Lorraine.
the other lands which he held; but the Emperor opposed himself, and used so
good means, that he took possession of all, as heir to his father: whereupon
there arose great wars and controversy between them, which lasted above five
years. Soon after this, the Emperor being in Milan, was taken with an
infirmity, whereof he died: who in my opinion (so far as I can gather out of
Histories, left no sons to succeed him: wherefore those which say that
CHARLES and JEWS were his sons, are deceived; for they were the sons of his
Uncle JEWS, King of Germany and Bauaria: the cause of which error was, for
that these two Princes were both of one name; but he that diligently reads
the Histories, shall find that which I say to be true, and the rest false. I
do not produce reasons and conjectures to verify my opinion, which are to no
other purpose, but to weary the Reader, and make the History more obscure:
presuppose that I say the truth, and then all is clear. And to conclude with
JEWS, of whom I have said little, and that confusedly (for that I could not
clearly discover any more) The death of the Emperor Jews.
I say that he died in the year of our Lord 878, when he had reigned 21 years;
yet some say but 19, at which time JOHN was Pope of Rome, and in Constantinople
BASILIVS was Emperor, who although he entered into the Empire as a Tyrant, yet
he was no evil prince.

THE LIFE OF CHARLES THE SECOND SVRNAMED THE BAVLD, AND FOVRESCORE ROMAN
EMEMPEROVR; AND OF BASILIVS, Emperor of Constantinople.
THE death of the Emperor JEWS was soon known and published to the world,
as usually is the death of such Kings and Princes as he was: but his Uncles
CHARRES the Bauld, king of France, and JEWS king of Germany, who were his
fathers brethren, had soonest intelligence of which were sons to the Emperor
LVDOVICVS PIUS, the first of that name: and although they were now old and
vnwieldie (for they had been Kings above thirty years) yet each of them
pretended to be Emperor. CHARLES for that he was King of France seemed to have
the better title, for it was transferred thither in the person of his
grandfather: and JEWS for that he was his elder brother, conceived as much.
But CHARLES used greater expedition, and made better provision, by reason of
the neerenesse of France to Italy, being thereto aided by his own condition;
for he was naturally proud and ambitious: so that with greater celerity then
any man would have thought, he had levied a great Army, and passing the Alps
came into Italy, and took his way directly for Rome; but he sent his Son
JEWS another way, to seize upon that which the Emperor JEWS had taken in
France, by the death of his brother, which was Austrasia, now called Lorraine.
CHARLES being come to Rome, where he had already by messages and letters (and
as some say by money and bribes) solicited, and gotten the good will of the
Romans, and of Pope JOHN the eight, or ninth, was presently Crowned by him,
and held for Emperor, and in the mean time, his brother JEWS in Germany
failed not to leuy forces to come against him: with a resolution to deprive him
of the Empire, and of his life also if he could. But CHARLES having settled the
affairs of Italy in very good order (ingreat choler against his brother)
returned into France, against whom he raised his whole power. They beginning to
march, the one against the other, JEWS was arrested by death, at Franckford;
leaving his Dominions, First, divided between his 3 sons, which were very
valiant men, to wit, JEWS, CARLOMAN, and CHARLES, of which three names, the
offspring of CHARLES the great made great account: which causes a great
confusion and obscurity in the History, if the Reader be not very attentive.
The division was made in this manner by the mutual consent of the three
brethren; to JEWS was given Saxony, Turingia, Friseland, and the Provinces
within them contained, and that he should be called King of Ostrofrancia, or
East France. To CARLOMAN, was allotted Bauaria, Austria, Carinthia, Slauonia,
Bohemia, and Morauia, with The division of King Jews his Dominion, between
his sons.
the title of King of Bauaria. To CHARLES befell Sueuia, Franconia, and all the
rest of Germany, and some Cities in Lorraine, which had been under his Uncle
LOTHARIVS, and he (as his Father had been) was called King of Germany. Their
Uncle CHARLES the Bauld, Emperor and King of France, being hereof advertised,
making less account of the Sons, then he had done of the Father, being more
proud and ambitious, then hardy and valiant, entered Germany with fifty thousand
men, and went as far as Coleyn; near whereunto his nephew JEWS, the new
King of East France, stayed for him, with the greatest part of his Fathers
Army, assisted by his brothers CARLOMAN, and CHARLES, and other great Dukes and
Princes of Germany, first seeking peace: but seeing that the Emperor would not
grant the same, he joined in battle with him, which was fought of either side
very obstinately. And the Emperor seeing his enemies fight with such
resolution, fled from the battle, and his nephew JEWS remained with the
victory. In this battle and pursuit, was made great slaughter of the French
Nobility: And so the Emperor returned into his Country, with less power, and
more dishonor, where he reposed himself for a season: his nephews taking no
care further to trouble him.

After this, it happened that one BALDVVIN, then Governor or keeper of that
Country, which now is called the Earldom of Flanders, (and was lately so
populous and so well inhabited, Baldwin Earl of Flanders, fell in love with
the daughter of Charles the Bauld.
and then for the most part was nothing but wood and Forest, with some few
little villages) fell in love with one of the Emperors daughters; and her
father being absent in the wars, he found means to convey her out of the
Palace, and so hid himself with her in those woods: against whom the Emperor
meaning to have proceeded with all rigor, at the entreaty of many religious
persons and of estate, was persuaded to marry him to her; and doing so, gave
him that country, with the title of Earl of Flanders: and this BALDVVIN
proved to be so excellent a man, and used such industry, that he replenished
the Country with Inhabitants, which The Original of the Earledom of Flanders.
so manured the Land, that within few years it did abound with people and all
other things necessary; And his Son ARNVLPHVS, and his successors, using the
like diligence, it came to be one of the most flourishing countries of the
world; of such power is diligence and human industry: this was the beginning of
that estate.

The Emperor CHARLES being thus in his Kingdom of France, in the mean time
while that he warred with his nephews, the Moors of Africa, who had a taste
of the wealth of Italy, came with a great Army, and made great spoils in the
Marches of Capua, and besieged that City: Whereupon Pope JOHN sent to request
the Emperor, to come The Moors came into Italy and besieged the City of
Capua.
to protect the Lands of the Church, which he performed with the greatest
speed he could make, for he was very politic, and cunning in the leuying of
men of war; but before his going into Italy, (to satisfy his wives humor)
he made her brother BOSON, who was also his near kinseman, King of Prouence.
Coming to Rome, the Infidels leaving that coast, took another way, which was
into Sicilia, which yet was under the Empire of Constantinople, whereof
BASILIVS was Emperor, of whom we will presently make mention.

When JEWS, CHARLES, and CARLOMAN, knew their Uncle was in Italy, they
united their forces, with a resolution to go against him, in revenge of former
injuries. Whereof as soon as the Emperor had intelligence, he departed from
Rome with his forces, to make head against them: But it pleased God to save him
that labor; which was, that coming to Mantoa with his Army, being now old
and decrepit, an infirmity took him, whereof he feared not that he should have
died. But a Jew called ZEDECHIAS (which The death of the Emperor Charles the
2. poisoned by his Physician which was a Jew.
was his Physician) poisoned him, and so he presently died: and his affairs
remained confused, and out of order; leaving for his heir in his kingdoms,
his Son called LVDOVICVS BALBVS, and other three which he had, who also had
ill success: which appertains not to my History. They called this his son
BALBVS, for that so in Latin they call him which stuttereth, and cannot
pronounce certain letters, but have that defect in their speech. At Ludouicus
Balbus, and why so called.
this time in the Empire of Constantinople, reigned BASILIVS before named, who
(as I have said) proved no ill Governor; for he released many of the tributes
and other exactions, which his predecessors had formerly imposed upon the
people: and he defended the Empire with great valor and much discretion,
although that in some things he had ill success. First, against certain
great troops of Infidels, which came from Alexandria in Egypt, into the I Will of
Candia, and had taken many places there, he rigged a Navy, and sailed thither
in person, where he fought, and was overcome, to the great damage of the
Christians: and (by great hap) escaping he returned by flight to
Constantinople, but not daunted, neither discouraged, and prepared a new
fleet: and to try his fortune with a new Captain, he sent therewith his wives
Father, whose name was CHRISTOPHER, a man very valiant, and of great
experience; who had so good hap, that obtaining the victory, he cleared that
Island. After this, he waged other wars in Asia, by his Captains, against
the Infidels, Turks and Persians: wherein for the most part he had good
success; and lastly, against the Africanes, which for fear of CHARLES the
Bauld (as was above said) leaving Italy, went into Slauonia, or Dalmatia, and
had taken some Towns of BASILIVS his Empire, he sent thither his Army and
Navy; and with the aid of the Venetians, drove them out of those Countries,
and recovered what they had taken. And so he reigned with greater honor, and
to the better liking and contentment of his Subjects, then many of his
Predecessors. At which time the Emperor CHARLES the Bauld died in Mantoa, when
he had reigned little more then two years, JOHN the ninth being then Pope.
Some Authors The death of Charles the ^uld.
say that he reigned a longer time; but the truth is as I have set down.

THE LIFE OF JEWS THE THIRD, SVRNAMED BALBVS, AND FOVRESCORE AND ONE ROMAN
EMPEROR; TOGETHER WITH the life of BASILIVS Emperor of CONSTANTINOPLE.
IF in the time of CHARLES the Bauld there were wars and troubles for the
Empire; there were no less after his decease, as the Reader may well observe
by the process of this history; wherein, although it seem that I use
brevity, for that I waste less paper in one then in another, yet is it not
so; for I seek (as much as I may) to make an even division of this book
between the Emperors, whose lives I write. But forasmuch as these Princes of
whom I do now treat, lived but a short time in the Empire, (to observe an
equality, and due proportion, as far as possibly may be) I hold it reason,
that the memory of them be brief, according to the time of their reign, and
to the end that we may have space to write of matters nearer to our time. The
Emperor CHARLES being deceased in Mantoa, as is aforesaid, his nephew CHARLES
King of Germany, with his brethren, which already had entered Italy against him,
stayed with their Army: for the enemy being dead, the war was ended. His
Son JEWS, who lived in France being advertised of the death of his Father,
and how that his Cousins had laid down their arms: first he endeavored to
settle himself in his Fathers Kingdom, and he also sent to entreat Pope JOHN
to aid him and to stand his friend in attaining to the Imperial dignity.

In the first he found some difficulty, being contradicted by his mother in
law the Empress, who was counseled and assisted by her brother BOSON king of
Prouence: but the matter was carried so cunningly, that within few days he was
held and obeyed for King. Now concerning the Empire, he found great
difficulty; for CHARLES surnamed the Fat, being king of Germany, besides that
he already had some Towns in Italy, had also the good will of many of Jews
made king of France.
the principal men in Rome; so as notwithstanding that Pope JOHN would have
had JEWS king of France to have been chosen Emperor, yet he could not
effect it: For, they not only denied to accept him, but were so audacious as to
lay hands upon the Pope, to the end that The Pope apprehended.
he should not do it. But he stayed not long in prison, for some of his
servants, either by force or policy, released him, and he in great haste went
into France, where he was honorably entertained by the King. Being there (of
his own authority) he entitled JEWS Emperor; and giving him the Imperial
ensigns, crowned him with great solemnity: and after this, remained one year
in France; where he called a Council, and made certain orders concerning the
state of the Church, and created a Bishop for the County of Flanders, where
there never had been any before, being but lately inhabited. In which time the
wars and troubles between The first Bishop of Flanders.
the new Emperor, and his cousin germane CHARLES King of Germany ceased not; who
was also so called by the will of the Romans, who were the occasion of a worse
inconvenience: for the Moors of Africa (seeing Italy abandoned by the Pope,
and that the defense came The Moors invade Italy.
slow and slenderly) prepared a great Navy, and did much harm there: whereof
Pope JOHN being advertised, with the aid of CHARLES the Fat, King of Germany,
who was also called Emperor, came into Italy; at whose coming the Infidels
retired, and the country was freed from the great danger wherein it was: The
Pope seeing how much Rome and all Italy had been better relieved by CHARLES,
then by JEWS, and how much CHARLES was more favored by the principal Barons
in Italy; and to the end to come to agreement with the said Barons, altring his
mind, he approved and confirmed the nomination and election made of CHARLES
King of Germany who for his corpulence was surnamed the Fat; and so he anointed
and crowned him Emperor; disannulling the coronation of LVDOVICVS BALBVS King
of France; for which cause it was thought that great wars and troubles would
have ensued: but by the intercession of certain great personages, a peace was
concluded between the two Emperors in this manner: That they both should hold
the name and title of Emperors, and that the country of Lorraine (about which
was wont to be great contention) should be equally divided between them, and
that for the Empire no war should be made; but that in all parts peace should
be entertained between the lands and subjects of the one and of the other
party; The Empire divided.
and that in Italy (until that an equal partition were made) each of them
should hold such lands and towns as he then had in possession: and if that the
Infidels invaded the dominion of either of them, the other was bound to aid
him with his forces.

This peace being concluded (although doubtful and fained) the Emperor JEWS
died in France, whereof he was King, having reigned not fully two years; in
all which time heeneuer The death of the Emperor I odouicus Balbus king of
France.
came to Rome, neither into Italy. But for as much as Pope JOHN crowned him in
France, and afterward in Rome disannulled his election and coronation, some
Historiographers leave him out of the catalogue of Emperors. He left when he
died two bastard sons behind him, the one called CARLOMAN, and the other
JEWS, and his wife great with a son, whereof she was afterward delivered;
which son being posthumus (for so do they call him which is born after his
fathers decease) he left for his heir of the kingdoms of France; wherein grew
great discord, wars and misery about the government and the kingdom; and in
the one and other were great alterations and changes, too long to be related:
for the bastard sons pretended title and right to the Crown, and so did
BOSON King of Prouence. Others would have the child (wherewith the Emperesse
was great at the death of the Emperor, who was afterward called CHARLES the
Simple) to be King. The governors also took upon them the name of Kings:
sometimes one was a King, and sometime another, and each of them made himself
Charles the simple posthumus.
Lord of what he could get. In these troubles the kingdom endured great
calamity. This Emperor JEWS died in the year of our Lord, eight hundred and
fourscore, according to the computation which I hold for most certain.

THE LIFE OF CHARLES THE THIRD, SVRNAMED THE FAT, AND FOVRESCORE AND SECOND
ROMAN EMPEROVR; AND OF BASILIVS and LEO, at that time Emperors of
Constantinople.
PResently upon the decease of JEWS the Emperor and King of France, the king
of Germany, CHARLES the Fat, without any contradiction enjoyed the Empire: for
in the others life time he had in a manner robbed him of that Majesty, which
(as the Reader may well consider) was at that time but only in name; for the
authority of CHARLES the Great and his successors, consisted more in letters,
and in the Kingdoms which they won and possessed (which were the Dominions
of Germany and Italy) then in any part of the Empire, whereof there remained
Italy only, and therein the Pope held the greatest part; and the Greek
Empire had ever some share: And that likewise which the Emperors held in
Italy, was recovered by the said CHARLES, and by his father; yet the name of
Emperor was in the highest degree desired, and the authority and Majesty
thereof was very great, and so continues until this day. CHARLES the Fat
remaining then sole Emperor in peace, as his virtues deserved, leaving Italy in
good order, went into Germany, to take possession of his brother JEWS his
Kingdoms; who also at that time died without heirs, whose dominion contained
Friseland, Saxony, Lorraine, and other provinces; and he had so good hap, that
within short space after, his other brother died also without sons or issue:
which provinces were afterward divided into sundry houses and states (in
process of time) by the gifts of the Emperors, and through sundry other
accidents, as it plainly appears. I say then that he remained Lord of all
Germany, and King of Italy.

The next year after this, died BASILIVS Emperor of Constantinople of a very
extraordinary Basilius Emperor of Constantinople, slain by a Stagge, and his
son Leo, succeeded him in the Empire.
death: for riding on hunting (as his custom was) he was slain by a Stagge.
BASILIVS in his life time had chosen and nominated his eldest son LEO for
CAESAR, after the death of his other eldest son CONSTANTINE: wherefore when
as the father was dead, his son LEO was crowned and obeyed for Emperor; and
was called the Philosopher, for that he was much inclined to learning: BASILIVS
left also another son, called ALEXANDER. The Emperor CHARLES having good
success in his affairs; and knowing what wars and factions were in France;
under color to war against the Normans which harried the Country, he sought
(as many others did, and had done) to make himself King thereof. Leuying then
a mighty Army of Germans and Italians, he entered France, and went to the City
of Paris, which the Normans held besieged: and, having taken all the Country,
and put the Normans to rout, he was called King of France; the young King
CHARLES the Simple, or BONOSVS King of Prouence, having no sufficient power to
make head against him.

In this war were many great fights; which, because the Authors handle the
same so confusedly, I pass over in silence. And the Emperors party became so
mighty, that he not only enjoyed the title and name of King, but the Kingdom
it self also: and to the end, that he might the better draw the Normans to his
service, he treated with them (after he had overthrown them) of peace, and
gave their King to wife a kinswoman of his, which was a Dukes daughter; and
assigned to him that part of France which lies beyond the river Sein,
bordering upon the English Sea, which after them is at this day called
Normandy, and is a very good Country and The coming of the Normans into
Normandy.
well inhabited. Yet some Historians say, that the Emperor CHARLES did not
this, but that CHARLES the Simple afterward did it when he came to be King
of France; who at that time was but an Infant, and under the government of
EVDON: but in my opinion that was too long a time, for they afterward had
wars with him. But howsoever it was, the Emperor CHARLES the Fat was Lord of
the greatest and best part of France, and was called king thereof, being before
that time King of Germany, and Emperor of Italy: and, setting all things there
in good order, he retired himself into Germany; where being arrived, as the
state of his dominion and Empire was grounded upon but weak foundations, so it
suddenly fell from the height of that Throne. Some allege the cause thereof to
be, for that he became foolish, proud, and unfit to govern: others say, that a
disease took him which bereaved him of his senses; which comes all to one in
effect.

To conclude, the Princes, Dukes and Gouerners of the Provinces of Germany and
France, seeing his great insufficiency and unaptness to govern, resolved to
deprive him of his Empire and Charles the Fat deposed from the Empire, and
Arnolph chosen in his place.
Kingdoms: and for as much as he had never a son (being, as they write of
him, unapt by nature for generation) by common consent they nominated and chose
a great and valiant Personage, called ARNOLPH, who was by CHARLES advanced to
the Duchies of Bauaria and Carinthia, and (as some write) was but of mean
parentage, and no way allied to CHARLES: and so they account CHARLES the Fat to
be the last of the lineage and blood of CHARLES the Great. But after some, which
is the most common opinion, ARNOLPH was nephew to CHARLES the Fat, bastard or
natural son to CARLOMAN King of Bauiere; which seems most likely to be
true, seeing that he without any gainsaying attained both to the Kingdom and
Empire, and was not only entitled Emperor, but also King of Germany: but in
France, after ARNOPH'S first fury, they made OTHO or EVD^S (who was CHARLES the
Simples Tutor) King of France; whom CHARLES the Simple afterward succeeded.
After this, many great matters ensued, which appertain not to my History. And
so CHARLES the Fat lost both his Empire and understanding, when he had reigned
nine years, in the year of our Lord eight hundred fourscore and nine; and lived
afterward about one year, in great penury and misery.

It is written, that this poor Prince found himself at one Instant deprived of
all means, and forsaken of all the world, degraded both of Realm and Empire;
having so ill provided for his affairs in the time of prosperity, that he found
himself naked without a house where to sh^owd himself from the shipwreck of his
disgrace, driven out of his Palace, and retired into a poor village of (...),
where he lived some days in extreme want, without any means or relief; in the
end died, not lamented or pitied of any man, in an unknown corner, yet noted
to be the Theater where was acted such an extraordinary Tragedy, That one of
the greatest Monarchs of the world is dead, without house, without bread,
without honor, without pity, and without memory, but to observe so miserable
an end.

In Constantinople yet reigned LEO, not so ill as some others: for,
notwithstanding that he was somewhat cruel, yet he was a lover of justice and
equity, and very zealous, and built some stately Temples. He warred with the
Bulgares, and overcame them, and was ouercomne by them; whose death and actions
we will declare hereafter: for, he reigned 25 years.

THE LIFE OF ARNOLPH, ONLY OF THAT NAME, AND THE FOVRESCORE AND FOVRTH ROMAN
EMPEROR; AND OF LEO, Alexander and Constantine, Emperors of GRAECIA.
IT is already mentioned in what manner ARNOLPH attained to the Empire, who is
numbered among the good Emperors: for, he was wise and upright in his
government, and had both valor and courage to defend and protect the Empire;
yet in his time were great wars. As soon as he was Roman Emperor and King of
Germany, he had a desire to make himself King of France also; and he fought
some battles with the Normans: who, understanding that CHARLES was deprived and
dead, rebelled, and made wars in France, wherein he had the victory: but,
constrained through some innouations in Germany, he returned thither, and
abandoned France; which I omit as a matter impertinent. Being comn into
Germany, his first business was with a certain people in the Province of
Morauia, called Magarens, which warred in all parts of Germany; and committed
such spoils, and put him in so great fear, that he sought to pacify them
rather by policy than by Arms: and to the end they should live in peace and
quiet, he agreed to give them that country to inhabit; so as to them was
assigned the Province of Morauia, with part of Bohemia, where it bordereth upon
Hungary, Poland and Slesia. Yet, nevertheless, this continued but a small
time: for, this people, waxing proud of their agreement, with greater
presumption invaded the country: against whom ARNOLPH levied an Army of
valiant men at Arms, brought out of Hungary; with which, and his other ordinary
forces, he overthrew the Morauians in a notable battle; and cutting the
greatest part of them in pieces, the rest fled and abandoned the country: but,
it being freed from the Subdued, was much more oppressed by the victorious
Hungares; who, mutinying for want of their pay, sacked the Cities and Towns of
Germany: and, crossing over the Country, without any resistance came into
Friseland, and thence into Gallia Belgica; part whereof at this day is the
Earldome of Flanders. These Hungars, as some affirm, were of the same Country
of Hungary; and VICENTIVS in his Mirror, and MARTIN affirm, that they came out
of Scythia into that Province: but whence-soeuer they came, it imporports not
much; it suffices they all agree, that ARNOLPHVS was much troubled with them,
and that they burnt and spoiled a great part of Germany: and ARNOLPH did all
that was possible, and at length constrained them to return into Hungary, from
whence (as long as he lived) they never durst come thither again.

Whilst these things passed in Germany, Italy escaped not free from wars and
combustions; whereof, the Emperors long absence was the occasion: for, he had
never been there, but went thither being called by Pope FORMOSVS, who was
chosen after the death of STEPHEN before mentioned. This FORMOSVS was chosen
against the will of the greatest part of the people of Rome, which favored a
Cardinal called SERGIVS, to whom they had given their voices: wherefore the
Pope, houlding himself greatly injured, went to the Emperor, and was the cause
of his coming into Italy; of whom before that we enter into any discourse, it
shall not be amiss to speak (after our accustomed manner) of the Emperor of
Constantinople, in the life of LEO the. Fifth, who (as we said) at that time
held that Empire; wherein ordinarily ensued great accidents: for, the Emperor
was ever at contention and variance (in Europe) with the Bulgarians, the
Hungars, the Russians, and other Nations; and in Asia with the Armenians, the
Persians, and other Infidels. But I desire to be held excused in that I write
not that History at large, seeing I am bound to write but of the Emperors of
the West only, who are held for the right Emperors; and of the others to make
but a brief relation.

LEO, having ended his war with the Bulgarians, resolved to war in Asia
against the Infidels, and did so; wherein al^hough that many losses happened to
either party, yet in the end his Army (being led by a good General) obtained
a very notable victory; whereby his name came to be very famous and renowned: so
as in these actions, and others which I write not, five and twenty years of his
Empire were spent: in the end whereof, he died of the Colic. And after Leo,
Emperor of Constantinople, died of the Colic, and Alexander succeeded him.
his death his brother AEEXANDER was chosen Emperor, notwithstanding that he
left a son called CONSTANTINE: but, forasmuch as he was of more years and
better beloved, the brother had the Empire, and held it thirteen or foureteen
months: during which time he did nothing that was good; and for abusing the
Ambassadors of SIMEON King of Bulgaria, war was made against him. He bestowed
offices and dignities upon ignoble and base personages, and in the end was
taken with a flux of blood at the nose, which never left him until he left the
Empire: and CONSTANTINE, son to his brother LEO, had the Empire; of whom
Alexander, Emperor of Constantinople, died bleeding at the nose.
we will speak hereafter: for, this happened in the time of ARNOLPH, Emperor of
the West, whose life we now write, which ended (as I said) coming into Italy,
in favor of Pope FORMOSVS, and to recover such Cities as were therein usurped
by certain Dukes and Earls; between whom and them ensued many battles: and in
all Italy were factions and dissensions, especially between GVIDO Duke of
Spoleto, and BERENGARIVS Duke of Friuli, who were made Dukes by the old Emperor
CHARLES; being men of the greatest account in all the Country, he thinking by
this means to defend the Country against the Lombards and French, and to hold
the same in subjection, having such mighty Commanders. But these men made
themselves Lords of all they could, and either of them was a great enemy to
the other, and fought a great battle; wherein GVIDO was overthrown, and
BERENGARIVS had the victory: who, understanding of the Emperor ARNOLPH'S
coming, sought to make a league with him, and offered him his service; more to
seek his enemies ruin, than for any service he meant to do to the Emperor.

ARNOLPH, being comn into Italy with a great Army, sought means to make himself
Lord of the Country, assisted by BERENGARIVS, whose Dukedom of Friuli was in
his way: he took many places which GVIDO had usurped, and went to Bergamo; into
the castle whereof, a certain Earl (one of those which conspired against Pope
FORMOSVS) was entered: who, together with others of that City, was there
besieged by the Emperor; who, taking it by force, caused him to be hanged. And
so he punished and did justice upon many others, and redressed many injuries
and wrongs done in Italy. Afterward he went with his Army toward Rome, where
the Pope attended his coming: but his adversaries were of such power, that,
whether the Pope would or not, they put the City in Arms, and (shutting their
ports) would not receive the Emperor; whereupon he besieged it, which caused
great tumults and mutinies therein: but in the end the Popes authority, and the
fear of the Emperors power, so much prevailed, that he was received; wherein,
by his direction, great punishment was inflicted upon such as could be taken;
and the Pope crowned him Emperor with great honor and solemnity: Arnolph
crowned Emperor in Rome, by the Pope.
and, within few days after, he departed, with an intent to ruin GVIDO Duke
of Spoleto, who was of great power, and thought as well as BERENGARIVS, to have
been King of Italy. Having taken some Towns, he besieged his wife in a certain
City: the Duchess practiced with one of the Emperos favorites to give the
Emperor a certain drink, which she made him believe would make him mild and
courteous: but as soon as he had taken it, he fell into a deep sleep, which
held him so long, that they thought he would never have awaked again; for he
slept three days and three nights, and no man could make him to move: but in
the end he awoke, and found himself so ill, that contenting himself to
settle the affairs of Italy in the best order that he could, he returned into
Germany, hoping in his native country to recover his health. At what time as
the Emperor ARNOLPH departed Italy, Pope FORMOSVS died, and after him BONIFACE
the sixth was chosen, who was Pope but twenty six days; and then succeeded
STEPHEN the sixth, who was so great an enemy to FORMOSVS and to his actions,
that when he was Pope, he sought to disannullal matters done by him; which was
an ill example, The sueceeding Pope condemned the precedents Actions.
and whereof afterward many evils ensued: for some Popes did the like by their
predecessors, against whom they had conceived displeasure.

This being done, Pope STEPHEN dyed in the third year of his papacy, and him
succeeded ROMANVS, a Spaniard borne, who was Pope but three months. And after
him came THEODORE the second, who held the chair but twenty days, in which
time his chiefest care was to confirm the doings of FORMOSVS, which STEPHEN
had disannulled; and after his death JOHN the tenth was chosen. While these
Popes ran in such haste to death one after another, the Emperor ARNOLPH with
his Army went into Germany and out lived them all, and reigned in prosperity,
nothing befalling him worthy memory; but in the end he was The miserable
death of the Emperor Arnolph.
assailed with a kind of sickness, which proved the worst disease that could be
imagined, and this was an infinite number of lice; wherewith he was so tormented
and eaten, that he could not be cured thereof, but dyed: this happened in the
year of our Lord, nine hundred and one, and in the twelfth year of his reign.
ARNOLPH at his death left behind him three children which he had by his two
wives; by his first wife, he had ARNOLPH, whom in his life time he made Duke of
Bauiere, and BERNARD Earl of a certain province: and by his second wife he
had JEWS, who afterward was Emperor; he had another base son called
ZENEBALDVS, whom in his life time he made Duke of Lorraine; and one daughter
called BERTA, married to the Duke of Cleue.

In the time that ARNOLPH reigned, began the Dukes of Normandy; for the King
or captain of the Normans married the daughter of CHARLES the Simple, king of
France, and making himself to be Christened, was called ROBERT, whose son was
the first Duke of Normandy. There were also Dukes in Burgundy of the house of
France, which a long time after were called Kings: and in Saxony also, and in
other parts, as has been observed, and hereafter shall appear in this
history: for the Kings and Emperorus of those times did use to govern their
cities and provinces by perpetual Dukes, so as at that time were very great
Earls and Dukes, and the Emperors governed Milan by an Earl, who was called
Earl of Milan; the like they did by other provinces: whereof it afterward
ensued, that their estates became perpetual, they holding the same by
inheritance.

At this time the principal Earls of Castile, through the many murders and
injuries committed by DON HORDONIO in that country, chose among themselves two
to be judges between them, and to determine their differences and wars:
which were HVNNO HVNNES RASVRA, and LAIN CALVO: after this followed DON ALONSO
the Son of DON FRVELA, who became a Monk. And the same year that the
Emperor ARNOLPH dyed, DON RAMIRES reigned: this DON RAMIRES performed great
matters against the Moors. In France reigned CHARLES the Simple. There were
then Kings in England, in Denmark, in Morauia, in Prouence, in Bulgaria: and
in Polonia were Dukes, and so were still until the time of the Emperor OTHO.

In Constantinople (as is abouesaid) CONSTANTINE the son of LEO, and nephew
to the Emperor ALEXANDER, was Emperor, and reigned a long time, for he was
Emperor thirty nine years: whereof fifteen were in the company of the tyrant
ROMANVS. In the beginning of his reign (for that he was a child) he was
governed by certain Princes, and by his mother ZOE, and had some wars with
the King of the Bulgarians, which he ended with happy success; PHOCAS being
General of his Army, who was of greatest account in his Court. Afterward,
through treachery, his soldiers abandoned him, and the Bulgarians became
Lords and masters of the field, so as he was constrained to buy his peace of
them for ready money. After this, in despite of himself and of his mother,
one which of a petty Prince, was come to be of great power, was made CAESAR
and his companion in the Empire, and had the superiority the other fifteen
years that he lived, notwithstanding that they both had the title of Emperors:
as we will tell you hereafter.

THE LIFE OF JEWS THE FOVRTH OF THIS NAME, AND FOVRESCORE AND FOVRTH ROMAN
EMperor; And of CONSTANTINE the Second, Emperor of CONSTANTINOPLE; And of the
Tyrants in ITALY.
AFter the death of the Emperor ARNOLPH, there was great confusion in the
Empire: the Italians and Romans desiring to make one Emperor that should be to
their liking; and the Germans desiring to do the like, they fell at such
variance, that the one party held one for Emperor, and the other part another;
so as rightly there was not any. And some Historiographers account none, from
these Emperors of which we now write, till the time of OTHO the Second, which
was for the space of threescore years, little more or less; (...)that none of
them were crowned by any Pope. Moreover, the History is written so confusedly
and abruptly, that it can hardly be explaned. The worst of all is, that those
times were most unhappy through want and defect of Emperors: for, thereof
infinite wars ensued; vices, insolences and rapines abounded, little justice
was executed, learning decayed, virtue was naught set-by, charity languished,
and the Infidels in many places had the upper hand; until it pleased his
divine Majesty to bring matters to a better estate. I say then, that the German
Princes chose, for their King and Roman Emperor, JEWS the son of the
Emperor ARNOLPH: but he could not (as soon as he desired) come into Italy;
without which they never held themselves Jews chosen Emperor.
for Emperors, holding Italy for the seat and original of the Empire: for the
Hungars in those days were the most feared and redoubted Nation in the world,
and which did greatest harm in Germany and in Italy; for, being freed from the
fear of ARNOLPH, they brake the peace made with him, and made war upon the
new Emperor JEWS in Italy: whereof, the chiefest Princes and of greatest
power were the above named BERENGARIVS Duke of Friuli, and GVIDIO Duke of
Spoleto; who, of Dukes and Gouerners, became Tyrant-Lords, each of them
pretending to be Emperor: but BERENGARIVS, being of great power in Lombardy put
his designs in practice, and usurped the whole Country, and any place else
that he could get, in despite of the Emperor, saying, that Italy was the true
seat of the Roman Empire, and that Germany might rather be said to be the
patrimony of CHARLES the Great his Successors, than the Empire. But JEWS,
for that he was the son of an Emperor, and descended from CHARLES the Great
who restored the Empire, pretended that Germany ought to choose the Emperor.

Matters standing in these terms, the Hungars salied out of their Country,
and began to rob and spoil the Countries of Austria and Bauiere, using in
them extreme cruelty with fire and sword. JEWS, being a courageous young man,
was highly displeased with this their presumption; and, gathering together such
troops of soldiers as he was able with the aid of his brethren went against
them, and near to the river Licus they met; where JEWS greatly desired to
come to blows with them: which the Hungars and Morauians perceiving, laid a
stratagem for him; for, offering to give him battle, they retired, till they
had drawn him within the danger of an ambush which they had laid in a wood;
and there they maintained the Fight A battle between the Jews and the Hungars.
to their great advantage, in regard of the place: but the Fight was so well
performed by the Emperors people, that if the Hungars had not been rescued by
their ambush, he had that day obtained a notable victory. But when the
advantage was discovered, and that so great a number of men on every side came
rushing out of the wood upon such a sudden, with so great force unexpected, the
Imperialists began to retire, and afterward to slay; in such manner, that the
victory manifestly appeared on the Hungars side, and the Emperor was driven to
save himself by flight: after which they did much harm throughout all Germany,
the Emperor not being able to resist or make head against them; but was
constrained to withdraw himself into the country, and secretly to give great
sums of money to the Captains and principal men of the Hungars, to the end
they should treat of a peace; and he openly gave great pay to their men of
war, and promised to allow them yearly provision for their houses: by these
means he freed his country from that misery for that time; but the peace
continued not long.

After this exploit; the Emperor, understanding that his base brother
ZENEBALDVS governed the Country of Lorrain cruelly, and as a Tyrant, he
deprived him of that Kingdom, and ^eised it into his own hands, and took
LVITGVARDA, the daughter of OTHO Duke of Saxony, to wife; which Province was
then subject to the Empire. In those days France escaped not free from wars
and troubles. The Emperor, thinking he had settled all matters in peace with
the Hungars, saw himself in a new perplexity: for, they not content with the
promised pay (which was very duly paid them) a great Army of them again
invaded Germany; and the Emperor in person went against them, and fought with
them twice in the Province of Bauiere; and both times had the victory,
although with great loss of men, and with no small difficulty and danger:
but not knowing how to execute his victory, or to follow his good fortune,
giving too much ear to some men's counsel; the Hungars fled into their
country, who (in most men's opinions) might have been wholly ruined and
defeated: where they reinforced and refreshed their troops, and did greater
harm in the Empire, then at the first, and were so expert in the wars, and
so greatly feared, that crossing through Germany, sacking and burning many
towns, amongst which the city of Basil was one, they passed into Lorraine,
which then contained the estates of Flaunders, Brabant, Gelders, Cleue,
Treuier, and many other provinces; in which they executed great cruelty: and
with the like fury they returned the same way they went, burning and spoiling
what before had escaped; and so they retired themselves into their country,
laden with riches and spoils; but fewer in number then they came from thence.
This people at that time was grown so proud, and of so great power, that all
Nations bordring upon them stood in fear of them, and did as the rest did: for
after the same manner as they had entered Bauiere, they afterward invaded
Bulgaria, and the Emperors countries of Graecia, sacking and burning his
Cities; and constrained the Emperor CONSTANTINE to give them pay, and ordinary
tribute, to be at peace with them; and the Emperor JEWS was driven to do the
like, to assure Germany, from this raging fire.

Historiographers write, that in those days were great wars in France and
Italy between BERENGARIVS and other Princes, and the like in other parts; and
that Princes used fraud and treachery one against another: so as a man can
write nothing that is good of those times; so much did malice, ambition, pride
and cruelty abound.

It afterward followed, that the Hungars, moved with the fame of the wealth
and abundance of all things in Italy, and through the civil dissension which
was therein (the ordinary gates by which destruction enters into any
Kingdom) and for that JEWS withstood them mightily in Germany, they resolved
to ransack and make a conquest of Italy: for which attempt they levied greater
forces than at any time before they had done. The fame heerof put all Italy
into such a fear, that they chose BERENGARIVS for their Captain and defender,
who was called Emperor; but till this time was not held for such. BERENGARIVS
then with great diligence and expedition levied many soldiers both of foot and
horse; and, at their coming The Hungars invaded Italy.
into Italy, opposed himself against the Hungars; and coming to blows, fought a
battle with them some Authors say two; wherein being overthrown he fled, and
lost therein the greatest part of his Army, and retired himself into the estate
of Milan, wherein consisted his greatest strength. The Hungars after this
victory were Masters of the Field, and spoiled all the Country, taking and
ransacking many Cities, and in less than one year ouerranne all the Land: in
which time these Barbarians, moved with the bruit of the riches of the City of
Venice, made Barks, Brigandines, and other vessels, therewith to have attempted
it; and so they assailed the City, and took some of those Islands: but their
coming was beforehand suspected, and therefore provided for; so as although
they took some part thereof, yet the Venetians so fortified the rest with
strong chains, and some places with walls, that, after some conflicts by sea and
by land, they despairing to be able to take the City, returned to Padoa, where
they had left the remainder of their Cauallerie and their luggage. BERENGARIVS,
seeing by force he could not deliver Italy from Berengarius bought his peace
of the Hungars.
the Hungars, put that remedy in practice which JEWS had used in Germany;
which was, to treat of peace by way of money: whereto the Hungars gave ear, and
it was concluded; and he gave them a huge sum of gold and silver, which by
the industry of BERENGARIVS was collected from all parts of Italy: wherewith,
and with the rest which they had stolen, they departed rich and victorious;
which had so good a taste, that it made them come thither again. The coming of
the Hungars into Italy, was in the time of Pope SERGIVS the Third: for,
BENEDICT the fourth being dead, of whom it was said that he was a good Bishop
(which ought The Hungars came the second time into Italy.
not to be accounted for a small matter, considering how few were so in those
times) LEO the Fifth succeeded, who enjoyed that dignity but forty days; for, a
great Cardinal called CHRISTOPHER, took him prisoner; who within few days
died in prison, and CHRISTOPHER remained Pope tyrannously, and within 7 months
(for, violence cannot last) was deprived, and put into a Monastery: and then
was SERRGIVS the Third chosen, in whose time happened this calamity through the
Hungars. But, returning to our History, I say that the Hungars being retired
into their Country, Italy was not therefore free from troubles: for, the Moors
of Africa infested the same with their fleets; and for all this, the civil
factions and discord ceased not betwixt the Princes: for, EDILBET, Marquess of
Tuscane, who usurped that Country, being of great power, rebelled against
BERENGARIVS; and the Popes authority and power was not such as it had been,
neither were they of such force by reason of their insufficiency and little
worth, and through the want of the accustomed succors from France, which they
had in the time of the successors of CHARLES the Great: which considered,
JEWS was of opinion, that Italy might easily be subdued, and that he might
bereave BERENGARIVS both of the name and dignity of Emperor, which he usurped.
Whereupon with a great Army he came into Italy: against whom came
BERENGARIVS with a good number of men of war; and they two fought a battle,
wherein BERENGARIVS was overthrown, with little bloodshed, by reason of the
small resistance made by his people; and JEWS went to the City of Verona,
near to which the battle was fought, and lay there like a Conqueror, and as
one that stood in fear of no man, and therefore careless: whereupon
BERENGARIVS, albeit he was ouercomn, practiced with some within the City, and
some also of the Emperors own people, to let him into the City; so as he
entered it by night, and took JEWS prisoner. Others say, that JEWS had not
the victory, but that he withdrew himself into the City for fear: and so in the
manner (as I said) The difference betwixt authors about the taking of the
Emperor Jews, and his death.
he fell into BERENGARIVS power. But howsoever it was, BERENGARIVS had him
prisoner, and put out his eyes, and so within few days through grief and
sorrow he died; and BERENGARIVS remained sole Lord of the Empire of Italy.

In this manner ended JEWS his Empire, which he held with so much trouble
when he had reigned Emperor full eleven years; and died in the year of our Lord
nine hundred and twelve, after the Abbot WESPERGENSIS his computation, which I
follow: other Authors (of no small authority) as, BLONDVS and CVSPINIAN,
recount this after another manner; saying, that this Emperor JEWS never came
into Italy, neither was ouerthrown by BERENGARIVS; but that in the end he died
of his natural death in Germany, and that that JEWS which was overthrown
and taken in Verona, was JEWS the son of BOSON King of Prouence, which came
into Italy against BERENGARIVS, proclaiming himself Emperor; and that
BERENGARIVS released him on his oath that he would come no more thither: which
oath he afterward brake. But in that manner as I have declared it is written
by PLATINA, HENRICUS MVCIVS, NAVCLERVS, JOHANNES VTICVS, Saint ANTHONY,
VOLATERANVS, and some others. In this time lived Pope SERGIVS the Third, and in
Constantinople CONSTANTINE, and ROMANVS the tyrant, who reigned in despite of
him. JEWS left not any son to succeed him. There befell also in his time
great wars and combustions among the Princes of Germany; which was tyrannized
sometime by one, and sometime by another, whereby his Empire was weakened, and
came to be of less power. This was the last Emperor of the line of CHARLES the
Great; yet in the Kingdom of France the succession continued, although within
a while after it ended also, and passed to another line, which lasts until
this day. And in Spain then flourisht the Flowr of chivalry against the
Infidels, conquering their Countries, and Kings which reigned therein, the
Earl FERNANDO GONSALVES.

In Hungary, TASSON first took upon him the authority of a King: which
Country in former time was governed by Dukes and sundry other Magistrates,
from the time of ATTILA, King of the Hunnes. This TASSON was grandfather to
STEPHEN who was canonized for a Saint, and the first confirmed King by the
authority of the Emperor FREDERICK.

THE LIFE OF CONRADE, THE FIRST OF THAT NAME, AND FOVRESCORE AND FIFTH ROMAN
EMperor; And of those which in his time took the name of Emperors in ITALY;
And of Constantine the Emperor of Constantinople.
THE ARGUMENT.
Jews being dead, there arose a contention between the French and the
Germans, about the Empire: for, either of these two Nations pretended to have
a just title to choose an Emperor, by reason of their ancient authority and
custom. But in the end the Germans, prevailing, would have chosen Otho Duke
of Saxony; who, for that he was already old, and unfit to govern the Empire so
much troubled, refused the charge, and counseled them to choose Conrade Duke of
Franconia: who, by the consent of the Germans, and of a good part of the
French, being made Emperor, was ever ruled by the counsel of the old Duke
Otho: and he dying, left a son called Henry, whom Conrade suspected and
feared. And taking occasion of war, he bent his force against him,
notwithstanding that his father made such account of him, that he preferred him
to the Empire; and only seeking means to bring him to destruction, took no
care how matters went in Italy, which was extremely turmoiled. Conrades
brother, fighting a battle with Henry, was by him overthrown: whereupon
Conrade, seeing the loss and the dishonor, reinforced his Army to be
revenged; and sending Ambassaedors to Henry to submit and yield himself, they
were not heard, neither could they come to any composition of peace. Whilst he
was busied in this action, Conrade fell very sore sick: and, knowing his end to
be nie; more regarding the good of the Empire, than his own private passion,
he chose his enemy Henry for his successor, and commanded his brother to yield
him obedience; which was a very heroical deed, and befitting a Christian.

THe time of the Emperor JEWS was troublesome and tempestuous, and his death
caused no calm, but brought greater storms in all estates; for in his time the
Imperial power was divided into two heads, in Italy, and in Germany, which
were, JEWS and BERENGARIVS: and JEWS being dead, one alone pretended not,
but many, to succeed him both in name and in the dignity of the Empire: France
would have nominated an Emperor, alleging that since that the line of CHARLES
the Great was extinct in Germany, and that in France the same remained, and
that Germany was conquered by the same CHARLES; in right therefore the title of
the Empire appertained to his successors, Contention between the Germans,
Frenchmen and Italians, about the election of the Emperor.
and so it ought to return to the Crown of France; for CHARLES the Great had
it not with the Empire as he had Italy, but it was given to him being King of
France, and by that title his successors held the same.

The Princes of Germany denied this, fearing to return under the subjection of
the French, and stood upon the possession and authority to choose the Emperor;
alleging for their reason, that the Empire was transported to the Germans in
the person of CHARLES the Great and that Germany was the Empire, and not the
Kingdom of France, and that they were in possession thereof. The Italians said,
that Italy was the ancient true seat of the Empire, and that they gave it to
CHARLES, and had authority to give it unto any other: and so they called and
held BERENGARIVS for Emperor, notwithstanding his competitors. In France,
JEWS, the son of BOS^N King of Pro^nce, challenged the Empire, for that he
descended from CHARLES the Great. But the Germans, who seemed to have the best
right and chiefest authority, and have so continued (having not any that might
succeed JEWS, for he had no sons) chose OTHO Duke of Saxony for Emperor, a
man of great wisdom and valor: but he would not Otho, duke of Saxony, chosen
Emperor, refused the Empire.
accept (...)that Empire which others so much desired; for, as he was now old,
so he knew that the affairs of the Empire stood in such estate, that they
needed a man of greater power, and of longer life than himself. The Lords Name
be blessed, that in time of so great ambition, one man was found that refused
to be an Emperor.

OTHO then answered those which had chosen him Emperor, that he had neither such
health nor strength as to be able to govern the Empire, and therefore would not
undertake a burden which he was not able to bear: but he would assist them
with his best counsel; concluding, that in his opinion CONRADE Duke of
Franconia was worthy to be chosen, in whom all the qualities and virtuous
conditions did concur, that might seem requisite in an Emperor: And so by
common consent of the Germans, and part of the French, CONRADE was chosen and
obeyed for Emperor, who (as some write) descended from CHARLES the Great. And
he presently began to govern the Empire, and in all things followed the
counsel and advice of OTHO, by whose means he obtained it: and so the first
year he lived and ruled very happily. But the great Dukes and Princes of
Germany waxing envious, and desirous to reign, ARNOLD Duke of Bauiere rebelled
against him, and went into Hungary, and induced the Hungars and their King to
war upon the new Emperor; whereupon, in the second year of his Reign, a sharp
and cruel war began: but, as he was very valiant and expert in Arms, so he
drew his forces to an head, and came to a battle with the Hungars, and
overthrew them, and constrained them to fly into their Country; and so freed
Germany from that peril. And although afterward it was sometimes molested,
yet by his diligence and courage it was ever defended: and so he maintained the
same in peace as long as Duke OTHO lived, upon whose counsel he chiefly
relied, but never durst come to make war in Italy.

After the death of OTHO, who left one son behind him called HENRY, who was
a very gallant young man, and of great power, CONRADE began to suspect him;
which was the occasion of the troubles which I will relate. BERENGARIVS being
held in Italy for Emperor, besides CONRADE who with better title was Emperor
in Germany; JEWS, the son of BOSON King of Prouence, determined to come into
Italy to deprive BERENGARIVS of that Empire; who held it, not without great
vexation and trouble; as well with the Princes of Italy (whereof some rebelled
against him) as with the Infidels and Hungars which infested the same. And (as
I said before) some Authors write, that this JEWS came the first time to the
same purpose, and was ouerthrown by BERENGARIVS, and this (as I believe) was
the first; and if it were the second, he came being called by some of
BERENGARIVS enemies. And notwithstanding that in the beginning of the wars he
had good success, yet in the end he was overthrown, and constrained to flee.
Thus much shall suffice for him, the matter being so doubtful. Yet here is
some diversity among Authors; whereof some say, At that time reigned in Italy
BERENGARIVS the Second, with the title of Emperor; as his father had done, who
was son of the other BERENGARIVS before named; others attribute it to the
father alone: but to the end we may the better understand the matter, we yield
that this was the second BERENGARIVS, for that we shall hereafter have occasion
to treat of another, which shall be the third.

I say then, that at what time CONRADE was Emperor in Germany, and BERENGARIVS
in Italy, poor Italy (besides domestic and civil wars) was afflicted with
other far more grievous and pitiful. This was, for that the Towns which the
Greek Empire held in Calabria and Pulia, together with the partialities and
factions which were in them, were not in subjection: whereupon CONSTANTINE, who
at that time reigned in Constantinople, or (as others say) ROMANVS the Tyrant,
which with him governed the Empire for a time, procured the aid of the Moors
in Africa, and of the Arabians; of which a great number came into Italy, giving
it out, that they came to help the Greeks to recover their right; under
color whereof, they The coming of the Moors into Italy.
became Lords of all Pulia, Calabria, and the rest which contains now the
kingdom of Naples; and they drew so near to Rome, that they sought to have
taken the same, without regard of the Emperor of Constantinople, under whose
name they first came into Italy. The cause of all which miseries, were the
wars and troubles between the Christians: for CONRADE Emperor of Germany
was busied in making war against HENRY Duke of Saxony, the son of OTHO:
BERENGARIVS was perplexed with the wars against JEWS the son of BOSON king of
Prouence, and others which for brevity I ouerpasse: and another occasion was,
the small authority and little worth of the Popes of Rome. But Pope JOHN the
eleventh, whom some call the tenth, seeing this great necessity, sent to
ALBERICVS Marquess of Tuscane, or (as some Authors say) to his brother, which
was the greatest Lord in all Italy (BERENGARIVS excepted) with whose father
BERENGARIVS had war and controversy; who promised him succor: and gathering
all his forces together, with the aid of many others which followed him in
that enterprise, he went to Rome, wherein the Pope had already leuyed an
indifferent good Army, which he joined with ALBERICVS his forces; and so he
marched against his enemies: some write that the Pope in person went to this
war, which had such happy success, that besides many encounters, ALBERICVS
fought one battle against the whole power of the Moors; wherein,
notwithstanding that it was very sharp and doubtful, yet in the end he gat
the victory; after which he was so absolutely master of the field, that he
found not any one to make head against him, and so in short time recovered all
that the Moors held in Italy; excepting some little, and certain fortresses
near to Mount Garganus in Pulia; whither the remainder of those Moors retired
themselves: whom for that he then forbear wholly to ruinate (an error for want
of foresight) it was the occasion of many calamities which ensued.

ALBERICVS having obtained so noble a victory, and leaving it in such estate,
as it seemed an easy matter for any other to have effected the rest; he
returned to Rome, where he was received with great pomp and triumph: but
within few days there arose discord and controversy between him and the
Pope, each of them attributing to himselife the honor of that journey:
whereupon ALBERICVS went discontented out of the City; whereof afterward
ensued great wars and mischiefs: and he was so ouercomn with rage and desire
to be revenged, that as soon as he came into his country, he began to
practice against the Pope, and to move the Hungars to war in Italy, promising
them his aid and assistance, thinking it a small matter for him to have made
himself Lord of Rome. The Hungars came into Italy, and it pleased God that the
greatest harm they did there, was in the said Marquess ALBERICVS own
countries, and amongst his subjects. In the mean time that Italy was thus
oppressed, the Emperor CONRADE (whose life we now write) sought the ruin of
HENRY Duke of Saxony, who was the son of that OTHO by whose direction and
counsel he was chosen and made Emperor, and was by him governed in the
beginning of his reign, as heretofore has been showed.

The principal cause hereof, was the fear and jealousy which he conceived of
him: for this HENRY was a young man of very great courage and valor, and above
measure desirous of rule; and in the wars of Hungary had done great service
to this Emperor CONRADE, and to his predecessor JEWS, against ARNOLPH Duke of
Bauiere, which fled into Hungary, as we have said: by reason whereof, HENRY was
generally so much beloved and esteemed, that CONRADE stood in fear to be
dispossessed by him of his Empire, and that he would have rebelled against him,
and therefore he resolved (if he might) to make him away: first practicing his
death by fraud and cunning; and that taking no effect, he resolved not to
dissemble any longer, but sent his brother EBERARD with an Army to destroy his
country, and if he might to bereave him of his life: for which fact he became
infamous, and all his actions were attributed to incomparable ingratitude: but
his passion was such as he neuertheless continued his intended course. But
HENRY governed himself so discreetely, and had already levied such an Army of
Saxons, which were his subjects and friends, that he met with EBERARD in the
field, and gave him battle; wherein his people behaved themselves so
valiantly, that the Emperors brother was overthrown, with the loss of the
greatest part of his Army, and himself escaped by flight. CONRADE being
advertised hereof (in extreme choler) raised the greatest power he could make,
and called all the Princes against HENRY, first sending Ambassadors unto him,
to persuade him to yield to his mercy, and not to persevere in his contumacie;
who concluded nothing: but returning, they reported that in their presence one
of Duke HENRY'S captains, whose name was DIEMATE, said, that the Duke had no
reason to come to any agreement; for he knew that thirty legions of soldiers
were coming to his aid. These words struck such a fear into the Emperors
Army, that without any battle, or sight of any enemy, the greatest part
thereof disbanded; whereupon he was driven to retire, with a determination to
return with greater force. But God, in whose hand are the hearts of Princes,
in very The hearts of Kings are in the hands of God.
short time altered his purposes; for CONRADE was assailed with an extreme
sickness, whereof he afterward died. And knowing that his end drew near, he in
great haste sent for the Princes of the Empire; the principal of which at that
time were BVCARD Duke of Sueuia, SIGISBERT Duke of Lorraine, and his brother
EBERARD, whom he had made King of Franconia, and many others, excepting ARNOLD
Duke of Bauiere, who remained in Hungary, and HENRY Duke of Saxony which
rebelled. These Princes being in this manner assembled, the Emperor, as a wise
man and a good Christian, having more regard to the good government of the
Empire, than to his own choler or private passion (which is an extrordinary
example) made unto them a very set speech; wherein in conclusion he exhorted
and counseled them, that after his decease (which, so far as he could
comprehend, would be shortly) they should choose the same HENRY Duke of Saxony
(who then was in his disgrace) for Emperor: for, notwithstanding that he had a
brother whom he loved very well, and was worthy of great estate, yet he
nevertheless chose HENRY, as only worthy to be an Emperor, and his successor;
for, as he very Conrade chose his enemy Henry for his successor in the Empire.
well knew, he was an excellent man, and endued with virtue, and with all the
conditions which were requisite in a good Prince; and that he pardoned and
restored him to his grace and favor, and that this was his last will, counsel
and resolution. The Noble mind and counsel of the Emperor was generally
commended; only his brother EBERARD showed himself grieved and discontented:
but CONRADE persuaded him to patience, and recommended to them all, peace and
concord. Then he made the Sword, the Scepter, the Robe, and the other Imperial
ensigns to be brought before him: and by the consent of all the Princes, he
appointed and charged his brother to carry the same to HENRY, and in his name
to make his peace and friendship with him, and to yield him obedience as to his
sovereign Lord: which he performed, and continued in HENRY'S good grace and
love so long as he held the Empire; which truly was a most noble part of both
these brethren: of the Emperor, in making choice of his enemy for his
successor: and of his brother, in voluntarily obeying him which was chosen.
This his good resolution being concluded, and put in execution, within few
days after CONRADE departed out of this life, leaving neither son nor
daughter; when he had reigned only seven years or somewhat less, in the year
of our Lord, 920; CONSTANTINE yet holding the The death of the Emperor Conrade.
Empire of Constantinople. In Italy reigned BERENGARIVS with the title of
Emperor, notwithstanding that he held no part thereof, but Lombardy only, and
some cities near thereunto adjoining, and those not without wars and troubles,
with JEWS son to the King of Prouence. The state of Italy being such as I
said, the Hungars invaded it, being called thither by ALBERICVS Marquess of
Tuscane, and ruined the country: and on the other side the Moors of Africa
salying out of such places as they held in Pulia, troubled the state of the
Church of Rome, and the frontiers thereof. And betwixt ALBERICVS and the Romans
was war and discord.

Forasmuch as in the life of this Emperor CONRADE, mention was made of ARNOLD
Duke of Bauiere, and for that heretofore this province has been treated of, as
of a kingdom, and so it is said, that JEWS King of Germany, in the division
made between his three sons, made CARLOMAN King of Bauiere, and now we call
ARNOLD, Duke thereof, which seems to be a contradiction: let the Reader
therefore know, that in this province (as in all others) there have been great
alterations: the last was, that after the said CHARLES, the Emperor ARNOLPH
succeeded in the state of Bauiere, and after ARNOLPH the Emperor JEWS; who
dying without issue, made this ARNOLD Duke of Bauiere: and afterward in
process of time, in this Kingdom happened many alterations and changes, and
in the end it joined with the state of the County Palatine of Rhine: and
afterward it was again divided; and so through sundry accidents, it came to
that estate wherein it is at this day.

THE LIFE OF HENRY, THE FIRST OF THAT NAME, AND THE FOVRESCORE AND SIXTH ROMAN
EMPEROR; AND OF CONSTANTINE Emperor of Graecia: And of those which in his time
were called Emperors.
THE ARGUMENT.
HEnry being chosen Emperor, first he applied himself to pacify the troubles
of Germany, which were very tumultuous; but above all, to assure the highways
from thieves, grown by reason of the wars; and to maintain justice. There
arose against him one Arnold, who lived in Hungary as a banished man; and each
of them having levied a great Army, and being in a manner ready to have come to
the shock, Henry called Arnold to a parley, and knew so well how to persuade
him, that he overcame him with words, which per adventure he should not have
done by Arms; and Arnold became his obedient subject. He took truce with the
Hungars, and subdued the Slauonians: but the time of the truce being expired
between him and the Hungars, and new occasions of war arising, they came in
the end to fight; where the Emperor obtained so great a victory, that all the
Princes of Christ endome sent to rejoice with him for the same. This good
Emperor had set his mind upon the affairs of Italy, and purposed to have
freed the Church from Hugh, and other Tyrants: but God, who had otherwise
determined, when he was providing for his journey, visited him with a mortal
infirmity; and he knowing his life to be near to an end, ordained, by the
consent of all the Princes, his eldest son Otho for his successor, having
reigned seventeen years, and lived sixty.

THE election which the Emperor CONRADE before his decease made of HENRY Duke
of Saxony, naming him Emperor and his successor, is to be thought to have been
done by Gods inspiration; for he proved a good Prince, and worthy the Imperial
majesty. As soon then as CONRADE was deceased, all the States received him for
their Emperor, and did him homage, calling him HENRY AVCEPS, that is to say,
the Faulconer, for The Emperor Henry called Henricus Auceps.
that he took great pleasure in Hawking; and when the news was brought him
that he was chosen Emperor, he was found busy in that exercise, which he used
at times of leisure for his recreation, without omitting any care for his
business. He then taking upon him the government of the Empire, applied
himself to do justice, with a desire severely to punish the wicked; chiefly
those which robbed by the high ways side, to the end that men might pass in
safety, which by reason of the wars had done much harm.

He gave himself also to pacify all discord and dissension, and to establish
peace and concord between the Princes, who for matters past were at variance
amongst themselves: for all which he provided a good remedy, employing his
wit, authority and power; and being obeyed by all men, excepting BVCCARD Duke
of Sueuia, who with the favor of France (for that he was son in law to the
Duke of Burgundy) attempted some innouations: against whom the Emperor raised
forces; but the matter was pacified, and the Duke acknowledged the Emperor for
his Lord and Superior. Besides this, it happened (which some report before this
time) that ARNOLD Duke of Bauiere, which (as we said) for fear of CONRADE,
lived as an exile in Hungary, returned to his Country, and gathering together
a great number of Hungars, was so hardy as to call himself Emperor, and to
deny his obedience to the Emperor HENRY; which he understanding, leuying his
old subjects of Saxony, and others of the Empire, went with a mighty Army
against ARNOLD, who likewise marched toward him; and as a good Christian,
being much grieved for the tronbles which were likely to have ensued, forbear
not to procure ARNOLD to give over his attempt: and it pleased God that his
good desire took effect in this manner:

Both the Armies being in a readiness to fight, notwithstanding it was
apparent that the Emperor had the greater number, and better and more choice
men; yet he sent ARNOLD word by a Trumpet, that he, upon sufficient security,
should come and speak with him; which ARNOLD performed: where the Emperor,
among many grave, good, and discreet speeches, spoke unto him in these words:

Take heed ARNOLD, and consider that what thou do, is to oppose thy self
against Speeches used by Henry to Arnold.
Gods ordinance, who is the giver of kingdoms and worldly power: Thou may
know that I was chosen of him by the mouth of my predecessor CONRADE, before
his death; and that to this election have consented all the estates of Germany,
and thou only seek to resist the will of God, and the general consent of
all men. I say unto thee, take heed what thou do, and I advise thee to come
to my obedience, and I will use thee as my son or my brother: and if thou will not do this, I take God for judge between thee and me. And one thing I
will swear and assure thee, that if it had pleased his divine Majesty that
thou had been chosen Emperor as I am, I would have been an obedient
subject, and have served thee faithfully: wherefore I pray thee, that since I am
so, thou will do the like by me. Thou may see that I entreat thee for
peace, at such time as my party has the advantage in the wars; consider well
what thou do, for I will not fail in any thing, that I have promised. These
and such like speeches were of such force, and so much moved ARNOLD, that he
presently submitted himself and his country unto the Emperor HENRY, and from
thenceforth was ever most obedient unto him, Arnold submitted himself to Henry.
without any remembrance of matters past. There happened likewise discord
between HENRY and the house and kingdom of France, about the sovereignty of
the province and Duchy of Lorraine; nevertheless coming to a peace and
agreement, matters passed prosperously, and he continued Lord thereof. And so
Germany (by means of his good government) took a taste of the fruits which
Justice and the tranquillity of peace bring forth. But in Italy notwithstanding
that BERENGARIVS was called Emperor, the want of such a Prince as HENRY,
wrought the contrary: it shall not be amiss therefore to speak of what
followed, while that HENRY was busy about these matters.

It is already said, how that between Pope JOHN and the Romans of the one
side, and ALBERICVS Marquess of Tuscane of the other, were great wars, after
the victory obtained against the Infidels; and how that ALBERICVS had induced
the Hungars to come into Italy against the city of Rome, and that the greatest
harm they did, was in his own countries, God permitting it as a punishment
for his wickedness; yet they did great spoils in the Church lands. The
Hungars having in this manner robbed the country, BERENGARIVS who was called
Emperor, came to a composition with them; which was, that they should depart
out of Italy, in consideration of a great sum of money which was given them.
And Pope JOHN and the Romans (in revenge of the injury received from
ALBERICVS) levied an Army, which was broken and overthrown by the Hungars, the
Duke of Spoleto being General of that Army; and ALBERICVS was besieged in a
town of his called Ortano, and was therein taken and slain.

At the same time the Infidels which remained in Pulia leuying new forces and
supplies renewed the wars, which was not foreseen in time by reason of the
domestical discord, and they took many castles and cities, while the Pope
applied himself to be revenged of ALBERICVS; and their power so much increased
that the people voluntarily yielded themselves, by reason of the small relief
which they had from the Emperor of Constantinople, in whose dominion the
greatest part of those countries was, or from BERENGARIVS, or from the Pope,
until that fear seized Rome: wherein making ^taine Earl called GVIDO their
General, they levied a good Army and it pleased God (...)give him the victory,
and he made the Moors to retire themselves into those holds which they held
before the bringing in of this second war, and so the city was freed from that
fear. But this brave and glorious exploite Earl GVIDO afterward Pope John
the twelfth taken prisoner, and slain by the Earl Guido.
blemished with the foulest fact that can be spoken, and such a one as my
members tremble to hear it, and my hand to write it. For this Earl GVIDO
afterward coming to Rome, with a resolution to make himself Lord thereof, he
seized on the Pope and slow him, and made another Pope; but his purpose took
no effect: for he whom he made Pope was presently deposed, and LEO the sixth
chosen, who was Pope but seven months; and him succeeded STEPHEN the seventh:

Whilst these matters passed in Rome and the marches thereof, BERENGARIVS the
Emperor (whom we may call Italian) lived not free from troubles; for through
the instigation of Rodulph deposed Berengarius.
certain I^alian Lords, RODVIPH Duke of Burgundy with a great Army came into
Italy with the title of Emperor, where he found so many friends (especi^lly in
Lombardy) that in very short space he dispossessed BERENGARIVS, and was ^ade
Emperor and King of Italy; and BERENGARIVS fled into Hungary, thinking there
to have found relief: where, as says BLONDVS The death of Berengarius.
and some others, he died, and that BERENGARIVS the nephew of the first
BERENGARIVS, was he which came afterward, as shall be specified. Some write
that he died in Italy, slain by the treason of Count FLAMBERT, who was his
gossip: But howsoever, he died deprived of his dignity: and he of whom we are
to treat, was nephew to the first BERENGARIVS, the son o^ his daughter, and
of a Marquess, which was his son in Law. I write thus much for that there is
a great confusion amongst Authors about these BERENGARII tyrant Rodulph Duke of
Burgundy Emperor in Italy.
Emperors, for that they all were of one name. RODVLPH remaining with the
victory in Italy was called Emperor, and held his Empire there the space of
three years in prosperity: In which time the Emperor HENRY in Germany overthrew
and repelled the Hungars; which after their departure out of Italy went into
Germany, wherein they did much harm: But (as I say) the Emperor put them to
rout, and chased them thence, and taking their General prisoner, constrained
them to sue to him, and to make peace for ten years; he restoring to them
their General The coming of the Hungars ^to Italy.
without ransom, yet they offered a great sum of money for him. RODVLPHVS
having feigned three years in Italy, the Hungars whose ordinary quality was
to spoil their neighbors and other Provinces; solicited thereto by BERENGARIVS
the nephew, under the conduct of a great man called FALARDVS, came into Italy,
and encamped before Pauia, which they besieged* for relief whereof RODVLPHVS
made so small provision, that the inhabitants of the country discontented with
his government, conspired against him, and slew his father-in-law The coming
of Hugh Duke of Orleans into Italy.
BOCARD Duke of Saxony, who came to see Milan; and then they called and
solicited HVGH Duke of Arles, a Frenchman, to come to their defense, promising
to receive him for their King and Lord, and to make him Emperor; which he
accepted, notwithstanding his neerenesse in blood to RODVLPH: and he came with
so many good men of war, and with such favor of the Italians, that none of
his enemies durst encounter him: and RODVLPH leaving Italy, returned into
Burgundy, where he afterward had such success, that he was for a space King
of France; and HVGH continued in Italy, and subdued a greater part thereof then
any of the other tyrants had done, banishing such as he suspected, and
rewarding his friends: he procured peace and friendship with the Emperor HENRY;
which he granted, thereby to settle peace in Germany with the Hungars, and with
other nations and Princes. And he afterward prevailed against ARNOLPH Duke of
Bauiere: So that HVGO was a greater Lord and of greater power then any of long
time had been in Italy; where leaving him until his turn, we will return to
our Emperor HENRY.

H^NRY having overthrown the Hungars, and made peace with them for nine or ten
years; as an ambitious Prince, and desirous to enlarge his Empire, after that
he had taken care for the establishment of peace and justice, and for the good
government thereof, he levied an Army, and sent the same into the countries
of Slauonia and Dalmatia, from which he had been annoyed and endamaged: and
overthrowing the inhabitants thereof in battle, he took many towns in those
Provinces, and doing therein great harm; victorious and laden with spoils, he
joyfully returned into Germany. The next year after this victory (which was
the tenth year of his reign) he marched with his power against the Bohemians
and WENCESLAVS their Duke, for that many of them held not the true faith, and
also for that they refused to be subject to the Henry brought the Bohemians
into subjection.
Empire, and against him had assisted the Hungars: Wherein he showed such
valor, that overthrowing the Duke, he took Prague, which is the chief City
thereof, and brought that kingdom into such subjection, as was the rest of
Germany, and so it continued all this Dukes life time.

This war being thus happily ended, another followed, which was against the
Danes, who with a mighty Navy came into Friseland, and into Saxony, and
took certain Towns there; but he made them to fly out of all that country,
to their great loss: and he also overthrew those of Norway, which then were
called Abroditi. HENRY having obtained so great and so many victories, the time
of the peace with the Hungars being expired, they presently sent their
Ambassadors to him, to require certain pay granted to their Ancestors, at what
time as peace was made with them; whereto HENRY gave no good answer; for he
accounted it a matter unworthy the Majesty of an Emperor, to pay tribute for
peace: wherewith the Hungars were so much incensed, that with their Duke or
Captain (for at that time they had not the dignity of a King) they issued out
of their confines with the most flourishing Army that ever they had, and
began to war with greater fury and cruelty, then ever they had done at any
time before, and never stayed until they came into Saxony, and into other
places which were the Emperor HENRY'S Patrimony, where they did much harm,
and showed great cruelty; which was done so suddenly, that HENRY in the
beginning could not prevent it: But in short space he levied a great Army; and
notwithstanding that he was extremely sick, yet neither the Princes, nor his
Physicians could stay him, but that he would go with his Army: and encountering
the Hungars (being so weak that he could hardly sit his Horse) he offered
them battle, which they refused not; where the Emperor, although with a
weak and low voice, made a speech to his soldiers, which did so much
encourage them, that they presently charged with such force, and the Hungars
(being a most valiant Nation) fought with such eagerness and fury, that it was
one of the most bloody and cruel battles of the world: But in the end the
valiant courage of the Emperor HENRY so much prevailed, that he obtained the
victory, and slew an infinite number of the Hungars, and many of them were
likewise slain upon The Emperor Henry his vi^ory against the Hungars.
the way as they fled; and those which suruiued, fled scattered into their
country; from whence they never after returned as long as the Emperor HENRY
lived. He wan so great reputation and glory by this victory, that all the
Princes Christian, sent their Ambassadors to him, to congratulate, and to
desire his friendship: But with the greatest instance came Ambassadors from
HVGH, who in Italy was called Emperor. HENRY was likewise called by his
subjects, semper Augustus, Pater Patriae, and other ancient names and titles of
honor; and he as a good Christian gave thanks to God; and the tribute which
at other times he had paid to the Hungars, he made to be distributed among the
poor, and so did other good deeds, and ruled the Empire in such manner that
Germany enjoyed both peace and justice, which are two blessings which make
mighty and rich kingdoms.

Italy in the mean time endured war and misery; for the Empire of HVGH
which last reigned, being turmoyled with war and discord, was neither firm
nor good, but Tyrannical and violent: by reason whereof the Infidels which in
Pulia held certain Towns and fortresses, made ordinary incursions upon their
neighbors. And at that time a mighty Navy of Moors came out of Africa, upon
the coast of Genoa and of Tuscane; and taking land did great harm, spoiling
many places, amongst which they besieged the City of Genoa: and the multitude
and force of the Infidels was so great, that notwithstanding that the besieged
fought very Genoa besieged and taken by the Moors.
valiantly, yet they entered it by force; all the Genowaies coming first to the
fight in defense of thire City.

After that the Infidels had entered it, they put all those to the sword which
were able to bear Arms; and spoiling and sacking it, left nothing therein
that was worth the carriage: and all boys, women and children they took
prisoners, and carried aboard their ships and galleys, which they led away
with them; and so left Genoa desolate and without any inhabitants: yet some
prisoners were soon released, and some were taken in their fleetes at Sea, and
elsewhere, which reinhabited the City: nevertheless it was long before it
could recover it self of this calamity: And some write that the Infidels
horse troops were taken upon the way, and that the prisoners were not carried
into Africa.

The Emperor understanding hereof, and being well informed of the state of
Italy, and that setting aside that which the Church held by so many titles and
donations, all the remainder of that Western Empire, excepting some Towns in
Pulia, was held by the Greeks, he therefore resolved to go thither in person
with a mighty Army, to free Italy from the yoke of HVGH, and of other Tyrants;
and to reform and reduce the same to such order as it ought to hold, and as he
had established in Germany. And beginning to make preparation for his journey,
and having mustered up his men of war, it pleased God to dispose thereof after
another manner; for he was taken with a most deadly infirmity; and knowing that
his end drew near, using such diligence as a good Christian ought to do, he
gave order that all the Princes (if possibly it might be) might be assembled;
with whose good will and consent he ordained his son OTHO (whom The death of
the Emperor Henry.
he had by his wife MAVD) Emperor and his successor: and his sickness
increasing, within few days after he yielded his soul to God, being of the
age of threescore years, in the seventeenth year of his reign, and in the
year of our Lord, 937. He left two other sons beside OTHO: the one was called,
by his name, HENRY, who was afterward Duke of Bauiere (for ARNOLDS sons were
deprived of that estate) he being married to his daughter IVDITH; and one other
son called BRVNVS, who was Archbishop of Colein; and he had one daughter
whose name was GERBIRGA, who was married to a Duke; and another called
ADALCIDA, which was married in Africa to Count Paris; and another called MAVD
which was a Nun.

In Constantinople ended the Empire of CONSTANTINE, when he had reigned eight
and thirty years, in company with the Tyrant ROMANVS; and part (as I said)
alone; in which time he had great conflicts in the Eastern parts, with the
Infidels in Asia, and with the Bulgarians in Europe; amongst which he won one
battle by Sea against the king of Russia, wherein were above a thousand sail
of ships, which came to the coast of Constantinople, by the Sea called
Euxinum; and other great accidents happened too long to relate: At the end whereof
he died, leaving his Empire to his son, which after his Grandfathers name was
called ROMANVS; The death of Constantine Emperor of Constantinople.
for CONSTANTINE had to wife the daughter of the other ROMANVS which was the
Tyrant, of wom I have already made mention.

This CONSTANTINE was a good Prince, very devout, and excellently well learned
in Humanity.

THE LIFE OF OTHO, THE SECOND OF THAT NAME, AND FOVRSCORE and SEVENTH ROMAN
Emperor. And of ROMANVS, and the rest which were Emperors in Grecia.
THE ARGUMENT.
OTho succeeding in the Empire, was much troubled; for not only the Princes of
Germany, but even his own brethren and kinsemen made war against him, and
fought bloody battles with him: of which, after long troubles he had
honorable victories? He also freed his brother in law Jews king of France
from certain Dukes which oppressed him. He was by the Pope called into Italy
against Berengarius; and coming with a great Army, forced him to fly.
Afterward his son, and one Conrade his son in law, whom he had left for
the defense of Italy, rebelling against him, and in the end the son coming
to a battle with the father (a thing more beseeming Turks and Infidels then
Christians) was the loser, and his fathers prisoner; who seeing with how great
humility, and with how many tears he sued for his life and pardon, he restored
him at length to his grace: and be afterward became most obedient. After this
war there grew a greater, made by the the Hungars and Slauons, which the
Emperor happily ended. He again came into Italy, by reason of Berengarius, who
tyrannized the same, and forced him to fly; and coming to Rome he was crowned
Emperor by Pope John. Many other rebellions ensue^d by the Popes and the Romans
against the Emperor, whilst he warred against Berengarius and his son: of
which, having fortunate succ^sse he returned into Germany, and ordained his
son Otho his successor; where being old, and busied in vertuons exercises, he
yielded his soul to God.

BEing come to write the life of OTHO the first of that name of the German
Emperors, of whom I am now to treat; it This Otho is called the first, for
that he is first of the Germane Emperors called by that name.
fares with me, in my opinion, as with one which has wandered, and is now
again returned into his right way. I make this comparison, for that there are
some which account not those amongst the Emperors, which I have placed after
ARNOLPH, the son of CARLOMAN, until this OTHO; of whom I say, that after the
death of his father, he found no contradiction in attaining to the name and
dignity of Emperor of Germany; for his father HENRY before his death had
nominated him for his successor. Truly this OTHO was very well worthy of the
Empire: for he was a Prince of an excellent wit, and of a wonderful great and
noble mind; and his great valor was accompanied with singular humanity and
clemencio* but notwithstanding al these deserts and virtues of a good Prince,
yet there were many great insurrections and rebellions against him; and he was
a Prince which had greater wars then any other then living, for the space of
of thirty and odd years that he held the Empire; in which time he passed
many adventures, and obtained great victories: and notwithstanding that he
underwent sundry dangers and hazards, yet he ever showed himself mild, and
pitiful to the vanquished; which (in my opinion) in the end made his Empire
more stable and firm, then all the victories which he obtained. As soon as
his father was dead, he was in the city of Aken, or Aquisgran chosen Emperor,
and anointed and crowned by OLDERICVS Archbishop of Mentz, all the Princes of
Germany (which could com) being there present; and the rest which could not,
wrote their Letters, and sent their Ambassadors, acknowledging their
obedience: And so his beginning was very peaceable and highly esteemed, and he
showed himself just, and valiant, and governed the estate with wisdom and
clemency. It happened presently after this, that BOISLAVS, brother Boislaus
slew his brother Wenceslaus by treason.
to the Duke of Bohemia (which at that time had not the title of King) by
treason slew his brother WENCESLAVS (for so was he called) to the end to have
the Sovereignty; and rebelled against the Emperor: whereof when OTHO was
advertised, moved with the hatred and vileness of the fact (for WENCESLAVS was
a just and faithful Prince, and his father HENRY had received him for his
servant and his subject, after that (as we have heertofore said) he had
subdued him, he resolved to send a good Army, under the leading of a valiant
Captain: whom the tyrant Duke attended in the field, and therewith fought a
terrible battle; and was overthrown with so great loss of his people, that
the Imperial General assuring himself of the victory, was less careful
and circumspect, then he ought to have been; but BOISLAVS within few days
reinforcing his Army, gathered courage from the others neglect; and charging
him suddenly in disorder and unawares, overthrew him, and slew the greatest
part of his people: wherewith OTHO was highly displeased, and sending thither a
new supply he sufficiently reinforced his Army: But BOISLAVS was grown so
haughty, and had such relief from the Hungars, that the wars grew to be
doubtful, and of long continuance, and in the mean time others happened; but
OTHO'S courage and resolution was so great, that he never forgot to provide
for this war, during the fury of all the other, as we will declare: yet it
lasted fourteen years, before he could obtain any complete victory; and then
BOISLAVS yielded as you shall hear.

The Emperor proceeding in this war of Bohemia; in the greatest heat
thereof, there began civil and domestical combustions and Insurrections,
which resolved into a very cruel war, the beginning whereof was this. EBERARD
which (as I remember) was brother to the Emperor CONRADE, and carried the
Imperial ensigns to the Emperor HENRY, father of this OTHO, being a great
Lord, rich and mighty, did an injury to an Earl, a man of less account then
himself, and burned a town of his; which for that the new Emperor would not
suffer to escape free, he condemned him in a sum of money, and to be imprisoned
and banished: which sentence highly displeased EBERARD, expecting opportunity
to show his discontent.

It happened also that a base brother of the Emperors called DAVZMAR, found
himself grieved, for that the Emperor had not given him the government of the
Province of Saxony, with the title of Earl, which was OTHO'S patrimony by the
death of Earl (...), lately deceased. In like manner the sons of ARNOLD Duke
of Bauiere, who then died, were discontent, for that OTHO had given that estate
to his elder brother BERTOLD; and they would not accept of the Earldome, and of
that part which the Emperor had assigned them: wherefore upon this occasion
EBERARD made a league with them, and with SIGISBERT Duke of Lorraine,
notwithstanding that he had married one of the Emperors sisters; and contending
with HENRY the Emperors second brother, who was a very young man, about the
bounds of certain lands, he besieged him in a city, and very shamefully took
him prisoner. And his base brother DAVZMAR, with the aid of the said EBERARD,
at the same time, took a city in Saxony, and sacked it, thinking to have
gotten the Earldome, which he demanded perforce as his right. The Emperor
understanding thereof, marched against his brother; and entering the city by
assault, DAVZMA^ was slain in a Church, whither he was brought by EBERARD the
motor of this treason. And after other practices, EBERARD agreed with HENRY the
Emperors brother, whom he held prisoner, to release and serve him, saying that
the Empire appertained unto him, for that his father begat him after that he
was Emperor, and OTHO before. HENRY moved with a desire to reign (a thing
which leads men to greater mischiefs) resolved to rebel against his elder
brother and sovereign Lord; whereto SIGISBERT Duke of Lorraine yielded aid
and assistance; who was a mighty Prince, and had the sister of the Emperor and
of HENRY to wife. And as the report went, that HENRY should be Emperor, each of
them desired to have the Empire for himself, and so practiced the same in
secret, for amongst the wicked there is neither faith nor truth: But they all
agreed together to ruin OTHO; and ^t let being removed, each of them thought
to have been a sovereign Lord, and to have had the Empire. The power and Army
which they levied was so great, as they took many towns: and as it usually
happens, fame and fear advanced the effect, so as OTHO was in great danger.
Nevertheless the other Princes of Germany did well and faithfully help and
assist him; and he, with the courage and diligence of a good Captain, levied
his forces, and marched against his enemies; and being come with his army to
the banks of the river of Rhine, and part thereof being transported in boats to
go against his enemies, which were encamped on the other side, whereof his
brother HENRY was General; his enemies having marched in great haste, were
gotten thither before them, and charged his men in such manner, as they were
likely to have been ouerthrown in the Emperors sight, who had not yet past the
River: but in the end, the The Emperors victory against his brother Henry.
Emperor making his prayers to God, obtained the victory, and his brother
being wounded, saved himself by flight. After this victory, the fame went, that
the Emperors brother HENRY was dead: which brought the Emperor this profit,
that the most of the Cities which held for his brother, yielded to him: which
when HENRY understood, he gat him into the City of Meresbergh, which is in
Saxony, and fortified the same in the best manner he could: and the Emperor
followed and besieged him, and brought him to that extremity, that he was
driven to give up the City upon condition, that he should suffer him freely to
depart whither he would. After which he went into Lorraine, and renewed the
war, ioining with Duke SIGISBERT, and with Duke EBERARD, his kinsmen: who with
greater fury and power then at the first, invaded the Emperors Countries, who
then was busied in besieging a town of Duke E^RARDS, called Stisaca; before
which he lay longer then was fit he should have done, through the deceit and
treachery of the Archbishop of Mentz, who secretly was a traitor to him, and
had intelligence with his enemies, to the end that HENRY and his confederates
should in the mean time make themselves Lords and Masters of the Country: which
when HERMAN Duke of Sueuia, and his brother OTHO, and CONRADE called the wise,
and other great Lords and Knights (which were the Emperors subjects)
understood, they joined al their forces together, and by his direction, with an
Army sought their enemies; and meeting them, fought a terrible battle: But the
Imperialists had the victory, and EBERARD, the ringleader, was slain fighting,
and SI^SBERT D. of Lorrain, was drowned in the Rhine, near the battle: yet some
say that he died in another Duke Eberard slain fighting, and Duke Sigisbert
drowned in t^ Rhine.
battle, and that HENRY the Emperors brother was not that day in the field, but
made war elsewhere. In this overthrow were slain, and taken prisoners, all
those which held with these Lords; amongst which were many Earls, and great
Personages.

This great victory being obtained by OTHO'S faithful friends and subjects,
the city which he besieged yielded, and he prepared himself presently to pursue
his brother HENRY, who fled into France. And then the Emperor went into
Lorrain, where his sister yielded herself into his power, together with her
son: where having set good order in that estate, and made peace Henry fled into
France.
with JEWS King of France, and recovered certain Towns which he formerly had
lost, he returned into Germany. In this manner he wholly subdued and tamed all
the Rebels; and in the end his brother HENRY humbly yielded himself into his
power: and he forgave him, and gave him lands and reueuues for his
maintenance, and likewise pardoned the other Earls and great men which had bin
his adversaries, together with FREDERICK Archbishop of Mentz, who was a Traitor
unto him, and was now in his power: but in the end he pardoned him also. And
forasmuch as his brother HENRY continued loyal unto him, he made him Duke of
Bauiere after the death of BERTOLD, who died without issue male; whose brethren
lost their right to that estate, for that they had conspired against the
Emperor; and HENRY had his legitimate daughter to wife, and so in good grace he
remained in his brothers service: Who, having brought these matters to an end,
resolved to make an end of the troubles in Bohemia, which through the aid of
the Hungars still continued, without any one days intermission, from the first
beginning of his Reign, which was a long time.

Finally, in some battles (wherein he was himself in person) BOISLAVS was
ouerthrown; in such manner, that he submitted himself, and became subject.
Having in this manner subdued Boislaus overthrown by the Emperor.
the Hungarians, the Bohemians, and such as rebelled, he resolved to relieve
JEWS the French King, who was his brother-in-law, and had sued unto him for
succors; whom for some occasions, too long to be recited, certain Dukes and
great Lords of France oppressed. Yet some Authors say, that this his going into
France was before the wars of Bohemia: but at what time, or in what order
soever it was, he went thither with a great Army, and relieved his
brother-in-law, and so again returned into Germany; where we will leave him to
enjoy his victories and good success, and will briefly declare in what estate
Italy then stood, and the accidents which then happened: which appertain to our
History, as well for that it was part of the Empire, as also for that HVGH
before named reigned there with the name of Emperor, although a tyrant. HVGH
having for certain years space possessed Lombardy, and a great part of Italy,
no man seeking to deprive him of his estate; for, OTHO (as is already said) was
busied with the troubles of Germany: in the end BERENGARIVS the Third, after
many long journies, having a desire to recover the Kingdom which his father and
uncle had possessed, and of all Italy, whereof the Emperor RODVLPHVS had
bereaved him; with the aid of certain Princes of Germany and of Italy,
resolved to make war against HVGH; and to that effect levied a great number
of good soldiers, and took his way toward Italy. HVGH, houlding himself
unable to make his party good against him, finding that such as were of
greatest power and authority in the cities, did not favor his faction; he
resolved to come to any composition: and so, finally, they agreed that HVGH
should leave the title of King of Italy, and return to his Duchy of Arles in
France, upon condition that his son LOTHARY should remain King in Italy
together with BERENGARIVS. BERENGARIVS accepted these conditions; and HVGH
returned to his old Dukedom, and left his son a King, and companion with
BERENGARIVS. This LOTHARY was married with ADELHAIDA, which by some was called
ALVADA, daughter to ARNOLPH Duke of Burgundy, who had reigned some certain time
in Lombardy, as we said before, and was expelled by HVGH. It happened that HVGH
afterward died in France: and in a short space (and after other matters that
ensued, which I leave to relate) LOTHARIVS died The death of Hugh and Lothary,
two Tyrants.
in Lombardy. And BERENGARIVS, seeing himself freed from company, took to wife
the widow Queen ADELHAIDA, which was a very excellent Lady. And since that he
found no contradiction or resistance in the Estate of Italy, against the
dignity of the Emperor OTHO (from whom he had received many benefits and
favors) he took upon him the name and title of Emperor, and instituted his
eldest son, whose name was ALBERT, King of Italy, and began to entreat the
people very badly, and in other matters to behave himself altogether like a
Tyrant.

At this time AGAPETVS the Second was Pope, who was held a virtuous, religious,
and innocent man (which, among men of that coat, was a matter not slightly to
be regarded) and he considering the violence and tyranny used by BERENGARIVS,
having now been Pope the space of 6 years, sent to solicit OTHO, Emperor of
Germany, to come into Italy, to free the same from so pernicious a Tyrant. The
like was done by sundry other Prelates and great men.

OTHO at that time was a widower of his wife EDITHA, by whom he had a son
whose name was LVITOLPHVS, a valiant and high minded young man: and having
heard the Italian ambassadors, at such time as he had ended the wars before
mentioned, moved by their persuasions, and through the desire he had to marry
Queen ADELHAIDA, whom BERENGARIVS held prisoner in Pauia, and to make himself
Lord of Italy, he levied an Army of fifty thousand men, and came down
against BERENGARIVS; who having no sufficient power to make head against him,
in the best order that he could, gave ground, still defending the strongest
castles and fortresses. OTHO marching forwards, taking towns and cities,
coming to Pauia, set ADELHAIDA at liberty, and with her good liking married
her, holding solemn nuptials: by reason whereof, his son LVITOLPHVS was very
sorry; and after it there ensued many inconveniences. This being done, and OTHO
having settled all matters concerning the State of Italy in good order, he
returned into Germany, leaving CONRADE for his Lieutenant in Lombardy. This
CONRADE was called the wise, and was Duke of Franconia, and sonne-in-law to the
Emperor by the marriage of his daughter LVIGVARDA: but his son LVITOLPHVS was
gone before into Saxony, which was his fathers house and patrimony, where he
raised some Commotions against him, for he was much grieved and discontented
with his fathers late marriage. OTHO being returned into Germany, and
BERENGARIVS seeing that by war, he could not recover what he had lost, came
into Germany, and brought with him his son ALBERTVS, and desiring pardon,
yielded himself into the Emperors power, vowing to be his loyal servant and
subject; which he protested in such manner, that the Emperor thought himself
well assured of him, and thereupon made him his Lieutenant in Milan and Otho
made Berengarius his Lieutenant in Lombardy.
^ll Lombardy, the ancient in heritance of the Empire, and gave certain lands
to him, and to his son ALBERTVS; wherewith his sonne-in-law CONRADE, which
before held that charge, being greatly discontented, he joined with LVITOLPHVS
the Emperors son, and so the son and sonne-in-law rebelled against him.
BLONDVS and other Italian writers, make no mention of CONRADE'S abode in Italy,
neither of BERENGARIVS his going into Germany; yet they mention his pardon, and
the offices that the Emperor bestowed upon him: But ABBAS WESPERGENSIS writes
in the same manner as I have related, and so do NAVCLERVS and other Dutch
writers. Italy remaining in this estate, the Emperor did not so soon abandon
it (as I suppose) without some suspicion conceived of his son LVITOLPHVS, who
departed from him and rebelled: truly he had reason to mistrust him, for
LVITOLPHVS being accounted his successor, found many friends to join with him
against his father; amongst which was his brother-in-law CONRADE, and ARNOLD,
and the other sons of BERTOLD late Duke of Bauiere; who dying the Emperor
gave to his brother HENRY that Estate: wherefore all those which were called
Dukes of Bauiere, were so much discontented with him, Luitolph and other rise
against Otho.
that they raised an Army, and took many towns and castles, meaning by force
to defend the same, with a resolution to depose him from the Empire, without
regard of the faith and loyalty which they, as his son and sonne-in-law,
ought to him.

OTHO making such account of this war as the importance thereof required,
levied his forces, and went against his son; who daring not to keep the
field against him, fortified himself in the city of Mentz, where his father
besieged him the space of threescore days, after Luitolphus besieged by his
father Otho.
that he had recovered many of those towns which had given their voices
against him; the city in the mean time being battered, and most valiantly
defended, in the end the besieged made a motion of peace: and to the end they
might have time to treat thereof, a truce was granted; in which time, the
forces brought by the Emperors brother HENRY to his service, through the secret
persuasion of ARNOLPHVS, and his brethren, which were called Dukes of Bauiere,
came to an agreement with LVITOLPHVS; with which, and with those which already
were in Mentz, in a night he found means to depart the city, and to get into
Ratisbone. The Emperor without making one days tariance, raised his siege, and
went to Ratisbone, which was better fortified and furnished then Mentz, and so
the siege was more hard and doubtful; and in the assaults and sallies many men
lost their lives, of the one and other party. And although that LVITOLPHVS
desired peace, and his fathers pardon, yet the Emperor would never yield
thereto, until that by the importunacie of some Prelates, he limited a
certain time, wherein his faults and offenses should be examined, and a treaty
should be held concerning what was to be done; and so LVITOLPHVS gave up the
city: And going thence, absented himself from his fathers presence, till that
(within the time prefixed) the Emperor being on hunting in the fields, LVITOLPH
acknowledging his error, and being very sorry for it, without security from his
father, came before him upon the way, bare beaded and bare footed, and kneeling
at his fathers feet, wept; who being amazed at* the strangenes thereof,
expecting no such matter, stood still: Luitolphus submitting himself to his
father entreated him.
and the son recovering spirit, in this manner entreated him to have
compassion on him, acknowledging his faults and offenses to be very great,
rather deserving a thousand deaths then any pardon; and therefore being heartily
forie for the same, (like the prodigal child) he presented himself before
his father, who also had a father in heaven, by whom he hoped to be forgiven*
and if it might please him to grant him his life, he should be assured of him,
to be ever after a loyal and obedient son, and one which lived, and would
live, in continual sorrow for what was past: if he meant to do otherwise by
him, he should yet consider that he was his own flesh and blood, and although
that the offense were only his, yet of the punishment inflicted upon the
guilty son, the just father would bear part of the sorrow; and that in
showing him mercy, there could no inconvenience ensue; but if he did to the
contrary, he should lose the most obedient son that ever father had.

Having ended these words, and other to the same effect, with great humility
he prostrated himself upon the earth, expecting his fathers sentence of life
or death. This struck so great an impression into the Emperors heart, to hear
and see his son to show such humility, and to shed so many tears, that he
could not for bear from doing the like: and commanding him to The pity of
Otho toward his son Luitolph^.
arise from the ground, with joy mixed with tears, from himself, and the rest
which were there present, he presently pardoned him, and restored him to his
grace and fatherly favor, and to the same place and dignity which he held
before; and so he continued constant in that loyalty and duty which he ought to
his father and sovereign Lord. This is a notable example to be read with
attention, whereby sons and subjects which have erred and offended their
sovereign Lords, may learn to repent and amend; and Princes to pardon those
which truly desire to be restored to their grace and service: for although
that it be most certain, that it is expedient for the good of the Common
wealth, that offenses be punished; yet generally no rule ought to be so strict
and severe, that no exception should be allowed; seeing that sometimes for the
common good, clemency is as profitable. Moreover, the shame and sorrow for the
offenses committed, is no small punishment to him that is pardoned.

OTHO having pardoned his son, and recovered Mentz and Ratisbone, and all the
other strong holds which had rebelled, and (according to the most and best
authors) reclaimed his sonne-in-law CONRADE, (yet some say the contrary) when
he should have taken rest, and have reposed himself, there arose new wars,
more dangerous then the former; for on the one side the Dalmatians and Slauons
entered the territories of the Empire; and on the other side, the Hungars (who
now had lived sometime in rest) gathering together an infinite number of them,
began the most dangerous and cruel war they ever had made; for besides that
they were a most valiant and proud people, they were so many in number, that
they reported of themselves, that the skies migh fall and so kill them, or the
earth might open and swallow them; but the power of no nations, or of any Kings
of the earth was sufficient to make head against them. Against a nation so
valiant and resolute, the valiant Emperor levied the best and mightiest Army
that ever he had done; for it consisted of eight legions, under the leading of
excellent Captains; and those, Dukes and Princes of the Empire. In this war
were many conflicts and exploits of Arms worth relating, which I omit for
brevity which I am bound to observe.

In the end these two mighty Armies joined, and sought a battle near the
river Danubius, which began about noone, and continued until night, without
any sign of victory to either side; the fields lying full of dead bodies, and
died with the blood of the slain and wounded; and the darkness of the night
parted the Armies, and made them leave fighting: but the Emperor spent the
whole night in dressing the wounded, giving them meat, and encouraging the
rest; and as soon as it was day, setting his troops in order, he took the
field, where they again began the fight, with as great fury as the day
before: But the Hungarians began to give ground, and within short space were
overthrown, and the Imperialists made an exceeding great slaughter of them,
and obtained one of the most famous victories that has bin in the world:
wherewith Otho's victory.
the Hungarians were so much daunted, that they never durst after that time
attempt to make wars in Germany. There died that day of the Emperors side some
principal men, among which was his sonne-in-law* CONRADE Duke of Franconia, of
whom all authors write, that he was the best and most valiant captain of his
time. Of the Hungarians died in a manner all the Nobility, and three Dukes or
Reguli, were taken prisoners, which the Emperor commanded to be hanged, for an
example, and punishment of the rebellion and pride of that nation.

This battle was fought in the eighteenth year of his reign, after which he
spent many days in processions, and in showing himself thankful to God for
so noble a victory: which being ended, he sent the greatest part of his Army
against the Slauons, and other nations which warred against him; all which he
vanquished and subdued with the like felicity, and then went to visit sundry
towns and cities of his Empire, to the great joy of his subjects. Great
matters in these times passed in France and in Spain, and in other parts of
the world, which I have not time to relate. In Italy BERENGARIVS and his son
ALBERT (seeing the Emperor busied in those dangerous wars) forgetting the
good which they had received from him, committed many tyrannies and
insolences, as well against the Church of Rome, as against the inhabitants of
the country: and therein also were other tyrants in diverse other parts. At
this time died Pope AGAPETVS, who held that seat almost ten years, and after
his death (by sinister means more by force and favor, then by any just form
of election) OCTAVIANVS, a Roman borne, the son of a man of great power and
authority in Rome, was chosen Pope, and called The commendation of Pope
Octauianus-called John the twelfth. The death of Romanus the Greek Emperor.
JOHN the twelfth, a most vicious wicked man, and given to all kind of
dissolution and ribauldrie; and above all, extreme cruel and covetous.

At this time died also in Constantinople ROMANVS the Greek Emperor, who was a
Prince far unworthy thereof; for he was both wicked and of a base mind, and
suffered his servants to rule him. In his time were two great wars in the
East Empire; one against the Mahometists Infidels, who had taken the I Will of
Candia; and the other in Asia, against the Turks and Persians. In the first,
NICEPHORVS (nephew to that NICEPHORVS which in the time of BASILIVS was so
excellent a Captain) was General, and wan great victories: In the other, LEO
was General, cousin germane to this NICEPHORVS; both which had happy success:
In the rest of his government he was a wicked and cruel Emperor; for although
that he had an excellent sharp wit and understanding, yet he abused the same.
ROMANVS being dead, notwithstanding that he left two sons, BASILIVS and
CONSTANTINE, and one daughter called THEODORA; yet by reason of their young
years and the hatred borne to their father, they then obtained not the Empire;
but yet afterward in process of time they gat it: and the said Captain
NICEPHORVS was chosen Emperor, who in the wars was very fortunate, and both
valiant and careful, but in peace careless and covetous.

Returning now to our Emperor OTHO, I say, that it was above six years after
his first coming into Italy, in which time having ended the wars with his
son, with the Hungarians and with the Slauonians, as we have declared; when
as (besides other times, that he had been prayed and entreated) Ambassadors
came unto him from Rome, and from sundry cities of Italy; entreating him to
come thither, and to free them from the tyranny of BERENGARIVS, and the cruel
tyrannous Pope JOHN, who also sent Ambassadors to him: whereto OTHO
consenting, resolved upon his journey into Italy with strong hand: and staying
to set some things in Germany in order, he sent his now loving and obedient
son LVITOLPHVS before him with the greatest part of his forces against
BERENGARIVS; who after some victories obtained against him, and the taking of
many cities, died of an infirmity: whereupon his father hastened The death of
Luitolphus.
his journey; but first he made his then eldest son called OTHO, of the age
of seven years, whom he had by his second wife, CAESAR and his successor. And
being come into Italy, neither BERENGARIVS nor his son ALBERT durst keep
the field, but fled to their holds and castles; and ALBERT gat into the I Will of
Corsica, and BERENGARIVS put himself into a very strong castle in Mount Leon:
And so OTHO, without shedding any drop of blood, took all Lombardy, and marched
toward Rome, where Pope JOHN attended his coming, and had by all means
possible sought his friendship; his conscience accusing him of his vices. In
matters which passed at OTHO'S second coming into Italy, there is some
difference between the Historiographers which write the same: but I will
follow that rule which the most of them have set down, and that which by many
conjectures seems to be most true. Being The Emperor Otho crowned by Pope
John the twelfth.
come to Rome (where of long time they had not se^e any Emperor) he was
received with great selemnitie and incredible pomp, by Pope JOHN and the
Romans; and with the like was by him crowned, having first sworn those things
contained in the Chapter Tibi Domine in the thirteenth Distinction. The
Emperor being informed in what manner Pope JOHN had attained to the Papacy,
and withal of his loose kind of life; after that he had remained there
certain days, in friendly sort he secretly admonished him to reform his
dissolute life, and the manner of his government in the Church; and seeing that
his secret warning prevailed not, he spoke to him in the Consistory before his
Cardinals, with greater authority and severity, then the other would he
should have done: which being ended, in hope that the Pope would have reformed
himself, he departed from Rome, to seek BERENGARIVS; and besieging him in a
City which he had fortified, he daily assailed it with great force and
resolution: in the mean time that he busied himself herein, Pope JOHN, with
some of his confederats (showing himself an enemy to the Emperor) called ALBERT
the son of BERENGARIVS into Italy, and made a revolt against him: whereupon,
OTHO leaving to besiege BERENGARIVS, returned toward Rome, where the Pope had
used great cruelty to those which held for the Emperor; among which (it is
said) that he cut off the Noses, and put out the Eyes of some of the Cardinals
and Citizens: but knowing with what fury the Emperor came, he durst not stay
his coming, but fled, and so lurked in sundry parts: and OTHO being comn, the
greatest part of the Cardinals, Clergy, and People of Rome informed him of the
Popes lewd life, and the insufficiency of his election; desiring him to place
a new: whereto he answered, that if their informations were true, they had
authority of themselves to choose whom they listed: And they holding JOHN'S
election to be of no effect, made choice of another, whose name was LEO, the
eighth of that name, who was presently received for Pope, the Emperor holding
him for such: And leaving him seated in his throne, OTHO went from Rome,
returning to his enterprise against BERENGARIVS and his son ALBERT; wherein
he used such Berengarius condemned to perpetual imprisonment, and his son
Albert to be exild, by the Emperor Orho the second.
diligence, and had so good success, that BERENGARIVS despairing to be able to
defend himself, yielded to his mercy; and his son ALBERT, with his wife and
children, were taken prisoners: And the Emperor OTHO (using his accustomed
clemency and magnanity) would not put them to death, but contented himself to
banish them: BERENGARIVS he sent prisoner, and banished into a strong Castle in
Saxony; and his son ALBERT to Constantinople, and so ended the tyranny of the
BERENGARII in Italy.

BLONDVS and other authors write that their imprisonment was as soon as OTHO
came into Italy: but I follow the Abbot WESSPERGENSIS, and the most part of all
the other Historiographers.

Within few days after that OTHO was departed from Rome, wherein he had left
LEO the eighth for Pope; the Roman people, by the persuasion of Pope JOHN, and
of his Allies and kindred (with the like lightness as they usually are moved)
altered their minds, and determined to cast out LEO, and to receive JOHN; and
so JOHN was restored, and LEO driven to fly, and to complain to the Emperor
at Spoleto.

When the Emperor was advertised hereof, making an end of such business as he
then had in hand, he concluded to come within few days with his forces to
Rome, against his enemy Pope JOHN, who died there before his coming: some
writers say, that a Roman, taking him with his wife, slew him, when he had
continued Pope nine years. The Romans hating Pope LEO, who was now with the
Emperor, chose another called BENEDICT the fifth; and he and they presently
sent their Ambassadors to the Emperor, to entreat him to be pleased with his
election: wherewith the Emperor was more offended then before, and gave them a
very sharp answer: But the Romans (who by this time loathed the Germans,
murmurring against the Emperor) persisted in their opinion of holding BENEDICT
for Pope: for this cause, OTHO removed with his Army, and came to Rome, where
Pope BENEDICT and the Romans had made provision of men and munition for their
defense; and he first spoiling the territory thereof, besieged the City, and
brought it to such distress, that they write wonders Rome besieged and taken
by the Emperor Otho.
of the famine and want which the besieged endured; which was such, that being
unable to endure the extremity thereof, they gave up the City to OTHO; who being
now Lord of that City, deposed BENEDICT whom he held for no Pope; and
reestablished LEO, whom he brought with him: then he stayed some days in Rome,
setting all things in good order, and carrying BENEDICT with him, whom they had
chosen in contempt of him, together with the sons of many of the chief men
in Rome for his better security; he departed thence, and came into Lombardy;
wherein, placing governors and garrisons in all the Cities which appertained
to the Empire, he returned into Germany; where he was solemnly received by all
the Princes and estates thereof: Within few days BENEDICT (whom the Emperor
brought with him) died of sorrow, six months after his election; so that Pope
LEO remained sole Pope without any competency: but his prosperity continued but
a while: for within little more then one year, after that he came to be Pope,
he died also; and through his death they chose Pope JOHN the fourteenth of that
name, but he was not received; for the President of Rome, who then was called
PETER, rose against him, and with the favor and assistance of the Decarconi,
which were Rulers for one year; and of the two Consuls of the City (this was
the manner of their government at that time) and a certain Prince which was
Earl of Campania, w^e name was GO^DVS, rising against the Pope, they became so
mighty, that they ap^ ended him, and committed him to the Castle S. Angelo; and
afterward, being Pope John prisoner in the castle S. Angelo.
masters of the City, they rel^ased him thence; so as he lived exiled eleven
months: which being past with the aid of JOHN, Prince or Duke of Capua, he was
restored to his estate, and the aforesaid GOPREDVS was put to death: this was
in the year of our Lord, nine hundred sixty and seven. OTHO having reigned
Emperor thirty and odd years; and being in Germany adu^ised of what passed
in Rome, and much grieved therewith, he resolved presently to take his way
toward Italy, to punish so great a contempt, and to supplant other Tyrants;
and putting the same in execution, he came thither with great forces of foot
and horse, and brought with him his oldest son and successor; coming to
Rome, he inflicted notable punishment upon this prefect PETER, and the rest of
the principal offenders.

This being ended, he sent his son OTHO with part of his Army against the
Moors, Otho's second coming into Italy.
who held many Towns in Pulia; and this OTHO drove them thence by force, and
was then contracted by his Ambassadors to THEOPHANIA daughter to NICEPHORVS, at
that time Emperor of Constantinople: And for as much as her father would not
send her unto him, he resolved to make a conquest of those Lands which were
subject to that Empire in Italy, and did so: for which cause (as some authors
write) the Greeks rebelled against NICEPHORVS, The death of the Greek Emperor
Nicephorus.
and depriving him of his Empire slew him, taking JOHN for Emperor, whose
sister or cousin germane OTHO afterward married.

Others say that the cause of this war was, for that the Greeks which dwelt
in Pulia, held peace and friendship with the Infidels which dwelt among them,
and did assist them. But, whatsoever was the occasion, OTHO and his son
bereaved them of the best lands that they held in Italy; wherein PANDVLPHVS
Duke of Capua did him especial service. All which being brought to a wished
end; Pope JOHN, with the consent and good liking of OTHO, crowned and made his
son OTHO his companion in the Empire, with great feasting and solemnity: and
so, very joyful and victorious, both the father and the son returned into
Germany, leaving the Pope in peace absolute Lord of Rome; and so was Italy
maintained seven years in peace without any tyranny.

The Emperors, being comn into Germany, were with great joy received; and to
them came Ambassadors of amity and friendship from all the Princes Christian.
The rest of his life, which was not long, he spent in doing justice, in
building of Churches and Monasteries, and in such like exercises: In which; in
the six and thirtith year of his Reign in Germany, and the thirteenth year
after his Coronation in Rome, it pleased God to take him out of this world, in
the month of The death of the Emperor Otho
May, in the year of our Lord 974.

A little before the death of OTHO, NICEPHORVS Emperor of Constantinople was
deposed and slain, who had reigned six or seven years, and had obtained great
victories against the Infidels: but, through his evil gouerument in time of
peace, they rebelled and slew him; And an excellent Captain, whose name was
ZIMICES, was chosen Emperor: who, the better to confirm himself in the Empire,
chose for his companions the two sons of ROMANVS, who was Emperor before
NICEPHORVS, whose names were BASILIVS and CONSTANTINE; and married himself to a
sister of theirs called THEODORA. This proved an excellent and valiant Emperor,
and subdued the Russians, and other northerly Nations, and also PHOCAS a
Tyrant, who rebelled against him: of whofe end you shall hear more hereafter.

THE LIFE OF OTHO, THE THIRD OF THAT NAME, AND FOVRSCORE and EIGHTTH ROMAN
Emperor; And of JOHN, BASILIVS and CONSTANTINE, Emperors of Constantinople.
OTHO the son of OTHO, and therefore called the Second (yet in truth he was
the Third) as soon as his father was dead; as well for his fathers worthiness,
as for that in his life time he was elect and crowned in Rome by the Pope, as
we have This Otho was according to the order of the Roman Emperors, the
Second; but the third Roman Emperor of that name.
related, was without any contradiction received and obeyed for Emperor. This
OTHO was a man of a great spirit, and very valiant, and so showed himself in
all his actions; though in the later end of his Reign he was unfortunate, as
you shall understand. He beginning to rule the Empire, all Christian Princes
sent Ambassadors unto him, to condole the death of his father, and to
congratulate his succession; and the Princes of Germany came to do him homage:
only HENRY Duke of Bauiere (who was his cousin germane, son of the other
HENRY, brother to his father OTHO, of whom we have made some mention, and whom
his father made Duke of Bauaria; being a man of great power, and therewith very
proud) refused to yield obedience to the new Emperor: but OTHO raised an Army,
and went against him, and compelled him to submit himself, and to yield his
obedience; this befell in the first year of his Reign. From thence he marched
against some Towns in Slauonia, which took Arms against him. In the mean time,
in the Province of Lorrain were some combustions, procured by LOTHARIVS King of
France; upon the news whereof, OTHO returned into Germany: but the French King
had raised such forces, and was so suddenly entered Lorrain, that he made
himself Lord thereof; pretending, that the Province did appertain to the Crown
of France. And not content to have subdued all that Country, within few days
after he marched forwards, spoiling and wasting the Country even to Aken; where
OTHO then was with small forces, nothing mistrusting that the King of France
would have proceeded so far in that war, where he was like to have been
taken, and was driven to depart thence in more than haste: but the French King
retiring with great prey and spoils; the Emperor, much displeased with his
doings, raised a very mighty Army, and the next year following, with great
courage and equal power, entered the Kingdom of France; in such manner, that
the French King neither durst nor was able to fight with him; but retired, and
fortified himself in the City of Paris: whither OTHO came (the King being
therein) and spoiled the Country, in revenge of the harms received; and in
coming within sight of the City, he lost some of his people in a skirmish
against the French: and seeing that the King salied not forth to give him
battle, and that he could not besiege him with any advantage, he resolved for
that winter to return into his Country: and in his retreit the King of France
sent the Duke of Burgundy and other Princes, to charge him in the arieregard
(as GAGVIN and other French Historians write) and at the passage over a river,
which was grown so high by reason of the rain, that it could not be waded
through, he received great harm by his enemies, and they slew a great part of
his Army; which the Germans do not so bravely describe (yet they acknowledge
to have lost some of their people at that passage) and the Emperor being
returned, resolved to have prosecuted that war; but it happened otherwise: for
he gave ear to a treaty of peace between him and the French king, moved by
certain prelates; which was concluded, as we will show you; whereof the wars
in Italy, made by the Greek Emperor, were the chief occasion; which passed in
this manner.

JOHN ZIMICES (as is before recited) having obtained the Empire of
Constantinople by the death of NICEPHORVS, and taken for his companions the two
sons of the Emperor ROMANVS, whose names were BASILIVS and CONSTANTINE; and
having obtained The Emperor of Constantinople poisoned Basilius; and his
brother Constantine succeeded John in the Greek Empire.
many victories, and governed the Empire very well; was poisoned in
Constantinople, when he had reigned six years and a half, and BASILIVS, and
his brother CONSTANTINE, which were his brothers in law, remained Emperors; but
BASILIVS bare the chiefest sway in the government, being now twenty years old;
who in process of time wan many great victories, as well against tyrants which
rebelled, as other people, and reigned fifty and od years; in which time many
reigned in Germany, the story whereof I am to write, although I ever make some
mention of Constantinople, as I have done hitherto.

In the beginning of the reign of BASILIVS, and of his brother CONSTANTINE,
they being both young, and of great power, and seeing that OTHO was busied in
the wars of France, and grieuing that he and his father had taken the lands
belonging to the Greek Empire in Pulia and in Calabria, they resolved to
recover the same, embracing the opportunity, considering that OTHO was pestered
with these troubles, and that the Popes were of small power by reason of the
great tyrants which were in Rome, and in a manner through all Italy by reason
of the Emperors absence. The two brethren having placed good Captains and
Garrisons in the provinces of Asia, and Graecia, took their passage into
Italy, and brought in their Army many Infidels, as well such as were newly
entertained, as such as in former time had made war in that country; and
began to take Cities and Castles, and in short space took all the rest of
Pulia, and Calabria: and Rome it self and all the country thereabout stood in
great fear of them.

OTHO having intelligence hereof (at what time as he was in parley of peace
with France) and grieuing much that the Greeks should recover what he had
conquered at the time of his fathers coronation in Rome, with a resolution to
recover and to defend the same, he concluded a peace with the French: wherein
was granted to him the supreme jurisdiction, and all the province The Emperor
made peace with France.
of Lotharingia, otherwise called Austrasia, which afterward was divided into
sundry estates, as Braband, Gelders, Cleue, Gulick, and that which now is
called Lorraine; whereof he gave the Dominion to the French kings brother,
whose name was CHARLES, with the title of Duke, the more to bind the king of
France to observe the peace: And having taken such order herein, and in the
rest of Germany, as was expedient; he went with great power into Italy, where
his coming was long expected; and taking his way toward Rome, he was there
again crowned by the Pope, notwithstanding that he was so in the time of his
father: and he required the Cities of Italy, that at a certain time and place
appointed, they should send him their men of war, which was performed
accordingly: and staying but a very small time in Rome, he drew all his Army
to one head; and so went to seek his enemies, who refused not the battle: and
both parties desiring the same, it was fought, wherein OTHO had very ill
success. For, having a greater number, and better men then were the Greeks;
the Romans, the Beneuentanes, and others which had the auauntguard, at the
first encounter charged so cowardly, that without making any resistance, they
abandoned the field in such confusion, that they disordered the other
Battalions and Squadrons of the Germans: so as the Greeks encouraged hereby,
followed the chase of them which fled; in such manner that OTHO'S people, being
unable to do as they would, and ought to have done, were broken and
overthrown, and a very great number of them slain.

The Emperor seeing no hope of better help, fled from the battle; and
coming to the Sea side (which was not far from thence) put himself into a
small boat, which he found there Otho taken by a Sea-rouer.
by chance, thinking so to escape: but he was taken unknown by a Pirat, and
carried into Sicilia, where he was discovered by a Merchant of Slauonia, who,
upon promise of reward made by the Emperor, bewrayed him not, but agreed for
his ransom. This is reported in sundry sorts: but in the end he was delivered
by the Merchants means, they nothing knowing that he was an Emperor. And so he
returned into Italy, and came to Rome, whereof the Greeks might have been
masters if they had known how to have followed their advantage; for, their
enemies being overthrown, they had not found therein any resistance: but, God
having otherwise ordained, they left the war, contenting themselves with the
victory.

OTHO, being comn to Rome, gathered together the remainder of his Army; and,
adding thereto new supplies, the first enterprise that he attempted, was, to go
to Beneuent: where he put the greatest part of the Inhabitants to the sword,
and sacked the City, because they fled from the battle. It is written of
him, that he inflicted cruel punishment in Rome for the same cause; so as he
was therefore called bloody: the cause whereof was, The great grief and sorrow
which he conceived for the loss of the battle, and his flight; considering,
that through the fault and cowardice of his friends it had happened: so as they
write of him, that ever after, whilst he lived, his countenance was ever sad
and pensive, and that he often gave great groans and sighs: and, finally, in
his apparel, and in all other things, he showed continual sorrow and extreme
heaviness; and all his speeches and discourses were, how he might be revenged,
and recover this loss.

After this, living in this care and melancholy in the City of Rome, he was
taken with a mortal infirmity, which (as some say) came through sorrow (but
not without suspicion of poison) which increased so, that he died thereof,
having reigned ten years, in the year of our Lord The death of the Emperor
Otho the third
nine hundred fourscore and four. He left behind him, when he died, one
son called OTHO (as himself) of the age of twelve years, who was afterward
Emperor; and another called HVGH, who was Duke of Saxony, and one daughter
called ALASIA, which afterward was married to a Prince of Saxony, whose name
was ALRANE or ALEDRANE, and was Marquess of Monferrato; in whom that house and
state had beginning. All these he had by his first wife, whose name was
THEOPHANIA, who had been late wife to JOHN Emperor of Constantinople. He had
also another daughter called VTILHVIDA, by his second wife, which was the
Marquess of Austrich his daughter, who was married to THEODORICVS, the first
Earl of Holland: and, OTHO being dead, the Greeks for that time continued Lords
of Pulia and Calabria.

THE LIFE OF OTHO, BEING THE FOVRTH OF THAT NAME, AND FOVRSCORE AND NINTH
ROMAN Emperor; And of BASILIVS and CONSTANTINE, Emperors of Constantinople.
THE ARGUMENT.
AFter long disputations and contentions about the election of the Emperor,
between the Romans and the Princes of Germany; in the end Otho the son of
the deceased Emperor, was chosen, being a child not fully twelve years old;
and so one Crescencius in the beginning of his reign rebelled against him in
Rome; who aspired to the Empire, and made himself a tyrant over many
Countries, and persecuted the Pope, driving him to fly; but finally for fear
of the Emperor, who came into Italy to protect the Pope, he made his peace
with him, and became his subject: the Emperor being departed, Crescencius
again took Arms and made a new Pope: and persecuting the Pope made by the
Emperor, he constrained him to fly to the Emperor, who conducting him into
Italy, took Rome, and slew Crescencius; and the other Pope died miserably. At
this time, an order and form was set down for the choosing of the Emperor,
and the honor being given to the Germans, the Romans were therewith much
displeased; and conspiring against the Emperor, put him so to his shifts, that
he was driven to fly disguised; but in the end, unable to eschew treason, he
died of poison, when he had reigned eighteen years.

IN such manner as I have declared, the Emperor Observing the ordinary course,
this Otho was the fourth of that name, although the third of the Germane
Emperor.
called OTHO the Third deceased: and in the City of Rome, was great contention
and controversy about the election of a new Emperor, between the Princes of
Germany which were there, and came with him; for some would have his son to
succeed him, whose name also was OTHO, being then but a child of eleven and
half years old; being the fourth of that name, but the third of the Germans.
Others were of opinion (by reason of the childs nonage) to make HENRY Duke of
Bauaria Emperor, who was his fathers Cosin-germane, the first OTHO'S brothers
son; who being a mighty man and there present, sought to have gotten his young
cosine into his power, to the end that he should not have been chosen; and did
so, and took upon him the title of Emperor: And the Roman and Italian Princes
(desiring to be freed from the Government of the Germans whom they naturally
hated) sought by all means that an Italian might have been chosen; and they
named one who was a very mighty Roman, called CRESCENCIVS NVMITANVS, who at
that time was Governor, and Consul in Rome: for (as it is said) they had
established a new manner of Government, imitating the ancient custom; for at
this time they had a certain kind of Consulate.

The Princes of Germany standing in fear of the Roman and Italian people (in
a manner) by common consent, maugre HENRY Cuke of Bauaria (who thought to have
been Emperor) resolved to choose OTHO son to the last OTHO; for although
that he were but young and scarcely twelve years old, yet he gave great
signs and hope of a future excellent Prince; and taking him out of the power
of the said HENRY of Bauiere, they departed with him from Rome toward Germany,
and came with him to the City of Aken, where he was crowned with great
solemnity, and obeyed and held for Emperor; and so he was in Milan, and in
other parts of the Empire. But in Rome CRESCENCIVS NVMITANVS, who (as we said)
sought to have been Emperor, possessed himself of the City, and of the
territory thereof: and for as much as Pope JOHN took part with OTHO, he made
him to be apprehended in the third month of his Papacy, and committed him
prisoner to the Castle of Saint Angelo, a Crescencius apprehended Pope John the
fifth, and committed him prisoner to the Castle S. Angelo, where he died of
sorrow.
wicked and impious act, where within five months after he died of sorrow.
Afterward JOHN the sixteenth came to be Pope, who was a covetous wicked man,
and consented to the Tyranny of CRESCENCIVS before named, and rebelled with Rome
against the Emperor OTHO (whereof the Emperors nonage gave the chief
occasion, and for the same cause some Princes of Germany likewise rebelled
against him) but within short space, having attained to the age of fourteen
years, he was of such courage and discretion, as he might well be accounted
for a perfect staid man: And with the aid of those which continued his loyal
subjects, he subdued and overcame (although long first) all such as rebelled
against him; with such happiness and good success, that he was held for the
wonder of the World, seeing in him so great valor and so ripe a judgment in
so green years.

What Rebellions these were, and in what manner he had so great good fortune,
none of the Historiographers do write particularly, that I could ever see; so
briefly they pass over this place: Wherefore I can relate no more then I find
written; only this they affirm, that for the space often years, he was
busied in pacifying and ordering the state of Germany: in which time
CRESCENTIVS tyrannized Rome; which passed in this manner:

Pope JOHN the sixteenth, who (as I said) succeeded JOHN the fifteenth (as it
pleased God) lived Pope but seven months; all which he spent vilely: and he
being dead, a learned man was chosen, whose name was JOHN also, which was JOHN
the seventeenth, but much unlike his Predecessor; for, he was an honest man:
and for being so, was soon at variance with the Tyrant CRESCENTIVS; who was of
such power, that Pope JOHN was driven to leave Rome, and to give place to his
tyranny. He oftentimes sent to the Emperor OTHO for succors, and to come and
reform the state of Rome and Italy: But the Emperor could not then perform his
request, by reason of his other weighty affairs; yet afterward he did it, as
you shall hear.

In the mean time, CRESCENTIVS fearing the Emperors coming, acknowledging his
error, practiced with Pope JOHN to return, promising him to be obeyed and
respected: and he so effectually handled the matter, that a peace was concluded
between them; and the Pope came, and was received with great solemnity. But,
this notwithstanding, the Emperor held on his way, and came into Italy with
great power (which was in the eleventh year of his reign) The coming of the
Emperor Otho into Italy
and was received every where as he passed, with great joy and feasting: and so
he came to Rome, where the Pope and CRESCENTIVS (after some treaties and
ambassages which passed) made great preparation to receive him. And the Emperor
being comn near to the City; the Pope, accompanied with all his Cardinals and
Clergy, and with all the Roman Nobility and Gentlemen, went forth to
entertain him: and so in peace and good friendship the Emperor stayed some
days in Rome; and, to gratify the Pope and the Romans, he went with his
Army to Capua and to Beneuent, which disobeyed, and were at wars among
themselves: whom he compelled to live in peace, to the contentment of the
Romans.

About this time died Pope JOHN; and the Emperor, returning to Rome, procured
an uncle of his of the house of Saxony, whose name was BRVNVS, to be made
Pope, and he was called GREGORY the Fifth: who, being seated in his papal
dignity, anointed and crowned the Emperor, with such solemnity and pomp as his
father and grandfather had been before him. Which being ended, and OTHO
imagining that the estate of Italy stood now in good form and order
(considering that his uncle remained highest Bishop) he took his way toward
Germany, and by the way visited Lombardy, and other parts subject to the Empire.

In the mean time, whilst that OTHO was busied about the affairs of Italy,
the Successors of CHARLES the Great were deposed from the Crown of France;
which although it concern not our History, yet for as much as it is a matter of
great importance, I think it worthy to be reduced to memory; and thus it was:
King LOTHARY being dead (who as we said made war against OTHO the Second) his
son JEWS, succeeding him, within one year died also. This JEWS being
dead; HVGH called CAPVTIVS or CAPET, Earl or Gouerner of Hugh Capet usurped
the king dom of France.
Paris, being a man of great power and authority in that Kingdom, tyrannically
took upon him the title of King, and made himself Lord of France; having no
right thereto, but the right of war: and first he took CHARLES (brother to
LOTHARIVS) prisoner by treason (who, by the death of his nephew JEWS, was
called King) and caused him to die in prison, and (subduing all such as made any
resistance) got the Crown and Kingdom; which has continued in his Successors
unto this day.

OTHO being returned into Italy; the Romans, who had ever murmured at the
election of Pope GREGORY, and loathed the rule and command of the Germans,
chose the Tyrant CRESCENTIVS for Consul: by whose aid and counsel they again
rebeld against the Pope; in such sort, that he was driven to flee Rome, and
earnestly to entreat the Emperor to relieve him; in hope that he would have
comn to his rescue, or that CRESCENTIVS and the Romans, fearing the Emperors
coming, would have recalled him, and have made peace with him, as they had done
with his Predecessor. But it fell out clean contrary: for, CRESCENTIVS,
alleging that Pope GREGORY'S elelection was violent (the Emperor forcing the
same) he caused the Bishop of Placentia to be chosen and made Pope, who was
called JOHN the eighteenth (yet sundry Authors hold him not for Pope).
Wherefore Pope GREGORY, leaving Italy, went into Germany to the Emperor; who,
being highly displeased, levied an Army, and came into Italy, and so directly
to Rome, where CRESCENTIVS had fortified himself, and provided a garrison to
defend the same; and the Emperor besieged the City: which put the Romans in
such fear, that they durst not stand to their defense; but, opening the gates,
desired the Emperor to pardon them; and the two tyrants, CRESCENTIVS and Pope
JOHN, withdrew themselves into the castle S. Angelo, which CRESCENTIVS had so
well fortified, that it was held for impregnable: whereupon OTHO came to a
parley with him, to the end that he should have yielded: and CRESCENTIVS
presuming that his life should have been saved (whereof he was put in some
hope) delivered up the castile; and he and the Pope coming toward the
Emperor, were apprehended upon the way; and CRESCENTIVS was Crescentius put to
death.
presently put to death by his commandment, as a violater of his faith, and
one that had been twice a traitor. Others write that he caused him to be
hanged, and Pope JOHN'S eyes to be Pope John the eighteenth had his eyes put out.
put out, who afterward died miserably: such are the rewards which the world
bestows upon those which to follow the same forget God, their own honor and
honesty. These tyrants being suppressed, the Emperor restored Pope GREGORY to
his seat and dignity, and set the best order in all matters in Rome, that the
time would permit. Pope Gregory restored to his (...).


All this which I have recited being ended, Pope GREGORY acknowledging the
succors which the Church of Rome had received from the Emperor, and from the
Princes of Germany (as a man affected to his native country, and to the
Germane nation; by the will and consent of the Emperor, and to prevent and
eschew the discord which did arise, or might happen, about the choosing of the
Emperor) made a law and Canon, which has lasted about six hundred years, even
until this day, which was, that the election of the Emperor, so long as the
Empire should be void, should appertain to six Princes only, which we will
presently nominate; three, whereof were Prelates, and the other three, secular
Princes, viz. a Duke, a Marquess, and an Earl, and if by chance there should
be equality of voices between these six, the King of Bohemia (which then was
no King) should also have his voice, and the party whereto he inclined, should
make the choice, and their election should stand: the Prelates are, the
Archbishop of The original of the order of the choosing of the Emperors,
ordained by Pope Gregory the fifth.
Mentz, the Archbishop of Colein, and the Archbishop of Treuier: the Princes
are the Count Palatine of Rhine, the Duke of Saxony, and the Marquess of
Brandenburgh. And he further ordained, that no man should be chosen Emperor,
except he were a Germane borne; and that being chosen by the Princes Electors
aforesaid, he should be called King of the Romans, and not Emperor Augustus,
until that he were confirmed and crowned by the Pope, as it is observed unto
this day.

This decree and law (as most authors write) was made in the year, one
thousand and two: which cannot be so, for all agree, that Pope GREGORY the
fifth which made the same, died in the year, nine hundred ninety and seven:
but this contrariety is easily salued, for the Emperor OTHO died in the year,
one thousand and two, or three; and so in that year, or the next, that law was
put in execution, notwithstanding that it was made some time before, and
therefore they say that it was made that year: And thus they are excused,
which attribute this order and form of election to Pope SYLVESTER, which
succeeded Pope GREGORY, who indeed was the man which made the same. And he
further ordained, that the election should be made in the city of Frankford,
and that he which was chosen, should come to the city of Aken to be crowned
King of the Romans. And the Emperor OTHO ordained certain preheminences and
offices, which each of these Electors should hold in the Emperors house and
court; as one to bear his Sword, another to be his Cupbearer, with such like,
which concern not our history.

This being ended and concluded in this manner; some authors write, that the
Emperor went into Germany, to set an order in the affairs of the Empire,
where this election before recited was approved and ratified: others make no
mention of this his going, but rather report, that he spent the rest of his
time in Rome. Howsoever it was, after the death of Pope GREGORY (which was
when he had been Pope two years and half) in his place was chosen one
GILBERT, a more excellent man for wit and learning, then any in his time was to
be found: but he abused and ill employed the same; for he was a great
Necromancer and enchaunter, and gave himself to bargaining with the devil, and
to other unlawful Arts: he was a Frenchman born, Pope Syluester a
Necromanter.
and was called SYLVESTER, and had been the Emperors School master, whom most
authors affirm, to have learned Magic in the city of Seuill in Spain:
which notwithstanding that it was in the power of Infidels, yet the Arts and
Philosophy did flourish there.

This people held the chair four years, in which time the Emperor came
again to Rome (or had not gone forth of it) and very effectually applied
himself to the good government of the Empire, punishing and reforming the
abuses committed by sundry, through the small authority and worth of former
Popes, and the tyrannies and factions which had been in Rome: all which was
done by the Popes consent, as by him which had been the Emperors
Schoolmaster, and was placed there by his authority. The Emperor (as it is
written of him) was a man of great understanding, and of a very good condition:
But the Romans, who now were much discontented with the form set down, for
choosing the Emperor, wherein they had no voice or authority, either to choose
or to be chosen; it being the chief seat and head of the Empire; and being
also extremely grieved, to see that OTHO did so absolutely command in Rome and
in Italy, and made so long abode there: first they began to murmr thereat,
and afterward secretly to conspire, and to practice his death; and in the end
their envy increasing, their audaciousnes and contempt likewise increased:
whereupon, one day when the Emperor suspected no such matter, and the people
which he then had with him in the City being The Romans made an insurrection
against the Emperor and would have slain him.
but only Courtiers, the Romans arose with a great tumult, and putting
themselves in Arms, slew many of the Germans: and then went to the Palace
where the Emperor was, and being unable to enter at their first approach (for
that his guard and Gentlemen which repaired thither defended the same) they
compassed the house, in such sort as the Emperor had been either presently
taken, or slain; but that one HVGH (who was his Lieutenant, and governed a
great part of the Emperors countries in Italy, with the title of Marquess,
and was well beloved amongst the Romans) came to a parley with them, desiring
some treaties of peace and agreement: and with him joined HENRY Duke of
Bauiere, to whom they also gave ear; which restrained the fury and rage of
the people: and holding them thus in talk, a mean was found whereby the
Emperor (changing his habit) gat forth of the City, not being discovered, and
went to the place where his forces lay (and the Pope did the like) whither
repaired to him all those which fled from the fury: and so for that time he
escaped death. But although that he was delinered from this public treason,
yet he could not free himself from that which was secret: for within short
space after, being busy in gathering his forces together (with an intent (as
some say) to have gone into Germany, and as others say, against Rome) he was
poisoned (as some write) by the wife of CRESCENTIVS the tyrant before named
(whom he commanded to be hanged in Rome) with whom, as she was the fairest
woman of her time, they say, that the Emperor being in Rome had secret
conversation; and that she faining to be greatly in love, poisoned him in a
pair of Gloves, which she sent him excellently perfumed: whereof within The
death of the Emperor Otho by poison Anno 1002.
three of four days after, he died, the poison working slowly and leisurely.

Other Authors believe not this, but that he was poisoned by others; yet they
all agree that he died of poison, in the year of our Lord, one thousand and
two; when he had reigned eighteen years complete, and lived only nine and
twenty and a half, leaving no son to succeed him: which some affirm was the
cause why he procured Pope GREGORY to ordain that manner of choosing the
Emperor, as I have already described: And they say moreover that he was
married with the king of Arragons daughter, whose name was MARY, a woman not so
careful for the preservation of the honor and honesty of her person, as she
ought to have been.

This Prince is accounted amongst the good Emperors, for his many virtues, and
for that he ruled the Empire with justice, and uprightly. Before his death
there appeared great signs in the firmament, as Comets, which continued many
days; and the most notable was, that one day in the morning about nine of the
clock, there appeared in the element a great flaming fire, like to a burning
torch, which continued a great while; and the light being vanished, there
appeared in the same place the likeness of a Serpent. The body of the Emperor
was carried by HENRY Duke of Bauiere, and the other great Lords, into Germany,
and buried in the City of Aken. A little before his death Pope SYLVESTER died
in Rome, whither it seems that he The Emperor Otho buried in Aken.
was returned, who died through Gods great goodness (as it is written) very
penitent for his sins; and in his place was chosen JOHN the 19, who dying
within four months after without doing ought worth the writing, another JOHN
succeeded him, which was JOHN the 20, of whom we will hereafter make mention.

During the reign of OTHO; in Constantinople reigned BASILIVS and CONSTANTINE,
brethren; but (as I said) BASILIVS was the more valiant, and the man by whose
counsel and direction, all actions were worthily and happily achieved in the
wars: for he enlarged that Empire both in Asia and Europe, and obtained many
great victories. In the beginning of their reign (as is before declared) they
came into Italy, and overthrew OTHO the Second: after this, their quarrels
were with tirants; the first was with a Captain called SCLERVS a very valiant
man, and of great power, who was their Lieutenant in Syria and in Phenicia; who
rebelling, made himself to be called Emperor: this was a very dangerous
war, but in the end he was overthrown, and escaped by flight to Babylon: but
afterward (many things happening in the mean time) he was reduced to their
service. The second was with PHOCAS, another Captain of no less renown and
valor then SCLERVS, who would also have been Emperor, and to that effect had
levied so great an army, that he doubted not to fight a battle with
BASILIVS, wherein he was slain, and therewith ended his life and tyranny; and
so achieved BASILIVS these two great exploits: after which ensued the war
which he had begun with SAMVEL, King of the Bulgarians; from whom, the lands
of the Empire had received much harm by fire and sword, in the time of the
wars with the Tirants aforesaid; of whom BASILIVS was sufficiently revenged
in many battles, as hereafter shall be related when time shall serve: the
Greek Emperors also held the greatest part of Pulia and Calabria; for the
said BASILIVS and CONSTANTINE recovered the same, when they overthrew OTHO the
second in Italy; and they sent some thither, with the titles of Governors and
Captains, who were call Calisti, as in ancient time were the Exarchi: yet
Sicilia was in a manner wholly possessed by the Infidels of Africa.

THE LIFE OF HENRY, THE SECOND OF THAT NAME, AND FOVRSCORE AND TENTH ROMAN
EMPEROVR.
THE ARGUMENT.
OOtho being dead, the Germane Princes Electors, according to their authority
chose and crowned Henry Duke of Bauiere (Cousin Germane to the deceased Otho)
Emperor. This Prince, in the beginning of his reign, was much troubled, by
reason of certain rebels. He warred against Robert King of France, and levied
a power against the Duke of Bohemia which rebelled: in both which attempts, he
obtained honorable victories. He made the King of Hungary (who desired his
sister in marriage) to be baptized; and went into Italy, whereto he had a
great desire; and marching with an Army against the Infidels, which held many
Towns in Italy, chiefly in Pulia, he subdued them. Returning into Germany, he
invited Pope Benedict to come to visit him; and the Pope coming thither, he was
received with exceeding great honor. He lived with his wife in continual
chastity, and left her as good a maid as he found her; and so falling sick of
an extreme infirmity, having performed all things appertaining to a good
Christian, he departed out of this life; but he first entreated the Princes
Electors, to make choice of a good Emperor.

IT cannot be denied, but that the three OTHOE'S, the Father, the Son, and
the Nephew, of whom but even now we left to discourse, were very valiant and
worthy Princes; and which repaired the credit and reputation of the Empire,
very much torn and decayed; and for such are commended and recorded by
Historiographers. OTHO then dying in Italy (as I have declared) after that the
Germane Princes and people were returned into their Country, with the
Emperors dead body, and had buried the same, with such solemnity as thereto
appertained: the before named Princes, that were made Princes Electors (which
were the Archbishoppes of Mentz, Coleyn, and Treuler; the Duke of Saxony, the
Marquess of Brandenburgh, and the Count Palatine of the Rhine) purposing to
show their Authority, and to choose an Emperor, met together in the City of
Frankford; where knowing the many virtues and merits of HENRY Duke of Bauiere,
they chose him for King of the Romans, and future Emperor AUGUSTUS; and he
was anointed in Aken by the Archbishop of Mentz, which was in a manner by the
common consent of them all, excepting HERBERT Archbishop of Coleyn, who was
of a contrary faction.

This HENRY was cousin german to OTHO, whom he succeeded in the Empire, and
Nephew to HENRY Duke of Bauiere, Brother to OTHO the first (yet second of that
name) who by the same OTHO was made Duke of Bauiere, as in his life we have
specified; and was the second of the Emperors so called: yet the Italian
writers say, that he was the first, for they do not reckon the other HENRY,
Duke of Saxony, for Emperor (whose life we have before written, who was Father
to OTHO the first) for that he came not into Italy, neither was crowned there
by the Pope. The election of the new Emperor was commended and approved by all
those which desired the good of the Commonwealth, for that he was a good Henry
the second chosen Emperor.
man: yet there were some ambitious, and unquiet Princes, which rebelling, took
Arms against him; but he showing his power and valor, in short space tamed
and brought them to his obedience: who they were which thus rebelled against
the Emperor HENRY, I could never read, for writers do not specify the same.

This HENRY being confirmed and assured in his seat, desired to come into
Italy: but he could not bring it to pass, until the eleventh year of his
reign, by reason of such wars as happened. First, some Authors write, that
there presently grew wars between him, and ROBERT King of France, who (by
the report of all writers) was also an excellent Prince, although the son of
HVGH CAPET, which usurped those Kingdoms: for what cause those two good
Princes fell at variance I find not written: but those which make mention
thereof, say, that HENRY had the victory in this war; and that afterward
they came to an agreement: which being ended, there followed a far more
dangerous war than the former: which was against BODISLAVS D. of Bohemia; who
being of great power and aided by the Slauons, the Polacres, Morauians and
other nations, rebelled against the Empire; and the Emperor with a great power
resolutely marching against him, the wars grew to be very cruel; and some
battles were fought, wherein BODISLAVS was overthrown: but not dismayed
therewith, persisting Bodislaus Duke of Bohemia, ouerthrown by the Emperor.
in his rebellion, he reinforced his army, and levied the greatest power he
was able, and again gave the Emperor battle; which, through the valor and
courage of the Captains and Soldiers of either side, was very doubtful and
terrible, but the Emperor HENRY with much difficulty obtained the victory;
and followed the same in such manner as BODISLAVS was constrained humbly to
crave pardon, and sue for peace: which was granted upon very hard and heavy
conditions; and so he was subdued, and made subject to the Empire, together
with his Confederates.

This enterprise being ended, and he free from war, in the mean time that
he made preparation for his going into Italy, (which he greatly desired) he
applied himself to matters of peace and good government, doing justice to all
men indifferently; and builded and enriched many Churches and Monasteries; and
honored and advanced Bishops, Monks, Priests, Friars, and other such like
religious people. In those days (being importuned, and in a manner compelled
by the great Princes of the Empire, wholly against his will) he married the
daughter of the Count Palatine of Rhine, called AMIGVNDA, a religious Lady:
with whom (undiscovered and unknown to any, until his death) he lived most
chastely, both of them observing voluntary virginity, without having any
carnal knowledge the one of the other; which is one of the most rare things
that I ever read, of any King or Emperor. Uoluntary chastity observed by the
Emperor and the Empress.


This Emperor had also a sister called GISELA, which (as they write) was the
fairest woman of her time, whom STEPHEN, Duke and Lord of Hungary, desiring to
have to wife, he could not obtain his suit, except he would first become a
Christian, and be baptized (for although that in that Kingdom were many
Christians, yet the Princes were Infidels) whereto STEPHEN yielded, and became
so devout, that he is accounted amongst the Saints: and the The King of Hungary
became a Christian, and was baptized.
Emperor gave him his Sister, and with her the title of King, and so he was
the first that was called King of Hungary. Some write that this GISELA was
Niece and not Sister to the Emperor. In these accidents before related, HENRY
spent ten years of his reign, and then resolved to levy a great Army to go
into Italy, wherein had passed some great matters: among which, MOLOCHVS,
Gouerner of Pulia and Calabria for the Emperor of Constantinople, and with him
WILLIAM, and his other brothers, sons to the Duke of Normandy (a Prince and
great Lord in France, who at that time was in Italy with great forces, whither
they came about some certain enterprises) joined their forces together, and
agreed with the Duke of Salerno and other Princes, to expel the Infidels of
Africa out of the I Will of Sicilia where they inhabited; which they did with such
force and courage, that within less than two years they recovered ^he whole
Island: whereof (according to the agreement) certain Cities and Towns were to
have bin given to the said WILLIAM, and to the other Dukes; but MOLOCHVS
satisfying the debt with part of the prey and booty which they had taken, of
all the rest would part with nothing, but put garrisons into all the Towns, to
hold the same for his Lord the Emperor. WILLIAM and the rest, being discontent
heerwith, came into Italy, where they took by force such Cities as were under
MOLOCHVS government: and MOLOCHVS coming out of Sicilia to make head against
him, they joined battle; and WILLIAM, obtaining the victory, became Lord of
the most part of Pulia and Calabria: where dying, his brother DROGVS succeeded;
and afterward, through sundry accidents, his offspring becam Lords of those
Provinces, and in process of time of Sicilia also for a long time after (first
with the title of Dukes, and afterward of Kings of Sicilia) and in the end of
both the Sicilies, which are Siciliae and Naples, as in time shall be remembered
in our History. Of the time when this WILLIAM and the Normans came into Italy,
Authors differ: but so far as I can conjecture by the true computation of
times, it happened at such time as I have set down. This being past, Pope SERGIVS
died in Rome, and BENEDICT the Eightth succeeded him: yet BLONDVS calls him
STEPHEN, which is contrary to the opinion of all other Historiographers; so as
I imagine it was through the error of the Writer: for, in that time there was
not any Pope that was called after that name.

In the time of this BENEDICT, the Emperor HENRY prepared for his coming into
The Emperor Henry's coming into Italy.
Italy, and came very mighty: and by the way visiting Milan, and the other
Imperial Cities, he came to Rome, where by Pope BENEDICT he was most solemnly
received, and afterward crowned with exceeding feasting and magnificence; where
making his abode some few days space, he marched thence with his Army against
the Infidels, which through the aid and permission of the Greeks (to use their
service against the Normans) came into Italy, and had besieged the City of
Capua: with whom the Emperor fought, and, overthrowing them, forced them to
abandon the Country.

After this, he went against SVBAGENVS, General for the Emperor BASILIVS, for
that he had supported the Infidels in Pulia; and, making cruel war against
him, dispossessed him of many Towns: and in the end laying siege (which lasted
four months) to the City of Treya which was but newly erected and ennobled,
he took it by force; so as, ex pelling the Infidels, and taming the Greeks,
leaving them some part of Calabria to inhabit, and in part favoring the
Normans, as those which had showed themselves his obedient and dutiful
servants, he left to them Pulia, whereof they were already possessed; and,
returning to Rome, stayed there certain days, and thence went into Germany
with great honor; and by the way visiting Milan and other Towns, was received
in Germany with great joy and solemnity: and so, his dominions being in peace,
he spent his time in ministering justice, and in well governing his Empire. As
the Emperor HENRY busied himself in those actions before specified, and had
reigned two and twenty years (some say, two years less; yet PLATINA and
BLONDVS write, that he reigned but eight years, wherein they are much
deceived: but I think for certain, that, as they were Italians, so they reckon
his Reign but from the time that he was crowned in Rome, which was in the
twelfth year thereof; and so comes their account to agree with the rest of the
Authors: whereof let the Reader be well advised, as well in this, as in what
shall be said hereafter) at the end of this time he was taken with a grievous
sickness; wherewith seeing himself oppressed, he commanded such of the Princes
Electors as might come in so short space, to be sent for: who being comn, he
counseled them, that after his decease they should choose the valiant Prince
CONRADE, Emperor; who was one of the Dukes of Sueuia, others say of Franconia:
the cause whereof may be, that he came of both houses; and so, after the German
manner, was called by both names, as at this day the Dukes of Bauiere are
called Count Palatines of Rhine. He nominated this man unto them, for that he
thought he was desirous of the Empire; and within The death of the Emperor
Henry the Second.
few days after died, viz. in the year of our Lord one thousand four and
twenty, leaving his wife as good a virgin as she came to him. It is written
that she being accused of adultery, showed her innocence, by going barefooted
upon certain places of fiery hot iron; and that the Emperor became very
penitent for permitting her to expose herself to such danger, being so chaste
and virtuous a woman.

In a manner about this time died BASILIVS Emperor of Constantinople: I say in
a manner, for that in this place, it is a hard matter to reconcile the times,
by reason of the incertaintie and variety among writers. BASILIVS when he
died was seventy and two years old, and had The death of Basilius Emperor of
Constantinople.
reigned two and fifty; in most matters, in great prosperity, at least in
Arms, as well against the Bulgarians, whom he compelled to pay him tribute, as
against the Infidels; and dying left his Empire to his brother CONSTANTINE, who
reigned three years, and governed the same negligently and viciously: and he
before his decease, ordained and left a great and valiant personage, called
ROMANVS ARGIROPHILVS, for Emperor; whom he first married to his daughter.

This ROMANVS in the beginning, showed himself to be an excellent and valiant
Prince: but being afterward overthrown by the Infidels in Asia, he altering
his condition, became couerous, and gave himself over to many other vices; for
which cause he grew to be so much hated, that having reigned but five years,
his own wife ZOE practiced his death, by the hands of one MICHAEL PAPHLAGONVS,
with whom she lived in adultery; and afterward married him, being a man very
well conditioned; who by her means had the Empire, which he valiantly and
manfully defended the space of seven years, in the wars which he held with
the Infidels in Asia, in Soria defending the frontires of Phenicia.

THE LIFE OF CONRADE, THE SECOND OF THAT NAME, AND FOVRESCORE AND ELEVENTH
ROMAN EMPEROVR; AND OF MICHAEL, Emperor of Constantinople.
THE ARGUMENT.
COnrade the second was chosen Emperor accordingly as the Emperor Henry
before his death had ordained, and thereto had persuaded the Princes Electours;
yet notwithstanding, his election was not without some contradiction and
difficulty. Being in possession of the Empire, he was to provide for many
matters, and to subdue many Rebels, which rebelled through the long vacation of
the Imperial seat, which was two years without any Sovereign. But all these
rebellions and tumults of war were pacified without shedding any drop of
blood, or drawing of sword; for he subdued them all through his humanity and
courtesy: these wars hindered him three years. This being done, he came into
Italy with a very great Army, and took Milan: which was a more rebellious
City, then any of the rest; and coming to Rome was crowned by Pope John the
one and twentieth. Afterward understanding of certain tumults in Germany, he
speedily returned: and that enterprise being ended, he came again into Italy,
where many Cities had revolted: but inflicting terrible punishments upon the
malefactors, he came at length to Rome, to relieve the Pope against such as
molested him; and having reformed all matters in Italy, he returned into
Germany: where being assailed by an infirmity, he died, having reigned
Emperor ten years.

THE Princes Electors of the Empire being assembled, to choose a successor to
the Emperor HENRY (whose History we have now written) notwithstanding that he
advised them to make choice of CONRADE, yet they could not so easily agree, but
that the difference continued between them the space of two years, not being
able to resolve, who should, or ought to be Emperor, whereof many
inconveniences and disorders ensued, and many Cities and Towns in Italy, and
some Princes in Germany, attempted to set themselves at liberty, and to shake
off the Imperial yoke: wherewith the new Emperor Elect was afterward greatly
troubled. At the end of this time, the aforesaid CONRADE was chosen and crowned
Emperor, as HENRY had willed; yet he was in some sort contradicted, particularly
by CONON one of the Dukes of Bauiere, and Uncle to the late Emperor HENRY; who
would have been Emperor.

This Emperor CONRADE was a singular good man at arms, and had been General
in the wars for the Emperor HENRY. Here authors do vary, and contend about
the matter, viz. Whether, that he were of the Dukes of Sueuia, or of Franconia,
and spend many speeches about proving their opinions; but I will avoid this
travel, notwithstanding that it seems to be most certain, that he was of
the house of Sueuia, or (as I said above) was peradventure descended from both
the houses, and after the Germane manner, enjoyed both titles, as at this day
is used. But let it be, as it shall please the reader. He was chosen as a man
which best deserved the same; which he afterward very well verefied and made
manifest. As soon as he was invested, he wrote his letters to all parts,
procuring peace and friendship with all the Kings and princes which desired it,
and commanded his subjects duly to observe the same: but the two years
vacation had bred such a custom of liberty, as they rebelled against him. The
first was BODISLAVS Duke of Austria, whom HENRY had subdued, and made
tributarie to the Empire, who (taking upon him the title of King) denied both
his vassalage and tribute: against whom CONRADE levied an Army, purposing to
have gone against him in person; but at the same time BODISLAVS died and left
two sons, the one called OTHO, and the other MISICVS. MISICVS was the elder
brother, and remained absolute Lord, and imitating his father, persisted in his
rebellion against the Emperor, and expelled his brother OTHO, because he would
not join with him in the action; and this OTHO departed presently to the
Emperor, who entertained him well, but was so much displeased with his brother
MISICVS his presumption, as he sent the same OTHO with part of his Army to
begin the war: and within few days, he himself followed with the rest, and
entered the country with such power, that MISICVS durst not abide his coming,
but went into Bohemia, to crave aid of WALDERICVS Duke and Lord thereof, who
was also one of those which rebelled against the new Emperor.

WALDERICVS having entertained and assured him; in lieu of ayding him, sent to
treat secretly with the Emperor, with an intent to have delivered him into his
hands, thinking by this mean to have comn to the better composition. But the
Emperor disdaining to circumuent his enemy by Treason, was so much displeased
with WALDERICVS for his treachery, as The loyalty of the Emperor Conrade.
besides that he would not accept his offer, he showed the greatness of his
generous and noble disposition, by sending to MISICVS, secretly aduising him to
come to his obedience, or to seek relief some where else, for in Bohemia he
had no security. MISICVS understanding what passed, and well considering the
Emperors bounty, went out of Bohemia; and coming into his country, left the
Ensigns and title of King, which his father and he had usurped, and with a
small train, came and yielded himself into the Emperors power, humbly
submitting himself, more in regard of his kind and gentle admonition and
advice, then for fear of his force: and the Emperor pardoned him, and granted
him peace upon the same conditions as before.

Following the example of MISICVS, the Duke of Poland and all the rest which
had taken Arms, and rebelled, came to the Emperors service and obedience;
amongst which were STEPHEN King of Hungary, and WALDERICVS Duke of Bohemia,
notwithstanding that they first failed not to try the utmost of what they were
able to do by Arms. In all which, CONRADE spent the first three years of his
reign, and could not (accordingly as he desired) go into Italy to be
crowned; where he had much to do, by reason of the great leagues and
confederacies made against him, that they might free themselves from the
imperial yoke and subjection.

This time being expired, and having taken order for the estate of Germany, he
levied the greatest Army he could, and came into Italy; but he first nominated
his son HENRY, King of the Romans: and forasmuch as Milan, and all the
Towns in that quarter, which in former Conrade came into Italy.
time were wont to be most serviceable and in greatest subjection, were now in
Arms, and rebelled, he therefore marched directly thither, and so it behooved
him to do: for Pope GREGORY the fifth (in the rule and Canon which he made in
the time of OTHO the Third, concerning the Princes Electors, and the choosing
of the Emperor) instituted and ordained, that he which was chosen, besides the
golden Crown which he should receive of the Pope, should be crowned with two
other Crowns; the one of straw in Monzi a City in Lombardie, and the other of
Iron, in the City of Milan; which (of set purpose) I have reserved to be
written in this place, and do here find it written by those Authors which I
follow Wherefore, for the full accomplishment hereof (although I have not read
that any his predecessors had done the like) the Emperor, battering and forcing
such towns as would not receive him, came to Milan, which then was more
obstinate and rebellious then any other: and doing much harm in the territory
thereof, he narrowly begirt the city with a siege, with a resolution to have
^uinated and burnt the same, for the great displeasure which he had conceived
against it; and for an example to the rest. Which he might and had easily
performed, and that in short space (as many writers affirm) but that (I know
not upon what occasion) he raised his siege and went toward Rome (no man
daring to make head against him) where Pope JOHN the one and twentieth most
solemnly received him, and with the like solemnity crowned him with the Crown
of gold: at which coronation (as affirm some authors which I follow) was
KANVTVS King of England in pilgrimage, with whose daughter, they say, that
HENRY, son to this Emperor CONRADE, was before this time married. And there
was also RODVLPH, King of Burgundy, and Uncle to GISELA the Empress, who was
descended from CHARLES the Great; and being deprived of his estate of
Burgundy, by ROBERT brother to the French king, came to implore the Emperors
aid and succors.

CONRADE being in Rome, there arose a great tumult between his train, and the
citizens; in so much that they all took Arms and fought a whole day together,
and many were slain of either side, but the Imperialists had the better; and
the Emperor in the best manner he could, pacified this riot: and staying but a
short space after this in Rome, he departed thence and out of Italy also
toward Germany; for his sonne-in law ERNESTVS Duke of Sueuia, son to the
Empress GESILA, by her first husband Duke of Sueuia, rebelled, and made war,
seeing him pestred in Italy. But he being come into Germany ERNESTVS, being of
no sufficient power long to defend himself, was soon overthrown, and fled to
the Mountains: where he was afterward taken and slain by the Emperors
soldiers, and his estate was given to his brother, whose name was HARMAN. At
this his coming (so far as I can gather, comparing the times with the
accidents) CONRADE gat by his Captains the country of Burgundy, and made it
subject to the Empire, which one hundred and odd years had been subject to
the house of France (but yet there had been very mighty Kings and Dukes
therein) which was effected by the will and testament of RODVLPH, who was
present at the Emperors coronation in Rome: and he bequeathed it to the
Emperors son HENRY, which could not be done without war and bloodshed; for the
King of France of the one part, and a certain mighty Earl of another,
pretended right thereto, and were possessed of great part of the country; but
to be short (for herein much might be said) at this time the supreme dignity
of Burgundy was transported to the Empire: yet ROBERT GAGVIN in the end of his
fifth book, says, that Burgundy was then divided The division of Burgundy
into the Duchy and the County.
into two pars, the one remaining subject to the French, and the other to the
Empire.

The Emperor CONRADE having ended these things so happily for his profit, after
that he had lived quietly some years in Germany, without any accident worthy
writing (by reason of which, the History of his time is more brief than of
other Emperors) he resolved to come the second time into Italy: for at the
first, by reason of the small time that he made his abode there, Conrade's
second coming into Italy.
he could not settle things in such order as he desired; and also for that he
understood that the Italians sought aid and relief from the Slauons and the
Hungars, against him, with a determination not to yield him any obedience. So
as, having all things in a readiness for his journey, as speedily as he could
he departed, and came with greater expedition and power than any man thought
of: and in his journey ruinating some Towns, and punishing some offenders which
thought to have made head against him, he came to Milan, which presently
yielded; where he punished the guilty for former offenses, and remained some
days therein.

Departing from thence, he took all the Cities in that Territory; and then went
to Rome to see the Pope, and to relieve him against such as disobeyed him
(which now, as I conjecture, was BENEDICT the Ninth, JOHN the one and twentieth
being dead, who was Pope eleven years). And from thence with great power he
traveled over all Italy, visiting all the lands belonging to the Church of
Rome and to the Empire, not finding any resistance whatsoever: yet in Pulia and
in Calabria the wars were still on foot between the Grecians and the Normans.

In this manner returned CONRADE into Germany triumphing and mighty, whose
History I have written very briefly; for, so do Authors handle the same: and
thinking now to repose himself after his former toils (which for the space of
fifteen years that he was Emperor he had endured) he was taken with an
infirmity, whereof within few days he died, in the year of The death of the
Emperor Conrade.
our Lord one thousand and forty; some add thereto three years. He left
behind him one son whose name was HENRY; who, as I will presently tell you,
succeeded him in the Empire.

In the time of the Emperor CONRADE, MICHAEL PAPHLAGONVS (as is already said)
reigned Emperor of Constantinople, for that ZOE took him for her husband; with
whom she had lived ever since the decease of A^GIROPHILVS her first husband;
and he ruled the Empire seven years. After his decease she took another
husband of the same name, called MICHAEL CALAFATES; and, being accustomed to
that trade, she made him Emperor: but, for that he lived with her but four
months, she remained a widow. By reason whereof, the same ZOE, together with
her sister THEODORA (which were the Emperor CONSTANTINE'S daughters) governed
the Empire three months: and as she was both inconstant and incontinent, so
she resolved once again to have a husband; and upon this occasion banished her
sister, and married a man whose name was CONSTANTINVS MONACVS, for that he came
of the line of the Emperors; who nevertheless was a wicked and evil Emperor:
which was the occasion that the Empire began to decline, and to be of small
account. At this time died the Emperor CONRADE. What end this Emperor
CONSTANTINVS MONACVS made, more shall be said hereafter.

THE LIFE OF HENRY, THE THIRD OF THAT NAME, AND THE FOVRESCORE AND TWELFTH
ROMAN Emperor; And of those which in his time reigned in CONSTANTINOPLE.
THE ARGUMENT.
IN the beginning of this Emperors Reign there were some troubles, for that he
was not chosen according to order: nevertheless, being held for such, he
warred upon the Duke of Bohemia, which denied him tribute; and, taking him
prisoner, constrained him to become a good and obedient subject. He afterward
took Arms against the Hungars, as well for that they had given aid to the
Bohemians, as for contriuing some unlawful innouations; and gave them a very
great overthrow: and their King being dead (whoknew not how to make benefit of
the Emperors clemency) he restored Peter to the Crown; and afterward subdued
the Duke of Lorrain which denied him obedience. He came into Italy; where he
reformed the estate of the Church which was far out of order, and was crowned
in Rome; and afterward, bending his forces against the Infidels, he drove them
out of Italy. And being comn into Germany, he sent a Pope to Rome (having
accepted the offers made unto him by the Cardinals concerning the Popes
election) who being received by the Cardinals, lived like a Pope: this Pope,
going against the Duke of Normandy, being in a battle taken prisoner, was the
very same day set at liberty, and obeyed by the victor. This Emperor once again
made war against the Hungars, for putting Peter their King to death; and after
many accidents (...)to an agreement with them: in which time there were so many
calamities and scourges sent from God into the world, that the Emperor falling
sick, died of sorrow when he had held the Empire 17 years.

IT cannot be denied, after that the Empire was wholly transported to the
Germans in the person of OTHO, but that the Emperors thereof defended and
governed the same very valiantly, as by the History appears; principally, the
OTHONES and the HENRY'S, as will appear by the two of whom we are to treat.
This HENRY, being the son of CONRADE, was a good Emperor, and in condition no
less virtuous than his father, or any of the HENRY'S, or other his
Predecessors; neither in Arms of less valor and courage. We have told you
before, how that his father in his life time had made him King of the Romans,
which was a policy that the Emperors have ever since used, to procure the
Empire for their sons; and by that means to leave the same to them by
election, seeing they could not do it by inheritance: which in truth seems to
be but a device to frustrate and prevent the law and decree made and
established by the Emperor OTHO the Third, and Pope GREGORY the Fifth,
concerning the place where, in what manner, and by whom, the Emperors (the
Empire being void) should be chosen; and that it should not be inherited by
succession, but by election: whereupon there grew some question and doubt about
the matter; viz. Whether this HENRY should be held for Emperor or no: for, the
Princes of Germany held it for very inconvenient and unfit, that his father
should nominate him, and that it was a dangerous matter to introduce fuch a
custom; for, this was a thing that ought to be done by the Princes Electors
only: but in the end (they acknowledging his good parts and deserts) he was
confirmed and crowned Emperor, and generally obeyed for such, according Henry
the Third chosen and crowned Emperor.
to the accustomed manner: only GRATISLAVS Duke of Bohemia, whom the Abbat
WESPERGENSIS, BLONDVS, PLATINA, and OLDERICVS, call FRATISLAVS (a man of great
power) rebelled against him, denying any superiority, or to pay him any
tribute, which (as JOHN CVSPINIAN says) was one hundred cowes, and five
hundred Marks of silver yearly. Against whom, HENRY (as a new Emperor, of a
great courage, and desirous to win honor and reputation) raised a great
Army, and that sooner than he should have done: for, they write, that he began
his war in the winter, and therefore failed of his expectation, and that
through the unseasonableness of the time, and the distemperature of the
Country, in skirmishes and encounters he lost many of his men, which were
taken and slain by the enemy; so as for that time he had the worst, and was
driven to retire, without accomplishing what he had projected, and with loss
of reputation: wherewith he was so much grieved and ashamed, that presently in
the beginning of the next spring he returned to the wars of Bohemia with all
the force he was able to make: and GRATISLAVS, grown proud of his late The
Emper^ Henry's victory against the king of Hungary.
good success, and through the new supplies which came to him out of Hungary,
offered him battle; wherein (notwithstanding that both Armies fought
courageously) in the end the Duke was overthrown, and afterward taken flying:
and the Emperor (showing what compassion the other craved) granted him life,
and pardoned the offense upon security, that from thenceforth he should be a
loyal subject; first gathering-in the arrerages of three years tribute which
was behind unpaid, as COSMVS de Andrepragana recounteth in his Annals; whereby
the Emperor won much honor. And presently after this, followed another war
against the Hungarians for the same occasion.

By the death of King STEPHEN, who was K. of Hungary, PETER came to the Crown:
against whom, for some ill usage, his subjects rebelled, and made a kinsman of
his, King; whom the Abbat WESPERGENSIS calls VBO, and others call him ABA: and
the Tyrant ABA being of greater power than the King, PETER was expelled his
Country, and driven to seek justice and relief from the Emperor HENRY; who
notwithstanding that he was not well pleased with him for assisting the Duke
of Bohemia against him, yet for that he had subdued them both, he as his
soueraign Lord entertained him, seeing that to him it appertained to do
justice, and not to permit any tyranny in his time: and ABA or VBO being
advertised heerof, and having sent his Ambassadors to the Emperor to show him
the equity of his cause, and to desire his confirmation in the Kingdom, not
contenting himself in that he had tyrannized Hungary, entered Austria and
Bauaria; and robbing and spoiling those Countries, carried great booty and prey
out of those Quarters. This he did at such time as the Emperor held a Diet or
Parliament in Colein; where the Princes of Germany were assembled: whereupon,
by the general consent of them all, the Emperor (accompanied with some of the
Princes) with a great Army departed from Colein toward Hungary, sending
GRATISLAVS Duke of Bohemia before to begin the war: which, ABA the
Tyrant-king of Hungary fearing, he sent Ambassadors to meet the Emperor upon
the way, with all the booty and prey that they had gotten in Austria and
Bauaria; entreating him for peace, promising to do what he should enjoin him
unto, conditionally that he might not be deposed from that Kingdom: whereto
the Emperor for that time yielded and consented; moved thereto by a rumor
spread abroad, that the Duke Lorrain, with the aid of France, was in Arms and
rebelled; which was the occasion of the peace granted to the King of Hungary,
to the end that the Emperor thereby might have the better leisure and
opportunity to follow the wars of Lorrain, which were so much doubted. But ABA
made not the benefit of that peace, which a wise and a peaceful Prince would
have done: but he entreated his subjects rather with greater pride and rigor
than before, putting many of the chief of them to death: upon which occasion
the Emperor the next year following (with no less an Army than the former,
but with greater resolution) entered Hungary, where ABA already attended his
coming with his whole power; and with such other aid and assistance as he
could get; which was such and so great, that assuring himself to prevail
against the Emperors forces, he offered him battle; which was exceeding
resolutely fought of either side, and was very bloody and cruel: but the King
in the end was overthrown, and (as writes HENRICUS MVCIVS) twenty and six
thousand of his men were slain: and of the Emperors side who had the
victory, three thousand: ABA escaping by flight, he was afterward in a
village (where Aba king of Hungary overthrown in a battle by Henry the
Emperor, and slain by his own people.
he had hidden himself) found and slain by his own people: yet some say that
he was taken and slain by his competitor PETER. After this overthrow, all the
whole Kingdom of Hungary sued to the Emperor for pardon, imputing all their
former faults to their King; and he gave them a general Pardon, and restored
King PETER to his throne, first reconciling him to his subjects, and placed a
Nobleman to be in some sort assistant to him in the government: But this King
(as he was naturally cruel) agreed so ill with his subjects, as in the end he
lost both his Kingdom and his life, as hereafter shall be specified.

This war being ended, as I have related, the Emperor longed to come into
Italy, as well to be crowned, as to take away the schism out of the Church: but
first he resolved (for so was it requisite) to tame the pride of GODFREY Duke
of Lorraine, who would neither obey nor acknowledge him, but rather usurped
some towns of his; which he had long dissembled, attending some fitter
opportunity, thinking that at length he would have submitted himself to his
service: but now holding it unfit any longer to dissemble, calling a Diet or
Counsel in the city of Spire, without declaring his intention until that all
the Princes were assembled, he then manifested the wrongs and contempts
committed by the Duke of Lorraine, and by common consent it was concluded to
make war against him: whereupon the Emperor without any further delay,
departed with such forces as he had already levied for that purpose, toward
Lorraine; and made such haste, that the Duke (notwithstanding that he was
promised great aid and favor both out of France and Germany) before that he
could unite those forces together, the Emperor had entered his country, and
besieging him in a town took him prisoner, and so ended that exploite: yet
they write not in what form the state remained. And so I advertise the Reader,
The Duke of Lorraine taken prisoner by the Emperor.
that in the order and time wherein these wars were, those which wrote the
same do much vary: I therefore have chosen this which I have set down.

The Emperor having now ended and performed (so much to his honor) three such
enter prises and wars, as these before mentioned, of Hungary, Bohemia, and
Lorraine, about which he had spent six years, reinforcing his Armies (wherein
he stayed some days) he took his way directly toward Italy to be crowned,
and to procure a reformation of abuses in the Church wherein was a schism,
such as before that time had never been, which was thus. The Emperor CONRADE
being dead, and BENEDICT the ninth being Pope (as I said) the Emperor HENRY
having then reigned more then four years; the Romans which knew not how to
live without factions and tumults, rebelled against the Pope: the cause
whereof, and in what manner it passed, I find not written; but their boldness
was such, that they deposed him from the Papacy, alleging that he neither
was, neither ought to be Pope, and so they placed in his seat a Bishop, whose
name was JOHN, who took part with them, and was called SYLVESTER the Third: And
as PLATINA and BLONDVS report, was Pope but ninie and forty days, at the end
whereof BENEDICT was restored by those of his faction: and he within six weeks
after, as a coward (being a wicked man and of ill behavior and condition) for
fear to Pope Benedict sold his papacy, and having received the money would
continue Pope.
be again deposed, for a certain sum of money before hand paid, compounded
with the Archdeacon of Saint John de Lateran, who was a mighty rich man in
Rome, to renounce to him the Papacy; and did so, but afterward recanting his
bargain, he ehallenged to be still Pope: and the Archdeacon with the title of
BENEDICTS renunciation, assisted by his friends, was made Pope, and was called
GREGORY the sixth, his own name being JOHN, alleging that he held the Papacy
by grant, by renunciation, and also by election; and he enjoyed the name and
authority of Pope (as PLATINA says) above two years: BLONDVS and others say,
but one year, seven months and half: and some authors, as GILBERTVS, and
IOHANNESDE COLVMNA, and ANTONIUS are of the same opinion, and write in their
histories that he performed the office of a good Pope, and was valiant,
administered justice, maintained the Papal dignity, and recovered much of the
Church patrimony, which others had usurped: so as in time of this confusion,
and of setting up, and putting down Popes (for there were at one time three
which were so called, and had been so) and (as writes GOTHIFREDVS Three Popes
in Rome at one time.
VITERBIENSIS, an author of four hundred years antiquity) they all three
came to a composition, and divided the Church rents amongst them: whereof one
of them dwelt hard by S. PETER'S Church, another at S. MARY'S, and this BENEDICT
in the palace at LATERAN.

Things standing in this estate, the Emperor HENRY with many good men of war
entered Italy, and came to Rome; whither he called a Synod and Council to
beheld of all the Bishops The Emperor came into Italy.
in Holy, and of lost parts of Christendom; which being assembled, together
with the three Popes, they treated of them ^ree and (after many censu^es and
opinions) the Emperor and all the rest concluded, that these three should be
held for no Popes, but be deposed, and that another should he chosen,
considering the voluntary renunciation made by BENEDICT, and other ^llities
and insufficiencies in the three elections. And this resolution was put in
effect; and they were condemned, deprived, and banished the country: And by
the same Council, with the favor of the Emperor, a Germane prelate and
Bishop of Bambergh was chosen, and was called CLEMENT the Second, who as soon
as he was Pope, anointed and crowned Pope Clement the Second crowned Henry the
Third Emperor.
the Emperor, after the accustomed manner, with great feasting and solemnity.

After this coronation the Emperor departed from Rome toward Capua, which the
Africane Infidels had taken, in time of the wars made by the Normanes in
those parts, and obtaining notable victories against them, dr^e them out of the
country; and setting the best order he could in all the rest, returned to
Rome; and thence visiting Haly and Lombardy, returned into Germany, and was
scarcely come thither when P. CLEMENT the Second (whom he had chosen) died in
Rome, when he had been Pope but 9 months; and that with suspicion of poison
by the practice of one STEPHEN a B. of Bauaria, who more by his force and
through friendship, then any right of election, gat the Papacle, and was called
DAMASVS the second. Only BLONDVS puts another Pope between CLEMENT the
Second and DAMASVS, whom he calls STEPHEN, of whom no other author (that I
have seen) makes any mention but Ighesse that he is deceived in the name, for
this DAMASVS, was first called STEPHEN. In those times the Popes were of so
little worth, and the Church lands were so usurped by tyrants, that they durst
not attempt any thing, and therefore were accordingly disobeyed and lightly
regarded. Returning to Pope DAMASVS, I say, that the Papacy which he obtained
by force, he held and enjoyed the same but three and twenty days; and being
dead, the Romans neither would, nor durst make choice of a Pope, without the
Emperors consent: for (as some write) Pope CLEMENT the Second had so ordained
when he was (at his suit) chosen; and they did so, imagining that the Emperor
would hau sent them word, that they should have chosen him whom they should
hold most worthy thereof.

The news of Pope CLEMENT'S death, and of his successor DAMASVS, and the
Ambassadors, came to the Emperor in a manner all at one instant: to the
Ambassadors he gave no such answer as they expected, but accepting their
offer, chose the Bishop of Tulon a German whose name was BRVNVS, whom he
nominated to be chosen Pope, and made him presently to depart toward Rome;
which the said Bishop was constrained to accept, much against his will, and in
a manner perforce. PLATINA and BLONDVS say, that from the time of his departure
out of Germany, he made him to wear the papal habit: but a Monk whose name
was ILDEBRAND meeting him upon the way, persuaded him to put off that weed,
seeing that yet he was not chosen; alleging further, that the Emperor had no
authority thereto: which persuasion so much prevailed with BRVNVS, that he
went to Rome as a private man, repenting that he had entered so far into the
action. This was in the year of our Lord 1049.

Being come to Rome, the Cardinals, clergy, and people consulted about choosing
a new Pope, but would not accept of BRVNVS, because the Emperors should not
challenge to themselves any right of election: but this ILDEBRAND used such
means, and gave such counsel to the Cardinals, that by a general consent
BRVNVS was chosen, and called LEO the Ninth; when the Chair had been void six
months. LEO being made Pope, GISVLPHVS Duke of the Normanes, being then Lord
of Pulia and Calabria, made war against him, and besieged the city of
Beneuent, which the Emperor HENRY the Second gave to the Church of Rome:
whereof when the Emperor was advertised besides the forces which the Pope had
Pope Leo the Ninth was in a battle overthrown and taken prisoner by
Gisulphus Duke of Normandy.
already levied, he sent him other; w^h which the Pope departed from Rome
against GISVLPHVS: but GISVLPHVS being the better man of war, and having
already taken the city of Beneuent, gathered his forces together and stayed
for him in the plain fields; and the Pope more like a valiant Almaine, then an
expert man at Arms, gave him battle, and was overthrown and taken prisoner.
So, as says IOANNES DE COLVMNA, it might be said to him as CHRIST said to S.
PETER: Put up thy sword into the sheath: But being prisoner, GISVL^HVS
entertained him with great honor, and presently the same day set him at
liberty, and gave him company and servants fit to attend on him, wherewith he
went to Rome: and they afterward came to a composition between themselves.
Herein is a great confusion among the Historiographers: for the Germans write
that this Pope went into Germany to see the Emperor, and that he called a
Synod or Council in the City of Mentz, and that the Emperor came the second
time into Italy: Others write nothing, either of the Popes going, or of the
Emperors second coming; in the rest they all agree. LEO held the chair five
years and a half; and when he was dead, one G^EARDVS a Germane Bishop born in
Bauiere, was chosen, and called VICTOR the Second; which they did to gratify
the Emperor: and presently without any delay, to the end he should not be
discontented, for that they had made choice of a Pope without his consent; the
new Pope and Clergy sent ILDEBRAND to him, who performed his legacy in such
sort, as the Emperor approved and confirmed what they had done.

Whilst these things passed in Italy, the subjects of PETER King of Hungary
(whom the Emperor had placed in that Kingdom) rebelled against him; and sent
into Poland for certain great men of Hungary which lived there in exile, one
of which was called ANDREW, and another L^VENTA, who were their Captains; and
after other great matters (which I omit) Peter king of Hungary was taken by his
subjects, and had his eyes put out.
they seized on their King, and putting out his eyes, caused him die in prison;
and with the help of certain Barbarians and Infidels which came to their aid,
slew some Bishops: which when the Emperor understood, he made great preparation
for war against them, especially against ANDREW, who took upon him the name
of King; and having built and rigged up a great number of Barks and Ships, the
Emperor came down the river Danubius, from Austria to B^da, and to other
places, where this ANDREW and the rest were; which voyage had ill success, for
his adversaries gat certain excellent swimmers and diverse which would lie a
long time under the water, and these in a night bouged the Emperors barks, in
such sort, as the greatest part of his munition and victual was lost; so as he
was constrained to return with his people in Expert swimmer^.
the best manner he could, without effecting any thing of worth. Afterward he
twice entered Hungary; in the first, notwithstanding that he went with great
preparation of horse and foot, yet he obtained no notable victory; and the
third year he made peace with the Hungarians, ANDREW remaining still their
King, who acknowledged a certain kind of superiority.

This being ended, and it seeming a small time since that the Emperor began to
repose himself; through the secret judgment of God, great calamities ensued
in many countries, as famine, Calamities by Gods providence
cruel plagues, horrible earthquakes, and other lamentable disasters: after
which ensued the death of the Emperor; the end of whose reign was, for the
causes before said, pitiful and sorrowful. It is written, that for sorrow and
grief, to see so great afflictions and miseries happen in his time, he fell
sick and died; leaving behind him one son about about ten years old, The
death of the Emperor Henry the Second.
called HENRY, whom before his death he made to be crowned king of the Romans,
the Electors consenting thereto; and three daughters, which afterward were
married to several princes: he reigned seventeen years, and died in the year
of our Lord, one thousand fifty seven.

In Constantinople during the time of this Emperor HENRY (of whom we now
treated) reigned CONSTANTINVS MONACHVS, by his marriage with the Empress ZOE,
as I said in the end of the Emperor CONRADE: This CONSTANTINE was a negligent
and vicious Emperor, and a public ill liver. In his time began the Turks to be
of great power in Asia, When the Turks began to grow mighty in Asia.
and did much harm in the tertitories of the Empire. This Emperor was also
much troubled by some which rebelled against him; yet he at length subdued them
all: and so between prosperity and adversity, he reigned thirteen years. In
his time also the Empire did greatly decay, both in power and authority. One
only good quality he had, which was, that he was an Alms giver, and a great
relieuer of the poor; and made a great Hospital for old men only, such as
through their great age being decrepit, could not get their living. Both he and
the Empress died (in a manner) at one time; and both of the plague.

The husband and wife being dead, THEODORA, sister to ZOE, had the Empire, by
the authority and sentence of the Senate, and people of Constantinople; and
governed the same with such equity, justice and quietness, for the space of
two years, that they sorrowed she had not lived much longer. Before her death,
by the counsel of certain Eunuchs (by whom she was much ruled) she made
YSACIVS CONNENVS General of her forces, who was a valiant and wise Captain.
THEODORA being dead, a man of great age, called MICHAEL, was made Emperor: but
proving to be incapable and insufficient for the government, which he had not
ruled one whole year; by a general consent he was deposed from the Empire,
and YSACIVS CONNENVS (whom THEODORA had made her Captain General) was chosen
in his place; who reigned two years; and although he made a good show of
himself, yet (considering his short time) he could not do any notable exploit,
and him succeeded CONSTANTINVS DVCA.

THE LIFE OF HENRY, THE FOVRTH OF THAT NAME, AND FOVRSCORE AND THIRTEENTH ROMAN
Emperor; And of those which in his time reigned in CONSTANTINOPLE.
THE ARGUMENT.
HEnry being yet a child when his father died, and chosen and proclaimed
Emperor; it behooved him for many years space to live under the government of
his mother, who by the consent of all men took the charge of him, and the
protection of the Empire: but afterward being comn to riper years, he would
no longer live under her command, but took the government into his own hands.
His first warlike enterprise, was against the Saxons; wherein he bebaued
himself so gallantly (notwithstanding that he was but young) that he brought
them to his obedience: yet they afterward rebelled, for that he would not
endure the insolency of the Pope and Court of Rome, which he little regarded.
This second war was far more dangerous than the first (although he had the
victory) and made him more disobedient to the Pope than before: whereupon he
was solemnly excommunicated, and deprived of the title and dignity of the
Empire, for that he called a Council in Germany against Pope Gregory. Of which
excommunication he could never be absolved, until that he had three days
together comn barefooted to entreat the Pope for pardon, who met him at
Uercelli. Whilst the Emperor was in this parley with the Pope, many Princes of
Germany rebelling against him, made another Emperor, which was Rodulph Duke of
Saxony: with whom Henry coming to a battle, had no such victory as he
expected; but was again excommunicate, and deprived of the title of Emperor,
which was given to Rodulph newly chosen: upon this occasion, Henry being much
incensed, chose another Pope called Clement. and made a schism in the Papacy,
which was the occasion of very great war: but Henry, after the death of his
competitor Rodulph, came into Italy, and besieged Rome; and entering it, was
crowned by the hands of Pope Clement, the other Pope being retired into the
Castle Saint Angelo: to whom great succors coming, Henry abandoned Rome, and
with Pope Clement went into Germany; and Pope Gregory, accompanied with his
crew of Cardinals, went to the City of Salerno, where he ended his days. At
this time followed the enterprise of Jerusalem, and the rebellion of Henry's
eldest son Conrade, because the Emperor sought to make his second son called
also Henry, his successor: which being done, he also rebelled against his
father: so as there were more than civil wars between them, neither could
there any means be found to apppease them, neither could this war be brought
to an end but through the death of the old Emperor Henry; who having
publicly (but by constraint) renounced all his jurisdiction of the Empire
unto his son, and afterward repenting, and seeking to recover the same,
could obtain no composition with him; and so for sorrow and grief falling sick,
died, God suffering him to make a miserable end.

TRuly, the three Emperors called HENRY'S, of whom we have treated, were very
valiant and worthy Princes in Arms; as, the father of him of whom we now begin
to write, and the other two before mentioned: but none of them can be compared
to this Fourth, of whom we are now to discourse. It is certain, that he was
valiant and addicted to Arms, as being traind up therein, and was one of the
most excellent Princes that ever was; for, unto this day it is not found
written, that any Emperor came so often to blows with his enemies, as he did:
for, all Authors affirm, that he fought in ranged battles with ensigns
displaied, threescore and two several times, and for the most part had ever
the victory: to which number JULIUS CAESAR or MARCUS MARCELLVS never attained
(which two in their time excelled all others).

This Emperor reigned fifty years. He was a man liberal, well spoken, very
wise; and had many other natural gifts and virtues: but (as says this Author)
he stained and blemished them all The qualities of the Emperor Henry the Fourth.
with his ambition, for he would be Lord over all both spiritual and
temporal, contemning the Canons and Decretals of the Church of Rome: which was
the occasion, that in his later days, he was disobeyed by those which ought
him greatest obedience, which were his own children. The History of his life
cannot but be longer then ordinary, for that it treats of many great
accidents which happened in the space of more then fifty years that he
reigned. I say then, that when his father died, he was not fully ten years
old; but yet for his fathers worthiness, and his mothers virtues, called YNES
(an excellent and discreet woman) he was crowned and obeyed for Emperor and
King of the Germans, as his father in his life time had entitled him; and, by
the consent of the greatest part of the Princes, his mother governed both his
person and the Empire: And all that time she ruled very wisely and valiantly,
as well in peace as in war, against some Princes, which, for that she was a
woman, and her son the Emperor so very a child, rebelled against him. Into
Italy she sent one GILBERT for Gouerner, who afterward was the cause and
motive of great schisms and dissensions in the Church of Rome. Of those which
rebelled, the first was a great Lord called FREDERICK of Gilbergh, and his
brethren and kinsfolks, who were men of great power: but she took so good order
with them, that she compelled them to sue for pardon, and to yield their
obedience. The greatest trouble and difficulty that she had, was against
RODVLPH Earl of Reinsfelt; with whom in process of time, HENRY had most
cruel war: who, by the aid of ROMOLDVS Archbishop of Constance, took the
Emperors sister MAVD, and married her; thinking by this title to become Emperor:
and the Emperesse (to gratify him, and to reduce him to her sons service) made
him Duke of Sueuia, which then was void through the death of OTHO who died
without issue; which Dukedom was promised to a great Earl called BERTOLD: in
recompense whereof, the Emperesse gave him Carinthia. And so she pacified the
great troubles which then arose; and some other by force, with the aid and
assistance of such as remained loyal Subjects. But in the end the young Emperor
growing to riper years, by the advice of some which were of his Council,
disobeying his mother, sought to be free from her authority, being thereto
persuaded chiefly by ANO (and, as others say, OTHO) Archbishop of Colein; who
dealt so cunningly, that he got him into his protection: and by the assistance
of some others, he assembling the Princes, alleged that it was very indecent
and unfit to be ruled by a woman, seeing the Emperor was of sufficient
discretion and understanding to do what was convenient.

The Emperor being gotten out of the power and controulement of his mother, the
Archbishop commanded in such sort, that all went to wrack: for, being bred up
in such liberty, he did what he listed, which in the end was the cause of his
ruin; for, he became both licentious and presumptuous, favoring some, and
grieuing others: by reason whereof he was ill beloved of many; and gave himself
to hunting, and to such other sports as that age is chiefly delighted withal.
His mother, seeing herself so little regarded, and that she could bear no more
sway with him, went to Rome, where she lived and died in a Cloister of Nuns.

Germany standing in these terms, in Italy a little before this time died
Pope NICHOLAS the Second, when he had held that Chair four years. This Pope
recovered much of the The death of pope Nicholas.
Church Lands which were usurped by sundry Captains and governors, which did
make themselves tyrants. And he also gave the title of Duke of Pulia and
Calabria, to GVISCARD a Normane being already Lord of those provinces, who
made himself and his countries subject and feudatorie to the Church of Rome.
This Pope held a Council, wherein he ordained that from thenceforth, the
Cardinals only should choose the Popes, thereby to avoid the factions and
dissension which arose concerning the same; as it appears in the chapter In
nomine Domini The dignity of cardinals.
in the three and twentieth distinction; which is observed unto this day. By
this mean, the Deacons and Cardinals Priests attained to great authority and
credit: for until then, they were not of any such account (although already
very much esteemed.)

This name and dignity of Cardinals, was in Rome at the beginning but a
troublesome and painful office; for they were as the Curates of parishes, and
had the charge of ministering the Sacraments and of burying the dead, and were
called Priests Cardinals, as the more worthy and of greater reputation: and as
Rome was then held for the head of all other Churches, so these Priests
Cardinals were regarded and more respected then any other; and they afterward
attained to greater pre-eminence, for that they were ever near unto the Pope;
and being in the time of this Pope NICHOLAS the second established Electors,
they grew to be of greater reputation; but not in so high a degree, as we now
see them, until the time of Pope INNOCENT the fourth, about the year of our
Lord, one thousand two hundred four and forty; for he gave them liberty to
ride on their footeclothes, and to wear such robes as they now use to wear,
to the end, that as they did excel other men in their degree and ornaments, so
should they in their behauior and virtuous conditions: wherefore to paint Saint
AMBROSE with a Cardinals crimson hat is a mere mockery; for in his ^me there
were not any: and so at length the dignity of Cardinal came to be the
greatest and the highest degree next to the Pope, and they accompany and
counsel him in all matters of importance: but many of them have carried
themselves so profanely, as they have given just occasion to the world, to
note and murmr at their Consistory.

Pope NICHOLAS being dead, ANSELME Bishop of Luca was chosen, and called
ALEXANDER the Second; against whom, GILBERT Governor of Lombardy for the
Emperor, by the consent of certain Bishops of that Province, made a Schism
in the Papacy, and chose another Pope: But GOTHIFREDVS and his wife MAVVD,
(which were the greatest Princes in Italy at that time) protected the first
Pope: And in Rome and abroad elsewhere, followed many slaughters and murders
of the one and the other party, until that in the end Pope ALEXANDER
prevailed, and the other Pope fled to Milan.

Whilst these matters passed in Italy (the Emperor, as it was said, permitting
and allowing the same) the like or greater were tolerated in Germany; for he
suffered Priests to marry, and gave Benefices and Bishoprics without the Popes
license or authority: wherewith the Pope was much displeased, and twice or
thrice sent his Ambassadors to the Emperor about that business. And in other
matters were great troubles and factions, and many rose against the Emperor:
the first were the Saxons: for from OTHO Duke of Saxony and Bauiere, who was
accused of treason, the Emperor took the Duchy of Bauiere, which his mother
had given him, and gave the same to a Noble man, named GVELPHO; against these
Saxons the Emperor attempted his first wars, when he was not full 18 years old;
wherein showing himself to be of an high mind, and free from fear or cowardice,
he personally fought in many battles and skirmishes against that people,
which is, and ever has been accounted for one of the most valiant Nations of
the world: but he finally overthrew them, and compelled them (for this time) to
yield him service.

Having obtained these victories, the Emperor sent into Italy for his
Ambassador to the Pope, the Archbishop of Coleyn, with sufficient authority to
conclude what to him seemed best to be done, and to excuse him of such things
as were laid to his charge: who being come into Italy, he put GILBERT out of
the Chancelorship and government of Lombardy, which the Empress INES had given
him, and placed therein the Bishop of Bercelli: and from thence, with great
authority and majesty, he went to Rome, where (Pope ALEXANDER giving him
public audience) he made a solemn Oration; wherein in effect, in the behalf
of his Lord the Emperor, he reproved the Pope, for having accepted the Papacy
without his confirmation, with other matters in the behalf of the Emperor:
whereto HILDEBRAND, by the Popes order, answered peremptorily; alleging that
the Pope ought not to attend any such confirmation; and he so sharply
reprehended the Emperor, as the Archb. was constrained to rest satisfied and to
crave pardon for his speech. After this, many matters followed in Italy, which
(unwillingly) I omit, to the end to treat of what passed in the time of the
Emperor HENRY, of whom only I write this History.

About this time, which was in the year of our Lord, one thousand sixty and
six, EDWARD King of England dying without issue, he made WILLIAM Duke of
Normandy his heir, who with the aid of BALDVVIN Earl of Flanders, obtained
the Kingdom; and so the houses of England and Normandy were united, and so
have continued a long time in the kings thereof, and in their successors.

The Archbishop of Coleyn having dispatched his business in Italy, returned
(discontent with his answer) into Germany, and within few days after died
Pope ALEXANDER, having held that seat eleven years and a half: Afterward
the Archbishop of Rauenna revolted from the Church of Rome. ALEXANDER being
dead, by the general consent of all the Cardinals and Clergy, HILDEBRAND the
Archdeacon (often before named) was made Pope, and was called GREGORY the
seventh; who sent his Ambassadors to the Emperor, praying and requiring him
to become an obedient son to the Church, and to alter the manner of his
government in Germany; and thereby gave him further to understand, that he
was resolved not to allow thereof, but to use his authority to reform the same.

Pope GREGORY at this time (as some approved Authors write) enjoined the
Bishops of Germany (contrary to the ancient Laws) not to suffer the Emperor
to confer any Bishoprics, who he said would give them to unworthy men or not
fit, neither should they from that time require any confirmation from the
Emperor; which care and ordination did not belong to any secular Princes, but
to the holy order, and chiefly to the Bishop of Rome, the President thereof.

The Emperor hereto gave a doubtful answer, but performed in effect nothing
of what was required; maintaining, that the Pope ought not to accept the
Papacy without his confirmation, according to the agreement made between his
father the Emperor, HENRY the third, and Pope CLEMENT the second, and so these
Ambassadors returned without any conclusion: this was in the seventeenth year
of his reign, in the year of our Lord, one thousand seventy four. At this
time, (and also before and after it) the Emperor had cruel wars with the
Dukes of Saxony, which again rebelled against him, they alleging the
Emperors disobedience to the Church of Rome to be the occasion thereof. This
was the most dangerous war that ever he undertook, wherein passed many
perilous Incounters, the Emperor hazarding his person (so valiant and warlike
he was) and he principally fought one very bloody battle, wherein he
prevailed; but (as says BLONDVS) with the loss of five thousand men: and the
Emperor and his brother in law RODVLPH, who afterward was his great enemy,
fought therein with their own hands most valiantly.

During these Combustions in Germany, Italy was not free from factions and
controversies, between the Imperialists and the Popes adherents. GILBERT, the
abouenamed Archbishop of Rauenna (who had been Governor for the Emperor in
Italy) finding that the Pope had resolved to excommunicate the Emperor, he
secretly agreed with one CINCIVS ayong Roman Knight, a man of a bold spirit
(whose father was Prefect of the City) that he should seize upon the Pope;
assuring him that the Emperor would accept thereof, for a special piece of
service; and he accordingly put the matter in execution: the Pope being upon
Christmas Eeue saying Mass in the Church of Saint MARY the greater in Rome;
this CINCIVS with a good guard, entered the Church, and laying hands upon him,
carried him away, and in a Tower detained him prisoner. But the people as soon
as it was day (being advertised thereof) went to CINCIVS house, and setting the
Pope at liberty, rased the Tower, from the top to the foundation: And of all
such of CINCIVS his servants as they found, they cut off the Noses, and
banished them from Rome; and CINCIVS escaping the death (which they desired to
have given him) by flight, durst not stay in Italy, but went into Germany to
the Emperor: This Archbishop GILBERT, whose practice was not yet discovered,
setting a good countenance upon the matter, departed the City; but being come
to Rauenna, he was by the Pope excommunicate and deprived of all his
ecclesiastical dignities and Benefices.

In Germany were no less contempts, against his Holiness then in Italy: for
(as the Abbat WESPERGENSIS and other Germane Authors report, besides the
Italians which verefie the same) by the procurement of SIG^FRIDVS Archbishop
of Mentz, with some other A Council held in Germany against the Pope.
Bishops and Abbats which joined with him, a Council was held against the
Pope, (the Bishops of Saxony disallowing and contradicting the same) in which
Council it was resolved, that GREGORY should not be held for Pope; and that
they all should renounce their obedience unto him (...)Whereupon the Emperor
and his Council, sent for Ambassador to Pope GREGORY, a Priest, whose name
was ROVVLAND.

The Pope in like manner called a Council against the Emperor, at Saint JOHN
DE LATERAN in Rome; where ROVVLAND being arrived, and the Pope and his Council
giving him audience, he in the behalf of the Emperor, required GREGORY to
desist from any longer exercising the papal function, and to resign the
authority of Pope: and he likewise signified the same to the Cardinals, willing
them to repair into Germany to the Emperor, who would nominate a Pope. GREGORY
was heerwith much troubled; and for as much as ROVVLAND was an Ambassador, he
commanded him presently to depart without any answer, and without any other
disgrace. But it is also written, that the Emperors mother at the Popes request
went into Germany, accompanied with many great Prelates, to persuade her son
to desist from intermeddling with the donation of Bishoprics or other
ecclesiastical Benefices; to forbid the marriage of Priests, and to yield
obedience to the Church of Rome: but for that it took no effect, the Pope very
solemnly excommunicated the Emperor, and deprived him of all imperial dignity;
and he also excommunicated all such as took his part, and freed all the Princes
and Lords of Germany and elsewhere, which ought him any duty or allegiance,
from their oaths, homage, and bands of obedience or subjection, giving free
liberty to all men; and authority The Emperor Henry the Fourth excommunicated
by the pope.
to the Princes Electors to choose another Emperor, such as should best please
them. The Archbishop of Mentz was likewise excommunicate, and deprived of all
ecclesiastical dignity, and with him all such as had been in the Council
aforesaid: but before the Pope had proceeded so far, he advertised all the
Princes in Christendom, of all, both past and present; and the Emperor wrote
to them, in like manner defending his cause, and excusing himself against the
Popes accusations.

The Popes terrible Sentence being published in Germany (as there were many
that took his part, principally the Prelates of Saxony and others) RODVLPH Duke
thereof, with many other Princes, called a Diet or Council; wherein they
resolved to require the Emperor to ask the Pope forgiveness, and to submit
himself to the Church of Rome: which if he refused to do, they concluded to
renounce their obedience unto him. The Emperor, notwithstanding that he was a
very brave man, and exceeding valiant (as some say, fainedly; and as others
say, of his own accord) promised to do what they required, which he openly
protested. Finally, it was agreed, To send to the Pope to come into Germany,
where full and entire obedience should be yielded to him; and in the name of
the Princes and Lords assembled at that Diet or Council, the Archbishop of
Treuier, and others of great account, went to the Pope, and entreated him with
such instancy, that he was persuaded to take his way toward Germany to meet the
Emperor, who stayed (as they said) for him, and would come to ask him
forgiveness, and submit himself into his hands. The Pope came to the City of
Bercelli in Lombardy; where being advertised, that the Emperor marched toward
him with great troops of men at Arms, fearing that he would have either slain
him or taken him prisoner, gaue-ouer his journey, and turned into the Country
of GOTHIREDVS and his wife MAVD, and was by them protected in an expugnable
Town and Castle, called Canusio or Canisio; whither within few days the
Emperor came: who, lodging his Army before the Town, in great humility sent to
entreat the Pope to absolve him of his excommunication, offering to become his
obedient son and subject; and three days together came barefooted to the
gates of the City, to sue for this absolution: but The Emperors submission, who
came (...)several days barefooted to the city gates wherein the pope was
suing for absolution.
the Pope would not yield thereto. In conclusion, there passed many treaties,
oaths and promises; but at length (through the instant suit of the said MAVD,
and of ADELAVS Earl of Sauoy, and, as some say, of INES the Emperors mother
also) the Pope, admitting the Emperor into his presence, absolved him: but
whereas he had deprived him of his Empire, and had laid other penalties upon
him for former matters, he referred that to the judgment of the next general
Council, which should presently be called; and the Emperor promised to stand
to the Councels arbitrament, and to banish from his company CINCIVS, who seized
on the Pope in Rome, and some excommunicated Prelates.

The Emperor continued some days in those parts (as some write, expecting when
the Pope would have come forth of that City; imagining that he, trusting to the
peace, might have bin apprehended) and departing from thence, he went to Pauia
in Lombardy, where the before-named CINCIVS died; and the Emperor, by reason of
the great abundance of rain which fell at that time, made his abode there for
certain days: in which he was given to understand, that in Germany the Saxons
and other his enemies (among which were BERTOLD Earl of Carinthia, the Duke of
Bauiere, RODVLPH Duke of Sueuia, and others) rebelled against him; and
assembling themselves together (denying him their obedience) made the Duke of
Saxony Emperor, Rodulph Duke of Saxony chosen Emperor.
of whom we have heertofore made mention; who was a man of the greatest
account, both for power and valor, of his time in Germany. This (after the
Abbat WESPERGENSIS his computation) was in the year of our Lord 1079, and in
the twentieth year of the reign of the Emperor HENRY the Fourth.

These news being brought to the Emperor HENRY (as he was a man of an high
mind and great courage) with the greatest fury of the world he departed
toward Germany, and by the way gathered together all such his friends as took
his part, which were many: and RODVDPH, assisted by the Saxons and Sueuians,
accompanied with some Princes and great Prelates; the most cruel war began
between them two, that had been ever seen in Germany, which lasted full four
years. In the beginning whereof (besides sundry conflicts and accidents of
war, whereto either of these Emperors did set their hands) they came to a
pitched battle, Army against Army: which because that their forces were in a
manner equal, and both A battle between the Emperor and the Duke of Saxony.
the Generals very valiant, was very doubtful and bloody: HENRY to defend the
Empire, and RODVLPH to get the same, did both that day marueiles in Arms in
their own persons. Finally, authors affirm, that either party fought with
such resolution, that having spent the greatest part of the day, the battle
was ended without any certain appearance of victory, both Camps remaining full
of dead and wounded bodies; and each General was constrained of necessity to
withdraw his Army from the other, to refresh and relieve his troops; but yet
the war ceased not.

In the mean time both these Princes sent their Ambassadors to the Pope,
either of them entreating him to condemn the other: and the Pope returned
Ambassadors to both these Princes, requiring them both to lay down their
Arms; and HENRY (according to the agreement made with him in Lanusio) to
permit a general Council to be held in Germany; and that either of them
should stand to such arbitrament, as by that Council should be concluded.
RODVLPH accepted these conditions; but HENRY answered that he was not bound
thereto, except the Pope would first excommunicate RODVLPH; and so prosecuted
the war with greater resolution then before. The Pope receiving this
answer, sent a new excommunication against him, and ratified the election of
RODVLPHVS; to whom (as JOHANNES DE COLVMNA, ANTONIUS, VINCENCIVS, JOHN
CVSPINIAN, JOHN CARRION, and many others do write) he sent a Crown, wherewith
he should be crowned, with this inscription, Petra dedit petro: Petrus diadema
Rodulpho.

After this, both these Emperors resolved again to try their fortunes by
battle; notwithstanding that it was in the midst of winter, which was no
less cruel and doubtful then the former, but rather more, and therein (as
says PLATINA) was as little sign of victory, as in the last: some authors
attribute the victory to RODVLPH, and others to HENRY; the cause whereof was
(as says the Abbat WESPERGENSIS and some others) for that in the beginning
RODVLPH'S vauntguard of Saxons was put to flight, and HENRY prosecuted the
victory: wherein the Duke of Bohemia, who bare RODVLPH'S imperial standard,
made a great show of his valor, which standard his successors afterward bare
in the wars, in remembrance of this victory. And in the mean season,
RODVLPH'S arierguarde spoiled the Emperor HENRIE'S camp, and so they might
well retire without any defeat, and either party might pretend to have gotten
the victory: this is the cause why it is so diversely reported. But howsoever it
was, HENRY was wounded, although not dangerously, but yet the war ceased not;
for A third battle between the Emperor Henry the fourth, and Rodulph Duke of
Sa^ony.
shortly after either of these Emperors reinforcing his Army, desired to fight
the third battle, with power against power, (notwithstanding that between
them there were daily some incounters) and neither party refusing the fight,
the two Armies joined, and they fought with greater fury then at any time
before: for the harms which were done, and the slaughters of their people of
either side were so great and so many, and their hatred and malice was grown
to so high a degree, that they thought on nothing else but how to kill and
destroy; with this desire and rage they maintained the fight: wherein after the
death of an infinite number of men, and the effusion of much blood, HENRY
obtained the victory, and RODVLPH was overthrown, and lost many of his
Saxons, which were very good men; but notwithstanding RODVLPHV'S overthrow, yet
(as a valiant Prince) gathering his forces together, and reinforcing his Army,
he retired into Saxony, which was his best refuge: where were some treaties of
peace and of a composition to be made between the Emperor HENRY and him; which
took no effect, for HENRY would not determine the wars, but by the sword:
for as he was a man of a great and high mind, so he presumed to subdue all
his adversaries by his power: and his hautie courage was such as could endure
no rival or equal; which through his late victory greatly increased.

The affairs of Germany standing upon these terms, HENRY still following the
war, sought the Popes destruction, and procured to be assembled in a city in
Germany, such prelates as took part with him, in the name of a Council; which
chose the before named GILBERT Archbishop of Rauenna, Pope (who was Pope
GREGORIE'S capital enemy; and a wicked man, and had laid the plot before
mentioned for his apprehension in Rome by CINCIVS) he was called CLEMENT.
Hereupon besides the miseries which afflicted Italy began a schism and
division in the Church of Rome, for those which took part with the Emperor
HENRY held him for Pope. The Emperor at that time sent his son HENRY into
Italy, there to govern such estates as were subject unto him, and to make
war against such as held with Pope GREGORY: of which that MAWD (before named)
was the principal; who levied her forces and came to a battle with HENRY the
son, wherein she was overthrown: for which the Pope was wonderfully grieved,
comparing this ill fortune, with the schism made by Pope GILBERT. The Emperor
was herewith so much encouraged, as leuying the greatest power that he was able
to make; he went to seek RODVLPH; who (as I said) was in Saxony, making
preparation for the wars, and was already in such order, that he doubted not
to fight with the Emperor, in hope to have overthrown him. And so they fought
a most cruel and bloody battle; wherein (as then there were no Cannons,
Culuerines, Musket shot, or other artillery, as now is used) neither party
wanting either force or courage, or standing in any fear or doubt to come to
blows with the other; with dint of sword and lance, they slew and wounded
their enemies; the two Emperors in person fighting in the thickest of the
prease. This fight was maintained the greatest part of the day; the end whereof
is related by Historiographers diversely. The most common opinion is, that the
Emperor HENRIE'S Army was overthrown, A fourth battle between the Emperor
and Duke Rodulph: and his end.
and that RODVLPH had the victory; but he was sore wounded and lost his right
hand: some say that he received that hurt by mischance amongst his own people;
which wound bled so much and pained him so sore, that he could not prosecute
the victory, and therefore was constrained to retire himself to a strong
castle to be cured; where within few days after he died. So as the Emperor
HENRY of a man conquered became a conqueror: for RODVLPH being missing, his
people disbanded, and so HENRY became Master of the field. Yet BLONDVS writes,
that the Emperor HENRY fled out of the field the same day wherein the battle
was fought, and lay close in a castle, until that he was certified of the
death of RODVLPHVS; and that he then came forth to enjoy the victory, through
the death of his enemy, whom he had not overthrown. CARRION writes that when
RODVLPH was ready to breath out his last (his right hand which he had lost in
the battle being brought unto him) detesting the wickedness and the treachery
of Popes too late; speaking to a troop of Bishops which were about him: This
is the right hand (said he) by the which I confirmed my plighted faith unto
the Emperor. This is an argument of my perjury (you being the motives) and a
testimony of your wicked treachery whereof you shall give an account unto God.
RODVLPHVS his servants going about to bury the body of their deceased Lord,
with the ensigns and ornaments of Emperor; some asked of the Emperor HENRY,
wherefore he suffered RODVLPHVS to be buried with such honor, seeing that he
was a tyrant and his enemy: whereto he made an excellent answer: I would to
God (quoth he) that all mine enemies were (like RODVLPH) A notable saying of
the Emperor Henry the Fourth.
buried with the ornaments and ensigns of Emperors.

The Emperor HENRY having slain his competior RODVLPHVS, making small account
of the rest, seized Sueuia into his hands, and dispossessed BERTOLDVS thereof,
to whom RODVLPH had given the same; and leaving garrisons in the frontiers of
Saxony (which was not yet througly pacified) and establishing the best order he
could in all parts of Germany; with his victorious Army he took his way
toward Italy; whither he came within few days, having with him Pope CLEMENT
who was chosen in Germany, with a resolution to depose Pope GREGORY; to whose
aid the forenamed MAVVD had sent a great supply of men; and Pope GREGORY had
already fortified and victualled Rome: for the Emperor came with so great
force and fury, that there was no reason to attend his coming in the open
fields; so as without encountering or resistance, he came to the very walls of
the city, whereto he presently manded assault to be given: but he found such
resistance, that being out of hope to enter it at that time, he burned and
spoiled the suburbs and Country round about, continuing his siege before the
City notwithstanding; which was one of the most famous that has been seen
before any City in the World, as well for continuance of time, as for the many
accidents and adventures in Arms, for it continued above three years, in which
time there were many cruel assaults and salies; and the besieged endured great
famine, and want of all things necessary: in the mean time the Emperor made
some incursions into Lombardy, and into other parts of Italy: Rome besieged by
the Emperor Henry.
the Germane Pope CLEMENT commanding his Army in the time of his absence In
this siege the Vaticane was taken, wherein are the Popes Palace, and Saint
PETER'S Church, which were ruined and burnt by the Emperor, together with the
best and fairest houses and buildings.

Whilst now the Emperor was busied in Italy, they were not quiet in Germany:
for besides the ordinary wars, the Saxons advanced a great man, called
HARMAN, to the dignity of Emperor: but this was a matter of small moment which
did little disturb HENRY, for they themselves expelled him. In the end, after
so long a time as the Pope was thus besieged in Rome, ROBERT GVISCARD a potent
Normane, Prince and Lord of Pulia and of Calabria, grieuing to see the Pope
thus distressed, resolved to give over his wars with the Grecians in Dalmatia
and in other parts, and (as the Popes liege man) to come to the relief of
Rome: and to that effect left his son BOHEMVND in his place, and levied
forces and other necessaries, fit for so high an enterprise.

The news hereof, being every where published, the Emperor with greater care
and circumspection more strictly continued his siege; and using as well policy
as force, he caused to be published amongst the Romans, that his desire was,
but to be absolved and crowned by the Pope, and that confirming him in the
Empire, he would presently depart from Rome: Whereto the Pope would not give
ear, except the Emperor would give security for the performance of his
promise: For, knowing that all was but dissembling and deceit, he would rather
continue constant in his resolution, then yield shamefully to such baseness,
and thereby lose himself: But the Emperor used such means, that the greatest
part of the Romans (being tired with so long and so cruel a fiege) went over
to the Emperors Camp; and others presumed to tell the Pope to his face, that
he did ill in not receiving him into Rome, seeing he promised to depart again
speedily: Besides this, the Pope was certified, that some had resolved whether
he would or no, to let the Emperor into the City: Whereupon he withdrew
himself into the Castle S. Angelo, and with him all the Cardinals; and made a
Nephew of his, whose name was RVSTICVS, to possess himself of another Castle
called Septem Solia; wherein he was well advised, for the Emperor was presently
received into the City, and with him the Germane Pope CLEMENT, and the said
Castles by his commandment were presently besieged, which was in the year of
our Lord, one thousand fourscore and four: And the Emperor with great
solemnity was anointed and crowned by Pope CLEMENT, more accompanied with men
of war then with Bishops and Prelates. Yet not omitting to batter The Emperor
anointed and crowned in Rome.
the Castles, wherein Pope GREGORY and his Nephew were; the assaults given
were so furious, that RVSTICVS was driven to yield himself prisoner: But the
Castle S. Angelo was so strong, that the Emperor could not prevail against it.

The affairs standing in this estate, the said ROBERT GVISCARD so much
hastened his coming with so great force, that (as the Italian Authors write)
the Emperor durst not stay for him; but giving it out, that by reason of some
urgent affairs in Germany, it behooved him presently to depart; he left part of
his forces for the defense of the City, and to continue the siege of the
Castle, wherein the Pope was; and fortified the Capitol, which then was
strong, and repaired other towers and fortresses decayed.

The Abbat WESPERGENSIS, and other Germane Authors write nothing of any such
fear the Emperor was in, but make mention of all the rest. But howsoever it
was, he went out of Italy, and with him his Pope, whom RICHARD Duke of
Beneuent did support for a season. Within few days following, ROBERT GVISOARD
came to Rome with all his troops of Normans and Calabrians (it had been better
that he had never come, as it afterward happened) and others which came to his
aid, to set Pope GREGORY at liberty: for from else where it was not to be
expected, for in Gracia the Emperors were at wars: and from France could come
no relief, for that Lombardy held for the Emperor: and in Spain, the Princes
were troubled and turmoyled with wars against the Moors; so as only ROBERT
GVISCARD, had means to do it and none other: Being comn, the Citizens of Rome
which had received the Emperor, with the assistance of those which he had left
in garrison, offered themselves to defend the City, so as he entered it by
force, with the aid and favor of some which were within it. He found so great
resistance in his adversaries that the two factions oftentimes fought within
the city; the greatest part of the citizens taking part with the Imperialists:
and there was so great disorder and confusion, that the greatest part of
miserable Rome was burnt and ruined; for whatsoever either party gat, they
overthrew or set on fire: so great was the rage and fury wherewith they made
this war. But in the end ROBERT GVISCARD, and the Popes party prevailing
against their enemies, they took, burnt and destroyed the Capitol; and left
Rome so ruinated, that neither ATTILA, or any other barbarous nation, did ever
commit the like spoils: for at this day there are orchards, vineyards and
gardens, where before that war, were streets, houses, Churches and other
sumptuous buildings. ROBERT having obtained so pitiful a victory, went to the
Castle S. Angelo, which until then was besieged: and freeing Pope GREGORY from
thence, restored him to his seat and palace. But within few days after, the
Pope considering into how miserable and pitiful estate the city was brought;
by the counsel of the said ROBERT, he determined to absent himself; and being
accompanied with the same ROBERT, and with his College of Cardinals he went to
the city of Salerno, where he afterward died, having been Pope twelve years,
one month, and three days. It is written that this Pope was a just, an
upright, a wise, and a charitable man, and an alms giver: but it is certain
that he was an obstinate, presumptuous, stout, and firm defender of the Roman
prelacie, with the liberties and immunities thereof. BRVNVS, and SIGISBERTVS
report him to have been both ambitious, a Negromancer, and an Inchaunter; and
that he had poisoned Hildebrand, called Pope Gregory the seventh, a notable
Inchaunter and Negromancer.
seven other Popes before he could attain to the Papacy.

Before we proceed any further, it shall be very requisite to make some
relation of the Emperors of Constantinople (seeing that we are not to discourse
of other kingdoms and commonwealths) to the end that having ended herewith, we
may proceed with our HENRY and the successors of Pope GREGORY. I say then that
in the space of seven and twenty years of HENRIE'S reign, little more or
less, five or six Emperors had reigned in Constantinople, before which time,
the Turks, Persians and other nations made themselves Lords of what the
Greeks held in Asia: whose event was this, as we said in the end of the life
of HENRY the Third, father to this HENRY of whom we now write. The better to
understand the matter, it shall not be amiss to return to YSACIVS CONNENVS,
who reigned two years Emperor in Constantinople: to whom succeeded CONSTANTINVS
DVCA, who in the beginning behaved himself very valiantly, subduing and
punishing such as rebelled against him, and in the rest was a very devout
Christian: but, being infected with the disease of covetousness, he was
therefore contemned both by his own subjects, and by the Barbarians; and in
his time were lost many Towns in Asia: and in Constantinople was so great an
earthquake, that the Churches and other A great earthquake in Constantinople.
Buildings fell down. And so his Empire being unfortunate, he died in the
seventh year of his Reign; and his sons remaining his successors, his wife
EVDOXIA took upon her the government, who held the same the space of seven
months only: for, by reason of the wars with the Turks and Barbarians, the
Greeks made her to take to husband a great man amongst them, called ROMANVS
DIOGENES, to help to defend the Empire; who, not content to govern in the
behalf of her sons, but proclaiming himself Emperor, usurped the Empire, and
going into Asia with an Army against the Turks, had variable success, and was
sometimes victorious, and sometime vanquished; and in the end was in a battle
overthrown by them, and many of his people slain; and being afterward by the
General of the Infidels well entreated and set at liberty, coming to
Constantinople, he found already placed in his throne the eldest of his wives
sons, called MICHAEL PARAPINASSVS: And notwithstanding that he attempted by
force to have recovered the Empire, yet he could not bring it to pass, but was
taken prisoner, and had his eyes put out (a cruelty much used in Graecia in
those days) and banished in the habit of a religious man to a certain Island,
where he died, when he had been Emperor about the space of four years.
MICHAEL PARAPINASSVS remaining in the Imperial throne, grew to be so careless
and negligent, and therewith of so little worth, that he applied himself to
nothing but to making of verses, and to dress the gowt wherewith he was
grieved: he held the Empire six years and half, with great loss in Asia, the
Infidels conquering many cities thereof: for which cause his subjects rebelled
against him, and chose for their Emperor a man of great fame and parentage,
whose name was NICEPHORVS BOTANIATES, who was descended from the Emperor PHOCAS
above mentioned: this man much honored the brothers of his predecessor MICHA^
PARAP^NASSVS, who were the sons of CONSTANTINV^ DV^A and of EVDOX^A before
named; and giving them offi^es and commands, ^ouerthrew by their means,
(...)and BASILI^S, which rebelled against him: for which and other favors
which he did, he was very ill req^ited; for they being sons and brothers to
Emperors, sought to be so themselves* and so the youngest and most valiant of
them, called ALEXIVS CONN^NVS (procuring friends) deposed him from the Empire
and gat the same for himself; when he had reigned three years, causing him to
taken eligious habit* And this ALEXIVS held the Empire seven and thirty years,
and fought many battles, both with Infidels and with Christians, but chiefly
with ROBERT GVISCARD* Lord of Pulia and Calabria, who released Pope GREGORY,
as we have related, who also thought to have been Emperor of Graecia; which
wars he continued with the aid of the Venetians. In this estate stood the
affairs of Graecia, at such time as the Emperor HENRY the Fourth departed out
of Italy* and Pope GREGORY the seventh died: wherefore let us now return to
speak of them.

The Emperor HENRY being departed out of Italy in such manner as we have
declared, and leaving Rome in such combustions as a foresaid, he came into
Germany, where lie called a Diet or Council in the City of Mentz, as well to
justify himself concerning such matters as were done in Italy; as to
prosecute the war against the Saxons and their adherents. In this Council
(being persuaded and in a manner compelled by sundry prelates) he yielded to
the altring of some things in the Church; as to decree that Priests should have
no wives, and some other matters; yet he perseuered in supporting Pope CLEMENT,
who was chosen against Pope GREGORY, and in such other things as before he
did. This Council of Mentz being dissolved, the Emperor again prosecuted the
war against the Saxons; in which, between both parties ensued great spoils,
many slaughters and great battles and encounters; wherein the Emperor did
often hazard his person; and in the most of them fighting most valiantly,
obtained the victory, there being of either side great Princes, Captains, and
very vali^t men, with many of which he came to an accord in the end, and so
grew daily more potent, yet never without enemies: Wherein succeeded many and
sundry accidents, which the brevity of the History, permits me not to
relate in particular.

In the mean season whilst he was thus busied, Pope GREGORY the seventh died
in Salerno: in whose place was chosen (notwithstanding that CLEMENT was still
called Pope) an Abbat, called DESIDERIVS, who being installed, was called
VICTOR the Third; This Pope also withstood the Emperors proceedings.

At this time also died ROBERT GVISCARD, Lord of Pulia, of Calabria, and of
great part of Sicilia, to whom succeeded his sons, ROGER and BOHEMVND. VICTOR
continued Pope one year and four months only: and being dead, they chose to
succeed him, the Cardinal of Hostia, whose name was OTHO, and called him
URBAN the Second; who in the beginning of his Papacy was somewhat troubled in
Rome, by some which were the Emperors adherents, and took part with Pope
CLEMENT, who yet lived, whom a certain Duke of Italy maintained in his
Country: Whereupon this Pope (for his better safety) went from Rome to the
City of Melfi: but he afterward removed to the City of Placencia, (there to
A C^ncell at Placencia.
be of the greater power, by reason of MAVVD, the great Lady so often before
named) where he called a Council, wherein some new orders were made; but he
still vpheld and maintained the quarrel of his predecessors Pope GREGORY, and
Pope VICTOR, against the Emperor and his followers: And there also he held not
himself to be safe, for that the Emperor H^NRY was of very great power:
wherefore he resolved to go into France, where what befell him you shall
understand.

In this place Authors do greatly vary, in relating the acts of this
Emperor: for some make not any mention of his second coming into Italy:
others hold it to have been at this time; and those which write it, agree not
well together in the times, neither do they distinctly set down what he did
there; which has been a great trouble to me, and has bred a great confusion:
wherefore let the reader pass it over as he may, for I cannot certainly
auerre, which accidents preceded the other.

The Abbat WESPERGENSIS and BLONDVS say, that the Emperor HENRY after that he
had buried his first wife, whose name was VBERTA, and had married again the
second time, came into Italy, and made his abode there about seven years,
making war against the Popes dominions in his own person, and that he took
many cities by force; among which were Mantoa and Ferrara, which were held by
MAVVD. And BLONDVS likewise affirms, that others write that these cities were
in the same war recovered by MAVVD, by the sufferance and aid of CONRADE the
Emperors eldest son, who openly favored her and the Pope against his
father: whereupon (they say) MAVVD grew to be so hardy as to join all her
own forces, with the power of his friends and allies, to stop the Emperors
passage to Rome; and that she fought with him and overthrew him; so as he was
constrained to depart out of Italy. Howsoever it was, among such diversity of
opinions, the truth is, and is approved by all without any difference, that in
this time the Pope being come into France, he called a general Council
Council of Cleremont^
in the city of Cleremount, in the year of our Lord 1094: where having
treated of many things concerning the faith, he attempted the greatest matter
that ever any other Pope had done; which was, the conquest of Jerusalem, and
other cities in the East, which of long time had been subject to MAHOMET'S
successors; and he solicited the same in that Council, with such instance and
efficacy, and his speeches so incensed the hearts of the people, that many
great Princes resolved to undertake the action: for out of France, Spain,
England, Italy, and Germany, there The conquest of the holy Land.
went so many, that all writers affirm, they did exceed the number of three
hundred thousand fighting men, which took for their device the sign of the
Cross: the chief Commanders of the one side, were PETER the Hermit, and
another great Lord Duke of Lorraine, called GODFR^Y of Buillon, and his two
brethren, the one called EVSTACE, the other BALDVVIN, and with them other great
Princes: And on the other side went HVGH, brother to the French King, ROBERT
Earl of Flanders, ROBERT Duke of Normandy, STEPHEN Earl of Chartres, RAIMOND
Earl of S. Giles, and BOHEMVND Prince of Otranto in Italy, and others of
equal and inferior degree. Many Authors write of this war, as Abbas
Wespergensis, in the life of Henry the 4th. Paulus Emilius in his fourth book
of the history of France. Merula in his third book of the history of Milan.
Blondus in his fourth of his second Decade, Antoninus* Platina* Sabellicus*
Nauclerus.


Some taking their way through Germany, Hungary, and Gr^cia, passed over into
Asia; and others through Italy, (taking, for their good speed, the Popes
blessing with them, who then was URBAN the Second) and passing the seas, they
divided themselves into two Armies, although not without great trouble and
difficulty; the cause whereof was ALEXIVS Emperor of Constantinople. In the
end, these troops passed over into Asia, and made cruel wars in sundry
parts, principally in Soria, and in Judea: This was one of the greatest actions
that ever was: which I forbear to write at large, as well for that it makes
nothing to my purpose; as also, for that so great an enterprise deserves a
particular history; but the success then was, that after many battles,
having taken many cities, and continued the war the space of three years; the
city of Jerusalem was taken by GODFREY of Buillon, the Duke of Normandy, and
the Earl of Flanders, and others, in the year of our Lord, one thousand
ninety and nine, upon the 15. day of July: four hundred and ninety years
after that it was first taken by the Sarazins, in the time of the Emperor
HERACLIVS.

The city being taken, the said GODFREY was made King thereof, and of all the
country round about it. Other of the Princes and Captains before named,
remained Lords and governors of other great cities and towns in Syria, yet
many of them returned to their countries, after the performance of so
honorable an action; among which were the Earls of Flanders, of S. GILES and
others: And the war continuing, this kingdom remained in him, and his
successors, the space of fourscore and eight years: which being expired,
through the weakness, and dissension among the Princes, it was again lost, in
the time of the Emperor BARBAROSSA, as hereafter you shall understand.

Let us now return to our discourse of the Emperor HENRY: who at such time as
these matters passed in Jerusalem, being returned out of Italy, the last time
that ever he was there; wherein he then left his eldest son CORADE for his
Lieutenant; assembling then some of the Prince Electors in the city of Colen,
he labored to have his son HENRY to be chosen King of Romans, whom he had
already made Duke of Franconia (which was his house and patrimony) which
HENRY was his second son, and whom he loved best. When this was made known
to his eldest son CONRADE, he was much distempered and grieved at his
fathers proceedings; and therefore resolved openly to deny him his obedience
(as to an Emperor, which was a Schismatike, and excommunicated) and so he
seized into his Conrade rebelled against his father the Emperor.
hands all the Lands of the Empire in ITALY, finding all men well affected
thereunto, for the hatred which they bare to his father; and he held the same
nine years with the title of King of Italy; his father either dissembling, or
not daring to come against him. And they say that he governed as a wise and
virtuous Prince: at the end of which time, he fell sick and dyed, Conrade
deceased.
about the year of our Lord, one thousand and twenty: and at the same time
died GODFREY the new King of Jerusalem, whom his brother BALDVVIN succeeded,
and Pope VRBANE the The death of Godfrey of Buillon.
Second likewise died in Rome, and there succeeded PASCAL the Second: and
within few days after died CLEMENT, who was made Pope by the Emperor: and
after his decease, the Earl of Capua, and others attempted to make one ALBERT
Pope; and afterward one THEODORICVS: and in Rauenna one MAGINVLPHVS, a man of
great courage and power attempted to have made himself Pope; but none of all
these continued long: and so PASCAL remained Pope in esse, who performed great
matters both touching the spiritualty and temporalty, in reforming the
corruption of manners, and recovering and defending the patrimony of the
Church: which the Emperor could not hinder, as he would have done; for at that
instant, his son HENRY (being desirous to rule) rebelled against him, and
wars began between them two, which were more then civil, which I will
breefly set down. The Emperor HENRY Henry rebelled against his father the
Emperor.
(the better to assure himself in his estate) procured his son HENRY to be
chosen King of the Romans (publishing that he meant to go into Italy) and
summoned a general Council to be held in Rome, with intent (as some write) to
have deposed Pope PASCAL. The Pope being advertised hereof, he presently
excommunicated him: for which cause, after many accidents which happned (which
for brevity I ouerpasse) by the advice and counsel of some of the Princes and
prelates of Germany, his son HENRY began to take Arms against him,
pretending that he did it, for that his father was disobedient to the Church,
and that he abhorred his Simony, and other crimes which he laid to his charge:
and in short space under this pretext (which as is most likely, was rather to
depose his father, then for any love he bare to the Pope) he grew to be so
mighty, that his father offered him large compositions, to reduce him to his
obedience; which taking no effect (for the son was resolved to be absolute)
they took Arms, and each of them assembled their forces and levied Armies, and
began to make cruel war one against the other. The son was aided and assisted
by the Dukes of Bauiere and Saxony, and by other Princes and great cities: and
the father by the Duke of Bohemia, and the Marquess of Austria, A battle
fought between the father and the son.
with other mighty Dukes and Earls. In the beginning, near the city of of
Ratisbone, with the aid of those of that city, the father obtained the upper
hand against the son, so as he was driven to retire to reinforce his troops:
afterward much desiring a battle, the son came against the father, in whom
his men now for his old age had less confidence then in former times. And the
Armies and Emperors drawing near together, they stood the space of three days
continually in sight the one of the other, marshalled, and ready to fight; a
little river being between the two Camps, where were many skirmishes, in which
died many notable personages; and both father and son being resolved to
fight, the night before they should have fought, LEOPOLDVS the Marquess of
Austria being weary of the fathers quarrel, holding it unjust, counseled him
to withdraw himself and not to fight; but seeing that his advice was not
accepted, he retired with all his forces, and the Duke of Bohemia being
advertised thereof, did the like, and presently after this there came a
gentleman of his sons troops, to warn him to look to his person, and to
take heed whom he trusted, for he was in danger: whereupon the old Emperor,
with some small troops of horse, and those the best that he could choose,
forsook the Camp, and went into sundry parts, emploring aid and succors.
The son by reason of the fathers flight, seized into his hands the best and
most of the cities of Germany, and the most of the Princes came to his side:
and then he went against the city of Spire (wherein his fathers treasure and
jewels lay) and took the same.

After this were moved some treaties of peace between the father and the
son; which was concluded upon condition, that they two should meet in the
town of Binge, which lies upon the Rhines side, before that the Council
should be assembled, which the son had procured to be called, of all the
Princes Secular and Regular, to be held in the city of Mentz* the next
Christmas following; which was in the end of the year of our Lord one
thousand, one hundred and five, and the beginning of the year one thousand one
hundred and six. They two meeting there, the son protested that he pretended
nothing but the peace of the Church of Rome, with a reformation of abuses in
Germany, that his father should be absolved and reduced to the Popes obedience;
and that he never meant to bereave him either of title or dignity of Emperor,
but that he should set matters in such order as was convenient. The father
promised to do all that he ought to do, and offered more then he either would
or could perform: but the one distrusting the other, the father said that he
would stand to that which the estates should conclude in Mentz, and in the best
manner he could, departed thence to a strong Castle, where he made account to
live in safety in the m eane time. But the son being there with his troops,
he shut up all the ways and passages toward that Castle, in such sort that
the Emperor could have no conference with any, without the knowledge of his
son. Some authors write, that he was taken and committed thither prisoner by
his son; and that his son made him to renounce the Empire, and that he
afterward died in his power. But the Abbat WESPERGENSIS (an author of those
times) and OTHO FRISINGENSIS, and the most and best Historiographers write, as
I have related it.

Christmas day being come, all the great Princes of Germany met in Mentz,
excepting the Duke of Saxony, who could not come, by reason of his great age;
and with him Pope PASCAL'S Legates; where the said Legates (as it was thought)
not without the sons consent and procurement, again pronounced the Popes
censure against the father, and all such as took his part: and as they debated
hereof, and of the Emperor which was in the Castle (who offered to perform
what they required; humbly suing for absolution, for which purpose he desired
to come to Mentz) the son protested that he neither desired, neither
pretended any other thing, but that his father should reform himself, and
become obedient to the Church of Rome, but in truth the issue did manifest,
that his principal intent was to make himself Emperor. The Popes Legates
answered to the Emperors offers and promises, that they neither could, neither
had authority to appoint any penance for the Emperor, neither could they give
him any absolution, but that it must be done in a general Council, and that by
the Popes direction, as it had been decreed by GREGORY the Seventh concerning
his deprivation, and all the rest. Matters standing in this estate, all men
were now most affected to the son, and desiring to win his grace and
favor; for they saw that he was mighty and victorious, and the father as he
was a man of great courage, coming to have put himself into Mentz, many
Princes and prelates went forth to meet him, and persuaded him, that unless
he would wholly bring himself to ruin, there was The Emperor. Henry the Fourth
renonnced the Empire to his son.
no remedy but to renounce the Empire to his son, and to repose his trust in
him.

HENRY seeing himself thus distressed, and finding no redress or counsel in
any body, accepted hereof, as some say voluntarily, as being tired and worn
out with wars and troubles. Finally, reposing his trust in his son, or in
despair by reason of the solemn decree, he resigned his title to the Empire
to his son HENRY; and sent to him from the Castle wherein he was, the Cross,
the Lance, the Scepter, the Globe; the Crown, and his other Imperial
ensigns Henry the Fifth chosen Emperor.
and ornaments: which renunciation being received in the Council, by a
general consent HENRY the son was chosen and created Emperor, and called
HENRY the Fifth, after the Germane, and Fourth after the Italian writers; for
they allow not of HENRY the First, as is before said: and the election was
confirmed and ratified by the Popes Legates; and like an Emperor, in that
Council, he treated with the Popes Legates, and with the Princes of Germany,
of all matters spiritual and temporal, concerning the Empire: and for his
Ambassadors he sent certain men of great account and authority to Pope
PASCAL, and so continued and was held for Emperor. But before many days were
past, the father seeing himself deprived, and his son exalted, repenting,
secretly sought and procured friends, to the end to have been restored; and
wrote to the French King, and to other Kings and Princes, complaining of his
son, alleging that he was forced to what he did, and standing in some good
hope, he openly showed his intent, and levied men of war, the Duke of
Lorraine taking his part, and some others, with the cities of Colen and Gulike,
and other imperial towns.

The son having intelligence hereof, again raised great forces, and desiring
to have gone to a Council in the city of Liege, he sent three hundred men at
Arms to take a bridge upon the river of Maze, all which were either taken or
slain by the Duke of Lorraine, who took the fathers part, and came upon them
at unawares: whereupon HENRY the son proclaimed him traitor, and deprived him
(being absent) of his Duchy of Lorraine: in the mean time, the father entered
the citi^ of Colen, fortifying and furnishing the same with men and munition,
and thence went to have put himself into the city of Liege, whither the
Council was called, which is a most strong city: in hope (as he was a man of
great spirit) to have been restored, having some other assistance, besides
those already named; principally amongst the common people, by whom he was well
beloved, they being moved thereto with compassion to see him deposed. The son
with his forces went against the city of Colen: and they within it fearing the
siege sent Letters and messengers, in general both to him and to all the
estates, in the name of his father, complaining in that he was thus deposed and
deceived; and laying great matters to his sons charge, he excused and
justified his own cause, so much as he might, desiring to be relieved: whereto
the son made answer, reciting his fathers excess, his simonie, his schism,
and rebellion committed against the Pope and Church of Rome, to the general
prejudice of the states of the whole Empire; ptotesting further that what he
did, was to do God service, by obeing his Vicar, procuring the union of the
holy mother Church of Rome, with many other matters which the Abbat
WESPERGENSIS, BLONDVS, and other authors do set down at large. Finally, he
sent him word, that he should not dote by reason of his old age, but that he
should come private, and ask forgiveness of the Church; and that then the
equity of his cause should be heard, both for himself, and for all the
princes which were with him. The father not only refused to follow his sons
direction, but ill entreated his Ambassadors; so as they could hardly return
to their Camp before Colen in safety. Whereupon the Son (seeing that he
could not take that City in any short space) he marched with his army toward
Lorraine; and before his departure, sent a second embassage to his father, the
effect whereof was, that if he desired justice, he should peaceably come to the
Council, which he summoned to be held at Aken: if otherwise, he gave him to
understand, that by the consent and will of all the Princes, he was resolved to
make war upon him, as against a common enemy. These Ambassadors came to the
city of Liege, where HENRY the father then lay; who was so enraged with his
sons answer and resolution, that he did and said many things in fury.
Matters standing in this estate (whereof it was both thought and feared, that
great wars, troubles, and other evils would have ensued) it pleased God to
take compassion of his people, which by reason of the cruel wars between the
father and the son, endured daily grievous and intolerable oppressions,
robberies, and irreparable calamities; which was, by taking the old Emperor
HENRY out of this world; which happened on the seventh day of August, about the
fiftith year of his reign, and in the year of our Lord, one, thousand, one
hundred and six. It is written, that he The death of the Emperor Henry the 4.
died of passion and grief to see himself (as it were) a prisoner, and
besieged in that castle, and deposed and forsaken by his own son and blood.
By the discourse of this History, it may seem to the Reader that the Emperor
HENRY was an unworthy and ill deserving Prince, considering that he was
excommunicated by the Pope, and his Empire given to an other, his only Son
took Arms against him, his Nobles rebelled, his subjects forsook him, and in
a manner all the world abandoned him, being in the end forced to resign the
Empire to his Son, and the Imperial ensigns and ornaments violently wrested
from him: yet for the Readers better satisfaction, I will set down what CARRION
(whom MEXIA voucheth among his other Authors) writes of him in thsetearmes.
Thus dyed HENRY the Fourth, a valiant and warlike Emperor, most loving to his
Country, the last revenger of the Imperial Majesty; who when he had fought
62 battles, having felt the sharpest storms of adverse fortune, yet he was
never daunted nor dejected, neither did he ever abandon or betraie himself, or
those things which concerned the Majesty of the Empire by the constitutions of
his Predecessors. The dead body of the Emperor HENRY, was buried by the Bishop
of the place where he died, in a Monastery; from whence (by the decree of the
Prelates, and consent of his own son) it was afterward removed, to the end,
that (as a man excommunicate) he should not be buried in Christian burial, and
was carried to Spire, where, in a profane place, was made for him a marble
sepulcher, wherein he lay five years; at the end of which time it pleased the
Pope to permit him to be buried in Christian burial. This Emperor had two
sons, and three daughters by his first wife VBERTA, who was the daughter of a
great Marquess in Italy, allied to the Lady MAVVD: his sons were CONRADE,
who died before him, and HENRY the Fifth which succeeded him; his daughters
names were INES, which married with FREDERICK Duke of Sueuia, and was mother to
the Emperor CONRADE the Second; and LIMPERGA which married with the Duke of
Carinthia; and SOPHIA, which was wife to the King of Hungary. In Constantinople
at this time reigned ALEXIVS, whose Empire continued seven and thirty years,
and he died afterward in the time of HENRY the Fifth: and to him succeeded his
son CALOIOANNES, as hereafter you shall understand.

THE LIFE OF HENRY, THE FIFTH OF THAT NAME, AND FOVRESCORE and FOVRTEENTH ROMAN
Emperor; And of ALEXIVS and CALOIOANNES in Constantinople.
THE ARGUMENT.
HEnry having taken upon him the government of the Empire, after that the death
of his father was known, all the Cities and Princes, which had bin his
adversaries made their peace with him; and became his subjects. He sent
ambassadors to the Pope, promising to become his good son; to whom he granted
to call a Council, wherein all matters concerning the Church should be
reformed, chiefly those which were introduced by his father. He committed the
Count Palatine to prison, by reason of some alterations, and made wars against
the king of Polonia, who entitled himself King, and subdued him; but not
without great difficulty. He came afterward into Italy to be crowned by Pope
Pascal: and being come to Rome in S. Perers Church, he seized upon the Pope,
and committed him to prison, sacking Rome and the territory thereof; neither
would he release the Pope until that he had confirmed his privileges of
inuesting Prelates in the Benefices of Germany: the Pope being out of prison,
and the Emperor returning crowned in Germany, the Council disannulled the
authority given him of inuestiture, as a matter granted by force: which when he
understood, he was incensed and committed the Bishop of Mentz to prison, who
favored the Popes party. But the Emperor coming into that City, the people
matined and apprehended him, and would not release him, until that he had
promised to set their Bishop at liberty. He was afterward excommunicated and in
danger to have bin deposed from the Empire; but leaving Germany, he went to
Rome, where he found not the Pope, neither would be come thither so long as the
Emperor was therein, neither would he give credit to his promises, or believe
any thing that he said. He again returned the third time into Italy, and set a
schism in the Church: and understanding of the Popes coming against him, he
returned into Germany, and then made his peace with the Pope basely, humbly
submitting himself to him. There ensued in those parts a very grievous famine,
and pestilence, and the Emperor falling extremely sick dyed, without leaving
any son to succeed him; when he had reigned Emperor, little less then twenty
years.

IN that I was longer then ordinary in writing the life of the Emperor HENRY
the Fourth, whom the Italian writers call the Third, I have already made my
excuse; which was, for that he reigned a long time, in which many great
accidents happened: and as he was a most warlike Prince, valiant, and high
minded, so his reign was troublesome and unquiet: by reason whereof, all men
(excepting some few which took his part) were well pleased with his death,
which (as it then seemed) brought to the estates of Italy and Germany, a clear
sky and desired, after the cloudie storms of cruel combustions: and to his
son HENRY, who was Emperor in his life time, all lay smooth before him:
Colein, and all the other cities which had held against him, submitted
themselves, yielding their obedience; and the Duke of Lorraine submitting
himself, sought his grace and favor, and so he became absolute Lord over all:
and then sent Ambassadors to Pope PASCAL, who with the assent of his Cardinals
and of the Emperors Ambassadors, summoned a Council to be held in October, in
the year of our Lord, one thousand, one hundred and six, in a city of
Lombardie called Gardacastello, upon the river of Po; where many things
touching the state of the Church both in Lombardy and in Germany were reformed:
and the Pope deposed such as were not confirmed by his authority.

In the second year of this Emperor HENRY (the better to corroborate the
peace between the Pope and him) it was agreed that the Pope should come into
Germany to the city of Ausburgh, where the Emperor (for certain days space)
expected him: but the Pope upon some jealousy and reposing small trust in the
people of that city, by reason of their ancient hatred, came not, but went
into France, where he assembled a Synod in a city called Trecas; whither came
a great number of prelates: and in that Council amongst other matters which
therein The Council of Trecas.
were handled, it was ordained, that the Emperors authority concerning the
prelacies and Church dignities in Germany, should be abolished, and that he
should not therein inuest prelates, contrary to the Popes Canons and
Decretals: which when he understood, he sent to the Pope, entreating him not to
determine so of the matter, but to allow him such right of donation, as his
predecessors had done to the Emperor CHARLES the Great. This matter was greatly
argued, but in the end it was deferred till the next general Council; and so
the Pope returned to Rome, and the Emperor in his progress visited sundry
cities of Germany; and upon some occasion apprehended the Count Palatine of
Rhine, whose name was SIGIFRED, and for a time held him prisoner: I call him of
Rhine, for the difference between him and other Counties Palatine.

At this time ALNIVS King of Hungary, came unto him to complain and to desire
justice against his brother COLOMAN, who had deposed him, and made himself
king: whereupon the Emperor entered Hungary with an Army, purposing to have
restored him: but through want of victuals, and by means of other disasters
and disgraces which befell him, he was driven to retire without effecting
aught; and so COLOMAN enjoyed the kingdom, the Emperor permitting The wars
of Hungary.
the same. There likewise grew war between him and the Duke of Poland; who
without his leave, entitling himself King, denied to pay him any tribute, or to
be subject: to which The wars of Poland.
war he went with a mighty Army (it behooued him to do so, for he was to
encounter a mighty enemy) and some write that they came to blows, and that
the Emperor had the victory: but not without much bloodshed and great
difficulty; and so Poland returned to the Emperors devotion, and paid the
tribute accustomed. In these actions and others of less moment, the Emperor
spent little less then five years, which were in the beginning of his reign:
in the end of which, moved with a desire (common to al Emperors) to be crowned
by the Pope, he resolved to come into Italy; and to that effect ordained a Diet
or Council to be held in Ratisbone; wherein showing his intent, his departure
by common consent was generally applauded: and leuying thirty thousand choice
men (besides the Princes and other voluntaries, which had a desire to serve and
follow him in that journey) he came into Italy, where other troops of the
states of Lombardy joined with him, and by the way befell many accidents, which
I omit, to relate such as were of most importance.

Afterward taking his way toward Rome, many ambassages passed between him
and Pope PASCAL; he requiring to be crowned, and the other promising the same;
but upon condition, which was, that he should relinquish his demand concerning
the inuesting of prelates: about this matter some things so fell out, that the
Pope grew iealousand mistrusted the Emperor. But in the end the Emperor
promising to maintain and observe the privileges and immunities of the church
of Rome, and to desist from inuesting of prelates, as is aforesaid; the Pope
sent a solemn embassage to meet him, offering him amiable and friendly
entertainment. Whereupon The Emperor Henry the Fifth came to Rome.
he came to the city, upon the twelfth day of February, in the year of our
Lord, one thousand, one hundred and eleven, being the first Sunday in Lent,
where he was solemnly received by all the Clergy and Roman people, with the
greatest provision, and show of joy, that the Pope and citizens could possibly
make; and the Pope accompanied with all his Cardinals, attended his coming in
S. PETER'S Church porch. The Emperor with his Princes and men of war being
entered the gate of the Castle S. Angelo, alighting, mounted up the steps to
meet him, and kissed his foot: and the Pope blessed him, and raising him up,
three several times embraced him: and then they went together into the Church,
and coming to the high Altar, where the Pope that day was to say Mass, they
sat down upon seats provided for them; where the Emperor again desired the
Pope to confirm the privileges which he and his predecessors had held,
concerning the nomination of prelates, and the donation of Benefices; which the
Pope absolutely denied. Some authors say, that the Pope requested the Emperor
(in performance of his promise) to renounce the right which he challenged to
have in ecclesiastical causes; and that the Emperor therewith displeased,
arose, and with his Germane Bishops and Princes went into a chapel (from
whence he sent him his answer; and denying what was required, persisted in
his demand concerning the confirmation of his privilege: so as there was much
strise and contention about the matter.

Some report this after another manner; which is no great marvel though it so
happen amongst Historians; seeing that we daily read, that when sundry men
have seen a matter which has happened in their sight, yet the same men which
then were present, have afterward related it after diverse manners, each one
pretending to tell the truth. I say this, for that some men are so hard of
belief, that if they find any contrariety amongst writers, they account the
whole History to be a lie: which is too great a severity. But returning to my
story, I say, that Pope Pascal apprehended by the Emperor Henry the fifth.
although they differ herein, yet all Authors agree, that upon this occasion
the Emperors Captains and Companies entered the Church; and the Mass being
ended, by the Emperors order, the Pope was apprehended, together with the most
part of the Cardinals, and that the Germans made boot or prize of the Bishops,
Priests, and other the Popes friends.

The Citizens and people of Rome, took this in such disgrace, that betaking
them to their weapons, they went against the Imperialists, which held the
Vaticane; where, fighting with incredible fury, they forced the Emperor to
abandon that part of the City, and to withdraw himself to his Camp; between
whom and the Citizens for three or four days space, were great skirmishes,
and much blood was spilt, and many men were slain of either side. Yet BLONDVS
and some others report, that during the three days that the fight lasted, the
Emperor held the Vaticane, and that he being unable to defend it, abandoned the
same and went unto his Camp, leading the Pope and his Cardinals with him
prisoners. Finally, these three days being past, he removed his Army, and
pitched his tents at the foot of Mount S. Syluester: and so marching forwards,
left the Pope with some of his Cardinals in a place of strength, and the rest
he left in another place, guarded with great troops of soldiers, and then
marched up and down the Country, burning and spoiling the Castles, Towns,
and Villages, near thereabouts; and so within some few days after, with great
fury returned to Rome, and sat down before it; but the inhabitants were
resolved not to receive him, except he would first set the Pope and his
Cardinals at liberty: But he perseuering earnest in his demand, would have his
request first performed; imitating (in the action, although not in the intent)
the Patriarch JACOB, who wrestling with the Angel, said, I will not let thee
go, except thou first bless me. Wherefore the Pope to avoid further
inconveniences, and to get out of the Prison wherein Pope Pascal ^ing released
from the Emperors prison, crowned him Roman Emperor.
he was detained, came to a composition with the Emperor, and confirmed to him
the privilege of inuestiture which he required, and admitted and allowed those
prelates which the Emperor had preferred and invested. And so all being
concluded, the Pope was conducted to Rome: and at the day appointed, the
Emperor entered the City, and came into Saint PETER'S Church, first setting a
good guard in the Ports and Turrets of the Vaticane; and with the accustomed
solemnity was therein by the Pope crowned, with appearance of very great joy
and gladness generally, by reason of the wished peace, after so long and
tedious war.

The coronation being ended, the Emperor (taking his leave, and the Popes
blessing with him for his good speed) departed from Rome very peaceably; and
so passing through Italy, and the estate of Lombardy, he returned into Germany;
where having made sufficient proof that his father dying, and acknowledging
his fault, desired to be forgiven, he obtained leave to bury him in the
Church; which was performed with accustomed solemnity; and in Italy and in
Germany generally was peace.

A little while after this, died that great and mighty Princess MAVVD, who was
Lady of many Towns in Italy: This Lady after her death, left a great part of
her estate to the Church, among which, is reckoned the City of Ferrara: but
the Emperor FREDERICK nevertheless Mawd the Empress daughter of Henry the
First, King of England, and wife of the Emperor Henry the fist.
afterward challenged to be her heir, by reason of the alliance between her
and his mother. The Emperor being in England solemnizing his marriage with
another MAVVD, daughter to the King of that Country; Pope PASCAL at the
request and persuasion of his Cardinals and Clergy, summoned a Council of
Bishops and Prelates of many Nations; in which Council (amongst other matters)
it was concluded; that the privilege granted by the Pope to the Emperor, for
the inuesting of Bishops and other Clergiemen, should be revoked, and held
for none; since it was exacted by force, the Pope being then his Prisoner; and
for such they declared and published the same, excommunicating the Emperor, if
he persisted in the execution thereof: in this Council were one hundred
Bishops, some Archbishops and Patriarchs, and all the Cardinals.

This being made known to the Emperor, he was much discontented for the same:
and much more, after that he understood that many of the principal prelates in
Germany took part with the Pope against him, and had left his service; amongst
which was ALDELBERT Archbishop of Mentz, a very mighty Prince, whom the
Emperor commanded to be apprehended, and held him above two years Prisoner;
whereof ensued many great tumults: And some Bishops were so hardy (being
authorized by a Cardinal Legate in Hungary) as to excommunicate the Emperor:
The number of those which conspired against him, daily increasing, he fearing
the like fortune as befell his father, appointed a Council to be called in the
City of Mentz, there to treat of those affairs; offering to stand to that
which should be determined; and to right any wrong that he had done.

The day appointed for this Council being come, and the Emperor therein
appearing, so few made their repair thither, that he was therewith much
troubled, and highly discontented, and therefore with greater instance procured
the assembly, but it little auailed him: for before they could come, the
inhabitants of Mentz mutined against him; as well for that he held their Bishop
Prisoner, as for that in former time in the wars between him and his father,
that City had endured much loss by his means: whereupon they putting
themselves in Arms, went to the palace where he was, whereof they became
masters, and of his person also; and threatening to kill him, they made him to
promise satisfaction for the losses and injuries they had received, and that he
should presently set their Bishop ALDELBERT at liberty: all which he promised
and confirmed with an oath, in such manner that they holding themselves
satisfied, left the Palace; and the Emperor departed, and in performance of
his promise, presently released the Archbishop: but yet notwithstanding he
continued much displeased, for the affront done him in that City, and no less
with them which failed to come to the Council. The next year, which was in
the year of our Lord, one thousand, one hundred and sixteenth; he holding his
Christmas in Spire, many prelates assembled themselves in the City of Coleyn,
and with them some Princes, with a resolution to seek to deprive him, for that
he was excommunicated, and disobedient to the Church of Rome: which he (to his
great disliking) having understood, and desiring to redress the same, sent his
Ambassadors to that assembly, promising to bear what should be imposed, and
protesting that he was in all points ready to satisfy the Pope: but his
Embassage was ill received, and as ill answered; for they sent him word, that
he should make his peace with the Pope, and conform himself to his will;
otherwise, they would neither serve, nor obey him, but generally would all
forsake him. Whereupon he tried his friends, seeking aid by all means
possibly; and as Princes never fail to find some to help and assist them
(some of duty, and others in hope of gain) he gathered many men together,
thinking to effect his business by force: and depriving some of his
adversaries, which held with the Pope against him, of their estates, be
bestowed many graces and favors upon his followers; and leuying a great Army,
resolved to go into Italy, as well to be far absent from the fury of
Germany, as for that he purposed (as he gave it out) to come to some agreement
with the Pope: for he had news (which were certain) that through factions and
partialities in Rome, which arose for that the Pope would not bestow the
Prefecture, or office of Lord President, upon the son of him which last
presided, the most part of the people rebelled against him, and fought with
such as took his part; and the matter came to this issue, that it behooved him
to leave Rome, and to go into Pulia, where he was harbored by WILLIAM the
Feudatorie Duke thereof, and by some other Princes.

The Emperor coming with his Army into Italy, he took his way directly for
Rome: yet some write that he first sent his Ambassadors to the Pope, and
requiring absolution used some complements; but for as much as he would not
make such satisfaction as was required at his hands, the Pope would not absolve
him.

Others write, that the Emperors Ambassadors found the Pope in Rome, and that
he, understanding of his coming, would not stay for him. But howsoever it was,
he came to Rome with his wife without any resistance (but yet he found not the
Pope there) having first made Mawd the Empress at Rome.
cruel wars in the territories of the Church as he came: And pretending that
his coronation was violent, and done by force, although by the Pope, he
therefore made himself to be crowned again by an Archbishop, whose name was
MAVRICE DE BRACHIA, whom he brought with him; the whole Clergy, together with
the people of Rome murmuring thereat.

This being done, he departed thence, and made very cruel wars against all
such towns as held for Pope PASCAL: But knowing that through his absence
Germany was like to be lost, for (as all writers affirm) at that time justice
and equity took no place, and there were such wars, factions, robberies,
insolences and other disorders, as cannot be recited: Wherefore he marched
with his Army thitherwards, taking his way through Lombardy. Coming into
Germany, with the aid of FREDERICK Duke of Sueuia, and of CONRADE Duke of
Franconia, which were his Nephews (being his sisters sons) and of some other
Princes which followed him, without any stay he went to make war against the
Duke of Saxony, who renouncing his obedience held for the Pope; with whom he
fought a terrible battle, and had the A battle between the Emperor and the
Duke of Saxony
victory; whereby his power and authority greatly increased with those which
had rebelled against him.

While these things passed in Germany, Pope PASCAL came to Rome, and after some
troubles which there arose, he departed out of this life, having been Pope
thirteen years and a half, in the year of our Lord, one thousand, one
hundred and eighteen: and in his place was chosen a Cardinal, whose name was
JOHN, and was called GELASIVS the Second. About this time also died ALEXIVS the
Emperor of Constantinople, and to him succeeded his son CALOIOANNES, as I have
said.

The Emperor having received news of the death of Pope PASCAL, and of the
Election of GELASIVS (seeing himself excommunicate, and shunned by many
prelates and Princes, which neither served him, nor saw him, although they
warred not against him) setting the The Emperors third going to Rome.
affairs of Germany in the best order he could, with a great Army, he came the
third time into Italy, addressing his way to Rome, where Pope GELASIVS durst
not stay his coming; for in Rome were partialities and factions against him.
Whereof the Frangepanes (who were many in number, and of great power) were the
chief; yet some others took his part, as the Cossi, the Normanes, the
families of the Leoni, and the Colunnesi, which then began to grow great.

The Pope being fled from Rome in his Galleys down the river of Tiber; the
Emperor coming thither, he pretended that the Election of GELASIVS was
insufficient, for that he was chosen without his consent, and therefore
procured such Bishops and prelates as were of his faction, to make that
MAVRICE, who (as I said) crowned him, Pope: and they did so, and called him
GREGORY; who being installed and lodged in the papal Palace, absolved the
Emperor, and confirmed and ratified his donations and inuestitures: And having
set up this new Idol, whom the Romans in disgrace called Burdino, the Emperor
recommended him to the protection of the Frangepanes: who were so much
discontented with the Election of GELASIVS, that they would have killed him;
and then took the field and spoiled the Lands of the Church, to make his Pope
GREGORY Lord thereof. Which Pope GELASIVS understanding, with the aid of
WILLIAM Duke of Pulia, ROBERT Duke of Capua, RICHARD, and other great Lords of
Italy, he levied such an Army, that the Emperor doubting what would follow,
published, that since he was absolved of his excommunication, he meant to
return into Germany. And being departed, Pope GELASIVS (leaving the Army which
he had raised) came to Rome; where, between such as took part with him, and
the Frangepanes, which held with Pope GREGORY, were so many encounters, and so
many men slain, that he was driven to forsake Rome, and (in a manner) to fly
into France, where he died in the Monastery of Clunia, having been Pope almost
one whole year and a half.

He being dead, CALIXTVS the Second was chosen, who before was called GVIDO;
and before his coming to Rome, the Antipope GREGORY BVRDINO, departed thence,
and went to a Town that was called Sutrio, where what happened to him, you
shall hereafter understand.

The Emperor to avoid loss of time, presently when he came into Germany
besieged the City of Mentz, against which he bare an old grudge, for the
injury which he had received: and holding it straightly besieged, sundry
insurrections were raised against him; for such as before had showed themselves
his enemies, feared that he would now be revenged on them all: Wherefore with
him, and against him, were every where making of parties. ALDELEERT Archbishop
of Mentz, with the aid of the Duke of Saxony, and of other Princes and
Prelates, had a great Army in a readiness: and of the contrary side, the Duke
of Sueuia, and others, had no less on his behalf; in such manner as it was
feared that great wars would have ensued. But the Emperor (being persuaded by
some, his loyal servants, and certain other Ecclesiastical persons, which
interposed themselves) inclined to peace, which was treated of; and all the
differences and controversies were referred to the arbitrament of certain
Princes of the Empire; and a Diet or Council was appointed to be holden in the
City of Wittenbergh, where all controversies should be decided and ended: and
it was so. And those which were appointed to be Arbitrators and judges of this
controversy, and of the rest, being there assembled (and certain Legates, as
some say, being also there from Pope CALIXTVS) it was by common consent
determined, that through all Germany a general and universal peace should be
proclaimed and kept between the Emperor, and all the Princes both
Ecclesiastical and Secular* and that the Princes in like manner should
maintain the same peace amongst themselves, upon pain of death: And that
whatsoever was taken from any Church, should presently be restored: and that
the like should be done by any thing withheld from the Emperors chamber of
accounts or Exchequer: And that the like should also be done between all
estates, which had taken aught (from other) by violence: And that all matters
in controversy should be speedily decided: And that justice should be equally
administered in all parts: And that all offenses and wrongs past should be
forgiven and forgotten: And that thieves and robbers by the highwaies, should
be sought out and punished: And that such order should be taken, that the
country should be maintained in peace: For the due execution whereof, the most
sufficient personages that could be found, were appointed; and every where was
done all that was possible to further the same.

As touching the excommunication and the Popes fulminations and censures; and
the differences between the Emperor and him, all was referred to be at Pope
CALIXTVS his order and discretion; to whom the Emperor sent Ambassadors about
the same in great humility.

This being ended, Pope CALIXTVS sent his Legate Alatere, and Ambassadors
Cardinals, to another meeting or general Diet held at Worms; the Emperor
being there present, where peace and concord was concluded between them: And
the Emperor acknowledging the Pope for Christ's Vicar here on earth, and
universal Pope of the Church, desired absolution; The Emperor reconciled to
the Pope.
and resigned into the Legates hands, all the right and title that he could
pretend to the inuesting of Prelates, and donation of any spiritual dignities;
and then gave up the possession of all Towns and goods belonging to any
Church; and bound himself to use his best means, that if any other Princes
usurped any, they should be restored; and himself to be obedient to the
commandments and Injunctions of the Church, and to aid, protect, and defend
the same. The Deeds and Letters Patent made hereof at large, were carried to
the Pope, who allowed thereof, and gave his Bull; whereby he granted that all
the Prelacies and Abbeyes which in Germany should be void, should be provided
by the Election of the Chapters of the same Churches, and that the Emperor
might be present at the Election: provided always that it should not be made
by force, or for bribes, or through any other kind of Simonie; and that he
which was chosen might receive from the Emperor, all that was merely Laicall
or Temporal; but must have recourse to the Sea of Rome for the rest, according
to the Popes Canons.

This being ended, the Emperor and all those which stood excommunicate, were
publicly absolved, and then the Letters Patent and instruments were solemnly
read; which befell in the Month of September, in the year of our Lord, one
thousand, one hundred, twenty two: But thus (says CARRION) the Constitutions
and Imperial Laws made by CHARLES the Great, and maintained for the space of
three hundred years, by the seditious conspiracy of his own subjects, and a
fatal success, in favor of the Popes, almost in an instant, were made void
and overthrown: What miseries fell both upon Church and Commonwealth by this
grant; What mischiefs Popes have done, being armed with this tyranny; what did
they not attempt to overthrow the authority of Emperors, being much shaken?
Finally, how often by their cruel practices, Germany being in combustion, has
taken Arms against it self, and imbrued her self, with her own blood, our
forefathers have felt and lamented: By pretext of this Session, the Popes have
violently taken the lawful power of the Keys of the universal Church, and
have feigned themselves to be divinely constituted Lords and Judges of all
Churches, Bishops, Pastors and Kings: Finally, of the whole Christian World, in
all causes whatsoever: they forced Bishops to take the power of their
administration from them, and to the Keys they added new divine worship, and
the making of new Laws, which whosoever should infringe, it was lawful for
them to declare them members cut off from the body of Christ, seditious
Heretics, Schismatics, and to damn them perpetually: Finally, by the weapon
of excommunication, they have usurped earthly possessions, and have settled and
dispossessed Kings.

The Emperor from thence went to Norenbergh, from whence he dispatched the
Popes The Emperor absolved from the Popes excomunication.
Legates very well contented, with great gifts and presents both for the Pope
and themselves, and they returned to Rome: By reason whereof Pope CALIXTVS and
all the Romish Court made show of great joy, for the recovery of their lost
fat Sheep: and truly they had great reason, for it much imported them; and
they recovered him but by great good hap.

In this time ROGER Earl of Sicilia, who afterward was King, and very
mighty, being Uncle to WILLIAM Duke of Pulia and Galabria* knowing that
WILLIAM was gone to marry with the Emperors sister of Constantinople, came
into Italy, and by force took all that his Nephew held there; and having made
himself Lord thereof, he was called King of Italy; and afterward leaving the
title of Italy, he was called King of Sicilia: I have reduced this to memory,
to the end that the Reader may have the better light of what shall be said
hereafter; and may also understand, that his successors have been ever since
called Kings of both Sicilies, which are Naples and Sicilia.

The Emperor HENRY being reduced to the Popes obedience; in little more then
two years which he lived afterward, he had two wars, the one against the
Hollanders, and the other against JEWS the French King: Against the
Hollanders he went with an Army, and subdued them; against the King of France
he levied a great Army, in the behalf of his father in law, HENRY King of
England; and marching toward France the war ceased, and he returned; for the
City of Worms rebelled, and he went thither, and besieging it, took it by
composition, and punished the offenders.

At this time in Rome died Pope CALIXTVS when he had been Pope six years,
within two months; and in his place was chosen LAMBERT Bishop of Hostia, and
wa^ called HONORIVS the Second. CALIXTVS before his death sent a great Army,
under the command of a Cardinal, against Pope GREGORY who lived in Sutrio;
which besieging the pl^, took him prisoner, and brought him to Rome, where he
was shamefully (to disgrace him) made to ride upon a Cammell, and the Pope
granted him his life upon condition that he should spend the rest of his time
in a Monastery.

In Germany the Emperor applied himself to purchase the good will of his
subjects, and to make himself well beloved; taking warning by his fathers
success. But there befell in all that Country so great a pestilence and
famine, that it was thought (as all writers affirm) that the third part of the
people perished: for which calamity and affliction, the Emperor being very
sorrowful, fell sick, and within few days died, penitent for his sins,
desiring God to forgive The death of the Emperor Henry the fist.
the same. And although it pleased God to give him a good death, yet he left
neither son nor daughter that might succeed him, but two Nephews which were
his ^isters sons; the mighty Dukes of Sueuia, and of Franconia, the one
called FREDERICK, and the other CONRADE: some Authors call CONRADE Duke of
Sueuia, and others of Franconia; he died the first day of June, in the year
of our Lord one thousand one hundred twenty and five, when he had reigned
about twenty years: and those which account but fourteen, ^kon but from the
time of his coronation in Rome; but I ever make my account from the day of his
Election; His body was embalmed and borne to Spire, and there buried amongst his
Ancestors.

When the Emperor HENRY died, in Constantinople reigned CALOIOANNES; who was
an excellent Prince and very necessary for that Empire. He was very liberal,
loved justice and equity, and obtained many great victories in Asia against
the Turks and Persians, and recovered from them many Cities which his father
and predecessors had lost; His brother ISACIVS being General of his Armies,
whom he dearly loved; and levied Italian soldiers in steed of Greeks. But
with these virtues, envying the Wars and Conquest which were made in Asia,
he did greatly hinder the French and others which went thither; and for the
same occasion f^ll at variance with the Venetians, which took from him by
force certain Islands in the Archipelague: of his end shall be spoken hereafter.

At this time in Jerusalem began the order of the Knights Templers, and also
the order of the Knights of Saint JOHN, called afterward of Rhodes, and now of
Malta, where they The beginning of the order of the Knights Templars, and of S.
John's, or of the Rhodes.
inhabit.

THE LIFE OF LOTHARIVS, THE SECOND OF THAT NAME, AND FOVRSCORE AND FIFTEENTH
ROMAN Emperor; And of CALOIOANNES, Emperor of Constantinople.
THE ARGUMENT.
HEnry the fifth being dead, Lothary Duke of Saxony was chosen Emperor: against
whom Henry's Nephews (aspiring to the Empire) in the beginning of his reign
rebelled, who after many fortunes of war, in the end became his subjects. He
came into Italy, to the aid of Pope Innocent, against a Pseudo-pope which had
driven him out of Rome. The Emperor was no sooner returned into Germany, but
the other Antipope, whose name was Anacletus (through the favor and assistance
of the King of Sicilia) made Pope Innocent to fly: Whereof the Emperor being
advertised, he returned into Italy, and restored Innocent to his seat, and
tamed Roger King of both the Sicilies. But returning victorious toward
Germany, he died in the Mountains of Trent; when he had ruled the Empire
fourteen years, leaving never a son, that might succeed him in the Empire.

THE two HENRY'S, father and son, which held the Empire seventy years, being
dead; LOTHARY Duke of Saxony, a mighty Prince (like as his predecessors had
been before him) was chosen Emperor. His house ever (or for the most part) was
enemy to the Emperor HENRY, and to his house and family, and rebelled against
him: wherefore for his virtues, and for the worthiness of his person, many of
the Princes and people of Germany, as soon as the Emperor HENRY was dead,
fixed their eyes upon him, to the end to have him for their Emperor and
Sovereign Lord: for they having been likewise enemies to HENRY, stood in fear
of his Nephews, CONRADE and FREDERICK, Dukes of Sueuia, and Franconia, who had
ever held with him; and for the same reason, the two brothers sought by all
means that the one of them might have been Emperor, and with all their might
withstood LOTHARY. These two brothers (as I said) were Nephews to the Emperor
HENRY the Fifth, and his sisters sons, who was the daughter of the Emperor
HENRY the Fourth. LEOPOLD Marquess of Austria, and CNARLES Earl of Flanders,
by reason of their estates and power, sought also to have gotten the Empire.
These four great Princes being competitors, by the procurement and industry of
ALBERT, Archbishop of Mentz, who remembering that he had been imprisoned, and
ill entreated by HENRY, for contradicting his friends; found means to draw the
Princes Electors to meet at Mentz, where they chose LOTHARY Duke of Saxony,
Emperor. Wherewith CONRADE and FREDERKCK were so much discontented, that in
lieu of doing him Lothary the second chosen Emperor.
homage as to their Emperor, they rebelled against him as their enemy: and in
him wanted neither will nor industry to persecute them.

First, he sent to Pope HONORIVS the Second, to complain of them; who approved
and was well pleased with the election of the Duke of Saxony; for as much as by
that house the Popes had ever been relieved and supported; wherefore he might
easily obtain of the Pope, to command them (by his censures) to yield their
obedience. But these two brothers (taking Arms) found so many friends, and
their Lands and Countries were such and so great, that a cruel war began
between them; which I omit, for that I find it briefly written: yet it
continued many days, and came to that issue, that CONRADE the elder of these
two brethren, with the help of his brother FREDERICK, and of GODFREY Count
Palatine of the Rhine, was called Emperor: and raising the greatest power that
he was able (leaving his brother in Germany to make head against LOTHARY) he
went into Italy, and took many Imperial cities in the state of Lombardy; where
the Archbishop of Milan crowned him with the Crown of iron: by reason whereof,
Pope HONORIVS afterward deprived him of his Archbishopric, and set another in
his place: and the Emperor LOTHARY being thus distressed, knowing that HENRY of
Bauiere (who was called the Proud, and was descended from the lineage of the
famous GVELPHONS; of which, the Abbat WESPERGENSIS and other Authors make so
great account) was a mighty Prince and very valiant, he practiced with him to
marry his only daughter, whose name was GERTRVDE; and to the end that he
should be a faithful and loyal servant unto him, he gave him with her for her
dowry, the title and succession of the Duchy of Saxony, which after his death
he enjoyed, and was Lord of both estates: yet afterward in process of time
there were alterations in them, and in others; whereof I will make no special
relation, for that it requires too long a time: yet I will sometimes speak
thereof as occasion shall be offered.

The Duke of Bauiere, and other Princes now helping the Emperor with all their
powers, made cruel war in CONRADE'S Countries, whilst that he was busy
about his Coronation in Lombardy, with intent to have gone to Rome. But as he
had levied mo men than he was able to pay, and wanted means to give them
satisfaction, he was driven to return into his Country, and to join with his
brother; and being returned, was not of power able to make head against the
Emperor, or at the least to go through with what he had begun: whereupon he
sought to make some agreement with him, and to obtain his favor; which was
effected (as says the Abbat WESPERGENSIS) at the intercession of Saint
BERNARD, he renouncing the name and title of Emperor, and giving other security
to serve him as a Subject: the like did his brother FREDERICK. And so ended the
Emperor LOTHARY this war, which (as he writes) was very bloody: during the
which, in Rome died HONORIVS the Second, having bin Pope five years; and to him
succeeded INNOCENTIVS the Second, a Roman born, who as soon as he was Pope,
resolved to have driven ROGER Earl of Sicilia out of Pulia; where ROGER was
called King of Italy (as I said in the end of the life of the Emperor HENRY)
having taken the same from WILLIAM, who was his Nephew, or (as some say) his
cousin germane: and leuying a great Army for those wars, he went thither in
person. But for as much as Authors differ in the recital thereof (the Italians
accounting it to be at this time, that the Pope was taken prisoner there: and
the Germans affirm it to have happened in the time of CONRADE the Third, who
succeeded LOTHARY) we will therefore leave it until that time; in which it
seemed most likely to have passed.

But here we will speak of another disaster, which befell Pope INNOCENTIVS;
which was, that with the fame of his imprisonment, or (as I rather believe) of
his death; a mighty Roman, of great power, whose name was PETER LEO, came to
Rome, publishing the news thereof: and procuring favor and assistance, was
chosen Pope, and called ANACLETVS; who taking all the Gold and Silver out of
the Temples and Churches, and giving the same to his followers, grew to be of
such power, that Pope INNOCENTIVS being returned to Rome, could not make his
party good against him, but was constrained in a manner by flight, to get him
into France, and from thence into Germany, to the Emperor LOTHARY; who by
reason of the peace and agreement between him and Duke CONRADE, was grown
very rich and of great power; who giving him very good entertainment, offered
to go in person to restore him to his estate: and although that the affairs
of Germany were not yet thoroughly settled, yet he in short space made ready a
fair Army, and they both together departed toward Italy, but by several
ways, dividing their Army, to the end to march the more commodiously: and
again meeting near to Rome, were there received, where Pope ANACLETVS durst
make no The Emperor Lothary in Italy.
resistance; whom his friends had hid so secretly, as at that time, he could
not be found; which was in the sixth year of the Emperors reign: And so with
great solemnity Pope INNOCENT was restored to his chair; and with the like or
greater, the Emperor LOTHARY was by him crowned; and within few days after,
returned with his Army into Germany, not finding any contradiction or
resistance.

The Emperor LOTHARY being arrived in Germany, and having by the consent of
the Princes thereof summoned a Council to be held there: By the Authority of
the Empire, he resolved to go himself in person against the Duke of Polonia,
because he refused to pay the Tribute, in acknowledgement of superiority,
which he ought for the space of twelve years behinde-hand, unpaid: But the
Polacres not daring to stand to the hazard of War; the Duke accompanied with
men of peace, came forth of his Country to receive the Emperor; whom the
Emperor would not see, neither admit into his presence, before such time as
he had paid him all the ariereages due for so many years past; and the Duke
accomplishing the same, came to see the Emperor in the Duchy of Saxony;
whither being comn, and having promised to perform the premises, he returned
home in peace.

At the same time the King of Hungary sent his Ambassadors and presents, in
acknowledgement of superiority. Pope INNOCENT in the mean time had ill
success; for within few days after the Emperors departure out of Italy, and
that he had called a Council to be held in the City of Spire; Pope ANACLETVS
aforesaid (through the favor and assistance of his friends and kinsfolks, and
of ROGER which was called King of the two Sicilies) returned again to Rome,
and took upon him as Pope, being already Lord of the City, and of some other
fortresses: whereupon Pope INNOCENT sent to the Emperor, imploring his aid
and succor, to restore him to his dignity.

The Emperor setting the affairs of Germany apart, and raising a greater Army
then at the first; within short space came into Italy; with whom (besides
those which the Abbat WESPERGENSIS sets down) came his son in law HENRY
Duke of Bauiere, with great and very good troops of men of war: OTHO
FRISINGENSIS says, that CONRADE Duke of Sueuia, which in former time had been
his enemy, came with him also: and beingarriued in Italy, entering Lombardy, he
found great war and dissension between the Cities of Cremona, and of Milan,
and he as sovereign Lord, took upon him to decide the cause of their
difference; and finding those of Cremona to be faulty, he proceeded against
them; and they rebelling were by him subdued by force. From thence he went to
the City of Pauia, and so to Bolonia, visiting and pacifying the other Cities
of Lombardy; which through civil contention, and the long absence of the
Emperors, were in a manner at liberty, and tyrannized; all which he subdued
and brought to subjection: and from thence (sending his son in law with the
one half of his Army into Tuscane, to receive the Pope, which lay in Pisa) he
himself by another way went with the rest into the Marcadi Ancona, wherein he
assaulted and took many towns which rebelled; as well against him as against
the Church of Rome; which he recovered and restored. Afterward joining with
the Pope and with his son in law HENRY, he took his way toward Rome, where he
restored the Pope to his seat and Palace; and thence marched forwards, to
war against ROGER, who with the help of his friends and subjects, had raised
a great Army, vaunting in brave terms, that he would fight with the Emperor.
But ROGER shamefully retiring without daring to meet him, put his men into
garrisons, to defend his countries; but the Emperor followed the wars with
such expedition and courage, that within short space he became Lord of Pulia,
and Calabria, and of all the rest that ROGER held; and constrained him to fly
out of Italy, and to get him into Sioily. And to the Emperor at Roger king of
Sicilia driven out of Italy.
his being there came Ambassadors from CALOIOANNES Emperor of Constantinople,
to congratulate his victories obtained against ROGER, whom he much hated, and
against whom he had afterward great wars.

At this time died the Antipope ANACLETVS. And so the Emperor finding no
resistance in Italy (having subdued the rebellious, and rewarded and honored
those which had faithfully and valiantly served him, in such manner that they
write of him, that since the time of CHARLES the Great, not any Emperor had
ever lived there in so great power and authority) he returned into Germany: but
before his departure, he bestowed upon a great German Prince, who was his near
kinseman and favorite, whose name was RAYNOLD, the State of Pulia, with the
title of Duke thereof, which he took from ROGER. About which gift,
notwithstanding that the Pope was well content therewith, OTHO FRISINGENSIS
(who was an eye witness and an Author of those times) writes, that there was
some difference between the Emperor and the Pope; The Pope alleging the
Countries of Pulia and Calabria to be subject and feudatory to the Church of
Rome; and that the favor and title which was given to RAYNOLD, should have
been given by him, and not by the Emperor: but in the end, a mean was found,
that it was done in both their names; and the Arms and Ensigns of Duke, were
given to RAYNOLD by them both; and so RAYNOLD remained a Duke; and the Emperor
departing, left many good men of war with him, whereof he afterward stood in
need, as you shall hear: And so leaving the Pope in Rome, he returned toward
his country, triumphing of his victories. Upon the way coming to the
Mountains of Trent, he fell so grievously The death of the Emperor Lothary.
sick, that unable to travel any further, he died in a little village, in the
thirteenth year after that he was chosen Emperor, and in the seventh after his
coronation in Rome, in the year of our Lord, one thousand, one hundred thirty
and eight: his body was carried into Saxony, and there most sumptuously
entombed, and by his death grew great alterations, both in Italy and Germany,
as shall be related.

He left no more children behind him when he died, but his only daughter
GERTRVDE, who (I said) was married to HENRY Duke of Bauiere; for his only
son called LOTHARY died a child before him.

In the time of this Emperor (as he was a great Iusticer) the laws and
institutions collected by the Emperor JUSTINIAN, were again revived and took
effect; which through the division and declining of the Empire, were grown out
of use, and in a manner quite forgotten; A reformation in the Civil law.
and VERNERIVS whom ACVRSIVS (a gloser upon the civil law) calls YRNERYVS,
sought, and took out of the ancient Libraries, the books of the laws which
JUSTINIAN had compiled, and abbreuiated out of the institutions of the Pretors
and Ediles, and ancient Emperors; which lay forgotten, and even lost: and he
corrected and reduced the same into the best form he was able; which the
Emperor LOTHARY commanded to be read in Schools, and that all Pleas should be
determined by them; and so it is observed unto this day.

Within a while after this, these laws began to be glosed upon by AZO a
famous Doctor; and afterward succeeded ACVRSIVS: and they have still so
increased, that since that The beginning of the Civil Lawyers.
time there have been many great and famous men in that faculty; which hold
the greatest authority and degree in the estate and government of all
Commonwealths. In Constantinople yet reigned CALOIOANNES, warring against the
Infidels, and against ROGER King of Sicily.

THE LIFE OF CONRADE, THE THIRD OF THAT NAME, AND FOVRSCORE AND SIXTEENTH ROMAN
Emperor. And therein is treated of CALOIOANNES, and of his son EMANVEL,
Emperors of Constantinople.
THE ARGUMENT.
AFter Lothary, succeeded Conrade, Nephew to the Emperor Henry the Fifth; who
was chosen by the Electors, and confirmed by the Popes Legate. He was in the
beginning of his reign disturbed by the son in law of Lotharius, who
withheld from him the Imperial ensigns; and not only refused to deliver them,
but also to yield him any obedience; whereupon the Emperor proclaimed him
Rebel, and took from him by force many estates: but this war had so many
variable accidents, that the Emperor therein spent seven years, during which
time, he took no great care how matters went in Italy. He went to the wars
of the Holyland, and being comn iato his enemies Countries, received so great
an overthrow, as there scarcely remained the tenth man of those which went with
him. After this rout, he prosecuted his attempt, in company of the French King,
from whom he afterward departed; holding his being with him for dishonorable.
He returned thither the third time, and together with the Kings of France and
of Jerusalem, did nothing of any account. Afterward, since it pleased not God
to favor the proceedings of the Christians in this enterprise, either of the
Princes returned into his Country: And the Emperor being comn into Germany;
whilst he was making preparation for his going into Italy, to be crowned, died
(as many men thought) of poison, in the fifteenth year of his reign.

I Have already related how that the Emperor LOTHARY married his only daughter
to HENRY Duke of Bauiere (called the Proud) who was a valiant and mighty
Prince; and that he gave him the title of Duke of Saxony, which was his house
and patrimony: and that this HENRY did him great service in his journey into
Italy, and also against the two mighty brethren, CONRADE and FREDERICK, Dukes
of Sueuia and Franconia, who were his enemies a long time: for when LOTHARY was
chosen Emperor, they thought to have had it for one of themselves, being
Nephews to the deceased Emperor HENRY the Fifth, and Grandchildren of the
Emperor HENRY the Fourth. When As the Emperor LOTHARY was dead, his son in
law HENRY Duke of Bauiere, who came with him, and was already called Duke of
Saxony, gat into his custody the Imperial Ensigns; as the Scepter, the
Cross, the Crown, and the Globe, imagining that he should have had use for
them, for that he thought to have been Emperor, but they were of little use
to him: For the two brethren, CONRADE and FREDERICK Dukes of Sueuia and
Franconia (before named) were of so great power and authority, as assembling
the Princes Electors in Confluence (where the River of Mosella joyneth with the
Rhine, THEODORICVS a Cardinal and the Popes Legate being there present)
CONRADE was chosen Emperor, and all the Princes swear to him homage and
obedience; which the Saxons and Bauarians Conrade chosen Emperor.
only opposed with HENRY their Lord, and his brother GVELPHO, who was a great
and valiant Prince. Whereupon the new Emperor called a general Diet or
Council to be held in the city of Bambergh, whither came the widow Empress,
late wife to LOTHARIVS, and the Deputies of Saxony, to acknowledge and yield
obedience unto him: But Duke HENRY would not appear, neither would he send the
Imperial Ensigns which he had in his power: and so by all the Princes there
assembled, with the Emperors authority, he was enjoined to appear and to
send the Ensigns aforesaid, by the feast day of Saint PETER and PAVL then next
following; which he did (for he durst do no other) but would not come himself
in person: Whereupon the Emperor (desiring to be at peace) after two or three
summons, enjoined him, within a certain prefixed time, to make his appearance
in the City of Ausburgh; for which purpose he presently caused a Council to
be summoned, and made great preparation, meaning to have proceeded against him
with all rigor and severity.

The Council being assembled, HENRY accompanied with many men of war, of
Saxony and of Bauiere, came near to that place where it was held, and lodged
his Camp, and began to treat of means to come to the Emperors obedience;
which treaty continued three days without any conclusion: for the Emperor
required him to resign certain lands which his father in law the Emperor
LOTHARY had given him: but the Emperor holding himself not in safety in that
City, departed without any speech of his removing, until he was gone, and
went to the City of Herbipoli: where many Princes meeting, by the general
consent of them all, he pronounced sentence against HENRY of Bauiere; whereby
he condemned him in the loss of all his estates: and many great matters
happened, which we will declare, when we have told you what befell in Italy to
the Pope and to Duke RAINOLD, whom the Empeperour LOTHARY made Duke of Pulia
and Calabria, with ROGER King of Sicily; which passed in this manner:

As soon as the Emperor LOTHARY was dead, there grew so great alterations and
troubles in Italy, that ROGER in great haste raised his forces, and went into
Pulia, with a resolution to have reconquered those Countries, whereof he was
dispossessed: But RAINOLD had so good men with him, that he fought with him in
battle, and overthrew him; so as he was driven to return with loss of part
of his Army: And being busied about making new preparation for the same
enterprise, RAINOLD died in the time of his good fortune; so as without any
great difficulty, ROGER recovered all the Countries of Pulia and Calabria,
which he first took from his Nephew, and which had been his grandfathers.
Pope INNOCENT seeing what passed, he sent to the Emperor to desire him to come
into Italy, or to send an Army to drive ROGER out of that Country: but for as
much as the succors came slowly (as writes GOTHIFREDVS VITERBIENSIS) the Pope
levied a great Army, and went against ROGER: but as he was no very expert man
of war, so by a device his Army was overthrown, and himself together with
his Cardinals taken prisoner. But ROGER making a Wars between the Pope and
Roger King of Sicilia: wherein the Pope was ouerthrown, and taken prisoner with
all his Cardinals.
conscience of the matter, set both him and all his Cardinals at liberty: for
which his liberality and courtesy the Pope confirmed him King of Sicilia; and
ROGER as his liege man did homage to the Pope, calling his Countries the Church
Patrimony; and so remained ROGER and his successors kings of Sicilia, and Lords
of Pulia and Calabria, and was a very mighty Prince.

This being passed, ROGER fearing the Emperors coming into Italy, he sent to
solicit HENRY the proud, and his brother GVELPHO, with Letters and money to
bear Arms against the Emperor CONRADE, with whom they already had great
wars; for HENRY the Proud being condemned by the Emperor, in the loss of
all his estates of Bauiere and Saxony; Wars between the Emperor and the duke of
Bauiere and Saxony.
and the Emperor having given the Duchy of Saxony to ALBERT cousin-germane to
the Duke; and Bauiere to LEOPOLD son to the Marquess of Austria (who was the
Emperors mothers brother) so as all was in combustion, and the war was
prosecuted with great cruelty, the one party seeking to hold and to defend
their estates, and the other to get the same: and he which chiefly followed
this war was GVELPHO, brother to HENRY the Proud; for HENRY now by reason of
his old age could not well bear Arms; and having provided a very good Army,
the Emperor went against GVELPHO, and fought a battle with him, which was
very doubtful, for GVELPHO was an excellent Captain and very valiant: but he
being ouer-matched, was overthrown, and lost many of his men, both Bauarians
and Italians, which ROGER King of Sicilie had sent to his aid, and he himself
escaped by flight. But he was a man of so haughty a mind, and therewith used
such industry and expedition, that within few days he reinforced his Army; and
sought aid of the King of Hungary, who repined at the prosperity of the
Empire, for that he would not acknowledge any superior: and so to his aid
came many Calabrians and Sicilians, sent by ROGER King of Sicilie; and the
Emperor of necessity was driven to do the like, and made his eldest son
called HENRY General of his Army, who afterward died before his father: and
he besieged a Town called Winsperg And lying before it, his son HENRY, near
to a place called Elnofen, fought a battle with GVELPHO, in which, some of
GVELPHO his party (which were Italians) cried, GVELPHO, GVELPHO, after the
name of their General; and the Imperialists cried, The original of the Gue^s
and Gibelins.
GIBELLIN, GIBELLIN, for that HENRY their General was bred up in a place so
called.

Some Authors affirm, that upon this occasion it afterward followed, that in
the controversies between the Emperors and Popes, the Imperialists took
their name of Gibellins; and the Popes party, Guelphs. And from hence sprang
the cruel factions of the Guelphs and Gibelins in Italy: Heerof are other
opinions, which import not much to be treated of in this place.

The battle was very cruel, but GVELPHO his troops (being of diverse Nations
and conditions) did not so well second and relieve one another, as HENRIE'S
did, so as GVELPHO was likely to have been overthrown. And finding no other
remedy, to avoid a further danger, he abandoned the field, and HENRY
apparently had the victory: who after that he left the pursuit, joined with his
father the Emperor at the siege of Winsperg; which being greatly distressed,
yielded to mercy. But all the grace the Emperor would grant to the inhabitants,
was to permit all the women which were in the Town, freely to depart, and to
have to their own use whatsoever they could bear on their backs: Whereupon
they used a commendable and memorable deceit, which was, that as they went
forth of the Town, each of A commendable deceit used (...)women in Germany.
them took her husband upon her back, and those which had none, took their
children or brothers, and so coming into the fields, set them at liberty: and
notwithstanding that FREDERICK the Emperors brother alleged that it was
deceit and cosonage, and therefore not to be permitted; nevertheless the
Emperor held it for well done, and commended them for the same. And truly I
hold it for one of the most memorable acts done by women that ever I read of.

Through these two overthrows, the party of GVELPHO, and of his brother HENRY
the Proud, was so broken and weakened, as ALBERT, to whom the Emperor had
given the title of Duke of Saxony, had time and opportunity to make himself
Lord thereof: And LEOPOLD, to whom he had given the Duchy of Bauiere, made
daily Conquest of more and more of that Country. Duke HENRY seeing this, came
disguised to such places as held for him in Saxony, where he used such
effectual speeches, and wrote so pitiful Letters to his friends and
subjects, that they being moved therewith, repaired unto him in such order,
that ALBERT was driven to fly to the Emperor for help; and HENRY the Proud
having this good success, and being in hope to have prevailed, died; after
whose decease, the Saxons in despite of the Emperor, took a son of his
called also HENRY, for their Lord; and they recovered great part of that
estate: But LEOPOLD was seized of the greatest part of the Duchy of Bauiere,
who (as I said) was the Emperors mothers brother: GVELPHO as soon as his
brother HENRY the Proud was dead, was called Duke of Bauiere, pretending that
it did belong unto him by inheritance: and many friends repairing unto him,
cruel wars began between him and LEOPOID, and GVELPHO overthrew LEOPOLD in
a battle: The Emperor seeking redress (to the end he would not at one time
have so many Irons in the fire together) compounded and made peace with the
Saxons, marrying the widow Duchess of Saxony, daughter to the Emperor
LOTHARY, with whom HENRY the Proud had that Dukedom, of the greatest part
whereof his son HENRY was then in possession: and this being effected, he
resolved to aid LEOPOLD against GVELPHO: but in the mean time LEOPOLD died,
and with the same trouble his son called HENRY had the Duchy of Bauiere,
against whom (with no less courage and diligence) GVELPHO prosecuted the
war: But CONRADE assisting his cousin-Germane the new Duke, neither GVELPHO
nor his Nephew HENRY Duke of Saxony, could prevail against him;
notwithstanding that GVELPHO was a warlike and valiant Captain.

CONRADE having spent six or seven years of his reign in these civil wars, a
voyage was pretended to Jerusalem; which although it had no great good
success, yet it was good and commendable. The Emperor Conrade his attempt for
the conquest of Jerusalem.
And to the end that you may the better understand the same, it shall be
requisite briefly to set down the most important causes thereof, and the
estate wherein the affairs of Graecia then stood, and of Italy also; which
was in this manner: The Christians having possessed Jerusalem, and many other
Cities in Syria and Mesopotamia, now above five and forty years, and having
performed wonderful matters in their continual wars against the Infidels,
which they waged at what time as CONRADE was busy about this quarrel; FVLCO
sonne-in-law to BALDVVIN, being then the fourth King of Jerusalem, and having
done great exploites against the Sarazins, there arose some controversies
betweeene some Princes, Dukes of certain places in the East; and so between
them, and CALOIOANNES Emperor of Constantinople; which gave occasion to the
King of Persia his Captains, to do much harm in the countries which the
Christians possessed: against whom, FVLCO King of Jerusalem made the greatest
resistance he was able, and did many worthy exploits.

Then ensued the death of the Greek Emperor, who had reigned six and twenty
years: And although that he had troubled the state of the East, yet
nevertheless by reason of his great power he was much feared of the Infidels;
and died of a small wound given him in the left hand with a poisoned arrow: by
his last will and testament, he ordained his youngest son for his successor,
for that his eldest son was incapable of the government. The state of Syria
being thus troubled, FVLCO King of Jerusalem went to encounter a great Army of
Turks and Persians, which came against the city of Antioch; and joining in
battle, overthrew and slew three thousand of them: whereupon the Soldane King
of Persia, whose name was ALAPH, drew together all his whole power, and came
before Edissa, a very mighty city in Mesopotania, which the Christians had
held five and forty years; which city by the Jews is called Aracha, and is
very famous, through the fertility and greatness thereof; and for that it was
the place, whither TOBIAS sent his son TOBIAS to GA^ELVS for his money, and
the same was converted to the Christian faith by THADEVS; and adorned with the
bones of S. THOMAS the Apostle, and at this time was inhabited and frequented
by excellent Christians: But ALAPH coming in person against it, King FVLCO not
being able to relieve the city, it was taken and sacked; wherein the Infidels
used such cruelties and villainies, as have not been heard of: some writers
reckon the loss of this city to have happened after the decease of King
FVLCO: but PLATINA and BLONDVS relate it as I have done.

After the loss of this city, another great misfortune ensued, which was the
unhappy death The death of Fulco King of Jerusalem.
of FVLCO King of Jerusalem in this manner: As he was busy, applying himself
to recover this lost city, and to levy new troops of soldiers, being one
day in the fields hunting the Hare, his horse fell with him, and his head fell
under the back part of the saddle, wherewith he was bruised, and so sore hurt,
that losing both his speech and senses, he died within three days, leaving
behind him two young sons, the eldest of which called BALDVVIN, had the
title and kingdom of Jerusalem: but through the want of FVLCO, and other
occasions, the Infidels daily took towns, and did much hurt to the Christians.

Pope INNOCENT and the Christian Princes understanding how matters went in the
East, and being sorry to hear thereof (as indeed they had reason, especially
for the loss of the great city of Edissa) they began to consult of some
redress and relief for the same; and as S. BERNARD was then in great credit
and very famous, he took upon him to persuade the Christians Princes, to go in
person to this war, Pope INNOCENT giving him in charge to perform that
action; which Pope having held that seat the space of fourteen years, died
(as says PLATINA) in the year of our Lord 1144. and to him succeeded CELESTIN
the Second, who was Pope but five months; and he being dead, LUCIUS the Second
was made Pope, in whose time (as says PLATINA and BLONDVS) S. BERNARD
undertook this enterprise; and as others say, in the time of INNOCENTIVS. This
difference does not discredit the authors: for the loss of the city of
Edissa, and the death of King FVLCO, and other matters which happened in the
East, passed at several times, and might happen in the time of all these
Popes, for the small time they lived: for LUCIUS the Second was not Pope fully
one year, and this was in the time of his successor EVGENIVS. I say then that
by means of the Popes Letters, together with the persuasion of S. BERNARD,
JEWS who then was king of France, taking for his device the sign of the
Cross determined with many great Lords and Knights of his countries, to go to
this war in the East, in the behalf of the King of Jerusalem; and leuying an
Army, BERNARD went into Germany to the Emperor CONRADE (whose The Emperor
Conrade and Jews King of France went to Jerusalem.
life we write) and obtained of him to do the like, as the French King
pretended to do: whereto he willingly and speedily prepared himself; and it
pleased God that this journey was so well liked of by all men, that
notwithstanding that there were very sharp and hot wars between the
Emperor, and GVELPHO with his adherents, yet GVELPHO notwithstanding offered to
go this journey with him, and to do him service therein. And so the Emperor
and the French King (by their Letters) agreed to go to that enterprise
personally. But forasmuch as they both could not conveniently march together in
company, by reason of the great multitudes of their people; it was concluded
that the Emperor should first set forwards (and so he did) in the year of our
Lord 1147, according to most authors, yet some write one year less: and he
departed, accompanied by these Princes, FREDERICK Duke of Sueuia, son to his
brother FREDERICK deceased, the Duke of Lorraine, the Earl of Flanders and
Friseland, the Marquess of Austria, and GVELPHO his former cruel enemy, but
then his servant and companion, whom the Emperor in all that journey called
fellow soldier, and made great account of his person, with many other Princes
and Lords of great account. In this all authors agree, that of the Emperors
own forces, with the forces of these Princes, together with the adventurers,
which came from al parts, upon the report of so zealous an enterprise, his Army
amounted to the number of threescore and ten thousand horse, and (in a
manner) as many foot: with which, marching through Austria and Hungary, he
directed his journey toward Constantinople; where he was very joyfully and
honorably received by the Emperor EMANVEL, son to CALOIOANNES; and his troops
were lodged in towns and places near at hand; and staying there some few
days, he crossed over the straight of Constantinople with his whole Army,
with less store of victuals then was needful in such an action, through the
Emperor of Constantinople his counsel and default, who promised to furnish
him with all things necessary; and so he marched through the Emperors
Countries, in Asia the less, and had Greeks for his guides, such as well knew
the Country.

Passing through the Province of Licaonia, which bordereth upon Galacia, in the
midst of Asia the less, being in his enemies Country in great want of
victuals, all his guides in one Treachery of the Emperors guides.
night forsook him: which, as some write, was thought to have been done by the
direction of the Emperor of Constantinople, who of malice or envy repined at
this war. Others imagine that they stood in fear, and fled, for that they saw
the Army so unprovided of victuals, or for that they had missed of their way:
but howsoever it was, the Emperor stayed near to the City of Iconium, which
is in Silicia, and (as some say) besieged the same, for that it was rich, well
furnished, and of great importance, thinking in short time to have taken it.
But forasmuch as victuals came not according to the trust he reposed in the
Greeks; his people within few days space endured extreme hunger and sickness;
and falling sick of the chaulk which (as some write) the Greeks did put into
their meal, they dyed.

The Emperor seeing himself thus distressed in his enemies country, and his
friends being doubtful and variable in their opinions, whether they should go
forwards, or retire (either of which was perilous) in the mean time, so great
a multitude of Turks, Persians, and other heathen nations (knowing the
distress wherein the Christians were) assaulted his Camp, in such manner,
that his person and Army were in danger to have been wholly lost (God in his
secret judgment, permitting it): and the Emperor knowing no better course to
be taken, came to a battle with them; some say two, and that the fight
continued two days together, one after another: and as the greatest part of
his Army was sickly, and almost hunger-starued; so after that they had done
what they possibly were able, they were broken and overthrown; and so many The
Emperor Conrade overthrown by the Sara^s.
of them were slain and taken prisoners, that there remained little more then
the tenth man of his Army; with which he escaped by flight, and therein endured
extreme hunger and many dangers; and stayed not any where until he came to
the city of Nicea, in the province of Bythinia, in Asia the less, which was
subject to the Greek Empire; where gathering together the remainder of his
Army (which from many parts, held by Christians, came thither to him) he
determined to attend the coming of JEWS the French King, who was already
upon the way. This overthrow happened in the month of November, in the year
of our Lord one thousand, one hundred forty and seven.

At what time as the Emperor CONRADE was thus overthrown by the Infidels, the
French King was come from Constantinople into Bythinia; where he had been well
received and lodged by the Emperor EMANVEL: and within few days after that
the Emperor CONRADE was departed from Germany, Pope EVGENIVS the Third, which
succeeded LUCIUS, flying from Rome, came to him in France, by reason of
certain mutinies raised against him in Rome, for the people would have placed
certain citizens in the government of the city; and the Pope finding the King
ready to depart, encouraged him to proceed in his journey, and gave him his
holy benediction; and the King in requital gave him men and money, wherewith
he returned to Rome, and was with much obedience there received.

King JEWS of France being arrived in Asia, and understanding nothing of the
Emperors misfortune; FREDERICK Duke of Sueuia, Nephew to the Emperor, came to
him, and certified him of their overthrow: wherefore the King hastened his
journey, and finding the Emperor in Nicea, he recomforted and persuaded him to
proceed in his company; which he then willingly did, and so they marched
together to the famous city of Ephesus, which is the chief of all Asia the
less, in the province of I^nia: where the Emperor considering that he went
not according to his estate and honor, going with so small forces, but rather
as a subject to the King of France, and for some other respects, giving good
words he took his leave of the King, and departed; and drawing near to the
Sea, sent his people by land, and he by Ship went to stay for them at
Constantinople: where dissembling the injury he had received (or peradventure
not suspecting any such matter) he remained the rest of the winter; to the end
that reinforcing his Army, he might from thence the next Spring return to his
enterprise.

In the mean time the French King prosecuted his journey, not without great
trouble and loss of many of his men, in a battle which he won; and in
another, wherein part of his Army was overthrown: how it passed I do not set
down, for that it appertains not to my History. After this, enduring great
toil and dangers, by long iourneies he came to the city of Antioch, in
company of RAIMOND or REMON, Lord thereof, who came to meet him upon the way,
and to do him honor, from whence he afterward (as I will show you) came to
Jerusalem.

The Spring being come, and the Emperor CONRADE having levied new forces,
which he joined with the remainder of his last Army; in a great fleet which
he had prepared, with the help of the Emperor of Constantinople, he
embarked, and came therein into Soria; and there disembarking in a certain
harbor, came with his Army by land to Jerusalem, where, by BALDVVIN the King
thereof, he was very joyfully received; and within few days they had
intelligence, that the French King was coming thither also: whom the Emperor,
and King BALDVVIN received with great joy; and then to avoid loss of much
time, they presently took counsel about prosecuting the war against the
Infidels; concluding to besiege the city of Damasco, from whence (for that it
was very puissant and populous) they daily received loss, prejudice, and ill
neighborhood: and so taking that obstacle, they resolved to have proceeded
further, which plot was presently put in execution; and the Emperor, and the
two Kings departed, with a great and very well ordered Army, with a
resolution, and in hope to have effected some great matters: but it pleased God
otherwise to dispose of their purpose: for being come to Damasco, and having
encamped themselves on that side of the city, toward Mount Libanus, Damasco
besieged by the Christians.
they had many dangerous skirmishes: wherefore (through the advice and counsel
of certain men of that country, which, being corrupted with money by the
besieged, desired to deceive these Princes) they removed their Camp to the
other side, and abandoned the most fit place for their siege: whereof it
ensued, that the Infidels taking the advantage of an Hill (which they
fortified) did greatly annoy them; and this Hill was so situate, that it stopped
the coming of victuals to the Camp: and the besieged defended themselves so
valiantly, and famine so much increased in these Princes armies, that it ^as
imposs^ for them to live, if they remained there any longer, so as they were
perforce constrained to raise their siege, and returned to Jerusalem,
sorrowful and in ill plight, there to consult of what course was best to be
taken. In this siege (as says the Abbat WESPERGENSIS) GVELPHO, the Emperors
ancient enemy (yet then his good friend) fell sick: and fearing to die if he
had stayed there any longer, he with his followers took shipping and sailed
into Sicilia, where recovering his health; through the counsel and instigation
of ROGER King thereof, he went into Germany, and there again rebelling, made
wars upon the Emperors countries.

The Emperor and French King then resolved to return into their dominions,
seeing it The returue of the Emperor and the French King from the
pleased not God to prosper their proceedings; and the rather to the end to
avoid innouations and troubles that might grow in the countries, by reason of
their absence; and they did so, leaving wars of the Holyland.
the affairs of the East in as ill estate as they found the same. The Emperor
rigging up his navy, embarked himself with his people, and again took land in
Graecia (as says OTHO FRISINGENSIS, who accompanied him in all this journey)
and in the province of Achaia, met the Emperor of Constantinople: where
refreshing himself awhile after his coming from Sea, he departed from the said
Emperor, and took his way into Germany, and so ended this religious
enterprise, in the fourth year after the same began. The French King, within
few days after the Emperors departure from the Holy land, took shipping also;
and after some adventures which befell him in the way, arrived in his country,
in health and peace; and the Emperor again warred against GVELPHO, to punish
him for his rebellion in his absence: but at the entreatie of his Nephew
FREDERICK, Duke of Sueuia, who was likewise Nephew to GVELPHO by his mothers
side, he pardoned him, and granted him peace, and allowed him certain lands
and revenues for his maintenance.

At this time came Ambassadors to the Emperor from the Christian Kings, and
from the Pope, to congratulate his return; and he commanded a Diet or
Council to be assembled in the city of Confluence; where, after many matters
appertaining to the government of the Commonwealth, he concluded to come into
Italy, to be crowned (being thereto invited by Pope VRBANE before named) and
making preparation for his journey, he was entercepted by death; not without
suspicion of poison, given him by an Italian Phisician, through the procurement
of ROGER King of Sicilia; he died in the year of our Lord, one thousand, one
hunddred fifty two, in the fifteenth year of his reign (some reckon one
thousand, one hundred fifty The death of the Emperor Conrade.
and four) and left one only son called FREDERICK, who afterward being
Duke of Sueuia, died in Italy: which son he had by his wife the Emperesse,
whose name was GERTRVDE, an Earls daughter which was a great Lord in Germany,
by whom he also had had another son, called HENRY; of whom mention has been
already made, who died before his father the Emperor.

In Constantinople reigned EMANVEL, and held the Empire after this almost
thirty years; this Emperor is reckoned amongst the wicked and vicious
Emperors, and is greatly condemned, to have been the occasion of the loss of
the two Armies, viz. the Emperors, and the French Kings, as we have already
related. For which cause, it is written that ROGER King of Sicily warred
against him: and having taken certain Islands from him; he came so near to the
city of Constantinople, that the arrows which he shot, fell within his
palace; and they affirm, that he gathered apples from the trees, growing in
the Orchards and Gardens belonging thereto. This ROGER died within a year or
two after the Emperor CONRADE; and his son WILLIAM the First succeeded him.

In the time of this Emperor, in the year of our Lord, one thousand, one
hundred thirty nine, died in France, a man called JOHN du Temps, who (as many
authors affirm) had lived three hundred sixty and one years, and had been
an Halberder of the Emperor CHARLES Johan de temps is reported to have lived
three hundred sixty and one years.
the Great his guard; it is a matter hardly to be believed, yet possible; and
many authors write the same.

THE LIFE OF FREDERICK, THE FIRST OF THAT NAME, SVRNAMED BARBAROSSA; Fourscore
and seventeenth Roman Emperor. And of EMANVEL, Emperor of Constantinople.
THE ARGUMENT.
AFter the decease of Conrade, his Nephew Frederick, Duke of Sueuia, was chosen
Emperor; a man endued with all excellencies, as well of body as mind, saving
that he was held to be more desirous of glory then was convenient. In the
beginning of his reign he showed himself very desirous of peace: but
afterward, in process of time, he undertook great wars; and having caused
many combustions in Germany, he purposed to make a iourny into Italy, there to
be crowned. Having levied a great army, and being past the Alps, he much
annoyed the Milanois, who made an insurrection against him; but spending no
long time about those factions, he went to Rome, where he was crowned by the
Pope. In the time of his coronation many troubles arose in Rome, wherewith he
was much displeased; which leaving imperfect, he returned into Germany, where
he afterward fell at variance with the Pope, by means of the King of Sicilia,
who was his enemy: this controversy was pacified by Christian Princes, which
paswaded him rather to seek to be revenged on the Milanois then to war against
the Pope. Whereupon he resolved again to come into Italy, by reason of Milan,
and came thither and ruined it, and ma de it to be razed by the Milanois
themselves, who were the Citizens and Inhabitants thereof; and besides this, he
did much more harm. He maintained aschisme in the Church of Rome, and gave
great aid to the Antipope, whose name was Victor: but all Italy was
discontent, by reason of the cruel punishment inflicted upon Milan; so when as
he was gone out of Italy, all the Cities of Lombardie uniting themselves
together made a league against him; wherein was included the City of Venice,
which took the protection of Pope Alexander. Which the Emperor hearing, he
sent the Antipope into Italy, who dyed in Luca; where, by the Emperors consent,
asuccessor was chosen, to maintain the schism, and he in person came against
the league; wherein all Italy in a manner, being combined, bent against him;
and coming to Rome, he constrained the Pope to fly to Gaeta, having first done
much harm in Tuscane in the Marca, and particularly in the City of Ancona:
and after many adventures, he went out of Italy, without effecting ought
against the Pope as he desired. After some space, he again returned into
Italy: but, being abandoned by the greatest part of his followers (instigated
thereto by Henry Duke of Saxony) the Emperor was in such distress, as he was
constrained to go sometime disguised, as another man's servant: but he very
severely punished Henry, for his mutining. He again took his passage into
Italy, and in a battle, with his enemies, was vanquished, and held for dead;
but recanting his former proceedings, he sued to be reconciled to the Pope;
which was concluded in the City of Uenice with a truce, with the cities of
Lombardy. This done, all was in peace. Afterward he went to war in the Holy
land: and having done some matters worthy memory, in the most flourishing time
of his victories, going to refresh himself in a river, he was carried down by
the current, his people being unable to help him, and there was drowned, when
he had reigned 28 years.

NOtwithstanding that the Emperor CONRADE, when he died, left a son whose
name was FREDERICK, who was called Duke of Sueuia; nevertheless, so great was
the reputation of his Nephew FREDERICK, who was his brother FREDERICKS son,
and Duke of Sueuia, that the Princes Electors being assembled in Franckford,
made him Emperor; and he presently Frederick Barbarossa chosen Emperor.
went to be crowned, with the first crown, in the city of Aken, whither
repaired all the Princes of Germany to see the new Emperor. For without doubt,
FREDERICK (as all authors write of him) was a Prince of great valor, and
worthy of the Imperial dignity, as well for the gifts of the body as of the
mind. He was of more then a mean stature of great strength and agilitie, very
well proportioned in body, and of a fair and pleasing countenance, accompanied
with gravity and majesty. His hair and beard were red, wherefore he was
called BARBAROSSA or ENEOBARBVS. With these corporal gifts, he was endued with
a sharp and excellent wit, and spoke wisely and effectually; and was of so
excellent a memory, especially concerning the gesture and countenance of a
man, that whosoever had once negociated with him, although in long time after
he had not seen him, yet he would know him at the first sight. He was also of
a mild and pleasant conversation, very liberal and bountiful, and an enemy
to covetousness; virtuous, without any noted vice: most valiant in Arms, and a
contemner The Emperor Frederickes qualities.
of dangers, very active both on foot and horseback; and very expert, and
well advised in the wars and military discipline. These virtues were
accompanied with a great desire of glory and renown; for he was very
ambitious, coveting rule and command, which in my opinion was the cause of
many mischiefs, of great wars, and of the effusion of much blood in his
time: the wars he followed in his own person, with great courage and valor,
for the space of thirty years, that he held the Empire: and imitating HENRY
the Fourth, he supported and maintained a schism in the Church of Rome, for
the space of twenty years; and revived the emulation, and competencie
between the Emperors and Popes, which LOTHARY, and CONRADE had pacified: as we
will briefly recite. The first thing he did after he came to the Empire, was,
to call a Parliament in the city of Mesburgh, whither (amongst other Princes)
came the King of Denmark, newly come to his inheritance, who there was crowned
by the Emperor FREDERICK, and did him homage, as a King subject to the Empire.
And there he also received the Ambassades of other Christian Princes, which
sent to congratulate his election, and he concluded peace with them all. So in
his beginning, he made show of a very peaceable Prince, but he afterward
proved to be one of the greatest warriors in the world: and it appeared, that
in the beginning he sought peace, thereby to be afterward the better able to
make war.

At that time was great contention between the Dukes of Saxony, and of Bauiere
(both which were called HENRY) which extended itself over all Germany; some
favoring the one party, and some the other. HENRY Duke of Saxony made claim
to the Duchy of Bauiere, which had been his fathers: whereof he was deprived
by the Emperor CONRADE, and now HENRY Marquess of Austria held the same, and
was called Duke of Bauiere, for that his brother LEOPOLD had left it him; for
to him had the Emperor CONRADE given it. The Emperor FREDERICK, for that he was
near of kin to both these competitors (for the one of them was his Uncle,
and the other his cousin german) reconciled them after this manner; that to
HENRY of Saxony should be restored the Duchy of Bauiere (but yet he afterward
lost the same) and he made HENRY Marquess of Austria (who was called the Duke
of Bauiere) Duke of Austria, and gave him some other places; and to GVELPHO,
Uncle to the Duke of Saxony, he gave certain lands, and an estate in Italy,
which he enherited from MAVD, often before mentioned.

This peace and agreement being concluded, and all other actions and debates in
Germany ended, he spent many days in establishing peace, and in doing
justice. After which, HENRY Count Palatine of the Rhine (a prince of great
possessions) died without issue or any of his house, that might succeed him;
but the Emperor found a mean to make his brother CONRADE his heir; who had
that country, and he afterward dying, left it to his only daughter, which
was married to HENRY Duke of Saxony, by which marriage he gat that estate. These
and such like accidents and alterations which I find in the Histories of
Germany, written by the Germans themselves, make me to doubt of these
genealogies, and antiquities of families, which they so much celebrate, to be
of a thousand, and of two thousand years continuance; descended in line
masculine from the father to the son without bastardie; and other matters
whereof the Germans vaunt; which are, in a manner impossible, or at the least
improbable: for we know that all those great houses and estates began since the
time of CHARLES the Great; and I see that in those principal houses there have
bin notable alterations, and chaunges, from one house to another; as heretofore
has bin seen in some of them; and now in this Count Palatine, which in this
place clearly passes from the ancient lineage, to the house of Sueuia, and to
this Emperors brother which happened in the second year of his reign.

This being past, the Emperor married the daughter of DIOPOLD Marquess of
Bospergh, called Alda: but forasmuch as it was found that they were within
prohibited degrees of consanguinitie, a Synod was assembled in the city of
Constance, in which he was divorced and separated from her; and then he married
with the only daughter of RAINOLD Earl of Burgundy, by whom he afterward
had five sons; HENRY, FREDERICK, CONRADH, PHILIP, and OTHO.

These matters being ended, the Emperor resolved to go to Rome, to be crowned
by Pope ADRIAN the Third, who was an Englishman; leuying a great Army, and
setting order Pope Adrian the third an Englishman.
for the affairs of Germany, he departed toward Italy: it behooved him to do
so, for the cities of Lombardy and others subject to the Empire, through the
long abscence of the Emperor (for CONRADE had never visited them) were
accustomed to such liberty, that any kind of subjection seemed to them
intolerable, especially Milan, which of them all was the richest, and most
potent. And so FREDERICK being arrived in Italy, Ambassadors came to him from
Milan; which after their due reverence, entreated him to be pleased, to make
Como and Lodi subject to their city, promising to give him a great sum of
money: which request he held unjust, and therefore would not grant it: which
was the original occasion of the rebellion of Milan, and of the evils which
afterward ensued: and the Milanois presently began to show their discontent;
for the Emperors Camp being lodged within a mile of the city, they not only
refused to lodge or to entertain him therein, but denied to give him victuals
for his people for money: whereupon, taking this their contempt in very ill part
(as he afterward manifested) he presently battered certain Castles within
their jurisdiction: but holding it no fit time presently to besiege the city,
his soldiers ouerranne their fields, even to their city gates; and he passing
forwards, went to Bercelli, and to Turin, and passed over the river Po; and by
the way burned Aste, for that it stood at defense; and afterward besieged the
city of Tortona, for as much as it refused The Emperor Frederick in Italy.
to receive him, which was a very strong hold. The siege continuing certain
days with great loss of both parts; in the end he took it, and made so great
a spoil in it, that he left it (in a manner) desolate and wholly ruined:
whereupon those of Pauia (for fear) received him, making show of great joy;
and there he received the second Crown, and thence marched toward Rome,
whither he went to be crowned.

Pope ADRIAN at that time was not well pleased with the Roman people, about
certain Consuls which they had chosen, a kind of government (which for a long
time they had sought to introduce) greatly abbridging the Popes power and
authority: about which, great matters had passed between the citizens and some
of his predecessors, as before has been mentioned. Wherefore to avoid this
trouble, and to prevent certain practices, which WILLIAM the new king of
Sicilia attempted against the patrimony of the Church of Rome, the Pope
absented himself, and with his Cardinals attended the Emperors coming in
Sutrio; from whence, with a show of great love, they came together to Rome: and
the Emperor lodging his Army in the fields near unto it, he, together with
the Pope (having a competent guard) entered the Vaticane, and the next day was
crowned in S. PETER'S Church with great solemnity. But the coronation was
scarcely ended, when upon the same day all the Roman people The people of Rome
rose against the Pope.
rising in an vproare, without knowing any occasion thereof, together with
their Consuls, put themselves in Arms, as men discontented with the friendship
between the Emperor and the Pope; and coming into the Vaticane, they set upon
the Germans which came with the Emperor: who hearing what passed, he caused
certain companies of soldiers, of those which were encamped near to the
city, spedily to enter, which fought with the Romanists, and many were slain
of either side: but in the end the Romans were constrained to retire by their
bridges into the city (seven hundred of them being first slain and taken
prisoners).

The Emperor remaining commander of the Vaticane, was so incensed, that but
for the Popes entreatie, he would have caused the city to have been assaulted,
and would have given the inhabitants a terrible remembrance for their
mutinying: but the Pope mitigated his displeasure, and the Romans stood all
that night and the next day in Arms; wherewith the Pope being grieved, was
little obeyed. The Emperor departed thence, and within few days after his
abode in that quarter, went into Germany (whereof the Pope complained, for that
he left him at variance with the citizens) and by the way took some towns by
assault; amongst which, Spoleto was sacked and burnt for resisting him: and so
he afterward passed through Lombardy, without any stay, with a determination
to return with greater power; where befell him some notable adventures, which
(the better to express such as are of greater importance) I omit. Being now
returned into Germany, with great power and greater authority, for that he was
crowned by the Pope; the Duke of Bohemia whose name was VLADISLAVS, or
LAVESLAVS, who came with him all this journey, was (by reason of his great
estate and the worthiness of his person) made King: yet I find it written,
that the Emperor HENRY the Fourth, in the year of our Lord, one thousand,
eighty and six, gave the title of King to BRATISLAVS Duke of Bohemia: but that
title was then given to his person, and not to the country; and so his
successors enjoyed not the same, until the time of this VLADISLAVS, which V
adislaus Duke of Bohemia made king.
continues until this day. And the Emperor passing forwards, without
discharging his Army, marched against the Duke of Poland; who for certain years
space had refused to pay the tribute, which he ought to the Empire: but he
compelled him to pay the same.

The Emperor being gone out of Italy, great controversy arose between the Pope
and WILLIAM king of Sicilia; wherein the Pope recovered certain places which
WILLIAM had taken from him; EMANVEL Emperor of Constantinople (and WILLIAM'S
enemy) furthering those discords, who sent to the Pope, and made great offers
and promises to aid and succor him: whereupon, after foam conflicts which
past between them, WILLIAM by all means possible sought the Popes grace and
favor, submitting himself to his obedience; and the Pope confirmed to him the
title of King of both the Sicilies: wherewith the Emperor FREDERICK William
confirmed by ^he Pope king of both Sicil^es.
was much displeased, and greatly complained, for he hated WILLIAM; and at his
coming into Italy, went of purpose to war against him, although afterward
he could not effect the same as he thought to have done.

For this cause and other which are not mentioned, in those days great strife
and contentions grew between the Emperor and the Pope; which neither PLATINA
nor BLONDVS specify, nor any other Italian Authors: but RVDEBICVS
FRISINGENSIS, who prosecuted the History which OTHO FRISINGENSIS left a little
before, and other Historiographers, describe the same at large: the sum
whereof is, that the Emperor began to do as some of his predecessors had done,
in giving Ecclesiastical dignities, and inuesting Prelates without the Popes
authority, or confirmation; and would not endure the Popes Legates in his
countries, but when, how, and in what manner it pleased him; taking occasion
hereof, that the Pope without his consent had made peace with his enemy
WILLIAM: whereto the Pope answered, that he could do no otherwise, for that
the Emperor abandoned him in his distress, when Rome rebelled against him.
And the matter came to this issue, that the Emperor would not permit any
appeals to be made to the Court of Rome; and about that matter he apprehended
certain Bishops, which NAVCLERVS, and HENRICUS MVCIVS, prove by certain Letters
passing between the Emperor and the Pope: which Letters they affirm to have
seen in a Monastery of Germany. They also speak of certain very sharp
Ambassages from the one to the other; and that in the end the Pope standing in
fear of the Emperors power (being advised by certain Prelates) and also for
that there was great discord between the Cities of Lombardy, whither the
Emperor meant shortly to come; they came to an agreement of peace, which was
concluded by Ambassadors in a Parliament, which the Emperor caused to be held
in Ausburgh: where after this was ended, he made relation to all the Princes,
of the injury which the Milanois, and certain other Cities in Lombardy had
done him: And there it was concluded, that he should the second time come into
Italy, with far greater power then at the first.

And whilst he was busied about these matters, the Milanois (who at that time
were of great power and very rich) being offended with what he had done in
their fields and territory, thought not only to free themselves from
subjection, and to have denied him their obedience, but also resolved to attend
his coming in the open field with an Army, and to make themselves Lords of all
that country with the marches thereof, and to shake off the Imperial yoke,
presuming upon their great power, and the aid of their friends and
confederats: and so they began to levy men, and to make leagues and
confederacies with other Cities, as with Crema, Brescia Placencia, and other
Towns: and they repaired and fortified Tortona, which the Emperor had
ruinated. Presently after this, they made cruel war against Pauia, Cremona,
and other places which held for the Emperor; and ruined the Cities of Lodi and
Como, which of long time they had hated, and were under the Emperors
protection. The chief Author hereof, was a man of great authority in Milan,
whose name was GVALPHAGO, who (as a Lord or tyrant) was of such power in the
city, that all was done at his pleasure and by his direction; which made the
Emperor the more to hasten his coming into Italy; two years being not fully
expired since his first coming thither: and with him came the king of Bohemia,
LEOPOLD Marquess of Austria, his Nephew FREDERICK Duke of Sueuia, and other
princes, besides some which were sent before to guard the City of Cremona:
The Emperor being in Italy, there came to do him service, HENRY the Duke of
Saxony with a thousand and three hundred men at Arms, and GVELPHO with three
hundred. The Emperors coming into Italy did put the country in such fear,
that Brescia (whither he sent the King of Bohemia, and his nephew the Duke of
Sueuia) yielded without assault, promising to be at his devotion. From thence
he marched with his Army toward Milan, and by the way had some skirmishes,
which I pass over: being come into the marches thereof, he stayed and took
certain Castles, which he did of set purpose, supposing that the Milanois
would have sued for peace, or have used some submission: but they were now
grown so proud, that they applied themselves to nothing else, but to fortify
their city: whereof when the Emperor was advertised, he commanded the cities
which were under his obedience, to send him soldiers; and so from Cremona (as
says the Abbat WESPERGENSIS) came to him thirty thousand fighting men; so
great was the envy they bare against Milan: and from Pauia and Nouarra, there
came also great numbers; with which, and with his own Army he went to Milan:
whither when he came, they salied out of the city into the field, in a very
great number both of foot and horse; and a The Milanois took the field and
sought (...)with the Emperor.
battle began between them, one wounding and killing another in most cruel
manner: but the Milanois being unable to endure the fury of the Imperialists,
they retired, flying to the walls of the city; and those of Cremona were so
greedy in pursuing them, that they far ouerwent the battallions of the
Germans: which when the Milanois perceived, turning head, they charged them in
such manner that they made them retire, and in their retreit slew many of their
men: And FREDERICK who saw all this, charged with his squadron with so great
force and fury, that he made them of Milan to turn their backs; and wounding
and killing many of them, compelled the rest to fly to the gates of their
city, and he firing the Suburbs, presently besieged the same; and so he held
it besieged for certain days, in which were many great and notable
skirmishes. But the Milanois seeing the Emperors resolution, and great power,
and the engines which he raised to batter their walls, were in so great fear,
that they resolved to yield, upon the best conditions they could get, and to
send their Ambassadors to the Camp; which confessing their offenses, and
craving pardon, with a long set speech entreated the Emperor to admit them
into his service; and afterward in particular they treated thereof with the
Princes in the Army, and (as some authors say) gave great gifts and Milan
yielded to the Emperor.
presents: finally, they obtained mercy, yielded the city, and were pardoned.
Milan being now brought to subjection (as it was the head of all the rebels)
the rest of the towns in Lombardy presently yielded obedience, and gave
security, promising to serve the Emperor, and to do what they should be
commanded; and the Emperor in person visited many of them, and appointed
Roncalia to be the place whither they should send their Proctors or Agents
with their authority; where he determined to hold a Parliament, to treat of
the common estate of these provinces. Having in so short space had this good
success in Lombardy he disannulled some of their laws and customs, and
prescribed other new, with greater rigor then (in truth) he ought to have
done: whereof many inconveniences ensued.

The time appointed for their meeting being come, and they making their
appearance accordingly; after many matters which there were debated, by the
advice of some of his Council, he caused an Instrument to be made, concerning
an universal peace; which he enjoined all the cities, and principal men,
Marquesses and Earls in all Lombardy, to observe. This was done after the
Germane manner, with penalties therein accustomed; which being published and
made known unto them, they all murmured, and held themselves wronged,
principally the Milanois; and this coffeehouse increased in such manner,
that it was the cause of greater miseries then the former, by reason of the
tolls and taxes which the Emperor imposed upon all the country; reserving to
himself the election and provision of all officers: and although he did it by
the advice and counsel of learned men and Princes; which maintained that the
Emperor might do it in all those countries; yet the people being unaccustomed
thereto, took it very grievously: which was the occasion of the evils which
ensued; although in the beginning they durst not rebel.

After this, the Emperor (for a trophey of his victories) made the city of
Lodi to be new builded, and with all speed and diligence to be walled and
fortified; and the Castles, which had bin adversaries to Milan, to be repaired
and victualled; wherein he placed governors and garrisons, and did other
things which my brevity permits me not to recite. And serting all things in
the best order he could, notwithstanding that he kew that Milan had not
obeyed his laws and ordinances, concerning the impositions which he had set
(as says the Abbat WESPERGENSIS, and JOHN CVSPINIAN and others) he took his
way toward the country of Burgundy; which was an estate he held by his wife:
other authors speak not of this departure, but recite what ensued, as though
he had not gone out of Italy: but in my judgment, Milan, Crema, and Brescia,
and the other cities, would not have dared so peremptorily to have rebelled, if
the Emperor with his Army had continued in Lombardy: wherefore (holding with
WESPERGENSIS, and such others as are of his opinion) I say that as soon as the
Emperor was gone out of Lombardy, these things insued, which we will presently
relate.

The Milanois (which never yielded to obey the Emperors laws) seeing
themselves of great power, took the field with their forces, and went to a
castle which the Emperor had built near to Como, and assaulting it, took it
by force; and so they began the war, and did as much harm as at the first,
but with greater resolution: presently the cities of Crema, Brescia, and
Placencia did the like, and all the rest of their faction. JOHANNES CREMONENSIS
in his fourth book says, that the Pope made a league with WILLIAM King of
Sicilia against The Pope made a league with William king of Sicilia against the
Emperor.
the Emperor, which was the cause of great hatred between them. The Emperor
being advertised of the bold attempts of the Milanois, and their adherents;
with great celeritie (before that his whole Army was in a readiness) returned
into Lombardy, and went directly to Milan; and finding no resistance in the
field, harried and spoiled the country, leaving nothing standing undestroyed;
so great was the wrath and displeasure which he had conceived against it: and
departing from thence he went to repose himself in Lodi (to be cured of a lame
leg which he had) whither came Ambassadors from Cremona, to complain of
those of Crema, for the great wrongs they did them, and to crave succor: the
harms don were the greater, by reason of the strength of the place, together
with the aid and relief which they had from Brescia, and from Milan. As the
Emperor was a man of a very haughty spirit, so he seeking a redress for all
disorders, sent his brother CONRADE, Count Palatine of the Rhine, and some
other principal men, with part of his Army, to besiege Crema; and the men of
war which were in Crema took the field, and gave them battle, which
continued long, wherein many of both sides were slain: but in the end the
Imperialists had the victory, and compelled their enemies to return runnning
to their town; so as they durst salie forth no more: and so the siege
continued.

At the same time new supplies came to the Emperor out of Germany; wherewith
came his wife the Empress, with many men at Arms out of Burgundy, and with
her came HENRY Duke of Saxony and of Bauiere, of whom we have spoken much: with
which, and with the rest which he had before, he laid a plot for those of
Milan; whereby he took prisoners above three hundred of them, and slew above
six hundred. But, houlding it his best course first to make an end with Crema
(which by his commandment was already besieged) he removed his Camp thither:
and the better to justify his quarrel, he sent to command them to receive
him into their City, as their Emperor and liege Lord; which they not only
refused, but gave him many peremptory proud speeches: whereupon he caused
sundry great engines and instruments to be made, therewith to batter the town;
and the besieged resolutely defended themselves, and all their prisoners daily
taken of either side, were either hanged or slain: but at length they were
constrained of necessity to yield, and held themselves for happy, and
charitably Crema besieged and taken by the Emperor.
dealt withal, that the Emperor would vouchsafe to give them their lives; and
that leaving the city, they might depart with their wives and children, and
such luggage as they could carry on their backs.

Whilst the Emperor was at the siege of Crema, Pope ADRIAN, choakt with a
Fly, died; after whose decease, the Cardinals, being in number five and
twenty, assembling together in Rome, chose ALEXANDER the Third (before called
ROVVLAND) in a manner by a general consent of them all, excepting only three
which gainesaid it, which stood for the Cardinal A schism in the papacy.
of S. Clement, whose name was OCTAVIANVS, whom the Emperor much favored: and
this OCTAVIANVS (notwithstanding his few voices in the election) was so bold,
as to proclaim himself Pope, and was called VICTOR: and there wanted not some
to take his part, and to support him. The other Pope, ALEXANDER, seeing himself
thus opposed, sent his Ambassadors to the Emperor, lying then at the Camp
before Crema, whereby he requested him, that (using the authority of an
Emperor) he would favor the Church, by taking away the schism. The Emperor
for answer willed the Pope to come to the city of Pauia, whither he also
appointed VICTOR to come, to the end he might there hear both parties, and so
determine of their controversy: herewi^h ALEXANDER was much discontent, and
resolved to seek other redress. The Emperor having raised his siege from
before Crema, leaving to make war against Milan until the next Spring (which
was after the Abbats computation, in the year of our Lord 1161) came to the
city of Pauia, from whence he sent two Bishops in Embassage to Pope ALEXANDER,
aduising him to come thither, where he said, many Bishops would meet in the
name of a Council, to the end that the schism might be decided; which
Ambassadors behaved themselves toward him, as to a Cardinal, but not as to a
Pope: for the Emperor (as he disliked his election) desired to support Pope
VICTOR. ALEXANDER taking this in ill part, dispatching the Ambassadors,
commanded them to return, and they went to VICTOR with the same message, to
whom they spoke, and did reverence as to a Pope; and he presently departed,
and went to Pauia, and was by the Emperor very well entertained, and there was
proclaimed for right Pope: and the Emperor kissing his foot, used other
accustomed ceremonies, whereof when ALEXANDER was advertised, holding himself
intolerablie iniuried, he proceeded against the Emperor, and his Pope, whom
he excommunicated, and anathematized: and the Emperor sending his Pope into
Germany, returned to the wars of Milan, wherein what passed, you shall
understand.

Pope ALEXANDER after his going to Rome, holding himself not in safety;
through the assistance of WILLIAM King of Sicilia, went by galleys into France,
where he was very well entertained by PHILIP the French King (I say PHILIP, for
that BLONDVS, and al those Italian authors call him so; but hereafter you shall
understand that it could not be PHILIP, but his father JEWS, comparing the
times) and there he called a Council in Cliermont, where he again proclaimed
the Emperor and his Pope excommunicate; what after ensued you shall hear.

The Spring of the year being come, the Emperor very resolutely returned
against Milan, Brescia, Placencia, and such other rebellious cities as were in
league with them: but first he ouerran and destroyed all the country round
about Milan: before and after this time were many skirmishes and encounters,
which for brevity I ouerpasse, wherein for the most part the Emperor had the
better, until that having withdrawn his Army to take-in a castle and
fortress at the passage over a river near to Placencia, and the Milanois
having a good Army, led by the tyrant GVALPHAGO, with the aid of those of
Placencia and Brescia, went to assault a strong castle, called Carcano, or
Coracio: whereof the Emperor being advertised, he speedily sent for men to
Pauia, Nouarra, and Lodi, with which, and with his ordinary troops, he put
himself between Milan, and the said castle (before which the Milanois then
were) in such a place, and in such manner, that of force they must fight, or
not return. The Milanois seeing themselves in this extremity, sent some of
the chief men amongst them to the Emperors Camp, to entreat him to suffer
them to pass, for they would not fight with him for the honor and duty which
they bare to his person. And the Emperor presuming that he already held the
victory in his hands, or that they durst not fight, would not grant their
request: by reason whereof, his adversaries drawing courage out of despair,
seeing themselves lost if their passage were stopped, and that they were unable
to relieve their houses and friends, or to be relieved by them, resolved either
to make way, or to dye in the action, and so marched in good order against the
Emperor, who likewise in very good order attended their coming, where there
began a most A battle between the Emperor and the Milanois.
cruel battle, as between very expert and valiant soldiers, and men in
despair. In the beginning, the Emperor apparantlie had the better, and many of
his enemies were slain, and their standard was taken: but the fight continuing
until noone, there came certain companies from the united cities to the aid
of the Milanois, which charged with such resolution and fury, that the
Imperialists retired, and their enemies (as masters of the field) slew and took
prisoners very many of them: and the Emperor showing the greatness of his mind,
drew together great part of his Army in the best order he could, and ranging
his troops into a round Battallion, most valiantly defended himself against
his enemies; but truly he had bin either slain or taken if the fight had
continued any longer: but it pleased God that he being in this danger, there
fell so much rain, and therewith the air was so dark, that they neither saw,
nor knew the one the other; and so the Emperor held it for his best course to
retire toward Pauia, and his enemies as conquerors, with spoils and prisoners
went joyfully to their houses, which afterward cost them very dear. This
notable exploit, PLATINA, BLONDVS, and other Italian authors pass over in
silence: but as they do not gainesay it, and the Abbat WESPERGENSIS and other
Germane authors report the same, I have thought good to make mention thereon

This adventure being past and known in Germany, some Princes and great
Prelates, with many very good men of war, came to the Emperors aid: with
which, and with all the rest he left Pauia, and with a mighty Army besieged
Milan, purposing not to rise from before it until he had taken it; and the
besieged being well fortified and victualled, were no less resolute to dye in
their defense: by reason whereof, this was one of the most cruel and terrible
sieges that has bin seen before any city, as well for the long continuance
thereof, as for the skirmishes, sallyes, assaults, loss of men, and effusion
of blood, with the famine and other calamities which the besieged endured, and
for the lamentable and pitiful end which it had. The siege continued two whole
years and one day: some authors reckon five, and some more, accounting (as I
think) from the time the Emperor first made war in the marches thereof.
What skirmishes were Milan besieged and destroyed.
betwixt the besieged and the besiegers, the Reader may conjecture, considering
the power and spleen of the Emperor, and the obstinacy and despair joined
with the great force and multitude of the Milanois. During the siege, there was
so great want of victuals in the city, that after they had eaten all the
beasts, and other food that might be eaten, they dyed of hunger: and being out
of hope to have any succor, or means to live (the Emperor refusing all other
compositions) they were constrained to yield to his mercy; yet some affirm,
that certain Jews gave him entrance; and some there are which say, that he
took the citieby force: but howsoever it was, the city came into the Emperors
power; who conceiving, that enough of them were slain, he gave the rest their
lives; but in that city, and in all the rest, he did the greatest spoil he
could possibly: for first he commanded all the men and women to depart the
city, and his soldiers to sack it; and then the buildings and walls thereof
to be thrown down and laid waste; and this to be done by the inhabitants
themselves, and by such as were borne therein: and whereas they sufficed not,
he caused a great number of people to come thither from Pauia, and Cremona,
which should wholly ruinate it, and leave it waste and desolate, like to
miserable Jerusalem: which truly should seem to be one of the most lamentable
spectacles that ever was seen in this world. Some writers affirm, that he
made the ground to be ploughed, and sown with salt. The inhabitants thereof
(as GVALPHAGO the tyrant, the Bishop, and many of the most principal) he
commanded to be sent prisoners into Germany: the rest of the People he
permitted to dwell in certain fields, which he appointed for them, far from
Milan, amongst bushes, in cabbins and cotages. The relics and bodies of
Saints which were in the city, and held in great account, he divided amongst
the Bishops and prelates which were there with him; of which, the three Kings,
which came out of the East to adore CHRIST in Bethlehem, were given to the
Archbishop and Cathedral Church of Colen, where (it is said) they are at this
day. In this manner was the ^tie of Milan laid waste, and left desolate; which
a little before was so mighty, that it was of power able to fight with the
Emperor in the plain field, and to overthrow him: it having three hundred,
threescore and five years (as reckons RAPHAEL VOLATERRANVS, for so long was
it after that the Lombards were expelled that Seigniorie) enjoyed liberty,
with good success, under the sovereignty and name of the Empire: which
happened in the year of our Lord, one thousand, one hundred, sixty and two.
Some say, somewhat more.

After this victory and terrible revenge, the Emperor came to Pauia, where his
wife the Empress then lay; from whence he sent to demolish and throw down the
walls of Brescia, and Placencia; which (Milan being taken) yielded themselves.
BLONDVS, PLATINA, PHILIP BERGOMAS, and other Italian authors say, that he also
destroyed the city of Cremona, which in my opinion seems not likely; for
Cremona had ever served him, and been obedient. I believe it is taken for
Crema, the error being the writers, or printers; and not theirs. And the
Emperor having tamed and subdued all the other cities which rebelled against
him, and made them to veeld obedience to Pope VICTOR, he resolved to take his
way toward Germany: for he understood that the same year many alterations and
troubles began, and that there was great want of Justice; which grew
principally through discord and enmity between a certain Earl called GVIDO,
Count Palatine of Turingin, and GVELPHO the famous Knight of the Dukes of
Bauiere before named, by reason of some injury done by the said Count Palatine,
to the said GVELPHO: whereupon young GVELPHO coming out of Italy (as a valiant
young man, desirous to revenge the injury done to his father) raised a power
against him, and the other in Factions in Germany.
his defense, and many great Princes taking part with either side, a cruel
battle was fought between them, wherein GVELPHO was overthrown; whereof
ensued great hurt, and the slaughter of many men, too long to be related: so as
if the Emperor had any longer deferred his coming, the matter was come to
that issue, that Germany was likely to have been lost and ruinated: but as
soon as he came, he endeauored by all means, to set peace between them:
wherein he found great difficulty, by reason that so many men were slain and
taken prisoners of either party. And notwithstanding that he had once
concluded a peace between them, yet within one year it was broken, and wars
were again renewed: but the great valor and respect of the Emperor, was a
sufficient mean to make an entire and perfect peace, and to pacify all:
wherein he was the more earnest, for that he knew what was daily practiced in
Italy against himself, whither he had a great desire to return. For as soon
as he was gone out of Italy, leaving Milan desolate; the people conceived a
great fear and hatred against him: (as is usual against Princes which too
severely, and with cruelty punish the offenses of their subjects) and their
fear and hatred increased in such manner, as they made new leagues and
confederacies Excessive punish^ent is often the cause of grea ter offenses. A
league made against the Emperor.
against him; casting out the governors which he had placed, and taking his
rents and customs into their hands. In which league, besides those which
before were friends, which were Brescia, Placencia, Crema, and the Milanois,
there now joined with them Verona, and the Venecians, which greatly
strengthened the league, theirs being a mighty commonwealth; together with
Padua and other cities: all which took part with Pope ALEXANDER, against Pope
VICTOR: and all these cities fortified and furnished themselves with men and
munition.

The Emperor seeing how resolutely those cities were bent against him, and
knowing the doubtful issue of the war, and that the name and authority of
Pope ALEXANDER was great; he resolved with himself to take another course, and
by letters and ambassades dealt with PHILIP King of France, who supported
ALEXANDER (yet in my opinion it should be JEWS, for this was in the year of
our Lord 1175, at which time, as it appears by all the French histories,
JEWS reigned) for a meeting between them two, whither he would bring with
him VICTOR, whom he held to be Pope: for which purpose, a place was appointed
on the frontiers of France and Germany, and there a Council to be held,
wherein it should be determined whether of these two should be Pope: which (as
some say) the Emperor procured, by that means thinking to have deprived Pope
ALEXANDER. The King of France, at the Emperors request, consented that this
Council should be assembled: but Pope ALEXANDER would not come, alleging that
he held that for no Council, which was not held by his authority. Finally,
the French King and the Emperor grew jealous and suspicious the one of the
other, which authors report diversely: but the truth is that the Emperor came,
and brought with him his Pope VICTOR; and with him came the Kings of Scots, and
of Bohemia, and many other great Princes and prelates, with a very great Army:
and the French King brought no less, with whom came HENRY King of England
with very choice men of war (from whom in my opinion he ought rather to have
feared war, then expected or hoped peace) and these Princes encamped the one
near to the other, a river being between them.

The Emperor understanding that Pope ALEXANDER came not, but had summoned a
Council to be held at Turreon in France, was greatly displeased therewith, and
resolved to depart: and the French King (to hold his word) without aduertising
the Emperor thereof, came to the place appointed: and some say that he washed
his hands in the river, and so returned to his Camp. To be short, howsoever it
was, they both returned into their countries, without treating of any thing;
and not well pleased the one with the other.

The Emperor, with the greatest preparation he could make, resolved to return
into Italy, whither he sent Pope VICTOR before him; who being come to the city
of Luca (which held for the Emperor and him) there died. And by letters and
commandment from the Emperor (persisting in his determination) the prelates
which accompanied VICTOR (he being dead) chose him a successor, whose name was
GVIDO, borne in Crema, and was called PASCAL. Pope ALEXANDER in France
assembled the Council which he had summoned; whither came many prelates and
Bishops, out of England, Spain, France, Sicilia, Graecia, and many other
parts: where they ordained what they thought good. The Emperors preparation for
his coming into Italy being published, the aforenamed cities, which were in a
league and confederacy against him, sought new succors, and provided an Army
to make head against him.

It happened at this time, that in Rome died a Bishop called JULIUS, who was
Vicar or governor thereof in the Popes absence; who being dead, the Pope sent
a Cardinal called JOHN: Who (notwithstanding a kind of government by
Consuls, whereby the Popes power and authority was much diminished) used such
means, that Rome and many Cities of Italy sent to entreat the Pope to
return; and he knowing with what affection he was called, resolved to depart
thitherwards: and for that he would not go through Lombardy (which held for
the Emperor) he took his passage by Sea into Sicilia, and from thence went to
Rome; with great company and provision, which WILLIAM King of Sicilie gave
him. Some write that he himself accompanied him, and that he was received
into Rome with marvelous great joy of all the people. With his coming, the
Cities which in Italy held for him, took such heart and were so much
encouraged, that they (not contented to have rebelled against the Emperor)
began to make war against the Imperialists, and took some towns; wherein
none were so forward as the City of Verona: which gave the Emperor occasion to
hasten his coming; which he had prolonged, to come with the greater power,
seeing that his enemies forces daily increased: and so he came into Italy with
a greater Army then at any time before spoken of. What he did, and the effects
which thereof ensued, I will recount as briefly as I may: for a reign so long,
and wherein happened so many and so great accidents, cannot be expressed in
few words; neither reduced to a more brevity. All this while reigned EMANVEL
in Constantinople.

The Emperor FREDERICK'S coming into Italy with so great power, did greatly
terrify all the Country, considering what harm he had done there in former
times: but the hatred of those which were his adversaries was so great, as they
would rather hazard any danger, then yield to his obedience. And he knowing by
experience, that his rigor and severity had little auailed him, but had done
him more harm then good, resolved now to make war after another manner; at
the least in Lombardy, wherein he pardoned those which submitted themselves
unto him, and would not permit the Country to be spoiled or wasted; using all
men honorably; dissembling and making show, that he understood nothing of any
conspiracy, or league made against him; and so drew near to Brescia with his
forces, where he gave good entertainment to all such as from Crema, Verona,
and Brescia, came to visit him (notwithstanding that those Cities were his
greatest enemies, and had most practiced against him) and so passed on, without
coming into any of them, or doing them any violence; and went to Ferrara,
where he was received; and from thence passed peaceably through the territory
of Bologna: so as (at this time) he passed through Lombardy without doing any
harm; and there he divided his Army; part whereof he sent to make wars in
Tuscane, and the marches thereof, for that it favored Pope ALEXANDER, and
rejected Pope PASCAL, which lay in Luca: and with the rest of his Army he
marched toward the City of Ancona; for that it held for his enemy Ancona
besieged by the Emperor.
EMANVEL Emperor of Constantinople: Which he besieged and began to batter
with great fury: But it was so well defended, that the siege continued longer
then he expected.

The Captains and men of war, which he sent into the marches of Florence,
Luca, and Pisa, after they had taken certain Towns, marched through the
territory of Rome, and made terrible war against all such places as held for
Pope AEEXANDER; and in Rome wanted not some which favored the Emperors
proceedings: yet the Pope left no means unsought, as well by gifts, as
promises, to assure himself, and to have all at his devotion: wherein (it is
written) he issued much treasure.

Whilst the war was prosecuted in this manner, the Emperor lying before
Ancona; the Milanois, which after the destruction of Milan, had for the space
of five or six years lived as banished men, in cottages, cabbins, and
villages; gathering themselves together, being wonderfully aided and relieved
with all manner of materials, instruments, workmen, and laborers, from the
Cities of Verona, Placencia, Crema, and other their neighbors and friends,
began to reedifie their old ruined City; repairing what might be repaired, and
the rest they new builded, and wrought with so good a will, that within two or
three years the Emperor could not hinder Milan reedified.
them: and they reedified it in such manner, as there seemed nothing to be
wanting. To all which (as writes HENRICUS MVCIVS) the presence of GVALPHAGO
(called Earl of Angleria) was a great help; who escaping out of prison in
Germany came thither. Whilst that the Emperor lay before Ancona, and cruel
war was made against Rome, WILLIAM King of Sicilia died; and his son of the
same name succeeded him, who was an excellent man of war, and a great friend
to the Church of Rome. At that time EMANVEL Emperor of Constantinople sent a
solemn Embassage to Pope ALEXANDER; whereby he promised in person with great
power to come to his aid, and to drive FREDERICK BARBAROSSA out of Italy, and
to conform the Greek Church, and to make the same subject to the Latin;
conditionally, that he would reduce the whole Empire into one head, by taking
it from the Germans, and deprive FREDERICK, seeing that he had already
excommunicated him, and that he was a schismatic and a rebel. But Pope
ALEXANDER (notwithstanding that he was much oppressed by the Emperor, reposing
small confidence in the promises or power of EMANVEL) gave a pleasing
Equivocal answer, and sent Ambassadors to temporize with him, but not to
conclude any thing at all.

It happened at this time, that the flower of all the men of war in Rome,
went to besiege the town and Castle of Tusculano, which is near to Rome, from
whence they were much annoyed, that Town holding for the Emperor, whereof a
Germane Prince was governor; and the besieged seeing themselves distressed,
sent to the Emperor (lying before Ancona) for relief: to be brief, from the
Emperors Army came for General, CHRISTERNE Archbishop of Mentz; who with
such troops as he brought from the Camp, and such others as he could get by
the way, came to fight with the Romanists which besieged that town, being in
number above thirty thousand men; who fought with the Germans (but not with
order and valor like Romans) and as as they were fighting, the besieged
governor with his Garrison salied out of the Town, and assailed his enemies
at their backs, in such manner as the Romans were broken and overthrown; and
so many of them were slain in the battle and in the pursuit, as some
Historiographers have compared this overthrow to the battle of Cannas, where
they were overthrown by HANNIBAL. Although the comparison be great, yet it is
certain that in a long time after Rome could hardly recover it self: and Pope
ALEXANDER took it very grievously, and sought by all means possible to
encourage and animate the remainder of the Citizens.

The Imperialists, as Masters of the field, daily took towns belonging to the
Church of Rome; and the Emperor (who still lay before Ancona) when as he
understood of this victory, knowing the time to be fit for his purpose,
departed presently thence toward Rome, and made no stay until he came before
the same; where the Pope and his friends had already set all things in the best
order they could for their defense. The Emperor presently caused the Vaticane
to be assaulted; and notwithstanding that the assault was terrible, yet the
place was so well defended, as it sufficed to keep him from entering: wherewith
he was so much enraged, that the next day he commanded a more terrible assault
to be given, causing fireworkes to be thrown upon Saint PETER'S Church; in
such manner, that the Pope being out of hope to defend the place, abandoned the
Vaticane, and fled into the City, to lodge himself amongst the Rome assa^led
by the Emperor.
Frangipanes, who were his trusty friends, and set great guards to defend the
City, and made many bridges over the river of Tiber: the which the Emperor
(being master of the field, and having the Vaticane) greatly annoied and
oppressed; with a resolution not to have risen from before it, until it had
yielded, or that he had entered the same by force: and during the siege, he
spoiled all the Country round about Rome.

WILLIAM King of Sicilie understanding how greatly Pope ALEXANDER was
distressed, and being willing to imitate his father WILLIAM, he sent to the
Pope up the River of William King of Sicilia relieved Pope Alexander against
the Emperor.
Tiber to Rome two Galleys with a great sum of money, men, and such other
necessaries as they could bear, to the end that the Pope might fly away, if
he pleased. The Pope made great account of this relief, and presently divided
this money amongst his friends and servants, wherewith they were greatly
encouraged to defend the City: and he sent back the Galleys to the King of
Sicilia, and in them two Cardinals, to confer with him, and to ask his
counsel what was best to be done concerning his person.

In the mean time the Emperor seeing that the City defended it self, and
could not suddenly be taken by force, he labored to persuade the Romans both
by secret and public messages, to give up the City, and then he would restore
whatsoever he held belonging to the Romans; and that by them it should be
determined, whether of the two ought to be held for Pope; to the end that he,
generally by himself and by all others, might be respected and obeyed. With
these practices which bare so great an appearance of a certain peace, a great
part of the Roman people were much moved, and were of opinion that these
conditions ought to be accepted, whether the Pope would or not. The Pope
understanding hereof, held it for a great disgrace to his Holiness, that he
being Christ's Vicar, should be judged by his enemies: and holding himself to
be in no safety in Rome, he left the City by night and went down the River of
Tiber to the City of Gaietae, and from thence to Beneuent: from whence he
wrote his Letters to the Emperor of Constantinople, and to the Kings of France
and Spain, and to the Cities of Lombardy, which held for him, imploring their
aid and succor. Some write that Pope ALEXANDER, flying from Rome, OTHO the
Emperors son pursued him with seventy five long ships or fregats; who
coming to the coast of Histria, he was encountered by the Venetian fleet
commanded by CIANVS, who fought with him, defeated his Army, took OTHO
prisoner, and carried him to Venice: at which time the Pope entering there in
triumph, he cast a Ring into the Sea, and wedded it unto him, ordaining that
every year on the Ascension day they should observe the like Ceremony.

Having in this manner abandoned Rome, within few days after the Emperor was
forced to do the like; for it pleased God to send so great a plague, both in
his Camp and in the City, as there died daily thousands of the one and the
other party: principally there died many Germane prelates, and some Princes,
which came with the Emperor: Wherefore he hastily A great pestilence in Rome,
and in the Emperors Camp.
departed, leaving Pope PASCAL with a good guard of Soldiers in Saint PETER'S
in Rome: which was in the year of our Lord 1168, and he with his Army came
into Tuscane, and the marches of Florence, where he took some strong holds
which held for the Pope; in which, and in many other he placed Garrisons of his
own soldiers: and in the marches of Ancona and in Tuscane, he gave some
places to certain principal men of Germany, with titles of Dukes and Earls,
to annoy and oppress Rome.

Whilst the Emperor was busied about these matters, Pope ALEXANDER procured
aid and succor from all parts, and sought to support such as were his
friends: And EMANVEL Emperor of Constantinople sent him an Embassage, offering
him a very great sum of money, desiring the same which we have before
specified, which was, that transporting the title of the Empire from Germany,
by depriving FREDERICK, he should give the same to him, and to his house: But
the Pope for many considerations would not yield thereto, notwithstanding that
he very pleasingly answered him. Within few days after, Pope PASCAL died in
Rome, where the Emperor left him: and the Emperor (persisting in his
resolution) chose one JOHN borne in Hungary, who was called CALIXTVS, whom Pope
ALEXANDER presently excommunicated.

The Emperor having remained some space in Italy, desiring to return into
Germany (for there was need of his presence) he sent a Bishop to Pope ALEXANDER
with certain Articls of peace; what they were, Authors write not: but they all
say that the Pope would not accept of them; and so they took no effect. The
Pope labored with the Romanists for his return to Rome; but as then the City
being governed by Consuls, which were odious unto him, he could not effect the
same according to his desire: And so went to other places in Romagna, and in
the marches of Pulia, where he was favored and supported by WILLIAM King of
Sicilia. The Emperor came to Pauia which held for him, where he fortified some
Towns: and forasmuch as a great part of his Army was sick and many dead, he
could not make war to any purpose against Milan and the other rebellious
Cities: but, after, he took his way toward Germany, having done in Italy such
harm as is expressed; without effecting what he principally desired.

Being returned into Germany, his greatest care was to make peace between all
men, and to purchase the good will of the people, and to make himself rich; to
return into Italy, which he resolved wholly to subdue. At this time he
inherited all the Castles, lands and goods, which belonged to his Cosin-german
FREDERICK, son to the Emperor CONRADE, who died of the plague at the siege of
Rome: and he inherited also the lands and goods of some other Princes, which
died without Heirs, and he also rewarded some, giving them Titles, and
Castles, and to some others he gave new Arms and dignities. To the King of
Bohemia he gave for his device, a red Lion in a silver shield; and to others he
gave many such like honors. But in the mean time, GVALPHAGO tyrant of Milan,
and the Milanois, were not careless, but continually fortified the City which
they had new built: besides which with the other Cities in Lombardy of their
confederacy, in honor of Pope ALEXANDER (under whose title and name they
opposed themselves against the Emperor) by a common consent and contribution
Alexandria in Lombardy built in honor of Pope Alexander the Third, and so
called after his name.
they began to build another City, calling it Alexandria, after the Popes
name, upon the side of the River of Tanaro, in a place which should serve for a
frontier Garrison against Pauia, Tortona, and the Marquisate of Monferrato,
which were loyal to the Emperor. And in this his absence they made such haste
(but chiefly those of Milan, Placencia and Cremona) as they walled and peopled
the same, in such manner as it became a very strong fortress; and many of
those which lived in the borders thereof in villages, and unfortified places,
came thither to dwell, in such numbers, that the very first year it began to
be inhabited, there were fifteen thousand men fit to bear Arms; so as at
this day it is a good and a famous City, and is called Alexandria of Straw,
which name the enemies thereof gave it in the beginning in contempt. This
alteration (added unto the rest) made the Emperor to hasten his coming into
Italy, when as he now had remained some time in Germany: And having disposed
all things in good order, he set forwards and came with a mighty Army by
sundry ways, addressing his journey directly toward the estate of
Monferrato, and those places which held for him: but he first took a Town at
the foot of the Alps, called Secusa, which he made to be thrown down and
ruined, for that it rebelled: and from thence he marched (not without trouble)
toward Aste, which yielded unto him, more for fear of the like fortune as
happened to Secusa, then for ought it wanted wherewith it might have defended
it self. And having such success in the beginning, he went to besiege the new
City of Alexandria, against which he came greatly incensed, purposing to have
utterly destroyed and rased the same.

In Lombardy and in Piemont, the Marquess of Monferrato held for the Emperor,
together with the cities of Pauia, Nouarra, Turin and their territories,
subjects and friends, and some other Alexandria besieged by the Emperor.
Towns. He besieged Alexandria, and lay before it four months, in which time
were done many notable feats of Arms; at the end whereof, the Emperor was
constrained to rise from before it, for that it was relieved by the River with
great store of provision; and all the Cities which were friends to it, sent
thither soldiers to defend it. But the principal cause was, that the great
Duke of Saxony, of Bauiere, and of many other estates, called (as was his
father) HENRY the Proud, being at this siege before Alexandria, went from the
Emperor with all his forces; alleging that he would not be excommunicate, and
a rebel to the Pope. It was suspected that he was corrupted and did this for
money: or (which I rather believe) that he had some practice or conceit to
have made himself Emperor, under pretext that FREDERICK was disobedient to
the Church of Rome: for which cause the Emperor raised his siege, and went to
overtake him, and sought by all means to have stayed him; in so much that (as
some write he would have cast himself at his feet, if the other had not
hindered him; and a private servant of the Dukes called JORDAN standing by, said
to the Duke, My Lord, suffer the Imperial crown to come to your feet, seeing
that shortly you shall wear it upon your head: Finally, Duke HENRY would not
stay; and the Emperor had so few soldiers left, and was so void of all
relief, that within few days he was constrained to leave the wars, for that
time; and so left Italy, without effecting ought more then I have said. And
although that BLONDVS and PLATINA conceal this his departure, let the Reader
nevertheless understand that I draw the web of my History from all the best
Authors; and therefore I say, that he departed in great danger of his person.

WESPERGENSIS, NAVCLERVS, and HENRICUS MVCIVS write, that he was aided and
succored by those of Nouarra, and of Turin, in the passages over the
Mountains, through which he took his way toward Burgundy, which was his wives
patrimony; and that upon the w^y he was in some places in such danger, that he
was driven to go disguised as another man's servant.

After all these extremities, arriving in Burgundy, he gathered together his
soldiers, and raised some new companies, and so went into Germany; where the
said HENRY had already practiced some Innouations against him, some Earls
conspiring with him; for he was the greatest Prince in all Germany: But the
Emperor brought him to be one of the least; for as he was much feared and very
valiant, the Duke could do little against him. But the Emperor as soon as he
came into Germany, assembled a Diet or Council of all the Princes, whither he
summoned HENRY to come: but he not daring to make his appearance, the Emperor
proceeded against him (although not without contradiction and many
difficulties) and in the end confisked The Emperor deprived Duke Henry of
Saxony of his estate.
his estate, and all his lands: which he might easily do, by bestowing the
same upon men of great power, all which making war against him at once, took
the same from him: Yet some write, that this Sentence and confiscation was
afterward, in the year of our Lord 1180, when the peace was made between the
Emperor and the Pope: It may peradventure be, that at this time the process
began, and judgment was then given, but afterward put in execution; which was
in this manner.

The Dukedom of Saxony he bestowed upon a valiant Knight, called BERNARD,
Earl of Anhald, whom the Archbishops of Mentz and Colen, and the Lantzgraue
of Turingia help to take the same. The best and greatest part of the Duchy of
Bauiere he gave to one OTHG Count Palatine, not of the Counties Palatines of
Rhine, but of Witilispach; which he took by the help of two of his brothers,
who were men of great power: another part of this State, which lay on the other
side of Danubius, he added to the house of Austria: other his lands and
Earledomes he divided between HENRY Lantzgraue of Alsacia, JEWS Marquis of
Turingia, BERTOLD of Carinthia, and some others; all which together made wars
against him; so as to him, his offspring and descendents, remained only the
County of Bruinswick, which afterward in the time of FREDERICK the Second was
erected to a Duchy; and that estate increasing, great enmity continued between
the Dukes thereof, and the successors of BERNARD, to whom was given the Duchy
of Saxony.

The Emperor did not only apply himself to suppress this HENRY in Germany,
but from the very first day of his coming thither, was careful for the
getting of money, and the raising of forces for his return into Italy: and so,
being assisted by all those Princes, to which he had given and promised to give
those estates, and by his own house and kindred of Sueuia, and his servants
and subjects; he in short space raised so good an Army, that he went very
mighty into Italy, and carried his wife the Empress with him. Being comn to
the City of Como, in the month of June, notwithstanding that he wanted
neither courage, discretion, power, or forces; yet matters prospered not with
him as he expected, but rather clean contrary: for the Milanois and their
confederats had now taken such heart, and were in such readiness, that they
resolved to give him battle, after they had spoiled the fields about Pauia,
and such other Towns as held for him: and so they took the plain field just in
the way which leads from Como to Milan, by which the Emperor was to pass;
who had no less desire to fight: and was very glad, when he understood their
resolution.

The two Armies being upon a clear day come within sight the one of the other,
and the squadrons and battalions of either side marshalled in very good order;
the Emperor drew near to the place which his enemies held; and (in a manner)
with equal spleen, hatred and power both parties began to fight: first the
horsemen brake; and then all the rest; and so there was fought a very fierce
and bloody battle; the one wounding and killing the other most cruelly. It
happened, that in this so great fury, he which bare the standard and Imperial
Eagle (through A battle between the Emperor and the Milanois wherein he was
thought to have been slain.
his rash hardiness, and desire of victory) advanced himself so far
forwards amongst his enemies, that he was slain, and the Standard taken: which
when the Emperor saw, who (as it seems) was not far from thence, he was
therewith so much enraged, that encouraging his soldiers, with a new fury and
resolution, he so oppressed his enemies, that he slew and wounded many of them
with his own hands: but as this could not be done without great danger to his
person; so in the thickest of the prease, and greatest throng, his horse fell
with him; being as is thought, first wounded: and the charge on every side was
so hot, that the Emperor was held for dead; which gave the Italians cause to
gather courage, and the Germans to faint; for both parties certified the death
of the Emperor, which so much discouraged the Imperialists, that victory
apparently showed it self for their enemies: and the Imperialists fled and
abandoned the field, where a very great and cruel slaughter was made of them,
besides those which thinking to escape by swimming, were drowned in the river
Tesino, near to the place where this battle was fought.

This battle being lost, and all the Imperial Army broken and put to rout;
all men holding the Emperor for dead; and his wife the Empress, remaining in
the City of Como, clad in mourning attire, suing to have her husbands body, to
bury the same, which she requested the Milanois to grant by her Ambassadors:
the fifth day after the battle, the Emperor appeared alive, and in health, in
his Imperial robes, in the City of Pauia: whither upon the bruit of his being
there, came all those which were dispersed and escaped from the battle; and
those which most desired to aid him, and to do him service. In what manner
the Emperor escaped alive, it is not written; but it may be conjectured, that
being fallen, he remained in the field, although without hurt, and the night
being come, escaped by secret and unknown ways. His enemies by reason of this
victory got such credit and reputation, that many Towns and great men in
Italy forsook the Emperor, and went unto Pope ALEXANDER.

The Empress with some Princes and prelates of the Empire, being come to
Pauia, boldly and plainly told the Emperor to his face, that for the schism
which he had made, and maintained in the Church of Rome, this calamity was
befaln him; for God would never give him any entire victory, and except he
would submit himself to the obedience of the Church, they could not well do
him service: whereupon being moved with these admonitions, and Note the pride
of Pope Alexander the Third.
knowing the time; (notwithstanding that his servants and subjects daily
repaired unto him with many warlike troops) yet he sent his Ambassadors to the
Pope; unfeignedly suing to him for peace: and so they began to treat thereof by
Ambassadors. In this negotiation, and by what A peace concluded between the
Emperor and the Pope in the cit^ of Venice, where the Emperor prostra^ed
himself at the Poyes seete and the pope in in^ting manner setting his foot on
the Emperor neck, used these wo^ds: Super aspidem and Basiliscum ambulabo, and
conculcabo lconem and draconem.
means this peace was made, there is great difference among Authors; some
relating it after one manner, and some after another, which I recite not,
avoiding the loss of time and labor: but they all agree, that after many
days spent in this treaty, the Pope went to Venice, whither the Emperor
came, and that there with great solemnity the peace was concluded, and that the
Emperor kissed the Popes foot, and yielded him obedience. Some Authors write,
that (among many Dukes and others which were present, when as the Emperor did
in all humility prostrate himself at the Popes feet) THEODORE, Marquess of
Misnia, seeing the tyrannous insolency of the Pope, setting his foot upon the
Emperors neck, moved with a generous disdain, with a threatening countenance,
and eyes inflamed with fury, ran to take him up: whereat the Pope was so
terrified, as he fled into the Emperors arms and kissed him; neither could he
be drawn away, before he was secured.

Then a truce was granted by the Emperor to the King of Sicily, for fifteen
years; and to the Cities of the league, for six: which (according to most
writers) passed in the year of our Lord, one thousand, one hundred seventy
and seven; and afterward in the year, one thousand, one hundred eighty and
three, the peace with Lombardy was concluded in the city of Constance; but all
in such manner as it pleased the Pope; and such towns as were withheld from
him, were commanded to be rendered: and so the Emperor continuing there some
few days, returned into Germany, and the Pope to Rome, but he first granted
to the city of Venice, and the Dukes thereof, great privileges, immunities,
and exemptions. The Pope being come near to Rome, before he entered the city,
some speeches were used concerning the deposing of the Consuls, and that no
more should be chosen: but as it was a custom of fifty years continuance, so
it could not then be abolished; but order was taken, that none should be
chosen, but such as pleased the Pope, and that before they executed their
offices, they should swear to be in all things serviceable, and obedient to
his Holiness.

This being concluded, the Pope came to Rome, where he was received with great
solemnity: and the other Pope CALIXTVS, acknowledging himself to have erred,
cast himself at the Popes feere, craving mercy (having first laid aside his
pontifical habit) and renounced all the right and interest that he had to the
papacy: and so ALEXANDER remained sole pope in peace all the rest of his life;
and so this schism (which had continued twenty years) ceased.

The Emperor FREDERICK being come into Germany (now old and tired with five
and twenty years wars, and combustions) spent his time in preserving the
peace which he had granted, and in establishing his five sons in estates:
which he did in such manner as you shall hear.

This peace being concluded in such manner as I have told you, Pope ALEXANDER
died, after that he had been Pope the space of one and twenty years, the most
of them, in troubles and contention, and LUCIUS the Third succeeded him: the
year before his death, in the year of our Lord, one thousand, one hundred and
eighty, died EMANVEL Emperor of Constantinople, who reigned seven and thirty
years, and left a son who was a child called ALEXIVS for his successor,
appointing a kinsman of his, whose name was ANDRONICVS (a man of great
parentage) to be his Governor and Protector; who was so very a Villain and
so arrant a Traitor, that after that he had governed certain years, and
committed many insolences; The young Emperor of Consta^inople murdered by his
protector.
he killed the young Emperor, and made himself tyrant of the Empire, putting
many great men (such as he feared) to death: against whom for his detestable
treason, WILLIAM King of Sicily made sharp war, and took many Towns from
him; which brought him to such an end as he deserved: for the
Constantinopolitanes seeing themselves thus oppressed, rose against ANDRONICVS,
and made one ISACVS or ISACIVS, descended of Imperial blood, Emperor: and
ISACIVS prevailing, ANDRONICVS was apprehended, and having one of his hands cut
off and one of his eyes put out, was carried through the streets upon a Camel;
and by the general consent of all men had such a death as he deserved, and as
such deserve, as through ambition and desire to rule, are traitors and
disloyal to their Lords. And so ISACIVS remained Emperor, and was an excellent
prince: his end you shall know hereafter.

The Emperor FREDERICK enjoying peaceful times in his Empire, summoned a
Council to be held in the city of Mentz, where he settled his sons in such
estates, as you shall hear. His eldest son he caused to be chosen King of
the Romans, and his successor: his second son FREDERICK he made Duke of
Sueuia, which was his own inheritance: to OTHO his third son, he gave the
title of Duke of Burgundy, appointing him to succeed his wife, the Emperesse,
to whom that estate appertained: to his fourth son CONRADE, and to his fifth
son PHILIP, he gave other rents, and some towns wherein they might live: but
it afterward ensued otherwise: for CONRADE succeeded FREDERICK in the Duchy
of Sueuia, for that he died without issue; and PHILIP after the death of his
elder brother HENRY, came to be Emperor.

Pope LUCIUS knowing there was great contention and discord between the
Princes of the Holy land, and the states of Soria, and fearing the danger that
might ensue, endeavored by his Letters and Ambassadors to reconcile them, and
to make them friends: and procured WILLIAM King of Sicilia, which then warred
upon ANDRONICVS, Emperor of Constantinople (who as I said made away the young
Emperor ALEXIVS) to give over his wars, and to relieve that country, which
was oppressed by the Infidels; and so the King of Sicilia sent thither forty
armed galleys; wherein went some principal men and soldiers unto that service.

The Emperor FREDERICK before that the time of the truce by him granted in
Venice to the cities which had rebelled in Lombardy, was expired; (desiring by
fair and gentle means without rigor or Arms, to reduce them to his service)
summoned a Council, or Parliament, to be held in the city of Constance;
whither he willed them to send their Ambassadors, with sufficient power and
authority to conclude a peace, showing them signs of great love and good
will. The cities being weary of the wars, imagining that there would be
far better condiditions propounded, held it for their good: so as besides
Pauia, Cremona, Aste, Alua, Tortona, and some others which had still perserued
loyal and in the Emperors service; the cities of Milan, Bercelli, Lodi,
Bergamo, Brescia, Mantoa, Verona, Nouarra, Vicencia, Padoa, Treuiso, Bolonia,
Fauentia, Modeno, Rezzo, Parma, Placencia, and others sent their Ambassadors:
with which the Emperor came to an agreement; granting them perpetual peace
and pardon for all offenses past; leaving to them, their laws, customs,
jurisdictions, civil and criminal, with authority Exemptions granted by the
Emperor to sundry cities in Lombardy.
to choose Consuls and Governors, and commanded to be restored al whatsoever had
been taken from them in time of war; and they acknowledging him and his
successors for their sovereign Lords, swear to him fealty, and homage: and it
was set down, how, and in what manner they were to do him service; greatly to
their advantage. And besides this, that whereas certain appeals for certain
sums should come to the Emperor; he ordained therefore to have his Agents in
Lombardy, to the end that the people should not be constrained to come to him
into Germany: and that the Consuls and Officers to be chosen, before they did
execute their offices, should do their homage and be sworn to the Emperor:
setting down likewise what services they should do, at such time as the
Emperor in person should be in Lombardy. Finally, there were new covenants and
agreements made, which were sworn, and confirmed by the Emperor, and the
Ambassadors. The Instrument of all which, as it passed, appears at large, and
in particular, in the Civil Law, in the end of the Volume entitled (De pace
Constanciae.)

This peace being concluded in this manner, the Ambassadors with great joy
returned; and all the Towns approved and swear to observe and keep the same.
Within few years after this, in Verona dyed Pope LUCIUS the Third, whither he
came to have assembled a general Council, for the relieuing of the King of
Jerusalem, and the Christian Princes of those Provinces in the East, between
whom was great combustion. And the potent King SALADINE did much oppress them,
who by stratagems, and great battles, had made himself Sultan, and Saladine
Sultan of Egypt.
Calipha of Egypt, King of Damasco and Aleppo, and held great part of Armenia,
Licia, and the most part of Mesopotamia; so as on every side he had means to
make war upon BALDVVIN the Fourth, then King of Jerusalem, who carried
himself valiantly; and against the Princes of Antioch, Tripoly, and others
which held, and defended those parts. And he so much oppressed BALDVVIN (who in
former time had been of such power, that Egypt was tributarie unto him, and he
held certain cities therein, which his father and predecessor ALMERICVS had
gotten, and had in person conquered Palestina, and other lands) that he now
employed all his forces in no other thing, but to defend himself: and in the
end what befell him, we will declare; for that it appertains to our history,
to show the reason, moving the Emperor FREDERICK to go to the wars of the
East, wherein he died.

Pope LUCIUS (as I said) dying in Verona, was buried there; and in his place
was chosen VRBANVS the Third, borne in Milan. At this time, which was in the
beginning of the year; one thousand, one hundred, fourscore and six, the
Emperor FREDERICK came peaceably into Italy, and with the good will of the
Milanois, and of all Lombardy, and at their especial request and entreatie
went to Milan, and was there received, with the greatest joy and solemnity,
that could be devised; and there a marriage was solemnized, between his son
HENRY, King of the Romans, and the sister of WILLIAM King of Sicilia (yet some
say that she was his Aunt, sister to his father King WILLIAM of Sicilia, and
daughter of his grandfather ROGER) she was a woman of the age of thirty
years, but very fair, and he of one and twenty, as GODFREY VITERBINGENSIS;
and OTHO in the addition to OTHO FRISINGENSIS his Chronicle, and the Abbat
WESPERGENSIS also write; which in my opinion is true; no^withstanding that
PLATINA and BLONDVS say, that this marriage was made after that the Emperor
FREDERICK was dead, by the procurement of Pope CELESTINE the Third, and that
she was threescore years old; and that WILLIAM King of Sicily dying without
heirs, the Pope by this marriage made him King of Sicily. But in my opinion,
the first Authors are to be believed, for that they might be eye witnesses, and
the others deceived; for as he was afterward (through this marriage) king of
both the Sicilies, they imagined it to have been done then.

This wedding feast being ended, the Emperor, leaving his son HENRY for his
Lieutenant and Governor of Lombardy, returned into Germany. Pope VRBANE knowing
what passed in the East with the King of Jerusalem, and the other Princes; when
as he was confirmed Pope, endeavored to persuade and encourage Christian kings
and princes, to succor and relieve those places: but they making long delays
(notwithstanding that they sent some supplies) it came to pass, that
Jerusalem, and many other Cities held by the Christians were lost: the cause
whereof (as well for that it was so great a matter, as also for that it
appertains to our History) I will set down, although it will be somewhat
long; for I presume that the Reader will not be discontented therewith, which
as briefly as I can express the same, passed in this manner.

BALDVVIN the Fourth (as I said) reigning King in Jerusalem; and BOHEMVND who
was a mighty Prince being Duke of Antioch: and RAYMOND, or REMON, Earl of
Tripoly, who was also Lord of other Cities, and of the provinces of Galilea,
and Tiberiades, which he had by the marriage of his wife, who was a great
princes daughter, and Lord thereof; and so other Princes and Captains: which
although they banded, and had quarrels with the Knights Templars, and of Saint
JOHN, yet they jointly together defended what the Christians held in the East
(which was no small matter) against the forenamed SALADINE.

Matters standing in this estate, BALDVVIN who was a man of great spirit and
valor, being in the city of Nazareth (wherein he then lay) was taken with
such a leprosy, that he was not able to go, nor to stand on his legs;
whereupon he was carried to Jerusalem, and his disease held him in such manner,
that he daily expected his end. Which being published, so much encouraged the
Infidels, that they made continual rodes and incursions into the countries of
the Christians. He seeing himself in this estate (having no son to succeed
him, or to govern the country for him) made a man of great sort, called GVIDO
of LVSIGNAN, governor thereof; who was the second husband of his sister
SIBILLA, who by her first husband, called WILLIAM LONGSVVORD, Marquess of
Monferrato, had a son called BALDVVIN; and a daughter called SIBILLA. With this
government some of the Princes were much discontented, and SALADINE with a
mighty Army inuading their countries, the Christians disagreeing amongst
themselves, GVIDO the kings brother in law, and Captain general of all his
forces, daring not to fight with him, the Christians daily lost Towns and
Castles: whereupon the sick King BALDVVIN resolved to take another course;
which was before his death, to make his Nephew BALDVVIN, who was his sisters
son, King, notwithstanding that he was but a child, and RAYMGND of Tripoly,
his governor and protector; and to put his brother in law GVIDO from the
government: by reason whereof, ensued new factions, after which followed the
loss of those countries, through conflicts, besiegings, assaults, and taking
of towns, by SALADINE in five or six years, that this war lasted, until the
greatest loss of all; which was the death of King BALDVVIN; which happened in
the year of our Lord, one thousand, one hundred, eighty five.

RAYMOND Earl of Tripoly, coming to govern the kingdom, in the behalf of the
young King, GVIDO of LVSIGNAN and SIBILLA mother to the said King, were so
invested The death of Baldwin King of Jerusalem.
therein, that he could not execute his office: whereof ensued new troubles,
the one for private and particular passions and quarrels (forgetting the
public good) seeking the ruin of the other. In this confusion died the young
King BALDVVIN, eight months after the death of his Uncle; His father in law
GVIDO, and his mother SIBIL, concealing his death for fear that RAYMOND Earl
of Tripoly, by means of his great power, would by the general consent of the
people, have made himself King: the matter was carried so cunningly, that by
means of gifts and fair words, the Patriarch, and other chief men of
Jerusalem, chose him for their King; which was the occasion of the evils which
afterward ensued: for RAYMOND Earl of Tripoly, was so highly offended
herewith, that (to the ruin of himself, and of all the rest) he Guido Lusignan
brother in law to King Baldwin deceased, was chosen King of Jerusalem.
made a league with SALADINE; promising and assuring him, that he would neither
aid, nor relieve the King of Jerusalem.

This friendship being made, such courses were held, that after certain truces
and treaties of peace and breaches of the same, SALADINE began to make war
against the King and kingdom of Jerusalem with greater fury then at any time
before: and as GVIDO wanted the aid of the Earl of Tripoly, and BOHEMVND Duke
of Antioch could hardly help him, by reason of the far distance; and for that
he also had enough to do, to defend himself against the Captains of the said
SALADINE, he was much distressed, and daily lost towns and Castles; never
ceasing by Ambassadors and Letters, to solicit the Emperor, the Pope, and
other Western Princes for aid; and they resolving to yield the same, and
making preparation for the voyage, it happened, that RAYMOND Earl of Tripoly
(either made a double league, as some write, or knowing that if the kingdom of
Jerusalem were lost, he should be assured to have an evil neighbor of
SALADINE) agreed, and made a peace with the King of Jerusalem, and came with
his power to aid him; whereupon SALADINE raised his siege from before
Ptolomaide, and encamped himself before Tiberiades, which belonged to the Earl
of Tripoly, strictly besieging the same.

The King of Jerusalem having drawn together all the power he was able to
make, came with a great Army, the Duke of Antioch being with him; whither came
with all their power, the said Earl of Tripoly, the masters of the orders of
the Knights Templars, and of Saint JOHN, with other great men, Knights and
Captains, the Patriarchs of Jerusalem, and of Alexandria, and certain
Bishops; so that (as it is affirmed) there were 30000. horsemen, and 40000.
foot; which was the uttermost of the Christians power in the East.

After many Councels and opinions, the King at the instance of the Earl of
Tripoly resolving to free Tiberiades, and to fight with SALADINE, which lay
before it, presently began to march, and the troops and men of war which he
had with him, which were such, as no man seeing them doubted of victory; but it
pleased God to give it an other success: for SALADINE, who knew their
resolution (as a man which wanted not courage, and had an Army containing
double the number of the Christians, of very well trained soldiers) resolved
to fight with them; (but not near to the besieged City) and to that purpose
went to meet them upon the way: and it happened that the two Armies drawing
near together, and the King of Jerusalem one day purposing to march with his
people with great speed, and to lodge them in a place wherein was very great
plenty of water (whereof in those countries is great scarcity) SALADINE by
espiall or some other misfortune being advertised thereof, marched thither with
so great celerity, that before the coming of the Christians, his men had taken
the same place; and the Christians coming extremely weary, and thirsty, by
reason of their long march, and the heat of the Sun, found enemies in the
place where they thought to have found water and ease; wherewith they were much
troubled: Nevertheless, the King seeing there was no other remedy, commanded
the place forthwith to be assaulted, presuming thereby to have repelled the
enemy: but missing of his purpose, he with his Army was driven to lodge all
that night in the dry fields; where they endured intolerable thirst; and by
the break of day, SALADINE (who the most part of the night had been busy in
ordering his troops) took the field with his squadrons, where the Christians
(with tired and weak bodies through extreme thirst, and their horses being in
the same extremity) stayed for them: and notwithstanding A battle fought
between Saladine the Soldane of Egypt, and the Christians.
that they began the fight with great courage and resolution, yet their
strength failing they were overthrown by the Infidels; and there was the
greatest and most cruel slaughter made of them, that in those days had been
seen, either in Asia or in Europe.

The King was taken prisoner fighting; and the Earl of Tripoly escaped by
flight, and some say that he made all the rest to flee, and that he afterward
died miserably. The Duke of Antioch was slain after that he was taken, with all
the Knights Templars, and of Saint JOHN, that could be found. SALADINE having
obtained so notable a victory, following his course, went to Ptolomaida, which
he easily took; and did the like by Berito, and other Cities too long to
relate. Finally, in his own person (after the taking of many Towns, which, out
of hope of any succors, or to be relieved, rendered; and the sooner, for that
he was a very just Prince in performing his promise, and courteous, entreating
those very friendly which yielded) he marched forwards, and sat him down with
his Army before Jerusalem: and having fiercely besieged Jerusalem yielded to
Saladine
and assaulted the same for the space of thirty days continually, they
yielded, upon the second day of the month of October, in the year of our Lord,
1187. And so was this City lost; and at this day is in the hands of the
Infidels, almost eighty nine years after that it was taken by GODFREY of
Buillon, and the other Princes before mentioned: in which time had reigned nine
Kings with him who then was, to weet, GODFREY of Buillon the first and only
King of that name; and then after him, the two BALDVVINS, and FVLCO, and
BALDVVIN the Third, then ALMERICVS, and BALDVVIN the Fourth, and BALDVVIN the
child, and GVIDO which then reigned: and notwithstanding that the name and
title of King of Jerusalem continued a long time, and that the Christians held
many Towns and Cities in Soria for the space of one hundred and odd years
afterward, and many Princes went thither to have made a conquest thereof: yet
in the City of Jerusalem they reigned no more, neither possessed the same, but
a small time that the Emperor FREDERICK the Second was there. The East parts
being brought to this estate, and Jerusalem lost; Antioch, and the Provinces
thereto belonging, together with Tire, Sidon, and Tripoli, were in the like
danger.

The Emperor FREDERICK understanding these unhappy news (although now old and
tired) resolved to adventure his whole power with his person, for the recovery
of what was lost, and to defend the remainder: and God did put the like
resolution into the hearts of the Kings of England and of France, and of many
other Princes. The fame of SALADINES acts daily increasing; it is written, that
besides the estate of Antioch, he took one hundred and five and twenty walled
Cities, and that he made cruel war over all the Country. Through sorrow and
grief for so great loss, the greatest provision and preparation was made to
go to the relief thereof, that has been seen in Christendom at any time
before or since. For, first the Emperor (leaving his son HENRY, who already
was King of the Romans, for his Lieutenant, and with him his two brothers,
CONRADE and PHILIP) prepared a great and excellent army both of foot and horse,
and began to march through Hungary, Bulgaria, and Thracia, toward
Constantinople, thence to pass over into Asia: and with him went his son
FREDERICK Duke of Sueuia, and BERTOLD Duke of Morauia, and his brother the
Marquess of Banda or Baden, and many other Dukes, Earls, Archbishops and
Bishops.

A little before this, died HENRY King of England, who purposed to have gone
the same journey: for it was enjoined him for his penance concerning THOMAS
BECKET, called S. THOMAS of Canterbury, which I had no time until now to
speak of. But his son RICHARD King of England, and PHILIP King of France,
concluding a peace (for they were at wars about the Duchy of Normandy)
either of them with the best Army that he could make, went to this war in
the East. The like did OTHO Duke of Burgundy the Emperor's son, and the
Venecians sent thither a great fleet, and so did the Pisans, who then were
mighty at Sea. To this service also went CONRADE Marquess of Monferrato, and
HENRY Earl of Champania, and many other great Lords and Captains of Italy,
France and England, whose names for breuity I leave. That which now most makes
me wonder in this zealous voyage of the Christians, is, that from Denmark and
Frisland came fifty Galleys, it being so long a voyage from thence into Soria:
and the Earl of Flanders sent twelve: and WILLIAM King of Sicilia did very
well set-to his helping hand: for (besides the forty Galleys which he sent
before) he furnished and relieved all such as went, and came by him, and
wanted, with shipping, victuals, arms, and other necessaries, and maintained
(for a long time) a great Navy, to assure all passengers that would go this
voyage, from rouers and pirates by Sea.

The success which all these men had, and what befell them, as well by the way,
as in that war, is too long to be written (for they did great matters) and I
should too much digress from the history of the Emperors (which is my task)
wherefore it shall suffice that the Reader understand by me the issue of these
proceedings; the rest let him read in the Authors which wrote thereof, which I
will name: I will conclude in the history of the Emperor, who coming with his
forces to Constantinople, made a league with the Emperor ISACIVS; and being
there, was given to understand, that GVIDO of LVSIGNAN, King of Jerusalem, was
gotten out A voyage to Jerusalem.
of prison, together with the Master of Saint JOHN; and that with such men of
war as repaired unto him, he had renewed the war, and determined to take
the Field, in hope to have recovered certain places: whereupon the Emperor in
great haste passed his Army over the Straight at Constantinople, in the year of
our Lord, one thousand, one hundred, eighty nine, and began to march through
Asia the Less; where passing in peace through the Countries of the Christians,
he entered the Country of the Sultan of Iconium, who was a mighty Prince in
those parts, with whom he made peace; upon condition, that he should give him
victuals and free passage: which if he performed, then he would not war upon
his Country. But, the heathen King not only brake his promise, but gathering
together a great number of Turks, stopped his passage, and did him the greatest
hurt he was able: wherewith the Emperor being very much incensed, made cruel
war in his Countries; and coming to the mountains at the entry into Cilicia,
he made his passage with great difficulty and danger: for, the Sultan had drawn
a head of a great multitude of Turks and other heathen Nations, thinking to
have overthrown the The Emperor Frederick his victory against the Soldane of
Iconirm.
Emperor in those Streights. But it pleased God that he passed, although with
great danger and some loss: and, coming down into the Plains, he fought with
the Infidels, and overthrew them, and slew a very great number of them. And so,
taking and sacking Cities and Towns, he marched forwards, and entered Armenia
the Less, and by force took the greatest part of all that Province.

The news of his coming and victories struck so great fear into his enemies,
and so much encouraged the Christians, that GVIDO King of Jerusalem, and his
brother EMERICVS, and other great men before named, which were there assembled,
leaving the Cities of Tire and Tripoli, whither they had retired themselves;
with a well ordered Army took the Field, and assailed Ptolomaida or Acon,
purposing to have the same, for tha^ it was a Haven of the sea, and of great
importance; whither came the fleets from Denmark and Flanders, and from other
parts. The siege was reinforced, and the Christians Army daily increased; and
all men knowing the Emperor to be near at hand, SALADINE thought himself unable
to defend what he had gotten: and King GVIDO, and those which were with him,
recovered force and courage. But it pleased God in his secret judgment, that
in the time of this hope and of good success, there happened so great a
disaster, that all was changed and turned vpside down; which was, the death of
the Emperor, which happened by great misfortune in this manner:

The Emperor being very near to Soria, upon a very hot day in the summer time,
desiring to wash and refresh himself in a river (as they write that at other
times he had done) the swiftnes and depth thereof was greater than he thought
or mistrusted: and so in the presence of his people going into the water,
without that any of them was any way able to save or help him, he was carried
down the stream, and therein drowned. And so in a little water died he, for
fear of The Emperor Frederick drowned.
whom all Asia trembled; which happened upon the tenth day of June, in the year
of our Lord, 1190, and in the eight and thirtith year of his Reign: through
whose death the enterprise was extremely hindered.

At the same time befell another misfortune, which was a controversy and
discord between the Princes of those parts; which happened by reason of the death
of SIBILLA, wife of GVIDO King of Jerusalem, and sister to King BALDVVIN
deceased. Whereupon, HERFRAND, who was married to ISABEL, sister to this Lady,
with the aid of some of his friends, would have been King, by the right of his
wife; which the widower GVIDO withstood, alleging that he was the sworn and
obeyed King, and therefore ought not to be deposed. And it followed, that
CONRADE, Marquess of Monferrato, took his Lady from him perforce, alleging
that she was not lawfully married to HERFRAND: and so he married her, and in
like manner challenged to be King of Jerusalem; which (besides that it was a
vile deed) caused great trouble: for, this Prince held the City of Tire. By
which means, the widower King GVIDO lost much of his authority, for that he
would not fall at variance with them: yet he still held the name and title of
King.

The matter remaining in this great confusion, after the sudden and unfortunate
death of the Emperor, a man may easily conceive the great grief and sorrow of
the whole Army: nevertheless, his son FREDERICK, Duke of Sueuia, as a
valiant and courageous Knight (being presently upon the death of his father,
as reason was, made General and their Head) encouraged his people, and taking
the dead body of his father, marched directly toward Soria; and sent certain
messengers to GVIDO King of Jerusalem, who lay before Ptolomaida, to advertise
him of the death of his father; and desiring him to send him such men as might
guide and direct him what was to be done. Which although it was not to be
effected without great danger (for, the most part of their way lay through
their enemies Countries) yet King GVIDO sent him two Knights well experienced
in the wars, which guided him and his people to the City of Antioch, which
lay nearest to his way: where, after that he had (for some days space)
refreshed his Army, he thought to have made great wars, and to have recovered
the Cities lost in that estate; and so to have proceeded forwards. But his
Army of Germans, which came wearied and tired of their long journey, finding
there great abundance of victuals; by means of their forepassed hunger, so
disordered themselves by surfeiting (or, it was Gods will that it should be so)
as there fell so great a plague among them, that within few days most of them
died; in such sort, that FREDERICK (with such as escaped the plague) departed
from Antioch; and drawing near to the sea, embarked himself, and sailed to the
City of Tire, which (as I said before) was held by the Christians: and leaving
there the dead body of his father, he went from thence with his people (but not
without great danger of the enemy) to join with GVIDO of LVSIGNAN, King of
Jerusalem, who lay before Ptolomaida; which, SALADINE had so The siege of Aco^
or Ptolomaida.
fortified and garrisoned, that the Christians were much troubled in the siege
thereof; and prevailed little, until the coming of the Kings of England and of
France, after many accidents be^ln them in the way, which was in the same year:
but they continued the siege, accompanied with other Princes, notwithstanding
that there was ever little conformity among them; where we will now leave
them, to make relation of the succession in the Empire, for this their history
apper^aineth not to my charge: and how HENRY the Sixth, the Emperor FREDERICKS
eldest son was chosen Emperor, who held his fathers place in Germany, being
already made king of the Romans, and what he did in Germany and in Italy. Yet
forasmuch as this enterprise of Jerusalem was so notable a matter, and so great
Kings came to the service, we will briefly tell you what end it had, though not
the success.

In Constantinople all this while reigned ISACIVS: in Italy a little before
this, died without issue, WILLIAM King of both the Siciliae: wherefore Pope
CLEMENT the Third challenged those kingdoms for the Church of Rome; and HENRY
King of the Romans, and future Emperor, pretended to be his, by reason of his
marriage with Constance sister to King WILLIAM. But the Sicilians and
Neapolitans, against the Popes will, chose one TANCREDE, who was Uncle to King
WILLIAM, a base son to ROGER King of Sicilie: who seized on the kingdom. In
writing this Emperors life, I have spent longertime then I ordinarily do, for
that many great accidents happened in his time, and for that so much is written
of him, I have bin in a manner constrained thereto; and also as at other times
I have said, in matters which draw near to our times, it shall not be amiss
to make longer and more ample relation.

My authors in whose books the same may be seen more at large, are these which
follow: OTHO FRISINGENSIS in the history which he particularly wrote in two
books, of the beginning of the Emperor FREDERICK'S reign, and RAVDAVICVS in
what he added thereto, and GODFREY VITERBIENSIS, all eye witnesses, and the
Abbat WESPERG. in his Chronicle, an author of the same time, wherein he writes
his life; Abbat ROBERT in the addition which he made to SIGIBERT'S Chronicle,
OTHO of S. Blase, BLONDVS of the declining of the Roman Empire, PLATINA in the
lives of the Popes, JOHN COLVMNA in his Sea of histories, JOHN BAPTISTA
IGNACIVS, JOHN EVTICHIVS, BENEVENT de Rombaldis, IOH. CARRION, IOH. CVSP.
RAPHAEL VOLATERANVS, in their writings of the Emperors, HEN. MVCIVS, GASPAR
CHVRREVS in his Affairs of Germany, in that part wherein he treats of
FREDERICK the first, FRANCISC. IRENICVS, PAVLVS CONSTANTINVS PHRIGIO,
CHRISTIANVS MASEVS, MATTHEW PALMERIVS, and the other general Historiographers,
treating of these times, as S. ANTH. ANTHONIVS SABELLICVS, IOH. NAVCLERVS,
which best of all handles the matters of Germany, PHILIP BERGOMAS; and besides
these, PAVLVS EMILIVS, ROB. GAGVIN, and other French writers, POLIDORE VIRGIL
in his English History, Pope PIUS in his history of Bohemia, JACOB MEIER in his
abbridgement of the history of Flanders, ANTONIUS SABELLICVS in the history
which he particularly wrote of the Venecians, ALBERT CRANTZ in his history of
Saxony, GEORGE MERVLA in the history of the Dukes of Milan, AVGSTIN JUSTINIAN
in his Annals of Genoa, MICHAEL RICIVS in his book of the Kings, and some
others which I now remember not.

THE LIFE OF HENRY, THE SIXTH OF THAT NAME, AND FOVRESCORE AND EIGHTEENTH
ROMANEEMPEROR.
THE ARGUMENT.
AFter Frederick succeeded his eldest son Henry: who as soon as he had the
government of the Empire, went into Italy to be crowned, and to get the
kingdom of Sicilia, which came vn^ him, by the right of his wife; and was
crowned by Pope Celestine. He would have made a conquest of the kingdom of
Naples, but the plague made him return into Germany. He again came into
Italy, upon the same occasion of Sicilia: wherein finding Tancrede dead, h^e
easily obtained the kingdom, notwithstanding that he committed some cruelties
therein worthy of blame: Being returned into Germany, he sent many men to the
wars of Jerusalem. And living in peace, he came in progress to visit his new
kingdom of Sicilia: where, for his pleasure riding on hunting (as his custom
was) he fell sick and died, when he had reigned eight years.

THE accidents which happened in the time of the Emperor FREDERICK, were so many
and so great, that I imagine to have insom sort satisfied the desire, which men
commonly have to read of great adventures: and if they yet remain with an
appetite, from this time forwards they shall have such and so many, that I
presume they shall not want to satisfy them. I say then, that as evil news
are commonly more swift of foot, then the good: so the death of the worthy
Emperor FREDERICK was soon known in Italy and in Germany, for which all
Christendom generally was sorry; as well for that it was so unfortunate, as
for that it troubled and interrupted the enterprise which he had begun, and
followed with such courage and good success. His eldest son HENRY, who (as
we said) in his fathers life time had been made King of the Romans, and future
Emperor; when as he understood of the death of his father, wrote to the
electors, and to the other Princes of the Empire: Henry the eldest son of
Frederick Barbarossa chosen Emperor.
and they yielding him the obedience which they had promised in his fathers
time, he took upon him the state and majesty of Emperor: which was in the
year of our Lord, one thousand, one hundred, nintie, and one, and was called
HENRY the Sixth; yet the Italians call him the Fifth, for that they reckon not
the first HENRY. This man was a wise Prince, of a sharp and quick wit, well
spoken, of a pleasing countenance, but somewhat pale faced, of a mean stature,
and tender and delicate of body; but of a fierce and cruel mind, and very
valiant, wherefore he was greatly feared of his enemies, and was more addicted
to hunting, then was fit for the good government of his estate. In the
beginning of his reign, those of Colen rebelled, and with them certain Earls
and other great men, but it was a matter of no great importance and so it was
soon pacified. Being freed from this care, seeking the aid and favor of his
friends, he made preparation to go into Italy (which was the next year) with a
desire to be crowned in Rome, and to get the kingdom of Sicilia, which fell to
him by the right of his wife the Empress, CONSTANCE, whereto he was invited and
called by Pope CELESTINE the Third, who was newly chosen Pope (yet some authors
say, that at this time, this CONSTANCE was given to him in marriage by this
Pope CELESTINE, who gave her a dispensation for that she was a professed Nun,
to the end, that they should have the kingdom) for the bastard TANCREDE King
of Sicilia and of Naples, who possessed the same, was odious and an enemy to
the Pope.

The Emperor HENRY being comn into Italy, passing peaceably through the
States of Lombardy (according to the agreement made between his father and
them) went toward Rome to be crowned; but before the Pope gave him the Crown,
he went against the City of The Emperor Henry the sixth crowned in Rome by Pope
Celestine the third.
Tusculano, which was situate in the Mountains near to Rome, which rebelled,
and did and had done the Romans much harm; and taking the same (for it yielded
without any resistance) he gave it to the Romans (for so was he enjoined to do,
before the Crown should be given him) and they presently rased the City, and
used the Citizens with great cruelty, for which the Emperor was much taxed, and
blamed to have suffered so cruel a fact. This cruelty being executed, and the
Emperor being with great solemnity crowned in Rome by Pope CELESTINE; and
other covenants and agreements being made between them concerning the kingdoms
of Sicilia, and of Naples, as feodatory kingdoms to the Church of Rome, and the
fee and tribute set down to be paid for the same: The Emperor marching
forwards, found all those Countries in Arms against him, holding for TANCREDE,
whom they had chosen, and held for King and their soueraign Lord; yet he took
some Towns by force, and went as far as Naples, The Emperor besieged Naples but
could not take it.
and besieged the same, as the head of that kingdom; and the Neopolitans
valiantly defending their City, the siege continued the space of three
months; in which time there fell in the Camp, so great a mortality, and so
many of the Emperors soldiers died, that without effecting what he had
purposed, he raised his siege and returned into Germany: And as he arose from
before the City, his wife the Empress (some say going into Germany, which
seems most certain; and others say, that she coming to her husband, to go
with him to the wars) was taken by certain Captains upon the way; but so great
diligence was used, and such a course was taken, that within few days she was
set at liberty; and they which took her, were severely punished: and so at
this time, he returned crowned, but not victorious, into his Country. Two
years of his reign were expired, and he frustrate of his purpose and desire to
recover the kingdoms of Naples and Sicilia, but yet he still had a resolution
to return thither again (as he afterward did) where let us leave him; and I
will tell you what happened unto his brother FREDERICK, and the other Princes
which had continued in the East ever sithence the death of his father, the
Emperor FREDERICK BARBAROSSA: wherein if all the skirmishes, encounters,
battles, and fears of Arms done by these three kings, of Jerusalem, France
and England, in those two years wars, should be written, I should have much
to say; but the success thereof was this, that the siege of Ptolomaida
continued two years, reckoning from the time that GVIDO King of Jerusalem first
besieged it, until it was taken; during which time, many great matters passed
between them and the besieged, and SALADINE'S other forces.

At this time died the said FREDERICK Duke of Sueuia, son to the Emperor
FREDERICK BARBAROSSA, and brother to the Emperor HENRY, and other great
personages.

At the end of this time, the City was yielded to the Christians, and the
Kings were grown Ptolomaida yielded to the Christians.
so mighty and so much feared, and the potent SALADINE had lost so many men,
that thinking himself unable to defend his countries, he caused the walls of
Cesaria in Palestina, with Ascalon, Gaza, Porfiria, and of other Cities upon
the Seacoast, to be thrown down: and the power of the Christians so much
increased, that SALADINE began to parle of the giving up of Jerusalem, upon
condition that he might live in peace. But God otherwise disposed, for the
Kings of France and England, were so ill met, that they could never agree upon
any thing: Wherefore the King of France resolved to leave the wars, and to
return into his country, The French king left the wars in the Holy Land.
and did so, and left the greatest part of his people with the Duke of
Burgundy; and so the opportunity of the taking of Jerusalem was lost; for by
reason of his departure, SAEADINE'S mind altered: Nevertheless, RICHARD King
of England was a Prince of so great a courage, and carried himself so
valiantly in those wars, as besides, that he new builded and fortified Iapha
(whilom called Ioppa) and some other Towns, he reduced the wars to as good
Richard (...)de Lion King of England his wars in Palestina.
order and estate, as they were in before the French Kings departure. It
followed in this time, that CONRADE Marquess of Monferrato, who was possessed
of the great City of Tire, and the marches thereof, and was called King of
Jerusalem, for that (as I told you) he married with ISABEL sister to SIBIL,
which was King GVIDO'S wife, was in the same City slain by certain fugitives,
Turks; and the widow ISABEL having one daughter by her husband, was married to
HENRY, called Earl of Champania, Nephew to the French King; and he marrying
her, had with her that City, and the title to the Kingdom of Jerusalem,
against GVIDO, which held that name and title. Whereupon King RICHARD dealt
with GVIDO to renounce the right which he pretended to the kingdom of
Jerusalem, and he would give him the dominion of the Isle of Cyprus, with the
name of King thereof; which Island the King of England took in his way as he
came to this war.

GVIDO accepted this bargain; and providing men and shipping necessary, sailed
into Cyprus, as King of that Island, and reigned therein all his life time; and
that kingdom remained in him, and in his heirs and successors, until the year
of our Lord, one thousand, four hundred and sixty, that the Venecians (I know
not by what title) made themselves Lords thereof: and the house of England has
ever since pretended right to the kingdom of Jerusalem, as says PLATINA, and
other Authors.

This being past, and many other matters in this war, amongst which was a
great battle which continued from noone until night; wherein the valiant
SALADINE was ouerthrown, and the King of England, and the Princes with him, had
the victory; they resolved to go and besiege the City of Jerusalem, knowing
for certain that SALADINE durst not abide them, for he sued to them for peace,
or truce, promising to render Jerusalem, and other places in those marches, to
the end that he might obtain the same for some long time: but the Christians
were of such power, that they were not therewith satisfied. But upon a sudden
the King of England (very unadvisedly) gave out in speeches, that he would
return into his country, for that he was certified the French king had entered
and taken his Duchy of Normandy: which if he had concealed, The cause why
(...)was ^alen by the ^ians.
he might have had what composition he would have required: but SALADINE
knowing his determination, and that the fleets of Pisa and of Venice were
already departed, by reason of discord and dissension between them, would not
resign Jerusalem. In the end the king of England concluded a peace with him for
five years; and leaving Garrisons and Governors in the Cities which the
Christians had recovered (OTHO Duke of Burgundy, and HENRY the husband of
ISABEL, which challenged the kingdom of Jerusalem, remaining commanders ^ng
Richard ^ueur de Lion, (...)prisoner ming from (...)w^es in (...)Holyland ^y
the Duke of ^rich.
thereof, with the Knights of Saint JOHN and the Templars) he departed
homewards, in the year one thousand, one hundred ninety three, and by the way
was taken prisoner by the Duke of Austria, and was ransomed, and other
accidents afterward befell him: and so he left the affairs of the East, and
more Towns, and better fortified then he found there: yet not so many as a man
would have thought that so great Kings, and such mighty Armies, might have
taken: what ensued, you shall understand hereafter.

The Emperor HENRY (as some men write) was well relieved and furnished with the
money which the king of England paid for his ransom, toward his journey into
Italy, for which he then made preparation but he first made his brother
CONRADE, Duke of Sueuia, for that his other brother FREDERICK died in the East
without issue. He then marching toward Italy, to conquer the kingdoms of
Sicilia and Naples, which fell to him by his wife, and the Popes grant; and
having sent certain Captains before with an Army, by which the wars were
already begun; King TANCREDE which possessed those kingdoms died; and a little
before him, his eldest son called ROGER, who was married to YRENE the
Emperors daughter of Constantinople, and he left another son called WILLIAM
(whom they presently made their King) and two or three daughters: by reason
whereof the Emperor hastened his journey, leading with him his brother PHILIP,
and other great Princes: but for all this, the great men, and Cities of those
kingdoms left not to rebel, and to withstand the Emperor HENRY, who with his
men of war entered the Country, besieging and battering Cities with such rage
and fury, that whatsoever City resisted him, he caused to be ruined and
burnt; using greater cruelty then befitted a virtuous or Christian Prince: and
so perforce, and for fear, all the cities in the kingdom of Naples, and the
most of those in Campania, and Pulia, yielded; and thence marching into
Calabria did there the like: and seeing himself Lord of the estates in the
maine land, he passed over into Sicilia: wherein, as there was not any King, or
head, to rule and command (for TANCRED'S son was a child, and his father had
been wicked, and a Tyrant) in short space he became Lord of a great part of
that Island. Nevertheless, after this the prelates and great Lords of those
kingdoms, with the greatest power they possibly could levy, gathered head
near to the City of Catanea, with a full resolution to try their fortune:
where they fought with the Emperor (yet some say the Emperor was not in the
battle) and the Sicilians were ouerthrown, the City taken, and of them was
made great slaughter, in which was executed extreme cruelty, putting to the
sword both men and women, not sparing those which had retired themselves to the
Churches for sanctuary: and some Noble men and Bishops were taken prisoners.

After this, many of the principal men conspired by any means howsoever to
kill the Emperor; which being revealed unto him, he caused death to be
inflicted upon all those he could get, which had been accused to have been of
that conspiracy, with such cruelty and rigor, as he could not avoid blame for
it: for some he made to be fleyed alive, others to be burnt, and of some he
caused sharp nails to be driven into their heads: finally, he executed such
horrible cruelty upon them, that he made himself to be the most redoubted man
in the World: By means whereof within short space he became Lord of the whole
Island; and coming with his forces to the City of Palermo (which was the
richest and most populous City of the Island) he was received without battle
or resistance, and made his entry most solemnly, with all the representations,
triumph and shows of victory that could be devised: in that City (it is
reported) be found many precious jewels, and great riches, which had been the
Kings of Sicilia, and there were kept.

He got also into his power YRENE the Emperors daughter of Constantinople, who
was betrothed to the deceased King TANCRED'S son, ROGER; which YRENE he
married to his brother PHILIP, although against her will. And the child whom
the Sicilians had made their King, he made his eyes to be put out, thereby to
make him incapable of the kingdom; and caused him to be carried prisoner into
Germany, where he afterward died miserably: and his mother the widow with her
two daughters, he commanded to be put-into a Monastery in Germany, so that he
left nothing forgotten that might assure him of those kingdoms.

This being done he went into Calabria, carrying with him for hostages, such
men as he held to be of greatest account in both the kingdoms: and for his
better assurance, both in the maine land, and in the Island, he placed Germane
governors and captains: to some of which he gave certain estates and titles.
Before this, his wife the Empress, who was there with him, bare him a son
called FREDERICK; at whose birth, by reason that some doubted whether that a
woman of her years might be with child or no, he permitted all that would to
be present at the birth, commanding it first to be published, at such time as
it was thought she should be delivered. In this manner did the Emperor HENRY
leave the two Sicilies in peace and subjection: And with the hostages before
mentioned, which were great Lords and Prelates, departed toward Germany (Milan
and all Lombardy peaceably obeying him, both at his coming and going) which
was in the fifth year of his reign, and in the year of our Lord 1195.

It is true, that although the Emperor obtained his desire in the conquest of
Sicilia and Naples, yet all writers affirm that he therewith purchased the name
of a very cruel, and vindicatiue Prince, for the great cruelties which he
committed. And PHILIP BERGOMAS affirms that through these cruelties, he fell
at such odds with Pope CELESTINE, that he excommunicated him, by certain
Bishops and other men of orders, which the Emperor apprehended, and put to
death: and that he afterward suing to the Pope for pardon, was absolved. He
was also noted and taxed of excessive couetousness, for the great loanes and
imprests, which he exacted from the people in those kingdoms: which gave
occasion that it was not long before that in Pulia, some towns and great men,
began to mutin and to rebel against him: whereupon he put out the eyes of all
the hostages, which he had sent into Germany; and sent Captains and soldiers to
suppress the Insurrections; and they by his commandment, inflicted cruel
punishment upon the offenders. Being in this prosperity, so as no man rebelled,
or held up his hand against him, his brother CONRADE Duke of Sueuia died, at
such time as he began to war against BERTOLD Duke of Zeringe, which then, and
before that time was, and had been, a great house in Germany: and his brother
CONRADE being dead without issue, the Emperor gave the Duchy of Sueuia to his
brother PHILIP, who (as I said) married the Emperors daughter of Constan.

After all these things, he sought by all means possible, that the Princes
Electors should choose his son FREDERICK (a child of little more then two
yeerrs old) for King of the Frederick the Emperors son being a child was chosen
king of the Romans.
Romans: and forasmuch as he was of great power, and much feared, they did so;
notwithstanding that it seemed to them, to be a matter very unjust and
unreasonable.

At this time Pope CELESTINE very earnestly solicited the Princes of
Christendom, and especially the Emperor (seeing that the time of the truce,
made in the East by the King of England was expired; and that the great
SALADINE was dead, but a little before, on whom depended the chiefest force of
the Infidels) that they should not now forget the conquest of Jerusalem, seeing
they had so fit an opportunity. The Emperor (with the zeal of a Christian
Prince, though a cruel one) seeing that he could not go himself in person,
by reason of his small assurance in his Kingdoms of Sicilia, and the
tranquillity of Germany: many Princes offering themselves to go that journey
voluntarily, and many soldiers and men of war, which he sent in his pay (at
his own charges) provided a very great and good Army: wherewith went the
Archbishop of Mentz, the Bishop of Ratisbone, BERNARD Duke of Saxony, CONRADE
Chauncellor of the Empire, LEOPOLD Duke of Austria, HARMAN Lantzgraue of
Turinge, the Duke of Brabant and some other Marquesses, Earls, and men of
estate; all which leaving their houses and countries, of mere devotion, with
valiant minds, after long travail by land and sea (wherein they were much
aided and relieved by ISACIVS Emperor of Constantinople) Another voyage to
Jerusalem.
came to the coast of Palestina, to the city of Tire and Ptolomaida, which
they called Acon; where they presently applied themselves to the wars; the
truce granted by the King of England being expired. In which time, GVIDO King
of Cyprus, who before had been King of Jerusalem, deceased; and forasmuch as he
had no son, his brother ALMERICVS had that kingdom: and it also happened,
that at that same season, HENRY, who was called king of Jerusalem, by the
marriage (as I said) of ISABEL sister to SIBIL, in his city of Ptolomaida fell
out of a very high terrasse or gallerie in his palace; and so died
unfortunately: and ALMERICVS king of Cyprus, sought to marry with his wife,
wherewith she was content; and so for a time he was called king of Cyprus and
Jerusalem. But for as much as he was negligent, and of small experience in the
wars, and in matters of government, he afterward lost the title of
Jerusalem, which was given to JOHN DE BREGNA, a Frenchman, being a man of great
worth and valor, who married the daughter of this ISABEL, which she had by her
second husband CONRADE. The Germans sent by the Emperor, joining with
ALMERICVS his forces, became masters of the field; and marching forwards,
besieged and assaulted some cities, took Berito, and reedified Ioppa, now
called Iapha.

While the Army did these things in the East, the Emperor HENRY setting all
things in order in Germany, came with his wife and his young son into Italy,
to visit his estate of Milan; and from thence went into Sicilia, the better to
confirm himself in his new Dominion; and the better also to provide for the
wars and conquest of the Holy land, which was generally desired. He came into
Sicilia, to the City of Messina, with his wife and his son, (who was already
called king of the Romans) and governed the Empire and those Kingdoms in
peace, enlarging the same more then the Pope would he should have done, for he
held from him the Marca de Ancona, and some places in Tuscane. But it pleased
God to frustrate all his dessigns by death: for being much delighted in
hunting; it happened, that hunting upon an extreme hot day, in the month of
August, he laid him down one night to sleep in a green field, near to
certain fresh springs of water: and awaking with the cold and the deaw of the
night, he felt himself very ill, and was carried to Messina, where his
infirmity increasing, he dyed; when he had reigned eight years, in the year
of our Lord 1198. having first recommended the protection and government of his
young son FREDERICK, who was called king of the Romans, and of the two
Sicilies, to his brother PHILIP Duke of Sueuia, until that he should come to
age fit to rule; and wrote his Letters concerning the same to Pope INNOCENT the
The death of the Emperor Henry the sixth.
third, who succeeded CELESTINE the third, who died a little before him in the
same year. This Emperor was a wise, a valiant, and a mighty Prince, but his
overmuch fierceness and cruelty blemished those virtues. All this while
reigned ISACIVS in Constantinople, which he governed very well for the space of
eleven or twelve years in peace; after the death of the tyrant ANDRONICVS, as
we have set down in the life of the Emperor FREDERICK.

THE LIFE OF PHILIP, THE SECOND OF THAT NAME, AND FOVRSCORE AND NINETEENTH
ROMAN EMPEROR; AND OF ISAGIVS AND ALEXVS Emperors of Constantinople.
THE ARGUMENT.
THE Emperor Henry being dead, the Empire was divided betwixt two competitors,
which were Philip and Otho: and either of them marshalling the forces of his
friends and assistants, many sore battles were fought between them. They both
were crowned: but Otho's coronation was ratified by the Pope, and Philip's
reproved, and himself excommunicate: but he making slight account of the
excommunication persisted in his attempt; and having in a bickering ouerthrown
the Lantzgraue, became very mighty; and Otho's power daily grew weak; and he
himself, in the end, was driven to fly, and to go into England. Philip
afterward sought to pacify the Pope, and to be at peace with him: and the
reconciliation being made, a Peace was procured with Otho. which was concluded
by making him his son in law, and his successor in the Empire: but this joy
lasted not long. For, Otho being comn to the Court, the Count Palatine of
Witilispach, who was Philip's secret enemy, upon a day (with a resolution to
kill him) came to his chamber, desiring to speak with him, and being let in;
he took his sword from his Page, and therewith slew the Emperor, when he had
reigned ten years.

IT is a common and usual thing through all the World, that after The death of
great Princes cause great alterations.
the death of great Kings and Princes, ensue great changes and alterations;
which is verified by the death of HENRY the sixth, whose History we have now
ended: for by reason thereof, followed great innouations, and unexpected
accidents. First in the Army which he sent into the East, to the conquest of
Jerusalem, and which had begun the war with good success, his death being
published, the Princes and Prelates which went thither agreed together in all
haste to return home to their houses, and did so; nothing prevailing with them
the counsel and entreaty of SIMON of Monferrato, a most excellent soldier,
who came thither with certain troops of Frenchmen to their aid: and so they
left the country abandoned, and in such necessity, as the Infidels taking the
City of Iapha, destroyed the same, and laid it even with the ground; and king
ALMERICVS and the Christians were brought to such extremity, as they were
driven to sue to the Infidels for peace: so as it appears, that it was not
Gods will that the wars and conquest of the Holyland should ever have any
good success.

In Germany followed the greatest tumults, wars and battails, touching the
choice of an Emperor, that ever had been seen for the like cause. Pope
INNOCENT began to recover some places which the Emperor HENRY held from the
Church. The Empress presently sued to the Pope, for the confirmation of
Sicilia to her and her son, which she hardly obtained, but with the loss of
lands and dignities. So great effect works oftentimes the absence, or
presence, of one man only: for PHILIP Duke of Sueuia, whose History I now
begin to write, was interrupted by his brothers death in Italy, he going to
visit him; from whence, as soon as he understood thereof (for as some authors
say he was not present when he died) he returned into Germany, and by the way
past many dangers, with an intent (notwithstanding that he had the title of his
Nephews Protector) to get (if he might) the Empire for himself: whereto,
being comn into Germany, as well by means of his estate and authority, as also
for that he was the brother and son of an Emperor, he found great favor, and
great contradiction and resistance also, by many Princes which were enemies to
his house and family, and for some other respects. Principally, the Electors
voices being divided into two, the one part named the same PHILIP for Emperor;
for of his nephew, by reason of his infancy, and also for Philip chosen Emperor.
that he was King of Sicilia (notwithstanding their promise made to his father)
they made small account: and the other party chose OTHO, Earl or Duke of
Bruinswick, the son of HENRY the Proud, who had been Duke of Saxony, and was
dispossessed (as we said) by the Emperor FREDERICK, wherefore some authors call
him Duke of Saxony: This OTHO'S mother Otho chosen Emperor.
was sister to the king of England, by whose means (as some say) he was called
to the Empire.

Between these two was cruel and sharp war and competency, having recourse
to their Arms: yet the Abbat WESPERG. says, that BERTOLD Duke of Zeringe,
before, or at the same time, was a third competitor, and was called Emperor:
but Duke BERTOLD'S challenge Bertold called Emperor.
continued not long, for he soon agreed with PHILIP; and for that most authors
write it not, I will pass it over, with the only remembrance thereof. PHILIP
and OTHO being in Arms, each of them with his partakers and friends, began to
war, killing, robbing and imprisoning one another.

OTHO was helped and supported by the King of England as his Uncle and friend,
and by the Lantzgraue of Turinge, the Count Palatine of the Rhine, the Duke of
Liconia, the Earl of Limburgh, the Archbishop of Colen, and his Prelates and
Suffraganes, the Earl of Flanders and his friends, and some other princes and
prelates: Pope INNOCENT also favored his cause, calling to mind that the
ancestors of this OTHO, Dukes of Saxony, had greatly assisted and defended the
Church of Rome: and to the contrary, PHILIP'S predecessors Dukes of Sueuia, had
persecuted the same, causing schisms and divisions; as HENRY the fourth,
FREDERICK the first, and his brother FREDERICK had also held many places in
Tuscane, and Ancona, belonging to the Church of Rome.

Those which took part with PHILIP, were the King of France, the Archbishop
of Mentz, the Dukes of Saxony, and of Austrich (who then came from the wars
in the East) the King of Bohemia, the Duke of Bauiere, the Dukes of Lorraine,
and of Brabant; and all the rest of the Princes which took not part with OTHO
(but yet the success changed these favors) and PHILIP for his person was
better beloved and more esteemd then OTHO, for he was mild, of a noble
disposition, discreet, and liberal (whereby good will is principally got) very
valiant, though but of a weak body, and of a mean stature; of a good
countenance, and fair, white and red.

OTHO had not so good parts of a man in him; for he was held not very wise,
rash, and without measure audacious. PHILIP having assembled his friends in the
City of Mentz, he was there anointed and crowned Emperor by the Bishop of
Tarantasia; the Bishop of Sutrino, who was the Popes Ambassador and Legate,
being there present, who came thither for another Philip crowned Emperor.
purpose; wherewith the Pope was extremely moved. OTHO and his friends,
perceiving that PHILIP was crowned, went to Aken, which PHILIP had already
taken; and besieging and scaling it, took the same upon composition: and there
ADOLPH Archbishop of Colen preposterously crowned him, and he therefore was
held for right Emperor: which coronation was afterward confirmed by Pope
INNOCENT, who sent GVIDO Cardinal of Otho crowned Emperor.
Preneste, for his Legate to the City of Colen, for the same purpose, and to
excommunicate PHILIP, and all his followers and abbetters. PHILIP (as a man of
great spirit) sought to fight with OTHO, and to that end entered his enemies
countries, destroying the same with fire and sword, and took some strong
Castles near to Argentine, where between his and OTHO'S troops, were many
skirmishes and encounters, and many men were slain of either side: and the
next year following he came against the same City of Argentine, which held for
OTHO; which yielded upon composition, and he was therein received and obeyed.

OTHO in like manner with all his whole power came against PHILIP: and between
the soldiers of the one and other, were some battles and skirmishes; wherein
PHILIP for the most part had the victory, which made some to come over to his
side: but yet the coming of the Popes Legate at this time, and the publishing
of the excommunication, did greatly hinder PHILIP'S proceedings, and was a
great help to OTHO, with the Prelates and ecclesiastical Personages. PHILIP
having the greatest quarrel against the Lantzgraue of Turinge, for that by his
means principally OTHO was chosen; he therefore resolved to enter his Country,
and to spoil it; and putting the same in execution, took one or two very strong
Towns of his. The Lantzgraue raising his power, and sending for help to the
Count Palatine of Rhine, and to OTHO CHARVS, King of Bohemia (who now joined
with OTHO, by reason of the Popes excommunication) and to other his friends and
kinsmen; levied so great a number of good men of war, that PHILIP, not daring
to fight with him, retired to a strong Town, wherein they besieged him: but he
used such means, that in the night he got out of the Town, and put himself in
safety. And within few days after came OTHO to the aid of the Lantzgraue with
his whole power, in hope to have taken PHILIP; for, they had written to him,
that he could not escape from the place wherein they held him besieged. So as
OTHO, being then Master of the field, summoned a Diet or Council to be held in
the City of Mersburgh, in the month of August, in the year of our Lord 1203:
where, in the presence of the before named Princes, and of his friends, he was
the second time crowned by the Popes Legate; and his first election was approved
and confirmed, and many revolted from PHILIP to him, by reason (as they
pretended) of the Popes censures.

At this time the Empress CONSTANCE, Tutresse of the young FREDERICK King of
Sicilia, dying, she recommended the protection of the child to Pope INNOCENT,
who sent certain Legates to govern those Countries in the behalf of the young
King; who afterward was Emperor, as you shall hear. OTHO his favorites and
partakers being gone from this Diet or Council with victory, the next year
following their fortune altered: for, PHILIP with the aid of France, Saxony,
Austria, Mentz, Wittembergh, Sueuia, Bauiere, and the rest of those which held
with him, came upon the Lantzgraue and his confederates; and entering his
Countries (as he had done the year before) took certain Castles. The King of
Bohemia and the Count Palatine came to ioin with the Lantzgraue, and so to
fight with PHILIP: but PHILIP met and fought with them before they could ioin
with the Lantzgraue, and obtained the victory, although bloody; the Bohemians
running away, and disordring themselves in the beginning, so as great slaughter
was made of them in the chase. PHILIP through this victory won so great The
Bohemians ouerthrowns.
reputation, that many of those which until then had been silent and neuters,
came to serve him; and from his enemy came not a few. And the Lantzgraue,
seeing his succors overthrown and scattered, and his Country spoiled, sought
means to come to some composirion with PHILIP, and to serve him: and PHILIP (as
he was a mild and courteous Prince) admitted him into his favor and
friendship; and the Lantzgraue with great humility came and yielded himself into
his power.

After him came ADOLPH, Archbishop of Colen; who nothing fearing the Popes
excommunications, against such as took part with PHILIP, or defended his
quarrel, compounded with him also, promising to bring the Dukes of Lorrain and
of Brabant to his devotion; a thing which PHILIP much desired, and gave him to
effect the same a great sum of money: which was the cause that many others
did the like. So as this party growing now to be strongest, a meeting was
appointed to be had in Aken: and for as much as PHILIP had not been crowned
there by a general assent, he was again with great solemnity crowned Emperor
and King of the Romans by the hands of the said Archbishop ADOLPH, who despised
and contemned his Popes censures: whereupon Pope INNOCENT deprived and deposed
him from his Archbishopric, and sent commandment to his Legate, who then lay
in Colen, to cause another to be chosen: and the Chanons assembling, made
choice of one BRVNVS, a man of great account; and OTHO took such order, that he
was presently consecrated by two Bishops that came from England: wherewith
PHILIP was so much enraged, that he presently went and set upon the City of
Colen; and not being able to take it by force, he spoiled the fields, and put
the deposed Archbishop in the possession of some Towns in the Marches and
Territories of that City; in so much that neither the one nor the other party
could rule or govern that Church.

The like happened afterward in many other Churches; some houlding of the one
faction, and others of the other: and miserable Germany at this time endured
grievous calamities; for, besides the great wars and battails, the Churches and
Monasteries were robbed.

After all this, the next year following, which was the year 1205, PHILIP, with
a great power of Princes and marshall men, came to make war upon OTHO, who
with his friends and allies was in Colen; with whom, amongst such orhers as
came thither, was GVIDO the Pope's Legate, and BRVNVS the Archbishop thereof.
And with PHILIP came the deposed Bishop: but OTHO, having no sufficient forces
to fight with him in field, held himself within the City, not daring to keep
the field against him; which, PHILIP perceiving, he sent for all the forces he
could levy, and besieged OTHO, and those which were with him in Colen: so as
OTHO was in greater distress than he thought of in the beginning; and the
siege was so sharp, that it was impossible for any man to get in or out without
the leave of the besiegers.

OTHO knowing that if he stayed any longer there, besides the reputation which
he lost, his person and life would be in great danger, resolved to make way
through his enemies, or to die in the action: and making choice of his best men,
both of horse and foot, besides men of account, he one day suddenly salied and
charged into his enemies Camp, and in the beginning made great slaughter of
them; but being oppressed with the multitude, he used the means he had
propounded, and so escaped by flight: yet in the chase, many of those which
salied with him were taken prisoners and slain. Among which, BRVNVS the new
Archbishop was taken prisoner, whom PHILIP held in irons above one whole year
after: and in this flight, OTHO never stayed till he came into Saxony, where
he was harbored and protected by Duke BERNARD. PHILIP, thus prevailing,
offered so honorable a composition to those of Colen, that they yielded, and
came all to his service; and restoring ADOLPH to his seat and Bishopric, he
wholly disannulled and made void the new election of BRVNVS, without any regard
of the Pope's commandments.

OTHO perceiving that PHILIP'S power did daily more and more increase, and that
he had not any forces wherewith he might defend himself, took ship and sailed
into England: and so for that time remained PHILIP peaceful Emperor, finding
no man that in field made any resistance, but what the Pope did with his
fulminations, whereof (as it seems) he made small account. And the better to
assure to himself the love of men (he naturally desiring to end matters by
clemency) he gave his eldest daughter in marriage to the King of Bohemia, and
another daughter to the Duke of Brabant's eldest son: and so upon other
Princes he bestowed favors and benefits; wherein (as says the Abbat
WESPERGENSIS) he spent his whole patrimony, giving Towns and Castles, yea,
Churches and their revenues: for, so much do men desire to reign, that, to
bring the same to effect, there is no law but they will break and violate; yea,
and they think they may lawfully do it: which may well and sufficiently be
proved by such matters as passed in these times in the Empire of
Constantinople; which, for that they make to our purpose and history, I will
here briefly recite, although so great accidents require a long relation: and
so for a while we will leave OTHO fled and banished into England, and PHILIP to
enjoy his victory.

In Constantinople then reigned ISAC or ISACIVS (of whom we have made mention)
as a just Prince and good Governor; who with a great sum of money redeemed a
brother of his, a valiant and excellent Captain, called ALEXVS, who in the wars
was taken prisoner by the Turks: to whom after his coming to his Court (besides
the Lands and estate allowed him for his maintenance) he gave so great
authority and command in the government, that all matters of greatest
importance were ordered by his direction; and he being in this favor, the
devil, ambition, and desire to reign, possessed him; so as, to bring his
purpose to effect, he resolved to break all laws both divine and humane,
together with the bands wherein he stood bound to his soueraign Lord and
brother: for, in requital of the benefits received, with the help and
assistance of such as himself, he apprehended his brother, and put out his
eyes, and seized upon the Empire to his own behoof: and a son of ISACIVS,
called after his treacherous Uncles name, ALEXVS, fled, and came into Germany
to the Emperor PHILIP, whose wife YRENE was this young man's sister: but as
PHILIP was not so firmly seated in his Empire, as to be able to succor and
relieve another, by reason of his wars with OTHO, so he could not then do as
he would have done.

At that time by chance (or else it was Gods will it should be so) were in
Venice, BALDVVIN Noblemen in Venice.
Earl of Flanders, and his brother HENRY; and BONIFACE Marquess of Monferrato;
L^VVES Earl of Sauoy; and other Noble Personages, with many soldiers and men
of war; induced to meet there, by Pope INNOCANT, for the conquest of Jerusalem
and the holy Land: where they staid for shipping to go on their voyage; whither
came, recommended to them by the Emperor PHILIP, this young ALEXVS. Whereupon
these Princes (by the consent of the Duke and Senate of Venice, and of the
Pope) concluded to go against the Tyrant ALEXVS: whereto the Venecians gave
great aid, sending an Admiral with a great fleet. The league and accord being
made with the Nephew ALEXVS; he promised, that being restored, he would reduce
the Greek Church to the obedience of the Latin; and many other matters in
recompense: and so they departed with a good and prosperous wind. And omitting
such accidents as befell them in their voyage (wherein they took the I Will of
Creta, now called Candia, and other places) it was so, that they arrived near
to the City of Constantinople, where the Tyrant ALEXVS in a readiness awaited
their coming, with a very great number of soldiers; and they, setting their
men on land, had a battle with T^EODORE LASCARVS the Tyrant's sonne-in-law,
who salied forth with an Army to fight with them: and he being overthrown,
they pursued him to the gates of the City, which they besieged both by sea and
land.

At the end of eight days which they had been there (wherein were many brave
skirmishes and fierce encounters) the Tyrant ALEXVS, seeing that he could not
preuail, fled out of the City by night; and after him followed the most part of
his accomplices: and the next day, the Citizens opening the Ports, took the
blind Emperor ISACIVS out of prison, and with him went forth to the Camp;
where very willingly they took the son to be Emperor, together with the
father: and he was with great solemnity received into the City, and crowned in
the Church of Saint SOPHIA, in the presence of all the Latin Captains;
wherewith the blind father was greatly recomforted; and it seemed that all
went well, and to the contentment of all men: and the Knights and Commanders of
the Latins, to avoid the scandals which might arise between their people and
the citizens, went to their Tents in the Camp.

In the mean while that the new Emperor and his father made payment to the
Venecians of what they had promised, and had accomplished the same, the Greeks
greatly murmuring for the natural hatred which they bare against the Latins,
the blind Emperor ISACIVS died; and then presently began new scandals and
tumults in the City, they all exclaiming against the promises made by the young
ALEXVS to the Latins; and alleging that they ought not to be performed, put
themselves in Arms against them: but yet the new Emperor desired to have
thoroughly accomplished the same. Yet some Authors lay this breach to his
charge; saying, that he would not hold his word. Finally, the matter fell so
out, that the tumult infinitely increasing, one MIRTILLVS, who had been a
Favorite of the Emperor ISACIVS (being the chief occasion of this mutiny, and
whom the Greeks chose for their General, calling him Emperor) went to the
Palace where the new Emperor ALEXVS was, and with his own hand slew him,
within one month after his coronation: and the new vpstart Traitor MIRTILLVS
was set in his place, who presently studied how he might set the fleet of the
Venecians, and of the Princes of the Latins, on fire, and to cut off all
victuals from them, and by assaulting them in their lodgings, to have
overthrown and defeated them; but the effect ensued after another manner: for,
after many skirmishes, slaughters, and effusion of much blood (which for
breuity I omit) the Latins had the victory, the Tyrant fled, and they were
Lords of the City, together with all the country round about it. And forasmuch
as the Empire was without any lawful successor, and that they had made a
conquest thereof, by a general consent they resolved to choose an Emperor; and,
making among themselves fifteen Electors, BALDVVIN Earl of Flanders was chosen
and created Emperor, and for such was sworn, received and obeyed: and the
Patriarch, THOMAS MOROSINI, a Venecian Gentleman, presently went unto Rome,
where his Prelacy, and the Emperor's election, and all the rest, was approved
and confirmed by the Pope; and he with his own hands invested him, and gave to
him for the Emperor the Imperial Ensigns.

This great attempt being achieved by these Captains, according to their first
agreement they divided what they had gotten; and the Islands of Creta, now
Candia, and Euboea now Negrepont, were given to the Venecians, which they have
held unto this day: and for as much as the I Will of Candia was first given to
BONIFACE, Marquess of Monferrato; the Country of Thessalia, which is a
Province of Macedonia, was given him, with the title of King; with other
rewards and shares given to other Princes, as well in the Islands, as in the
Maine; of which remained estates, and houses, which I omit: and so the Empire
continued BALDVVIN'S and his successors, for the space of more then 60. years;
with such adventures, as you shall hear hereafter: but Adrianople rebelling,
defending it self all this while; THEODORE LASCARVS the Emperor ALEXVS son in
law, who (as we said) salied out to fight with the Latins, being gotten into
the same. The new Emperor, BALDVVIN, besieged that City, and died before it,
and his brother HENRY succeeded him in the Empire: the rest you shall understand
when the turn comes.

Now let us return to our story of PHILIP Emperor of Germany, whom we left
victorious; and to OTHO fled into England: yet let the Reader remember and
abhor the treasons of ALEXVS and MIRTILLVS; whereof the one put out the eyes
of his own brother; and the other murdered his sovereign Lord: and let him
consider what ends they had, and therewith, how little stabilitie and assurance
there is in the Empires and principalities of this world; and with how unjust
titles they are oftentimes gotten and possessed; of all which, there has been
a sufficient and apparent example, in that which has now been spoken of the
Greek Empire. The Emperor PHILIP having expelled OTHO out of Germany, he and
his followers imagined that their adversaries should not be able any more to
molest him: nevertheless in regard of peace, he being in disgrace with the
Church of Rome; by the advice of the Princes which were assembled for that
purpose, sent his Ambassadors to the Pope, excusing his doings, alleging the
equity of his cause, entreating him to establish some peace in the Empire, to
absolve him, and to confirm his election; and therewith yielded himself to his
obedience. The Pope hearing the Embassage, gave also ear to the treaties, and
sent, for his Ambassadors, Cardinals, Legates of great account, to the
Emperor, to treat of a peace: which being come, and with much honor
received; among other motions, one was, that the Emperor should marry a
daughter which he had, to RICHARD the Popes Nephew; and should give him
therewith the estates of Spoleto in Tuscane, and the Marca de Ancona, which
belonged to the Church of Rome, and were in the Emperors possession.

This motion (as says ABBAS WESPERGENSIS) was made by the Emperor, by that
mean to win the Popes grace and favor: yet some attribute it to the Pope.
These and many other matters were motioned, and there were many meetings of
Princes; whither his competitor OTHO also sent his Ambassadors; and afterward
came out of England into Saxony in person: And of the one side and of the
other, many demands and offers were made (the Cardinals Legates being vmpiers
and mediators between them) in the end, in a general meeting which was held in
a Town on the borders of Saxony, OTHO being in a Castle near unto it,
security being given by either party, a general peace was concluded, upon
condition that OTHO should marry with the daughter of the Emperor PHILIP, and
be held for king of the Romans, and future Emperor after the decease of PHILIP:
Which agreement was confirmed and sworn, and a general pardon was given by one
to the other, and the Pope dispensed with their near enesse of blood; and all
such as were excommunicate, were absolved by the Popes Legates: and so all was
in peace and quiet, and OTHO remained the Emperors son in law, and heir
apparent, and for such was presently sworn, and the Legates returned to Rome:
All which passed in the year of our Lord 1207, wherewith all men were very
glad and well contented, hoping that it would have long continued; for PHILIP
was an exceeding liberal and courteous Prince, and dearly beloved generally
of all men. But it otherwise happened: for the year following, the Emperor
being in the Town of Bambergh, for the recovery of his health; OTHO Count
Palatine Witilspach, who had been his deadly enemy (and was so still in secret)
came to the Emperors court, showing himself publicly to be his loyal
servant. His coming (as it afterward appeared) was but to practice the
Emperors death, and as a traitor to kill him, which PHILIP nothing suspected.

The Emperor being one day after dinner in his chamber reposing himself upon
his bed, for that he finding himself somewhat ill, had been let blood that day;
the Count Palatine called at his chamber door, accompanied with some which
were acquainted with his pretense: and the Emperor understanding who he was,
made the door to be opened, notwithstanding that none were with him but his
Chancellor the Bishop of Spire, and a page which waited on his Cup, called
HENRY of Wilspurch, without any weapons: the Count Palatine at his entrance,
imagining the time now fit for him to execute his devilish intent and treason,
at the door took his sword from a page which carried the same; and suddenly
drawing it, before that the Bishop orpage could rescue him, wounded the
Emperor in the throat: which wound, although it The death of the Emperor
Philip.
were not great, yet it was mortal, and he presently died thereof, the organe
pipes being cut. The Page, making a loud outcrie, would have shut the door,
to the intent that the Count Palatine should not have gotten forth: but he gave
him a sore wound over the face, and opening the door departed: and joining with
the Bishop of Bambergh, and the Marquess of Histria, which were his
confederats in this treason, they al together fled from the Court, upon poast
horses which they had laid for that purpose.

This murder was committed upon the 22. day of June, in the year of our Lord
1208. in the tenth year of this Emperors reign. Great was the tumult which
grew hereof, and the concourse of the people which ran to the Emperors
chamber: who finding him dead, made great moan and lamentation for him (for he
was a Prince well beloved, for the nobleness and liberality of his mind) all
men abhorring the Count Palatines treason: for which he escaped not unpunished;
for he was slain by the Emperors steward HENRY, in revenge of his Lords death.
The Emperor PHILIP had never any son, but four daughters then married, one
with OTHO the King of the Romans, when the peace was made between them, which
OTHO succeeded him: and another with the King of Bohemia, another with the Duke
of Brabants eldest son, and the fourth with RICHARD Earl of Tuscane; nephew
to Pope INNOCENT. In Constantinople reigned HENRY the brother of BALDVVIN, of
whom we of late made mention.

THE LIFE OF OTHO, THE FIFTH OF THAT NAME, AND HVNDRETH ROMAN EMPEROR.
THE ARGUMENT.
AFter the death of the Emperor Philip, Otho without any contradiction was
taken for Emperor; and, notwithstanding that he was chosen for his successor in
Philips time, it pleased the Electros to choose him anew: and he being
confirmed, was crowned by the Bishop of Colen. After the ceremonies were ended,
he applied himself to persecute the murderers of Philip; and notwithstanding
that he was well pleased with his death, nevertheless he made this show of
revenge. He came afterward to be crowned in Rome: but a great tumult arising
between his people and the citizens, he departed in choler with the Pope, and
made war upon him; so as the Pope excommunicated him; and deprived him of the
Empire. Whereupon, many Princes of Germany, denying him their obedience, chose
another Emperor, which was Frederick, King of Sicilia: and although that Otho
sought by many means to recover the Empire, yet he could never attain thereto;
and so died a private Lord in Saxony, when he had reigned five years.

BY how much PHILIP was a better Emperor then his competitor OTHO, it was not
long before the same According to the Germane Emperors this Otho should be the
fourth: but holding the ordinary course he was the Fist of that name.
OTHO made it apparent; notwithstanding that in the beginning he gave some
signs to the contrary: so as we may hold the old proverb to be true, which
says, that Authority will manifest a man. As soon as the violent death of
PHILIP was published, the agreement being yet fresh in memory, that OTHO
should succeed him; by common consent he was held for Emperor: yet he held not
the dignity long, being cast down by the Popes sentence which had raised him:
and notwithstanding that in the life time of PHILIP he had been twice crowned,
nevertheless the princes, electors (according to the ancient custom) met at
Frauckford; and he being there chosen again went to Aken, and there was
crowned by the Archbishop of Colen, although with some delay; for the
Archbishop of Spire, who was Chauncellor to the late Emperor PHILIP, and was
present (as we said) when he was flaine, had lodged himself in a very strong
Castle; and would not deliver the Scepter, the Cross, the Crown, and the
Imperial ensigns, which remained in his custody; except he were first
confirmed in his office of Chauncellor: whereupon the new Emperor confirmed
him; and so was crowned peaceably with great solemnity: which being ended,
Pope INNOCENT'S Legates came to him (who had ever been his friend) to
congratulate his election, and to approve and confirm the same (...)the
coming of which Legates, the Emperor attended in the city of Hiperboli; and
they delivered their ambassade, and treated of other matters concerning the
general peace and public good: and offered the Emperor in the behalf of the
Pope, that if he would come to Rome, the Pope would crown him with his own
hands, as his predecessors had done.

OTHO having dispatched these Legates, he took his way toward Sueuia, to take
possession thereof, in the right of his wife the Emperor PHILIP'S daughter;
with whom, at the conclusion of the peace he was married; and to whom (he said)
that state did appertain: yet FREDERICK King of Sicilia, PHILIPS nephew, who
afterward was Emperor, was called Duke of Sueuia; and was so afterward. OTHO
coming into Sueuia (protesting his coming thither to be, to quiet the
troubles, by suppressing robberies and violences committed in that country;
much whereof he redressed) gave so ill entertainment and countenance to the
Earls, Barons, and Gentlemen of that great Duchy, that many of them abandoned
the country; and he made himself to be generally ill beloved: yet there
wanted not some, which to flatter him, commended his doings (a thing which
makes Kings and Princes most to err, and to continue in their errors). And
within few days after he went to Augsburgh, which is in the same province;
whither he summoned the Princes to come; and with their consent he proceeded
against OTHO, Count Palatine of Witilspach, (who murdered the Emperor PHILIP)
and against such as were his accomplices in the murder: all which were
condemned, being absent, as guilty of high treason, and were deprived of all
the dignities, goods and lands which they possessed; of which, some he bestowed
upon others, and part he confisked to the chamber of the Empire. And
notwithstanding that all men presumed that he was well pleased with the death
of PHILIP, yet he inflicted this punishment; and outwardly made show of much
sorrow for the same: and some were of opinion that the Count Palatine murdered
the Emperor PHILIP, in hope that his successor OTHO would have rewarded him
for the fact. But whatsoever any man thought, he did as I say, and well might
he be pleased with his death; and displeased with the treason. By means of
this punishment, and for righting some other wrongs; he began in many men's
opinion to be reputed a good Emperor, and a great Iusticer: yet amongst men of
the better sort he was blamed, for the oppression which he used, both in Sueuia
and in other places: but in the beginning he was without contradiction obeyed
of all men.

Few days after this, in the month of March, in the year 1209, he summoned
a general Parliament or Diet, to be held in the city of Haguena; where the
principal point that was handled, was but how to get aid and relief from the
Princes and estates of the Empire, toward his journey into Italy, to be
crowned in Rome: and it was concluded, that he should do so; and many offered
him their service, and to accompany him in that journey: and so he, and they
which were to go with him, levied their forces, and put themselves in a
readiness, with such expedition that in the beginning of July following, they
all met in the city of Augsburgh; from whence he took his way toward Italy:
first leaving his wife the Empress in Saxony, in the city of Branschaiel,
which was his inheritance; which, with other towns, he held and defended,
being part of the estate of HENRY the proud, when he was deposed; and
descending down through the valleys of Trent, he went directly to Verona;
where he was received and obeyed as A Council held by the Emperor in Bologna.
their Lord: and from thence went to Milan, and by other cities of Lombardy, to
Bologna; whither he summoned the cities of Lombardy, and all the towns and
cities subject to the Empire in Italy, to come to a Council: wherein he was so
fortunate, that all obeyed, and came at his summons peaceably, and furnished
him with men and money for his journey; and many Earls and Barons accompanied
him in person, in such sort, that he departed thence very strong toward Rome;
where Pope INNOCENT attended his coming, and he and all his Nobles which came
with him, were there received with great joy, and he himself was crowned in S.
PETER'S Church by the Pope; who had much desired to see that day, persuading
himself that he should have had a great friend of him, seeing that he had ever
procured his greatness against the Emperor PHILIP: and the Emperor, after the
accustomed manner, swear obedience to the Church of Rome, and to enlarge, and
not to usurp the patrimony thereof: which he afterward hardly performed.

The same day, between his soldiers, which remained in his Camp near to the
walls of Rome (part whereof were come to see the city) and the citizens,
arose so great a tumult and bickering, that abou a thousand of the Emperors
men were slain; wherewith he was very much incensed; and so was the Pope, who
indeed was his friend: And seeing that greater inconveniences were likely to
have ensued, he departed, and came directly to Milan with his Army, accusing
and blaming the Pope for what had passed; and in Milan he was received and
obeyed, and lay there all the winter, which was very tempestuous. Leaving there
his Imperial ensigns (wherewith the Milanois held themselves greatly
honored) reinforcing his Army (for that he had discharged a great part
thereof) he departed in the Spring, to make a conquest of the Church lands;
first in the province of Tuscane, where he took many places: and thence he went
into the Marca de Ancona, where he did the like, and could not be resisted: and
from thence it was thought that he would have made war in the territory of
Rome, and have besieged The Emperor made wars against the Pope.
the city. The Pope sent his Legates unto him, putting him in mind of the
favors and good offices which he had done him; and to require and admonish him
to desist from his enterprise: but the Emperor making no account thereof,
leaving garrisons in those towns, marched toward the kingdom of Naples, and
began to make war against FREDERICK king of Sicilia: and took (the young King
mistrusting no such matter) the city of Capua, and many others in those
quarters: wherewith the Pope was no less displeased then with the former, but
rather more, for that he held those kingdoms as feodatorie to the Church of
Rome; and also for that the Pope had the protection and government of the young
King: so that the Pope, seeing that all his Ambassages and admonitions
prevailed not, resolved to use a more violent course, proceeding against him by
censures and excommunications, and by his Letters and messengers excommunicated
him through all Italy and Germany: and he also excommunicated all such as
followed him, or did him service: which excommunications some prelates obeyed;
wheruepon new troubles began. But the Emperor regarded it not, but was rather
therewith the more incensed, and prospered well in the war, taking all Pulia,
and Calabria; and placing garrisons in the Castles and fortresses, made account
to have bin King thereof. Whereupon the Pope levied soldiers, and fortified
the city of Rome, fearing to have been besieged; and again sent into Germany,
to proclaim and publish the Emperor for deprived; and to release his subjects
from the homage and faith which they ought him. CARRION writes, that Pope
INNOCENT the Third seeing that all Italy in a manner had yielded voluntarily
unto OTHO, and fearing that the Popes power and command would be thereby much
shortened and restrained, for that he could not so suddenly repulse the victor by
Arms, he flew to the weapon of excommunication, in which alone (whilst that
superstition swayed and ouerruled men's consciences) they reposed all their
safety. This, being fearful to men grownded in superstition, not only
expelled, OTHO out of all Italy, but utterly overthrew him and ruined him; the
Princes of Germany being persuaded by the Archbishop of Mentz (who was the
chief Instrument of the Popes tyranny in Germany, and the executioner of his
unjust decrees) to reject OTHO, and to send for FREDERICK the son of HENRY,
to whom they had promised the Empire being a child before PHILIP and OTHO.
OTHO being advertised hereof, and that the Archbishop of Mentz, the Lantzgraue
of Turinge, and some others, claue to the Pope; and that there were both
private and public treaties and practices against him, with the King of
Bohemia, the Duke of Austria, and other Princes, he was much afraid: and
leaving garrisons in such places as he had taken, in great haste he left the
kingdom of Naples, and marching by long iourneys, came into Germany, in the
year of our Lord 1212, and called a Council in the city of Norimbergh; in
which Council it was decreed, that he should make war against the Archbishop
of Mentz, and the Lantzgraue of Turinge: and so the war began, and was very
cruel.

At this time died his wife the Empress, daughter to the Emperor PHILIP.
Notwithstanding all this, HARMAN Lantzgraue of Turinge, SIFRIDE Archbishop of
Mentz, the King of Bohemia, the Duke of Austria, the Archbishop of Treuier, and
others which resolved to take Arms with them, and to obey the Popes censures,
and to deny their obedience to the Emperor; taking the Popes advice in the
matter, who in all interposed his authority, chose FREDERICK King of Sicilia
for Emperor; who was but a youth, little more then eighteen years old: and
sent their Ambassadors unto him, with their authority, soliciting him to come
into the Empire; alleging that in right he was and ought to be Emperor, for
that he was chosen and sworn King of the Romans, in the time of his father
HENRY the Sixth: the like reason they gave to the other Princes in Germany:
whereat Pope INNOCENT greatly rejoiced, and in word and deed approved the same.
OTHO herewith was very much troubled, and seeking means to defend his estate,
made terrible wars against his adversaries. The Germane Ambassadors were
well received by the King of Sicilia, who was in great doubt to undertake so
great an enterprise; but being persuaded by them, and by the French Kings
Letters (who was Frederick king of Sicilia chosen Emperor.
OTHO'S enemy, for his strict alliance to the house of England) he consented
thereto, and was called Emperor.

FREDERICK having in this manner accepted the Empire; he first applied himself
to recover such towns as OTHO had taken from him in the Kingdom of Naples;
which being done, with the greatest power he could raise, he took his way
toward Germany; and in his journey went to kiss the Popes foot, and to
entreat him that he might be crowned Emperor of the Romans, seeing that he
was called and chosen: but the Pope resolved him that his request could not be
granted, for that thereby the ancient custom in the election and coronation
of Emperors should be perverted: and so encouraging him to proceed in his
enterprise, he sent his Legate with him, to be present at his Coronation in
Germany; and therein to use his authority, and to proceed against such as were
disobedient, or rebelled against him. Herewith the Emperor elect continued his
journey; wherein, the cities of Pauia and Cremona, and some other, aided and
assisted him; Milan and the rest being against him.

Finally, with much trouble and danger he arrived at the city of Constance in
Germany, whither many men of war repaired to him, together with some Princes
which were of his faction: which, OTHO understanding, as he was very valiant,
so with the greatest power he could levy he went to that city, thinking to
have been able to have either slain or overthrown this new Emperor FREDERICK:
but the men of war which he brought with him, daily forsook him and went
over to FREDERICK; in such sort, that seeing himself abandoned, he retired
into his country: and FREDERICK, very mighty, and accompanied with a great
Army, marched along the river of Rhine, to the city of Mentz; where many
prelates and Princes were assembled; all forsaking OTHO, holding him for
deprived, in perfourmance of the Pope and his Legates commandment: amongst
which, thither came the Archbishops and Bishops of Mentz, Treuier, Colen,
Constance, Basil, Spire, Hiperboli, the King of Bohemia, the Lantzgraue of
Turinge, the Count Palatine of Rhine, besides those which were already come
with him; from whence, after the handling and concluding of many matters,
FREDERICK departed toward Aken, where he was crowned with the first crown, in
the presence of the Popes Legate, Frederick crowned with the first crown in
Aken.
who approved and confimed his election; and so he attained to the Empire: and
for his better assurance in that estate, he procured peace and a league with
PHILIP, then King of France.

The Emperor OTHO seeing himself in Saxony thus forsaken, got from England,
and other parts, such forces as he could, and came into the country of
Guelders, where he made cruel war, for that it held with FREDERICK; and
from thence, together with the Earl of Flanders, who was of that faction (for
that he married with IOANE daughter to BALDVVIN Earl of Flanders, which held
the Empire of Constantinople, and at that time joined with England against
France, and with the Earl of Bologna in France who had rebelled) they went to
join with the King of Englands forces, to fight with the French King (which
OTHO did for the alliance between him and the house of England) thinking, by
overthrowing the King of France, who was enemy to them both, he should be
restored to his Empire. But his conceits deceived him: for the King of France
came and fought a battle with them, near to the city of Tournay; which is
recorded to have been very bloody and cruel, wherein the French king was in
great danger to have been slain by the Emperor OTHO, who dismounted him: but
he being rescued, encouraging his people, obtained the victory; and OTHO
escaped by flight, but the Earl of Flanders was taken prisoner, and some other
principal men: and OTHO in the best manner that he could got into Saxony;
void of all hope to recover the Empire, when he had bin Emperor the space of
five years, and they not fully expired; and there with sorrow and anguish he
ended his days. How long he lived after that he was deposed, authors write
not: but true it is, that his reign as Emperor, ended in the year of our
Lord 1213.

In Constantinople (as writes BLONDVS) the same day that OTHO was ouerthrown,
HENRY (brother to the Greek Emperor BALDVVIN) died; who being Earl of
Flanders obtained that Empire; and having made war with the Duke of Walachia
(which is part of the ancient Dacia) he made a peace with him, marrying
himself with his daughter, and he gave his own daughter to PETER, Earl
ALTISIODORENSIS: and he (as I said) dying at this time without any heir, the
said Earl PETER had the Empire, and came afterward to Rome, and was crowned
by the Pope.

In the time of the Emperor OTHO (by whose aid, and the assistance of HENRY
Emperor of Constantinople, an excellent French captain, called JOHN de Bregna,
had the kingdom of the East, with the title of King of Jerusalem; being called
thereto, only for the valor of his person; marrying him with the daughter of
ISABEL, to whom that kingdom appertained, as is aforesaid) the Captains and
masters of those parts denied their obedience to ALME^ICVS King of Cyprus, of
whom particular mention has bin made. And so JOHN de Bregna had that kingdom,
of whom we must of necessity speak hereafter: for which cause we remember him
in this place.

THE LIFE OF FREDERICK, THE SECOND OF THAT NAME, AND THE HVNDRETH AND FIRST
ROMAN EMPEROVR.
THE ARGUMENT.
FRederick having obtained the Empir, made a solemn vow to go to the wars
of the Holy land; and coming to be crowned in Italy, was earnestly persuaded
thereto by the Pope; whereupon he entered into the Croisade; and deferring his
going, many Lords went into the East without him. In the mean tim^ there grew
discord between him and the Pope, for that he withheld certain lands belonging
to the Church, anlfor deposing certain Bishops from their Bishoprics in
Sicilia, and placing others at his pleasure; upon which occasions the Pope
proceeded against him with his pontifical Arms, and excommunicated him: But
the King of Jerusalem coming afterward into Italy, and giving the Emperor,
his daughter to wife; he was absolved, and he again promised to go to the
wars in the East: but delaying the time, and finding daily new occasions to
defer his going, he was in the end again excomunicate; by reason whereof he
resolved to go: but being arrived in the East, he procured an agreement with
the Sultan, and obtained the city of Jerusalem, and therein was crowned: but
this satisfied not the Pope, neither the Christian Princes; and then he
returned into Europe with small reputation, and went into Germany, where his
son (through his Fathers absence) had taken upon him very great authority,
whereof grew some suspicions between them, which were soon ended;
nevertheless, the Emperor coming into Italy (by reason of Lombardy) and
finding that his son was his enemy, he causing him to be apprehended, made
him to die in prison: and bending his forces against Lombardy, principally
against Milan, he used such rigor, that the Pope became his open enemy; and
calling a Council to be held in Lions in France, he excommunicated him, and
induced the electors to choose a new Emperor: which was the Lantzgraue Henry,
who lived but a while after, and then the Earl of Holland was chosen, against
whom his son Conrade continually warred, although with no great success. But
Frederick being in Italy, seeking to be revenged of certain Cities which
rebelled, and seeing that his enemies became daily more mighty, by reason of an
Overthrow given him, he with drew himself with dishonor into Pulia, where
falling sick he dyed (as it was thought) through the practice of his base
son Manfrede, when he had held the Empire, about five and thirty years.

IN such manner as I have declared, had this second FREDERICK the Empire, and
therewith the Duchy of Sueuia; having first been King of Naples, Sicilia and
Sardinia, and held the same the space of thirty and odd years, with great
reuolutions, wars, battails and troubles, as you shall hear: wherefore I must
spend more time in writing the history of his life, than of some others. He was
at no less variance with the Church o^ Rome, than the other FREDERICK his
Grandfather was before him; and it now seemed to be an hereditary malady,
through which the Emperors and the Popes never failed to be at contention and
discord; for the Popes would uphold their Supreme Authority, their Lands also
and Patrimony; whose only study and care was to make all old Italy which is
divided from Lombardy by the river of Rubicon, subject to the City of Rome,
from whence they had excluded the Emperors; The Popes knowing that what they
attempted, they should never attain unto, nor long maintain the authority
which they had gotten, unless they should suppress the Emperors growing power
in Italy, neither could the wars be ever pacified, until they had gotten all
they desired, or wrested away part: Neither did they as Popes do in these
days, enrich their kinsfolks with the goods of the Church, but to settle and
enlarge their dominion. This CARRION writes, and this experience has seen
verified.

The Emperors after they had obtained the Empire, and were established in their
thrones, pretending that all the jurisdiction and supreme power in temporal
causes, both in Germany and in Italy appertained to them, could therefore
endure no superiority; and there wanted not men of either side to persuade them
that they had reason: and sometimes ambition and covetousness Discord betwixt
the Pope and the Emperor.
of either side were the occasions of the miseries before mentioned, and of
such as we will relate.

FREDERICK seeing himself freed from his adversary OTHO; the better to
justify his title and reign, caused a new assembly and meeting to be held of
the Princes of the Empire, and of the deputies of the Imperial Cities, and
went to Aken, where he caused himself to be the second time crowned with great
solemnity; and then he made a public solemn vow, within a certain time to
go in person to the wars and conquest of the City of Jerusalem, for
Frederick the second time crowned.
the victory which God had given him: and in requital of the aid and favor
received from Pope INNOCENT, he gave for ever to the Church of Rome the City
and County of Fundi; with all which the Pope was very glad.

After this coronation, FREDERICK went through sundry provinces, and making
himself absolute Lord thereof, brought them to his obedience as to their
Emperor. And for as much as HENRY Duke of Brabant had not yet done him homage,
he with all the speed possible, with a great Army, marched into that province:
and the Duke seeing himself in danger, sought his favor, offering to obey, and
to do him service, and was admitted, he giving his son and other Noble men of
his house, for hostages and assurance thereof. Few days after this (by the
Emperors consent) Pope INNOCENT called a general Council in the City of
Rome, whither came from all parts of Christendom, Greek and Latin, the
Patriarchs of Iarusalem and Constantinople, threescore and ten Archbishops
Metropolitanes, four hundred and twelve Bishops, eight hundred and odd Priors
and Abbats couentuall; and Ambassadors from the Emperor FREDERICK and King of
Sicilia, from the Emperor of Constantinople, from the A Council held by the
Pope in the city of Rome
Kings of France, England, Spain, Arragon, Hungary, Cyprus and Jerusalem; and
from other Kings and Princes: in which Council were condemned certain sects
newly risen in France; but the chiefest matter that therein was handled, was
for the wars and conquest of the City of Jerusalem, whereto they all gave
their consent, promising aid and assistance. The Pope sent his Leters into all
parts of Christendom, inciting all men to this holy war: granting large
Indulgences and Pardons to such as dyed in that action: and all such as gave
their names to go to that war, took for their device the sign of the Cross
of Jerusalem, which they ware upon their garments, and were called Croisats.
And so an infinite number of men, and many Princes took the same: amongst
which in Germany the Emperor FREDERICK took it, and HENRY Duke of Brabant, the
Duke of Morauia, the Duke of Iuliers, the Count Palatine of Tubingen, the
Marquess of Baden, the Earl of Nassao, the Duke of Limburgh and other Princes;
with the Archbishop of Mentz, and many other Bishops: and in France, were many
which prepared and armed themselves for this expedition, which afterward took
no such effect as the preparation seemed to prognosticate. Amongst other
matters, the great wars between the Pisans and the Genoayes (then two mighty
common wealths by sea) was a great let and hinderance; wherefore the Council
being ended (which was one of the most famous that ever had been) the Pope went
from Rome to Perugia, that by his authority he might settle some peace or truce
between these two Commonwealths; where, within few days, without concluding
ought, he died, having The death of Pope Innocent and the election of Honorius.
governed the Church of Rome eighteen years and a half. He being dead, HONORIVS
the Third was chosen, who in the beginning of his Papacy crowned PETER and his
wife, Emperor of Constantinople; who (as I have heertofore told you) succeeded
his father-in-law HENRY.

While these matters passed, the Emperor FREDERICK applied himself to settle
and confirm his estate in the Empire; and to provide for his coming into
Italy to be crowned in Rome, defering his journey to Jerusalem until this were
done. But Pope HONORIVs (having a prophecy revealed unto him, importing that
in his time the City of Jerusalem, should be recovered) used all means
possible to cause those which had undertaken the same to depart A voyage into
the holy land.
into the East, and never ceased to urge the Emperor FREDERICK to accomplish
the vow which he had made; threatening him with censures if he performed not the
same: but the Emperor delaying his going; by the Popes persuasion there went
into the East, ANDREW King of Hungary, the Dukes of Bauiere and Austria; and
out of France, the Earl of Niuers, WALTER the Kings chamberlain, and other
great men; and with them went JOHN de Columna the Popes Legate, with so many
good men of war, that it was hoped they would have effected some great
matter: who being arrived in Palestina in Asia, in the harbor of Ptolomaida,
otherwise called Acon; after certain consultations, joining themselves with
JOHN de Bregna, King of Jerusalem, and with the Masters of the Knights
Templars, of S. JOHN, and the Dutch Orders and all their forces, whose number
was great; they departed thence with a prosperous wind to the City of
Damietta, called in ancient time Pelusium, on the coast of Egypt, in one of the
mouths of the river of Nilus where it falls into the sea; which they
besieged the space of eighteen months: in which time many accidents befell,
which the Authors write, and I ouerpasse as nothing to my purpose. The Sultan
of Egypt was heerwith so much put to his shifts, that he offered to give up the
City of Jerusalem and the Territories thereof, upon condition that they would
raise their siege from before Damietta: and notwithstanding that there were
sundry opinions between the Kings and Princes concerning the same, yet in the
end it was concluded Jerusalem dismantled by the Soldans son of Egypt. The city
of Damietta in Egypt taken from the Sultan by the Christians.
not to accept thereof; wherein they greatly erred, as by the sequel it
appeared. In the mean time, the Soldans sonue CORDIRIVS, who was in Jerusalem,
seeing what distress Damietta was in, and that both he and his father were out
of hope to defend Jerusalem, threw down and ruinated all the walls thereof. In
the end, the Christians took the City of Damietta, and certain other Towns in
that Quarter, and in all things had then good success, although afterward the
contrary ensued.

At this time, which was in the year of our Lord 1220, the Emperor FREDERICK
came into Italy; and by Letters and Ambassages understanding the Popes mind,
came to Rome, and was therein received and crowned, with the ceremonies and
solemnities accustomed, and there he again vowed and bound himself, to make
his voyage into the East, promising also great matters to the Pope: but being
out of Rome, their friendship continued not long, for he presently seized
certain towns into his hands, pretending that they appertained unto him.
CARRION writes, that FREDERICK coming into Italy certain Noble men of Tuscanie
and Apulia with some Bishops falling from their allegiance to the Emperor, by
the Popes instigation invaded both what belonged to the Empire and to FREDERICK
by inheritance, whereof some places they took and held, others they spoiled and
burnt: the Emperor being incensed with their perfidious treachery, came to
Arms: and having happily subdued his enemies he displaced the Bishops and
subrogated others in their places. The rest which had fled unto the Pope (the
Author of the sedition) deprived both of dignity and estate he condemned to
perpetual banissiment. The Pope requiring to have these restored, the Emperor
in a grave Oration refused him, inueighing bitterly against the ambition,
pride, fraud, and practices of Popes; whose speech is yet extant. This bred a
bitter hatred between them, which burst forth into cruel wars.

Then the Emperor came into Lombardy, to settle that estate; and passing
through Tuscane, there arose some controversy between his soldiers and the
inhabitants of that country: the like happened afterward in Lombardy; so as he
began to grow odious, and ill beloved: and from thence he gave a turn to
visit his kingdoms of Sicilia and Naples; where, besides the taking of some
towns and places from the Pope, he placed certain Bishops, in some Churches
displacing such as the Pope had enstalled therein; alleging that the Kings of
Sicilia had a privilege to do so. Whereupon the Pope and he fell at open
variance, and the Pope proceeded against him by his fulminations, commanding
him particularly to accomplish his vow, for the conquest of the Holy Land, and
pronounced him for excommunicate, if within a prefixed time he restored not
what he had taken; and performed not his vow: and so this contention
continuing, he seizing many towns into his hands (which he left garrisoned and
fortified) returned into Germany.

Whilst these matters passed in Italy, great discord and dissension arose in
the Army in the East, between the kings and princes, and the Popes Legate about
the superiority, and at what time, and in what manner the war was to be made:
but finally, the Christians agreed to take the field, and to besiege the great
city of Babylon in Egypt, called Cair, and other Towns thereabouts, in the
month of July, in the year 1221, with an Army of threescore and ten thousand
Babylon besieged by the Christians
excellent men of war, foot and horse, besides grooms and horse-boyes. And
notwithstanding that the Sultan had an exceeding huge Army, yet he durst not,
or would not fight with them, of purpose prolonging the war, until that
about two months after (the Christians having not encamped themselves in such
place and order, as was convenient, and as they ought to have done) the river
Nilus swelled and ouerflowed, as it usually does in that country yearly in
August: Besides which, the Sultan caused the dikes and banks thereof to be
broken and cut, which in ancient time were made for a defense, and to keep in
the waters of that river: so as the Christians Camp was environed with water,
in such sort that they could not forage or get any victuals: finally, they
were so distressed, that they sent to the Sultan (who lay not far from them)
offering to come to a composition with him: In conclusion (to be be brief, and
to return to my History) after many treaties between the Kings, the Legate; and
A peace between the Christians and the Sultan.
the Sultan; a peace or truce was concluded for eight years, and that he
should suffer them freely to depart; and that therewith they should presently
render the City of Damietta, and such other towns of less importance, which
they held in Egypt; and that all Captives of either side should have liberty;
and that the Christians should depart with their troops, to the Cities of
Ptolomaida, Tire, and such other places as they held in Soria.

These conditions being agreed upon, the Sultan made provision for them, and
holp them upon their way, until they came to Damietta; where the Christans
again fell at variance amongst themselves, about giving up of the City: but in
the end it was yielded, and the Christian army returned into Palestina, part by
land and part by sea. And from the port of Ptolomaida the king of Jerusalem
returned to his country; and the king of Hungary, and the other Dukes, into
Europe, unto theirs; with little contentment and less joy; extreme sad and
sorrowful for their ill success; having done little or nothing to any
purpose: by reason whereof, there was great sorrow and heauiness through all
Christendom; and all men murmured against the Emperor FRBDERICK, for that he
went not that journey. In the next year, which was in the year of our Lord
1222, the Emperor stmmoned a Council to be held in the City of Hiperboli,
where he procured the electors to make his young son HENRY, of the age of
(...)years, king of the Romans; and so he caused him to be crowned in the City
of Aken.

Presently after this, JOHN de Bregna king of Jerusalem, seeing the small power
of the Christians in the East, resolved to come in person to seek relief,
leaving the best garrisons in the country that he could (not withstanding the
truce) and came from Soria into Italy and went to Rome, where the Pope gave
him honorable entertainment, and he presently undertook to be a mediator
between the Pope and the Emperor, who then was a widower; whereby a peace was
made in this manner: The King of Jerusalem gave his only daughter in marriage
to the Emperor, with the right of inheritance to the kingdom of Jerusalem:
And the Pope absolved him of his excommunication: Whereupon he promised
presently after the marriage to go with his whole power to the wars in the
East, and to reform all matters whereof the Pope accused him; and to restore
such lands as he held from his Church. Upon this agreement he came from Germany
to Rome, whither the kings daughter of Jerusalem was brought; and the marriage
was solemnized with great joy and feasting. By this title, and by the marriage
of this Lady with the Emperor FREDERICK; CONRADE their son, and those which
until this day have succeeded in the kingdoms of Sicillia and Naples, have
been, and still are, called Kings of Jerusalem. This being ended, the king of
Jerusalem went into France, where he received a great sum of money, which King
PHILIP left him by his last will and testament, toward the wars: there he
stayed certain days for the Emperor, whom all men believed (for that the
inheritance of that country belonged to him, and for the great power and fit
opportunity which he had, being King of Naples and Sicilia) would now have
performed his vow and promise. But departing from Rome, he went with his
spouse into the provinces of Pulia and Calabria, visiting his kingdoms, not
caring to proceed on his journey, in more then two years space: for which
cause, and for that he had not fully performed the agreement with the Pope,
they again fell at variance.

After this, his eldest son HENRY (who was in Germany) held a Council in
Franckford; under pretext to procure certain Princes to go with their power
to the conquest of Jerusalem; to which the Emperor sent his Letters,
certifying his speedy coming into Germany, to the end to go that journey:
wherefore many Princes gaue-in their names, promising to go with him. At this
assembly was HENRY King of the Romans, the Emperors son, married to
MARGARET, daughter to the Duke of Austria. The year following, most of the
cities in Lombardy made a league, and rebelling against the Emperor, denied him
their obedience, alleging the principal ^eason thereof to be, for that he was
disobedient to the Church: wherewith he was very much displeased; and many
ambassages were sent from the one to the other; and there were many tumults,
and much leuying of men, which continued many days; the Emperor pretending it
to be the cause why he deferred his journey.

At this time died Pope HONORIVS the Third, having bin Pope ten years and
half, in the end of the year 1226. This Pope is held for a very good Pope.
The greatest reason why The death of Pope Honory and Gregory chosen.
he is so esteemed, is, for that he solemnly confirmed the orders of the
Franciscane and Dominicane Friars. After HONORIVS succeeded GREGORY the Ninth,
an Italian borne, nephew to INNOCENT the Third. The first matter he took in
hand, was to require the Emperor to restore what he detained from the Church of
Rome, and to go the journey which he had vowed to Jerusalem; publishing him
for excommunicate, if within a certain time limited he did not put the same in
execution; which he afterward incurred: yet he presently answered, he was
content to go from Sicilia, where he then was, and sent to his son to call a
Council in the City of Aken in Germany; where (through his persuasion and the
Emperors letters) many Princes offered to go that journey: and the Emperor
sent to them, that (with the greatest expedition that might be) they should
repair into Italy, to the Port of Brundusium, which is in the remotest part
thereof, whither he promised presently to come: whither repaired many men of
war, Princes and Prelates, attending the Emperors coming all the summer: but
he came not, pretending that he was sick. Which (as most Authors affirm) was
but fained: and as BLONDVS and others affirm, he treated under hand with the
Sultan of Egypt, hoping to have concluded some peace with him before his going
out of Sicilia into Italy: so as by reason of the great heat of the summer,
the most of the men of war at Brundusium, and the Country thereabouts,
attending his coming, dyed, together with many great Personages, amongst which
was the Lantzgraue of Turinge, a rich and mighty Prince: which when the
Emperor understood, he came to Brundusium, where he seized into his hands all
the gold, silver, Arms and other things which the Lantzgraue brought with him;
and it was said that the Emperor came thither for no other purpose. But the
sickness increasing in the Army and Letters coming daily from the Pope; the
Emperor, to perform his promise, departed with all his Army toward the East:
but within few days sailing he returned, and arrived in Italy, alleging that
contrary winds had constrained him so to do. But this was held but for fained,
and he was therefore ill spoken of by all men: and Pope GREGORY holding himself
to be abused by the Emperors promise (other discord and disagreement remaining
betwixt them) sent to declare him excommunicate, and for such proclaimed him
throughout all Germany and Italy. At this The Emperor Frederick the Second
excommunicated by the Pope.
time dyed the Empress, wife to the Emperor FREDERICK, and daughter to the
King of Jerusalem; who left behind her one son, whose name was CONRADE.

CARRION writes, that the Emperor lay sick in Brundusium, when as the Lantzgraue
and diverse others died; and that contrary winds drove him back, being in the
Streights of Peloponesus and Crete: yet the Pope began to thunder against him,
taxing him with the crimes of perjury, adultery, cruelty to his wife, and with
the loss of Damietta, for the which he did excommunicate him. He sent JOHN de
Bregna, the Emperors father-in-law, into Romagnia, with the title of Exarch,
and commanded the Earls of Tuscanie, with the Cities of Lombardy, to take arms.

These matters which we have related being past; the Emperor, seeing himself in
a straight by reason of the Popes censures on the one side, and the entreaty of
many of his friends on the other; with the greatest power that he could make,
and with a great number of ships, set his course toward Soria, and landed in
the City of Ptolomaida, otherwise called Acon: yet BLONDVS and some other say,
that he first staid in the I Will of Cyprus, and from thence sent a Captain with
the greatest part of his Army to Acon; who by his commandment began a treaty
of peace with the Sultan, before that he himself came to the war. FREDERICK
coming afterward thither, the Masters and Knights of the Orders of S. JOHN and
the Templars ill agreed with him: for, they surmised he had intelligence and
treated of a peace and agreement with the Sultan. And in Italy he was in no
better terms with the Pope: for, RAINOLD, the Dukes son of Spoleto, whom he
had left for Captain and Gouerner in the Kingdom of Naples, began to make
war, and took certain places from the Church of Rome, in the Marca di Ancona
and other parts. Whereupon, the Pope called to his aid JOHN de Bregna, King of
Jerusalem, who then was ready to have taken shipping, to have gone to defend
his countries in the East, and to have helped FREDERICK in the wars; which
(it was thought) he would have done: and so open war began between the Pope and
the Emperors Captains and Countries. I have not read in any Author, in what
manner he began and continued the war, during his abode in Palestina; only
they say, that prosecuting the treaty of peace begun with the Sultan, it was
concluded, and that they came to an agreement; which was, that the Sultan
should deliver up the An agreement between the emperor and the Sultan.
Cities of Jerusalem, Nazareth, Iapha, and other places in that Kingdom; and
should retain to himself certain fortresses of greatest importance, and that
there should be peace and truce betwixt them for ten years.

Many days were spent about this matter; and on Easter day, in the year of our
Lord 1229, the Emperor entered Jerusalem, and made himself to be crowned
therein, and was called King of Jerusalem. Then he presently sent an embassage
to Pope GREGORY, giving him to understand of all that had happened; therewith
requesting him, seeing that he had accomplished his vow, to declare him
absolved a poena et culpa, for his long delaying the same, and for some other
matters. But when his Ambassador came, the Pope houlding the peace and
agreement made by the Emperor, dishonorable (since the Sultan should continue
in the possession of the fortresses and strong houlds; presupposing, that as
soon as the Emperor should have left those countries, the Sultan would
presently resume them into his hands, as he afterward did) protested that the
Emperor had done this but only to make a show to have performed his vow:
wherefore, and by reason of the wars which his Captains then and before that
time had made against him; he affirmd, that the Emperor had made no
satisfaction, nor was freed from the excommunication: and so practicing with
the Emperors subjects in Pulia to renounce their obedience to their Soueraign,
he recovered some Towns which had been taken from him; which when the Emperor
understood, with the greatest speed that he possibly could make, he embarked
himself, leaving part of his Army in Palestina, and the Towns fortified and
garrisoned in the best manner he could; and with a fair gale of wind landed in
Pulia, so as this enterprise of the Emperor FREDERICK the Second had no better
success than the rest.

Being arrived in Italy, those places which had rebelled and had held for the
Pope, revolted and held for him; and he sent for men into Germany and into
Sicilia; and began to war upon the Popes towns, and took many of them: and
notwithstanding that he seemed to have sped well in the war, yet he sought to
be at peace with the Pope, by reason of some tumult and combustion in Germany.
And by the intercession of the Master of the Order of the Knights and Friars,
called Teutonici (which like the Knights of S. JOHN and the Templars, lay in
the East) and the Archbishop of Messina, a peace was concluded between the
Pope and him: LEOPOLD A peace concluded between the Emperor and the Pope.
Duke of Austria, with other Princes and Prelates of Germany, being there
present. CARRION writes that those Prelates and Princes of Germany were a whole
year before they could pacify the Popes displeasure against the Emperor: but
in the end his choler was appeased with a hundred and twenty thousand ounces
of gold; and so he was absolved and the towns were restored, and the Pope
absoluing him, proclaimed him King of Jerusalem, Naples, and Sicilia; and they
met at a place appointed, and with great show of love and good will dined
together at one table, and so a peace was concluded between them for that
time; wherein; and touching that which I have already written, were sundry
opinions, as the custom is in this world, some excusing the Emperor, and
others imputing the fault to him, for what had passed: and others attributed
the fault to the Pope, for practicing against him in his absence. This peace
being made, the Emperor returned into his Kingdom of Naples; and the Pope to
pacify matters in Perugia (where had been great tumults and contentions) went
thither; what befell in Rome in the time of this his absence, I will presently
tell you; first, bringing in few words to mind, the estate and success of the
Empire of Constantinople, whereto I am also bound; for as the Emperor
FREDERICK reigned long, it is not convenient to leave this, to make mention of
another matter, wherein were great changes of Emperors, through the small time
of their continuance: and thus it was.

By the death of HENRY Emperor of Graecia (as we have above said). PETER had
the Empire, for that he married his daughter IOLE; who returning crowned by
Pope HONORIVS to his Empire, had wars with THEODORE LASCARVS; who holding the
City of Adrianople, was called Emperor, for that he married the sister of the
Emperor ALEXVS, Peter Emperor of Constantinople put Lascarus the Tirant of
Adrianople to death.
who killed his own Brother, as is before declared: and a peace was made
between them, wherein PETER being circumuented and taken prisoner by LASCARVS,
was afterward put to death in prison, when he had reigned three years only:
which when his wife IOLE understood, she making her son, called ROBERT, to
be proclaimed Emperor, undertook the government, until that he should come to
Constantinople: (for he was in Italy when his Father dyed) and he being com,
was obeyed, and began to govern the Empire. Within few days after this, dyed
LASCARVS the Tirant of Adrianople, and left the usurped name of Emperor to his
son in law, JOHN de Plobatacio, who married his only daughter, called YRENE;
by whom he had already one Son, called THEODORE LASCARVS, as his Grandfather.
ROBERT having made show of a good Prince (by the devils instigation) fell in
love with a fair young damsel, which was betrothed to a Burgonian Knight (a
man of great sort, and which had served the Emperor) and by the consent of her
mother, brought her to his court, and married her, and made her to be honored
and held for Empress: which did so much grieve the Burgonian that should have
been her husband, that after some days dissembling, he took a terrible
revenge, which was, that joining himself with his friends and kinsfolks,
together with many Greeks, which hated this ROBERT'S government; accompanied
with them al; with armed hand he came one night into the Emperors Palace, to
the Empress which should have been his wife, and cut off her nose: and her
Mother which had been the causer of the marriage, he threw out at a window into
the sea, wherein she was drowned: and having done this; he departed, and put
himself and his friends into a place of safety, so as the Emperor ROBERT could
not punish the fact: who shortly after came to Rome to be crowned, and
returning homewards, fell sick in Macedonia, and dyed, leaving behind him one
Son, called BALDVVIN; others say, a Brother, who was presently received for
Emperor and his successor. And for as much as he was very young, by a general
assent JOHN de Bregna King of Jerusalem was sent to be his governor and
assistant in the Empire, who then was in the Popes service in Italy; and he
with the Popes leave and consent came into Graecia, and took upon him the
government of the Empire of Constantinople; and betrothed a daughter which he
had, to the young Emperor BALDVVIN; and governing that Empire whilst he lived
(which was some six or seven years) he left it in peace to his son in law:
but in what manner he lost the same, you shall know hereafter.

This coming of JOHN de Bregna to Constantinople, was about the same time that
the peace was made between the Emperor FREDERICK the Second, and Pope GREGORY
the Ninth: which being concluded, Pope GREGORY went to Perugia to pacify the
City and the marches thereof: and the Emperor went to his Kingdom of Naples.
During the time that the Pope was absent from Rome, the government of the
Consuls being abolished, (which was so hateful to the Popes) and now the
government of a Senator being brought in, sometimes one, and sometime five,
which governed the body of the City; a man of great power, called HANNIBAL,
was advanced to that dignity; who incensed the people against the Pope, he
being absent: and the Pope coming to Rome at that time, many combustions
ensued; but in the end, this HANNIBAL was deprived of his office, and one JOHN
de Poli, a seditious fellow also succeeded him, who put the City in Arms
against the Pope, and against such towns as held for him, and open war began
between them, yet the Pope by all means that could be imagined sought peace.

The Emperor FREDERICK being in Pulia, and advertised hereof; offered to come
to his aid, and came to speak with him (and as says BLONDVS) gave him for a
pledge of his friendship a base son which he had, whose name was HENRY, whom he
had made King of Sardinia, the Germans call him ENCIVS, and so do some authors;
but the Emperor performed not what he had offered; for within few days after,
he departed for Germany; the Pope remaining in the heat of his troubles with
the Romans; wherewith he was much discontent, but yet not so as to break the
peace between them. But before the Emperors departure, the Pope with his money
drew the Germane soldiers to his service, and with them recovered certain
Towns which rebelled; and his Army overthrowing the Roman forces, he made
quiet; yet for that time he could not safely come into Rome. The peace between
the Pope and the Emperor lasted about eight years, although there were little
love between them.

The Emperor being comn into Germany, from whence he had been long absent,
where his eldest son HENRY King of the Romans commanded for his father, and
had taken greater authority upon him, than his father would he should have
done: there grew some suspicions and jealousies between his father and him, and
many Princes held with the Son, against the Father: Upon this occasion many
Meetings and Councels were held; but in the end, FREDERICK forced his son to
leave the counrrey, and to go as his Lieutenant and Viceroy, into Sicilia and
those Countries.

After this, the Emperor being a widower, he married with the King of Englands
sister. In this journey, the Emperor gave to FREDERICK, Son to LEOPOLD Duke
of Austria, the title of King, and that his eldest son and his posterity
should so be called: but his successors have not enjoyed this privilege, the
cause whereof I think to be, for that this Duke FREDERICK died without issue
that might succeed him; and there was great contention for his estate; but in
the end, RODOLPH Earl of Habspurg enjoyed it, who was afterward Emperor, and
gave the estate of Austria to his eldest son ALBERT, as when time comes
shall be declared.

This being past, the Emperor made no long abode in Germany, but as soon as he
could, levied an Army and went into Italy: for many Cities in Lombardy
rebelled, and some men waxing mighty, tirannized the same, and many of them
maintained the old league and confederacy, which they held in the time of
FREDERICK the first; as Milan, Brescia, Mantoa, Bologna, Verona, Vicenza,
Padua, Triuigi, and many others, which being assisted by the Venecians, made
head against the Emperor: and for the Emperor, Cremona, Bergamo, Parma,
Modena, and Rezzo, continued in their obedience, and bound the one to the
other. The Emperor being comn near to Verona, after some skirmishes, the
Town was forced to yield, through the policy and power of one ENCELINVS,
called by his surname ROMANVS; who was the mightiest man in all those parts,
and by descent a Duch-man, Nephew to another of the same name, who came into
those parts in the time of OTHO the Third. From Verona, the Emperor went into
the territory of Mantoa, where he took and sacked two strong Towns, the one of
which was called Marcaria, and the other Claro. From thence he went to Cremona,
where he was joyfully received, and made his abode there the space of nine
months: at the end of which, giving it out, that he would go to besiege
Mantoa; he suddenly returned and came before Vicenza, which he besieged: the
inhabitants being taken unawares and unprovided, offered to yield upon
composition; and the Emperor gave ear to this parle, giving them good words;
but upon a sudden he commanded the City to be assaulted; and entering by force,
he set it on fire, and did much harm, passing forwards and spoiling the fields
and marches of Padoa: thinking to have taken Triuigi, he besieged it, and put
it to such distress, that if from Padoa had not come relief, he had entered,
and ruined it.

As he lay before Triuigi, he had certain intelligence that his son HENRY,
King of the Romans, whom (for that in Germany he had practiced against him) he
had made Gouerner of The emperor Fredericks son, Henry conspired against his
Father.
Sicilia, was confederate with the City of Milan, and the rest of that faction,
and that some Princes of Germany were of that league, and that they levied
their forces to succor those Cities. The Emperor stood in such fear of this
practice, that he resolved for his refuge to flee to Pope GREGORY
(notwithstanding that he knew him to be displeased, for abandoning him when he
had war with his Citizens of Rome) and by Letters and Ambassadors complained
to the Pope of the perfidy and disloyalty of his son, humbly entreating him to
grant his Letters against him, as against one that was disloyal and
disobedient to his father: and the Pope, knowing that it was true, did so,
thinking it a just request; or else for fear of the Emperor's power. He wrote
his Letters to the Princes of Germany, commanding them upon pain of
excommunication not to ioin with HENRY, King of the Romans, against his father
the Emperor, neither to obey his commandments. The Popes command was of such
authority, that none durst come into Italy, as they promised; and the Emperor
used such means, that he apprehended his son, and sent him prisoner to a
Castle in Pulia, where he afterward died; some men were of opinion, that he
was poisoned by his fathers commandment: and he enjoined The Emperor committed
his son to prison, where he died.
the Dukes of Bohemia and of Bauiere, to make war upon FREDERICK Duke of
Austria (whom he had made a King) for that he had conspired with his son
against him.

Within few months after that HENRY King of the Romans was taken, his father
the Emperor leaving the affairs of Lombardy in the best order that he could
(notwithstanding that Milan and other Cities still continued disobedient)
doubting of the estate of Germany, went thither; and making war in Austria,
took the City of Vienna, and many other Towns: so as, taming and punishing the
Duke of Austria, he was much feared, and generally obeyed. And Vienna in
Austria taken by the Emperor.
knowing that his son HENRY was dead (who left a lawful son called
CONRADIN, of whom hereafter much mention shall be made) he used the means to
assemble the Princes Electors, and that they should choose his son CONRADE
(whom he had by his second wife IOLE, and whom he had already made Duke of
Sueuia) for King of the Romans; and notwithstanding that the Electors did it in
his absence, yet for the better assurance of what was done, he and his son
called a Council in the City of Ratisbone, where what was already done was
approved, and CONRADE was again chosen and crowned King of the Romans: from
whence they both sent their Ambassadors to the Pope, for a confirmation of the
title to the Kingdom of Jerusalem, which his father-in-law JOHN de Bregna had
resigned unto him. The Pope granted his request: for, the Emperor was of great
power, and it was said that he would return into Italy; which put him in fear,
notwithstanding that the speech went, that he came but against Milan, and the
other Cities of that faction, with which he was much displeased, and resolved
to bring them to subjection: but the Cities alleged, that they were content to
serve him according to the agreement made with the Emperor FREDERICK the First,
called the peace of CONSTANCE, as we have declared in his history; wherewith he
held himself not satisfied: and so raising a very great power, he came again
into Italy, leaving his son CONRADE, King of the Romans, in his place in
Germany.

The Emperor, coming into Italy, took his way directly toward Padoa; and the
Padoans, being induced thereto by ENCELINVS (who bare a great sway in Lombardy)
received him into their City, assuring themselves, that the liberty and
privilege which the Emperor FREDERICK the First had given them, should have
been maintained: but this FREDERICK was of another humor; for, when he was
within the City, he prescribed them such laws as pleased him, as to his
vassals and subjects.

Pope GREGORY, having intelligence of the Emperors coming into Italy, sent a
messenger to meet him, called GREGORY de Monte longo; by whom he both desiring
and requiring him (in requital of the benefits which he had received from the
Church, as well in the peace and absolution granted him when he came from
Jerusalem, as in the favor which he had showed Isabel, daughter of John king
of England, married to the emperor Frederick the second, died in childbed.
him against his son, and in dispensing with his marriage in England) that
his now coming might be for the good and peace of the country; and that he
would maintain that peace and agreement which was granted by his Grandfather to
Milan and to the other Cities, and which was confirmed by the authority of the
Church. And after this he sent three Cardinals with the same message: but to
neither of them he gave any good answer; so as they conceived, that he was no
good friend to the Pope; and they all feared that he came no less against him,
than against Milan; so as without any conclusion they returned to Viterbo,
where the Pope then lay. It is written, that FREDERICK and his son CONRADE
did require the rights belonging to the Kingdoms of Naples and Sicilie; which,
the Pope, contrary to covenants, unjustly detained from them: And the Pope, to
arm himself with a faction, commanded the Emperor not to molest the confederate
Cities of Lombardy, with whom he was in league: but the Emperor giving him
reasons why he could not do it unless they would giue-ouer their conspiracies
against the Empire, and return to their obedience; the Pope, fearing the event,
bent all his forces to this common war.

The Emperor, leaving Padoa garrisoned, marching through Lombardy, took his way
toward the City of Brescia, which was of the league, and besieged a Town
called Claramont; and taking it by assault (the more to terrify the Brescians,
and to make them to yield) he destroyed and burnt the same. But, the Brescians
for all this were not dismayed, but made show of greater obstinacy. FREDERICK at
that time besieged not their City, but marched toward Milan, the Captain and
Head of all the Rebels: and the Milanois (with the help of the Venecians, and
of other Cities their friends) had an Army in a readiness; whereof, PETER
TEVPOLO, the Duke of Venice his son, was General, together with CHARROCHIO a
principal citizen of Milan, and other prime men of other Cities: all which
with great courage (for that not long before they had overthrown his
Grandfather FREDERICE) stayed to fight with him A battle between the Emperor
and the Milanois.
in the field, and met with him near to a place called Cro^ona, and he marched
with as great a desire to fight with them; so as they fought a very cruel
battle, the Armies being in number and in force (in a manner) equal: but,
after they had fought many hours, the Milanois began to shrink, and the
victory showed itself on the Emperors side; and PETER TEVPOLO their General
and other Captains were taken prisoners: all which, the Emperor commanded to
be put to a shameful death. After this victory he came to Cremona, to refresh
and reinforce his Army, having had some loss in the battle; where some cities
which had rebelled, compounded, and yielded their obedience.

The Pope being advertised of the calamity of the Milanois and of those of the
league (whose cause he seemed to protect and defend) fearing the Emperors
greatness (whom he knew to hate him) made a league with the Venecians (which he
knew to be much grieved for the pitiful death of their Dukes son) and
resolved to succor Milan and their confederates. And the better to bring this
to pass, he made a kind of peace and truce for ten years, between the Cities
of Venice and Genoa, which at that time were at wars; and used such means,
that he himself was received into Rome, having ever since the last troubles
lived out of it. Being in Rome, he sent out his Bulls against the Emperor,
which he published to all Christendom, and excommunicated both him and all
such as took his part; who then from Cremona (where he had refreshed his Army
after the battle) came to Pauia, leaving Milan, to make war upon the
Venecians. And there he was advertised of the Popes fulminations, and of the
great preparation made by the Venecians against him, both by sea and land. Upon
this he raised new forces, and so with a great victorious Army (wherein many
Moors of Africa, which they called Sarazins, served him on horseback) he took
the field, and ouerran the Territories of the Venecians, wasting and spoiling
the same; and incamping himself by the waters side in the sight of Venice, the
Venecians salied forth with a great number of Archers and others, in barks and
boats, therewith to annoy his Camp as much as they could from the water.

The Emperor, seeing how little he profited by lying there, returned to Padoa,
leaving ENCELINVS to war against Triuigi and the country thereabout, carrying
with him some principal men of Verona and Padoa, for hostages; giving it out,
that he went to besiege Mantoa: and passing by it, he went to Parma, and from
thence to Luca, and from Luca to Pisa, with a resolution not to stay till he
came to Rome.

At this time GREGORY de Monte longo (who was the Popes Legate in Milan) came
to Bolonia, and from thence took the field with the troops which came to him
from Milan and other parts: and joining with the Venecians, and others of the
league (first taking Ferrara by force) every where began a most cruel war,
which was the greatest that of long time, either before or after, had bin seen
in Italy; some houlding for the Pope, others for the Emperor. This war was so
great, and so many and so great accidents happened, that if I should relate what
I find written, I should spend a great part of this volume in this relation:
wherefore I will only write the sum thereof.

The Emperor being in Pisa, with a resolution to besiege Rome, then began the
great and fatal factions in Italy, between the Guelphs and the Gebelins; the
Guelphs houlding for the The original of the Guelphs and Gibelins in Italy
Pope, and the Gebelins for the Emperor: of the original of which factions
authors write so confusedly, that I will not enter into disputation concerning
the same. Let their beginning be what it will: I think it was the invention of
some devil, as it should seem by the sequel: for within short space, these
factions extended themselves so far over all Italy, as no place was free from
this infection (Venice except) wherein this pestilence took no hold: all the
rest was divided into these two names and factions, without any other
foundation of love or hatred, but only for the names sake: and there daily
ensued scandals and slaughters; and in families and linages it often happened
that the father was against his sons, and brothers were against brothers;
which fighting slew one another, ransacking towns, burning and ruinating
houses, in worse sort then if they had been traitors, or Infidels, with so
great rancor and hatred, as the like thereof before that time had never been
seen nor heard of. And truly it was a strange thing and to be admired: these
two factions were so contrary the one to the other, that they could not in any
thing endure any conformity or resemblance: for they differed in their
ensigns, in their colors, in the fashion of their apparel, in attiring
themselves, in their disports, in their feasts, yea, even unto their very
manner of going, speaking, feeding, riding, and in all things that man's wit
could invent.

The Emperor and his adherents were called Gebelins; and he proclaimed that all
such as The factions of the Guelphs and Gebelins between the Emperor Frederick
the second and Pope Gregory the ninth.
took part with him should be so called, which was performed throughout all
Italy: and all the Guelphs held with the Pope. With this name the Emperor
departed from Pisa toward Rome; wherein the fire of these factions was already
kindled, and the greatest part of the people were Gebelins, who were ready to
have set upon the Guelphs, and to have spoiled and killed them, without any
redemption. The Pope seeing himself in so great danger, took the heads of
Saint PETER and Saint PAVL (as they say) and made a solemn procession, and
therewith a long oration to the people; showing them how vain a thing it was
for men to kill one another, for that they had only taken contrary names; and
dissuading them from their intent he persuaded them to defend his Church and
their country against his enemy FREDERICK, who was coming thitherwards: and
of his bountiful liberality he gave to all such as in his quarrel would take
Arms, and would bear the sign of the Cross, plenary Indulgence, and
absolution.

The people were herewith so much persuaded, that when the Emperor with his
Army came before Rome, presupposing that the greatest part of the Citizens had
been Gebelins, he to the contrary found them all marked with the sign of the
Cross, in Arms against him: and coming with his people to the gates of the
city, some companies salied to skirmish with him: and so some were slain of
either side, which made him to use extraordinary cruelty; for all those of the
City which were taken with the sign of the Cross, he caused to be slain: some
of them had their heads cloven acrosse; and of some others he made crosses in
their foreheads with hot irons: and priests he made to be crossed upon their
crowns: and after three days (despairing to take Rome by force, spoiling the
country round abount it) he went into Campania, and gave a sudden turn and
came to Beneuent, which he took and sacked, and commanded the same to be
dismantelled and razed: and so marched through many parts of Italy, warring
upon the Popes Towns, and such as took his part; wherein he took Rauenna, and
besieged Fauencia. And in Sicilia he confisked the goods of many
Ecclesiastical persons, and apprehended and put some Bishops to death: others
he banished out of that country; and he particularly caused all places, which
appertained to the order of the Knights Templars, to be sacked and spoiled;
using herein the service of his horsemen, which were Moors of Africa, which
served him in that war, to whom he gave many preheminences and double paies;
and the City of Nuceria in Pulia to inhabit, which they possessed many years
after. Pope GREGORY seeing himself so distressed, sent his Legates to the
kings of France, England and Spain, bewailing his misery, and complaining of
the Emperor, he implored succor, aid, and council: whereto they gave him
gentle answers; and by their consent he called a general Council, for the
reformation and preservation of the Church, and for a conquest to be made of
the Holy land, which was now in greater distress then ever.

The Emperor having intelligence that a general Council was summoned, and
imagining that the chiefest intent thereof was against himself; he resolved by
all means possible to disturb it, by stopping the passages, and apprehending
such as went to it; and sent his son ENCIVS (king of Sardinia) to Pisa (which
then was of great power by sea) where he armed a great number of ships and
galleys, to stay the coming of the Cardinals, the Popes Legates; which with
many prelates of Spain and France came to the Council: they being upon the
sea, in a fleet of Genoaes of 40 Galleys, between Corsica and Pisa, within
sight the one of the other, the Legates would have fled, and so avoided the
fight: But the Admiral who was a Genoais, would not alter his course, so as
they fought a most cruel battle, which lasted the greatest part of the day:
But in the end, the King of Sardinia had the victory, and the Cardinals and
Legates being taken prisoners, were carried into Pulia, except some which were
slain or drowned.

The French Bishops and Abbats which were taken, the Emperor set at liberty, at
the request of the French King: the rest lay long in prison; so as the Council
could not be held or begun as the Pope would have had it: wherewith he was so
much troubled, that with very rage and anger he fell sick and died; having been
Pope above fourteen years, whereof the most part was Pope Gregory the Ni^th
died for anger.
in trouble and contention. He died in the year of our Lord 1241. This Pope in
his life time first canonized S. FRANCIS and S. DOMINICK for Saints; and
afterward Saint ANTHONY, called Saint ANTHONY of Padoa, although a Portingall,
and born in the Ci^y of Lisbon. He compiled also the Book of the Decretals, and
instituted the singing of Salve Regina at certain times and hours, with the
ringing of the sacring Bell; and that our Lady should be prayed unto in the
night, with Aue Maria, which should agree with the ringing of the Bell; and did
many other things like a Pope.

Pope GREGORY being dead, by the general consent of all the Cardinals which
were in Rome, GAVNFREDE de Castilion, a Milanois born, was chosen Pope, and
called CELESTINE the Fourth, a good man and very learned, but old and sickly; who
presently sought to be at peace with the Emperor, and to that effect sent his
Legates to his Camp, he then lying before Fauencia: but this Pope could not
tarry for an answer; for, he died the eighteenth day after his election.

CELESTINE being dead, the Cardinals could not agree about choosing him a
successor: some say, that for fear of the Emperors threatenings, they durst not
choose whom they would have chosen. PLATINA says, that the Cardinals of Rome
determined to choose no Pope at all, until that the Emperor released those
which he held prisoners. BLONDVS following his Author (who as he said was an
ey-witnes) affirms the cause to be, for that the Cardinals who were
prisoners, sent to require, and therewith protested, that no Pope should be
chosen without their voices. So as upon some of these occasions, or for all
together, for the space of twenty months Rome was without a Pope. And in all
this time the Emperor would not release those Cardinals which were his
prisoners; neither would those of Rome choose a Pope. In which time the Emperor
took the City of Fauencia (which held out against him about one year) and came
before Bolonia: but seeing that he could not take it, he spoiled the country,
and transferred the University from thence to Padoa; and afterward went to
Modena, and to Rezzo, which also stood upon their guard, and took Towns
appertaining to the Church of Rome; so as there were great wars in all parts of
Italy, which cost many men their lives.

At the same time, when the Emperor thus warred in Italy against the faction of
the Guelphs, The original and suc^esse of the Tartarians.
the Tartarians invaded Hungary. These Tartars are a barbarous Nation in the
North, which came out of Scythia Asiatica (as some say; and VOLATERRANVS says,
out of Taurica Chersonesus in Europe) about the year of our Lord 1202, and made
an irruption into Asia, and subdued some Provinces therein, under the leading
of their King and Captain, called CANGVISTA: and they afterward so increased
in the beginning of the Emperor FREDERICK'S Reign, about the year 1222, that
they conquered Georgiana* Armenia the Less, and other provinces in Asia, and
suppressed the power of the Turks (which I for breuity sake pass over). And
coming afterward into Europe by the Caspian sea, crossing the mountains
Riphei, became Masters of those countries, and made wars in Russia and in
Polonia, and subdued a great part of Sarmacia, which at this day is called
after them, Tartaria; and their King is called the Great CAN: they received the
sect of MAHOM^T, through their first conuersing with the Turks; and in such
manner they made war, that they put the world in fear of them. And the Emperor
Hungary invaded by the Tartarians.
now making war in Italy against the Guelphs, the Tartars, under the leading
of their King called BATVS, came into Hungary, and warred therein three years,
and did much harm; VELA the Fourth being then King thereof: at the end of which
time they returned to the countries which they before had gotten. And so
Hungary, a Province of the Empire, endured as great misery as Italy.

And it happened also, that the Emperor of Constantinople lived not in peace in
those days: for, JOHN de Bregna, King of Jerusalem (who was Governor of the
Greek Empire, with yoeng BALDVVIN who married his daughter) being dead, the
Empire remained in BALDVVIN: against whom JOHN LASCARVS (nephew to the other of
that name, who was called Emperor in Adrianople) raised such power, and found
so many friends, that he took Smirnia and Satilia, with other cities, towns and
Islands: so as the Emperor BALDVVIN, accompanied with the Earl of Tolousa (who
had been with him in all his wars and troubles) came into Italy to sue for aid
and relief against his enemies: and finding it in such estate as you have heard
(imagining that in time of such confusion he should not get any) he sought
means to have a Pope chosen, and so came directly to the Emperor; who having
then taken the city of Parma, and driven the Guelphes out of it, went thence
to Placencia. And BALDVVIN coming thither, and being well received and
entertained, used such means to the Emperor FREDERICK, that at his request all
the Cardinals were released and set at liberty, whom he had long detained
prisoners in Melphi: and the Emperor of Constantinople with the good leave of
the Emperor FREDERICK, went to Bologna, where the Cardinals were, to treat with
them concerning the election of such a new Pope, as might be acceptable to the
Emperor FREDERICK, to the end that peace might be maintained between them.
Where he was with great joy honorably received, in June, in the year 1244. and
they presently conferred about the election of a Pope, and one SINOBALDVS
Cardinal of S. LAVVRENC^ borne in Genoa, was chosen, and called INNOCENT the
Fourth; who was the Emperors greatest friend of all the Cardinals: which when
the Emperors friends and servants understood, with all possible speed they
gave him to understand thereof: when the news was brought unto him in the
city of Parma, it is reported that he presently said, (presaging what would
follow) I have exchaunged my best friend, being a Cardinal, for my greatest
enemy, being Pope.

After the election, the new Pope, the Emperor of Constantinople, and all the
Cardinals came together to Rome, where they consulted of a peace to be
concluded with the Emperor FREDERICK, and Ambassadors were sent from the one
to the other: but the Emperor in the time that the Papacy was void, was
grown so great and so mighty a Lord in Italy* that he would not accept such
conditions as were propounded; and so gave ambiguous and uncertain answers,
such as they knew not how to resolve: four months being spent in this parle,
the Pope was certified that the Emperor had secret intelligence with sundry in
Rome against him: the effect whereof was, that in a place called Castello amar,
whither it was agreed that the Pope should come, to yield his resolution
concerning the peace, and there expecting the Emperors coming, should be
seized on.

This being discovered, and the Pope seeing how small power he had in Italy,
speedily went to Hostia; and there embarking himself in certain galleys of
Genoa, which he had secretly caused to be brought thither for that purpose,
went to Genoa, where he fell sick, and recovering health he there again
shipped himself, and went into France; and arriving at Aigues mortes, and Pope
Innocent went into France, where he excommunicated the ^pero, and released his
sub^ects from their (...)^geance.
coming up the river Rodanus, the French King received and entertained him
with great solemnity: and then he went to the city of Lions, where he
complained of the Emperor, and w^in some few days after, proclaimed through
all Christendom, a Council to be held at Lions in France, in the beginning of
the year 1246* whither he cited the Emperor to come and to make his personal
appearance; and in many his sermons and orations which he made to the people,
he with a loud voice summoned him to appear: and so prelates from all parts of
Christendom repairing thither, the Council began; and the Emperor sent his
Ambassadors to make his excuse; and otherwise made many large offers. But the
Pope would accept neither his offers nor excuses; but published, that if within
a certain time limited he appeared not, he would then pronounce Sentence
against him; as is contained in the chapter Adapostolica^ sedem, de reiudicata,
libro sexto: wherein he condemned him in the loss and deprivation of the
Empire, and of all the other kingdoms and dominions which he enjoyed, and
presently proclaimed the same throughout all Christendom, and commanded the
Princes Electors with all speed to choose a new Emperor, releasing them from all
allegiance and oaths made to the Emperor FREDERICK whatsoever. At this time,
BALDVVIN Emperor of Constantinople, understanding that his enemy ROBERT
LASCARVS was dead, returned, and had such success as you shall hear.

So great account was made of the Popes sentence pronounced against the Emperor
in Germany (it being approved by the Council) that the Electors began to
treat of the choosing of a new Emperor: and notwitstanding that his son
CONRADE King of the Romans, was therewith much grieved, and by all means
sought to have prevented the same; yet they met at Hiperboli, and chose HENRY
Lantzgraue of Turinge, Emperor: and he according to the accustomed manner went
to Aken, where he was crowned: whereupon presently between him, and CONRADE
the Emperors son, began a cruel war; the end and success whereof we will
report hereafter, when we have related* what FREDERICK did when he understood
that he was deprived. As soon as he heard thereof, in extreme choler he caused
the houses of the Popes friends and kinsmen in Parma to be thrown down, and
their goods to be spoiled: and wrote his Letters into Germany, excusing and
justifying his proceedings, and to animate his son. But conceiving his estate
to be in great hazard, he resolved to go in person to the Council at Lions in
France; and to that effect he first made a league of friendship with the Duke
of Burgondy; and had a safe conduct and assurance from the French King, for his
going, abode and return. And leaving his son ENCIVS (King of Sardinia) in
Parma, he commanded him not to salie out of that City, for that he held the
same and the situation thereof, to be of great importance: and so being
accompanied with men both of peace and war, he took his way toward France;
and having past Turin, messengers ouertook him, which gave him to understand,
that Parma (whereof he made so great account) was lost, through his sons
oversight: for he through a greedy desire to have taken Brescia, which was of
the contrary faction, by the advice and procurement of those of Cremona, went
from Parma with part of the garrison which lay therein; and in the mean time
that he was about this exploit, the Popes friends and kindred, which lived in
Placencia, having intelligence with some which were within Parma, came thither,
and by surprise took it, but not without shedding of much blood. These ill
news touched the Emperor FREDERICK to the quick: and he fearing on the one
side, his unsafe going into France, and on the other side, that other Cities in
Italy following the example of Parma (he being absent in a strange country)
would also rebel, resolved therefore in great fury to return: and raised forces
in Sicilia and Naples: and from Triuigi came his great friend ENCELINVS with a
great troop of men of war; all which he sent against Parma, whither he
himself marched with a full resolution to have ruined the same, and to have
laid it waste, and used some speeches to the same effect: but he failed of his
expectation; for GREGORY; de Monte longo, who from the time of GREGORY the
ninth had been the Popes Legate in Milan, and in the other Cities of that
faction in Lombardy, getting soldiers from Milan, and other Cities of the
league, put himself with them into Parma: and Furnished and provided it with
all things requisite to endure a siege.

It was not long before the Emperor came before it with his Army (wherein were
threescore thousand men) and besieged it, with a full resolution not to rise
from before it, until that he had taken the City; and so he began to assault
it on every side. But the besieged defended themselves so well, that they daily
salied out and skirmished with their enemies, in such manner that it behooved
the Emperor to withdraw his Camp a little further from the City, and the war
continuing, he compassed the City round about with a wall: and as he purposed
wholly to have ruinated Parma, so he caused a new City to be built in the same
place where his Army lay; which he presently environed with walls, and made
market places, Churches, and houses in it; and appointed lands for those of
Parma, which would come thither to ^abit: so as within short space the city was
built, and peopled, and he named it Victoria. And as the Emperor had lien about
two years before Parma, and the news of this new City, and the distribution
made by him was bruited abroad, many came thither from all parts to dwell; in
Victoria built by Frederick.
so much that PLATINA affirms, that therein were as many fair gardens and
orchards, with birds and beasts in them, and so great concourse of men and
women, as in any the most peopled ancient cities of Italy.

While the Emperor lay before Parma, his son CONRADE and the Lantzgraue HENYY,
made cruel wars; which Lantzgraue through FREDERICK'S depriving, was chosen
and called Emperor: and he raising the greatest power he could (therewith to
make himself Lord of the Empire) he met with the Emperors son CONRADE, near
to Franckford, who had as great an Army as his; and there they two fought (as
some authors write) one of the most cruel battles that of long time had been
seen, wherein CONRADE being ouerthrown, he fled into Sueuia; and HENRY
remaining master of the field, was held for Emperor. And for as much as he
understood, that the Emperors son CONRADE leuyed new forces, and gathered
head in Sueuia, he went thither with his Army, and besieged and took some
cities; and continuing his course of victory, laid siege to the city of Vlme;
and holding it very hardly besieged, at a time when he thought that nothing
could have offended him, or defended it self against him; an arrow shot at
random out of the city (which was though^ to be poisoned) wounded the new
Emperor HENRY, so as within few days after he died thereof, within one year
after his election: and the princes and men of war which were with him
dispersed themselves, so as it presently appeared, that the party of the
Emperor FREDERICK and his son CONRADE would again prevail. But yet the
electors of the Empire, within few months after (by the procurement of the
Cardinal of Saint GEORGE called PETER Image of gold, whom the Pope (being
advertised of the death of HENRY) sent from Lions thither, the Emperors son
CONRADE not being able to stay or hinder the same) they met at Waringen, and
chose WILLIAM, Earl of Holland, for Emperor: who, accompanied with the
Electors, and other Princes and Prelates, went to Franckford, and there was
William, Earl of Holland, chosen Emperor.
crowned. And for as much as he understood that CONRADE levied a power against
him, he called a Council in the City of Vtrecht: whither came the Archbishops
of Mentz, Treuier and Colen, and other Prelates; and JEWS, Count Palatine of
Rhine, with many other Earls and Deputies from more than twenty several
Imperial Cities in Germany, and from some Princes also; where they handled
some matters concerning his confirmation in the Empire. But CONRADE, raising a
great power in Sueuia and in other parts, began to war against WILLIAM; and
WILLIAM levied an Army to do the like by him: in which war we will leave them
for this time, to speak of the Emperor, and of what success he had in Italy;
and then afterward, when time shall serve, we will again return to this
subject.

Two years were now expired since that the Emperor FREDERICK came to lie in his
new City Victoria, before Parma; daily expecting when it would have yielded
(for, the Besieged endured extreme famine): by reason whereof, there was not so
good guard held in the Camp as there was wont to be. And GREGORY de Monte
longo, the Popes Legate, who had the command of the City, as he had valiantly
defended it, so he never let slip any opportunity to do any notable service; who
perceiving, and being also advertised, what manner guard was held in the new
City (without attending any other forces to ioyn with him) he resolved to
salie, and to attempt it; and laid such a plot, that he performed one of the
strangest exploits that has bin seen or heard of; which was in this manner:

Certain companies of Moors and Germans, coming from the Camp, drew near to
the City, expecting that some would come forth to skirmish with them, as at
other times they used to do. The Legate, perceiving this, and thinking it now a
fit time to put in execution what he before had proiected, with all possible
speed made all his Troops to be armed; and setting them in order, when the
skirmish in the field was most hot he commanded the Ports to be opened, and
salying suddenly, charged with such resolution, that without any great adoo or
difficulty he overthrew those Troops; that presently retiring they turned
their backs and fled: and he pursuing them came to the new City (wherein was
the Emperor FREDERICK in his palace disarmed, suspecting no such matter, and so
was the greatest part of his Army) and charging with such fury that the Guard
could not withstand them, entered the City, putting to the sword as many as they
found to bear Arms against them: and so the fight began on every side. But as
the attempt was sudden and unexpected, so great a fear surprised them, that
without making any great resistance they all fled: and the Emperor, knowing no
better course to be taken, took horse, and so escaped with such as could keep
with him; and all those which remained, were either slain or taken: and the
Legate and his people had one of the richest preies and booties that had been
seen, as well of such things as were the Emperors and of the Army, as of the
Inhabitants of the City; which they presently razed and made level with the
ground, executing as much therein as the Emperor thought to have done in Parma.
And here was slain JOHN The city of Victoria taken and destroyed by the
Parmasans.
TVRRIO, one of the heads of the faction in Milan, who kept with the Emperor:
and with the Legate was one MATTHEW VISCOUNT, who was the other: for, these
two, namely, Viscounts and Turrions, were the two factions, then in the City of
Milan. As soon as the fame of the taking of Victoria was spread over Italy,
those which held for the Pope were greatly encouraged.

The Emperor in his flight stayed not in any place until he came to Cremona;
but he trusted them not so well as to come into their city, notwithstanding
that they earnestly entreated him: but raising men from all parts (besides that
many of the Gibelins came voluntarily to serve him) within a small time, as a
valiant man, and as if he had had a great Army, he came to Placencia, but
besieged it not, only spoiling the Country. And leaving his son ENCIVS,
King of Sardinia, for his Lieutenant in those Towns which held for him, he
went into Tuscane, in hope to have taken Florence, which in that Province was
against him. But as his faction was now but little regarded or feared, so the
Florentines would in no wise receive him; but agreed with him to put all the
Guelphs, which were his enemies, out of the Town, wherewith he was contented:
and staying in the Country near Florence, in hope to have levied some new
Troops, and so to have recovered the honor which he lost, news came how that
his son ENCIVS, with the greatest power that he could levy, thinking to
have done some notable piece of service, went toward Bologna; and the
Bolognois, being advertised thereof, with the aid of their friends, salied
forth to fight with him; and overthrowing him, had taken him prisoner. Which
when the Emperor understood, he was extremely grieved and offended; and
seeing that in Lombardy his enemies were too hard for him, and that out of
Germany he was out of hope that any succor could come, for that therein his
son CONRAD made war against WILLIAM, Earl of Holland, who was called
Emperor; he therefore resolved to go into his kingdom of Naples, in hope
there to reinforce his Army, and to take some other counsel. And coming into
Pulia with greater wrath then honor, by reason of such adventures as were
befallen him; he made a base son of his, call MANFRED, Prince of Tarent, and
gave him many places in subjection.

Within few days after, he fell grievously sick, and his disease held him
long, whereof in the end he dyed: which Historiographers relate after sundry
manners, so as it seems that the truth can hardly be known. Some say, that
his disease killed him: others say, that beginning to recover health, he was
poisoned: others say, that his son MANFRED practiced his death, The death of
the Emperor Frederick the Second.
with desire to reign; as it after appeared. Some write, that when he saw that
not only his friends failed him, who commonly change their minds with fortune,
but that also fortune had abandoned him, which hitherto had favored him, and
understanding that there were practices to poison him, he resolved to return
into Sicilie: but upon the way he fell into a burning fever through poison,
and ended his days in a certain Castle of Apulia. Some affirm that his base
son MANFRED (hearing that the Physicians had abated the force of the poison,
and that there was hope of his recovery) smothered him with a pillow. But
howsoever, he dyed at this time, which was in the year of our Lord one
thousand two hundred and fifty and in the six and thirtith year after his
election. In the time also there is ever some difference; for there be some
authors which do reckon, but from the time of his coronation, and not before.

He was when he dyed seven and fifty years old, and left behind him, three
sons, two bastards, and one legitimate: his eldest son CONRAD he had by
IOLE, daughter to the King of Jerusalem, who in his fathers time was King of
the Romans, and inherited the Kingdoms of Sicilia and Naples, and the Duchy
of Sueuia. And his bastard son ENCIVS, whom he made King of Sardinia, lived,
and died prisoner in the power of the Bolognois: whom they would never set at
liberty for any ransom. Some authors write, that he was prisoner there twenty
and odd years, very well used, and dyed in Bologna, and there was buried: and
MANFRED, the afornamed Prince of Tarent; he also had two daughters, ANNE and
CONSTANCE, which married with several Princes.

This Prince was adorned with sundry virtues, and excellent graces: and so
likewise infected with dangerous vices: but he was very valiant, and of a
strong constitution, able to endure travel, very wise, and expert in the
war, desirous of glory and fame, very liberal, and inclined to learning, and
skillful in the tongues, and could speak Greek, Latin, Arabic, French, and
Dutch very well, and delighted much in the reading of Arts and Histories. But
these virtues were greatly obscured, through his unmeasurable desire of honor,
and his ambition to command and to be Lord over all men, and through his
cruelty used in many exploites in the wars; destroying and rasing towns, and
in shedding blood, for he was very vindicatiue and sudden: and, above all, was
an enemy to the Popes, and scorned their command. He was likewise noted of
incontinency: for, besides that he had sundry wives, he kept many concubines,
and accompanied other women; all which, in Princes deserve greater
reprehension: for In the In maxima fortuna minima licentia est.
higher degree, the less liberty. What things followed after his death you
shall know in the next.

CARRION, writing of this Prince FREDERICK, says, that he was of a noble and
generous spirit, never dejected nor daunted in danger, constant and temperate
in all fortunes, valiant and wary in battle, active both with hand and
counsel, bountiful, and most free from cruelty. And when as the Popes by open
force, secret fraud and treachery, had sought his death, yet he suppressed his
indignation, and desire of revenge, as much as might be, being Victor; and did
moderate the offenders punishments. But his many crosses and homebred
conspiracies in the end did much alter him, and made him bitter, when as he was
deprived of the Empire, not finding any one among his own whom he might trust:
and being often vexed and vvounded to the very heart with the fear of his
friends falling from him, and of new conspiracies, every thing grew suspicious
unto him, and age did make him more apt to jealousy; insomuch that he spared
not those who were nearest and most faithful unto him. But as there is no
humane virtue, how great and glorious soever, that is perpetual and without
some blemish, the which is more apparent in great Personages than in private
men: so I will not deny but FREDERICK was subject to some vices, whereof I may
partly impute the cause to his afflictions; the which errors at his death he
did much lament.

In Constantinople BALDVVIN was Emperor, who had great wars with MICHAEL
PALEOLOGVS, who was called Emperor, and succeeded ROBERT LASCARVS before
mentioned, who left him Tutor over his son JOHN: but he took the Empire to
himself, murdering the pupil, and warred to make himself absolute Lord over
all. In France at this time reigned King LEWIS, called Saint; who,
understanding that the City of Jerusalem, after that the Emperor FREDERICK had
recovered it, was again lost, and that the Christians in the rest of the Cities
were greatly distressed; providing a great Army and Navy, departed therewith
in person, and sailed into Egypt to war upon the Sultan; and, taking land,
besieged the City of Damietta before named, and after some skirmishes and
conflicts took the same, and performed other worthy adventures, in the year of
our Lord one thousand, two hundredth, forty and nine. But, prosecuting the
war, it pleased God that in a battle he was afterward overthrown, and by
the Sultan taken prisoner, with two of his brethren; and, to recover their
liberty, he gave up the City of Damietta, and the rest of what he had gotten;
and so returned to his Country, having effected as little as those which went
before him. The Kings of Spain, with equal courage to any of the other Princes
(but with better fortune) reconquerd the countries which the Infidels held in
Spain. At that time reigned King FERDINAND, who won Seuil and Cordoua, and
many other Towns and Cities.

THE LIFE OF CONRADE, THE FOVRTH OF THAT NAME, AND HVNDRETH AND SECOND ROMAN
EMPEROR; AND OF THOSE WHICH WERE called Emperors till that RODVLPHVS was chosen
Emperor.
THE ARGUMENT.
FRederick being dead, the Empire being divided between two Emperors, was
infested many years; each of using all means to suppress the other. First,
Conrade determined to go into Italy to take possession of the Kingdoms of
Naples and Sicilia: and going with a mighty Army, he took those Kingdoms by
force. After which conquest he died, and William remained sole Emperor; who
desiring to go into Italy to be crowned by the Pope, was hindered through a
tumult raised by the Frisons: and going against them with an Army, he was by
them unfortunately slain. The death of William was the occasion that the seat
of the Empire was void, and that the Electors were divided, and could not agree
among themselves: for, almost every one of them would have such an Emperor as
was best to his liking; whereof ^nsued great trouble and much prejudice to the
Country of Germany. In Italy also were great wars between Manfrede and the
Pope, King Charles and Conradin, whereof in the end King Charles had the
victory. And in Germany the Electors being a long time at variance, in the end
agreed to choose Rodulph Earl of Habspurgh, when as for a long time they could
never agree upon any other man.

THE greatest part of the Authors which wrote the lives of the Emperors,
account all the time from the death of FRBDERICK (whose life we have now
written) until that RODVLPH, Earl of Habspurgh, was chosen Emperor (which were
23 years, beginning in the year 1250, in which FREDERICK died; and ending in
the year 1273, in which RODVLPH was chosen) for an interregnum and vacation of
the Empire; accounting none of those for Emperors which in that time were
chosen and so called, for that they were chosen in competency one against
another, and were not crowned by the Popes; which were WILLIAM, who was Emperor
in the time of FREDERICK, and FREDERICK'S son, CONRADE, who was King of the
Romans; and RICHARD, brother to the King of England; and ALONSO, King of
Castile, whom the Spaniards call the Wise: all which were chosen in contention,
and were competitors; wherein (in my opinion) they have no reason, especially
in what concerns WILLIAM, since he before FREDERICK'S death was in name and
possession Emperor; and albeit he was not crowned by the Pope, yet his election
was approved and confirmed by him: wherefore (to yield every man his title and
dignity, howsoever it were, as also to keep the course of our history) I have
determined to treat briefly of all in such matters as concern the Empire, which
is the subject of my travel. I will likewise in sum relate what past in
Italy, that so the history following may be the better understood. I say then,
that the Emperor FREDERICK'S death was soon published (as that of Emperors and
Kings is usual) and caused new accidents.

In Germany his son CONRAD, who in his fathers life time was Duke of Sueuia,
and King of the Romans, and his heir in the Kingdoms of Sicilia and Naples, and
by his mother pretended title to the Kingdom of Jerusalem, took upon him as
Emperor against WILLIAM Earl of Holland, who by the Popes commandment was
chosen against his father, and possessed the empire. WILLIAM, seeing that his
competitor was dead, made account to have defeated and supplanted CONRAD:
whereto he was presently countenanced and encouraged by Letters from Pope
INNOCENT, who all this while was in France, and was supported by many Princes
of Germany; which, forasmuch as CONRAD was excommunicate (as well as his father
FREDERICK) WILLIAM pretended that CONRAD had lost his right to the Empire, and
was deprived thereof by the Pope, as indeed by the Popes Sentence he was.
Nevertheless, CONRAD was still called Emperor. And so they were divided into
two factions: yet WILLIAM was the mightier, for he commanded (in a manner) all
the cities in Germany.

In Sicilia and Naples, FREDERICK'S base son MANFRED, who (some say)
smothered his father, had a conceit in time to make himself King of Naples and
Sicilia: but being a bastard he knew that the lawful inheritance appertained
to his brother CONRAD, who was in Germany, in whose name (as governor for him,
and to his use) he possessed himself of those kingdoms, excepting Naples,
Capua, and some other towns, which would not receive him: whereupon he
proclaimed them traitors and rebels, and began to war against them. In other
parts of Italy the wars ceased not, notwithstanding that the Emperor was
dead: for malice and hatred had taken so deep root between the Guelphes and
the Gibelins, that they were never without wars and troubles, murdering one
another: and ENCELINVS (who as I said before was of great power in Lombardy,
and a faithful servant to FREDERICK) took part with CONRAD, as with the
Emperor, and so did some others: yet the contrary part which held for the
Pope was more mighty.

CONRAD seeing the affairs of the Empire to stand in this estate, and
considering that it was doubtful holding of Germany against WILLIAM; and that
Naples and Sicilia was a good portion, and came to him by inheritance from his
father, raising the greatest power that he could in Sueuia, leaving garrisons
therein, and in such other parts as he held of the Empire; with the aid of the
Duke of Bauiere, with whose sister he was married, came to take possession of
those Kingdoms, as most certain and assured; and with a very good Army came
to Verona, houlding stil^ the name of Emperor, where he was received: and
afterward (being assisted and guided by ENCELINVS, Gouerner of Lombardy) he
came to certain Harbors upon the coast of the Venecian Sea; where he was
shipped by the Venecians, and thence sailed into Pulia (for, from thence there
was no safe passage for him by land) and taking land with his people, he was
obeyed by his brother, and received into the Towns of Naples and Sicilia. And
notwithstanding that those of the Cities of Naples and of Capua alleged, that
in that they refused to be commanded by MANFREDE, it was not in respect that
they had any meaning to have rebelled against him, but for that they understood
that MANFREDE meant to become a Tyrant; Yet MANFREDE carried the matter so
cunningly, that his brother was persuaded to the contrary, and therefore highly
offended: by reason whereof, the Neapolitanes and Capuans durst not put
themselves into his hands, but stood upon their guard; and CONRADE with great
fury held Naples besieged the space of eight months: in the end whereof he took
the same through famine, and executed cruel punishment therein; and thence
went to Capua, where he did the like, and in some other places which were of
their confederacy: so as from thenceforth, wheresoever he went he found no
resistance, neither by Cities, Princes nor Lords.. And those which he any way
suspected, he banished, and then began to war against the Lands and friends of
the Church of Rome.

After this (two years after his coming into Italy) he fell sick and died,
being poisoned in his medicines (as it was then thought) by the practice of his
brother MANFREDE, who did it of purpose to have been King. NAVCLERVS and
HENRICUS MVCIVS write, that the Emperor CONRADE before he died went into
Germany, leaving garrisons in Sicilie; for that he understood, the Emperor
WILLIAM made himself strong, and was possessed of the whole Empire, by the
means of the Legates which the Pope sent thither for that purpose; and that
CONRADE, coming into Germany, joined with the Duke of Bauiere, and with an
Army entered the jurisdiction of Ratisbone, and afterward took the city it
self, where he committed great spoils; and that WILLIAM, understanding thereof,
levied such forces, that CONRADE durst not give him battle; and that he then
abandoning Germany, went to Naples, where he died. Heerof other Authors make no
mention: wherefore I am of opinion, that it was before CONRADE'S first coming
to Naples, and that after his coming thither he returned no more into Germany.
But whether he returned into Germany or no (for, it might be) he died in the
Kingdom The death of the emperor Conrade the four^.
of Naples, and left his son CONRADINE (who was in Sueuia, being very young,
and whom he had by the Duke of Bauiers sister) for heir of his estate and
Kingdoms; wherein also is difference between the Authors: for, some say, that
he was his son (which is the most likely) and others say, that he was his
nephew, and the son of his elder brother HENRY, who (as we said) died in prison
in the time of his father FREDERICK. But I find it written, that HENRY married
MARGARET the daughter of LEOPOLD the Glorious, Duke of Austria, by whom he left
two sons, FREDERICK and HENRY, whereof one was poisoned by CONRADE; the other by
MANFRED a bastard; as competitos to the kingdoms of Sicily and Naples.

His son CONRADINE remaining his heir, and not of age fit to govern his
Kingdoms, he left him under the tutele and protection of his mother, and of
certain Dutch Princes. And MANFREDE (as some write) for certain days space
concealed his brothers will; and though as yet he durst not take upon him as
King, yet in his nephew CONRADINE'S name he sought by all means to possess
himself of the whole Country.

As soon as the death of CONRADE was published in Germany, all those which had
taken his part, sought to be friends with WILLIAM; who being freed from his
competitor, friendly received them, and sought (by force or policy) to draw them
to him, to the end to have made a general peace. At this time Pope INNOCENT
(who had made his abode in France for the space of nine years) understanding
that CONRADE was dead, came presently into Italy: Pope Innocent returned out
of France into Italy
And MANFREDE (as he knew him to have bin an enemy to the Emperors, FREDERICK
and CONRADE; and that he alleged, that their wills and testaments were of none
effect, seeing they were by him excommunicate and deprived; and that the
Kingdoms of Sicilia and Naples belonged to the Church) fainedly took part with
him in Otranto; purposing to exclude those which came to govern for the child
CONRADINE, who remained in Sueuia, and by fishing in troubled water, to get the
Kingdom for himself.

The Pope being joyfully received into most of the Cities in Italy, with the
greatest power that he could make, took his way toward Naples, where he was
received; and to that place came MANFREDE, and some other Princes and
Governors of Cities, to yield their obedience, as feudatories to the Church of
Rome: and he, excluding CONRADIN'S tutors, thought within short time to be Lord
of the greatest part of the rest. And as this was his drift, so after that the
Pope had confirmed him in his estate, and had bestowed other favors upon him;
he began to publish the discord openly, which he before had sown in secret,
and to show himself enemy to the Pope: but before that it took any effect, the
Pope died in Naples, having bin so eleven years and half, in the year of our
Lord 1254.

This Pope gave order that the Cardinals should ride on their food-cloathes,
and wear red Hats and Robes, which they use at this day; to the end that as
they did excel other men in dignity The institution of the Cardinals Hats and
robes, by Pope Clement, and riding upon foote-cloathes.
and pre-eminence, so they should go different in apparel, and thereby be
known from other men. Presently upon the death of Pope INNOCENT, MANFREDE
publishing that his Nephew CONRADINE was dead, cladding himself in mourning
attire, proclaimed himself King of Naples and Sicilia; and raising forces, drew
the Africane Moors, which dwelt in Nuceria, to his service; and suddenly set
upon those places which held for the Pope: so as ALEXANDER succeeding INNOCENT
the Fourth, sent a Cardinal whose name was OCTAVIUS to Naples, against
MANFREDE, who proceeded so far as to excommunicate him: but MANFREDE, who now
was called King of both the Sicilies, took such order with the Legate that he
constrained him to shut up himself in Naples; and so was he Master of the
field, and not only in that province, but in all Italy sought to raise
dissension and discord, showing himself to be of the faction of the Gibelins,
with whose aid he made himself mighty, and was principally assisted by the
great tyrant ENCELINVS. In Florence, in Lombardy, and in other parts, happened
many great accidents, which I have no time to relate, being to return to my
History of the lives of the Emperors: nevertheless it shall be expedient to
declare what end MANFREDE and his Nephew CONRADINE made; who was also called
King of both the Sicilies; and at that time, by reason of his nonage, was in
his mothers keeping in her estate of Sueuia; which gave opportunity to MANFREDE
to rise, as he did, with the kingdom.

The Emperor WILIAM, seeing in what estate Italy stood, and being now Lord of
all Germany in peace, desiring to come into Italy to visit the lands of the
Empire, which had recovered liberty through the long absence of the Emperors;
and likewise to be crowned by the hands of Pope ALEXANDER, he summoned a
Council to be held in the city of Colen: and having therein determined of his
journey, he was advertised that the province of Friseland was up in Arms, and
rebelled against him; and that not content therewith, they had invaded Holland,
where they had done great harm, by taking and carrying away whatsoever they
found. WILLIAM, to suppress this rebellion, resolved to go in person to bring
the Frisons to obedience, which were such men, and so many, that he otherwise
knew not how to bridle them; and it seemed no sound course for him to go into
Italy, and to leave Germany in an uproar. And so marching with his Army against
the Frisons, which lay encamped not far from him, as it was in the winter,
and in that country are many Lakes and Moorish places, which then were frosen,
the Emperor with one or two with him, or else alone on horseback, went to
view his enemies Camp, or to view some ground where his own Army might lodge:
and passing over a lake, his horse slipped, and fell with him, and the Ice
breaking, his horse and himself were so pestred in the water, that they could
not get out of it: which a company of Frisons (which lay undiscovered in an
ambush) perceiving, sallied out, and unknown slew the Emperor, thinking that
they had slain but some mean horseman, without being perceived by any man in
his The Emperor William, Earl of Holland slain and drowned.
Camp, neither by them which were with him, or else they durst not reveal it:
and so he lay unseen in the water, until that afterward he was found and
known by his enemies.

This happened in the year of our Lord, one thousand, two hundred, fifty and
six: in the eight and twentieth year of his age, and the seventh of his reign.
And as he was mist in his Camp, and no man knew what became of him, nor what
was befalne him (men being of sundry opinions) some imagining that he was
gone, and had abandoned them, and others were of other opinions; at last they
were certified of the truth by their enemies. Whereupon the Army disbanded,
and went every man whither he listed: in this manter ended the aspiring
thoughts, life, and reign of the Emperor WILLIAM, whom his son FLORIS,
which then was a child, succeeded in the estate of Holland, and the rest: who
afterward made cruel war against the Frisons, in revenge of his fathers
death; who until then lay in a poor Sepulture. In Sicilie and Naples MANFREDE
grew daily more mighty, and was called King.

The discord and division, which (as we said) was in the Empire between
FREDERICK and WILLIAM, and afterward between WILLIAM and CONRADE, FREDEKIC'KS
son, and that which we will declare which happened after his decease, was the
beginning and The cause of the declining of the Germane Empire.
original cause why the Empire lost in those times great part of the
authority, power and reputation, which it before inioied, and that some Cities
in Italy recovered liberty, and were exempt from the Empire, and that others
fell into the hands of Tyrants, as it afterward ensued. For notwithstanding
that there afterward were valiant and mighty Emperors, yet all matters were
so corrupt and out of order in the Empire, as it could not be reduced to the
ancient policy; neither did the Electours and Princes of Germany (in whom
consists the chiefest strength of the Empire) yield such obedience and
fealty to them, as their ancestors had done, making themselves through these
vacancies and dissensions, free, and of greater power, and the Emperors became
poor, of less account, and were less respected by them. I say then, that as
the Princes Electors of the Empire were certified of the death of the Emperor
WILLIAM (which were as all men know) the Duke of Saxony, the Count Palatine of
Rhine, the Marquess Princes Electors.
of Brandenburgh, the Archbishops of Mentz, Colen and Treuier, and (when they
cannot agree) the King of Bohemia, they began to consult about choosing of a new
Emperor, first writing the one to the other, and afterward meeting in
Franckford, where they could not agree, for there were many Competitors, and
the matter was carried by bribes, gifts and sinister means.

Coming in the end with great difficulty to make the election, upon Twelfth
day, in the year of our Lord, one thousand, two hundred, fifty and seven: the
voices were divided into two parts; the Duke of Saxony, the Archbishop of
Treuier, and the Marquess of Brandenburgh chose ALONSO King of Castile: and
EBERARD Archbishop of Mentz, CONRADE Archbishop of Colen, and JEWS Count
Palatine of the Rhine, gave their voices to RICHARD Duke of Cornwall, brother
to the King of England. In this manner they parted divided, Disagreement in
choosing of the Emperor.
either party holding him for Emperor whom they had chosen: but most men
affirmed that it was no election, for it seems not that the King of Bohemia
gave his voice, or was present at the election, or would join with either of
the parties, but was singular in his voice, feeking to have been Emperor
himself. Those which chose ALONSO and held with him, sent him their
Ambassadors (which were the Bishops of Spire and Constance) to give him
intelligence Alonso King of Castile chosen Emperor.
of his election, desiring him to prepare himself to come into the Empire: at
their coming into Castile they were ioifully received by the King, who being
very glad of their Embassage, accepted the election: but he being busied in the
wars against the Moors (from whom he had a little before taken the Town of
Niebla and other places) he could not then come into Germany: but writing his
letters to the Princes Electors, he dispatched the Ambassadors (giving them
and sending to the rest many jewels and great rewards) and so they returned
very well content. But King ALONSO his going into Germany, through many
occasions which were offered in Castile, as well against the Moors (from whom
he twice wan the City of Xeres, the City of Murcia and other places) as for
that his brother PHILIP withdrew himself from his service, his journey was a
long time deferred. The other part of the Princes Electors, which had chosen
the King of Englands Brother, sent him also a solemn Embassage; and Richard
Brothe to the King of England crowned Emperor in Aken in Germany.
he came into Germany, and with the aid of his Brother the King, came to Aken,
and there was crowned by those which had chosen him, and he afterward was
possessed of some Towns and Cities upon the Rhines side: and so began very
great wars and troubles in Germany, some holding for RICHARD, and others for
ALONSO; others (which were the greatest number) admitted neither the one nor
the other, holding the Empire for void: and so miserable Germany was set on
fire with cruel war, which continued the space of fifteen or sixteen
years, in which time, RICHARD dyed out of possession of the Empire, and King
ALONSO could The death of Richard, Brother to the king of England.
never come thither, by reason of sundry accidents whieh happened in Castile,
as in the Spanish Chronicles does appear.

At the same time BALDVVIN the Emperor of Constantinople being unable to make
his party good, against MICHAEL PALEOLOGVS, (who by making away the two sons
of THEODORE LASCARVS, gat the Empire to himself) fled from Constantinople,
and Baldwin deposed from the Greek Empire, by Michael Paleologus.
MICHAEL PALEOLOGVS had the Empire, and so it returned to the Greek nation,
having bin above seventy years governed by the Latins: the first that had the
same was called BALDVVIN, and so was he which lost it, which was in the year
of our Lord 1260.

At this time also came Ambassadors to Pope ALEXANDER, from CONRADINE Duke of
Sueuia (who was called, and ought to have been, King of Sicilia and Naples)
entreating his favor in his behalf against MANF^DE, who usurped the said
kingdoms; but it could take no effect at that time; for MANFREDE was now
grown so mighty, that the Pope was not able to make head against him: and
besides the kingdoms of Naples and Sicilia, he was Lord of Florence and other
towns in Italy. Within few days after this dyed Pope ALEXANDER, having held
the chair about seven years, with troubles and wars in little prosperity.
This Pope Alexander canonized Saint Clare for a Saint.
Pope canonized Saint CLARE, of the order of Saint FRANCIS, for a Saint: and he
being dead, the Patriarch of Jerusalem (a French man borne) was chosen Pope,
and called VRBANE the Fourth; who considering what great power the Tirant
MANFRED had got in Italy, (for what his father held therein, was at his
douotion.) And seeing that there came no sufficient aid from Germany, and
moreover having no meaning to approve the succession of CONRADES son
CONRADINE, for that his ancestors had bin ancient enemies to the Church of
Rome, but chiefly for that he had small confidence in his power, and for other
occasions which I forbear to write; by the advice of his Cardinals he sent his
Ambassadors to JEWS the French King, desiring him to send his brother
CHARLES Earl of Prouence and Aniow with Pope Vrbane the fourth, called the
Duke of Aniow into Italy, to make war in Naples and Sicilia.
an Army in relief of the Church, and to expel the Tirant MANFRED out of the
Kingdoms of Naples and Sicilia, and that then he would give the same to him in
fee, as the Churches inheritance. The French King willingly gave ear to the
Popes, Embassage, and yielding to his demand, offered aid, and to send him
into Italy: and so CHARLES began to provide necessaries for his journey, which
Pope VRBANE could never see take effect, for he was intercepted by death in the
city of Perugia, in the third year of his papacy: in all which time (by
reason of factions and partialities) he never came to Rome.

This Pope instituted the feast of Corpus Christi, which is celebrated by the
Church of Rome The Feast of Corpus Christi instituted by pope Vrbane the fourth.
with great solemnity, unto this day, being first invented by the famous Doctor
THOMAS of AQVINE, a Friar of the order of Saint DOMINICKE, who flourished in
those times. At that time also flourished S. BONAV^NTVRE, a Doctor and Friar of
the order of Saint FRANCIS. VRBANE being dead, GVIDO Cardinal of Sulconia
borne in Narbone in France, was chosen Pope, and called CLEMENT the Fourth; in
whose time at his instant entreatie, the French Kings brother, or cosine
germane, Earl of Aniow came into Italy with a great Army, to make a conquest
of the Kingdoms of Naples and Sicilia from MANFRED, who was already called
king of Naples and Sicilia; and there passed between them many conflicts and
encounters, which I ouerpasse: CHARLES being assisted by the faction of the
Guelphes, at length near to the City of Beneuent, MANFRED and he, with power
against power fought a battle, wherein MANFRED was overthrown and slain,
after that he had seen CHARLES cast to the earth, and his Army in a manner
wholly overthrown, but yet in the end CHARLES had the victory; wherein he was
much assisted by the counsel and help of John de Rata, Earl of Caserta, who
sought revenge for that MANFRED had ravished his Manfrede king of both
Sicilies, ouerthrown and slain by Charles duke of Aniow.
wife. Thus MANFDED lost his life with his kingdoms, the which he had gotten
by fraud, treachery and parricide.

This overthrow and death of MANFRED caused a great alteration in Italy, for
the faction of the Guelphes every where prevailed (in a manner) in all the
cities of Italy, being favored by the new king of Sicilia, against the
Gebilins. And in short space king CHARLES was possessed of the kingdoms of
Naples and Sicilia, being first crowned in Rome king of both the kingdoms; and
in acknowledgment of the fee, he was bound to pay yearly to the Church of Rome,
threescore thousand ducats, or crowns of Gold. In this manner, the state of
Prouence, whose head is the City of Marselles, was united to the kingdom
Naples, which was in the year of our Lord 1266.

In the time of these alterations in Italy, Germany was still troubled about
the election of an Emperor: and whereas the king of Englands brother RICHARD,
who contended with ALONSO for the Empire, at this time died, if ALONSO had then
come into Germany he might easily have obtained the Empire, seeing his
competitor was deceased: but by reason of civil wars against the Moors, he
could never have opportunity to come thither: and his brother PHILIP, and other
great men of Castile, left his service, and ouerran his country. Germany being
thus without an head, endured great misery, as well for this cause, as through
the great wars which the king of Hungary made against the king of Bohemia,
and other Princes, upon sundry occasions. CHARLES the new king of Sicilia
living in this prosperity, all those which in Italy were of the faction of the
Gibelins, sent to solicit CONRADINE Duke of Sueuia, who was also king of
Naples and Sicilia, (as son of the Emperor CONRADE, and Nephew to the
Emperor FREDERICK) to come, and reconquer his kingdoms, and that they all
would help and serve him in that action: whereto CONRADINE (as a courageous
young man) soon agreed, and began to gather forces and to try his friends,
whereto he was also persuaded and encouraged by HENRY the king of Castiles
brother, who was banished from his brother for some factions and confederacies
which he had made against him; And at that time was governor, and a Senator of
Rome, made by Pope CLEMENT; which dignity he obtained (after that he had
wandered through England, France and Germany) at the request of king CHARLES of
Naples, by reason of his affinity, and the Popes favor, to whose court he came,
lying then in Viterbo, and the Pope made him a Senator of Rome, which then was
the highest dignity and command therein.

This HENRY was a man of so great valor, and therewith so politic, that he
wholly commanded the City; and being so, he induced CON^ADINE to come into
Italy (for he was his kinsman, and had found him his friend at his being in
Germany) promising and putting him in hope, that he should not only have the
kingdoms of Naples and Sicilia (which were his by inheritance) but should also
be Emperor of Rome; for he would receive him into the Conradine his coming
into Italy against the Duke of Aniow.
City. Finally, CONRADINE moved by these Letters and messages, but reposing
his chiefest confidence in the Gebelins, came into Italy with ten thousand
the most expert men of war that he could get; to whom many of the Gebelins
resorted, and he was received and lodged in Verona, whither the Sienois and
Pisans sent their Ambassadors (and many other Cities wherein the Gebelins were
masters) exhorting him to proceed.

When King CHARLES was advertised hereof, he went from Tuscane, where he then
remained, into his kingdoms; leaving good garrisons in those towns which held
for him; and a governor with the title of Marshall. And HENRY the Kings
brother of Castile, who was then in Rome, whither CONRADINE was travailing,
openly showed himself for him, being of power able to do so, whether the Pope
would or not; who favored CHARLES his party, as a King whom he had made. But
the factions in Italy made all poor, and inconstant. To be short, after other
matters which befell CONRADINE by the way, he being come near to the City of
Arezzo, fought a battle with the Marshall whom King CHARLES had left in those
parts. And notwithstanding that the Marshall and his people fought valiantly,
yet CONRADINE was Victor and the Marshall was slain in the battle, and his
party ouerthrown; whereby CONRADINE won so great credit and reputation, that
if he would have stayed in those quarters, many towns would have yielded unto
him: but being solicited by Letters, and messages from HENRY in Rome, he took
his way thitherwards, passing near by Viterbo, where Pope CLEMENT lay, who as
an enemy to wars, and bearing of Arms, was very sorry for what passed: and
coming to Rome, he was solemnly received with all the ceremonies accustomed,
and HENRY calling him Emperor, lodged him as one in the Capitol.

After some few days stay in Rome, he departed toward Naples, accompanied
with the said HENRY, to find out king CHARLES; and HENRY left in his place and
office in Rome, one GVIDO FERRETANVS, a man whom he much trusted. King CHARLES
having already intelligence of CONRADINES coming, and seeing that by delays
he daily lost more and more, notwithstanding that he had no equal forces, yet
he resolved to end the controversy by a battle, which by CONRADINE (who
presumed much upon the multitude and valor of his soldiers) was chiefly
desired, so as the one Army drawing near the other, near to Alua; CHARLES
knowing how to take benefit of the ground where he was encampt, marshalled A
battle between Charles of A^ow king of Sicilia, and Conradine duke of Sueui^.
his troops in such manner that he might shadow the greatest part of his Army
behind a Hill, and ^o the fight began and continued above three hours: in
the end whereof, CHARLES his troops being near ouerthrown, he brake out of his
Ambuscado, and charged with such fury, that he forced his enemies to turn
their backs, and obtained the victory: And CONRADINE, HENRY and FR^DERICK, who
(I know not by what title) was called Duke of Austria, escaped by flight. But
through sundry casualties they all three with few days after fell into his
hands, and he cruelly executing the law of Arms, made the heads Conradine duke
of Sueu^ and king of both the Sicilies ^ut to death by Charles duke of Aniow.
of king CONRADINE, and of FREDERI^K Duke of Austria to be stricken off,
contenting himself to hold HENRY prisoner for their neerenesse in blood.

Some Authors write, that when these Princes were brought before CHARLES, he
not content with the glory of the victory (which had been the part of a noble
and generous mind) insulted proudly over them. Then by the barbarous and wicked
cruelty of Pope CLEMENT the fourth, who being demanded his advice touching the
prisoners answered; The life of CONRADINE is the death of CHARLES, and the
death of CONRADINE is the life of CHARLES: whereupon, by a never heard-of
example of cruelty in the Christian world and unworthy the name of a King, he
put them to death, as has been said; The Earl of Flanders telling him in
vain, that moderation and clemency did become a generous conqueror. So in the
end by the execution of CONRADINE, a most generous and innocent young Prince,
the most ancient and noble family of the Dukes of Sueuia having managed the
affairs of the Empire and their own at home and abroad, both in peace and
war, wisely and valiantly, was by the practice of Popes extinct, when it had
reigned in the Empire, one hundred and fifteen years, and held the realms of
Sicilia and Naples, 76.

By this means king CHARLES won great reputation, for he had ouerthrown and
slain two kings, MANFRED and CONRADINE. And within short space all those towns
which held for CONRADINE hearing of his death, reduced themselves to CHARLES
his subjection: and so in Sicilia, Pulia, Calabria and in all Italy, the
faction of the Guelphs recovered the upper hand. So as poor CONRADINE in hope
to have gotten the kingdom of Naples, lost his life, and therewith his estate
of Sueuia, whereof he was assured: and in him ended the line of the house of
Sueuia, for he left no heir; and that state was lost, most of the Cities
therein making themselves Imperial: yet RODVLPH and his son JOHN were
afterward called Dukes of Sueuia.

The victorious triumphant king CHARLES, with Pope CLEMENT'S leave and
authority, went to Rome, to execute the office of Senator, which HENRY had
lost, and to pacify the factions which were in the City; and the Pope from
Viterbo where he made his residence, never ceased to procure peace and concord
between the Cities of Italy, and to pacify king CHARLES: but his desire took no
effect, for he was interrupted by death, which ouertook him in the end of the
year 1278, having been Pope little more then 3 years, and was reconed amongst
the Saints.

Pope CLEMENT the fourth being dead, the Cardinals agreed so ill about choosing
him a successor, that for the space of two years there was no Pope. What happened
in the mean time, is too long to be written, wherefore I leave it apart:
amongst which Saint JEWS King of France went against the kingdom and City of
Tunis, where he died of the Plague. His going thither was with an intent to
have gone from thence to the conquest of Jerusalem, whereto he was induced by
Pope CLEMENT before his death. Before the Popes death, EDWARD King Edward
Longshanks at the wars in the Holy Land.
King of England went to the same service with about two hundred thousand men,
which from all parts of Christendom vowed to go that voyage, but all was
afterward. Two years being past that the Cardinals could not agree, by their
common consent in the year 1270, THEOBALD a Cardinal was chosen, and called
GREGORY the tenth, who was a Legate with King EDWARD in that enterprise: which
EDWARD performed as little in that action, as well by reason of King JEWS his
long abode before Tunis, where he died, for whom The death of S. Jews king of
France before Tunis. King Edward the first of England returned from the war in
the Holy Land.
King EDWARD stayed; as also for that the Popes seat was void the space of
two years, which put all out of order, and caused him and such as were with
him, to endure great want and penury: and for that at this time also died the
Patriarch of Jerusalem; by whose counsel he began and continued that war,
and in the end THEOBALD: who was the Apostolic Legate in this journey, came to
be Pope, wherefore King EDWARD also returned to his country, without effecting
what he desired.

When TH^ALD, or P. GREGORY the tenth, being in Aken was advertised of his
election; with the aid of King EDWARD, who furnished him with men and
shipping, he came into Italy, and was joyfully received and entertained by
King CHARLES of Naples, through whose country he passed, who accompanied him
some days iourneys; and coming to Viterbo, where the Cardinals attended his
coming, he was crowned after the accustomed manner: and he then presently
summoned a general Council, First to procure the reformation and peace of the
Church: Secondly, that an Emperor should be chosen; for Germany was brought to
ruin through civil dissension and want of justice: and Thirdly, to take order
for the conquest of the Holy Land, appointing Lions in France to be the place
where this Council should be held; whither he presently went, first settling
the best peace he could in Italy, principally between the Genoais and the
Venecians, two mighty Commonwealths in those days who made most cruel war.
This being done he came to Lions, from whence he sent to the Princes Electors,
commanding them to meet, and to make choice of an Emperor. To this Council at
Lions, came PALEOLOGVS the Emperor of Constantinople, whom the Pope confirmed
in his Empire, notwithstanding that he obtained the same by indirect means;
and he and the Prelates which came with him, in the name of the Greek Church,
submitted themselves to the Council in certain points, wherein the Greeks
dissented from the Latins: but they observed the same as little as at other
times they had done.

The Princes Electors met at Franckford, to treat of the election of an
Emperor, seeing how many years the Empire was void, for now twenty years were
fully expired since the death of FREDERICK, in all which time, Germany was
never free from factions and partialities about the Empire, and thirteen or
fourteen years since the Emperor WILLIAM died, so that Germany lay abandoned
without an head or soueraign Lord: for RICHARD brother to the King of England,
and ALONSO King of Castile, were chosen in discord and dissent of voices; and
RICHARD within short space died, and King ALONSO could never come to enjoy the
Empire.

All the Princes Electors meeting, spent three years before they could agree
about the Election; for either of them would have him to be Emperor in whom
they thought to have greatest interest: some alleged that no election could be
made, for that King ALONSO of Castile was chosen; and the same King sent his
Proctors to protest that he prepared himself speedily to come unto the Empire:
there were others that hindered the election, for that they had usurped the
lands and possessions belonging to the Empire, and were in fear to lose the
same: finally, the matter was very confused and out of order, but in the end
they agreed: and notwithstanding that OTHO CARVS King of Bohemia, had won the
most part of the Electors, and assured himself that he should have been chosen
in this great confused Anarchy during the vacancy, Italy being on fire with
intestine combustions and seditions, and Germany ^ost with old hatreds and new
alterations, when as all things threatened a fearful ruin, then did the
Electors chose RODVLPH Earl of Habspurgh and Hessia, who in line Masculine
descended lineally from the father to the son, from PHAROMOND King of the
Francons: The Earl of Halspurgh and Hessia chose^ Emperor.
others have written (amongst which is VOLATERRANVS) that this RODVLPH was
descended from the house and family of the PERLEONES, or LEONES in Rome, an
ancient house of Earls, and that one of them upon certain occasion left his
country, and went into Ergouia, and there built the Castle of Habspurgh, from
whence descend the Earls of Habspurgh: which they say was in the year 1150.
But it cannot be so, for the Town and Castle of Habspurgh, from whence these
Earls are descended, is not in Ergouia, but another much more ancient, and
far distant from that, whereof long before the time that they speak of, the
Earls of Habspurgh were Lords: And JOHN STABIVS sets down a pedigree of nine
Kings and fourteen Earls before this RODVLPH, of whom we now treat: who
besides that he was chosen and crowned Emperor, and governed the Empire the
space of eighteen years, came (through want of Heirs) to be Duke of Austria:
and that house has continued in that lineage from that time until this day,
and has produced nine Emperors, and a great number of dukes: from which
RODVLPH the First, is descended RODVLPH the Second now reigning in the year
one thousand six hundred and four. In Constantinople still reigned MICHAEL
PALEOLOGVS.

THE LIFE OF RODVLPH, THE FIRST OF THAT NAME, AND THE HVNDRETH AND THIRD Roman
Emperor; And of MICHAEL PALEOLOGVS, Emperor of Constantinople.
THE ARGUMENT.
WHen Rodulph's election was published, all Germany rejoiced, seeing an end of
so many troubles: he was according to the custom crowned in Aken, but would
never go to be crowned in Italy, alleging that all the Emperors which went
thither, either died there, or returned with great loss. He had great wars
with the King of Bohemia, who by his wifes persuasion, violating his faith,
rebelled against the Emperor to whom he had sworn fealty and obedience. After
this war, the Emperor addicted himself to maintain justice; and taking no
care to come into Italy, contenting himself with their tribute, he held all
Germany in peace, a thing which no Emperor ever had done. He subdued all those
which rebelled, and being old departed out of this life. He made alliance with
many great Lords by means of his daughters, for in his sons he was not very
fortunate.

AS soon as it was published that RODVLPH was chosen, there was great joy in
all the towns and Cities of Germany, and by all men which desired peace and
justice, as well through the desire they had to have an Emperor, as for that
RODVLPH was a man much esteemed, and the hope they conceived that he would
prove a good Prince; for he was held to be a man of great judgment and very
valiant, whereof he had made great proof both in peace and war, in the
service of FREDERICK the Second, who was his Godfather, and afterward in the
war against the King of Bohemia, But the Ambassadors of the King of ALONSO,
and likewise of the King of Bohemia, departed very much discontented from
Franckford, making first their protestations. Earl RODVLPH had little
apprehension thereof when the news was brought him of his Election, who at
that Psitaci and Stellleferi, two factions in Basil.
time lay before the City of Basil, besieging the same, wherein were two
factions of the Psitaci and the Stelleferi, whereof the one had driven the
other out of the City: and he took upon him the charge to restore the banished
to their houses; with whose aid, and the aid of his The Emperor Rodulph
crowned in Aken.
friends and subjects, he besieged that City: but being advertised of his
election, he came to the City of Aken, and there according to the accustomed
manner was crowned; whither came Ambassadors from the Princes of Germany to
congratulate his election: but neither the King of Bohemia, nor the Duke of
Bauiere would obey, or hold him for Emperor on What ensued, you shall
understand hereafter. After the coronation, he and the Electors sent their
Ambassadors to Pope GREGORY the Tenth, who then was at the Council of Lions in
France, who being hery glad of his election, confirmed the same: and promised
to give him the Imperial Crown, if he would come into Italy; but he would
never go to be crowned in Rome, neither come into Italy: It is written that
being demanded wherefore he would not go thither, for answer he recited one of
^SOPS fables; saying that the Lion as king of all other beasts being sick,
would have them all come to visit him, and they went and comforted him: but
the A tale of a Lion
For of purpose staying to be last, and being come to the mouth of the Cave
wherein the Lion lay, would not enter; and the cause being demanded, answered,
that the most part of the footsteps which he saw, were of such as went in, but
he could hardly perceive that any of them came forth again; whereby he knew
that the most part of them remained food for the sick Lion: wherefore he would
not put his life in such hazard. After this manner said RODVLPH it befell the
Emperors, his predecessors, in t^ iourneys into Italy: for they either died
there, The cause why the Emperor Rodulph would not come into Italy.
or returned with great loss: wherefore upon this consideration, he would
never come into Italy to be crowned, which was the cause that many Cities
exempted themselves and became free.

The new Emperor through a desire to reform the estate of the Empire, summoned
a Diet or Parliament to be held in the City of Norembergh, whither came all the
Princes in person; or else such as could not come, sent their Agents or
deputies, excepting the King of Bohemia, and the Duke of Bauiere, who neither
came nor sent; neither would they acknowledge him for their Emperor: Whereupon
RODVLPH by the consent of all those which were present, ^soribed them a
certain time, within which they should restore and deliver up the Lands and
possessions which they had usurped in the time of the Empires vacancie: as well
such as appertained to the Empire, as to other particular persons; and charged
them to make their appearance within the time limited, in the City of
Augsburgh. The time being expired, and the Emperor being comn thither, all
came or sent their lawful excuses: And notwithstanding that the Duke of
Bauiere came not, yet he sent by his Agents, to yield his obedience to the
Emperor; but in the behalf of the King of Bohemia it was not so; for he sent
his Ambassadors, amongst which was a Bishop, to whom public audience being
given, the Bishop began a long set Oration, wherein he sought to prove, that
the election of RODVLPH was of no effect; and that the King of Bohemia was not
bound to yield him obedience, neither to acknowledge him for his Lord: Wherewith
he and the Princes present were so much displeased, that without permitting him
to end his discourse, they commanded him presently to depart the Court and
City; and so he and his associats departed. In that Council the King of
Bohemia was proclaimed a Rebel and disobedient, and as such, they were to
proceed both against him and his estate: The Emperor presently sent the
Burgraue of Norembergh (which is a dignity in Germany) to require him to
surrender the Duchy and states of Austria, Carinthia, Carniola, and Stiria,
which he usurped. But the King neither would, neither had any meaning to do so,
and therefore took Arms to make resistance: And the Council being ended, the
Emperor likewise levied an Army against him: What ensued, we will tell you
after that we shall have related what end the King of Castile had in the
Empire, which passed in this manner.

ALONSO King of Castile understanding that RODVLPH of Habspurgh, was chosen
Emperor, was very sorry; and after many consultations held, and a peace
established with the King of Granada, he departed from Spain, purposing to
have been Emperor, and sent soldiers and other provision before him, by sea
and land to the City of Marselles; for he held the Kings of France and of
Naples for his friends and kinsmen: and so departing from Castile, accompanied
with his brother EMANVEL, and other great men in the month of March in the
year 1275, leaving his eldest son HERNANDES Governor in his absence, he came
into France, with an intent to have proceeded on his journey. What ensued and
how he passed, Histories record not: the effect is, that at the same time the
Pope GREGORY having dissolved the general Council, and returning into Italy,
met with King ALONSO, at a place called Bellocadoro; where the King showed
himself discontent, for that the Pope (to his prejudice) had consented to the
election of an Emperor, he pretending to be already lawfully chosen: but the
Pope so excused himself, and gave the other so good counsel, that he
persuaded him to give over his challenge, and to return to Castile; which was
greatly furthered through the news of the death of his eldest son, and of
the incursions made into his Country by the Moors, and of the pra^s of his
second son called SANCH^S, (who afterward was King) who then took upon him the
government of the Kingdom, and sought to have succeeded by depriving the sons
of DON HERNANDES for these and other great difficulties (whereof the King was
advertised) he returned into Castile; where he afterward lived in great
trouble, for his son SANCHES rebelled with the Kingdom; only the Cities and
Kingdoms of Seuil and Mur^ia were faithful unto him til about 9 or 10 years
after he died in Seuil, in the year 1284, and the said SANCHES succeeded him in
the Kingdom. Pope GREGORY after his departure from king ALONSO, travailing
through Italy toward Rome, died in Arezzo, and in his place was chosen PETER
TARENTA^S Cardinal of Hosti^ a Dominican friar, and was called INNOCEN^ the
fifth: in whose time the truce between the Venecians and Genoais being expired,
cruel war began between them: the Pope sought to make peace between them and
the other citys in Tuscane, Pisa, Florence, Luca, Siena, and the rest which
were in arms; K. CHARLES of Naples also interposing his authority. But before
he could effect it he died, having been Pope 5 mon^s and two days only; to
whom succeeded OTHO BON, a Cardinal, and was called ADRIAN the fifth, who was
Pope but forty days: after him was chosen one PETER, born in Lisbon, and was
called JOHN the 22, who was a great Physician, and wrote of Physic: and
although he was a great clerk, yet was he nothing expert in governing his
charge, so as if he had lived long, he would have showed his imperfections, but
in the 8 month of his Papacy (he being in Viterbo) the roof of a chamber fell
upon him: and although he was taken out alive, yet he was so bruized, as he
died within 7 days. He being dead, Cardinal JOHN CA^TANVS was chosen and
called NICHOLAS the third with whom, and with all the rest, the Emperor held
friendship; whom we left making preparation for his wars against the king of
Bohemia; which he was constrained to defer for a space, for that L^VVES Count
Palatine of the Rhine, and the Marquess of Baden, would not (within the time
limited) surrender such lands and towns as they had taken, at what time the
Empire was void: wherefore he went in person to recover them by force with much
trouble and danger. This being done, he marched first with his forces to make
war against the D. of Bauiere, for that he performed not what he had sworn by
his Ambassadors and Proctors, but aided and favored the K. of Bohemia. The
Emperor with a mighty Army, entering his country slew many of his people, and
by force took and ruined some towns, so as he compelled the Duke to submit
himself. The Emperor marching further, entered Austria, which OTHO CARVS had
taken, and therein had placed Bohemian garrisons: nevertheless some castles
yielded, and others were taken by force; and he afterward besieged the city of
Vienna; to the relief whereof, after the siege had lasted the space of 7 weeks,
the King of Bohemia came with a great power, which he had levied in his
kingdom, and in Morauia and other countries: and to the Emperors camp came
against him the King of Hungary, who was an enemy to the King of Bohemia, and
had taken some towns from him: the two Armies being come, the one near the
other; and in a readiness to have fought; certain Monks and Friars became
mediators between the King and the Emperor, who used such means, that a peace
was concluded: and the Emperor pardoned the King, upon condition that he should
presently surrender the estates of Austria, Carinthia, Sciria, and Carniola to
the Emperor; and to the King of Hungary, what he had taken from him; and that
the Emperor should confirm unto him the Kingdom of Bohemia, and Morauia, for
which he should come in person to yield obedience, and to be sworn after the
accustomed manner. All which the King (seeing no other remedy) yielded to
perform, being at the point to have lost all the rest; but he instantly
requested, that he might do his homage in some secret place; for as he was a
very haughty minded man, so did it extremely grieve him to kneel to a man to
whom he had given pay; and thinking that the Emperor would have performed what
he requested, forasmuch as he stayed for him in a close Tent, he came, and
kneeling down before the Emperor to do him homage; the Tent was so
artificially made, that it fell open, in such manner, as he was seen by the
whole Army, wherewith he was much discontented.

This agreement being made, and the King returned into his country, he was by
his wife the Queen very ill entertained; for being a vain proud woman, she
told him that he was not worthy the name of a King, neither to wearea crown,
since he had lost so great estates without the hazard of one battle; and had
humbled himself disarmed, before him who had been his servant; having an Army
of so good men to take his part as he had: and since that he had made so
shameful a peace, he should now let her have his Army, and she would by war
recover what he had lost by avoiding it. These his wives speeches, and such
like, which she used at other times, added to the sorrow for what he had lost,
did so disquiet him, that he repented him of what he had done; and rebelling,
meant to wipe away this reproach by Arms: Whereupon he drew his forces to an
head, and such places as were not resigned, he repaired, and fortified; and
went into Austria to recover what he had already surrendered; which he did with
such expedition, that he took many places there. When the Emperor understood of
the King of Bohemia's proceedings, he with no less expedition raised his
forces, and with some Princes of the Empire came against him with a great
power; who resolutely stayed in the field to give him battle, which befell upon
the six and twentieth day of August, in the year of our Lord, 1277: which
battle was sharp and cruel, and the king in the midst of the troops, being
deadly wounded by one BERTOLD a favorite of the Emperors, fell from his horse:
Which sudden accident, A Rattaile between the Emperor and the king of Bohe^,
wherein the Bohemians were overthrown, and their King slain.
together with the enemies force, was the cause of his peoples overthrow, and
that the Emperor being victorious was master of the field: and the King was
afterward found there, as naked as he was born of his Mother.

The Emperor having obtained this notable victory, followed not the same with
such rigor and cruelty as he might have done; for the King leaving a son
called WENCESLAVS, the Emperor married him to his daughter IVDITH, and invested
and confirmed him in the kingdoms of Bohemia and Morauia: and for as much as
he was but a child, he gave the government both of his person and estate, to
the Marquess of Brandenburgh: and so had RODVLPH the Duchy of Austria, and
other estates thereto appertaining; which he afterward gave to his eldest son
ALBERT, who in process of time came to be Emperor.

After the war of Bohemia, the Emperor sought to settle justice, and to free he
country from the eues and rebels, by reason of the late troubles; amongst
which, one was so audacious that he shamed not to say that he was the Emperor
FREDERICK the Second, who died in Italy; stoutely maintaining himself to be
the same: the cause whereof was, for that the common people never certainly
know what passes; and some reported that the Emperor FREDE^ICR was not dead
but lay hidden. This rumor was so generally diuulged and believed, that this
man gathered so many unto him, that he took some Cities, and so much troubled
the Emperor, Acounter^eit Emperor.
that he was constrained to levy an Army against him, by which this
counterfeit FREDERICK was overthrown and taken prisoner; and afterward burnt
by the Emperors commandment, and the rest of his confederats were severely
punished: and so he was generally obeyed. But as for matters of Italy, he took
no care to go thither in person, but sought to govern by his Vicars and
Lieutenants, ever maintaining peace with the Popes; contenting himself that
some Cities in Lombardy, and others which acknowledged the Empire, repaired
unto him and paid their customs and tributes, whereof he was very greedy: for
in truth, notwithstanding that this Prince was adorned with many great virtues,
yet he was much noted and taxed for being covetous and greedy of money, as he
afterward showed. And in regard of peace between him and Pope NICHOLAS, he
freely granted to him Rauenna, and the other Towns of that government, which
the Pope challenged to be the Church inheritance; uniting thereto the City of
Bolonia, which of later time held for the Empire. Pope NICHOLAS having the
Emperors friendship, and for that he was a Roman borne, was of greater power
then any of his predecessors had been; and took from CHARLES King of Naples the
office of Senator, and made a Law, that from thenceforth no king or Kings son
should be Senator: he also took from him the Lieutenantship for the Church in
Tuscane, alleging that it was not the Emperors pleasure that he should hold
that dignity; and so jealousy and suspicion grew between them: for it was
odious to the Pope to see that CHARLES was of such power; wherefore he procured
PETER king of Arragon, to make challenge to the Kingdom of Naples The Pope was
authoo of all the wars between the French and Spanish for the kingdom of
Naples.
and Sicilia; affirming that they appertained unto him, by reason of his
marriage with CONSTANCE daughter to MANFRED king of Sicilia. All this the Pope
durst to do, having the favor and friendship of the Emperor RODVLPH, whom they
knew to be of great power in Italy, and obeyed in Germany.

About this time the Emperor sent one to be his Lieutenant in Italy, whom many
Cities received and obeyed, and others would not. At this time also died Pope
NICHOLAS, having held the sea four years, saving four months; and upon some
occasion, that Sea was void five months; and then was chosen SIMON Cardinal,
of S. Sicilie, a Frenchman borne, who was called MARTIN the Fourth. In those
times, the Popes made their abode in Viterbo, but he would not be sacred there,
but went for that purpose to Ciuita Vechia, whither came to see him CHARLES
King of Naples, who (for that they both were Frenchmen) was very joyfully
received, and afterward much favored: which was in the year of our Lord 1281.
In the same year, the Emperor settled WENCESLAVS king of Bohemia (whom he had
married with his daughter IVDITH) in the government of his kingdom; free from
the tutorship of the Marquess of Brandenburgh, to whom he had given the same.
And the same year he had war with the Governor of a people called Ethni,
inhabiting a province in France about Lionois, who rebelled, and would have
made himself Lord of Burgondy, and of part of Sueuia; whither he went in
person, obtained victory, and left the country in subjection. And returning
from his journey, he came into the province of Alsatia, where were many
factions, and many great men rebelling, disobeyed his commandments: but with
his presence all was still and in quiet: so as in all Germany he was both
obeyed and feared, and reigned in prosperity. But as in this life no estate
high or low is free from disasters and misfortunes, so a son of his whom he
much loved whose name was HARMAN, passing the river of Rhine, in a boat, was
drowned, together with certain other eminent men, and his wife the Empress
also died; and about three years after he married again, with the daughter of
the Duke of Burgondy: and so he passed five or six years without any accident
worth the writing. In Italy, CHARLES, King of Sicilia and Prouence, being rich
and of great power, through the favor of Pope MARTIN, had a conceit to have
deposed MICHAEL PALEOLOGVS, and to have restored BALDVVIN to the Empire of
Constantinople; who marying his daughter, was deprived: and although he
pretended this title, yet it was thought that he would have had the Empire for
himself.

This being done, he thought to have recovered the kingdom of Jerusalem,
whereof he entitled himself King: whereupon he practiced with the Pope,
persuading him to excommunicate PALEOLOOVS, for that he had not observed what
was decreed in the Council late held at Lions, whither he came to Pope GREGORY
the Tenth, concerning the uniting of the Greek Church with the Latin. He had
also intelligence with certain Cities in Graecia which rebelled against
PALEOLOGVS, and began to provide men and galleys for that enterprise. But all
these purposes were frustrate: for whilst he sought to depose another from his
Empire, he within few days lost great part of his own: for all the Cities in
Sicilia, unable to endure the violence and oppression used by the French, rose
and rebelled, and slew all the Frenchmen which were in the Island, in two
hours space: having first had intelligence with PETER King The Frenchmen
slain in the I Will of Sicilia.
of Arragon, who lay in wait for Sicilia (under this title, that he married the
daughter of King MANFRED) and came in great haste with a fleet of fifty
galleys and ships, faining that he had rigged the same, to have passed over
into Africa; and so became Lord of the whole Island. Afterward there were great
wars between them both by sea and land, during which, King CHARLES falling
sick, of an infirmity and of sorrow, died; leaving his eldest son CHARLES
prisoner, in the power of PETER King of Arragon. Pope MARTIN sent his Legate to
Naples, to hold that kingdom in subjection to CHARLES who was in prison, whom
he proclaimed to be his fathers heir and successor: the French King sent also
to the same effect. Finally, at this time the Kingdom of Sicilia was divided
from the Kingdom of Naples, and the King of Arragon held the same; and
afterward followed other alterations. Returning to my History, I say that the
Emperor RODVLPH, through the counsel of HONORIVS the Fourth, who succeeded
Pope MARTIN, in the year of our Lord 1286, sent for his Lieutenant-generall, an
Italian Earl called PINCINAGLIA di Fisco (a man very private with the Pope)
who coming into Tuscane, Florence, and many other Cities which were of the
faction of the Guelphs, would not obey him; and there passed many treaties and
demands; but in the end, he having made his protestations, and condemned some
cities, returned into Germany: and the Emperor sent thither another Lieutenant,
who (having commission) gave ear to certain cities, which offered to compound
for money; and so by the Emperors consent, Florence, Luca, Pisa, and some
Florence, Luca, and Pisa bought their freedom of the Emperor Rodulph the first
others, bought their liberty, whereby the Emperor gat little honor;
notwithstanding that in all the rest he was a good, a valint, and a prudent
Prince: but the greediness of money, and his resolution not to come into Italy,
made him to use this baseness.

In those days, EBERARD Earl of Wittembergh, being assisted by some other
Princes, rebelled: but the Emperor entering his country, besieged him in a
strong Castle, and compelling him to sue for mercy; at the entreaty of the
Archbishop of Mentz, he pardoned him: and although that he afterward made some
alterations, yet in the end he perseuered in his service. At this time died in
Rome HONORIVS the Fourth, having been Pope two years and one month, and after
his death the chair was void ten months; and then was chosen the Cardinal of
Saint Sabina, a Friar, and General of S. FRANCIS Order, called NICHOLAS.

All this while the Emperor RODVLPH governed Germany in peace; yet in the
province of Turinge, many insolences and robberies were committed, by reason
of the factions and controversies, between the Lords of the Castles there:
wherefore the Emperor called a Diet to be held in the city of Erfordia; and
by the consent of the Princes, made threescore Castles in that province to be
thrown down, and laid level with the earth, whereby he brought all Germany
into quiet subjection; which continued so, until his death, which was within a
little while after. So as it cannot be denied, but that this Emperor was a
good Prince, and a prudent governor, both in peace and in war, and in all
things (wherein he would intermeddle, which was but in Germany only) desiring
as a wise Prince to rule and govern the same well, rather then to seek to
subdue Italy, and other countries, and so to lose both the one and the other;
and to avoid contention with the Popes, which in Italy he could not eschew. One
thing made his reign unfortunate, which was the loss of the Holy land; the
Christians losing all the cities The loss of the Holy land.
which they held in Soria, and Palestina: for the Souidan of Egypt being Lord
of Jerusalem, seeing the wars between the cities of Italy, and the Christian
Kings of Arragon, and of Naples; and also between the Kings of England and of
France; came with a great Army of foot and horse, and besieging the city of
Tripoli in Soria, took the same by force: and presently did the like by the
cities of Tire, Sidon, and Brito, with their confines; which he destroying,
slew and captiuated an infinite number of people. The Christians which escaped,
retyring themselves by sea and land to the city of Ptolomaida, whither came
the King of Cyprus, the Masters and Knights Templars, of S. JOHN, and of the
Duch order, together with the Patriarch of Jerusalem; they fell there at
variance amongst themselves, who should be Governor, and have the command:
which the Sultan understanding, and a certain truce which he had granted them
being expired, he came with 150000 men before the city; and taking and
destroying all the country round about it, sent his son with his whole power
to besiege the city: who continued the siege, notwithstanding that his father
died in the mean season.

After sundry accidents which happened, the greatest part of those which were
in the city, abandoning the same, fled by sea; and near to the coast of
Cyprus were overtaken with such a tempest, that the greatest part of them were
cast away and drowned: and the next day, the Sultan entering the city (some few
which had no means to depart, being left to defend the same) commanded first
all those which he found therein, to be slain; and then the city to be
ruined, leaving no house or wall standing: and so the Christians were wholly
expelled out of all which GODFREY of Buillon and other Christian Princes had
gotten 196 years before: which was in the year of our Lord 1290: for which as
soon as it was published in Europe, the Emperor, the Pope, and generally all the Princes Christian were very sorry; knowing that by reason of the wars
between them, those countries could not be relieved.

The next year after this, the Emperor falling sore sick, was carried to the
city of Spire, accompanied with the Empress and his son in law, the King of
Bohemia and his Queen, the Duke of Bauiere, and many other Princes: and dyed
the same day that he came to the city. The Emperor Rodulph dyed in the year
1291.
This Prince may well be accounted for one of the most valiant and excellent
of the world; for that being but a mean Lord, and finding the Fmpire divided,
rent, and tyrannized, without an Emperor, and at liberty, for many years
space, he pacified and brought the same fully into subjection and obedience,
and maintaining justice and equity therein, left the same in peace. His house
and estate he so much increased, that he left to his son ALBERT, the Duchies
of Austrich, and Carniola. He was twice married: first with a Countess of
Sueuia called ANNE: the second time with the Duke of Burgondies daughter,
called YNES: by the first only he had children. About the number of his
children authors vary: but when he died, it seems that he had but two
sons; the one was ALBERT before named, and the other RODVLPH, whom he made
Lord of part of Sueuia, who was father to JOHN the paricide, who slew his
uncle, as hereafter you shall understand. He had also (as writes JOHN
CVSPINIAN) seven daughters, which he married to mighty Princes: the first was
EV^EMIA, which was a Nun; the second was IVDITH, married to WENCESLAVS King
of Bohemia; the third was MAVD, married to the Count Palatine of Rhine; the
fourth was YNES, married to the Duke of Saxony; the fifth was KATHERINE, married
to HARMAN Marquis of Brandenburgh; the sixth was ANNE, married with OTHO Duke of
Bauiere; the seventh and last was called CLEMENCE, and was married to CHARLES
the Second, King of Naples: from which issued great Kings and Princes.

The same year that the Emperor RODVLPH died, MICHAEL PALEOLOGVS Emperor of
Constantinople died also, and his son ANDRONICVS had the Empire: and the next
year following died Pope NICHOLAS, having bin so four years, and through
discord between the Cardinals, that Sea was void two years and three months.

THE LIFE OF ADVLPH, ONLY OF THAT NAME, AND THE HVNDRETH AND FOVRTH ROMAN
EMPEROR.
THE ARGUMENT.
ALL men thought, after the death of the Emperor Rodulph, that the Electors
would have chosen his son Albert: but, through the cunning of the Bishop of
Mentz, Adulph Earl of Nassaw was chosen; which, Albert disdaining (with the
aid of the French King) bare Arms against him, purposing to depose him. Heerto
the Electors consented; and repenting that they had chosen him, deprived him of
the Empire, and chose Albert; who, going to be crowned in Aken, came to abattel
with Adulph, and slew him.

THe Empire, through the death of the Emperor RODVLPH, being void, all men
were of opinion that his son ALBERT Duke of Austria should have succeeded
him: and (in a manner) all the Princes Electors desired the same. But GERARD,
Archbishop of Mentz (which was one of them) used such policy, that at the
Princes meeting at Franckford, he (cunningly) got their voices, and made
ADVLPH, Earl of Nassaw, who was his near kinsman to be chosen. The mean which
he used A policy used by the Archbishop of Mentz.
was this: He having already gotten to this effect the Archbishop of Colens
voice, used the fame policy in obtaining the rest of their voices. First,
conferring with the Duke of Saxony, he told him that he had some of the
Electors voices to choose the Duke of Bruinswick (who was his great enemy) but
yet he would forbear to do it, if he would give him his voice. The Duke fearing
that this had been true (for, he had heard that the Bishop of Colen, and the
Marquess of Brandenburgh, had granted their voices to the Bishop of Mentz)
persuaded him not to consent thereto; for if he did, it would be his ruin if
he were chosen: so as whosoever were chosen (were it not the Duke of
Bruinswick) he should have his voice presently.

The Duke of Saxony being thus deceived, with the like wile he gat the voices
of the Archbishop of Treuier, and of the Count Palatine of Rhine; propounding
in secret, to the Count Palattine, the King of Bohemia, and to the Bishop of
Treuier, the Duke of Gueldres; whereto each of them answered him, that if he
were not chosen whom he named unto them, they would give him their voices:
this they did, supposing that he would have chosen ALBERT the Duke of Austria,
for so he made show in outward appearance: so as by this device he gat all
all their voices, the one not knowing what the other had done: and the Marquis
of Brandenburgh promised him his voice also, for that he had favored him in
the controversy between the uncle, and the nephew, Marquises, whether of them
should be Elector: so as the day of the election being come, they all referring
their opinions to the Archbishop of Mentz; by common consent Adulph Earl of
Nassaw chosen Emperor.
the Earl of Nassaw was chosen; whereat they all marueiled, as well for that
they expected that ALBERT should have bin chosen, as also for that ADVLPH was a
man of mean estate, and of too poor a revenue to maintain the imperial
dignity; notwithstanding that for his own person he was valiant, greatly
esteemed, and held for an excellent man of war: but as his reueneues were
small, he presently began to be held in contempt, especially by the Duke of
Austria and his adherents.

ADVLPH being thus chosen, by means of the Bishop of Mentz, and of his other
friends and kindred, went to Aken, and there was crowned with great solemnity;
and then called a Council to be held in a city in Sueuia: and from thence,
(for that there were then great wars between the Kings of England and of
France) he sent to offer his aid to the king of England against The Emperor
Adulph offered to serve the the King of England in his wars against the
French.
the French King; and the King of England sent him a great sum of money, to
the end that with an Army he should in person have come to his aid; wherewith
the Princes of the Empire seemed to be much grieved, alleging that it was a
great dishonor to the Empire, that the Emperor should take pay of any
foreign Prince: and the Duke of Austria said, that seeing the Emperor received
pay of the king of England, he might as well take pay of the French king. The
Emperor having received this money, and knowing that the Lantzgraue of
Turinges sons made war upon their Father, he went in person to aid the
Lantzgraue; who to obtain his favor, and for the hatred which he bare against
his sons, sold to him the Earldom of Turingia, for part of the money which
the King of England had given him. It seems the Author was not truly informed
of this history: and therefore (for that it is a memorable action) I will
borrow so much liberty as to set it down as I find it in an approved Author.
ALBERT Lantzgraue of Turinge, married MARGVERIT daughter to the Emperor
FREDERICK the Second, a very virtuous Lady, by whom he had two sons FREDERICK
and TICEMAN: ALBERT fell so passionately in love with a strumpet, as he sought
his wives death, who being advised by her wise and faithful friends to fly the
fury of her wicked husband, retired by night out of his Castle, and got to
Franckford, where spending some years in mourning and devotion in a Nonnerie,
she dyed. Soon after the Mothers escape, DITERIE Marquis of Misnia, brother to
ALBERT, a wise and a just Prince, called the two sons to his Court, lest they
should be spectators of their fathers villainy, and also to free them from
danger, breeding them up virtuously in the fear of God. This Marquis had one
son who dyed, and therefore being loath his brother should succeed him, and
fearing that he would chase away his children, for that he more respected a
base son, as also for that he hated his conditions, he made his will, by the
which he adopted his brothers sons, and made them heirs of Misnia: and calling
together the principal men of the province, he acquainted them with his
testament and the reasons thereof, requiring them to protect his heirs, which
they promised, and not to receive any other Lord.

DITERIE being dead and the heirs in possession and much beloved of their
subjects for their virtues, the father ALBERT challenged the estate, as his
brothers next heir: but the estates of the country would not accept of him,
saying that they had allowed of DITERIE'S piety and the reasons of his last
will, and that they would defend them who were recommended to their protection.
ALBERT flies to arms, and in the beginning took his eldest son FREDERICK whom
he kept in prison a year: but his kepers pitying the young man's estate,
assisted him in his escape.

The Emperor RODVLPH being dead, who had enjoined them to peace, ADOLPH
succeeding, ALBERT takes Arms again, and to engage him in this war, he sels
him Turinge, to deprive his heirs: so as the wars grew hot in Misnia both
during the six years reign of ADVLPH, and in the time of ALBERT of Austria
his successor, but God protected the brethren and expelled the Emperors Army
both out of Turingia and Misnia.

The Emperor ALBERT put FREDERICK in hope of peace, but finding Misnia and
Turingia fit for him to make wars against the Bohemian, he deceived
FREDERICK and entered the Country with an Army. They write that FREDERICK was
called to a counterfeit treaty: where being invited to a banquet by the Emperor,
a soldier stepped forth with his sword drawn to strike FREDERICK; but a Citizen
of Friberge, being among the guard, received the blow that he might escape. The
Emperor excused himself: yet all men thought that he had suborned the
murderer.

TICEMAN the younger brother was soon after treacherously wounded in a Church
at Lipsic, on Christmas eve at night being at his devotion, and died within two
daiesafter; It was thought that PHILIP of Nassau had employed this murderer,
of whom FREDERICK vowed to be revenged, and meeting him in a battle, he slew
him with his own hand.

ALBERT the father a breaker of wedlock, cruel to his wife and children, who
furiously drew ruin upon himself and his Country, suffered bitter punishment
by the Justice of God, dying in extreme want and contempt in the year 1315.

The Emperor spent two years in those wars, desiring to advance his house,
and to enlarge his possessions, as he did: and this time being expired, he
desiring to satisfy the King of England; and being unable to perform the same
(for, the Princes were much discontented for that he gave them no part of the
gold which the King of England sent him) open enmity brake out between him and
the Duke of Austria: and the Duke practiced with the other Princes to depose
him from the Empire, by the consent of the same Archbishop of Mentz who had
chosen him; so as the Emperor ADVLPH was of no such power or authority as was
his Predecessor: and men began to stand in fear of what afterward ensued.
While these matters passed in Germany, which were of great moment, I will tell
you what passed in Italy, touching the Papacy: which was in this manner;

At the end of two years and three months after the death of Pope NICHOLAS the
Fourth; in all which time he had no successor; in Perugia (whither the
Cardinals repaired to make their election) was chosen a very zealous man, who
was both a Monk and an Hermit, called PETER MVRRON; who thinking himself to
have bin called of God accepted the Popedom, and was named CELESTINE the Fifth:
in his beginning (as it was written) he was so highly honored, that upon the
day of his sacring, there came to Perugia (as to see a wonder) 200000. persons:
but as this man had wholly secluded himself from the world, and given himself
to contemplation and prayer; so the world could not well like of him, nor of
his fashions; neither knew he how to deal in the world, for his small
understanding, and less experience in worldly matters; which was the occasion
that he gave credit to what was told him; by means whereof he did sometimes
one thing contrary to another: whereupon some of the Cardinals cunningly
counseled and persuaded him to renounce the Papacy; whereto this Pope
Celestine the Fifth renounced the Papacy.
good man willingly agreed, accounting himself incapable of that charge, and
so oftentimes protested, and in conclusion (notwithstanding that CHARLES King
of Naples would have hindered him, and to that end induced him to come to
Naples) did so, and in a solemn act renounced the Popedom; five months after
that he had accepted the same: and upon his renunciation, was chosen Cardinal
BENEDICT, who was called BONIFACE the Eight, who was the man which chiefly
persuaded CELESTIN to renounce the Papacy: and this devout man being about to
return to his hermitage, BONIFACE fearing that the people would again have
restored him, made him to be apprehended and detained in prison until he dyed,
which was within short space after: whose successor BONIFACE was far unlike
unto him, for he was ambitious, proud, factious, and a great persecutor of the
Gibelins, yet very learned, politic, subtle, and of great experience; whose
end was such as hereafter we will tell you.

Returning to the Emperor ADVLPH, understanding that the Duke of Austria
practiced against him, and sought to deprive him of the Empire, he made war
against him, to whom the French king under hand gave secret aid, to the end
that the Emperor should not be able to join with the King of England against
him, as he purposed to have done.

Upon this occasion all Germany was in combustion, some holding with one
party, and some with the other: and ADVLPH'S friends daily forsook him,
through his unequal carriage toward them, for in his favors he was partial,
a thing which makes Princes to be hated: by means whereof ALBERT'S party
became so strong, that the Princes Electors (excepting the Archbishop of
Treuier, and the Count Palatine of Rhine who would not be there) met in the
city of Mentz, where alleging such reasons as they thought good (which in my
judgment were very insufficient) they deprived ADVLPH of the Empire, and chose
his enemy ALBERT; who with the greatest and most flourishing power that he
could procure, of his own, and of his friends, went to be crowned in Aken:
whom ADVLPH (who was not a coward, or any way pusillanimous, notwithstanding
that his power was unequal) went to meet: and the two Armies joining near the
city of Worms, in the month of July in the year of our Lord 1298, there
began between them a most cruel and bloody battle; the despair wherewith
ADVLPH and those of his party fought, making their inequality equal. The
battle continued A battle between the Emperor Adulph and Albert Duke of
Austrich.
above six hours, either party fighting most cruelly, before that it could be
perceived whether Army should have the victory; and each General having lost
great part of his people: ADVLPH fighting with his face against the sun
(which did greatly annoy him) in the midst of the throng where the fight was
most cruel, was in a great charge overthrown from his horse, whither (by
chance) came his enemy ALBERT, who (before that he could be able to avoid his
thrust) with the point of his sword gave him so great a wound in the face, that
it bereaved him of his senses, so that he was slain in the place. Some write,
that whilst that he was The Emperor Adulph slain.
in this fight, ALBERT cried unto him alowd; Here ADVLPH shall thou lose the
Empire; whereto he answered, This (O ALBERT) is in the hand of God.

As soon as the Emperor was slain, and being perceived by his soldiers,
they (without making any more resistance) were overthrown, and ALBERT remained
victor, although it cost him dear, for a great number of his men were slain
and wounded. In this manner was this Emperor murdered by the hands of a
Prince subject to the Empire; in the seventh year of his reign: whether the
cause moving him thereto were right or wrong, I leave to God, who is the
righteous judge: but the reasons which they alleged, were that he took pay of
the King of England, wherewith he was grown so proud, that he caused a Mass
priest to be beheaded, that he had caused false money to be coined, and had
degraded certain Ecclesiastical persons: that he had forced certain damsels:
and such others which they alleged: which whether they were true or false, it
pleased GOD that he dyed in this manner. Some authors write that all those
which conspired against him, and were accessarie to his death, had evil ends:
how ALBERT sped, I will tell you hereafter.

Of ADVLPH'S sons small mention is made, excepting one who with many Earls
was taken prisoner in the Battle; and the Duke of Bauiere escaped by flight;
other men of great account in this cruel battle were slain. In
Constantinople, ANDRONICVS, son to MICHAEL PALEOLOGVS, was Emperor.

THE LIFE OF ALBERT, THE FIRST OF THAT NAME, AND HVNDRETH AND FIFTH ROMAN
EMPEROR.
THE ARGUMENT.
ALbert would not accept of his first election: but Adulph being dead, he
caused it to be renewed, and was confirmed by the Pope, who was easily drawn
to confirm him, to the end he should make war upon the French King: which he
would not do, neither ever come into Italy. Germany then enjoyed peace, and in
twelve several battles he ever had the victory, by reason whereof he was
called Albertus Triumphans. Many notable matters happened in his tim^, as the
translating of the pontifical seat from Rome to Auinion, the subversion of
the Knights called Templars, the beginning of the house of the Ottomans in
Turkey, and many other things worth the reading. He died infortunatly through
the conspiracy of a nephew of his who slew him near to the Rhine, in the
tenth year of his reign.

AS the chief right to Kingdoms and Empires many times consists in Arms: so
ALBERT (who was, as it has been often recited, son to the Emperor RODVLPH,
Duke of Austria, and Lord of other estates) remaining Victor; and the Emperor
ADVLPH (who was his rival) being dead, he finding no man in field to make
head against him, remained sole Emperor. But forasmuch as his election was made
in the time of the Emperor ADVLPH, in discord (many contradicting the same) he
sought to legitimate and assure his estate. For which cause (accompanied with
many Princes) he went unto the City of Franckford: A^bert Duke of Austria the
second time chosen Emperor.
where, in the presence of the Princes Electors assembled, he renouncing his
first election, and holding the Empire for void, was the second time by common
consent chosen Emperor; and from thence went to Aken to be crowned, together
with his wife ISABEL, daughter to the Earl of Tirol and of Carinthia, by whom
he had many children, whose brother married ALBERT'S sister. Which Coronation
was performed with so great solemnity, and so many repaired thither to see the
same, that upon the coronation day there was so great a throng and prease of
people, that the Duke of Saxony (who married another of the Emperors sisters)
and many others were smothered to death, and no man could rescue them; which
was a great disgrace to the Feast.

After this Coronation, a Diet or Council was held in Norembergh, wherein he
took order for such matters as appertained to the Empire: and thence sending
his Ambassadors to Pope BONIFACE, he gave him to understand of his election,
and entreated him to confirm the same; which the Pope at that time would not
grant, but like a proud priest (as it is written) answered, that he was not
worthy the Empire who had murdered the Emperor. But he shortly after confirmed
him: for, as this Pope was of an high mind and presumptuous, so upon some
occasion which happened (which I have no time to relate) he fell at such odds
with PHILIP the French King, that the King apprehended a Bishop which was his
Ambassador: and such other matters passed between them, that the Pope summoned
a Council to proceed against the King of France; who would not permit any his
subjects to sue to the Court of Rome, neither to carry or send any rents or
revenues to the same. Whereupon the Pope, meaning to use the Emperors aid
against the French King, very willingly confirmed his election; and persuading
him to take upon him the title of King of France, he promised to deprive the
King, and to give him the Kingdom: about which matters were many treaties, and
in the end the Pope pronounced The Pope deprived the King of France by his
censures, and gave his kingdom to the Emperor.
Sentence against the French King; whereby he deprived him of his Kingdom, and
gave the same to the Emperor. Heerin is great difference between the
Historiographers: for, they report this after sundry manners. But the truth is,
that the Emperor was the Kings friend, and had married his eldest son
RODVLPH, whom he had made Duke of Austria, to the Kings daughter BLANCH: for
which cause, or for some other (for, many are alleged) he accepted not the
title to the Crown of France; but was contented with his confirmation in the
Empire, wherein (following his fathers counsel) he reigned in prosperity,
without any desire to go into Italy; and so never went thither.

The hatred betwixt the Pope and the King so much increased, that the King,
deadly hating the Pope, practiced with a Nobleman of Rome, whose name was
SARRA, of the house and family of the COLVMNOIS (who was Lord of many Towns and
Castles, and was of the faction of the Gibelins) whom the Pope had banished:
for this cause he abode in France, and was highly favored in the French
Court. The conclusion was, that this Lord should apprehend the Pope; which he
undertook, using such means as you shall hear. This Lord SARRA COLVMNA, having
many friends of the faction of the Gibelins in Alnania, where the Pope was then
resident (for, it was his native Country) departed France disguised, having
first agreed with a Captain called NOGAR^T, to lodge himself with two hundred
soldiers in a place which he had appointed; and he himself went into Alnania,
where having secret conference with his friends, he showed them the French
Kings Letters and favors; and so carried the matter, that one day he assaulted
the Popes Palace, and took him prisoner, and presently took his way with him
toward Rome; which he entered with the aid of the Gibelins, and of his own
family Pope Boniface appreh^ded by Sarra Columna.
of the COLVMNOIS which lived there. But the Pope within five and thirty days
after died, having been Pope the space of eight years and nine months, which
was in the year of our Lord 1302.

In this manner ended the high designs of Pope BONIFACE, who wrote the sixth
book of the Decretals. What the Lord SARRA meant to have done with him, is
unknown; yet it is written that he purposed to have carried him into France,
which he then could not, or durst not put in execution. After that BONIFACE
was dead, NICHOLAS Cardinal of Hostia was chosen, and was called BENEDICT the
Eleventh, who was born in Treuigi, and was a Dominican Friar.

While these matters passed in Italy and France, ALBERT reigned happily in
Germany: but in Hungary were great combustions about the title to that
Kingdom: for, ANDREW their King dying without issue, VENCESLAVS, son to the
King of Bohemia, aspired to that Kingdom; and afterward, OTHO Duke of
Bauiere; and CHARLES, son to the King of Naples: but in the end CHARLES was
King; and VENCESLAVS inherited Bohemia, which was his fathers inheritance, who
was of the same name: but he proved to be so wicked (notwithstanding that he
was but a young man) that his subjects, conspiring against him, slew him in a
City of Morauia. And forasmuch as he also had no issue, the like controversy
arose in Bohemia, as was in Hungary, notwithstanding that he left a sister
whose name was ISABEL; which the Emperor ALBERT understanding, he resolved to
procure her for his son RODVLPH, by reason of a certain covenant and
agreement made between the houses of Austria and Bohemia; which was, that the
one wanting heirs, the heirs of the other should succeed in the estate. But the
greatest part of the Bohemians resolved to choose a Lord of their own nation
for their king, whose name was HENRY, who was Earl of Carinthia and of Tirol,
and was the Emperors brother-in-law: nevertheless there was ever some dislike
and discord between them; and HENRY, desiring to reign, without any
intermission hasted into Bohemia, and there was received and obeyed for King.
But the Emperor, presently leuying an Army, entered the Country with so great
power, that HERRY durst not abide his coming: and he put his son RODVLPH in
possession (who was a widower, having buried the French Kings daughter); and
the better to assure him, and to make him the more acceptable to the Bohemians,
he married him to the widow ISABEL, late wife to VENCESLAVS deceased: which
took such effect, that he was presently obeyed by all men, and began to reign
in peace. But it pleased not God that he should long enjoy that Kingdom: for,
within few months after, when he was freed from all his enemies, he died
suddenly in the year of our Lord 1306. By reason whereof, the old discord and
The death of the King of Bohemia
contention was renewed, some desiring to have the deposed HENRY, Earl of
Carinthia, and others would have FREDERICK, the Emperors second son, to be
their King. But the Earl HENRY'S party being the stronger, he was received and
established in the Kingdom: which the Bohemians did so willingly, that the
Emperor (within few days after) coming thither in person with a mighty Army to
have preferred his son FREDERICK, they all so resolutely served their new
King, that, after much harm done in the Country, the Emperor was forced to
return without effecting what he came for, seeing how constantly the Bohemians
stood to their defense. In which wars and others, which he first had with the
Emperor ADVLPH and other Princes, it is written, that he fought in person
twelve several times, and in them all had the victory, and therefore was
called ALBERTVS Triumphans.

In the time of this Emperor ALBERT, Pope CLEMENT the Fifth, leaving three
Cardinals The Pope (...)ued his seat (...)Rome to Auinion in France. The
beginning of the Turkish Empire, anno 1307.
to govern Rome, removed his seat from thence to Auinion in France, where he
and his successors made their abode for the space of seventy and odd years,
whereof ensued many inconveniences. In the beginning of the Emperor ALBERT'S
Reign, in Asia the less began the Empire and dominion of the great Turk, which
is now so mighty and powerful: the head and founder of which Empire was one
OTTOMAN, of the same nation; a man of base parentage, but of a great spirit,
and very politic; who of a small beginning grew to be so mighty, and brought
so many nations to his service and subjection, that he conquered many
Countries, and made himself a King, and laid the foundation of that Empire,
which his successors have from time to time enlarged, and brought to that
estate wherein we see it at this day: and from him is descended in line
masculine, to the great Turk now reigning, in the year of our Lord 1604.

In the tenth year of the Emperor ALBERT'S Reign, which was in the year 1307,
the Knights of the Order of S. JOHN took the I Will of Rhodes from the Infidels,
where they made their seat and principal residence, and therefore were
afterward called Knights of the Rhodes; and performed many maruels in Arms
both by sea and land, until (in our time) that Island was The Knights of the
Rhodes.
taken by SOLIMAN the great Turk, who conquered the same.

In the time of the Emperor ALBERT, in Lombardy near to Nouarra, began a sect
of Heretics, which under color of religion and charity, made all things
common: and women in like manner moved men to carnal conjunction, alleging it
to be a deed of charity; and did many other things. This error dispersed it
self into sundry parts, and many thousands of people followed the same. But the
Pope and other Princes used such diligence in punishing these Heretics, that
in the end it was suppressed, yet not without great difficulty.

In the time of the Emperor ALBERT'S Reign, the Heluecians (now called
Swissers) began to be famous: all which joining together, made a league to
enfranchise themselves, and to The beginning of the Cantons of the Swissers.
defend their liberty, and governed and ruled their state by their Heads or
Cantons; which they have maintained until this day, and have done many
singular feats of Arms against the Dukes of Austria and other Princes; and from
that time hitherto have been accounted for a very valiant Nation.

Toward the end of this Emperors Reign, Pope CLEMENT, by the counsel and
consent of the King of France, dissolved the whole Order of the Knights
Templars, and condemning their bodies, confisked their goods; which were of so
great value throughout all Christendom, The order of the Knights-templars'
dissolved and condemned. The I Will of Sardinia taken by the Moors.
that what was taken from them, was sufficient to have enriched many Princes,
and the other Orders of Knights whereunto they were applied. In his time also
Sardinia was taken by the Moors: which Island Pope CLEMENT bestowed upon the
King of Sicilia, to the end that he should recover the same.

About the end of the tenth year of this Emperors Reign, he having levied
great forces to have gone into Bohemia, with an intent to have made his son
FREDERICK King, wherein then reigned HENRY, Earl of Carinthia; a nephew of his,
being his brother RODVLPH'S son, whose name was JOHN, through secret hatred
which he conceived against him for not giving him any estate (he withholding
from him in Sueuia, what to him by inheritance from his father appertained)
resolved to kill him: and upon this occasion, conspiring with other Barons,
which were RODVLPH, VLRICH and WALTER, in the month of April, in the year 1308,
the Emperor being in Austria, purposing the next day to have passed the River
of Rhine; he after dinner for his pleasure taking horse, and riding over the
ploughed fields between two little rivers called Rifa and Arula, near to the
Rhine, accompanied only by these conspirators, who were his great Familiars;
his nephew JOHN with his confederates, and others which followed him for the
same purpose, getting before him, RODVLPH laid hand upon his horses bridle: his
nephew JOHN stabd him in the throat; and VLRICH with a blow claue his The
death of the Emperor Albert the First, murdered by his nephew.
head; and the rest wounded him, some with blows, some with thrusts, so as he
was soon slain: and the murderers, setting spurs to their horses, left the
miserable Emperor dead in the place; in which, his son the Duke of Austria
afterward built a stately Monastery: his body was carried to Spire. The
conspirators were sought out by his sons, and most of them found and put to
death. This death was reputed to happen in this manner to him through the just
judgment of God, for killing his Predecessor the Emperor ADVLPH: the truth is
known unto God only, who orders all things according to his good pleasure.
All that I can say, is, that the highest estates are in least safety, and most
subject to danger both bodily and ghostly. What appertains to the soul is
hard to be proved, for that it is secret, whereof God only can judge: but, as
it appears, in great estates liberty to sin makes it doubtful, and men's
weakness is alike as well in the great as in the small; which is an argument of
the greater danger, as our Savior plainly expresses in the Gospel; wherein
he shows how hardly rich men inherit the Kingdom of heaven: wherefore great
Princes ought to be circumspect concerning bodily dangers. I will not weary
the Reader with other examples: those shall suffice which I have written of
Emperors; on whom (as I have declared) there is no kind of death that has not
befaln. And, to the contrary, in many mean estates we find not any that in
many years space have died of a violent death, but that most men of mean
fortune have died naturally: but pride and ambition do so blind men's eyes,
that what is most hateful is most desired; and we ever seek to attain to that
wherein is greatest danger: yet some have been of so good an understanding,
that they would not accept, but have refused Empires and dominions when they
have been offered them, although the number be but small. But returning to the
Emperor ALBERT, he had by ELIZABETH his wife one and twenty children, sons
and daughters, whereof ten died in their infancy: and his eldest son
RODVLPH died in his time King of Bohemia; so as when the Emperor ALBERT died,
he left five sons, and as many daughters: his daughters names were ELIZABETH,
ANNE, GVTTA, KATHARINE and INES, all which were married to sundry Princes: his
sons names were FREDERICK, LEOPOLD, HENRY, ALBERT and OTHO, which OTHO married
the Duchess of Bauiere; all which (after the Germane manner) were called Dukes
of Austria, which causes a great confusion in histories: but the house of
Austria rested in ALBERT, who (for that he had the gowt) was called the lame;
and was the stem and original of the house of Austria, from whom are descended
his successors.

At what time as the Emperor ALBERT was slain, ANDRONICVS was Emperor of
Constantinople: of whom I find little written, and therefore make no
particular relation of him.

Pope CLEMENT the Fifth making his abode in Auinion, governed Rome and his
estates of Italy, by his Legates; by reason whereof, and of the Emperors long
absence, many cities in Italy took for their Lords, the heads and leaders of
their factions, which they possessed a long time, and to this day some remain,
which of tyrants, have in process of time made themselves absolute Lords; as
in Verona, those of the house of SCALA, in Ferrara, the house of ESTE,
extending it self afterward to MODENA, whose descendents at this day enjoy
that estate; in Padoa those of CARRARA; in Mantoa the PASSERINI were expelled
by the GONZAGHI, who afterward were, and to this day are, great Lords: and
others in other parts.

THE LIFE OF HENRY, THE SEVENTH OF THAT NAME, AND HVNDRETH AND SIXTH ROMAN
EMPEROVR.
THE ARGUMENT.
HEnry being chosen by the Electors was confirmed by the Pope, with an
iniunction that he should come into Italy, by reason of much discord which
was there: the French King was greatly displeased with his election, for that
he pretended to have been Emperor. The first enterprise he took in hand was
against the King of Bohemia, and against the Earl of Wittenbergh, against both
which he had good success: he came afterward into Italy, as well to satisfy
the Pope, as to visit the Countries under his jurisdiction: having past the
Alps he found no great resistance by reason of the factions in Rome, where he
was crowned with more sadness then joy, the City being divided between the
Colonnesi and the Vrfini, who daily fought together. The Florentines would not
yield unto him, nor lose their liberty: and having endured a long siege, in
conclusion they defended themselves bravely, so as the Emperor changing his
mind went to the conquest of Naples, and while he made preparation for the
same he was poisoned, and dyed in Buon Conuento, leaving Italy in greater
combustion then before. He reigned seven years.

TRuly I conjecture, that in writing the life of the Emperor ALBERT, I have
made too long a digression, by reason of the recital of other matters which
happened in his time: but yet nevertheless I did it, for that I was brief in
writing his life; holding it necessary, to the end the rest may be the better
understood, and to explain what is already said: and also for that the
accidents were notable, it was not fit to pass them over in silence. The
Emperor ALBERT being slain through the treason of his Nephew JOHN, and his
death being generally published, his sons sought revenge, and to get his goods
and estates, and some of them to have the Empire.

The princes Electors, to make choice of a new Emperor, retired themselves
(according to custom) to the city of Franckford. By the translation of the
Popes seat from Rome to Auignon, the French conceived no small hope to obtain
the Empire, as the Councels of PHILIP the father, the French King, and CHARLES
of Vallois his brother did discover. For, having him in their power, who did
arrogate unto himself a right to give the Empire to whom he pleased, they
persuaded themselves that they should recover it by him without any opposition:
Wherefore, when as they were to go to an Election after the murder of ALBERT,
CHARLES of Vallois by his brothers advice draws an Army together, that he
might wrest away the Empire, even in spite of the Pope; who although he were
no enemy to the King, yet foreseeing that this alteration would be fatal to
Italy, and to the Roman Hierarchy, he would not suffer it, but prevent the
French.

The Pope being secretly advertised of his purpose (and being, together with
the greatest part of his Cardinals, of opinion, that if the French King were
Emperor, he would by that mean make himself Lord of all Italy, and so his
patrimony should be oppressed, and brought to subjection, and that many other
inconveniences would have ensued) by his Letters and Bulls enjoined the Electors
presently without any delay to choose an Emperor, such a one as should be most
fit for the state and common good: and they knowing his mind (notwithstanding
that they were solicited and urged to the contrary by the French King) by
common consent chose HENRY Earl of Lutzenburgh, upon the first day of
November, in the year of our Lord 1308: Wherein his brother BALDVVIN Bishop of
Treuiere, and one of the Electors did greatly assist Henry Earl of Lutzenburgh
chosen Emperor
him. When his Election was published, and notice given to the French King, he
was much discontented (for he assured himself to have been Emperor) and much
more after that he understood that the Pope had hastened the Electors, and had
authorized them to make the Election; for which, afterward grew some discord
between them. The new chosen Emperor, well accompanied, went to the city of
Aken, where with great solemnity he was crowned; and thence sent his
Ambassadors to the Pope, entreating him to confirm his Election: which the
Pope gladly performed, inioyning him within the term of two years to come to
Rome, there to be crowned by his Legates.

This the Pope did to the end that the Emperor should have endeavored to make
peace in Italy, for there were then many factions and tyrannies. HENRY
accepting these conditions, resolved to come into Italy, and began to provide
for his journey, which neither RODVLPH, ADVLPH, nor ALBERT, his predecessors
would do; and to this effect called a Diet to be held in Spire, whither came
(in a manner) all the Princes. At the same time new cares and troubles arose,
besides his journey for Italy: the first was, that understanding that HENRY
Earl of Carinthia, was king of Bohemia, and that the same Earl was in
possession of the kingdom, the new Emperor (wanting none to incite him
thereto) resolved to depose the said Earl, and to make one of his own sons
King: whereupon he caused the daughter of WENCESLAVS king of Bohemia, and of
the Emperor RODVLPH'S sister, to be brought to Spire; and notwithstanding that
she was four years elder then his son JOHN, yet he married him unto her, and
with this title levied an Army and sent him to the conquest of Bohemia, whither
he was solicited to come by many of that Kingdom. At the same time also a
second occasion of care was offered, which was, to levy an Army and to send
the same against EBERARD Earl of Wittembergh, who being discontent with
HENRIE'S election refused to come to his obedience, and being countenanced by
the French King, took many towns in the Empire. The enterprise of Bohemia had
good success: for the said Earl having (as writes HENRICUS MVCIVS) raised a
power to fight with the Emperor; and the two armies being encamped the one
near to the other, between them many notable skirmishes were maintained; but
in the end the Earl of Carinthia, who was called King, was constrained to
retire, and the Emperors son assaulted the City of Prague, which is the head
of that kingdom, and taking the same, was therein crowned by PETER the
Archbishop of Mentz; and his power presently so much increased, that the Earl
of Carinthia abandoning the Kingdom, went home into his own country; and the
Emperors son JOHN remained King of Bohemia. If he sped well in Bohemia, the
Army The Emperor Henry made his son John K. of Bohemia.
had no less good fortune, which he sent against EBERARD Earl of Wittembergh
for the greatest part of his castles were taken, which (as says NAVCLERVS)
were fourscore: and in the end he himself in the best manner that he could,
was constrained to compound, not without great loss of his estate; which
notwithstanding after the Emperor was dead, he recovered again.

During the time of these troubles, the Emperor forgot not within the time
limited by the Pope to prepare for his journey into Italy: where, when his
coming was certainly known, it caused so great fear, as though it had been a
matter the like whereof had never been seen; for threescore years were now
expired since that any Emperor had been there, even from the time that
FREDERICK the Second died there, who also was King of Naples: that time being
spent in contention and discord in the Empire, by reason of the death of the
said FREDERICK: and afterward in the time of the Emperors ADVLPH and ALBERT,
neither of them would ever come into Italy. The Emperor HENRY being in a
readiness to march with his Army, he first sent his Ambassadors to the Cities
in Italy, and to their Governors, giving them to understand of his coming, and
of his Army; exhorting them to peace, and to lay down the^ Arms, for to that
purpose he principally addressed his journey into that country; and he further
required them to receive him and his Army into their Towns and Cities. His
Ambassadors were very honorably received, and answered generally by them all:
for as there were many factions and partialities, each party desired to win the
Emperors favor: only the Florentines holding themselves for free (having
bought their liberty of the Emperor RODVLPH, and being then very mighty,
having at that time made a league with ROBERT King of Naples, and lying then
encamped before Arezzo) answered the Emperor that they maruailed, that so The
Florentines answer to the Emperor Henry the (...).
wise a Prince as he was, would come into Italy with so great a number of
barbarous people, as it was said he brought with him, seeing that the Emperors
office and duty was to take care to purge that country of barbarous nations,
and not to bring them thither. And whereas he said that they should leave to
make war against the Aretines; they answered, that it also was against his
Imperial office, for it was his part to right wrongs, and to redress
injuries: and whereas those of Arezzo had banished the Guelphs from their
houses, he ought to command them to be restored: and as for receiving him into
their City, they would be advised and consider what ought to be done, and in
time would answer him accordingly. The Emperor took this answer in very ill
part: BLONDVS, PLATINA, and others write, that DANT^ an excellent learned Poet
in that time, understanding of his countrey-mens answer in his absence, said,
that the Florentins were blind and saw not the present estate, seeing they had
given such an answer.

The Emperor having past the Alps, the Earl of Sauoy, and the Marquess of
Monferrato came to receive him, and went with him to Turin; where he and his
wife the Empress were quietly received: with him also came RODVLPH Duke of
Bauiere, and LEOPOLD son to the Emperor ALBERT, who (as were his brethren
FREDERICK, ALBERT, and HENRY) was called Duke of Austria: and the Archbishop of
Treuier, with other Princes, which was in the year of our Lord 1312. At that
time Pope CLEMENT called a general Council to be held in the city of Vienne
in France, whither came three hundred Bishops, besides many other prelates,
wherein the Begardes were condemned for heretics. From Turin the Emperor came
to Aste, whither came unto him some principal heads and Lords of cities,
offering him their service The Emperor Henry's coming into Italy.
and to receive him into their governments. And so came to him PHILIP who was
called Earl of Pauia; SIMON COLLVVIANO of Bercelli; ANTHONY VISERAGO from
Lodi; to all which cities, and to Turin and Aste, the Emperor sent his
Lieutenants to govern in his name, who were received.

From Aste he went to Milan (the head and strength of all Lombardy) wherein
were two houses and factions of great power: viz. the Visconti from whom
descended the Dukes of Milan; and the Turriones which were of the faction of
the Guelphs; and as these two were then of chiefest authority, so they sought
to hinder the Emperors coming into their city: so as there was a great
tumult about the matter: but either party fearing that their adversaries would
join with the Emperor, they both received him into Milan, and he made many of
the Viscounts which were expelled by the Turriones, to come in with him: and
the Emperor to content both parties, and to make them friends, to GVIDO
TVRRIO, he gave the city of Bercelli; and made GALEAZZO Viscount, his
Constable of the city; and left LEOPOLD of Austria with certain companies of
Germans to keep the city in peace. CARRION writes, that before the Emperor
came to Milan, he reconciled the Iurioni, and the Visconti, inioyning them to
live with equal rights in their country which was now restored to their
aatient liberty, and to be content with their patrimonies: but when at the
Emperors entering into Milan, MATTHEW VISCONTI went on the right hand, and GVIDO
TVRRIONI being commanded to go on the left, he grew discontented; and fearing
the loss of his authority, and that his faction would be expelled, he flew to
turbulent courses, causing a tumult in the City after the coronation of HENRY,
so as the Emperor was in no small danger, but the loss fell upon the Author.

The other cities of Lombardy understanding that the Emperor was possessed of
Milan, sent their deputies unto him to offer him their obedience, and received
such Lieutenants as he sent them: and so did those of the contrary faction,
excepting Alexandria and those which were further off, as Padoa, Ferrara, and
Bolonia, which being of the faction of the Guelphes, and in league with the
Florentines, sent not to him. The Emperor within few days after was crowned
with the iron Crown in Milan, which was wont to be done in Monza: for which
and for other occasions, a certain contribution of money was levied in the
city, which (as they thought which paid it) was too excessive: by reason
whereof and of the Germans ill behavior, the people murmuring, took Arms
against the Imperialists and fought with them; and the Emperor sending for his
soldiers into the city, GALEAZZO Viscount, head of that faction, used a
notable (though doubtful and dangerous) stratagem; which was, that he leaving
his father in his house, together with the greatest part of his adherents, went
to LEOPOLD of Austria (who was with the Imperialists) and told him that GVIDO
TVRIONI and his adherents had caused that tumult, to make themselves Lords of
the city, as they already were: but as for him and his friends, they were
still ready to do the Emperor service in ought they should be commanded. It
was an easy matter to persuade him, who had all men in suspicion, to give
credit hereto: and so LEOPOLD and the Imperialists joining with GALEAZZO, set
upon GVIDO and the Turriones, who suspected no such matter, (yet armed and in
order, expecting the issue of that tumult) and wounding and killing many of
them, they drove them from the place which they had taken: and GVIDO TVRRIONI
surmising what the matter might be (seeing The Turriones driven out of Milan.
the Imperialists joined with his adversaries against him) abandoned the city,
and in the best manner he could, with the greatest part of his faction, retired
to Bercelli: in this manner were the Turriones (who were of the faction of the
Guelphs) driven out of Milan: wherefore as soon as this was known, some other
cities which were of that faction, forsook the Emperors service, amongst
which were Crema, and Cremona, which presently by force thrust out the
Emperors Lieutenants, together with the faction of the Gibelins: the like was
also done in Brescia and in Parma. The Emperor leaving Milan under the
government and guard of the Viscounts, which (as he thought) had done him
loyal service, marched with his Army against Crema and Cremona: but as soon
as those of Cremona understood that he was entered their confines, without
making any resistance they submitted, and yielded themselves and their city,
and the Emperor received them to mercy. But those of Crema suffering
themselves to be besieged, were taken by force, and had the walls of their
city rased and dismantelled, and the Emperor otherwise punished them for an
example: whereupon Parma fearing the like, sued to him for pardon. But the
Brescians trusting in the strength of their city, chose rather to hazard
themselves like those of Crema, then to follow the example of Cremona, and so
had the like success: the Emperor besieged them long, and many were slain
both of the besiegers and besieged, but in the end the city was yielded to the
Emperor; who commanded their gates and the most of their Bulwarks to be
thrown down. By these two enterprises the Emperor wanne so great reputation,
that the cities of Verona, Vicenza, Padoa and Treuigi, sent their Ambassadors;
and entreating for peace, offered him their service, and to receive any
garrison that he should send them. His Ambassadors also which he had sent to
Venice, returned, certifying him that the Venecians were willing to do what he
required of them, which was, to furnish him with shipping to convey his Army
(if he pleased) to Rome.

The Emperor having taken order for the affairs of Lombardy, desired to see
the city of Genoa, and being there his wife the Emperesse fell sick and died;
and thither came to him Ambassadors from ROBERT King of Naples, and from
FREDERICK King of Sicilia; both to desire peace and his friendship: but the
request of the King of Naples was held for counterfeit for that he maintained
three thousand horse in Tuscane, in favor of the Florentines and of Luca, who
pleading liberty rebelled against him; and to the end also to relieve Bolonia
and Ferrara if need required. The Emperor dispatched them, some with fained,
and others with unfeigned kind speeches of love and good will, according to
their ambassages; and within few days after departed from Genoa by sea, and
sent his Army by land, which making great spoil in the territory of Luca,
came to Pisa, a city at that time very friendly and much devoted to the
Emperors service, wherein he was received with great joy, and continued there
above two months. There he was advertised of the estate of Rome, and how that
therein were great factions and combustions, some desiring his coming, and
others seeking to hinder the same. Those which sought to let his coming were
the Lord JOHN, who was brother to the King of Naples, who came thither with
some troops, and with him came all the faction of the Vrsins, and were seized
of the Castle S. Angelo, the Capitol, the Vaticane, and other Holds, and of
all Rome beyond Tiber: against whom the Colonois and their faction held the
rest of the city; between whom was daily skirmishing and sl^ghter of either
side: for which, Pope CLEMENT, by whose counsel and instigation the Emperor
came into Italy, was much blamed: for it appeared that where he thought to have
established peace, he kindled war.

The Emperor departing from Pisa toward Rome, and (for that he would not be
pestered with the Florentines) taking his way near to the sea side, sent the
Earl of Sauoy before with part of his horse troops: finally, after some days
stay in Viterbo he came to Rome, where by the Cardinals Legates, and the
Colonois, he was received with great solemnity; the Kings brother of Naples
together with the whole faction of the Vrsins having fortified themselves in
such places as they had taken. The Emperor being entered Rome, how long he
remained there, and what befell him, is not distinctly written: some say that
he stayed there three months, in all which time were daily skirmishings, the
king of Naples sending galleys and soldiers up the river of Tiber to relieve
his brother, who with the Vrsins, held the Vaticane, and the Castle S. Angelo:
and that the Coronation was deferred until they might send to the Pope to
appoint the place wherein it should be solemnized, for it could not be done in
S. PETER'S Church (for that it was held by the enemy) and that the Pope was in
doubt to give order for the Emperors coronation, for that many of his friends
and servants were of a contrary opinion. Others set less time, and write not
that the Pope stood in any such doubt: but they all agree that the Emperor The
Emperor crowned in Rome.
(for that he could not get into S. PETER'S Church) was crowned by the three
Cardinals which were the Popes Legates in Rome, in S. JOHN de Lateran; and that
during the time he continued there, his people fought daily with the
Neapolitans and Vrsins, not only in the streets, but even in the houses also
wherein they dwelt: during the time of which skirmishings he left Rome.

The Emperor being highly displeased with ROBERT King of Naples; leaving Rome
went to Arezzo, which being at his devotion was enemy to the Florentines and
Lucois; whither all the Gibelins which were expelled Florence, Luca, Siena, and
other cities in Tuscane, repaired unto him, and from thence he went to besiege
Florence, in which siege many notable adventures Florence besieged.
passed: but the city was with their own people (together with the Sienois
and Lucois which came to their aid) so well fortified and manned, that it
sufficiently defended it self: whereupon the Emperor having lien six weeks
before it, raised his siege, having first built a fortress on a mountain near
to the city, wherein, and in other Castles and places of greatest importance,
he left munition and garrisons to ouerrunne the Florentines country, and to
make war upon them; and so marching up and down their country for the space
of two months, in the end he went to Pisa: where using more then ordinary
authority of an Emperor, he summoned ROBERT King of Naples to make his
appearance before him, as before his Emperor and sovereign Lord, and to
answer to such matters as should be objected against him, for that he meant
to proceed against him, and to cause him, for such matters as he had attempted
and The Emperor summoned the king of Naples to appear before him in Pisa.
done against him, as well in Rome, as in other parts of Italy, to be indicted of
treason. But King ROBERT making no account of this summons; the Emperor (lying
at the siege of Florence) procured FREDERICK King of Sicilia (with whose son
he purposed to marry his daughter) to make war against him in Pulia: which
FREDERICK putting in execution rigged a fleet, wherein he sent great forces,
which began the war. And in the mean time the Emperor left not to prosecute
the war against the Florentines and the other cities of their faction; and
the Florentines seeing in what distress they were, and fearing that the
Emperor would the next Spring in person again return to the war against
them, sent to yield themselves subject to the king of Naples (reserving certain
preheminences and exemptions) upon condition that he in person, or some other
either his son or his brother should come to relieve them.

The Emperor having made his abode in Pisa, many days, in the midst of
summer (as writes S. ANTHONY) departed thence very ill at ease; and passing
through the territory of Siena (wherein he did much harm) he went to the city
of Arezzo; whither being come, and the time limited to the King of Naples
expired, he pronounced sentence against him, whereby he deprived him of his
kingdom of Naples, and released his subjects from the homage and allegiance
which they ought him; and gave authority to his enemy FREDERICK King of
Sicilia, Robert king of Naples condemned by the Emperor.
to make a conquest thereof for his son, and son in law, which should be,
to the Emperor: which sentence, as soon as Pope CLEMENT understood, he
presently protested the same to be of no effect, alleging that the Emperor
neither could, or had any authority to condemn King ROBERT; for that kingdom
was neither subject nor feudatorie to any but to the Church of Rome; as
appears in the Clementines, in the chapter, Pastoralis de Sententia and re
Iudicata, and made other protestations contai^ in that chapter. With what
leuitie the Pope did it, and with what impudency he does make other Kingdoms
of the christian world subject to the Roman Hierarchy, the form of the
decree does show.

The Emperor departing from Arezzo, with a resolution to have besieged Siena,
imagining that the Florentines seeing themselves on every side oppressed, would
have come to some composition: and being by the way advertised, that in Naples
and in other parts of that kingdom after the publication of his Sentence
pronounced against the King, were some Commotions and Insurrections against
him: he thereupon with a desire to have been revenged of king ROBERT, and to
have made a conquest of that kingdom, resolved to go thither with all his
whole power; and coming within three miles of Siena, he lodged his Army in a
place called Monte aper to: where feeling himself ill at case, (by the advice
of his Physicians) he went thence to the Bathes of Macerata, and then (feeling
no amendment) went to Buonconuento, directing his journey toward Naples,
whereon he had settled his thoughts: all which, together with his other
deseigns were made frustrate by his death, which thorough his infirmity
ouertooke him in the same place; which happened upon the day of the Assumption
of our Lady, he having the same day received the holy Sacrament of our Lords
Supper; wherein (as some say) he was poisoned by a Friar of the Order of S.
DOMINICK, called BERNARDIN, and died thereof the same The death of the Emperor
Henry the Seventh, who was poysonrd in the Host by a Friar.
day: which was so wicked and so odious a fact, that a man would think that no
Christian would have committed, much less a religious man. The same Historians
write, that the Pope understanding that a religious man was accused thereof,
wrote his Letters and Bulls by which he published him for innocent and not
guilty.

This Emperor died in the year of our Lord 1313. in the seventh year of his
reign. Most authors which write of him, say, that he was a lover of justice
and equity, of a pleasing conversation, amiable, valiant, expert in the wars,
of an honest life, a devout Christian and one that feared God: yet BLONDVS
taxes him of indiscretion, and covetousness. He had by his wife the Empress
one son and three daughters; his sons name was JOHN, whom he had already made
King of Bohemia, and was likewise by inheritance from his father, Duke of
Lutzenburgh. The eldest of his daughters called BEATRICE was married to CHARLES
King of Hungary, brother to ROBERT King of Naples, who within one year died in
childbed: the second was MARY, and she was married to CHARLES King of France,
who also died in childbed: the third was married to RODVLPH Count Palatine of
the Rhine. His body was carried to Pisa, and there with great lamentation
solemnly entombed. The Emperor being dead there ensued a great alteration in
all Italy, his Army was dispersed and came to nothing: and great and cruel wars
ensued between the Florentines and Pisans.

There is so little written of the Emperors of Constantinople in these times,
that it is hard to accord one History with another: what I can gather out of
the authors is, that the Emperor ANDRONICVS, of whom we have before made
mention, by reason of his great age, made his son MICHAEL his companion in
the Empire, who presently dyed, and left one son called ANDRONICVS, after the
name of his Grandfather, who rebelling against the old ANDRONICVS after six
years war bereaved him of the Empire; eauing him his life, and the Title of
Emperor. This ANDRONICVS was called the younger, and was a great warrior, and
very valiant. He that will know more of this Emperor, let him read GEORGE
MERVLA in his seventh and eighth books of the History of Milan, and LEONARD
ARETIN in his fourth book of his History of Florence.

THE LIFE OF JEWS, THE FIFTH OF THAT NAME, AND HVNDRETH AND SEVENTH Roman
Emperor; And of his Competitor, FREDERICK.
THE ARGUMENT.
HEnry being dead, and much time spent before the Princes electors did meet,
in the end they were divided, and chose two Emperors, and each endeavored to
defend and maintain his party by Arms. They both were Crowned, and all
Germany was divided into two factions; Frederick was favored by the Pope, yet
he would not confirm any of them. This division increased the troubles in
Italy, wherein were long and cruel wars, and no less in Germany between the
two Emperors, which fought a battle continning 12 hours; at the end whereof
Jews was Victor and Frederick taken prisoner. Jews being sole Emperor he
warred against the Pope, who excommunicated him: so that he was constrained to
set Frederick at liberty; who together with his brother Leopold dyed shortly
after. So as he remained without any ryuall, and without suspicion; but not
without grief, for that he was constrained to come into Italy, called thither
by those of his faction, where ensued many Innouations, by reason of the
factions of the Guelphs and Gibelins. After many accidents he came to Rome,
where he was crowned by Stephen Colonna, having an int ent to have gone to
Naples against his enemy Robert. Upon certain occasions he made a new Pope in
Rome by whom he was absolved: which the other Pope in France understanding,
excommuuinicated him again with greater vehemence; and the new Pope after the
return of the Emperor into Germany fell into the old Popes hand, and this
Emperor could never agreewith the Popes, neither could be absolved from the
Popes curse, so much were they incensed against him. And so the Electors
fearing the Popes fulminations chose another Emperor, which was the occasion
that Germany was again divided. So as this Emperors reign was in the
beginning and ending after one manner: and he in these troubles, overcome with
grief, dyed suddenly, when he had reigned in company and alone thirty three
years.

AFter the decease of the Emperor HENRY (who died in Buonconuento and was
buried in Pisa) the Princes of Germany which were with him, returned home with
some part of his Army, for the most of his soldiers remained in Italy to get
pay and entertainment in the wars, which were already begun, and as it seemed
would never have been ended; the rest were dispersed into sundry parts. But it
was one whole year after his decease before the electors chose him any
successor, by reason that it was long before they met, and also for that they
could not agree in their election; so as (the Empire being without an head)
there was in all things a great confusion, and the worst of all was, that in
all their treaties and negociations, they could never agree (as reason
required) but were still divided: at length meeting, it seems most of them
made choice of FREDERICK Duke of Austria; for HENRY Archb. of Colein. ALBERT
duke of Saxony, and VALDEMAR Marq. of Brandenburgh, though absent, by his
Agent, took his part; all which were his consins-germans, his fathers sisters
sons and Nephews to the Emperor RODVLPH; and RODVLPH Duke of Bauiere and
Count Palatine of Rhine, had promised him his voice: but JOHN King of Bohemia,
PETER Archbishop of Mentz, and BALDVVIN Archbishop of Treuiere, were so
contrary unto him, that thinking to get the voice of RODVLPH Duke of Bauiere
and Count Palatine on their side (procuring also the voice of the Marquess of
Brandeburghs deputy to that effect) they resolved by all means possible to
make JEWS Duke of Bauaria, Emperor: and either party was so obstinate in
their resolution, that making their election with the accustomed solemnities,
upon S. LVKE's day, which was in the year of our Lord 1314, in steed of one
Emperor, they chose 2. The K. of Bohemia, the Archb. of Treuiere and of Mentz
and NICHOLAS de Bo^c (who was deputy for the Marquess of Brandenburgh) chose
JEWS Duke of Bauiere: And the Archbishop of Colen, the Duke of Saxony, and
RODVLPH Count Palatine of Rhine and Duke of Bauiere, to hold his Jews Duke of
Bauiere, and Frederick duke of Austrich both chosen Emperors by the Electors.
word (notwithstanding that JEWS was his own Brother) chose FREDERICK of
Austria; and so there was a division in the election; and either party
maintained that he whom they had chosen, was and ought to be Emperor. JEWS
his party alleged that he was chosen by most voices, for of seven he had
four. FREDERICK and his friends pretended that the Marquess of Brandenburghs
proctor had falsified his authority, who bringing in writing the hand of the
Marquess for FREDERICK, rased it out, and wrote JEWS in the place; wherefore
he was the man that was chosen: So as all Germany, the Princes and Cities, was
divided into two factions, the one holding for the one party, and the other for
the other: and from contrariety of opinions, they came to blows; and the war
continued between them for the space of eight or nine years, until it ended
in such manner as hereafter you shall hear.

JEWS departing from Franckford with the aid of those which took his part;
went to the City of Aken, where he was crowned by the Archbishop of Colen: but
for as much as FREDERICK could not get into it, (which was the right place) he
was crowned in another City. The solemnity of the Coronations being ended,
they could not send to the Pope for that the Sea had been void above two
years, through the death of CLEMENT the Fifth; but either of them sent to the
Princes, Cities, and Potentates, Signifying by their Letters and messengers,
the equity of their causes, and to justify their election. And some being
persuaded by the one party and others by the other, the most part of the Cities
of the lower Germany as far as Colen, held for JEWS; and so did (in a
manner) all Sueuia, excepting the City of Vlme, and some Towns which were of
the contrary faction: and in high Germany and in Swisserland, almost all the
Cities held FREDERICK for Emperor; and either of the Princes Electors took his
part whom they had chosen, and so they were divided: yet the greatest part
favored JEWS more then FREDBRICK; but his brethren ALBERT and LEOPOLD did so
assist him, that leuying an Army and taking the field, he besieged Smina in
Sueuia, and brought it to such extremity that the inhabitants sent to JEWS
for relief; who raised his whole power, and with the aid of the King of
Bohemia, and the Archbishop of Treuiere, came to free the City: FREDERICK being
advertised of his coming, went to meet him, and near to the River of Nechar,
joined battle, where both the Emperors fought in their own persons: and the
battle was so furious that it lasted the greatest part of the day; so as the
dark night parted them without any apperance of victory; yet HENRICUS MVCIVS
says, that JEWS A battle between Frederick and Jews
lost more men then FREDERICK: and so FREDERICK returning to the siege which he
had begun, JEWS went to the City of Strausburgh which held for FREDERICK, and
was received into it by means of the great privileges and exemptions which he
gave and promised them; which FREDERICK'S brother LEOPOLD understanding, he
raised a great power of his subjects and friends, and came to make war
against such as held for JEWS, and encamped himself before Spire; whereof as
soon as JEWS was certified, he departed from Strausburgh and with his
greatest forces went to seek LEOPOLD, with a desire to have fought with him
before he joined with his brother; but FREDERICK made such speed that he
joined with LEOPOLD before they could meet: Whereupon JEWS not daring to
fight with them both together retired, with some loss both of his people and
reputation, resolving to make war after another manner without hazarding any
battle, and so took his way into Bauiere, to war against his own brother,
for that he having chosen FREDERICK took his part, who, being expelled Germany,
fled into England, where after some years he died in banishment. His wife
MECHTILDA, daughter to the Emperor ADVLPH, remained in Austria with her sons,
where she also died. Soon after, JEWS called home his brothers sons, and
restored unto them Heidelberg, with some other Towns; so as, according to the
custom in civil discords, the beginning of the war was the expulsion of his
brother.

This happened in the year of our Lord 1316: and in the same year Pope JOHN the
three and twentieth was chosen at Lions in France, after two years and odd
months that the seat had been void; who, presently coming to Au^ion, favored
the party of FREDERICK of Austria: but for that time he confirmed neither. The
war between these two Emperors (notwithstanding that in the space of four or
five years the one sought not to give the other battle) was so cruel and
general through all the Country, and between the Cities and some Princes, as
the like had not been seen; whereof ensued many violencies and robberies by the
highways: insomuch that for redress thereof, the Cities of Strausbourgh,
Spire, Worms, Ment^, and others, made a league, and agreed to raise certain
companies of foot and horse to guard and assure the ways and passages for
merchants and travelers, whithersoeuer they went. And so was Germany afflicted
with combustions and misery, without any battle or exploit of Arms worth the
writing between the two Emperors, until the year 1323; in which time what
happened in Italy, from the time of the Emperor HENRY the Seventh until then,
we will briefly relate, especially in Lombardy, being a matter concerning the
Empire.

When the Emperor HENRY died, the Viscounts (from whom descended the Dukes of
Milan) were so absolute Lords thereof, that they being no longer content with
that City, MATTHEW Viscount, GALEAZZO and the rest, took Pauia and other
cities; which they might easily effect, having the aid of the Germans, which
had been left there by the Emperor; they also taking part with the Emperor
JEWS: and as the Empire was divided and in strife, JEWS, to have of his
side so puissant a people and family, sent him Ambassadors and very kind and
friendly Letters. But Pope JOHN being of the contrary faction, as soon as he
was chosen, persuaded FREDERICK to send his brother HENRY into Italy; who, in
hope that the Pope would have confirmed his election, did so. But his going was
to small effect, for he came but near to the City of Pauia, and from thence
returned: for, as the Imperialists ever maintained the faction of the Gibelins,
and the Pope the Guelphs; so he, for that he could not hold with both parties,
returned into Austria: by reason whereof, the Gibelins prevailed in Lombardy
against the Pope, and against King ROBERT of Naples, who were of the contrary
faction; insomuch that MATTHEW Viscount of Milan, being of the Gibelins, with
the aid of CANNIS SCALIGER, Governor of Verona, purposed to have taken Genoa,
under color to have restored the SPINOLAS and the DORIAS, who were banished
thence for that they were Gibelins (the Guelphs being of greatest power in that
City) and sent his son MARK Viscount thither with an Army, who besieged the
City; and aid coming to either side, the war was very sharp, and the fiege was
one of the most cruel that has been seen; insomuch that the Genoais, to
obtain aid and succor, became subject to the King of Naples for ten years.
Before and after which siege there was cruel war between the Pisans and the
Florentines; the King of Naples assisting the Florentines; and other Princes
and Cities, the Pisans: a matter too long to be related.

The power of the Viscounts daily increasing in Lombardy, the Pope, who was
their enemy, sought a means to draw the French King to send his nephew PHILIP
with an Army into Italy; which he did: and coming into Lombardy, many things
happened which I have no time to relate; but the conclusion is, that he returned
again into France, without doing any thing worthy memory. The siege of Genoa
continuing, MATTHEW Viscount besieged Bercelli, and took it, expelling the
Turriones, who were his ancient enemies: so as at this time the Viscounts were
Lords and in possession of the Cities of Milan, Pauia, Placencia, Lodi,
Cremona, Bergamo, Nouarra, Bercelli, Terdona and Alexandria, besides others
which were his confederates; as, Luca, and CASTRVCHO the Gouerner thereof, the
Cities of Pisa and Arezzo, and the Marquess of Ferrara, a City belonging to
the Church; and SCALIGER of Verona: against whom ROBERT King of Naples, the
Florentines, the Pope, and all those which were of the faction of the Guelphs,
waged war. The siege of Genoa continued five years; wherein many accidents
befell both by sea and land; whither the King of Naples and the Pope sent
threescore galleys to the relief thereof: and in the end the City was not
taken, but the siege was raised, and many matters besell which I cannot write,
for that I am to return to my history of JEWS and FREDERICK; both which were
called, and pretended to be Emperors.

The eightth year being now expired since these two made war, and FREDERICK
pretending to make a conquest of the Country of Bauiere, whereof the Emperor
JEWS was called Duke, and was in possession (as Protector to his nephew,
through the death of his brother RODVLPH) he levied 2200 armed pikes, and a
great number of other footmen which were his subjects, and of the King of
Hungary, and other his friends: and therewith (being accompanied with his
brother HENRY, and other Princes and great men, daily expecting the coming of
his brother LEOPOLD out of Sueuia to ioyn with him, with eight hundred men at
Arms, and a great number of foot) he departed from Austria, and entered Bauiere,
wherein he took Towns and Castles.

Being there for a time master of the field, his enemy JEWS in the mean time
was not idle: but of his own forces, the Kings of Bohemia, the Archbishops of
Treuier, and other of his friends which being absent sent their aid, he levied
an Army containing above thirty thousand foot, and about two thousand men at
Arms. With these forces he went to seek his enemy, with a resolution to give
him battle before that his brother LEOPOLD should ioyn with him; which
FREDERICK purposed to have deferred until his brothers coming: but JEWS came
so near him, and gave him so many occasions, that, contrary to the opinion of
most of his friends, he resolved to hazard a battle; and so upon a morning, in
the month of September, in the year of our Lord 1323, each of these
competitors marshalling his squadrons, and both the one and the other assuring
himself that in the victory consisted the possession of the Empire, with equal
power and courage most valiantly beginning the fight, they maintained A battle
betwixt the Emperors Jews and Frederick, wherein Frederick was ouerthrown and
taken
the same with great fury until it was dark night; that Author which sets
down least time, says, that the battle lasted twelve hours: and in the end
JEWS having the victory, FREDERICK and his brother HENRY valiantly fighting
were taken prisoners, and many others of great account were taken and slain.

It is written, that in this battle were slain four thousand horsemen, and so
great a multitude of foot, that they number them not: so as the victors
received no less loss than the vanquished. After this notable victory, the
most of the Cities and Princes which held with FREDERICK (conforming themselves
with the time) yielded obedience to JEWS: and so he remained sole Emperor,
whom all men imagined would have put FREDERICK to death; but he, receiving him
to mercy, sent him prisoner to the Castle of Trisnir. FREDERICK'S brother
LEOPOLD (who as I said came to ioyn with him) understanding that his brother
was overthrown and taken, was wonderfully grieved; and the more, when he knew
that if he had forborne to fight until his coming, he might have obtained the
victory. This passion continuing in him, he never left to molest the Emperor
LEVVLS during his life; first procuring his brothers liberty, and afterward in
revenge to execute the wrath and displeasure which he had conceived.

In this manner JEWS, by the overthrow and imprisonment of his enemy
FREDERICK, remained sole Emperor: but he was not therefore free from troubles
and wars; for, as he was chosen in discord and controversy, so his Reign
(though of long continuance) was ever unquiet and full of crosses and troubles:
wherefore the history of his time will be longer than ordinarily of others.
When he had obtained this victory, he sent an Ambassador to Pope JOHN the 23
(who then lay in Auinion) and desiring him to confirm his election, yielded
apparent reason for the same. Pope JOHN, who had ever been his adversary, would
not grant his request, whereof FREDERICK'S brother LEOPOLD was the principal
occasion; who leaving his estate of Austria to his brothers OTHO and ALBERT,
came into France to the Pope to incense him against the Emperor JEWS, and to
entreat him to command him to resign the Empire, and to release his brother:
and thence he went to the French King to procure the like; in both which places
he found good entertainment and favor: and they sent their Letters and
Ambassadors to the Emperor, requesting and requiring him to release FREDERICK,
and presently to set him at liberty: but he, making his excuses, would not
perform what they required; and knowing that the Pope was his enemy, he wrote
his Letters of favor, and sent authority to MATTHEW Viscount, and to his son
GALEAZZO, Gouerners of Milan and of other Cities in Italy, to govern the same
for him; and he sent soldiers to them, and to others of the Gibelins.

The Pope being heerof advertised (assembling many Bishops in Auinion, together
with his Consistory of Cardinals, by the consent of the French King, and
through LEOPOLD'S entreaty, which solicited the same) excommunicated the
Emperor, and alleged for his reason, that he favored such as were enemies to
his Church in Lombardy and in Italy; and therewith assigned him the term of
three months; within which, he renouncing the election which was made of him,
should appear before him, to answer to what should be objected; and should
recall the forces which he had sent to the Viscounts in Italy, and other
enemies to his Church. The Emperor JEWS answered modestly, that he had sworn
at his election to maintain justice, and therefore he had assisted Galeace in a
just cause. Moreover, by the same oath he was bound, that being chosen he
should perform the office of an Emperor. Therefore the election was made, that
he should be a true defender of justice, and maintainer of peace in all his
dominions; the defense whereof was recommended to the Emperor, and every Power
was bound by the word of God to do that which belonged to his office. Neither
was the power to carry the sword, given by the Pope, but by God: wherefore he
maintained, that he neither could nor would renounce the Empire which was
given him from God; and if this answer would not satisfy the Pope, he would
appeal to a lawful Council: and then he published his reasons and excuses
through all Italy; where at that time were most cruel wars made by the Popes
Legates and Captains, and the King of Naples; against the Viscounts, the
Pisans, the Lucois, and other Cities and Princes Gibelins, whom the Emperor
LEWIS favored and assisted; whereof GEORGE MERVLA, LEONARD ARETIN, ANTHONY
and MACHIA^L, have written at large.

The hatred between the Emperor and the Pope so much increased through the
instigation of LEOPOLD of Austria, for that he would not release his brother
FREDERICK, that the Pope, meeting the French King, consulted with him how he
might depose the Emperor, and give the Empire to the King of France: but the
Emperor LEWIS was of so great power in Germany, that this parley took small
effect; nevertheless, to pacific LEOPOLD, and FREDERICK'S other kinsmen and
friends (taking FREDERICK'S oath, and such other securily as he could give him,
that he would no more take upon him the name of Emperor, neither practice The
Emperor Frederick set at l^erty by the Emperor Lewis
or procure the same) he released him out of prison, and suffered him to go at
liberty into his Country of Austria, where he after for a small space lived in
peace and sorrow. Some write, that after three years imprisonment he was
released upon these conditions, that it should be lawful for him to bear the
name of Emperor whilst he lived, but not to vsurp any authority or
jurisdiction. HENRY his brother, who was taken prisoner with him, freed himself
by the restoring of certain Towns and Castles in Morauia, which the Austrians
had in this war taken from the Bohemians: and LEOPOLD, notwithstanding that
he saw his brother at liberty, never desisted from molesting LEWIS, but yet
could do little for the small time he lived; and both of them dying without
issue to succeed them, with their death the controversy ceased.

JEWS being freed from this quarrel with FREDERICK and LEOPOLD, and Letters
coming daily to him from the Gibelins which took his part in Italy (soliciting
him to com thither) and from the City of Rome it self, he with a desire to
rule and command, and to be crowned there, resolved to go: wherefore, causing
a Diet to be held in Spire, he gave the Princes of Germany to understand of his
resolution; who, moved with his reasons, consented to his going, and some
offered to serve and accompany him; and all, to aid him with men and money. And
so leuying an Army he departed out of Germany, carrying with him his second
wife called MARGARET, daughter to the Earl of Holland, and came to the City of
Tr^nt (in the year of our Lord 1327, and in the thirteenth of his Reign,
reckoning from the beginning of him and FREDERICK) where he stayed: for;
thither he had appointed all the Cities which were at his devotion to send
their Agents, to treat of what was to be done. Thither came Ambassadors from
GALEAZZO Viscount of Milan, and from his brothers, JOHN, MARK, LVCHIN and
STEVEN (for, their father MATTHEW was dead) and from the Marquess of Man^, and
from him of Verona, and the cities of Pisa and Luca, and the rest within
Lombardy which were in league with Milan, and from many others; who, making
great offers to aid and assist him with men and money, counseled him presently
to march forwards; and he did so, and came directly to Brescia, and thence to
Milan, and there was crowned with the Crown of iron: where he stayed above
thirty days after his coronation. And from thence, as some say, sending to
entreat the Pope to confirm his election, and to absolve him of his
excommunication, he st^ied there longer than he thought to have done, to get
money to pay his soldiers: by reason whereof a greater contribution was to
beleuied in Milan, and in other cities of the league, than they willingly would
have paid: and GALEAS Viscount, sometimes by en treaty, and sometimes by
counsel, sought to have avoided the tribute which was to be levied upon his
country: whereupon the Emperor made him, his sons and brothers, to be
apprehended, and deposed them from the government of the City; and, to win the
good will of the people, and to show that he gave them liberty, he granted that
they should choose among themselves 28 Citizens and one President, which should
have the government thereof. With this bait he obtained what he desired, and
the tax which he had laid upon them: which deed (although it is written after
sundry manners) was the cause of great alterations; and that the Emperor was
noted of ingratitude and excessive cruelty, so to deal with those who had
called him into the country, although it cannot be denied but that they were
Tyrants.

Having dispatched his business in Lombardy, he took his way through Tuscane
toward Rome, by the procurement of CASTRVCHO, who was one of the most valiant
Captains of his time; and commanding in Luca, maintained the war against the
Florentines, and against CHARLES the son of ROBERT King of Naples, who with a
great garrison defended that City by his fathers direction, to whom it was
become subject: and he carried with him GALEAZZO Viscount and his brethren,
prisoners.

The Emperor, being comn to Luca, was by CASTRVCHO received with very great joy
and solemnity: and from thence desiring to go to Pisa, the Pisans were in doubt
whether they should receive him or no; but in the end he was entertained, and
made his abode there about two months. During which time, CHARLES of Naples
being with great forces in Florence, the Emperor resolved to hold on his
journey without troubling himself with him; and being in Pisa, released GALEAS
Viscount of Milan, and his sons, AZZO and MARK, upon their oaths; and at
CASTRVCHO his entreaty, whose authority (gotten by his valor in Arms) was
then very great: who afterward were released from all, in such manner as you
shall hear. The Emperor going from Pisa, accompanied by CASTRVCHO with 1500
horse of his own, went along the sea coast toward Rome, purposing (as some
write) after his coronation to have gone against the King of Naples, who was
his great enemy: whereupon, as soon as the Emperor was comn near to Rome,
CHARLES departing from Florence toward Naples to the aid of his father, left an
excellent Captain called PHILIP CARNOSENSE, in Florence: and within short space
after, this CHARLES dying (his father having no more sons) left two daughters.

The Emperors coming being known in Rome, caused great dissension and tumults;
but as the greatest part was willing to receive him, and the rest to the
contrary, in the end he was solemnly received: but his coronation, and who
crowned him, where, and upon what day, is diversely written; which often happens
among those which are present, much more among Historiographers: the truth is,
that JEWS was crowned in Rome by the hands of STEPHEN The Emperor Jews the
Fis^ crowned in Rome.
COLONNA, who at that time was Vicar of Rome (an office and government then
newly erected) yet LEONARD ARETIN and ANTHONY say, that his son SARRA COLONNA
crowned him, and that he was crowned against the will of the Pope or his
Legates, yet with great applause of the people both secular and regular.

It is written, that being in Rome, the Emperor would not be crowned before he
had delivered unto the Cardinals and Bishops, and then unto the Senate
consisting of many worthy men, the injuries which Pope JOHN the 23 had done
him, and had understood that they approved his cause and affection to the
Commonweal; referring the business to them, and promising to observe
whatsoever they should decree. He affirmed, that he did constantly believe the
doctrine of the Catholic Church, and did always wish a general peace:
whereto both the clergy and Senate answered, that they held that Pope JOHN the
22 had not done rightly, for that he had made decrees in so great a business
without a Synod, or knowledge of the cause, and had followed them with
excommunications, and therefore (knowing he was free from all false opinions)
they would ioyn with him.

JEWS being crowned, together with his Empress, he was called Emperor and
Semper AVOVSTVS; and the news being dispersed over Italy, there repaired to
him many chief men of the Gibelins: and he being very puissant, and accompanied
by the valiant CASTRVCHO (of whom next to the Emperor was made chiefest
account) to justify his coronation and his other actions in the judgment of
the people; maintaining, that Pope JOHN the three and twentieth, who then was in
Auinion, neither was, neither ought to be held for Pope, he of his own
authority created one PETER de Goruaria, a Franciscane Friar, Pope; which Friar
(as writes PLATINA) had been a married man, and in his wives time took that
habit: and, he, accepting the Papacy, was called NLCHOLAS, and made Cardinals
and Bishops, and held a pontifical Court; and the Emperor gave him the
obedience and honor, as to a Pope; and being absolved of his excommunication,
was confirmed in his Empire, and had else what he would desire: which was done
against the will of many Priests and other regular persons, who therefore left
Rome; yet there were others which, approving the same, took part of the benefit.

When these news were brought to Pope JOHN, he aggravating his censures and
excommunications, proclaimed him for no Emperor, but a Tyrant and an Usurper of
the Empire. The Pope excommunicated the Emperor.
The Emperor being in Rome, the Empress bare him a son, called LVDOVICVS
ROMANVS; and making preparation to go in person against the King of Naples, he
practiced with FREDERICK King of Sicilia to do the like: but, staying longer in
Rome than was expedient, it happened that the Captain whom CHARLES of Naples had
left with the garrison in Florence; together with the Florentines, surprised
the City of Pistoia, which was at CASTRVCHO his devotion, and in league with
Pisa and Luca: whereof when CASTRVCHO (being then with the Emperor in Rome) was
advertised, he for fear to lose the rest, presently departed, and coming
thither, found great resistance; but in the end he valiantly recovered the
City. CASTRVCHO his departure from the Emperor made him so to alter his
resolution, that, giving over the enterprise of Naples, he departed with his
Pope from Rome (wherein he left the best order that he could for his purpose,
first establishing two Gouerners, one of the family of the Vrsins, and the
other of the Colonnois, which were called the Emperors Vicars) and then he
took his way toward Florence; where when it was known that he was coming, all
men were of opinion that he would have taken that City by force, holding it not
possible to be defended, since that CASTRVCHO was in his service, against whom
alone the Florentines could hardly make their party good: but it pleased God to
dispose thereof after another manner; for, CASTRVCHO (in whom he reposed his
chiefest trust) died, and his death caused so great an alteration, that the
Emperor by his death, and through the loss of many of his people, and also for
that others mutined, resolved to return into Germany, first placing his
Lieutenants in Pistoia and in Luca, out of which he put the sons and
kinsfolks of CASTRVCHO: such are the rewards which ungrateful Princes use to
bestow upon the children of those which have done them good and faithful
service. At the same time also died in Pisa, GALEAS Viscount (tyrant of Milan)
deprived of that dominion; and the Emperor for a great sum of money, gave
leave to his son AZZO to return to Milan, which he promised the Emperor
toward the payment of his soldiers before his departure, and left his brother
MARK in pawn for the same. Coming to Milan, he was received with great
affection, into the same place and authority his father held; and recouerd in
Milan the money promised, and delivered the same to the Germans, sent by the
Emperor; who, forgetting to come therewith to Pisa, returned to their houses.

The Emperor leaving Pisa, resolving to continue his journey into Germany, left
his Pope there behind him; who after, by the practice of one BONIFACE of Pisa,
was taken and brought to Auinion, and coming in a private habit before the
Pope, dyed in his power a prisoner. The Emperor passing through Lombardy into
Germany, AZZO Viscount would not receive him into the City, nor was the Emperor
able to assault it. And so, leaving Italy, he left neither the peace nor the
good government which he found there: but the City of Pisa, and others which
had held for him, when he was gone, cast out his Lieutenants and Gouerners; and
the former tyrants therein, took mo Towns and Cities, most of which were
Gibelins: and those of the house of GONZAGA then made themselves absolute lords
of Mantoua, which they hold till this day.

It seems that the long continuance of their possession has made their title
just and lawful, adding thereto the confirmations made afterward by Emperors
and Popes after sundry sorts: and some Captains also had tyrannized: as,
GALEOTTO MALATESTA in Arimino; MANFREDO PIO in Carpi; RICHARD MANFREDI in
Fauencia, and others in many other places. But for all this, the factions of
the Guelphs and Gibelins was so rooted in Italy, that all the Gibelins which
took his part presently solicited the Emperor for his speedy return: for, by
his absence, the Guelphs, with the aid of the Florentins, the K. of Noples and
the Pope, warred upon them: but the Emperor, being otherwise busied in Germany,
could not return, though he desired the same. But JOHN K. of Bohemia by his
direction levied an Army and came into Italy; who past many adventures which
for breuity I omit: in fine, he thinking to please both parties, was called
Italies peacemaker: and he procuring many parlies with the Popes Legates,
thereby displeased both the one and other party, as it ordinarily happens to
those who seek to pacify two contrary factions, and fell into suspicion with
the Emperor, but much more with the Lords of Italy: whereupon, AZZO Viscount
Lord of Milan, MASTINO de la Scala, Lord of Verona, PHILIP GONZAGA Marquess of
Mantoa, VBERTINO di Carrara Lord of Padoa, the Marquess of Ferrara, and some
others, as ROBERT King of Naples, and the Florentines which until then had
been their enemies, joined together in a league and confederacy, promising that
they would protect and defend the one the other against the whole world: for
the which not only the Emperor, but the Pope also was very much discontented;
and there ensued great changes and alterations in all matters and affairs in
Italy, which I have no time to relate.

The Emperor seeing himself excommunicate, and that the Pope desisted not from
proceeding against him, persuaded all men that he was unjustly accused; and
fearing some alteration, with fair words, large gifts, and good entertainment,
satisfied the Lords and Princes of Germany, seeking otherwise to be absolved,
and some means of reconciliation, which was a matter almost impossible to be
effected: for, the King of France, in whose country and (as we may say) power
the Pope and his Cardinals then were, notwithstanding that the Pope would, yet
he would not consent thereto; and so the matter continued till the death of
Pope JOHN, which was in the year of our Lord one thousand, three hundred,
thirty and four, having been Pope 19 years and four months: at which time the
States of Carinthia and Tirol came to be united to the house of Austria.

Matters being in such confusion as we have declared, and Pope JOHN being dead,
the Cardinal of Saint Prisca, whose name was JACOB, born in Toulouse in
France, was chosen Pope; who was a Monk of the Order of CISTEAVX, and was
called BENEDICT the Twelfth. Being installed, he ratified and renewed the
Sentence pronounced by his Predecessor against the Emperor; which he did so
speedily, that it was thought to have been done through the instigation of the
French King: but within few days after, the King desiring the Pope to make
him his Vicar or Lieutenant General in Italy, and to give him the tenth part
of the Church revenues and first fruits throughout all Christendom (therewith
to make a conquest of Jerusalem) he so much troubled the Pope with that
request, that he made show to be much discontented therewith; and began in
secret to give ear to the Emperors party: whereof he being advertised, sent him
a solemn Embassage, praying and entreating him to absolve him, and to approve
his election; whereto the Pope made a pleasing answer, and the matter was at
the point to have been concluded: but the Kings of France and of Naples
(enemies to the Emperor) so terrified the Pope and his Cardinals, that he durst
not perform it; so as the Emperors Ambassadors returned with good words of no
effect: and the like happened to the Ambassadors sent by the Princes and Cities
of the Empire, the next year following. Whereupon, forasmuch as at that time
there were great wars between EDWARD King of England, and PHILIP the French
king, about the succession and right to the Crown of France, the Emperor entered
into league with the King of England; so as there was great trouble and
dissension betwixt the one and other party: but in the end the French King,
seeking the Emperors friendship, promised to cause the Pope to absolve him, to
the end that he should stand his friend; so as the Emperor, through the great
desire he had to be confirmed in the Empire by the Pope, came to a composition
with him. With this confidence in the French King, the Emperor sent his
Ambassadors into France; the which, together with the Kings Ambassadors, went
to Auinion to treat of the matter: but the Pope with diverse reasons so
prolongd the conclusion, that it plainly appeard that it would take no good
effect; which made the Emperor to suspect the King: for, it was held for
certain, that the Pope would therein have satisfied the King, as in many other
matters he had done, even against his own will; which was so ever as long as
the Court of Rome remained in France, and is the reason why the Germane
Historians, treating of the Emperors affairs, say, that the King of France made
show to desire that which he would not have, and the Pope to have that which he
desired not.

The Emperor despairing to come to any agreement with the Pope, seeing that his
Ambassadors returned without any such end or conclusion as he expected,
returned to his former rigor: and assembling a general Diet or Council, he
sought out learned men to pen his resolution; and finding such as were for his
purpose (as Princes never want) after many matters The Emperors in^unction made
against the pope.
treated of, he seeking to get the good will of the Princes, caused an
iniunction to be dispatched, wherein he affirmed the Sentence pronounced
against him by Pope JOHN to be unjust and of none effect, and that his
excommunication did no way bind him: wherefore he commanded, upon great
penalties, that no man should obey his interdictions and censures in that
behalf, alleging other matters contained in the said injunction, which the
Popes friends would not should be revealed in any public history: which
injunction (being published, and commanded to be observed) caused great
alterations in Germany, especially amongst the Clergy; some holding with the
Emperor, others with the Pope. But DANTE, a man at that time, of a most
excellent wit and profoundly learned, wrote a Book called The Monarchy, wherein
he seemed to favor the Emperor; for which he was afterward condemned, and
his Book held for heresy: and other great men wrote Books and Treatises
defending the Popes supreme authority, alleging the same to be above all
principalities and powers; which (besides other reasons) they sought to prove
by histories: as, how that Pope ADRIAN translated the Eastern Empire into the
West, in the person of CHARLES the Great; and after, in process of time, the
Popes removed the same out of France into Germany, in the person of OTHO the
First; and how that many Emperors were excommunicated by them, yea and deprived
of their Empires; and how that the manner and authority to choose them, was
given by the Popes, and from them was derived the power and authority of the
Princes Electers; and that the Emperors were confirmed and crowned by the
Popes. Yet there wanted not some which defended the Emperors cause; and so the
Popes curses and excommunications were contemned and rejected: but he, The
Emperor again excommun^cate, and deprived by the Popes censures.
knowing that the Emperor had published the said Letter against him, renewed
the same; and employing his whole power, alleged the Empire to be void, and
that the government thereof belonged unto him until that a new Emperor were
chosen, according to the declaration made by CLEMENT the Fifth in the Council
of Vienne. And understanding that the Emperor purposed to come into Italy, he
did one thing which then was held for a point of wisdom, but experience
teaches, that it was very prejudicial to his estate; which was, that he made
those Tyrants or Princes which in Italy held the Towns of the Empire, his
Vicars or Lieutenants in the same Towns they held; to the end they should be
resolute enemies to the Emperor; and, commanding that they should neither
receive or obey the Emperor, gave them power and authority to defend and
maintain the same, as Lieutenants to the Church: which were, LVCHINO Viscount,
Tyrant or Gouerner of Milan, and other Cities; MASTHINO SCALA in Verona and
Vicenza; PHILIP GONZAGA in Mantoa and Reggio; ALBERTINO di Carra in Padoa and
other places; O^IZO da Este in Ferrara and Modena: and forasmuch as these were
the Churchlands, he enjoined them to pay him yearly ten thousand Ducats of
gold; with which title they were the more strongly possessed of those estates.

This contention continuing between the Emperor and the Pope, there failed not
some who usurped the Popes Towns: to which, or to the most part of them, in
requital of what the Pope had done to him, and to bind them to do him the
better service, and the more to incense them against the Pope, the Emperor gave
and sent titles and charters, making them Lieutenants for the Empire in the
cities and lands appertaining to the Church of Rome: which they accepted and
held, and the offspring of many of them have continued therein until this day.
Amongst which was GALEOTTO MALATESTA in Arimino; ANTHONY FER^TRANO in the City
of Vrbin; GENTIL VARANO in Camerino; GVIDO POL^NTA in Rauenna; JOHN MANFREDO in
Fauencia; ISMADETIO in Sanseuerino; and NICHOLAS BOSCARETO in Esio: and in like
manner others had the government of, and continued by succession in, other
Towns and Cities.

These matters passing in this manner in Germany and Italy, Pope BENEDICT being
dead (who had held that sea the space of seven years and three months) in his
place was chosen in A^inion, in the month of May, in the year of our Lord
1342, Pope CLEMENT the Sixth, in whose time were great alterations as well in
the Cities of Lombardy as of Tuscane. The Emperor sought to come to some
composition with the new Pope (as the Germane Authors write) but there was no
peace to be expected: for, the Pope alleged, that the Emperor sued not for
peace in such humble and submissiue manner as he ought to have done. But
CVSPINIAN, NAVCLERVS and MVCIVS write, that by means of the French King, who
fained to be a good mediator between them, the Emperor sent his Agents to Pope
CLEMENT with full authority, to accept of any condition of peace that he would
propound unto them: to which the Pope gave a certain note in writing, wherein
they in the name of the Emperor were enjoined to confess the Emperor to have
erred, and to have been a schismatic, and disobedient to the Church; and
moreover, that the Emperor should presently renounce his right to the Empire,
together with the possession thereof; and that he should not intermeddle
therein without The intolerable pride of Pope Clement the Sixth.
the Popes permission; and that the Emperors person, together with his sons,
should be at the Popes disposing: all which Articles the Emperors Ambassadors
accepted and granted in his name; whereat the Pope wondered.

These rigorous and terrible Articles and conditions being brought to the
Emperor, he holding them for unjust and intolerable, sent the copy of them to
the Princes and Cities of the Empire; and therewith summoned a general Diet or
Parliament to be held in Franckford, where with a grave speech he complained
of the Pope, and showed what his Ambassadors without his knowledge or consent
had yielded unto; alleging these demands to be made but only to ruinate the
state of the Empire, with other matters which he thought might cause greater
indignation against the Pope, and move the Princes the more to favor his
proceedings. And his words wrought such effect, and the Popes demands seemed so
dishonest and intolerable, that they adiudging the same to be rejected and not
to be allowed, made great offers to the Emperor for the defense of his person
and estate: yet some were of a contrary opinion, who affirmed that the Pope
ought to be obeyed, and that the matter ought to be referred to him, as it was
sworn and promised. He which held this opinion, was JOHN King of Bohemia, and
his son CHARLES, who were discontent with the Emperor for some other causes:
but the Council resolved to send Ambassadors to Pope CLEMENT, to show him that
the conditions ought not be performed, and so Ambassadors went: what ensewed
we will soon tell you; which was, that the Pope holding himself for deluded,
was so enraged, that he again proceeding against the Emperor, sent to all
parts copies of the fulminations and censures given by Pope JOHN, with a
relation of his offenses, including the same within the compass of heresy;
and also that he had chosen and installed another Pope, and that he was not
according to due order chosen Emperor, but by deceit and bribery; and that he
never was Emperor, neither ought to be so called; and that he gave Bishoprics
and Prelacies at his pleasure, placing such as pleased him, and displacing such
as were preferred by the Pope; and that he making marriages, dispensed like a
Pope with such as were married within prohibited degrees of consanguinity, as
he had done by his son JEWS and the Countess of Tirol, being allied unto
her within an unlawful degree; and she having an husband alive, which was the
son of the king of Bohemia: for which cause the Pope, sending his general
edicts against him, enjoined the Electors, upon pain of excommunication, to
meet and choose a new Emperor; excommunicating all such as followed the Emperor
JEWS, or obeyed him. So as the Popes edicts, and the Emperors contradictions
caused many insolences and combustions in Italy and Germany. As the King of
Bohemia and his son were his adversaries, so they procuring the good will of
the Duke of Saxony, and of the Archbishop of Colen, by bribes and large
promises, sought to procure a meeting, and so to elect and choose an Emperor.
At the same time there were two which pretended to be Archbishops of Mentz, the
one called HENRY de Vierner (whom the Pope condemned and deprived, for that he
defended the Emperors cause) the other was by name called GERLASSE of Nassaw,
whom the Pope had appointed to enjoy the others place.

This GERLASSE, to show his authority, and to accomplish the Popes
commandment, summoned the Princes Electors to meet in the City of Rens, in the
year 1346: where met the Duke of Saxony, the King of Bohemia, the Archbishops
of Mentz, Treuier, and Colen: and so by reason of the Popes decree, alleging
the Empire to be void, they chose the King of Bohemia's son CHARLES for
Emperor; JEWS being then in Bauiere, busy in leuying forces to stay the
same. The new elect CHARLES would presently have gone to have been crowned in
Aken, but could not: for, that City held for the Emperor JEWS, and was
sufficiently fortified. Pope CLEMENT being advertised of the election of
CHARLES (as a thing done by his commandment, and against LEWIS) presently
confirmed and approved the same, and procured the French King to aid and
assist him, which he promised to do with all his power: but in the mean time
befell a strange accident which marred all; which was, that shortly after,
EDWARD the Third, King of England, came into France with a mighty Army: and
Wars between Philip King of France and Edward the third, king of England,
wherein in a battle fought between the two Kings, the King of Bohemia was slain.
PHILIP the French King raised his whole power to fight with him; whereof the
King of Bohemia and his son CHARLES (newly chosen Emperor) having intelligence,
they with more haste than good speed with all their forces came in person to
his aid, the more to bind him to perform his promise to them against the
Emperor: and they joining in battle against the English (which, as all Writers
affirm, was very cruel and bloody, and continued fully six hours) the King of
England in the end had the victory, and many great Personages of the vanquished
were slain. Amongst which was JOHN King of Bohemia; and the French King, and
the new elect Emperor CHARLES escaped by flight. Through the Iosse of this
battle, the French King had so much to do to defend his own country, that
he could yield CHARLES no relief or succor at all against the Emperor JEWS,
which made his case the more doubtful: but as he had the Popes favor and the
favor of those which chose him, so was Germany divided; some holding with him,
others with the Emperor JEWS: so as JEWS his reign ended as it began, with
competencies and factions. But yet he forgot not to raise forces and to seek
aid and friends, which with his life lasted but a while: but before we declare
his end, I will briefly relate a strange accident that happened in the city of
Rome, which shall neither be impertinent, nor unworthy to be related, which was
this.

Rome at that time being governed in the Popes absence by two Senators, as the
Popes Vicars or Lieutenants; one of which was of the family of the Colonnois,
the other of the Vrsins; a certain man born in Rome of mean parentage, whose
name was NICHOLAS RENZO, who being of a great courage and high mind, yet of no
greater calling then a Notary public, in such manner won the good will of
the people, which repaired unto him, that he perswadeed them to recover the
ancient liberty of Rome, which (as a man well read in Histories) he laid open
unto them, and was not ashamed to tell them that it was requisite, for the good
of the commonwealth, to alter the manner of the government, and to reform
and reduce the same to the ancient estate, rule and order: for seeing Rome was
a free City and Lady of the whole world, they ought and were bound in duty to
recover her liberty. To these speeches together with many other to the like
effect, the common people (as light of belief, and desirous of novelties)
willingly gave ear: and he found such favor and good liking amongst them, as
gathering a head, he seized on the Capitol, and without that any man durst
make head against him, he deposed the Popes Vicars or Lieutenants from the
government, and intituling himself NICHOLAVS SEVERUS (the favorable Tribune of
peace, liberty and justice, the noble redeemer and restorer of the sacred Roman
commonwealth) he made and ordained Senators, and settled the government of
Rome in such manner as it was in the time of the ancient Romans, with so great
obedience in all men, as if he had come from heaven for the same purpose. And
he presently established such peace and justice in the City, and made the same
to be observed in such manner, as the like had not been seen in Rome in 500
years before.

The fame whereof was presently spread into many parts, and all the Towns near
to Rome became obedient unto him, and so did many other that were far off:
and all the tyrants and Princes hearing of so strange an accident, and of the
title, and the enterprise which this man undertook, sent Ambassadors to him;
and making great offers, sought his favor and friendship. And the matter was
so carried in the beginning, as it seemed that in short space Rome would again
have become Lady of a great part of the world. And as the report of such
accidents is ever greater then the effect, so these news being carried out of
Italy, such fear was generally that many altered their resolutions: And this
NICHOLAS as a proud vain man (nothing considering that upon so weak and
feeble a foundation he could not possibly build any great edifice) making Rome
to be the head and Lady of all the World, he wrote his Letters with the
aforesaid proud titles, to the Pope, requiring him to make his residence in
Rome; and to the Emperor JEWS and his competitor CHARLES, commanding them
within a certain prefixed time to make their appearance before him and the
Roman Senate, and to show by what Title they held the Empire: The like he
wrote to the Princes Electors and to other Princes.

These Letters being seen and read (notwithstanding that they were held for
vain and frivolous) did put the Pope in a great perplexity, seeing that Rome
and the territory thereof in his time was usurped. But this vanity continued
not above seven or eight months: for as it was grounded but upon the favor of
the common people, so it soon waxing cold, and they repenting of what they had
done, began to murmur and so to forsake him: whereupon he foreseeing his fall,
departed from Rome, and went to CHARLES, the Emperors competitor: thinkto have
found favor, and to have made some league with him; but he caused him to be
apprehended, and sent him to Auinion to the Pope, who commanded him to be
detained prisoner: what end he had we will tell you, which truly is a pleasant
discourse, as you shall see in the end, and so have all the vanities of the
world, although some last longer then others. What I have spoken is written by
BLONDVS, PLATINA, NAVCLERVS, and all the Historiographers. PETRARCHA, in some
of his Epistles affirms, that all the time that this man commanded, there was
such peace and quietness, and justice was so duly executed in Rome and in part
of Italy, that it seemed the Golden-age was come again: whereupon he made
that excellent Sonnet which begins, Spirto gentil che quella membra reggi.


But now to return to our History: Germany being thus divided, some holding
for the Emperor JEWS, and others for the new chosen CHARLES, who was already
King of Bohemia, this controversy between these two was ended, through the
sudden death of JEWS, which happened upon the seven and twentieth day of
September, in the year of our Lord 1347, in this manner: He riding that day
over the fields on hunting, was taken with so cruel an Apoplexy, that he fell
from his horse and died suddenly, when he had reigned 33 years, the first nine
in contention and competency with FREDERICK, who was called Emperor: it was
also suspected that he was poisoned by the widow of ALBERT of Austria, with
whom he had been familiar. This Emperor having bin twice married, had six
sons, and one daughter, which from their father inherited sundry Lordships
and estates. At this time the Genowaies and the Venecians made most cruel
war one against another; the like did the English and the French. The Kings
of Spain wholly applied themselves to war against the Moors.

In Constantinople reigned JOHN PALEOLOGVS, called CALOIOANNES, son of
ANDRONICVS the younger, who had much to do with CATACVZENVS (whom his father
left for his tutor) about the Empire; sometime the one prevailing, and
sometimes the other: by reason whereof they both are accounted Emperors; but in
the end CALOIOANNES PALEOLOGVS was sole Emperor, as hereafter shall be
declared.

THE LIFE OF CHARLES, THE FOVRTH OF THAT NAME, AND HVNDRETH AND EIGHTTH ROMAN
EMPEROR.
THE ARGUMENT.
CHarles having no Competitor, went to subdue those Countries which held with
Jews. Many were of opinion that the Empire was void: wherefore some of the
Electours met at Franckford, and chose successively two Emperors, which would
not accept thereof. In the time of this Charles, was that memorable pestilence
through all Europe, in Anno Domini, 1348. and the slaughter of aninfinite
number of Jews. Afterward the Electors chose one Gunther for Emperor, who
coming against Charles dyed before any battle. Charles having made an accord
with the Electors which were his enemies, was freed from all his competitors,
and came afterward into Italy to be crowned; where he behaved himself with
such humanity, as there was no Lord or Commonwealth that did not acknowledge
him for their Emperor: and contented to pay his Soldiers, he giving
privileges to sundry Cities in Italy, he returned into Germany: wherein he
maintaining peace and justice, he sued to make his eldest son Wenceslaus
King of the Romans, which he obtained for money. After all these things
falling sick he dyed, when he had valiantly reigned two and thirty years.

WHen the Emperor JEWS died, his Competitor CHARLES (who in his lifetime was
called Emperor) was in his kingdom of Bohemia; and as soon as he was
certified of his death, with the greatest power he could raise left his
kingdom, to make himself Lord of such towns as held for the deceased
Emperor JEWS: and coming to Ratisbone he was there without any
contradiction received as Emperor; and thence went to Nurembergh, and had there
the like reception, and generally in all the other cities whither he came; for
he released all the actions which he had against them, and promised to procure
the Pope to absolve all those which had continued in the service of JEWS: but
he afterward coming to Basil, they would not receive him, except he first
obtained for them the Popes pardon, and a release from all the curses
pronounced against their city, for that it held for the late Emperor: and
while as they treated hereof, there came a Legate from the Pope, who hearing
that JEWS was dead, sent him to CHARLES with authority to absolve them and
all the rest. And although that in this city and in others theie was great
contention, about the oath and the form of the confession which the Pope had
commanded to be made before they should be absolved; yet in the end absolution
was given, and the Emperor with great solemnity was received into the city,
and into some other places. And notwithstanding that in the beginning he had so
good success with some cities and Princes, yet with many of the rest he sped
not so well: for those which had continued firm and loyal to the Emperor
JEWS, and had been enemies and made war against CHARLES, would not accept
him for Emperor; but holding the Empire void, pretended a new election to be
made; especially those Electors which consented not to his election; which were
HENRY Archbishop of Mentz, (whom the Pope had deprived, and in his place set
GERLASSE of Nassaw) JEWS Marquess of Brandenburgh, ROBERT Count Palatine of
Rhine and Duke of Bauiere; al which pretended that CHARLES his election was
neither lawful, nor of any validity, for that it was not made in Franckford;
and also for that the estates were not assembled by the Count Palatine, neither
were they present, or sent their Agents or Proctors: all which things (they
said) were requisite in a lawful election: and HENRY the new Duke of Saxony
and some cities joining with them, alleged also that those which chose him
were corrupted with money by CHARLES and his father JOHN King of Bohemia; and
also that he was not crowned in Aken as he ought to have been. For which
causes (although in my opinion the greatest was the spleen and hatred which
they bare him) in the beginning of the year 1348, the aforesaid Princes met in
the city of Franckford (notwithstanding that CHARLES used all his power and
policy to have prevented the same) where declaring the Empire to be void (the
Bishops of Colen, Treuier and the other Bishop of Mentz being absent) by the
common consent of those which were present, they chose the king of England (for
that he was descended from the Germane blood) for Emperor, to whom they
presently sent their Ambassadors to the same effect: but after that he had
well considered Edward the 3. King of England being chosen, refused to be
Emperor.
of the matter, refusing their offer, he sent to them, desiring to be held
excused: And they seeing themselves frustrate of their hope, chose FREDERICK
Marquess of Misnia, who was a man of great judgment and very valiant; who
standing in doubt whether he should accept it or no, and considering well
thereof (for CHARLES being thereof advertised, to the end that he should not
accept the election, sent him a great sum of gold and silver, and therewith
gave him to understand of the inconveniences that would ensue) made the like
answer as did the King of England: so as for that time without agreeing upon
any other, these Princes still continuing disobedient to the Emperor CHARLES,
departed from Franckford not choosing any Emperor at all.

The chiefest cause of their departure was the plague in that country; which
in that time was General plague through all Europe.
so great and so universal through all parts of Europe, that the like thereof
before that time had never been seen nor heard of: for Historiographers
affirm that it continued above one whole year, beginning in the year one
thousand three hundred forty eight, and ending in Ann^ 1350; which raged in
such extreme manner, that where it did least harm, the tenth person escaped
not.

BLONDVS says, that he heard his grandfather GASPAR BLONDVS affirm with an
oath, that many towns in Italy were therewith so dispeopled, that not any one
remained therein alive. During the time of this calamity, there was a general
peace, so as not any could or durst make war against other, except a little
which was made against the Synagogues of the Jews: for the common people took
a conceit, and it was firmly believed, that the Jews had poisoned the waters,
and caused this plague; whereupon (the Princes and governors being no way able
to prevent the same) the Jews were every where torn in pieces, and an
infinite number of them were by the Christians sacked and robbed, in France,
Italy, Germany and Spain. At this time also the French King gat the Country
of Daulphine, and the City of Vienne the head thereof; which do now belong to
the Princes of France; which was given him by HVM^RT, Daulphin of Vienne,
having no heir to succeed him; upon condition that the eldest son of France
should be called Daulphine of Viennois.

In the year 1350. our Lord mitigating his ire, and the plague ceasing, Pope
CLEMENT this year by the consent of his Cardinals ordained that the Iubile
which Pope BONIFAC^ the 8. had granted to be held in Rome every hundredth
year, should he held that year; and thenceforth every fiftith year,
considering the shortness of man's life; so as an infinite number of people
repaired to Rome to the Iubile. After the danger of the plague was past, men
presently being free from the fear thereof, returned to their wars and
dessension, principally the aforenamed four Princes Electors, HENRY Archbishop
of Mentz, JEWS Marquess of Brandenbrugh, RODVLPH Duke of Bauiere and Count
Palatine of Rhine, and HENRY Duke of Saxony: all which rebelled against the the
Emperor CHARLES, and stood upon their Gunther Earl of Swarzemburgh chosen
^mperor against Charles King of Bohemia.
guard; and the one aiding and assisting the other, they again met at
Frankford, and after many consultations, chose GVNTHER Earl of Swarzemburgh,
who was an excellent and very valiant man of war. This man with the aid of
those that chose him, and of his friends and kinsfolks, with a great number of
very good men of war, came to Frankford; where attending his enemies coming,
he kept the field the space of six weeks (for so they write was then the
manner of the new chosen Emperors). That time being expired, he was received
into the city, and sworn and obeyed for Emperor. And notwithstanding that the
Emperor CHARLES had leuyed a very great power, yet being unwilling to hazard
his whole fortune in one battle, he would not fight with GVNTHER: but all the
Princes of his faction, meeting in the City of Spire, it was concluded that he
should employ his whole power to make head against GVNTHER, and by force of
Arms defeat him.

With this resolution the Emperor CHARLES with his Army took his way toward
Mentz; and the one drawing near the other, the war began between them, which
men thought would have proved very terrible and cruel: but through the death
of GVNTHER peace ensued: before which time some write it was concluded; for as
soon as GVNTHER fell sick, some unpassionate Princes sought to reconcile them:
the conditions of the peace were, that GVNTHER should renounce the Empire to
CHARLES, and that CHARLES should give him two walled Cities in Turinge, together
with their confines. But in the time of this treaty (as most writers affirm)
GVNTHER died, poisoned by his Physician; who being to give him a purging
potion, and taking but the assay of it, died together with GVNTHER the next
morrow; which made men to think, that without the knowledge of the poor
Physician, poison was put into the decoction; so as GVNTHER dying in the time
of the parle of peace, CHARLES remained sole Emperor, and in good sort
compounded with those which were his adversaries, who being weary of choosing
Emperors, the controversy ended, to the contentment of all men. And for as much
as the plague was in Aken, he was with great solemnity crowued in another city;
and going afterward in his progress, he visited many Cities, to which he gave
sundry privileges.

In time of this prosperity he had a son whose name was WENCESLAVS, of whom
we shall have cause to speak hereafter: and he applying himself with great
care to maintain peace and justice, there yet rested for him to go to be
crowned in Italy; whereof Pope CLEMENT the sixth was very desirous: but in his
time it could not be, for he died within few days after. At this time the
Viscounts having made themseluss Lords of Milan, were of great power in many
other Cities, the chiefest of which was JOHN Viscount Archbishop of Milan, a
man feared through all Italy; who by the Popes permission under the title of
his Vicar, or Lieutenant, made himself Lord of Bologna, for which he was to pay
yearly 12000 ducats of gold. Pope CLEMENT being dead, INNOCENT the sixth was
chosen; This Pope sent for Legate into Italy the valiant Cardinal Giles, a
Spaniard borne, who was called Don GIL CARILLO ALBORNOZ, who by his great wit
and valor, coming twice into Italy recovered all the Cities and lands of the
Church which had been usurped by tyrants: in the beginning of whose Papacy was
fought the memorable battle by sea between threescore galleys of the
Genowaies, under the command of PAGAMO DORIA; and fourscore of the Venecians,
the Kings of Arragon, and the Emperors of Constantinople, who were in league
together against them; which battle was fought in the straight of
Constantinople, and lasted from the break of day until the evening, in which
the Genowaies had the victory, but with loss of many of their people: and the
year following which was in the year 1354, the Venecians and Catalonians
repairing their fleet, again fought with the Genowaies, near to the I Will of
Corsica, wherein the A nauall battle between the Genowaies and the Venecians.
Genowaies were so pitifully overthrown and with so great loss, that one and
forty of their galleys, with all the men in them, were sunk in the sea; by
means of which overthrow their power was so much weakened, that they became
subject to JOHN Viscount Archbishop of Milan, upon condition that he should
protect them; yet there ensuing other alterations, they afterward committed
themselves to the protection of the French King.

At this time also was a treaty between the Emperor and the Pope, concerning
the Emperors coming into Italy to be crowned in Rome, he making preparation
for the same. There befell in Rome also another great accident, although not so
much spoken of as that of NICHOLAS RENZO who would have raised Rome to her
ancient state and dignity, and was called the Enfranchiser of Rome: which
was, that another Notary called FRANCIS VARONCELLO, imitating the said
NICHOLAS, incensed the people, and with the same ti^le of Roman Tribune,
deposed the two Senators, JOHN VRSINO, and PETER de Colonna, who governed as
the Popes Vicars: whereof the Pope being advertised, and fearing that the
matter would have grown of importance; to avoid a further inconvenience, he
thought it best to release NICHOLAS RENZO, whom his predecessor CLEMENT had
left in prison; and thinking (as we say) to drive out one nail with another,
sent him to Rome against FRANCIS; who used such means, through the help of
the Roman Nobility, that by force he expelled FRANCIS VARONCELLO out of the
Capitol and slew him in fight^ but after this victory, the said NICHOLAS with
a desire to usurp, (...)the Colonnois fell at variance with the principal men
of Rome, and in the end was slain; and so Rome was delivered from both the one
and the other: and then one GVIDO JORDAN (by the Popes consent) was made
Governor, and afterward there were two.

While these matters were in hand, it was agreed between the Pope and the
Emperor (as write the Italian authors) that as soon as the Emperor should be
crowned in Rome by Cardinals, without making any longer stay, he should return
into Germany. The Emperor and Empress accompanied with many Princes and a
great Army, in the year 1355 came into Italy, The Emperor Charles came into
Italy.
with intent only to be crowned, and to favor and further the Popes
proceedings, which he did accordingly, which made his journey easy: for being
come into Italy and seen to use no violence, or to oppress any man, neither
to deprive or dispossess any man of his goods or lands, he was very honorably
received by the Lords of CARRARA in Padoa, and afterward by the GONZAGAS in
Montoa, and by those of the house of ESTE in Ferrara* and by the Viscounts in
Milan, and by the most of the Lords of Italy, which did him homage, and
acknowledged him for their Emperor; and he left them in their lands and
estates: and coming to the city of Milan he was crowned there with the Iron
Crown, and from Milan went to Pisa* whither came Commisioners to him from
Florence, and from many other cities, who acknowledging him for their Emperor,
and suing for peace and his favor, furnished him with money for the payment of
his soldiers; and so departing from Pisa, he went peaceably to Rome, where
they attended his coming, and was solemnly received by the Cardinals Legates
which came to crown him, together with the Senators, the Popes Vicars, and
with all the Clergy and Roman people: and on Easter day, which was the morrow
after his coming, he together with his wife the Empress, was after the
accustomed manner by the aforesaid Cardinals crowned with great pomp. His
coronation being ended, as he came in peace and quietly, without offending or
gri^uing any man, so he departed from Rome, contenting himself with their
service and the money which they had given him, which (some write) amounted to
a very great sum; and so he returned into his country, more peaceably and
with less tumult, then ever any Emperor that came into Italy before him had
done. Being in Italy he favored Don Giles Cardinal of Albornoz who recovered
the patrimony of the Church.

At this time King JOHN of France being in a battle taken prisoner by the
King of England; after four years imprisonment, was upon certain conditions
of peace set at liberty. This King had by inheritance the Duchy and County of
Burgundy, which after his decease he gave to his second son PHILIP, whose of
spring enjoyed the same; from whom lineally descended the Emperor CHARLES the
Fifth, by his grandmother, who was Lady of that estate. What ensued after the
Emperors return into Germany is briefly and confusedly written, and the
Annals of Germany treat of some matters of small importance, and that very
preposterously; wherefore I will write only what shall seem most agreeable,
until we come to the end of his life. First, this Prince is commended for his
wit and humanity, and to have been discreet and just in administering justice,
and to have been learned in the tongues, and well seen in history, and
indifferently well in other Arts and Sciences, whereof he made no small benefit
in his actions. CARRION writes, that after the Emperors return out of Italy, he
called a famous assembly of Princes in the Cities of Mentz; where the matter
being wisely discust with the chief orders of the Empire, for the contracting
into one, and reducing into order, the ancient and modern institutions
concerning the Majesty and honor of the Empire, and of every one The golden
Bull made by Charles.
in particular, he made a law which is famous by the name of the golden Bull,
comprehending certain orders to be observed in the Emperors election, and
providing for the power, authority, and dignity of all orders: which work of
his was very commendable; for that has been a firm bond of public peace. By
this law he did strengthen the Majesty of the Empire, and did cut off all
occasions of dissension in the election; by this he did so bind the Emperor
and Princes, as no man durst attempt any thing to the prejudice of the
Commonwealth or Emperor. And as he was much affected to his country of
Bohemia, so (as Pope PIUS QVINTVS and other authors write) in Prage he erected
sundry stately edifices; and made the Church and Archbishopric of that city a
Metropolitan, exempting it from the Church of Mentz, and erected an
University in that city, wherein Arts and Sciences were read; and all his
whole life time he had so great a care to adorn that city and kingdom, that
the rest of Germany murmured against him for it, and so do the
Historiographers which write thereof. In those days some sedition and tumults
arose in the city of Nuremburgh, which in the end he pacified, although with
some difficulty. It happened also that EBERARD Earl of Wittembergh made an
Insurrection against this Emperor, and had a great Army and many followers;
but all was pacified, and CHARLES reigned peaceably. In the year following,
which was in the year 1362, died Pope INNOCENT the Sixth, and in his place was
chosen Cardinal WILLIAM of S. Victor, a Monk of S. BENNET'S order, and was
called VRBANE the Fifth.

This Pope having resolved to come into Italy, the better to secure and settle
his estate he sent to entreat the Emperor to do the like: which he chiefly
did, for fear of the Viscounti Lords of Milan, and of the greatest part of
Lombardy; which the Emperor at his entreatie performed: at which his coming I
find it not written that he came by Milan, for that BARNABY and GALEAS
Visconti were not his friends; but he took his way by Padoa, and from Padoa to
Bologna, and thence to Pisa, and so to Rome, where he found the Pope: what they
did there, I find not written, either through negligence or for that it little
imported; one thing BLONDVS, PLATINA, and others report, that it was unknown
what was become of the heads of S. PETER and S. PAVL, and that the Pope and the
Emperor made great search for them, and at last found them and set them where
they stand (as they say) this day. After this, the Emperor having been but
three months in Italy, returned into Germany; and after his departure the Pope
went to Marselles in Prouence in France, and thence to Auinion where he died;
after whose decease PETER de Belfort Cardinal of S. MARY the new was chosen,
and called GREGORY the Eleventh.

The Emperor in the same year summoned a Diet to be held in the city of
Franckford, where after many practices, he entreated the Princes Electors to
make his son WENCESLAVS, King of the Romans, and his successor; which was
not only solicited by entreatie, but by great gifts and large promises; which
were so excessive, that (as PIUS QVINTVS writes) he promised an hundred
thousand Ducats to every Elector: and as the sum was greater then he was able
to pay, he gave in pawn for the same many towns and lands of the Empire,
which they hold until this day. This they write to be the cause of the
weakening of the Emperors power which were his successors; which ALBERT CRANTZ
also confirms in his History of Saxony, alleging that this Emperor morgaged
sixteen Imperial towns in Sueuia to the neighbor Princes, which, together
with the imbecility and baseness of his son WENCESLAVS who succeeded him in
the Empire, so decayed and weakened the power of the Emperors in Germany, that
they never recovered their former vigor: this was imputed to have been a great
oversight in so wise a Prince, notwithstanding that in all his other actions he
governed with great policy and wisdom. Yet many imperial cities, through
sundry accidents which happened, without his commandment or leave, made war upon
the Earl of Wittembergh, which war continued many days, and many were slain
of either party: wherewith the Emperor being much displeased, and favoring and
assisting the Earl, he besieged the city of Vlme, where he punished some for
examples sake.

In this mean time, some cities in Italy belonging to the Church of Rome,
discontent with the government of the Popes Vicars or Lieutenants, rebelled
against him: Whereupon, the Pope knowing the great prejudice which his Church
received through his absence, resolved to return with his court to Rome: for
which purpose (under another pretext) in the year one thousand three hundred
seventy six, he caused certain galleys to be rigged and armed in the river
Rodanus, wherein embarking himself he sailed into Italy: and so the Papal
court after it had continued in France the space of threescore and ten years
and some what more, and the most part of that time in the city of Auinion,
returned to Rome.

The Emperor having reigned now 32 years, and being busy in pacifying the
cities in Germany which warred against the Earl of Wittembergh, was in the
year of our Lord, one thousand three hundred seventy eight, taken with an
infirmity, whereof he dying, left two sons legitimate; the eldest of which
was called WENCESLAVS, who was already King of the Romans, and succeeded his
father in the kingdom of Bohemia by inheritance, and in the Empire by
election: the others name was SIGISMVND, who afterward by the right of his
wife was king of Hungary, and in process of time came to be Emperor.

Some Authors write of the Emperor CHARLES, that he had been worthy of praise,
if he had not more affected Bohemia and France then the Empire, if he had not
been more careful of his own private interest then of the public; and to
advance his posterity, then to enlarge the Empire; if he had not been more
greedy of money, then to do what was right and just, and if he had not both in
Germany and Italy, diminished the dignity and wealth of the Empire, alienating
kingdoms and the public revenues, selling Immunities, and granting liberties:
wherefore the Empire being spoiled of many ornaments, his posterity did not
reign long, but was unfortunate, and in the end fell; but yet he may not be
deprived of his due commendation, for the constitution which he made, which was
very beneficial to the commonwealth.

Touching the Emperors of Constantinople (of whom I am bound to make some
mention) I find so great confusion in the Histories of those times, as there
was in that Empire; wherein were factions and wars: but in sum, in the time
of CHARLES the Fourth in Germany, the discord in Constantinople between JOHN
PALEOLOGVS CALOIOANNES, and his father in law JOHN CATACVZENVS (both which were
called Emperors) was the cause that AMVRATH King of the Turks (having taken all
that the Christians held in Asia) under color to help and succor CATACVZENVS,
passing Hellespont, came into Europe, and took Gallipoli, The first coming of
the Turks into Graecia.
and other cities in that coast, and afterward the city of Adrianople: and he
passing forewards, there came against him LAZARUS DISPOTE of Seruia (which in
ancient time was called the upper Misia) and MARK DISPOTE of Bulgaria (which
is part of the ancient lower Misia) and many other Princes; which in a battle
about the year of our Lord 1363 being ouerthrown, AMVRATH became Lord of a
great part of the Christians lands in Europe; and his son BAIAZETH succeeding
him conquered more; and so the Empire of Constantinople daily decreased. And
afterward in the time of the Emperor WENCESLAVS, CALOIOANNES being now old,
and having dispossessed CATACVZENVS; dying, a son of his called EMANVEL
PALEOLOGVS succeeded him.

THE LIFE OF WENCESLAVS, ONLY OF THAT NAME, AND HVNDRETH AND NINTH ROMAN
EMPEROR.
THE ARGUMENT.
IT seldom happens that the sons imitate their fathers goodness, chiefly
among Princes. But Wenceslaus would verify this rule in himself: for being
without any contradiction chosen Emperor, he proved so unlike his father in
goodness, that he left of himself as much infamy, as his father did glory:
Neither did he pacify the wars which in Germany were kindled in his fathers
time, but suffered them to proceed; which was the cause of much misery in that
country. In his time began the great schism which continued forty years. The
Turks in his time made great conquests upon the Christians: and John Galeas
made himself in his time Lord of Lombardy. The Electors seeing the small care
that this Emperor took to becrowned; for the defense of Christendom, to set
his hand to the good government of the Empire, especially in the affairs of
Germany, and that he led a base and a licencious life, deposed him, as
unprofitable and of no worth. When he had unworthily reigned Emperor two and
twenty years, he afterward died a private Lord.

ALthough that the desire to come to an end of this History (being near
thereunto) does incite me to make haste; yet there are so many matters to be
written of, and modern Historiographers have so copiously set down the same, as
I am constrained (even against my will) to prosecute the remainder more at
large; wherein I presume to be held excused, for the pleasure and profit which
the Reader shall receive thereby: wherefore to avoid prolixity, I say, that
WENCESLAVS King of Bohemia, and eldest son to the Emperor CHARLES the Fourth,
succeeded his father in the Empire; who proved very unlike to his father; for
he grew to be vicious, and of little worth. It is written of him, that he had
nothing in him like unto a man, but the form; and that was crooked and
deformed, more like to THERSITES then a Prince. He was dull witted, basely
inclined, affecting nothing but pleasures, not caring for the Commonweal nor
any honesty; A coward and very cruel; Of a lazy body, fit for nothing but the
pleasures of gluttony and filthy lusts, if they may be called pleasures: But
yet in the beginning, as he was young, and men were in good hope of him; being
chosen in his fathers time King of the Romans, he was presently without any
great contradiction obeyed for Emperor, and was so two and twenty years, and in
the end lost it, as you shall hear.

His brother SIGISMVND being of more spirit, and fifteen years younger then
WENCESLAVS, JEWS king of Hungary married him to his daughter (who was also by
his mother King of Poland) and thereby SIGILMVND came afterward to be King of
Hungary, as we will declare, of whom in the History of WENCESLAVS we shall make
especial mention, for in process of time he came to be Emperor; for by
reason of the insufficiency of WENCESLAVS, little is to be written of him: so
as of these two and twenty years that he held the name of Emperor, the least
that is to be said, is of him; but yet nevertheless passing it under his name,
we will briefly relate what passed in the countries subject to the Empire in
his time, wherein he should have borne the greatest sway, if he had not been so
base and negligent; for although it seem little to the purpose, yet it shall
be expedieut for the knowledge of such matters as follow.

First, for the war between the cities of Germany, and the Earl of
Wittembergh, which his father before his decease sought to have extinguished,
his son had no such care: for in his time it increased; and Germany from the
beginning of his reign, until the end thereof, endured want both of peace and
justice. In his time also happened a schism in the Church of Rome: for in the
same year that the Emperor CHARLES the Fourth died in Germany, in Rome died
Pope GREGORY the eleventh, who as I said returned the Papal court to Rome: and
after his decease the Cardinals assembling themselves in the Conclaue to choose
a successor, of which, thirteen were Frenchmen, and four Italians, whither
all the Roman people running, desired them to choose an Italian, and no
Frenchman; and the French Cardinals used all means to have had a Frenchman;
and the rest an Italian: And notwithstanding that the greatest number were
French, yet disagreeing amongst themselves, one BARTHOLMEVV a Neapolitan, and
Archbishop of Barri was chosen Pope, who took for his name VRBANE the sixth.
The French Cardinals presently repenting, alleged that what they had done was
for fear of the Roman people; whereupon some of them departed from Rome: yet
VRBANE notwithstanding was consecrated, and generally obeyed; and those which
had absented themselves returned, and so they continued three months: which
being expired, through some discontentments which they conceived against him
(and as PLATINA writes; for that he showed himself severe and rigorous
against the abuses and pride of the Clergy) eight of the French Cardinals,
faining that they left Rome by reason of the heat, went to Fundi,; where being
favored by Queen IOANE of Naples which sold the City of Auinion to the Pope,
they pretending and publishing the election of VRBANE to have been made by
violence, that he was no Pope, and that the Sea was void; they amongst
themselves in Fundi chose a new Pope and called him CLEMENT the seventh; whom
Queen IOANE and all the kingdom of Naples obeyed and held for Pope; and so
began the schism, which lasted forty years. Through the wars and dissension
between Princes, Christendom was divided into two factions; for besides
Queen IOANE and her kingdom of Naples, the French king favored Pope CLEMENT,
and persuaded the King of Castile to do the like. All Italy (excepting
Naples) obeyed Pope VRBANE; so did the Emperor WENCESLAVS, Germany England and
Portugal; and the one and the other alleged such reaasons, and so great and
so worthy personages took part with the one and the other, as it made the
matter very doubtful.

This schism (as I say) continued long, notwithstanding that those which were
chosen died, for the Cardinals of either party chose a successor, and held the
chair for void, as hereafter shall appear. Pope CLEMENT went into France,
where with the aid of the French King, and of the Queen of Naples and of
Prouence, he held his court in Auinion, and VRBANE remained in Rome; and they
two making war, either of them by all means possible sought the others
destruction. Pope VRBANE sent his Ambassadors to complain to the Emperor
WENCESLAVS, of what had happened, and to persuade him to come into Italy in
favor of him, against the Queen of Naples, who then was the widow of JEWS
Duke of Tarent, after that she had murdered her first husband: But he giving
them good words took little care for the matter, but yet he and his brother
SIGISMVND sent to Pope CLEMENT at Auinion, admonishing him to leave the name of
Pope, and to submit himself to Pope VRBANE.

Pope URBAN finding himself much grieved against Queeene IOANE, for that
through her assistance the schism began (that Kingdom being subject and held
of the Church of Rome) sent to treat with CHARLES, Nephew to JEWS King of
Hungary (who as some say) was the son of her husband ANDREW King of Naples,
whom she had made away) to come into Italy with an Army; promising him (as a
schismatic and disobedient to his Church) to deprive Queen IOANE, and to make
him King of Naples, whereto CHARLES and his Uncle JEWS King of Hungary
willingly gave ear, which JEWS was father-in-law to SIGISMVND the Emperors
brother; who, being very glad thereof, gave him his aid and counsel. CHARLES,
when as he was called to the Kingdom of Naples, made war against the
Venecians: for he and his Uncle, the King of Hungary and Poland, favored the
Genowaies; between which and the Venecians in those days were very great and
cruel wars, many Princes assisting both the one and the other party: in
which war many great exploits were performed, chiefly by sea; sometimes the one
party prevailing, and sometimes the other. But at this time the Genowaies had
the Venecians at such an advantage, that with a mighty fleet of Galleys by sea
they besieged the City of Venice, and their partakers and friends made very
sharp war against them by land; so as the City was in danger to have been
taken and ruined. We may say, this was the most cruel war that until that
time ever was seen in the world: for, therein was artillery first of all used
by the Venecians; which was about the year of our Lord one thousand Artillery
first used in the wars.
three hundred, eighty two, or a little while after. The invention of this
pestilent scourge of mankind was attributed to the Germans: some say that a
Monk, who was a great Philosopher, found out the same; not to that purpose to
have killed and slain men therewith, but with a desire to have experimented the
quality and natural force of things. Others are of opinion, that it was one
PETER, a great Magician: but it imports little to know who it was; for,
besides the ordinary Historiographers which I follow in this place, there be
many others write thereof.

Venice scaping from being taken in this war, and many other matters
succeeding; the Duke of Sauoy treated, and set down articles of peace between
those two Commonwealths, which peace was concluded. So as to return to my
discourse, CHARLES being called to the kingdom of Naples, he went into Hungary:
where being furnished with men and other favors by his Uncle King JEWS, and
the Emperor WENCESLAVS, he came into Italy, and to be brief (leaving what
befell him upon the way) he went to Rome, and was very honorably received by
the Pope, and thence took his way toward the kingdom of Naples; and coming to
blows with Queen IOANS Army, he overthrew and scattered the same; and then
marching to the City of Naples took it: and the Queen retiring to Castle nouo
was therein besieged, and so CHARLES in short space made himself Lord of the
whole kingdom, which was in the year of our Lord one thousand, three hundred,
eighty two. Queen JOAN, being besieged, sent to the French King, to her
Country of Prouence, and to Pope CLEMENT, for relief; and for as much as she
had no issue, she adopted JEWS Duke of Aniow, Uncle to the French King, for
her heir: which JEWS, with a puissant Army of Frenchmen, and with all the
favor that Pope CLEMENT and the Country of Prouence could yield him, went to
relieve her; which was so great, that what is written thereof seems incredible:
for they write, that he came with above thirty thousand horse. Being comn into
the Territory of Bologna in Italy, warring upon such as were his adversaries,
and giving it out that he came to set Queen JOAN at liberty, to supplant Pope
URBAN, and to place Pope CLEMENT (of which, both the one and the other in any
man's judgment was easy to have bin done) in the midst of his iourny (which
was very long by reason of the great number of people which came with him, and
being hindered by King CHARLES of Naples, and Pope URBAN) he was taken with so
vehement a The death of Jews Duke of Aniow.
sickness, that within very few days it deprived him of life; and his Army,
without a Leader being divided and dispersed, returned to their Country: and
so was King CHARLES freed from this fear; who, having by sundry practices
gotten Queen JOAN into his power, commanded her secretly to be drowned: and so
she dying, suffered punishment for the death of her husband; and CHARLES
remained King and absolute Lord of Naples, with whom the Pope Joan queen of
Naples drowned
fell at variance, and other matters followed.

While these things passed in Italy, there was neither peace nor quietness in
Germany, through the negligence and little care of the Emperor WENCESLAVS; who,
making his abode in his Kingdom of Bohemia, gave himself wholly over to his
pleasure. About this time died the Earl of Flanders; and PHILIP Duke of
Burgundy, son to King JOHN of France, inheriting The uniting of the County of
Flanders to the duchy of Burgundy.
his estate, the houses of Flanders and Burgundy were united. It happened at that
time also, which was in the year of our Lord one thousand, three hundred,
eighty three, that JEWS King of Hungary and Poland dying, left only two
daughters; of which, one who was called MARY was married to the Emperors brother
SIGISMVND, who by her inherited the Kingdom of Hungary: and the other was
married to the Duke of Austria, with the title of the Kingdom of Poland.

King JEWS being dead, and SIGISMVND being but fifteen years old, after that
he and his wife were crowned, his mother in law Queen ISABEL had the
government of the kingdom: who following the counsel of the Earl of Gara (a
favorite of hers) governed with such rigor and severity, that the greatest part
of the subjects murmuring against her, rose and rebelled; and as SIGISMVND was
but a child, and she a woman, and the Emperor unable to relieve them, the
rebellion could not be pacified: whereupon the principal men of that kingdom,
sent for CHARLES king of Naples, alleging that the inheritance of the kingdom
of Hungary appertained unto him, and to no other; for that he was a man, and
nearest of blood unto King JEWS deceased. King CHARLES thirsting after another
kingdom, and hoping of the like good success in Hungary as he had in Naples,
accepted the offer; and making preparation for his journey, leaving the
government of Naples to his wife; with the greatest provision of men and money
that he could make (for that he would not compass Italy about) sailed along by
the Adriatic Sea (now called the Gulf of Venice) and landing at a place in
Slauonia, subject to the kingdom of Hungary, was there so well received, and in
like manner by all those of that kingdom, that the young King SIGISMVND,
doubting of the power of his friends which held with him, leaving his wife and
his mother in law the widow Queen in Hungary, sled to his brother the Emperor,
who then was in Bohemia: and the Queen mother being a subtle woman, sent a
messenger to welcome king CHARLES into the country, and to tell him that she
reposing her trust in his goodness, would yield her self and her daughter into
his power, for that she assured her self his coming to be for the good of
that Kingdom. King CHARLES gave such credit to her speeches, that he came to the
place where she was; and holding himself for absolute Lord, and taking upon
him the government of the kingdom, was not so careful for the safety of his
person, as reason required; for one day coming to the Queens lodging, he was K
Charles of Naples murdered in Hungary.
there by the Queens direction and some of her favorites traitrously slain by
the hands of one BLASH de Forback: so as this King, not contented with the
kingdom of Naples, came to lose his life for the kingdom of Hungary: and the
two Queens, mother and daughter having made away their enemy, wrote to the
Emperor, to send his brother SIGISMVND into that Kingdom; and they in the mean
time had the government; for as it seems, there was then no open
contradiction.

The Queen being more confident then she ought to have been considering what
she had done, went from the place where she made her abode, to go in progress
into the country, carrying her daughter with her; and passing one day
carelessly with a small guard; a great Lord of Hungary, called JOHN BAN de
Horubach (who had been of the adverse party) meeting her upon the way,
apprehended the two Queens, mother and daughter, and so many as were with
them; and there in her presence slew BLASE FORBAC, who murdered King CHARLES;
The Queen of Hungary drowned.
and made the old Queen and others of her company to be drowned in a lake of
water which was thereby: and having thus cruelly revenged the death of king
CHARLES, he carried the sorrowful young Queen MARY prisoner to a Castle. When
King SIGISMVND was certified of this great and strange disaster, moved with
just sorrow for his mother in law and his wife, with the aid of his brother
the Emperor, he entered Hungary, where, by the most part he was received and
obeyed; moved thereto with compassion to see his wife imprisoned: which when
JOHN HORVBACH, the cruel revenger of King CHARLES his death understood;
repenting of what he had done, or fearing to be brought to ruin for the same,
he so practiced with the Queen, whom he held prisoner, that she promised and
swear to obtain his pardon of her husband, whereupon she being set at liberty
went presently to Buda, where her husband was, and there they both were again
crowned, and received for King and Queen, which happened in the year of our
Lord, one thousand three hundred eighty and six. But SIGISMVND notwithstanding
his wives oaths and promises, in such manner persecuted JOHN de Horubach, that
after many conflicts having gotten him into his power, he commanded him to be
flain: and so he remained King of Hungary, wherein he reigned many years after
the chances and changes of fortune before recited, in that Kingdom, and in
Naples; such as if they have been read with attention, are as strange as most
that have passed in the world; yet afterward ensued other as great or greater,
as shall appear.

SIGISMVND having brought that kingdom to subjection, and thoroughly seated
himself therein; in revenge of matters past, he at a Parliament held at Buda
(as writes PIUS QVINTVS, who before was called AENEAS SYLVIVS) who beheaded
two and thirty of the chiefest Lords of that Kingdom, who had been his
enemies and made war against him: which truly was cruel and severe justice,
notwithstanding that they had deserved it: for which cause, the kinsfolk and
friends of those which were executed did ever after so much hate him, that they
brought him into many difficulties and extremities; for it is a far more safe
course to pardon, and to use moderate justice, with clemency: then to extend
the rigor and Summum ius, summa iniuria
extremity of the laws. In the kingdom of Naples reigned LADISLAVS son to king
CHAALS, although not without trouble by those which held for JEWS Duke of
Aniow (son to that JEWS which died in that action as is before declared)
who challenged the kingdom of Naples, and Queen IOANE'S other dominions.

IOHA GAL^AS Viscount, son to GALEAS, in those days made himself Lord of
all Lombardy, by putting his Uncle BARNABY to death by treason, with whom he
had in his fathers time divided the Country, in this manner. BARNABY held
Placencia, Cremona, Parma, Lodi, Brescia, Bergamo and other places thereto
appertaining: and his Nephew JOHN held Pauia, Vercelli, Nouarra, Tortona, and
the rest between that and the Alps; the City of Milan was for them both,
conditionally that they should peaceably govern the same. But as sovereignty
can endure no company or equality: so JOHN GALEAS, to make himself Lord of the
whole, found a means in a Castle to seize upon his Uncle, and father in law,
who trusted him as his own son, wherein either of poison or other infirmity
he died prisoner: and he made himself Lord of Milan, and the other cities,
notwithstanding that BARNABY had one son called ASTROGIO, and another called
CHARLES Viscount, who afterward troubled his kinseman all that he might. But
the ambition and power of JOHN GALEAS rested not here; for as at that time
there were wars between ANTHONY de la Scala Lord of Verona and Vicenza, and
FRANCIS CARRARA, Lord of Padoa and other towns; he in such manner favored the
party of FRANCIS CARRARA, that expelling ANTHONY de la Scala, GAL^AS took those
Towns to himself, and possessed the same: and after that he had subverted the
enemy, he bent his Arms against his friend, and besieged FRANCIS CARRARA in
Podoa: and entering it by force, he took the poor old man prisoner; and so for
that time made himself Lord of those Cities, and was the most mighty and
redoubted man in all Italy: so as this was the right and title of the first
Dukes of Milan: yet until that time they were not called Dukes, for this
GALEAS was called Earl of Virtues, until that the Emperor WENCESLAVS gave him
the title of Duke, as hereafter we will declare.

The Lords which were thus deposed, left sons behind them, with whom he
afterward had wars, and many accidents happened, which I must of force
relate, for the better understanding of my principal intent: but this for the
present shall suffice, to bring that to light whereof we purpose to discourse,
which is of the reign of the Emperor WENCESLAVS, for that it concerns the
state of the Imperial towns and lands of the Empire in Germany, and Italy,
whereof the Emperor took not such care as he ought to have done, and cared not
to be crowned in Rome, neither to come into Italy. And as for Germany, he
governed it with so little order, that the wars between the cities of the
Empire, and the Dukes of Wittembergh ceased not; sundry Princes favoring both
the one and the other party, and all the rest was out of order: whereupon they
began to consult of deposing him from the Empire, which was afterward
effected; and the Bohemians, which were his own subjects being much
discontented with his government, held him for the space of seventeen weeks
prisoner; and he being afterward upon certain conditions released, fell to
his old manner of living; at the end whereof, viz. in the year of our Lord,
one thousand, three hundred, eighty and nine, Pope VRBANE the Sixth died in
Rome, having been so eleven years, and Cardinal PETER TONAC^LLO a
Neapolitane, was by the Roman Cardinals chosen for his successor, and called
BONIFACE the ninth: yet in Auinion, CLEMENT the seventh was held and obeyed for
Pope in all France.

This BONIFACE used such policy, that getting the absolute government of Rome,
he suppressed the power and liberty of the people; and making officers at his
pleasure, fortified the Castle Saint Angelo with a garrison, which of long time
had lien desert, an habitacle for Goats and other beasts: otherwise he was not
greatly commended, for the contention between these two Popes opened the gate
to Symony and many other abuses. And Pope BONIFACE afterward sent a Cardinal
Legate to crown LADISLAVS, King of Naples, son to King CHARLES who was
slain in Hungary: and Pope CLEMENT in Auinion a little before gave the same
title to JEWS Duke of Aniow, son to the other JEWS his fathers rival; so
as many things passed between these two Princes, which I omit: but King
LADISLAVS prevailing in the year following Pope BONIFACE his election, Pope
CLEMENT died in Auinion: and the Cardinals which followed him, chose one PETER
de Luna a Spanyard to be his successor, a very excellent learned man, if he
could have been restrained from the ambition to have bin Pope, who was called
BENEDICT the thirteenth.

JOHN GALEAS Viscount being of great power, sent the Archbishop of Milan for
his Ambassador, to entreat the Emperor to give him the title of Duke of
Milan, and to approve his right thereto: which the Emperor without the consent
of the Princes of the Empire granted, more for the desire of the money, which
was presented him, then for any right or reason that might induce him thereto:
and all things happened to JOHN GALEAS so well according to his desire, that he
came to be one of the most puissant and redoubted Princes in Christendom.

The schism between the two Popes, and the wars in Italy and Germany in
those days, together with the Emperors baseness and insufficiency, were the
cause why the Emperor and Empire of Constantinople could not be relieved or
succored, which at that time were mightily oppressed by BAIAZETH the fourth
King of the Turks; who with a puissant Army coming into Europe, overcame and
slew in battle MARK DESPOTE of Bulgaria, and ouerranne Baiazeth king of the
Turks came into Europe.
all his country: and within three years after, returning into the provinces
of Graecia, took and conquered cities and provinces: and passing forwards
marched through all Walachia, which in ancient time was called Dacia; and so
came into Hungary, whence he returned with great spoil, remaining Lord
(besides what he held before) of the provinces of Macedonia, of the greatest
part of Thracia, of Thessalia, of the province of the ancient Athens and other
countries; and coming victorious he besieged the Impeiall city of
Constantinople: whereupon SIGISMVND King of Hungary, with the aid of his
brother the Emperor (but with much more and far better from sundry other
Christian Princes; chiefly from England, and France* whither he sent to sue for
the same, and also from the Emperor of Constantinople) came to seek the great
Turk, with 100000. men, whereof twenty thousand were horsemen: whereof
BAIAZETH being advertised, raised his siege from before Constantinople, and
with three hundred thousand men came to meet him; and the two Armies upon
Michaelmas day in the year of our Lord, one thousand, three hundred, ninety
and seven, fought a bloody and cruel battle, wherein the King of Hungary,
and the other Princes and Nobles which were with him were A battle between
the King of Hungary and the Turk, wherein the Christians were overthrown.
overthrown, and as it is written a very great slaughter was made of the
Christians, through the fault of the French, which charged before their time;
and the King of Hungary, and the Master of the Order of the Knights of the
Rhodes escaping by flight, the greatest part of the French were either slain or
taken prisoners. After this victory, BAIAZETH returned to the siege of
Constantinople: at which time if the great TAMORLAN (who was one of the most
mighty and most victorious Captains that ever was in the world) had not risen
in Asia, he had taken the city, and at that time had wholly subdued the Empire:
wherefore he leaving in Europe the best The great Turk overthrown and taken
by the mighty Tamorl^.
garrisons he could, went to the defense of Asia, wherein he was in a battle
overthrown and taken, and in TAMORLANS power died prisoner; which (for that
time) brought some rest to Christendom. King SIGISMVND, escaping from this
unfortunate battle, came unto Constantinople; and from thence sailing unto the
I Will of Rhodes, he came into Dalmacia or Slauonia.

In the time of this his peregrination, many of his kingdom of Hungary
publishing him to be either dead or taken prisoner, advanced the Colors of
LADISLAVS king of Naples, proclaiming him king by the right of his father
CHARLES, of whom we made mention, and of his death being slain after his
coming into Hungary, for which purpose his son was now sent for: but SIGISMVND
afterward appearing, with the aid of the Archbishop of Strigonium, and other
his friends, recovered his Kingdom; although that afterward he was again
imprisoned, and fell into great troubles; the occasion whereof was the malice
and hatred which many of his Kingdom bare him, for the cruel execution done
in the beginning of his reign, as then was expressed.

These matters being past, and other which for that they concern not the
history of the Emperors, I ouerpasse; the Princes Electors of the Empire, and
the rest, seeing the insufficiency and little care the Emperor took to
suppress and pacify the wars and controversies between the cities amongst
themselves, and among the Princes; and that he gave himself to his pleasure
and vain delights, by reason whereof he was little regarded; resolved to
meet* and to depose him, as dangerous, and unprofitable for the Empire; and to
choose another Emperor; alleging him to be altogether unfit for the government;
that he desired not, neither sought to be crowned; that he had without reason,
order, or equity given the title of Duke to JOHN GALEAS the tyrant of Milan;
that he had put many men of Sacerdotal order to death, and some prelates; that
he was vicious, and no good Christian; that he took no care to resist But the
chiefest cause was for that he favored the doctrine of John Husse and Jerome of
Prage, which then began to ^ke root in Bohemia.
the Turks; and finally, that he was a man unprofitable for the Christian
Commonwealth; with many other matters which they laid to his charge; and
putting their resolution in effect, they met for that purpose in the city of
Franckford, in the year of our Lord, one thousand, four hundred, Pope
BONIFACE being the chiefest author thereof, who published him for deprived and
unworthy of the Empire, in the 22. year of his reign. During the reign of
this Emperor WENCESLAVS, they began to dispute against the vanity of the Popes
indulgences in the University of Prague which then flourished. JOHN HVS a
Bohemian, who then was very famous for his learning and piety, did much
oppugn them, saying, that they were mere Impostures. He inueighed against the
Popes tyranny, as the cheef cause thereof, and blamed the avarice, luxury and
pride of the Clergy, rejecting their vows, impure Celibate superstitions,
fictions and all their monastical life, and whatsoever did not agree with the
Analogy of faith. These matters were formerly brought in question in England
by WICKLIFFE about the year of our Lord 1372.

Here is some difference between the authors: for some write that ROBERT whom
some call RVPERT, Count Palatine of Rhine and Duke of Bauiere, was chosen in
his place; without making mention of IODOCVS Marquess of Morauia cousin germane
to the Emperor WENCESLAVS (being his fathers brothers son) who some say, was
chosen before ROBERT, and lived but a little while after: others (which I
rather believe) say that there was controversy between the Electors; some
choosing IODOCVS, and others ROBERT, and that IODOCVS dying, the contention
ended. Howsoever it was, it is true that IODOCVS lived but six months after
this election; and of him nothing is written worthy to be recited. So as
(according to all writers) ROBERT by common consent, after the decease of
IODOCVS, remained sole Emperor; and his election was ratified by Pope BONIFACE.
CARRION writes, that IODOCVS soon after his election to the Empire, went to
visit WENCESLAVS King of Bohemia, his cousin germane; who bringing him into a
private Chamber said unto him: Although I know that it is not for my dignity
that the Electors have degraded me, yet it is my comfort that our family has
not lost this honor. I willingly and gladly accept you for my successor. And
when as IODOCVS amazed with these words kneeled unto the King, desiring him not
to impute any thing unto him; Fear not says he, for neither do I unwillingly
leave the Empire, neither would I violate the rights of blood and
consanguinity, if I had a desire to hold it. Be therefore of good cheer and
enjoy the Empire which is given thee; Bohemia is sufficient for me; make use of
the power, Arms and wealth of my Kingdom as thine own, and so he dismissed his
cousin with joy. CVSPINIAN in this place makes mention of one FREDERICK Duke of
Bruinswick, who (as he says) was also chosen before ROBERT, and was slain
before that he could be crowned, through the treason of a certain Earl, by the
counsel and procurement of the Archbishop of Mentz; and that ROBERT was chosen
afterward. I know not what authors he followed therein, for I find it written
by him only. It suffices, that ROBERT, whom the Germans call RVPERT
(WENCESLAVS being deposed) The Emperor Wenceslaus deposed from the Empire.
remained Emperor: whereof WENCESLAVS made no great account, for in truth he
that took small care to preserve it, it is no marvel though it grieved him
little to lose it; for he contented himself with his Kingdom of Bohemia,
which he enjoyed a long time after, and governed the same so retchlesly, that
his brother SIGISMVND King of Hungary, by the consent of his subjects took him
once, and another time, and they themselves apprehending him, delivered him to
the custody of ALBERT Duke of Austria, who held him for a space prisoner in
Vienna: whence being afterward released, he returned to his Kingdom, in
possession whereof he afterward lived ninteene years, and died being of the
age of seven and fifty (as writes Pope PIUS QVINTVS, otherwise called AENEAS
SYLVIVS) without leaving either son or daughter by two wives to which he was
married. And he reigning in Bohemia, the religion began to spring, whereof
hereafter mention shall be made, which was the ground of that which at this day
is professed in Germany, and in the greatest part of Christendom, which (as it
feemeth) this King favored. This was the end of the Emperor WENCESLAVS his
Empire.

All this while JOHN PALHOLOGVS reigned in Constantinople, who was also called
CALOIOANNES; yet BLONDVS is of opinion, that ANDRONICVS, the son of this
CALOIOANNES, reigned at this time; wherein (as I conjecture) he is deceived:
for the authors which particularly write the lives of the Greek Emperors, make
no mention of ANDRONICVS in this place, but of JOHN CATACVZENVS, with whom
CALOIOANNES contended for the Empire. A little after the depriving of
WENCESLAVS, EMANVEL PALEOLOGVS succeeding his father CALOIOANNES, the Empire of
Constantinople decayed and came to ruin; for BAIAZETH the great Turk took
many provinces and countries thereof, as we have already declared: yet it had
some rest in those days, by reason of the calamity brought upon the Turks by
the great TAMORLAN; but it continued not long; for TAMORLAN being dead, CALAPIN
the son of BAIAZETH, recovered and reformed the Kingdom and Empire of the
Turks, and again molested and persecuted the Empire of Greece, and the Kings
of Hungary.

THE LIFE OF ROBERT, ONLY OF THAT NAME, AND HVNDRETH AND TENTH ROMAN EMPEROVR.
THE ARGUMENT.
RObert, being in the time of Wenceslaus made Emperor, took speedy order to
make it known to the world, that the dignity was not given him for naught, and
therefore he caused himself to be crowned: and having suppressed the troubles
of Girmany, he went to be crowned in Italy, and to protect the Florentines
against the Duke of Mitan; but his coming was no less dishonorable than
unprofitable, neither were the Florentine wars with the Duke of Milan ended,
but through the death of the said Duke: for, the Emperor departing without
having defended them, or without putting their aduersa^ in any fear, applied
himself to the affairs of Germany, wherein he was much troubled about the
^ohisme in the Church of Rome; and desiring to assemble a Council, the Popes
not consenting thereto, he was a long time in doubt: but in the end, resolving
to have a Council held in such a place whither both the Popes without
suspicion might come, he fell sick and died, in the tenth year of his Reign.

THe Emperor WENCESLAVS being in such manner as I said deprived, ROBERT Duke of
Bauiere, and Count Palatine, was chosen in his place. He was a man of a quick
apprehension, little of stature, but of a great spirit, very careful and
studious of the Majesty of the Empire and of the public affairs, famous for
his integrity and justice, and well practiced in Arms. Coming to Aix to be
crowned, they would not receive him into the City, pretending that they were
yet bound by their oath to WENCESLAVS: wherefore the new Emperor elect,
accompanied by the Electors and some other Princes, went to the City of Colen,
and there was crowned by the Archbishop thereof; and his election and
coronation was confirmed and ratified by Pope BONIPACE: and so through all
Germany he was held and obeyed for Emperor, but not with such obedience and
reverence as some of his Predecessors had been: for, the remiss behavior and
little worth of WENCESLAVS, and the morgages and sales made by his father
CHARLES, had given such liberty and exemptions in the territories of the Empire,
that the Empire scarcely retained the authority and reputation in the Imperial
countries, and with the Princes of Germany, which ought to have been given it.
But as ROBERT was a wise and prudent Prince, and of himself very mighty and of
great power, so in the ten years which he reigned, he made a great
reformation in all matters, and settled the best order that was possible,
as well in the controversies and wars which were in Germany, as in the
execution of justice and good government.

Italy was then on fire with war and factions; in the kingdom of Naples
LADISLAVS the son of CHARLES before named, with the aid of Pope BONIFACE,
warred against those which held for JEWS Duke of Aniow, soon to the other
JEWS who held some Cities and Towns in that kingdom, with the title which
he inherited from his father, and from Queen IOANE, being invested in that
kingdom by CLEMENT 7, who in Auinion was called Pope: And LADISLAVS his power
increasing, he in the end prevailed.

The most powerful man in all the rest of Italy, was JOHN GALEAS Viscount
Duke of Milan, who (as I said) was an haughty minded man; who not contented to
be Duke and Lord of so great estates, and of so many Cities as he was, thought
to have been a King, yea an Emperor and Lord of all Italy; and at that time
made cruel war against the Florentines, who only durst and were able to make
head against him, they being assisted by the sons of BARNABY who had been
tyrant of Milan; and by the sons of those which had been tyrannes or
Governors of Padoa, whom he had deposed, and others which he had wronged and
dispossessed; and by many others which did stand in fear to be dealt withal
in the like manner.

Matters standing in these terms, and the Election and Coronation of the
Emperor ROBERT being published, the Florentines sent Ambassadors to entreat
and to persuade him (for seeing he was Emperor he was bound thereto) to come
into Italy, to free the Country from so cruel and pernicious a tyrant, as
was Duke JOHN of Milan (who had usurped so many towns of the Empire, and of
the Church) and therewith offered to give him toward his charges the sum of
two hundred thousand Florines, whereof one hundred thousand presently in hand,
and the rest the first day that he should enter into the Tyrant Dukes country
with his Army; wherein they would assist him with the greatest power they were
able to make both of foot and horse. These Ambassadors being arrived in
Germany, they were very well entertained by the Emperor, who presently
accepting their offer and service, promised to come into Italy, as well for the
enterprise of Milan, as to be crowned in Rome: and he thereupon presently began
to provide all things necessary for his journey.

The Duke of Milan having intelligence hereof, little regarded the devices and
policies which his predecessors had used with former Emperors, seeking by their
Ambassadors to procure peace with them, and to obtain their grace and favor,
to bear themselves as their vassails and subjects; but he as a mighty absolute
Lord, with great resolution mustered up his men, and provided armor and
Artillery (which then was in use) and all things else needful for the wars:
so that great preparation was made of both sides; and all Italy and Germany
were very attentive to see the event of this great action. The Emperor stayed
longer then he, or those which expected his coming, thought he would have
done: for having resolved to come in the beginning of the year 1401, he came
to Trent (which is at the entry into Italy) in the end of harvest following,
accompanied by the Duke of Austria, the Archbishop of Colein, and some other
Princes, with many Captains of Germany and Italy. And to perform the
conditions made with the Florentines, he came with his Army within sight of
Brescia, which held for the Duke of Milan: but the Duke had in that City, and
the marches thereof, so many good men of war to make head against him, that
they feared not to offer him battle; and the Dukes Cauallerie were such
excellent good horsemen, that in all skirmishes and encounters wheresoever
they met, they had the advantage of the Germans, and slew many of them: and
they one day coming to join with their whole forces in a battle, the
Emperor and his Army were ouerthrown, near to the Lake of Benaco, now called
Garda: and being thus broken, he retired to The Emperor Robert ouerthrown in
Italy by the Duke of Milan.
Trent, where he stood in great doubt and perplexity, to think whither he
should return into Germany, or reinforce his Army to return into Italy;
where the Duke of Austria and the Archbishop of Colein leaving him returned
home, wherewith the Emperor was so grieved as he was ready to have done the
like; but persuaded by FRANCIS CARRARA, the son of CARRARA the tyrant of
Padoa, and by other Italian Captains: and thinking it a shame for him to
return without further trial of his fortune, he went with his Army (which he
had reinforced) as far as Triuigi, and thence to Padoa; where by means of
CARRARA he was received; whither came to him four Ambassadors from the
Florentins, being of the chief of the City: who also sent two Captains with
certain troops of horse and foot; one of which (as says BLONDVS) was SFORZA
ATENDVLO, who afterward was an excellent and very famous captain, and was
father to that FRANCIS SFORZA which was one of the best captains in the world,
and afterward duke of Milan.

This SSORZA ATENDVLO was borne in a village called Catiniola, of mean
parentage and very poor. With these Ambassadors ROBERT had long treaties,
concluding that the Duke of Milan was of such power, that neither he nor they
had forces sufficient to ruin him, or to expel him out of his estate:
wherefore he held it best for him to return, and that they should seek new aid
and relief: besides this he demanded so great a sum of money for the payment of
his soldiers, that it seemed not to be raised.

The Florentines fearing their ruin if the Emperor should abandon them and
return, they left no means to detain him: wherefore two of the Ambassadors
returned in post to Florence, to confer with their citizens about this
matter; and the other two remained with the Emperor: who for that it was
winter, and no fit time to make war (having a great desire to see that city)
went to Venice, where he was most sumptuously entertained. The Florentines in
the mean time having heard their Ambassadors, resolving what answer they
would make to the Emperor, determined to procure the friendship of the
Venecians, and to make a league with them, and with the Pope, and to give the
Emperor great aid of men and money: herewith the Ambassadors returned to
Venice, relating to him the resolution of their citizens. The Emperor
complained of them to the Venecians, for that they had not given him that money
which they had promised: and they excusing themselves, alleged that he came
not with such power as was requisite, neither had entered the territory of
Milan. Finally, many treaties and speeches passed, as well with the Emperor as
the Duke of Milans Ambassadors, who came thither to defend their cause before
the Venecians; the Florentines still insisting to stay the Emperor in Italy;
who giving them sometimes hope, and sometimes making the matter doubtful, came
from Venice to Padoa, where he lay all the rest of the winter: and the month
of April being come, in the year of our Lord 1402, in the third year of his
reign, he perceiving that the Venecians would be but lookets on, and newters,
and would not help the Florentines; and that LADISLAVS King of Naples had
enough to do with JEWS of Aniow, and that Pope BONIFACE (notwithstanding
that the Duke of Milan had taken many towns from him) durst not attempt ought
against him; he resolved with himself to return into Germany, and did so,
although with loss of reputation: whereby it appeared that the Empire was not
of such power as in former times; whereat the Florentines were much grieved,
and used all possible means to have stayed him. And although I shall make some
digression, yet I will declare what end the war between the Duke of Milan and
the Florentines had, and how it was interrupted by the death of the said Duke.

The Emperor being departed out of Italy; the Duke of Milan resolved presently
to effect his desires, and to make himself Lord of Florence; sending his
General, called ALBERICO Earl of Cuno, with all the force which he had
levied to make head against the Emperor, to assault Bologna, which was
governed by JOHN BENTIVOGLIO, a friend and confederate with the Florentines.
And with the Dukes Army went the Marquess of Montoa, his friend and
confederate, and PANDOLPHO MALATESTA Lord of Arimino. The Florentines to the
relief of BENTIVOGLIO, sent their best Captains and men of war, amongst
which was FRANCIS CARRARA the son of FRANCIS CARRARA Lord of Padoa. BENTIVOGLIO
herewith and with his own forces took the field, with a resolution to fight
with the Duke of Milans power, which refused not the same: wherein, JOHN
BENTIVOGLIO and his partakers being overthrown, he escaped by flight, and the
CARRARI were taken prisoners: and ALBERICO presently besieging the city of
Bologna, and battering it in many parts, by one of which some of his men, by
the permission of some within the city began to enter; but BENTIVOGLIO
resolving to die honorably Lord of Bologna, charged those which were entered,
and fought with such obstinacy, that being unknown he was there slain, and
cut in pieces. Being known that he was dead, the city without any more
resistance was entered, Bologna taken by the Duke of Milan.
and so the Duke of Milan had that city.

This victory struck such a fear into the Florentines, that they holding
themselves for lost, would have accepted any conditions of peace, had they been
never so hard; and sent to desire the Venecians to purchase the same for them:
but the Duke of Milan, which now assured himself to be Lord of Florence,
refusing to hear them, commanded his Army to march forwards: and being in the
height of his greatness, that God which only is able, and uses to abate men's
pride, measured his ambitious thoughts; for, he was suddenly taken with a
pestilent Fever, whereof within few days after he died: and notwithstanding
that his death was kept secret, yet it was soon discovered, and the Florentines
were freed from the great fear of the servitude which they expected. I know
well that I have spent much time about this man: but I do it for that it is a
notable matter to see to what great power this Duke tyrannically, in despite
of Kings and Emperors which were his adversaries, attained; and for as much as
he was a subject of the Empire, whereof this History is, it may be said to be
of the substance of the same History.

This Prince JOHN GALEAS Viscount, Duke of Milan, was tall of stature, of a
fair and comely aspect, indifferently well seen in the liberal Arts and
Sciences, very well spoken, of a quick and sharp wit, hardy and valiant in
Arms, and therewith very politic and subtle in his actions: but he was so
ambitious and desirous to reign and command, that to attain thereto, he setting
aside the fear of God, made no question to attempt any means, just or unjust
whatsoever, so he might obtain his purposes; which were so many and such, that
I cannot describe them. It is certain that he acquired much of what he desired:
for, before his death he was Lord of nine and twenty Cities in Italy; which
were, Milan, Pauia, Monfrigal, Nouarra, Bercelli, Alba, Aqui, Cities subject to
the Duke of Milan.
Alexandria, Tortona, Drobio, Placencia, Parma, Rezzo, Bologna, Pisa, Siena,
Massa, Grosseto, Clusio, Perugia, Asti, Nocera, Lodi, Feltro, Vicenza, Verona,
Brescia, Bergamo, Como, Cremona and Crema, besides the Towns and Castles
subject and appertaining to these Cities, which were very many. He died in the
month of November, in the year of our Lord one thousand, four hundred The
death of John Galeas Visconti, duke of Milan.
and two.

This mighty Duke left two sons behind him, the eldest of which was called
JOHN MARIA Viscount; and the other, PHILIP MARIA Viscount: to the elder he left
by his Testament the title of Duke, and the City of Milan, with all the Towns
and Cities within the jurisdiction thereof; and out of it the Cities of
Bologna, Siena, Perugia and Asti. To his second son PHILIP he left the Cities
of Pauia, Verona, Vicenza, and other places: and to a bastard son, whose name
was GABRIEL, he left the City of Pisa. Which division made to his sons was
imputed unto him for a great oversight, and was after very prejudicial to that
estate: for, the two brothers disagreeing, it came to decay and ruin; for they
were so young, that the eldest of them was but fifteen years old; so as there
presently began factions and partakings between them and the widow Duchess
their mother-in-law, and their kindred and favorites, about the government and
command. Finally (for that it would be long to relate) the matter grew to that
issue, that as soon as the discord was known to be between the heads, all the
members became so out of order, as the greatest part of the Cities rose and
rebelled against the Duke; some with those which first held them, and others
with the new Captains and Tyrants: so as what in the time of the Duke was held
for the greatest evil (which was, To be subject to one) seemed afterward to
be the least, by reason of the multitude of Tyrants, and the war and great
discord which ensued: for, in Cremona arose V^OLINO CAVALCABO, and PANDVLPHO
MALATESTA with Brescia and Berga; PHILIP ARCELLANO in Placencia; PAVLO GVITTIGI
with Luca; FACINO CANE with Vercelli, Alexandria, and other places; the SVARDI
in Bergamo; FOGLIANO RISCONE ^n Como; GIANINO VENATESE in Lodi; GEORGE BENZONE
in Crema; OTHO VITALE in Parma: and others sought to do the like in other
places; as, the CARRAR^SI and those of Scala sought to make themselves Lords of
Verona and Padoa: in such sort, that the state of JOHN MARIA, the new Duke of
Milan, was in great combustion and danger; and what did most hurt, was his own
tyrannical condition: for he (as a proud cruel boy) beheaded sundry of the
chief men of that Country. He also apprehended his mother, and committed many
other insolences, which in the end cost him his life: whereof being
reprehended by a servant and favorite of his, which told him that he was
unlike to his Ancestors, he yielded a reason answerable to his actions, willing
him to let him alone; for, that house or family could not be accounted
excellent or famous which produced not men of all conditions. Thus, what the
father had gotten by his valor and policy, the son lost by his weakness and
cruelty: for, besides the aboue-named Towns which were usurped by other Lords,
the Pope recovered Bolonia, Assisia and Perugia: the Florentines bought Pisa.
They of Sienna having slain CORREGIO their Governor, recovered their liberty,
being subject to cruel seditions. Neither did the Venecians forget themselves
in these combustions, but extended their power as far as Friuli and Istria.
NOVVEL CARARIVS the son of FRANCIS who had fled into Bauaria when his father
was taken, having now recovered Padoua with the assistance of the Venecians;
being unmindful of their favors, he sought to supplant them: and having
persuaded WILLIAM SCALIGER to seize upon Verona, being his familiar friend, and
one who had assisted him both with counsel and Arms, he poisoned him to get
Verona, and afterward caused his sons ANTHONY and BRVNO to be trecherously
murdered. He also attempted Vincentia: but they hating his tyranny craved
protection from the Venecians, who embracing this occasion, took Arms against
him, besieged him in Padoua, and in the end forced him to yield; so as he with
two of his sons were strangled by the Venecians. By this victory they got
Padoua, Verona, Vincentia, with other Towns.

But PHILIP, his successor, revenged his brothers death and expelled some of
the tyrants, he recovered Bergamo and Brescia; having chased away MALATESTA,
and Lodi, by the taking and hanging of VENATESE. He got Placentia and slew some
of the ARC^LANI and banished the rest. He cast FRANCHINO RVSCA out of Como:
with a promise of reward, he got Cremona having taken GAB. FVNDVLI, neglecting
those which lay farther off. Let this sufficef or his estate, and now to our
purpose.

The Emperor ROBERT going into Germany (as is before said) applied himself to
the pacifying thereof: for besides the ancient controversies between the
cities (as before is specified) in those days many great men in Hungary
through the old hatred which they long before had conceived against SIGISMVND
their King, for the cruel execution which he caused to be done in the
beginning of his reign, rebelled against him, and they apprehending him
committed him in a Castle to the custody of a widow and her two sons, whose
father he had put to death. SIGISMVND being thus prisoner, they sent to
LADISLAVS King of Naples to come and take possession of that Kingdom, to whom
it belonged: who although he was not thoroughly confirmed in the Kingdom of
Naples, yet moved with an ambitious desire to reign and to command, he made
the greatest haste thither that he could; and leaving Naples he came into
Slauonia, where, in a city subject to the Kingdom of Hungary, he was crowned
and proclaimed King: but in the mean time SIGISMVND used such means with the
widow and her sons, that they released him out of prison; and being at
liberty, with the aid of his friends and many others which he reduced to his
service, he recovered his Kingdom: and LADISLAVS being thereof advertised,
without proceeding any further (his hope and purpose failing him) returned to
his Kingdom of Naples: but before his departure, in requital of his good
entertainment, he sold to the Venecians that city wherein he was harbored.
For all these matters (as it appears by the histories) his brother WENCESLAVS
King of Bohemia and deposed Emperor, took little care; for he had enough to
do to hold himself in his Kingdom; and as little is written of what the
Emperor ROBERT did herein, or in the cruel wars between the Swissers and
the Duke of Austria, the original and issue whereof were long to be related.
It seems he was otherwise busied in the Empires affairs; whereof, seeing it was
in peace, no notable matter is written; and matters of small importance are not
worth reading: for certainly although it be the blessing of God to live in
peaceable times, and under the rule of good kings and princes for the time
present; yet the histories of them after their death are nothing delightful:
and commonly men take more pleasure in reading of battles, alterations of
kingdoms, the falls of Kings and their estates, then in histories of peace,
justice, and quiet times: and this is the reason why books of lies and fables
are read with such delight, for that they are full of such fained accidents and
adventures. True it is that those times were not without matters worthy to be
related: but forasmuch as they concern not the Emperor, I am not to write
them in this history.

The Emperor ROBERT reigning in peace in Germany, in the fifth year of his
reign Pope BONIFACE died in Rome, in the year of our Lord 1404: and he being
dead the Cardinal of S. Cross was chosen and called INNOCENT the Seventh, who
before was called COSMO; BENEDICT the Thirteenth living still in Auinion.
Before that INNOCENT was chosen, all the Cardinals swear and promised, that
whether soever of them should happen to be made Pope, he should do his best
endeavor to end the schism in the Church; and this INNOCENTIVS swear the same:
but after that he was Pope, he used no such care therein as was expected.

The Emperor ROBERT, for that he was otherwise busied in Germany, or else
through want of men or money, or both, could not or would not come into Italy
at that time: whereto if he had had means, occasion was offered him to have
recovered to the Empire the Cities which the Duke of Milan and others had
usurped, by reason of the wars and great troubles which were among them in
those days: but (as I have already said) the power and authority of the
Emperors (for the causes before mentioned) was so much weakened, that they could
not provide for all parts; but the Venecians, taking the benefit of the time,
made themselves Lords of Padoa, Verona and Vicenza, with their confines; who
before that time held not any City of importance in the main Land of Italy: and
so they wholly extinguished the houses and estates of the CARRARI and of Scala,
which of long time had been Lords of Padoa, Verona, and other Towns. The
Florentines at this time bought the City of Pisa, of GABRIEL the base son of
Duke GALEAS of Milan; who, after that he had been Lord thereof the space of
three years, being unable to hold it, sold the same: and the Pisans to
defend their liberty, and for the hatred which they bare to the Florentines,
resolved (although in vain) to shake off the yoke of subjection. Whereupon, the
Florentines besieging them, through famine, and by the treason of one JOHN
SHORTLEG, took the City, which in former time had been of very great power, and
Pisa taken by the Florentines.
was now made a slave and subject to the Florentines, as it is at this day:
such is the weakness and instability of the power and estates of this world.

Pope INNOCENT the Seventh being dead, all the Cardinals, before the election
of a new Pope, made a solemn vow, that he which should be chosen should
endeavor to cause BENEDICT the Thirteenth, who was in Auinion, to renounce the
Papacy; and that BDNEDICT doing so, he that was chosen should do the like, to
the end that the schism in the Church might cease, and that another should be
chosen: this was held the fittest mean to end the schism. After this solemn
oath, one ANGELO CORARIA, Cardinal of Saint MARK, a Venecian, was chosen, and
called GREGORY the Twelfth; who, as soon as he was chosen, confirmed the oath
which he before had made: whereupon a meeting was procured to be had between
these two Popes, to the end that they both together should have renounced the
Papacy, and that another might be chosen; and many Letters and messengers were
sent, and they both made show to be willing thereto. But they could not agree
upon the place of meeting: yet in the end Sauona was appointed; and one Pope
came from Rome to Luca, and the other from Auinion to Genoa: but they alleging
many frivolous reasons, neither of them came to Sauona; whereby it plainly
appeared that they had no meaning by their reconciliation to end the schism.
The Cardinals of either side lying near together, and perceiving that neither
of these two Popes had any meaning to renounce the Papacy, or to perform what
they both had sworn, by Letters and messages passing between them agreed to
meet together, to call a general Council, to deny obedience to them both,
and to choose a new Pope.

The affairs of the Church being in this confusion, the power and authority of
both Popes decreased, especially of BENEDICT the Antipope, France denying him
obedience; who, finding no safety in Auignon, went into Arragon, where he was
obeyed: and afterward he retired himself unto Buiscaie, where he continued in
his hardness of heart until he died; GREGORY also going from Rome, and the
Cardinals repairing to the Council. LADISLAVS king of Naples had an intent
during this discord to make himself Lord of Rome; and with such forces as he
could draw together, he went thither and seized thereon, with the help and
favor of the Colonnesi; the which he held certain days: during the which
there were skirmishes and murders; but the Vrsini being in the end the
stronger, he retired into his Kingdom.

27 Cardinals meeting altogether in Pisa, after many disputations a Council was
assembled, wherein met three Patriarchs and 180. Archbishops and Bishops: the
conclusion was, that A council held at Pisa.
the two Popes were cited to come to this Council: whereto BENEDICT who was in
Auinion, answered, that the question was between him and Pope GREGORY, whether
of them two should be Pope: wherefore they could not, neither did it appertain
to them to determine the cause; and that he marueiled at their presumption in
attempting the same. Pope GREGORY also sent them word that they well knew him
to be right Pope and canonically chosen; and therefore they neither could nor
ought to call a Council without his authority, for it appertained unto him,
and that he would not have it held in Pisa, but in some other place; and that
they were bound to go to that place which he should appoint, which was to
Aquileia, whither he went. About this controversy the Emperor ROBERT summoned
a Diet to be held in Frankford; whither came a Cardinal from Pope GREGORY, and
another from the Council held in Pisa, each defending his cause; and Pope
GREGORY desired that some other place might be appointed, but not Pisa.
Finally, after many contestations, the Emperor yielding to the opinion of many
learned men, and holding with Pope GREGORY, affirmed that he only had
authority to call the Council, and to appoint the place: But notwithstanding
the Emperors opinion, the Council of Pisa, holding neither GREGORY nor
BENEDICT for Popes, chose a Franciscan Friar called PETER, Cardinal and
Archbishop of Milan, who took to name ALEXANDER the Fifth. This being done,
thither came JEWS Duke of Aniow and Earl of Prouence (rival and competitor
with LADISLAVS King of Naples) who acknowledging ALEXANDER for Pope, was by him
invested: and ALEXANDER gave him the title to the Kingdom of Naples against
LADISLAVS, who took Pope GREGORIE'S part. The schism for all this ceased not,
but increased: for in lieu of two Popes now there were three, and each of them
held his court apart, and had Cardinals, and many followers; but the new chosen
Pope had the greatest and strongest party: and Pope GREGORY wandering up and
down remained for a space in Gaeta, (for LADISLAVS King of Naples was his
friend) but in the end he came to Arimino, where CHARLES MALATESTA Lord of that
city harbored him; he there continuing until the Council of Constance. Pope
ALEXANDER went to Bologna; but within eight months after his election he died
in the same city; and the Cardinals which were with him assembling in their
Conclaue in the same city, chose BALTHAZAR COSSA, a Neapolitane and Cardinal
of S. Eustace, who was called JOHN the 24. which Election was by some held for
violent and forced; for this BALTHAZAR being a Captain in the wars, and
Governor of Bologna, had the command of men of war and was of great power:
but yet in the end he was by the greatest part of Italy held for Pope; and so
were GREGORY and BENEDICT also in the places where they lived; by reason
whereof all Christendom was divided into three factions. The Emperor ROBERT
being herewith discontent, and desiring a redress, procured that a general
Council might be held by the consent and authority of all those three which
were called Popes; which afterward in the time of his successor SIGISMVND was
accomplished. But he having begun this work was within few days after
surprised by death, in the tenth year of his reign, in the year of our Lord
1410, leaving the The death of the Emperor Robert.
schism and division in the Church as before. This Emperor had six sons,
the eldest of which, ROBERT and FREDERICK died before their father, so as when
he died there remained JOHN, JEWS, STEPHEN, and OTHO, which had diverse
titles, and possessed sundry estates.

EMANVEL held the Empire of Coustantinople in little prosperity, as well by
means of the wars with the Turks, as other troubles and disorders in that
Empire. In his time MAHVM^T son of CALAPIN was king of the Turks: who in the
beginning, and before that EMANVEL was Emperor, came into Europe and warred in
Walachia; but the rest of his time he spent in Asia in recovering that which
TAMORLAN had taken from his grandfather BAIAZETH.

In his time JOHN HVSSE began to be of such credit and reputation in Bohemia,
that he drawing many to be of his opinion, threw down the Images in Churches,
denied Purgatory, the sacrament of Confession, the Popes power, his
Indulgences and pardons, Dirges and praying for the dead; praying to our Lady
and to Saints; and held many other opinions which at this day are maintained in
the greatest part of Christendom.

THE LIFE OF SIGISMVND, ONLY OF THAT NAME, AND HVNDRETH AND ELEVENTH ROMAN
EMPEROR.
THE ARGUMENT.
SIgismund King of Hungary, after the decease of the Emperor Robert, was
chosen Emperor, whose election was very grateful, for that he was a man of
great expectation. He being confirmed, procured a Council to be held in
Constance, to cease the Schism which had continued many years: but it behooved
him to defer it for a time, by reason of the wars between the Pope and the
King of Naples, who had taken Rome. But Ladislaus being dead, the Council was
assembled, whither the Emperor himself came in person: i^ which Council John
Husse and Jerome of Prague were condemned and burned. The two Popes Gregory and
John renounced the Papacy, but the third (which was Benedict) would not, so as
the Emperor going in person to procure him to renounce it, could not prevail;
for Benedict was resolved to dye with that title, notwithstandin^ that he^ was
deprived by the Council; and that all the Princes Christian, together with his
best friend the King of Arragon (seeing his obstinacy) rejected him. The
Council being dissolved, the Emperor went to pacific the troubles in Bohemia,
and to suppress the followers of John Husse; but he neither by peace nor war
could effect the same: and the Papists being seu^rall times memorably
overthrown, the Bohemians could never be subdued by force of Arms. But in the
end Sigismund was receiud as King of Bohemia: and the Council of Basil having
decreed, concerning the opinions of the Bohemians, the Emperor upon the way
going into Hungary dyed in Zenona, when he had reigned 37. years.

THe Emperor ROBERT being dead and buried, the Princes Electors (according to
their custom) met to choose a new Emperor in the city of Franckford: which
being made known to Pope JOHN, he (with a desire to show the authority of a
Pope, to corie favor, and to get aid against king LADISLAVS, who would have
made himself Lord of Rome) sent his Legate to entreat them to make choice of
SIGISMVND king of Hungary: truly his request was reasonable, for he was a
prince in that time, for his wisdom and valor besides his other gifts of
nature much esteemed: for he was tall of stature, very well proportioned, of a
mild aspect, very discreet and advised, of a pleasing conversation, and above
all most bountiful: and in conclusion such a one as was needful for the
present time. The Ambassadors from JOHN who was called Pope, were joyfully
heard by the Electors; and all Germany fixed their eyes upon SIGISMVND, as well
for his merits, as for that he was a mighty King, and son to the Emperor
CHARLES the Fourth; so as by common consent he was chosen Emperor; and coming
from Hungary to Aken, he was there crowned with the accustomed solemnity: and
Sigismund chosen Emptrour.
his reign was afterward very long, and so shall I be in writing his history.

When Pope GREGORY in Arimino, and Pope JOHN in Bologna were advertised of his
Election, they sent him their Ambassages and approbations, either of them
attributing the authority to himself: but SIGISMVND by reason of particular
former friendship, seeming to incline to Pope JOHN more then to any of the
others, presently began by messengers to treat with him concerning the calling
of a general Council, for the suppressing of the schism: touching the
appointing of the place, there was some question, but the Emperor appointed the
city of Constance, whither (as all men thought) all those which were called
Popes, were bound to go, there to make their renunciations. And for as much as
the most of the Towns and Cities in Italy held JOHN for Pope; and also for
that LADISLAVS King of Naples sought to have usurped Rome, and all the Church
lands and goods, and in effect, though not in name, under color of taking Pope
GREGORY'S part, to make himself Emperor; Pope JOHN departing from Rome, sent
against him JEWS Duke of Aniow, called king of Naples, PAVL VRSIM, SFORZA,
and other Captains and soldiers, with the aid of the Florentines which were
his friends. These joining in battle with LADISLAVS, overthrew him: but they
following not the victory, LADISLAVS gathered his men together, and levied so
many others, that Pope JOHN (being then in Rome) was glad to make peace with
him; and LADISLAVS sent to yield him obedience: but as it appears fainedly,
for within few days after he came under color of other occasions with an Army
into the territory of Rome, and entered the City by force; and Pope JOHN having
no power to make head against him, fled to Florence; so as the King was lodged
in Rome with as great state as if he had been Lord thereof; which struck a
great fear into the Florentines and their confederats. To Pope JOHN being then
in Florence, the Emperor sent another Embassage about the general Council;
and the Pope sent two Cardinals Legates to the Emperor, concluding the Council
should be held in Constance, and begin the first of November, An. 1402: which
for some occasion was deferred, but yet the Emperor never left to procure the
same.

The State of Milan and Lombardy was not in peace in those days, for there
were great wars between the tyrants which were therein, of which I have named
some; but FACINO CANE was of greatest power, for he held Alexandria, Bercelli,
Tortona, and Nouarra, and found the means under the title and name of Governor
to PHILIP Viscount brother to the Duke of Milan, to get into Pauia; and being
possessed of that City, he kept young PHILIP in poor estate in the Fortress:
under the same pretext he afterward made cruel wars against the other
tyrants and cities which were his adversaries. At the same time the Emperor
SIGISMVND sent a Captain with a good number of soldiers to make war upon the
Venecians, wherein (as says SABELLICVS) happened many notable adventures: but
for as much as he shows not the cause of this war, I hold it fit to come to
matters of greater importance, concerning the Emperors coming into Italy;
before which, in the year 1412, FACINO CANE dying, he left neither son nor
daughter to succeed him but his wife, who was his heir. At that time, JOHN
MARIA Duke of Milan, by reason of his cruelties and bad conditions was slain
by his own servants and familiars: and those which slew him taking the City,
made ASTROGIO Viscount, son to BARNABY Viscount, whom the mighty JOHN GALEAS
father of this John Maria Duke of Milan slame.
JOHN MARIA, to have the dominion of Milan, put to death by treason (being his
Uncle) as is before declared: which the other brother PHILIP (who was in Pauia,
and now of age and of power to execute any great attempt) understanding, he by
the counsel of his friends took the widow of FACINO CANE to wife,
notwithstanding that she was much older then himself: by which marriage,
besides Pauia which was his own, he made himself Lord of those Towns which
FACINO CANE had possessed. His power and courage herewith increasing, he
resolved to see if he could get Milan and the rest, which his father and his
brother had enjoyed, and thereupon went presently thither; ASTROGIO not having
yet gotten the Fortress, for it defended it self against him: so as having
intelligence with some within the City, and assisted by certain captains which
had served FACINO CANE, he entered Milan, and expelling ASTROGIO, suddenly made
himself Duke; and in process of time having good success was a great and
very redoubted prince, of whom we will sometimes make mention.

These matters before spoken of, together with the tyranny and power of king
LADISLAVS of Naples (Italy being out of order) were the causes why the Council
appointed to be held in Constance took not such effect as the Emperor SIGISMVND
desired: for Pope JOHN, who had appointed the same, durst not go out of
Italy, leaving his competitor GREGORY and the King of Naples with such power
behind him: wherefore the Emperor resolved to come thither, to make some
conclusion with Pope JOHN concerning the Council, and to assist him against
the king of Naples, to the end that the Council might be the more commodiously
held, which he presently put in execution: and as the country was divided into
factions and partialities, some were glad of his coming, and some were sorry.
The Pope being certified thereof came from Florence to Bologna, and thence to
Placencia, whither came the Emperor, where they two met and stayed a month.
But what forces the Emperor brought with him, in what manner they were
received into those cities, or what happened in peace or war, is not distinctly
written, but that he was in Lodi and in Cremona, and afterward in Mantoa;
where the Marquess gave him most sumptuous entertainment. In these places they
treated of the recovery Aparle betwixt the Pope and the Emperor.
of the city of Rome, and other places which were usurped by the King of
Naples; which seemed very expedient to be done, to the end the Council might
be held: and on the other side it seemed that the matter ought to be deferred,
considering the Kings great power, with whom the Florentines at that time (more
for fear then for any good will) had made peace, and (to the end that he
should draw his forces out of their frontiers) were to give him a great sum
of money: for which Pope JOHN was very sorry, for this made his war more
doubtful. But that fear was soon ouer-past: for LADISLAVS feeling himself
sick, went to Naples, and there died Lord of Rome and of all the territory
thereof, besides his kingdom of Naples. When he died, he left neither son nor
daughter, and but one sister whose name was IOANE, which presently succeeded
him in his Kingdom: in whose little time, and after her death in that
kingdom, were great wars and combustions about the succession. LADISLAVS being
dead, the citizens of Rome, crying Liberty, submitted themselves to Pope JOHN,
and so did the most part of the other towns; and he sent his Legates to them;
for Pope GREGORY although he had a better title, yet he had not so great power
to do it: for he with his Cardinals lived poorly in Arimino: yet some
Princes and people acknowledged him.

Pope JOHN, having taken the best order for his business that he could in
Italy, resolved to go to the Council in Germany, whither the Emperor to make
provision of all things necessary (having already proclaimed the Council in all
parts of Christendom) was already gone: so as after the coming of Pope JOHN
and the Bishops, Prelates, and Ambassadors from Christian Princes, into
Germany, the general Council (according to the appointment) began in
Constance, upon the fifth day of November in the year 1414. Yet in the beginning
of the Council there came no Ambassadors from JOHN King of Castile nor from
FERDINAND king of Arragon, for that they obeyed BENEDICT, who was gone from
Auignon into Arragon: yet afterward they sent their Ambassadors. The first
Session thereof was upon the sixteenth day of November the same year: and so
began this Council, which continued three years, and was one of the greatest
and most solemn, and wherein were the greatest number of Princes, Ambassadors
and Prelates, that ever was held by the Church of Rome: for writers affirm
that with the Emperor, and with the other Princes, Prelates, and Ambassadors,
there came 40000. persons. What matters passed, and what was decreed and done
in that Council, plainly appears in an Instrument which at this day is
extant; the sum of that (which is to our purpose) is this;

That upon Christmas even ensuing after the Council began, the Emperor
accompanied by the Dukes of Saxony and of Wittembergh, and other Princes, came
to Constance, where he was solemnly received; and afterward in Imperial pomp
and habit was present at the Sessions of The Council of Constance.
the Council. After New-yeeres day came the Duke of Bauiere, and then the
County Palatine of Rhine, and the Duke of Silesia. Thither also came Cardinals
Ambassadors from Pope GREGORY in Arimino, who with authority from him approved
the Council: but BENEDICT who was in Arragon, would neither come nor send. The
Council being solemnised and ordained in this manner, Pope JOHN in the second
Session, which was the second of March the same year, promised and solemnly
swear to renounce the Papacy, in case that GREGORY and BENEDICT would do the
like: this he did to purchase grace and favor with the Emperor, to the end
that he might continue Pope still; whereof (as all writers affirm) he was
unworthy, for his great vices and Insolences, which were made manifest to the
whole Council. And he standing in fear of what after ensued (his own
conscience accusing him) fled in disguised attire into the Duke of Austria's
Country who favored him and took his part. Whereupon many Ambassadors were
sent from the Emperor and the Council to Pope JOHN, and from him to them. The
Emperor and the Council proceeded against the Duke of Austria, for that he
was of counsel with the Popes flight, and had (notwithstanding their
prohibitions and warnings to the contrary) harbored and protected him: and the
Emperor confisking his goods, the Swissers took certain places from him.
Whereupon the same Duke which had assisted him, now persuaded Pope JOHN to
depart and to return to the Council; whereafter many Citations made and
signified unto him, he submitting himself to the Council, and approouing what
by them was or should be determined, as it appears in the twelfth Session,
was by their Sentence pronounced non Pontifex: and the Duke conducted him to
Constance: where he voluntarily renouncing the Papacy, was apprehended, and
committed to the Count Palatine, in whose custody he lived miserably the space
of three years; what befell him afterward you shall understand.

After this, CHARLES MALATESTA Lord of Arimino, where Pope GREGORY lay, came to
the Council with sufficient authority from him to renounce his right to the
Papacy: by virtue whereof he publicly renounced the same in the 14. Session,
saying, that Pope GREGORY in the commission which he gave him said, that for
the union and universal reformation of the Church, and for redress of the
schism, it was requisite and expedient that he and the rest which pretended to
be Popes, should renounce the Popedom, and that the Council there assembled
should choose such a one as might be for the good of the Christian
commonwealth: and notwithstanding that he was the right Pope and canonically
chosen, yet he now, as he ever before had offered to do; did renounce and
there resign the Papacy into the hands of the Council, approving what
therein by them should be done, or what they had done already. Pope GREGORIE'S
renunciation was highly esteemed, and he therefore much commended: whereupon
the Council holding the Papal seat for void, made him a Legate and governor
of the Marca de Ancona; which office he enjoyed but a little while, for he
shortly after died, as some say of sorrow, to see himself deposed from his
pontifical seat; and the Council admitted and received those Cardinals which
had served him, and were made by him, and had confirmed to them the revenues
which he had given them. What appertained to Pope JOHN and Pope GREGORY being
ended; it yet rested to deal with BENEDICT who was in Arragon, to whom many
ambassages and admonitions had been sent, that he should either come or send to
the Council, for that no Pope should be chosen until the schism were
thoroughly ended: what was done therein we will presently declare. But first I
will show you that amongst other matters which in this Council were decreed and
determined, a famous Bohemian whose name was JOHN HVSSE, was therein for
certain opinions which he held, condemned and burnt by the decree and Sentence
of the Council; and after him JEROME of Prague, who was The burning of John
Husse and Jerome of Prague.
a follower of his. Sentence being given against JOHN HVSSE, being deprived of
his priestly Orders, he was delivered to the Civil Magistrate to be burnt, and
was brought to the place of execution with a Bishops mitre of paper on his
head, whereon were devils painted with this Inscription, This is an
Arch-heretik. It is said, that before his death he did presage, with a
prophetical spirit, the declyning of the Popes Kingdom, saying that there
would a goose rise out of his ashes which they should not be able to burn, for
in the Bohemian tongue HVSSE signifies a goose. He also uttered these words,
After a hundred years you shall make answer to God and to me. And the event
afterward did verify and make good the truth of that his prophecy.

This being past, the Council sent to BENEDICT in Arragon and to the King
thereof, to treat with them, to the end that BENEDICT should renounce the
Papacy; and besides this, to treat of a meeting to be had at Nizza between
the Emperor and the King, where they might confer of the matter: in the end,
in the sixteenth and seventeenth Session it was concluded that the Emperor in
person should with the Ambassadors, from the Council, take the pains to go
to Pope BENEDICT, to the end to procure him to renounce the Papacy.

Whereupon he resolving to put their determination in effect, departed from
Constance in the month of July, in the year of our Lord, one thousand, four
hundred, and fifteen. And forasmuch as at that time there were very great
wars between the kings of England and of France, the Emperor going in
person to each of them, sought to have reconciled them: but he failing of his
purpose, concluded with them, to request and require Pope BENEDICT in Arragon
to renounce the Papacy; which if he refused to do, that then through all
their dominions they should command that none of their Subjects should obey
him. And passing forwards (for that the King of Arragon, by reason of his
infirmity, could not go out of his Kingdom to meet him in Nizza, or in
Narbone) he was content to go to Perpinian, whither the King of Arragon and
Pope BENEDICT were already come, where he and the Ambassadors which came from
the Council were by the King very honorably received: and after that the
Emperor had visited the King and conferred with him about the matter, he went
to see Pope BENEDICT, whom with the best speeches and reasons he could devise,
he persuaded to yield to the Councels determination.

To the first, BENEDICT gave very good words, but general without any
conclusion, and did the like to what the Councels Ambassadors propounded.
Afterward there were other meetings between these Princes and this Pope about
the same matter, but to no effect; for BENEDICT notwithstanding the King of
Arragons entreaty, and the Ambassadors from the King of France, for the same
purpose deferring the conclusion with delays, departing from Perpinian, went
to Colibre: where imbarking himself in a Galley, without any stay
(notwithstanding that the King and the Emperor by their Letters desired the
contrary) he went thence by Sea to Peniscola, which is a little Town (but very
strong) in the country of Valencia in Spain, upon the Sea coast; whither both
the Emperor and king of Arragon sent unto him: but he persisting obstinate, the
king upon the fifth of January, in the year of our Lord, 1416, rejecting him,
denied him to be Pope.

This being published, the Emperor and the Ambassadors took their way toward
Constance: and in his return (as I guess) was his journey to the Kings of
England and of France, concerning Pope BENEDICT: for by the Histories it
appears not when it was, but it seems to be at his return, for he came not
to Constance until the beginning of the year of our Lord, one thousand four
hundred and seventeen, having spent one whole year upon the way between
Spain and Constance; being one year and a half after his departure from the
Council to go this journey. Those which write that he spent three years
therein are to be excused, for he took part of all three years, to wit, 1415,
1416, and 1417. The Emperor and the Ambassadors being returned, and the
Council having at large heard their relation, they resolved to proceed
against Pope BENEDICT, as against a rebel, and one whom they never had held
for Pope; and his accusation was signified unto him, with a new charge to
renounce: but he (persisting in his obstinacy) was denounced for no Pope, but
an Heretic, a schismatic, and a scandalous perturber of the unity and
universal peace of the Christian Church and Commonwealth: And the Kingdoms of
Castile, Navarre, and Portugal, which until then had been at his devotion,
rejected him.

The Council (by reason of the renunciations made by JOHN and GREGORY, and
BENEDICT being deprived) holding the Papacy for void, determined to choose a
new Pope: and appointing five Prelates of five several nations, to wit,
French, English, Spanish, Italian and Dutch, to these, together with the
Patriarch of Constantinople, and to the Cardinals which had chosen the other
Popes, the Council gave order to choose a Pope; all which agreeing together,
chose Cardinal OTHO de Colunna, and he was called MARTIN the fifth. This MARTIN
being chosen (to avoid all occasion of scruple) ordained that every tenth year
a Council should be held, and that the first should begin at the end of five
years, and that all the benefices given by the three Popes before that JOHN and
GREGORY renounced, and BENEDICT was deprived, should be confirmed. After this,
in the five and fortith Session, in the month of April, in the year of our
Lord, one thousand four hundred and eighteen, three years and a half after
the beginning of this Council, it was dissolved, and the Pope took his way
toward Rome, and all the rest toward their Countries. At this time the
Emperor made the Earls of Cleues and of Sauoy, Dukes, and so have their
successors continued ever since.

The Emperor having newly redeemed the Marquisate of Brandenburgh, from WILLIAM
Lantzgraue of Turinge; to whom IODOCVS, Marquess of Morauia, his cosen
germane, had pawned it when he aspired to the Empire, the same with the
Electorall dignity he sold to FREDERICK Burgraue of Norembergh, a Prince of
known wisdom, magnanimity, loyalty and authority, having deserved well both
of the Emperor and Commonwealth, for four hundred thousand Crowns; with this
condition, that if the Emperor should have a son, it should then be lawful
for him to redeem it. And yet in this sale the price was not so much regarded,
as the reward of FREDERICK'S virtues and merits, who had done SIGISMVND great
services, and undergone many dangers for him. There is one memorable thing
written of this FREDERICK; who, making his Will, called his four sons unto
him, speaking to JOHN the eldest after this manner: I first got this
septentrionall dignity when I was familiar with the Emperor SIGISMVND; and now
that I am called out of this life, my care is, that such an honor should not grow
contemptible in our family; Thou I see art wholly inclined to a quiet and
contemplative course of life: In this Septentrionall charge thou shall find
nothing but cares and continual toil; wherefore if I might, with your liking,
I would give this charge by my will to FREDERICK your second brother, who
seems to be more fit for action: To whom JOHN answered, I did always think
that FREDERICK had been more dear unto you then my self, which did somewhat
grieve me; but now dear father, I will change my opinion, and will honor and
love you, who by your last will be queath rest to me and cares to him. A
notable example in old FREDERICK, not of fatherly affection, but of wisdom,
providing for the public: and of modesty in JOHN the son, yielding to his
fathers judgment touching the succession, without any froward opposition.

This being ended, the Emperor went to pacify the troubles in Bohemia, where
the followers of JOHN HVSSE and IEROM of Prague which were burnt at the
Council of Constance, were of such power that they pulled down some Churches
and Monasteries, which did more abound in Bohemia then in any kingdom in all
Christendom; the King having little means to redress the same. I say King,
for WENCESLAVS who had been Emperor, lived until this time, who holding not
himself to be in safety in the City of Prague, retired himself to a most
strong Castle, about five miles from thence, and being there the Hussites rose
and committed many insolences: Which King WENCESLAVS perceiving, he sent to
his brother the Emperor (as at other times he had done) for aid, about the
time that the Council brake up at Constance: but he was so resolved to go to
the wars against the Turks which annoyed him in Hungary, or peradventure in
hope to be revenged for the battle which he lost against them before that he
was Emperor, which I write not for that it makes nothing to my purpose: the
which he did contrary to his duty, and therein had ill success, and in Bohemia
worse, for presently after this, King WENCESLAVS dying without leaving any
successoor but his wife the Queen, the Emperor was sent for to take
possession of that Kingdom: but desirous to renew the war against the Turks,
wherein most commonly he had ill success, he would not come; thinking to
entertain the matter by Governors which he sent thither: wherein he erred, for
that occasion being lost, the troubles increased; and there arose one JOHN
CISCA, Cisca Captain of the Hussites in Bohemia.
a man of a noble house and very expert in the wars, whom the Hussites made
their Captain, to whom out of Prague and other parts thereto adjoining, came
40000 of the Hussites; who not content with the subuerting of Monasteries and
pulling down of Images, possessed themselves of the fortresses of that City,
and being masters of the field, took the town of Relezina, and other towns and
castles.

CISCA before the coming of the Emperors Governors, was grown so mighty, that
they were constrained to make peace with him and with the Hussites, to the end
that they should give up Prague and other Castles, which they desired to have
until the Emperors coming, which was shortly after; wherewith far greater
accidents ensued, when peace and quietness was hoped for; as we will declare
after that we have made some relation of the state of the Empire in Italy,
wherein they now knew no Emperor but in name only; and likewise of the coming,
and success of the new Pope.

The Council being dissolved, Pope MARTIN notwithstanding that he was diversely
counseled, (by some, that he should continue in Germany, and by others, in
France) remained firm in his resolution to go into Italy and to Rome,
alleging that he which governs the ship, ought to sit at the Helm, and not
in the Prow, neither in the mid-ship. In conclusion, he departed from Germany
the same year that he was chosen, and came directly to Milan; for Duke PHILIP
(who by his policy and valor was grown very mighty) was his friend. At that
time PHILIP was busied in the wars against PANDVLPH MALATESTA, who withheld
Bergamo and Brescia from him, and against GAERINO FONDVLO, who held Cremona,
and against other Lords which held other places which had been his fathers, the
mighty JOHN GALEAS, and were lost in the time of his brother JOHN MARIA; in
which wars PHILIP had so good success, that he recovered all those estates,
and was afterward one of the most puissant princes of the world, and was Lord
also of Genoa. He possessed the state of Milan until he died, which were two
and thirty years, in which time he had great wars with the Venecians and
Florentines, and with other Princes; wherefore of necessity we must sometimes
make mention of him.

From Milan the Pope came to Florence, but could not go to Rome, for that one
BRACCIO MONTONIO (an excellent Captain, and of very great power) in the time of
Sede vacan^e, and of the Council, had taken the City of Perugia, and the
Territory thereof, and many other Towns in the jurisdiction of Rome: and many
others of his condition joined with him; so as there was no safe passage for
the Pope to Rome, wherein the said BRACCIO MONTONIO had a strong party. But at
the intercession of the Florentines, which were mediators between them, BRACCIO
MONTONIO afterward submitted himself to the Pope, and rendered some Towns
which he had taken; and the Pope made him his General against Bologna which
rebelled: which by him, and by GABRIEL Cardinal of Saint CLEMENT, was reduced
to the Popes obedience.

In those days (but somewhat before this time) BALTHAZAR COSSA, which had bee^
Pope JOHN (who renounced his Papacy in the Council of C^nstance, of whom Pope
MARTIN stood in no small fear that he would have attempted some alteration by
taking upon him as Pope, and would have renewed the schism) came into Italy,
and finding favor and entertainment among some of his friends, would not
intermeddle in any matter; but of his own accord without any safe conduct or
other agreement, at such time as no man thought thereof, came voluntarily to
Florence where the Pope lay; and coming into his Palace, kissed his foot, and
acknowledged him for Pope, Saint PETER'S Successor, and CHRIST'S Vicar;
whereupon, Pope MARTIN made him a Bishop and a Cardinal: but he, within few
months after dying, was in Florence most solemnly buried, by the procurement
(principally) of COSMO de Medicis, a rich and noble Citizen thereof, and chief
of the house and family of the Medici's, whose beginning (as it is written) was
through the treasure and riches which he inherited from this BALTHAZAR COSSA,
otherwise called Pope JOHN.

Pope MARTIN, knowing that troubles were in the Kingdom of Bohemia, sought by
his Bulls to have pacified the matter: but seeing it was comn to blows, the
friendship betwixt him and the Emperor SIGISMVND was soon after broken. In
those days came to Rome JEWS, Duke of Aniow and Earl of Prouence, son to the
other JEWS deceased, to receive from the Pope the title and inuestit^re of
the Kingdom of Naples, against Queen JOAN, sister and heir to King LADISLAVS;
being called thither by the Pope for the same purpose, through her ill
government and tyranny, but chiefly for that she joined with BRACCIO MONTONIO,
and made war upon him, and for other matters too long to relate. The Pope
proceeding against her, and holding her unworthy to enjoy the feudatory lands
of the Church, sent for Duke JEWS, offering him the Kingdom of Naples: but
Queen JOAN, being thereof advertised, adopted ALONZO King of Arragon (who was
also King of Sicilia) whom she called to her aid, and to the succession in
that Kingdom; who came accordingly. The Queen afterward (according to her
natural condition) falling at odds with him, and reuoking the adoption which
she had made of ALONZO, adopted the same JEWS whom the Pope had called.
Heerof grew the wars between JEWS and ALONZO for the Kingdom of Naples; and,
after the decease of JEWS, with his brother RENE, which wars continued Wars
for the Kingdom of Naples.
many years: but in the end, ALONZO having the victory, obtained the
sovereignty of that Kingdom.

These things passed in Italy, where the Emperors were now of small power: and
in Germany, the wars which the Turk made in Hungary being assuaged, the
Emperor resolved (though late) to come into Bohemia, to take possession of that
Kingdom; whither if he had presently comn, it is very likely that the
troubles there had been pacified: for, at his coming to Bruna, which is in
Morauia, Ambassadors came to him from Prague to submit themselves, and to sue
for pardon; which he entertained and heard; and proponing certain tolerable
conditions, granted them a general pardon: the news whereof were very joyful
to the Inhabitants of that City and Kingdom; to the Hussites, to see
themselves pardoned of their offenses; and to the rest, in hope to live in
peace. But all this was crossed, for that the King came not presently to take
possession of that City which is the head of that Kingdom, where they
peaceably attended his coming; but he would first go to Vratislaue, the chief
City of Silesia, a province to the East of ^ohemia. There, as well as in Prague
(in time of the insurrection of the people) the Governors which were left
there by WENCESLAVS were slain; and the Emperor, to punish the offense, did
justice upon the principal heads of that rebellion.

As the news thereof was published in Prague, and as their offenses were
equal or greater, this unseasonable punishment struck such a terror into the
people, that they fearing the like rigor, without any further consideration
rose up in Arms; and resolving to refuse him for their King, wrote their
Letters, thereby inciting the rest through all the kingdom to do the like;
publishing that he had resolved to commit great cruelty amongst them. This
took such effect, that in the greatest and best part of the kingdom, the
people took Arms: and as the greatest part of those of Prague were Hussites
(the rest joining with them) they altogether sent for a Captain of the
Hussites, a man of great power, whose name was CISCA, whom they put into Prague
for defense thereof against the Emperor, who was coming against it. Hereof
ensued in that City and Kingdom many encounters, skirmishes, battles and
bloodshed by fire and sword, such as never was seen or heard of, and such as I
am not able to relate: the most effectual whereof may be seen in the third book
of AENEAS SYLVIVS, afterward called P. PIUS QVINTVS, in his History of Bohemia:
for my part I will rest satisfied, briefly mentioning the most notable
accidents which happened. The Emperor accompanied by the Duke of Saxony, the
Marquess of Brandenburgh, and the Duke of Austria, with many other soldiers
both of Foot and Horse, came near to the City of Prague: Whereof the
Fortress called Vicengrade was at his devotion.

CISCA and his people very resolutely battered the same, but their chiefest
hope was to take it by famine. The Emperor coming thither relleued the
Fortress, and entering it, was therein crowned King of Bohemia: the Fortress
being victualled and garrisoned, he presently besieged the City; which siege
continued six weeks; in which time in all the skirmishes and encounters which
happened, it pleased God that CISCA and his followershad still the better: The
Emperor making war against the Hus^tes besieg^ the City of Prage
the like issue befell in a manner in all parts of the kingdom, between the
Hussites and the Imperialists. Where^pon the Emperor raising his siege from
before Prague, came to (...): and CISSA leaving the City, joined with the
Taborites, so called after the name of a City founded by them and so called:
And being victorious and not co^nted to make defensive wars only, taking the
field, he likewise took some Towns and Castles from his adversaries.

Many other conflicts after this ensued, which I omit: and the matter came to
this issue, that the Emperor with his whole power came to a strong Monastery
which held for CISCA, with a resolution to batter and to take it; and if CISCA
came to the relief thereof, to fight with him: for his army was such, that he
doub^ed nothing of the victory. But there befell a strange accident: which was,
that CISCA resolving to come to the ^eliefe of that Castle, and so to fight
with the Emperor, and being come to the point to have joined, the Emperors
troops but The Emp. coming to fight with the Hussites at the fight of them, his
people fled without blow stricken.
at sight of their enemies, making no resistance, or showing the minds or
courage of men, suddenly ran away, and the Emperor was driven to do the
like, not daring to stay in any part of all Bohemia: So as CISCA and his people
being masters of the field, besieged many strong holds and Castles, which he
took by force* At the assault of one of which; as he had but one eye, that one
was shot out with an arrow; but his credit and reputation was so great, that he
continued in the government and command of the Army, which was led by a blind
Christian: a thing never seen nor read in any History; for notwithstanding that
he was blind, yet he still prosecuted the wars.

The Emperor (notwithstanding these disasters) was not dismayed: but leuying
his whole power he sent for the Princes of the Empire, whom he appointed to
enter Bohemia by the West; and he with his Hungars would enter it by the East.
Thither came with great troops the Duke of Saxony, the Count Palatine of Rhine,
the Marquess of Brandenburgh, the Archbishop of Mentz, and some other
Princes and Prelates, who began the wa^re, and be^eged and took some towns.
The Emperor stayed longer then he had appointed, but coming with his Army, he
The Emp. ouerthrown the 2 time by the Huss^, and their blind* Captain Cisca.
began on his side, and notwithstanding that CISCA was blind yet he took the
field against him; and coming to join in battle, the Emperors men were
stricken with such ^eare of CISCA and of the Hussites, that they were presently
ouerthrown, and many principal men of them were slain; and the Emperor
unfortunate in the wars, being driven to fly, CISCA followed the execution
of the victory.

Matters standing in this estate, the Nobles and principals of Prague and of
all Boh^ (^esiring to have a King, that might oppose himself against
SIOISMVND) sent to yield themselves and their kingdom to VITOLD Duke of
Lituania; for which CISCA was sorry. The Duke desirous to be a King, accepting
their offer, sent a Captain called TOR^BVT with his power; who being gladly
received into the City, began to show the power of a new King, and to b^ter
such castles and Fortresses as were his adversaries. But this Duke within short
space after, at the entreaty of the King of Poland, coming to a composition
with the Emperor, gave over his enterprise and title to the Crown of Bohemia.
It followed, that the Emperor gave the Province of Morauia to ALBERT his
son-in-law, one of the Dukes of Austria, to the end that he should defend the
same: and he returning to the war against the Hussites, there happened betwixt
CISCA and the Imperialists another great battle; wherein CISCA having the
victory, nine thousand of the Imperialists were slain. A third battle wherein
the asniperor was overthrown, and 9000 of his people slain by the Hussites.


The Emperor, seeing the power of CISCA to be so great, that without his good
will he could not be King of Bohemia, sought to be at peace with him; and to
that end made him many large promises and offers: at the time of the parley,
being at a point to have made a conclusion, CISCA died of the plague; after
whose death the Hussites were divided into several factions, of which some were
called Hussites, and some Taborites; so as they were at variance and contention
amongst themselves: but warring against the Imperialists, they ever joined and
were friends.

After many other accidents, Pope MARTIN sending his Legate into Germany,
commanded the Emperor to renew the war against the Bohemians: and the Duke of
Saxony entering the Country upon the one side, and the Marquess of
Brandenburgh upon another side, and at another place the Archbishop of Treuier,
either of them with the greatest power they were able to levy, all which,
meeting together in Bohemia, and beginning the war, and knowing that the
Hussites came to fight with them (a matter seeming incredible, yet true
although strange and shameful) they were stricken with such fear, that without
seeing or hearing any enemy, both Captains and Soldiers setting all shame
apart, abandoning the field, ran away in such manner, that neither entreaty
nor authority was able to stay them; and the Hussites, pursuing At a fourth
invasion the Imperialists raw before they saw any enemy.
them, took all their baggage and ar^illery; and not content therewith, salying
forth of their Kingdom, warred in other parts; out of which, in consideration
of a great sum of money, they returned home again.

The Pope, understanding in what estate the affairs of Bohemia stood, resolved
to give a Croisade, and to send a new Legate against the Bohemians,
notwithstanding that in Italy there was as little quietness; but great wars, as
well in the Kingdom of Naples, as in Lombardy and in other parts. And to that
effect he sent IVLIAN, Cardinal of S. Angelo, to be his Legate against the
Hussites, and that (the time being expired) he might sit in his place in the
Council appointed to be held in Basil. This Cardinal coming to the Emperor,
it was decreed, that a new Army, and new forces, to a greater number than
before, should be levied against the Hussites; whither came FREDERICK,
Marquess of Brandenburgh (who was chosen General) and the Dukes of Bauier and
of Saxony, the Archbishops of Mentz, Treuier and Colen, and many Bishops,
Prelates and Princes, together with the companies of the Cities; and so many
others, that they amounted to the number of forty thousand horse, but not so
many foot (for, it seems they were not so requisite for that war); who with
this power entered the Kingdom of Bohemia, the Cardinal Legate going with the
Army. But the Hussites were so accustomed to the bearing of Arms, and were
therewith so courageous, that they drew themselves to one head, with a
resolution to fight with the Imperialists: and the one Army being opposite to
the other, so as no man doubted but that the Imperialists (considering their
multitude, and the goodness of their Captains and Soldiers) would have had the
victory; there happened the strangest accident that ever was seen, whether
through treason or practice in the Army, or through some vain and cowardly
(...)or imagination, or through the secret judgment of God who was not pleased
that the matter should be decided by Arms, there fell a sudden fear in the
Camp, and a rumor that they were not to stay there: whereupon they all began
presently to march, leaving behind them all they brought; and many, their Arms
and furnitures: and the whole Army (no admonition, threatening or entreaty, made
by the Princes and Commanders, being able to prevail with them) fled; and they
did the like, without seeing or fighting with any enemy: and so they A
wonderful (...).
fleeing out of the Country, the Hussites made great booty of what their
enemies left, and could not carry with them.

So great an Army being so shamefully overthrown, the Emperor intended not
(for that time) to raise any other: but the time being expired that the
Council should begin, the Cardinal Legate went to Basil; and the Emperor, by
reason of the aid and assistance promised him by PHILIP Duke of Milan, resolved
to go into Italy to be crowned in Rome. At this time died Pope MARTIN; and
after his decease, a Cardinal called GABRIEL CONDVLMERO, a Gentleman of
Venice, was in March in the year 1431 chosen, and called EVCENIVS the Fourth:
in the beginning of whose Papacy many insolences (as says PLATINA and other
Writers) were committed in Rome between the Pope and the Colonnois. EVGENIVS,
approving the Council appointed by Pope MARTIN, commanded it to be begun in
Basil; where, the Cardinal of Saint Angelo being President, the first Session
was held upon Friday, the seventh of December: whereof before that we make any
relation, which shall be but little (notwithstanding that it continued long,
and that therein was much controversy and contention with the Pope) we will
describe the journey SIGISMVND made to his coronation, which was in this manner:

Upon assurance of the promises and offers made by the Duke of Milan, SIGISMVND
with small troops of Germans and Hungars came into Italy; and coming to Milan,
the Duke being not there, he was by the Dukes commandment very honorably
received by a Captain of his called NICHOLAS PICHININO, and other principal
men, and there according to the custom was crowned with the Crown of Iron: but
the Duke came not to see him; yet he afterward by Letters and delays
temporized with him many days in Parma and in Placencia, yet not furnishing
him with such things as he had promised against the Florentines; who, as
enemies to the Duke, stopped his passage to Rome, and to that effect maintained
an Army in field: and moreover they persuaded the Pope to prohibit his coming
to Rome, assuring him, that by the instigation of Duke PHILIP he came against
him. The Emperor, without speaking with the Duke, in the best manner that he
could came to Luca; and notwithstanding that the Pope and the Florentines
sought to stay him, yet he, after some accidents which happened between the
soldiers of the one and other side, came to Siena, where he stayed six
months: in which time he came to a composition with the Pope, many ambassages
passing between them in the mean season; so as he peaceably departing toward
Rome, was therein solemnly received, and with great solemnity crowned by the
hands of the Pope, upon the last day of May in the year of our The Emperor
Sigismund crowned in Rome by the Pope.
Lord 1432; and after some treaties he took his leave to return into Germany.
By the way he was entertained in Ferrara and Mantoa, by their Lords and Dukes
(the wars continuing in Italy, as before) wherein passed many great matters:
the principals were the Florentines and Venecians which made war against the
Duke of Milan, who now was become Lord of Genoa, the which he took by means
of the dissension and discord that grew between the I^habitants.

Whilst the Emperor was in Italy, in the Council at Basil many matters were
treated of, but had not yet taken such effect as they desired: for, the
Hussites persisting constant in their opinions, the Council sent thither
certain learned men, such as well knew the Country, who by flattery and fair
means sought to have seduced the Bohemians; in whom they sometimes found hope of
peace, and at other times signs of war: and so the case continuing as
doubtful as before, it pleased God that by secret means unknown to man, there
grew some suspicion and jealousy between the Nobility of that Kingdom
(whereof one MENANDER was the chief) and the Taborites and the Hussites
(notwithstanding that some of the Nobles were Hussites); but in the end it
grieved them all to be governed by PROCOPIVS, a man of base parentage, who
being General of the Taborites, commanded all; and by another PROCOPIVS called
the younger, Captain of the Hussites. After that they had long murmured at the
matter, they summoned a Parliament to be held by all the estates of the Realm,
under pretext to set some order in the government: for they were discontented
with the violences and insolences daily committed. Finally, the Parliament was
assembled, and a Nobleman and nobly descended, although of mean estate, whose
name was ALCION, was nominated and made their Governor, and he presently
undertook the government. And although he had the title and outward show, yet
all was done by the order and direction of MENANDER the chief of the Nobility.
Heerwith the Hussites and the Procopii were so much discontent, that the matter
came to blows. I cannot describe all that passed; for there were many notable
accidents: but I will tell you the event thereof.

When the Emperor, coming out of Italy into Germany, was upon his way toward
Basil, he understood that between the Pope and the Council there was great
discord: for, the Pope Dissension betwixt the Pope and the Council of Basil.
perceiving that the Council began to treat of many matters against his
authority and dignity, commanded it to be dissolved, and to be transferred to
Bologna; and the Council, rejecting his commandments, would not accomplish
what he required, but made other acts and statutes to his disgrace. Whereupon
many matters passed, and the Emperor came to the Council, and there hearing
the matter debated, made a reconciliation between them: and the Pope again
ratified the Council; yet they afterward fell further at variance, as you
shall hear: for, those of the Council, refusing to make an end, continued the
Council a long time in despite of the Pope: but the Emperor by his authority
in the best manner that he could took up the matter; and understanding of the
wars between the Nobility and the Hussites in Bohemia, holding the same for
the most assured mean for him to recover that Kingdom, went from Basil to Vlm,
where he was advertised of a battle fought between them, wherein the Lords had
the victory; and therein were both the Procopii (Captains of the Hussites and
Taborites) slain, with many thousands of others; and a great number were taken
prisoners: and they found the means afterward to kill or burn all those which
were taken, or escaped from the battle. The Emperor, understanding heerof,
sent his Ambassadors into Bohemia, to persuade the Nobility to obey and receive
him for their King, for that of right it appertained to him, as to the son
and brother to the Kings of Bohemia. And it pleased God to work such an
alteration in the hearts of the Bohemians, that they sent their Ambassadors to
Ratisbone, whither the Emperor was gone from Vlme, to whom they gave order to
receive him for their King and soueraign Lord: and they agreed with him
concerning his coming into Bohemia; and he there ratified the conditions
concluded by those of the Council with the Bohemians, concerning points of
religion; which in sum was, that that the Bohemians wholly submitted
themselves to the Church of Rome, and that they, believing as it did, forsook
all matters in question, except communicating under both kinds of bread and
wine; which was granted them upon this condition, that the matter should be
referred to the determination of the Council: and all other matters concerning
Churchrents and goods, and other ecclesiastical benefices, were concluded and
agreed upon.

These matters being ended, the Emperor within few days after peaceably
entering Bohemia, was with feasting and great solemnity, upon the fourth day of
August, in the year of our Lord 1436, received into the City of Prague: he had
been there but a few days space, but there was so great an alteration, that it
seemed a new world, and another kind of people: for, notwithstanding that
there remained some of the sect of the Hussites, yet the greatest and most
common were Papists. The Temples which had been spoiled and ruinated were new
built, and those which were defaced were repaired, and the Altars were decked
with Images and Relics, and the Monks and Friars terurned to their Couents
and Cloisters: finally, all was restored to the former order. Of the pretended
Heretics, which would not be converted, some fled for fear of imprisonment,
and to others a time was limited wherein they should recant; and against such as
persisted constant, the Emperor proceeded: for his success heerin, Pope
EVGENIVS sent him a Rose of gold, who at that time commanded the Council at
Basil to be dissolved, and a general Council to be held at Ferrara; where
they expected the Emperor of Constantinople: but the Council of Basil,
holding themselves to be above the Pope, would not obey him, neither be
dissolved.

The Emperor being now threescore and ten years old, and tired with wars and
troubles both before and after he was Emperor (which were more than I have
written) began to wax feeble and sickly; and perceiving death to approach, he
was advertised that his wife (considering that he was old, and could not live
long, and that he had but one daughter which was married to ALBERT of Austria)
sought, as soon as he should be dead, to marry with the King of Poland; and
that the Bohemians should take him and her for King and Queen. For redress
heerof, and being somewhat jealous of the Bohemians for matters past, he sent
for the Noblemen of Hungary which came with him into Bohemia; to whom in
seeret (aduertising them of what passed) he recommended his daughter and
son-in-law, and made them to promise to take them for their King and Queen
after his decease. And notwithstanding that he was very sick, yet he caused
himself to be carried out of Prague toward Hungary, where he desired to die:
but being unable to reach thither, he was carried to his daughter and
son-in-law in Morauia, who by his gift possessed that Province, which came to
meet him in the City of Zenomia; whither also came his wife the Empress, who
there by his commandment was apprehended. The Emperor within few days after,
in the 37 year of his Reign, upon the day of the conception of our Lady, in the
year of our Lord 1437, died. And so ended this Prince both his life and
troubles; who although he had unfortunate success, especially in Arms and
wars, yet he failed in nothing The death of the Emperor Sigismund.
that belonged to a wise and valiant Knight. This Emperor might well be
paralleld with the ancient OTHOES and CHARLES, for the excellency of his wit,
piety, wisdom, greatness of mind, industry, dexterity of counsel, and
patience in labor, if fortune had been answerable to his wise resolutions and
commendable attempts, and that God had not denied success to his just and
necessary Arms against the Turk. He returned no more to these Turkish wars,
being hindered with intestine combustions, and terrified (as I conceive) with
the remembrance of two overthrows: and although he desired to be revenged of
these cruel and barbarous enemies, yet he durst not make trial of a third
battle. He delighted much in the reading of Histories. He had always this
Saying in his mouth, He knows not how to reign, that cannot dissemble;
meaning, that he must not do all things according to his own will. He hated a
flatterer as the plague: but when as a stander by did blame the Emperor, saying
that he was governed by flatterers; he answered, So it falls out in Courts:
those whom we hate most and seek to shun, we are forced to obey. Speaking of
government, he was wont to say, that all men refused to practice any Art which
they had not learnd; but no man refused to command, which is the most difficult
of all Arts. Blessed were Kings on earth, if having excluded proud men from all
government, they drew into their Courts such as are mild and grave. And
when as his Courtiers did blame the railing of the German multitude, who
commonly spoke ill of their Princes; smiling he answered, Do you think it
strange that they speak ill, when as we do ill? In his youth he was
vindicatiue; but age and experience tempered this heat: wherefore one
expostulating with him, that he not only pardoned his enemies, but also
favored and advanced them; Thou, said he, think it a benefit to kill an
enemy, for that there is not any danger in a dead man: but I kill an enemy
when I spare him; and I make him my friend when I advance him. He was twice
married, first to MARY daughter to the King of Hungary, by whom he had that
Kingdom; the second time with BARBARA, daughter to the Earl of Cilia, by whom
he had his daughter ISABEL which was his heir, and married to ALBERT one of the
Dukes of Austria, who then was Lord and Marquess of Morauia. His wife after
his death was set at liberty: but spending her days infamously, in the end she
died of the plague.

The state of Italy when SIGISMVND died was so confused and out of order, that
except I should relate the whole, I cannot express the same in such sort as it
may be understood. Duke PHILIP of Milan, being an enemy to Pope EVGENIVS,
favored the Council of Basil: and the Florentines and Venecians supported the
Pope against him. There were other wars among them; wherein the most famous
Captains were, FRANCIS SPORCE before named, and NICHOLAS PICHININO. ALONSO King
of Arragon (Queen IOANE and JEWS being dead) contended with RENE, JEWS his
brother, about the Kingdom of Naples. A little before that JEWS died, K.
ALONSO and his brother the King of Navarre being taken in a battle by sea, and
with them many other Lords by the fleet of the Genoais, were carried prisoners
to Duke PHILIP of Milan, who then was Lord of Genoa; who, showing his
magnificence, released them, and set them at liberty: which the Genoais took in
so ill part, that they reuolting made themselves free from the Duke.

In those days were cruel wars between the Kings of England and France; and
amongst the French was a woman which bare Arms like a soldier, and afterward
(as a Captain) wrought wonders, and defended and recovered many Castles for the
French: this woman was called IEANNE la Pucelle.

After the decease of EMANVEL Emperor of Constantinople, his son JOHN
PALEOLOGVS reigned, who was already upon the way to come to the Council in
Italy.

THE LIFE OF ALBERT, SECOND OF THAT NAME, AND HVNDRETH AND TWELFTH Roman
Emperor; And of John Paleologus in CONSTANTINOPLE.
THE ARGUMENT.
SIgismund being dead, his son-in law Albert was peaceably chosen; who was in
some doubt to accept the Empire, by reason of the Kingdom of Hungary: which
being past, he accepted the government. For that he lived not long, he could
not effect so great matters as he proiected. He had wars with some rebels,
which he luckily ended. But he could not make any peace or union between the
Councels which were held in his time, one in Basil without the Pope, the other
in Ferrara where the Pope was in person; which Council was afterward ended in
Florence. He took Arms against Amurath King of the Turks, in the behalf of the
Dispote of Seruia: but, being in a little village upon his way, he died of
Dysenteria, having reigned but a small time. His death was much lamented, by
reason of the great hope conceived of his virtue.

THE same day that the Emperor SIGISMVND died, his sonne-in-law ALBERT Duke of
Austria was by all the principal Lords of both those Kingdoms which were
there with him, together with his wife SIGISMVND'S daughter, to whom in right
those Kingdoms appertained, hailed King of Hungary and Bohemia; who from that
City of Zenomia which is in Morauia, sent Ambassadors into Bohemia, with
SIGISMVND'S Will and Testament, and by his authority to take possession of that
Kingdom: and he with his wife, carrying with them the dead body of the
Emperor, and the widow Empress prisoner, departed toward Hungary; where they
were without any contradiction received and obeyed, and afterward with great
solemnity, upon the first day of January, in the year of our Lord 1438,
crowned; having first performed the Imperial funerals and obsequies.

In the mean time, his Ambassadors which were in Bohemia, assembling the
principal Lords of that Realm in the City of Prague, showed the Testament of
the deceased Emperor and their King; and all eaging many effectual reasons,
persuaded them to choose ALBERT, as well for that he had married the only
daughter and heir of their King, as also for that he was of the house of
Austria; between which and Bohemia there was an ancient covenant, that
whenever there failed an heir in any one of these houses, one should be
chosen out of the other. Finally, the Ambassadors used so good means, that the
Assembly concluded, that ALBERT and his wife should be their King and Queen;
and so in their absence they were sworn unto, and received for such,
notwithstanding that some of the principal Barons were against the same: among
which many were the Empress kinsmen; of which the chiefest were TASCON and
ALCIOSTEREMBERGH, which were consenting to the practice which we spoke of when
the Emperor died. These men, requiring certain conditions which might not be
granted, departed from ALBERT'S service and obedience: which, calling and
inuiting others to join with them, chose for their King, CASIMIRE brother to
the King of Poland; and they sending for him to come and take possession of the
Kingdom, offered him their aid and service in the action.

In this mean time, the Electors of the Empire being certified of the death of
the Emperor SIGISMVND, met in Franckford to choose a new Emperor; where ALBERT,
King of Hungary and Bohemia, and Duke of Austria, was upon the twentieth day of
March, in the year 1438, Albert Duke of Austria chosen Emperor.
chosen; and being by the same Princes advertised of his election, very gladly
gave ear to their Embassage, but yet could not presently accept the government,
for that when he was sworn in Hungary, he promised the Hungars, notwithstanding
he were chosen, he would not accept the Empire, because it was not held
expedient for that Kingdom, that the King thereof should be Lord of any other
Countries, but should make his abode in Hungary only; producing the Emperor
SIGISMVND for example, whose absence was the occasion of many inconveniences in
that Country. But notwithstanding all this, new Ambassages daily arriving, he
caused the principal Lords and the Burgesses of Cities in Hungary to meet in
the City of Viena in Austria, wherein he found some contradiction: but in the
end the Hungars being entreated and persuaded by FREDERICK, Duke also of
Austria, they consented to his election, and ALBERT accepted thereof; and
presently went to be crowned at Aken, which was acceptable to all Germany: for,
he was held for a wise and valorous Prince, and showed the same in the small
time Albert crowned Emperor in Aken.
that he enjoyed the Empire.

ALBERT, knowing that CASIMIRE brother to the King of Poland had accepted the
Kingdom of Bohemia, and that with the aid of his brother he levied forces for
that enterprise, sent his Ambassadors to the King, desiring him, that si^h he
well knew him to be the right King of Bohemia, he would not suffer their just
friendship for any unjust cause to be broken: whereto the King of Poland
answered, that he could not let his brother to accept that Kingdom which by
the natural subjects thereof was offered him, together with other excuses such
as he thought good. Within few days after, the Emperor entered Bohemia,
notwithstanding that TASCON and the rest of his faction sent (with certain
protestations) to require him that he should not do it: but he, holding on his
journey, was in the month of May, in the year 1438, crowned in the City of
Prague. And TASCON, and such others as took CASIMIRE'S part, joining themselves
with the men of war which came out of Poland, raised an Army; and taking the
field, and fortifying such Towns as were at their devotion, warred upon the
rest: and the Emperor with the Troops which he brought with him, and others
which came to his aid, did the like. And notwithstanding that others were
expected to come to him out of Austria and from other parts, yet he would not
stay, but went to seek his enemies and to fight with them: but TASCON and the
Polacres not daring to give him battle, returning, encamped themselves near to
the City of Tabor, which was inhabited by pretended Heretics; whither the
Emperor pursuing them, had in his Army CHRISTOFER Duke of Bauiere, FREDERICK
Duke of Saxony, and ALBERT Marquess of Brandenburgh: which there pitching
their Tents, daily skirmishes passed between them; wherein the Polacres and
Bohemians were so hardly bested, that they disbanding, part of them put
themselves into Tabor, which is a most strong impregnable Town; and ALBERT,
knowing it to be such, returned to Prague: and the Polacres (fewer in number
than they came into that Country) returned to their houses; so as the
Emperor, finding no resistance, discharged his soldiers which were strangers:
and some Princes which came to his aid, returned to their Countries; yet
between the one and the other Kingdoms some roads and incursions continued:
but shortly after a truce was taken between them. And forasmuch as there came
tidings of the coming of AMVRATH the great Turk with a great power into
Hungary, ALBERT was constrained to leave Gouerners in Bohemia, and to take his
way thitherward, with a determination to levy forces and to fight with the
Turks, notwithstanding that he was counseled by many to the contrary, being
feared with the unfortunate battle fought by the Emperor SIGISMVND. But
notwithstanding all their admonitions and persuasions, nothing could divert the
Emperor, so great a desire had he to fight: and that which more increased his
resolution, was, that the Dispote of Seruia, fleeing from AMVRATH, came into
Hungary to implore aid and succor to relieve and unset his son which was
besieged in the City of Sinderouia, situate upon the side of the river
Danubius, which the Turk held besieged, and put it to great distress:
wherefore the Emperor resolved to raise his forces for that journey, which was
in the year of our Lord 1439.

At this time the discord and contention between the Council of Basil and the
Pope grew more violent: for, notwithstanding the Popes commandments to
dissolve (it having now continued eight or nine years since it first began)
they held, and refusing to be dissolved, cited the Pope to make his personal
appearance before them. In this Council they disputed long of the authority
and power of the Pope: and in the end they decreed that the authority of the
Council was above the Pope, and that they might displace the Pope; and that
not only Bishops, but other learned and godly men should have their voices.
Hereupon EVGENIVS finding that this Decree would shake the Popes authority, and
that the Council would arrogate more liberty then he thought fit, he resolved
to dissolve it.

The Pope hereupon summoned a general Council to be held in Ferrara, which
was the year before (by his commandment) begun by the Cardinal S. Cross,
whither the Pope himself came in person. Here was that which had never been
seen (a schism of Councels) for those of Basil would not give over, yet many
which had been there came to Ferrara. In the Council of Basil were many
disputations and arguments concerning this matter. To the Council of Ferrara
came JOHN PALEOLOGVS, Emperor of Constantinople, with a great number of Greek
Prelates, notwithstanding that those of Basil sought to have induced him to
come thither: but a great plague falling amongst them at Ferrara, the Pope
removed the Council to Florence; where the Greeks and their Emperor submitted
themselves to the Latins, touching the proceeding of the Holy Ghost, the third
person of the Trinity, which they held to have proceeded but from the Father
only: and other matters were there handled, which ANTONIUS Archbishop of
Florence in his histories, and PLATINA and others write at large. But this
notwithstanding, those of Basil proceeded in their Council against the Pope;
and although the Emperor sought to bring them to unity, yet his other affairs
were so great (considering the small time he ragined) that he could not effect
it; and now worst of all, for he had raised his whole power, and was marching
with his Army against the Turk, to free the city of Sinderonia.

Being past Buda, and encamped between the rivers Ticius and Danubius, he was
certified that the Turk had taken the said city and had put out the DISPOTE'S
sons eyes: and AMVRATH being advertised of his coming, retiring with his Army
toward Thessalonica, a famous city in Macedonia, took afterward many cities
in Epire and Thessalia. The Emperor seeing that he could not recover the city,
and that the Turk was retired, returned to Buda, where he discharged his Army:
and being come thither, what with the scorching of the Sun, and with the
heat of Summer (and as some say, by eating of more Cucumers then did him good)
he was taken with a flux; wherewith growing very weak, departing from Buda
with a desire to go to Viena, The death of the ^mperor Albert the second.
he died by the way, in a little village called Langstraet, upon the 27. day of
October, in the year of our Lord 1439, before that two years were fully
expired, since that he was first chosen Emperor: his death was much lamented
for the great hope conceived of him, that he would have proved a good Prince.
The Emperor ALBERT left two daughters, one of which was married to the Duke of
Saxony, and the other afterward to the king of Poland; and his wife the
Empress he left great with child of a son, which in time came to be king of
Hungary, and of Bohemia: but first there ensued much discord between the two
kingdoms, as hereafter shall be declared.

The schism and contention between the Pope and the Council of Basil grew to
be so great, at what time the Emperor ALBERT died, that they chose for Pope
AMADEVS, whom many called BASILISK^, for that he was chosen at Basil, who was
now called FELIX: he had been Duke of Sauoy, and married and had children, he
took religious orders (as many write) to the end to be made Pope: he was father
in law to PHILIP Duke of Milan, to whom was imputed the principal cause of his
election: for he being the Popes enemy, procured that the Council in Basil
should make choice of him, and he himself made cruel war against the Pope,
against the Florentines, and the Venecians, PICHININO being General of his
Army. And FRANCIS SFORCE (PICHININO'S competitor) was General for them, so as
there was a greater division in the Church of Rome then ever had been seeene
before, for there were now two Popes, and two Councels; and some Princes
favored the one, and others the other: amongst which ALONSO King of Arragon
being an enemy to EVGENIVS, favored Pope FELIX: but as it seemed that EVGENIVS
had the better title, Pope FELIX his credit daily impaired, yet he held the
name of Pope the space of nine years; and afterward Pope EVGENIVS being dead,
in the time of Pope NICHOLAS he renounced the Papacy.

In Constantinople reigned JOHN PALEOLOGVS, who in those times came to the
Council at Florence; who having ended such matters as he came for, concerning
the union of the Greek and Latin Churches, returned to Constantinople; where,
within a little after he died, and CONSTANTINE succeeded him in the Empire.

THE LIFE OF FREDERICK, THE THIRD OF THAT NAME, AND HVNDRETH AND THIRTEENTH
ROMAN EMPEROR.
THE ARGUMENT.
ALl the Electors jointly agreeing in the election of Frederick Duke of
Austria, a young man of the age of five and twenty years, he accepted the
Empire; and coming to be crowned in Aken, was con^irmed by the Pope. He was a
lover of peace, and a faithful obseruer thereof in all his actions. He
supplanted the schism, and showed himself a perfect friend to the Pope; and
coming into Italy was crowned in Rome, to the great contentment of all the
Country: Wh^reinwere made most sumptuous feasts by all the cities which
received him. He afterward returning into Germany, was much troubled with the
combustions he found there, by reason of the King of Bohemia; which could not
be pacified but by the restitution of the King to the Bohemians. In time of
this Emperor, Constantinople to the great shame and dishonor of all
Christendom was lost, and greater harms were threatened by the Turk: but a
Croysade being made, the Turk had a very great overthrow, so as he was
constrained to aleer his resolution. This Emperor had some controversy with
his brother about the Duchy of Austria, but in the end the title rested in the
Emperor: who to his son Maximilian gave the title of Archduke of Austria and
made him King of the Romans. He ever sought to maintain peace, by reason
whereof he was called the peaceable Emperor. And being now old, and his son
Maximilian swaying the government, it pleased God to take him out of this
world, when he had ruled the Empire three and fifty years.

THose which have traveled a long journey, and being come near to their
iourneis end; through the desire they have to attain thereto, and to rest
their weary bones, make commonly greater haste then before: so I desiring to
do the like, and to make a quick dispatch in writing the history of the
Emperors remaining yet behind; being tired with the long journey which I have
traveled, and to obtain rest, after so long watching and so much pains taken
in that which is past; in the end of my journey the Emperor FREDERICK
presents himself, and after him his son MAXIMILIAN; whose lives were such
and so long, that all the time and paper which I have spent might have bin
employed in writing the lives of them two: of FREDERICK, for that he was
naturally more inclined to peace, and procured the same, and reigned fifty and
odd years; in which time so many accidents passed, that they require a long
discourse: and of MAXIMILIAN, for that his acts were so great, and so many
accidents happened in his time, that if they all should be written, this volume
would hardly contain his history. Whereof (when I had well considered) it did
put me in a great perplexity, fearing to be tired or foundred before I should
attain to the end of my journey: but setting all fear apart I will proceed,
and thus it was:

As soon as the death of the Emperor ALBERT was published, the Princes
Electors of the Empire assembling in the city of Franckford; about two or
three days before the new year 1440. chose for Emperor FREDERICK Duke of
Austria, a young man of the age of five and twenty years, who a little before
came from Jerusalem where he had been in Pilgrimage. This FREDE^ICK was the son
of Duke ERNESTVS of Austria, descended in line masculine Frederick Duke of
Austrich chosen Emperor.
from the Emperor ARNVLPH, above named. When as he understood of his election,
accepting the same, he prepared himself to go to Aken to be crowned; before
which I hold it expedient to relate in few words what happened in the Kingdoms
of Hungary and Bohemia, after the death of the Emperor ALBERT; since they were
provinces of the Empire: and forasmuch as they serve for our purpose, for the
clearing and better understanding of that which follows.

The widow Empress (as before is said) at the time of her husbands decease was
with child: and as soon as he was dead, the Lords of Hungary assembling
together consulted about the choosing of a new King: for since the Empress
before had already two daughters, they thought not that she now would have had
a son: whereupon after many doubts they choosing VLADISLAVS King of Poland for
their King (yet some say it was the Kings brother) sent to The King of Poland
chosen King of Hung^y.
advertise him thereof. In the mean time that the Ambassadors were upon their
way, the Empress was delivered of a son, who was named LADISLAVS; which when
they saw, they then wished they had not sent to the King of Poland: yet they
held it more expedient for the good of the Kingdom to have him for their King,
for that he was of age and power to protect their country, and to govern the
same, which would be wanting in the infant; and they in like manner were of
opinion that the Bohemians would have made him their King also.

Standing in this doubt, the King of Poland (to take benefit of the time) in
the greatest haste he could, came into Hungary, and was in Buda by those which
desired to have him so received for their King. In the mean time, the widow
Queen with her newborn son, together with the Earl of Cilia and great part
of the nobility, went to Alba Regalis, where upon Whitsonday the young child
was crowned King by the Archbishop of Strigonium.

This solemnity being ended, and fealty sworn to him by those which were
present, as to their Lord and King, the Queen with her son fearing the
inconstancy of the Hungars, by the counsel of some her friends presently took
her way toward Viena, and committing him to the protection of his Uncle the
new Emperor, together with the crown of that Kingdom, which she had in her
power (which is there held for the best right to have the possession thereof)
she returned into Hungary, to se if she might have the government thereof,
during her sons minority. Some say that she sent the young King to the Emperor:
but howsoever it was, the Emperor as his Uncle had the wardship of the child,
for to him appertained the protection of the house of Austria. In Hungary was
great contention who should be King: but those which took part with VLADISLAVS
King of Poland being assisted by JOHN HVNIADES VAIVODA (a very famous Captain
for the great victories which he had obtained against the Turks) for that
time prevailed: and the young LADISLAVS, although crowned, remained a long time
dispossessed in the Emperors keeping. In the Kingdom of Bohemia was no less
combustions: for the Emperor ALBERT being dead, they in like manner treated of
the choosing a new King; and they having appointed a day for that purpose;
before the time came, the widow Emperesse was delivered of her son LADISLAVS,
and she presently upon her delivery sent into Bohemia, to inform the
Bohemians of the equity of her cause, and to put them in mind that she was
the daughter of the Emperor SIGISMVND, King of Bohemia; and that she and her
husband ALBERT had enjoyed the same, wherefore they should not now deprive her
son of his right.

The Ambassadors doing what in them lay, found favor and assistants; but
TASCON and the rest which had been ALBERT'T enemies, were of such authority,
that notwithstanding they confessed that the child LADISLAVS had right to the
Crown, yet they alleged that he ought not to be King before he was four and
twenty years of age: and their sentence prevailing, they chose ALBERT Duke of
Bauiere for their King, who showing the greatness of his mind, would not accept
it: a rare example of magnanimity, and seldom seen. The Bohemians meeting
again agreed to send to entreat the Emperor FREDERICK; that seeing he had
charged himself with the protection of the person of the young King, that he
would also be pleased to take upon him the government of the kingdom of
Bohemia: and TASCON who was one of the Ambassadors, counseled him to have made
himself King thereof, which was a matter easy to effect.

This Embassage was delivered to the Emperor at such time as he was going
toward Aken to be crowned (for he was but newly chosen) his answer he
referred until his return; which then was, that whereas they had offered him
the kingdom of Bohemia, he would not show himself so unjust a tutor, as to
bereave the pupil of his right: and that he could as ill take upon him the
government of the country, for he had otherwise enough to answer for before
GOD, for that which he held, and for that cause he would undertake no other
charge: Wherefore amongst themselves they might find men sufficient to have
the Rule and Government.

Those which came with this Embassage being returned, the Lords of Bohemia
appointed a new meeting; and chose for Governors until that LADISLAVS should
come to age, TASCON and MENANDER; who were heads and leaders of the contrary
faction: To TASCON repaired all the reputed heretics of time past. Within a
little while after, TASCON dying GEORGE POGIABRACCIO succeeded him, who after
the decease of MENANDER, had the sole government; and many other matters befell
in the time that LADISLAVS, by reason of his nonage was in the Emperor
FREDERICK'S protection: And the Hungars and Bohemians oftentimes sought to have
the keeping of him until he came to full age. This for the present may
suffice, to understand the success of the kingdoms of Hungary and Bohemia.

The Emperor FREDERICK spent the time from January until July, in providing
for the affairs of Hungary and Bohemia, and to make provision for his
Coronation, which should be solemnized in the month of August, in the City of
Aken, at which time Cardinal JEWS being sent by the Council at Basil, came
thither to approve and authorize his Election. About whose coming, there were
great alterations; for the Bishop of Liege who was an enemy to the Council of
Basil, and to Pope FELIX, holding with EVGENIVS, put him out of the town: but
THEODORICVS Archbishop of Colen (who held with those of Basil) made him to be
received in again, whereupon Pope EVGENIVS deposed him from his Prelacy,
until that afterward he was through the Emperors entreaty by his Ambassadors
restored. The Coronation being ended, the Emperor returned into Austria where
he was at great controversy with his brother ALBERT about the division of the
estates thereof; with whom FREDERICK The Em^ror Frederick crowned in Aken.
seeking to come to an agreement, procured peace and concord through all
Germany; for he was ever inclined to peace and a lover thereof. Whilst the
Emperor applied himself hereto, in Italy in those days (or a little before)
after great war and infinite combustions, a peace was concluded between Duke
PHILIP of Milan of the one side, and the Venecians and the Florentines of the
other. And FRANCIS SFORZA who was General of their Army marrying the Duke of
Milanes base daughter, had Cremona and other places with her for her dowry:
this peace was made in the year 1442. A little before this, in the same year,
ALONSO king of Arragon wholly expelling his competitor RENE out of the kingdom
of Naples, remained in full possession thereof. About this time, VLADISLAVS
King of Poland (who was also in possession of Hungary) after many adventures
past in the wars against the Turks fighting a battle with them, was
therein unfortunately slain; having been King of Hungary but four years.

King VLADISLAVS being slain in this manner, the Noblemen and Burgesses of
Cities assembling, chose the child LADISLAVS their right Sovereign, for their
King; who (as I said) at the age of four months was crowned in Alba Regalis;
and they having proclaimed him for their King, sent a solemn Embassage to
entreat the Emperor to permit them to have the custody of him, to the end that
they might crown him: whereto the Emperor (commending their doings) answered,
that there needed no election, since he was their natural Lord; neither was
there any need to crown him, since he was already crowned. And seeing that he
was but an infant, and wanted a tutor, until that he should come to age, he
willed them to chose them Governors; and he would take care for his person
until he should be of years fit to govern. With this answer the Hungars being
greatly discontented, resolved to have that by force which by fair means they
could not obtain: And JOHN HVNIADES being chosen for their Governor, came into
Austria to war upon the Emperor, for that he gave them not their King; but
finding sufficient resistance, mist of his purpose. About the same time, the
Bohemians in like manner did sue to have him; to whom the Emperor gave the
self same or the like reasons and excuses as he had done to the Hungares, and
so he dispatched them for that time.

Whilst these matters passed, after most cruel wars, between England and
France, a truce for a time was taken between them, and the Daulphin of France
whose name was JEWS, in the time of this truce, without any reason o^
occasion that might move him thereto* levied a very mighty Army; and entering
Germany, besieged and took the City and state of W^embergh, and other Towns of
less quality, no man knowing thereof: yet Historians set down sundry. Some
say, that he came by the Emperors pr^urement against the Swissers, who at that
time were enemies to the house of Austria. NAVCLERVS writes, that he
published, that he came to recover those lands which in ancient time
appertained to the house of France. PLATIN^ and other Italians write, that the
Dolphin's coming was by the Popes instigation, to ouerth Towe the Council at
Basil; which in my opinion is most likely to be true: for, he presently
marched against Basil; and the Swissers (who were in league with that City)
sent 4000 chos^men to the relief thereof; but they could not enter it without
meeting with the Dolphin, A memorable battle fought by the Swissers against the
Frech near to Basil.
who within sight of the City fighting with his whole Army, were all slain, not
one escaping: but they sold their lives very dear; for, they fighting in a
manner a whole day from the morning till night, were not broken until they had
slain twice so many of their enemies as they were. After this battle the
Emperor sent to require the Dolphin to make no wars in the Territories of the
Empire, and began to provide for the defense thereof. Some report it after this
manner, and others after another: the conclusion was, that the Dolphin having
done much harm in many places, returned to his fathers Kingdom.

At this time died JOHN PALEOLOGVS Emperor of Constantinople; and for that he
had no son, his brother CONSTANTINE PAL^OLOGVS succeeded him. Many matters
The death of John Paleologus, Emperor of Constantinople.
passed in those days in Italy, which I have not time to relate. King ALONSO
of Arragon, possessing the Kingdom of Napies, and defending the cause of Pope
EVGENIVS (with whom he was in great grace) was by him invested, and confirmed
in his Kingdom.

Pope EVGHNIVS being dead, Cardinal THOMAS SARZANO (who lately was Legate The
death of Pope Eugenius, whom Nicholas the Fifth succeeded.
in Germany) was chosen, and called NICHOLAS the Fifth; to whom (as soon as he
was consecrated) the Emperor sent to acknowledge obedience, and he sought to
have established a general peace through all Italy: but the treaty of peace
and the conclusion thereof was interrupted by the death of the great and
puissant P^ILIP, Duke of Milan; who might justly be called The death of the
mighty Philip, Duke of Milan.
great: for, he was great of mind, of body, of power, of estate, and of far
greater wit and understanding than any of his Ancestors: which PHILIP died the
thirteenth day of August, in the year of our Lord 1447, in the two and fiftith,
of his age, and the two and thirtith of his reign. When he died he left never a
son, and but one base daughter called BLANCH, who (as I said) was married to
FRANCIS SFORC^.

The Duke being dead, the City of Milan, crying Liberty and Empire, made choice
of twelve men to govern it; but there was a sudden alteration: for, many sought
to have been Lords thereof. The Milanois (as I said) desired their liberty; and
King ALONSO of Naples and Arragon Titles to the duchy of Milan.
pretended a title of inheritance: for, Duke PHILIP by his Will and Testament
made him heir to all his dominions. The Emperor with better right pretended
that estate to appertain to the Empire (for default of heirs) and therefore it
was to return to the Empire: but he had not time to come into Italy, by reason
of the great fear and danger of the coming of the Turks into Hungary; which, as
Emperor, and Tutor to the young King, he was to defend. FRANCIS SFORC^, having
married the base daughter of Duke PHILIP, pretended title to the duchy of
Milan by the right of his wife. CHARLES Duke of Orleans would have it, for that
he was the son of VALENTINA, sister to Duke PHILIP'S father; which VALENTINA
was married to JEWS Duke of Orleans, brother to CHARLES the sixth King of
France: wherefore CHARLES pretended that Duchy to appertain unto him. The
Venecians, taking for their right the occasion which was offered, presently
seized sundry, Towns into their hands; as, Cremona, Placencia and Lodi. All
those which pretended title to the Duchy of Milau, sent their Ambassadors to
the Milanois; not that they all did absolutely make claim thereunto, but with
certain complements and offers to assist them against the Venecians which took
their Towns. The Milanois would accept no Soueraign but the Emperor: whom they
entreated to permit them to enjoy their liberty, upon condition whereof they
would yearly give him a cup of gold in token of their vassallage and
subjection; and to that effect they dis^atched their Ambassadors unto him: but
God in his secret judgment had reserved that estate for FRANCIS SFORC^; which
happened after this manner:

FRANCIS SFORCE being certified of the death of his father in law PHILIP, and
that the Venecians made themselves Lords of the country; hasted him to
Cremona, which was his own town, given him for his wives dowry; and
fortifying, garrisoning, and furnishing the same with all things needful, he
went to Pauia, whither being called by the inhabitants, he became Lord thereof.
The Milanois made him General of their Army against the Venecians; and he
accepting the charge, having good success, overthrew them in battle: and
being victorious (imitating OCTAVIUS CAESAR) made peace with them, which they
gladly accepted, and in their agreement they bound themselves to assist him
with certain troops of men of war: and he resolving to put in execution what
he had intended (which was to make himself Lord of Milan) bent his forces
against the Towns and Cities of Lombardy; some of which he took by force, and
other by fair means, and in the end besieged the city of Milan itself: and
after many accidents, was received into it; and so with the title and by right
of Arms, was called Duke of Milan; and afterward coming to be Lord of the
whole estate, was a mighty and a valiant Prince, and lived many years Lord
thereof.

At the same time when these matters passed in Milan and Italy, the Emperor
FR^DERICK, after the dissolution of the Council of Basil, sought by all means
to root out the schism betwixt the Popes, for FELIX was still called Pope and
obeyed by the Sauoisns: but the Emperors Counsel and Authority so much
prevailed with him, as he was forced to come to obedience, and renouncing the
Papacy, was by Pope NICHOLAS made a Cardinal, and his Legate in Sauoy, and in
certain other Provinces. Shortly after ensued great wars in Germany, between
many of the Imperial cities, and the Marquess of Bra^denburgh, who was
assisted by the Earl of Wittembergh: the war was such, as in the space of
two years that it lasted, they fought nine several times, and fortune favoring
sometime one, and sometime the other, much harm was done before that the
Emperor could pacify the same: until at length; by his intercession and
commandment, a peace was concluded between these Princes and the cities. And
he having settled this concord, resolved to come into Italy, for the great
desire he had to be crowned, wherein ALONSO King of Naples and Arragon was his
allie and great friend; the Venecians were also his friends, for as he loved
peace, so he ever sought to maintain the same. He having resolved to go his
journey, and agreed to marry with the Lady ELENOR daughter to the King of
Portugal, it was decreed that she (he being there) should come into Italy by
Sea, and that the nuptials should there be solemnized. Whereupon he levied an
indifferent Army of foot and horse, and provided all things necessary for his
journey: and departing from Germany, carried with him LADISLAVS the young king
of Hungary and Bohemia, not without grief to both those kingdoms, who very
instantly desired to have had the guard of him: by reason whereof, a great
number of the Nobles of both those Kingdoms, together with many Lords of Su^uia
and Austria accompanied him: with which (although in warlike manner) in the
beginning of The E^r going into Italy
January in the year of our Lord one thousand four hundred fifty two, he
entered Italy: and coming into the countries subject to the Venecians,
Ambassadors with show of singular love and affection came to entertain him,
who freely furnished his whole Army with victuals whilst he was in their
jurisdiction.

Keeping on his way by Treuigi and by Padoa to Ferrara, he was thereby BORSIO
their Duke sumptuously feasted; and in all parts was entertained with great
love and good will From Ferrara he came to Bologna (notwithstanding that
FRANCIS (...)invited him to come to Milan, there to be crowned with the crown
of Iron) and following his way toward Rome, accompanied with the Cardinal
which came to receive him there) he went to Flor^ce, and was there most
sum^ously entertained, and had the like in Si^na, whither he presently went: at
his being there, he was certified that the King of Portugals daughter, to whom
he was to be married, being but sixteen years old, was arrived by Sea in the
city of (...) and he staying for her there, she, with many gallants in her
train was brought to Stena; where the Emperor, accompanied with the King of
Bohemia and other Princes and men of account, went to meet her.

The Emperor was already by his deputy betrothed to her, but he deferred the
Nuptials until he might receive her at the hands of the Pope. The Emperor
being com^ to Rome, was sumptuously entertained and feasted by Pope NICHOLAS,
who upon the steps coming into Saint PETER'S Church clad in his pontificalibus,
attending his coming, received Henricus Mucius lib. 29.
him; the Empress and the King of Bohemia, kissing his foot he gave them his
hand coming into the Church, and having made their prayers, and other
ceremonies accustomed, they went The Emperor Frederick crowned and married in
Rome by Pope Nicholas.
to their lodgings; and upon the fifteenth day of March in the year one
thousand four hundred fifty two, the Emperor was married to the Empress, and
was the same day with the Iron crown, which should have been done in Milan,
crowned king of Lombardy: And three days after in the same Church, with the
ceremonies and solemnities accustomed, was crowned Emperor of Rome, and the
Empress in like manner. The feasts at the coronation being ended, the Emperor
leaving King LADISLAVS in Rome went to Naples, whither afterward came his wife
the Empress, to see King ALONSO who was her uncle, where they were continually
for the space of fifteen days sumptuously feasted. From Naples the Emperor
by sea, and up the river Tiber, returned to Rome, thence to take his journey
toward Germany; where he was advertised, that the Hungars and Bohemians had
caused some alterations for that the Emperor detained their King from them; the
chief motors were VLRICH Earl of Cilia, and another VLRICH a man of great
power.

The Empress tarrying 8. days longer in Naples then the Emperor, went by
land to Manfredonia, and from thence by sea to Venice, for she knew that the
Emperor would go to see that city before his return into Germany. The
Emperor in his journey took Ferrara in his way; where in reward of the service
done him by BORSIO Duke of Ferrara at his coming and going, he made him Duke
of Modena and Reggi^, and gave him the title and sovereignty of those cities:
and being there, GALEAS SFORCE Viscount, son to FRANCIS SFORCE Duke of Milan
came to see him, and brought him gifts and presents from his father. The
Emperor friendly entertaining him dubbed him Knight, for the good conceit he
had of his person. And from Ferrara the Emperor sending his people by land,
went down the river of Po to the city of Venice, where he was received with
infinite sorts of triumphs, whither the Emperesse was already com, and was
received with no less solemnity: in such feasting and pastimes he spent there
other ten days: and then departed, accompanied with the Duke and Senate of
Venice to the sea side, who sent Pouruoiers before with order, that in all
their dominion, his whole court should be furnished with all things necessary
gratis. And so this peaceable Prince passed through Italy in peace, and with
every man's love and applause, which he could not have done if he had been
ambitious and desirous of war: and if he could have done it, it would have
bin to the greater loss of his people and expense of money, and with the peril
of his life and burden to his conscience, as by the histories of other
Emperors which came into Italy to other intents, it may appear.

The Emperor being departed out of Italy, it seemed that peace and quietness
went away with him: for the wars presently began between those which
formerly had bin enemies, who as Wars between the (...)of Italy.
long as he was there were in some sort pacified. The Venecians being in league
with King ALONSO, with the Duke of Sauoy, and with the Marquess of Monferrato,
against FRANCIS SFORCE Duke of Milan, made cruel war against him, whom the
Florentines and JEWS GONZAGA Marquess of Montoa assisted and aided. And King
ALONSO, enemy to the Florentines, sent his son FERDINAND with 8000 horse as
some write and 4000 foot to make war in Tuscane. The King of France dealt
with RENE Earl of Prouence, to pass into Italy with 2000 horse, in the
behalf of the Duke of Milan and the Florentines, in hope of the enterprise of
Naples. So as there was most cruel war through all Italy, the issue whereof I
have no time to declare. The Pope using all means to have pacified the same,
desired they al should have joined together, to have helped the Emperor of
Constantinople against the great Turk, knowing that he purposed to besiege the
city of Constantinople: but he could not then effect the same, and so
Constantinople was not relieved, when it stood in mostneed.

The Emperor FREDERICK coming into Germany, found it in no better quiet, then
(...)his departure he left Italy; for a great part of his country of Austria
was in Arms against him, and had thrust out the Governors which he had set
there: all which was done for that he had (...)left they young King of Hungary
and Bohemia at liberty, moved thereto by the Earl of Cilia and by VLRICH a
great man in Bohemia; who persuaded them to take LADISLAVS, the son of ALBERT
Duke of Austria for their Lord, to whom that country did more properly
apperta^e; and the Emperor understanding of their rebellion, came with part of
his Army to a town called Nieustat, where those of Austria came against him;
and notwithstanding that the Emperor had good forces, yet they fought with
him, and the fight continued four hours: but so many charged the
Imperialists, that they were constrained to retire to Nieustat, before which
those of Austria encamping themselves with great fury, in the name of Hungary
and Bohemia requiring their King, ba^tered the same. When it was known that
the Emperor was besleged, great preparation was made through all Germany by
sundry Princes which resolved to free him: and the like was made by the
Hungars and Bohemians, which to the contrary required to have their King.

The Emperor foreseeing the great miseries likely to ensue, gave ear to a
parley, wherein it was agreed that he should deliver the young King LADISLVVS
who was not yet fully 14 years old) into the hands of the Earl of Cilia, who
should have the keeping of him until November then next coming, in the year
one thousand four hundred fifty two: And that the Proctors and deputies of
Hungary and Bohemia should meet in the City of Viena, there to conclude who
should have the government of those kingdoms; with many other promises which
were never performed.

Herewith the siege was raised from before the city, and the Earl of Cilia,
carried the young king to Viena, where he was received with as great joy, as if
he had been the natural Lord thereof: and so presently without any other
treaty, he gave offices and dignities as lord of the country, and was also
called Duke of Austria, by the Title before specified. To him came presently
many great men of both the kingdoms, and amongst them JOHN HVNIADES VAIVODA,
who had been governor of Hungary; and GEORGE POGIOERACCIO Governor of Bohemia.

The time appointed being expired, thither resorted many Princes of Germany,
and Ambassadors from the Emperor: but the young unexperienced King would
accomplish no part of what was couenanted; and being ruled and led by
favorites, in the small time that he lived many disorders were committed in his
house and Court, which AENEAS SYLVIVS has most excellently written in his
History of Bohemia. Viena, and the other Cities which held for LADISLAVS being
supported by Hungary and Bohemia, perseuered in their rebellion, and so
continued as long as LADISLAVS lived.

Whilst the Emperor FREDERICK was pestered with these troubles, and the other
Princes had wars amongst themselves, MAHOMET the great Turk in the beginning
of the year one thousand four hundred fifty three, with an huge Army besieged
the Imperial City of Constantinople, the head of all the Greek and Oriental
Empire (CONSTANTINE Constantinople besieged and taken by the great Turk.
the last Emperor thereof being within it) which he besieged the space of more
then fifty days; in which time (for that it was not relieved) upon the nine
and twentieth day of May in the same year, the City was by force taken and
entered, and the Emperor, to the shame and dishonor of all Christen dome was
therein slain: and in that City were such cruelties committed, as the like
thereof had never been seen or heard of. For the loss of Constantinople all
the Princes in Christendom were very sorry, but much more when they understood
how great cruelties and murders the Turk had afterward committed; and that
he had taken other Towns and Provinces thereto adjoining, and that he
therewith threatened Italy and Germany: Whereupon they began to consult of
defense and resistance to be made against him: but the Ambition and dissension
which reigned amongst them, gave no place to the conclusion or performance of
any good exploite; as in our days the like has been seen in the like
necessity. Yet the next year a peace was concluded in Italy between the King
of Naples and the Venecians, the Duke of Milan, and the Florentines, and those
of their league: which being concluded, the Pope rigged up a great fleet of
Galleys to make head against the Turks; but they write that he was ever so
sorrowful after the loss of Constantinople that he never enjoyed good day,
but falling sick died, upon the twenty fifth day of March in the year one
thousand four hundred fifty five, in the fifteenth year of the reign of the
Emperor FREDERICK, and the eighth of his Papacy.

After his decease, Cardinal ALFONSO BORGIA a Spaniard was chosen Pope, and
called CALIXTVS the Third. The first rhing he undertook was to procure war
against the Turk, and to that effect sent out his Bulls, and a general
Croisaide, and therewith sent his Legates into all parts of Christendom,
especially into Germany; where the Emperor having the like care, had summoned
a Diet or Parliament upon that occasion. And notwithstanding that many Princes
gaue-in their names, and offered to serve in this war, yet the jealousy and
dissension amongst them was such, that they put nothing in execution: but the
Pope nevertheless sent Cardinal JOHN CARAIAVAL for his Legate into Germany;
who for that it was certainly known that the Turk was coming into Hungary,
with the Emperors aid and favor levied men and money: presently hereupon came
news that the Turk was come, and that he had in his Army (they which say
least) one hundred and fifty thousand men, and that he went to besiege Belgrado
otherwise called Alba Graeca, and more anciently, Taurinum; and that The great
Turk^ entered Hungary.
he purposed in few days (taking that City) to march forwards. King LADISLAVS
giving the charge of that war, with the defense of that City and Kingdom to
JOHN HVNIADES, retired to Viena: for in truth he was neither of age, neither
had power sufficient to fight with the Turk.

The Popes Legate with the greatest number of men that he could get came to
Buda, and from thence before the Turks coming put himself therewith into the
City of Belgrado: amongst those which came with him, was one JOHN CAPISTRANO, a
Franciscane Friar, who with his sermons and exhortations gathered together and
brought with him a great number of men, which for their device ware the sign
of the Cross. The Turk coming with The Turks besieged Belgrade.
his power, and besieging the city, these men wrought wonders in the defense
thereof, being furiously battered. To the relief thereof, with the power which
the Emperor sent, and such others as he could raise in Hungary, which were
forty thousand Foot, and five thousand Horse, came JOHN HVNIADES.

To be brief, it pleased God, that the succors being arrived, and comn to
blows, they had so good fortune that the Turk was overthrown and wounded,
and a great number of his men slain: Whereupon he raising his siege and
flying, left his Artillery and baggage behind him. The great Turk ouerthrown
before the city of Belgrado in Hungary.
This happened upon Saint MARY MAGDALENS day, in the year one thousand four
hundred fifty six. All Christendom rejoiced, and made bonfiers for this so
notable a victory: And Italy and Germany by this means were delivered from
the fear which they conceived, by reason of the late loss of Constantinople:
For, considering the great power of the enemy, they all feared to have been
lost. Within few days after this victory, died that excellent Captain JOHN
HVNIADES: and the Turk by reason of this overthrow, suffering Hungary and
Italy to rest in Peace, made wars in the Islands of the Sea called
Archipelagus, and in other countries bordering upon them.

The Emperor FREDERIDKS reign was so long, and so many accidents happened
therein, that I shall be enforced to be briefer in writing what follows, then
I have been in what is past. After this victory obtained by JOHN HVNIADES, the
Emperor FREDERICK applied himself to the establishing of peace in Germany, to
the end he might be able to prevent what might befall: and being busy herein,
the young King of Bohemia and Hungary being of the age of eighteen years died
(not without suspect of poison) in the City of Prague, where he attended the
coming of the French Kings daughter, to whom he should have been married. The
realms of Hungary and Bohemia, and that also which he held in Austria, by
reason of his death without issue and heirs, were void; which caused much
strife in those countries and kingdoms, about the succession and election,
diverse Princes pretending to have right to them. In the end the Bohemians took
GEORGE POGIOBRAC^IO (who was Governor thereof in the time of LADISLAVS) for
their King, a man of a Noble house and of great valor. The Hungars for their
King chose MATTHEW the son of that excellent warrior JOHN HVNIADES, as well
for the love which they bare to his father, as for the good hope they had of
his person, being a young man of nineteen years old, and then prisoner in
Bohemia for the death of the Earl of Cilia; which grew upon this occasion, the
young King LADISLAVS was wholly governed by the Earl of Cilia, who had envied
the virtues and glory of JOHN HVNIADES; and after his death continued his
hatred against his sons LADISLAVS and MATTHEW, seeking their ruins:
LADISLAVS coming to expostulate the matter with the Earl, they fell to
words, so as in the end the Earl struck him, and LADISLAVS slew the Earl.

The King of Hungary being informed of the fact, promised LADISLAVS pardon and
gave him a pur^le roabe imbroydred with Gold: yet being newly incensed, he
seized upon both the brethren, and put LADISLAVS to death, and finding that the
Noblemen of Hungary hated him for this fact, and that he could not stay there
without danger, ^he returned into Bohemia, carrying MATHIAS the younger brother
with him, where soon after the young king died, leaving him a prisoner; whom
POGIOBRACCIO the new King of Bohemia setting at liberty, married him to his
daughter; and he afterward being King of Hungary, proved an excellent and a
most valiant Prince.

In the house of Austria (the government whereof in right appertained to the
Emperor) his brother ALBERT pretended, that for as much as his brother was
Emperor, he ought to enjoy the same; the like did his cosine SIGISMVND. About
this controversy those of Austri^ assembling maintained the Emperor to be
their principal Lord; and that he according to the custom of Germany was to
have regard to the maintenance of his brothers and cosin-germanes estate:
Wherefore and for the better preservation of the peace, certain Lands and
revenues were assigned unto them. The Emperor upon this agreement came to
Viena, and was there received and obeyed: but his brother and cousin,
perseuering in their purposes, caused some alterations in the Country; and
there were some sharp bickerings about this matter: but, by the mediation of
JEWS Duke of Bauiere, a composition was made between him and them, yet they
were never without iealousies and contentions till the death of ALBERT: at
which time the Emperor without any contradiction took possession of that
estate. After this, in the year 1458, died ALONSO, King of Arragon and Naples,
whom his brother JOHN King of Navarre succeeded in the Kingdoms of Arragon and
Sicilia; and in the Kingdom of Naples succeeded his base son FERNANDO, who
contended with JOHN the son of RENE, with whom his father was at variance about
that Kingdom. And in the month of August following, died Pope CALIXTVS; and in
his place was chosen AENEAS SILVIVS, a Cardinal and Citizen of Sieua, and was
called PIUS the Second; who was so excellently learned, and endued with so many
graces, that I cannot express what is written in commendation of him: besides
this, the books which he wrote bear record of his wisdom and learning; who
accordingly first took care for the defense of Christendom, and for the wars
against the Turk, and to that effect wrote to the Emperor and the other Princes.

The next year after his election, he summoned a general Council to be held
in the City of Montoa, to treat more effectually of the matter; where many
Noblemen and Princes Ambassadors met, and many matters were devised and
ordained, which were never put in execution, by reason of the wars and troubles
in Italy, and between the most part of the Princes in Christendom.
Particularly in Germany, in the year 1460, began great debate and strife
between VDALRICVS Earl of Wittembergh, and FREDERICK Count Palatine of Rhine,
about a dowry and some such matter; for which they came to fight sundry times,
and many were slain of either side, until that an agreement was made by the
Emperors commandment and authority.

After this another war ensued, of longer continuance and more dangerous;
which was for the Archbishopric of Mentz: for which, DIYETERVS of Ysenburgh,
and ADVLPH of Nassaw contended. DIYETERVS, who was in possession of the
greatest part of the Bishopric, being for his contumacy, intrusion, simony,
and such other matters, by the Sentence of Pope PIUS deposed, ADVLPH by the
Emperors consent was by the Pope created; so as the one to get possession, and
the other to defend the same, troubled all Germany, which the Emperor could not
remedy: for, their rage grew to that height, that his commandments being
contemned, some Princes taking part with the one, and some with the other, all
employed their whole force therein; and there followed many battles and
encounters, and many great Personages were slain of either party.

CARRION writes; that Pope PIUS the Second, of the house of the Puolomini, who
had been Secretary to the Emperor FREDERICK, relying upon his private love, and
his respect to the Sea of Rome, deposed DIYETERY from the Archbishopric of
Mentz, and advanced ADVLPH of Nassaw. The chief reasons they say were, for that
he opposed himself stoutly against the Popes unjust exactions, wherewith the
Provinces were oppressed under color of the Turkish war; and that Pope PIUS
required an oath, whereby his successors should also be bound, that he should
not call the Electors together for the choosing of a new Emperor, or to
determine of any other thing concerning the Empire, before they had acquainted
the Pope therewith, and known his pleasure, which he refused to do. This
quarrel drew most of the Princes and chiefest Lords of Germany into Arms and
combustions, as you have formerly heard.

This war continued long: but yet in the end, by the Emperors order and
authority, the matter was taken up; but the harms which were done before that
time, could not be repaired as he would have had them. For, he was so ill
obeyed by his subjects in Austria, that those of Viena joining one day with his
brother ALBERT, in the year of our Lord 1463, took Arms and besieged the
Emperor in the Fortress of that City; and, battring the same, would have taken
him prisoner.

The King of Bohemia, who was his next neighbor, desiring to win his grace and
favor, came to his aid; and rescuing him, in such manner pacified the
rebellion, that the Emperor if it had so pleased him might have apprehended his
brother ALBERT, but he of purpose let him go: and it pleased God that a while
after Duke ALBERT died, when as without his death there was no mean of peace in
the state of Austria. He being dead, the Austrians together with Duke SIGISMVND
wholly submiting themselves, became subject to the Emperor.

In the year 1464, in the 24 year of the reign of the Emperor FREDERICK, died
that excellently learned Pope, PIUS the Second, otherwise called AENEAS
SYLVIVS, after The death of Aeneas Syluius, otherwise Pope Pius 2.
whom was chosen Cardinal BARBO a Venecian, and was called PAVL the Second, who
considering that the Turks daily conquered the Christian countries, applied
himself to procure a remedy: but the same reason which hindered others,
prevented him also, so as he could not bring it to pass. Yet the Venecians
entered into league with MATTHIAS King of Hungary, whose fame and reputation was
then very great; and they giving him a certain sum of money, resistance was
made in diverse parts. About this time died FRANCIS SFORC^ Duke of Milan, whom
his eldest son GAL^AS MARIA SFORC^ succeeded in that Dukedom. About this time
also died PMILIP Duke of Burgundy, and Earl of Flanders, whom succeeded the
most valiant and renowned Captain Duke CHARLES, called CHARLES the Hardy.

In the second year after Pope PAVLS election, the Emperor FREDERICK came to
Rome, where by the Pope he was most honorably received: the cause of his
coming, some say was to perform a vow which he had made; others say that it
was to confer with the Pope concerning wars against the Turk: but
howsoever it was, he came and returned quietly into Germany, where through his
means peace continued long after, at the last there was no great war, either
in Germany or in Italy. In those days notwithstanding that these countries
were in peace and quiet, yet Duke CHARLES of Burgundy had cruel wars with
France, and with the Swissers, and with other Princes. Pope PAVL being dead,
SIXTVS the 4 succeeded him, who although he was but a Franciscane Friar, yet
they write that he was so warlike, that the most part of the time that he was
Pope he warred in Italy. The next year after his election which was in the
year 1472, and the 32 of the Emperors reign, Duke CHARLES of Burgundy (of whose
power and aspiring mind and of his wars, and the battails which he fought,
wonders are written) procured leave to see, and to speak with the Emperor: and
they meeting in Lutzemburgh, the Duke requested many matters at the Emperors
hands; amongst which, this was one, that the Emperor should give him the title
of King of Nvples, and make him his Vicar or Lieutenant in Italy, for he
purposed to have made a conquest thereof.

The Emperor disliking the ambition of this Prince, temporizing in the best
manner he could, answered him in general terms without concluding any
thing, and in a night without bidding him farewell, departed the City;
wherewith the Duke was very much discontented, and the next year following he
levied a very great Army, and marching toward Colen be^ieged the City of Nuis:
which he did to the end (as he said) to restore Colen to ROBERT of Bauari^ the
Archbishop thereof, who was his kinsman and good friend. The Emperor
understanding that the Dukes meaning was (if he could) to take Colen; required
him to raise his siege; which taking no effect he levied a very great Army, and
therewith marched directly against the Duke: but as he was slack in his
business, so he needed (considering the Dukes power) to have speedily brought
a great Army: but as he came not with such expedition as the cause required; so
the besieged, and the country thereabout endured great extremity, and the
siege continued many months: but he coming at length (though late first) and
the one Army encamping near to the other (with the Emperor came the Duke of
Saxony, the Marquess of Brandenburgh, the Archbishoppes of Mentz and Treuiere)
and being at the point to have given battle (which as it was thought would
have been very cruel) a treaty of peace was propounded between them, whereto
the Emperor never refused to give ear, in so much that he was therefore
called The peaceable Prince. What the conditions of the peace were, I find not
written by those Authors which I have read: but the effect of what ensued, was
that the Duke raising his siege from before the Town, returned with his Army
into his Country; and so the war ended betwixt the Emperor and him.

Some write, that by this peace it was concluded that MAXIMILIAN the Emperors
son should marry with the only daughter of CHARLES, and enjoy all his
Provinces, if he died without issue male. Out of this peace were excepted by
CHARLES, JEWS the French King, SIGISMVND of Austria the Emperors
cosin-germane, RENE Duke of Lorraine, and the Swissers, who had made an
irruption into Burgundy by the procurement of JEWS: and he was incensed
against SIGISMVND, for the redeeming of certain Towns which had been pawned
to him. But the Duke had other wars, for he ever desired and procured the
same, and thereby enlarged his Countries and Dominions until that in the year
one thousand four hundred sixty six, in a cruel battle which he fought with
the Duke of Lorraine, he was ouerthrown and slain. His death was the cause that
the Emperor The death of Charles the Hardy, Duke of Burgundy.
and his son MAXIMILIAM warred with the French King, the relics and seed
whereof continued long, and happened in this manner:

The warlike Duke CHARLES dying in such manner, as I said, left no heir but
one only daughter; whose estate contained the two Burgundies, the estates of
Flanders, Brabant, Guelders, Holland, Zealand, Artoys, and many other Towns,
besides those which he had taken in Lorraine, in Picardy, and from the
Swissers; for his mind and valor was so great, that he durst hold all the
world for his enemy, and made no reckoning to take theit towns. But this
smoke (for so it may well be called) being by his death ouerblowne; even as he
had done by all others, so all men dealt with his. The Duke of Lorraine, and
his confederats the Swissers, recovered what he had taken from them. JEWS the
French King, speedily leuying an Army, recovered Picardy, took the Cities of
Peronne, Mountdidier, Turnay and other Towns. The Flemmings and Burgonians
with those of their party, in the name of their Soueraign Lady, MARY daughter
of the deceased Duke, for their defense put themselves in Arms. The French
King alleged that Burgundy for want of heirs males, was to return to the
house of France: the Duke of Lorraine by his commandment entering Burgundy,
took the greatest part thereof; and the King sent to require the Duchess MARY
to come into France in person to do him homage for the Earldom of Flanders,
and her other estates subject to the Crown of France: but she understanding his
meaning, refusing to come stood upon her guard. Hereabout were many treaties
and parleys, and many Towns were taken, too long to be recited.

The Flemmings sending to the Emperor for aid, offered their Duchess MARY in
marriage to his son MAXIMILIAN, who was then one and twenty years old, a
young man of a great spirit, valiant, a comely personage, of a very good
constitution, and apt for any attempt. The Emperor being very glad of this
proffer, granted their requests, notwithstanding that he saw he undertook a
war against France, and that he already had wars with MATTHIAS King of
Hungary, who (like the Duke of Burgundy) was never content with what he had,
but thought all too little; and incensing the Austrians against the Emperor,
took some towns from him in Austria and warred upon him.

The French King having intelligence of this treaty of marriage, sent to the
Emperor and his son MAXIMILIAN persuading them to desist. This
notwithstanding, MAXIMILIAN who was now called Archduke of Austria, with many
good men of war, in July, in the year 1467, went into Flanders, and marrying
this Lady MARY had with her all her dominions: the wars on the Flemmings side
against the French through his coming, were well reinforced: and he therein
fighting oftentimes in his own person, showing the greatness of his mind,
obtained some victories, especially one memorable battle between Turnay and
Arras, wherein he alighting from his horse, put himself into a squadron of
foot. Afterward some The (...)of Guinegast.
treaties of peace being motioned, a truce was taken for a time; wherein the
French King rendering some Towns, continued in possession of what he had taken
in Burgundy, and so for a season the war ceased. This peace (so far as I
can conjecture) was made by the Emperors procurement, by reason of wars made
against him by MATTHIAS King of Hungary: for which, being otherwise troubled
with other occasions of the Empire, he could make no sufficient provision, and
also for that the peace with Fr^nce (as presently shall be said) continued but
a small time.

The reason of the war, betwixt the Emperor and MATTHEW CORVINVS King of
Hungary, was, for that the Pope having by his Bulls given the kingdom of
Bohemia to CORVINVS, from GEORGE BOIEBRAC, who constantly defended and
maintained the doctrine of JOHN HVSSE, which was hateful to the Court of Rome,
the Emperor refused to inuest him in the said kingdom. But this quarrel grew
violent after the death of GEORGE, when as the Noblemen of Bohemia, and the
Emperor neglecting CORVINVS, made choice of LADISLAVS the son of CASIMIRE
King of Poland, the Emperor having first refused to come unto the said
kingdom; either terrified with the mutinies of the Bohemians, or else that he
fled from toil and danger, wherein he knew he should be engaged against so
powerful and valiant a Competitor. In this war the Emperor was in very
great danger to have lost Austria, if ALBERT Duke of Saxony had not valiantly
and fortunately made head against MATTHIAS, forcing him in the end to accept of
conditions of peace. MATTHIAS did so honor ALBERT for the event of this war,
as he gave him only the praise, to be one of the greatest and most valiant
Captains among all the Princes of Christendom.

At the same time GALEAS MARIA having been nine years Duke of Milan, certain
his subjects and favorites, for his licentiousness, and insatiable Luxury,
conspiring against him, slew him as he was in S. STEPHENS Church at Mass, he
being then of the age of three and thirty years. He left for his successor a
son of the age of nine years, whose name was JOHN GAL^AS, who by reason of
his nonage was under the tutele of his mother BONA: through whose negligence
and unchaste life, his uncle JEWS or LODOVVICK, called the Moore (a man
blinded with ambition and desire of command) seized upon the person of the
young Duke, whom he consumed away with a slow poison, and usurped the
government, getting into his hands all the strong holds, or whatsoever else did
belong to that state, whereby he came to be absolute Lord of the whole Duchy:
and his Nephew (languishing two and twenty years) had only the title of Duke;
and LODOVVICK the authority and possession: where many matters happened, which
for that they concern not my History I omit. The truce between MAXIMILIAN and
France continued little more then one year, at the end whereof the French King
and he renewed the war, which lasted a certain space* and some Towns were
taken both of the one side and of the other; until at length through the
procurement of the Emperor FREDERICK, a peace between them was concluded for
seven years.

At the same time when these matters passed, the great and mighty Turk
MAHOM^T, having done much harm in the Christian countries, held Rhodes
besieged little less then three months; but it pleased God that he could not
then take it: this happened in the year of our Lord 1480. After this in the
same year, he sent a mighty Army by Sea, which landing, in Puglia and in the
kingdom of Naples, took some Towns, and amongst others Otranto, which they
held more then one year after: and if through the goodness of God the great
Turk had not died, all Italy was in danger to have been lost: but through the
death of this mighty Tyrant The death of Mahomet the great Turk.
(who in Graecia, besides Constantinople and Thracia) had taken and subdued
many Provinces, and an infinite number of Ci^ies and Towns) those towns in
Italy were recovered, and Christendom was freed from the oppression which it
endured: and the rather for that his son and heir BAIAZETH in the beginning
of his reign, was troubled with domestical war and dissension. At this time
died RENE Earl of Prouence and Duke of Ani^w, an ancient challenger of the
crown of Napl^s.

In Italy was great war at that time, which beginning between the Venecians,
and the Duke of Ferrara, spread it self over all Itali^: Which the Emperor
FRED^RICK perceiving, and considering how great danger all Christendom was in,
he procured the Princes of Germany to settle some perpetual peace and
concord, thereby to be able to resist the Turks: the like he practiced with
the French King, and with his own son the Archduke of Austria, and Duke of
Burgundy. Whilst he was thus busy, the Duchess MARY, daughter to the brave
Duke CHARLES, with whom MAXIMILIAN had so many provinces, came unfortunately to
her end: for she (as of custom she used to do) riding ahunting, fell from her
horse; and, as some say, the horse trod upon her, or kicked her, whereof she
died: others say, that with the fall she was so bruised, that she died thereof
the eleventh day after, which was upon the seventeenth day of March, in the
year of our Lord 1482, when she had been Lady of those Countries little more
than five years. She left at her decease one son and one daughter which were
PHILIP, who afterward was King of Spain, and father to the Emperor CHARLES the
Fifth; and MARGARET, which afterward was a Princess in Spain. When this
Duchess MARY died, JEWS the French King was very sick, and lying upon his
death bed, desired peace; wherewith the Emperor being well pleased; they
agreed, that MARGARET (which was a child of two years old) when she should be
of age, should be married to his son CHARLES, who afterward was King and
then twelve years old: and that their fathers and they should keep perpetual
peace: with this condition, that either of them should continue in possession
of what they held in Burgundy. This being concluded, the young MARGARET with
great pomp was brought to Paris, where her wedding feast was held, although it
afterward took no effect, as shall be said.

Within few days after this solemnity King JEWS died, leaving his son
CHARLES of the age almost of thirteen years, to succeed him. At the same time
a peace was coucluded The death of Jews king of France.
in Italy, and about the same time the Emperor assembled the Princes Electors
and other Princes of Germany in the City of Franckford, where he desired and
obtained of them to make his son MAXIMILIAN King of the Romans, which was
effected in the seven and fortith year of his reign, upon the sixteenth day
of February, in the year of our Lord one thousand four hundred eighty six: and
departing thence with a very great court of Princes and Lords, they went to the
City of Aken, where he was with great solemnity crowned with the crown which
sometime was of CHARLES the Great; brought for that purpose from Norembergh,
where it was kept with great respect. The same day, by the consent of all the
Princes, he made a Law: Whereby he ordained under great penalties that peace
should be kept through all Germany; which was obeyed, and in the greatest part
of Germany observed a long time after.

After this, the new king of the Romans came into the Low countries, whereof
his son PHILIP was now lord, whose tutor he was, where at first he had great
oppositions, ADOLPH D. of Guelders being head of a faction, who (conspiring
with the French) was slain at Tourney, whereupon the Duchy of Guelders
yielded unto him; he being assisted by the counsel and fortune of that valiant
warrior ALBERT Duke of Saxony: the Belgians factiously mutyning, and
insolently rejecting the command of their new Prince PHILIP of Rauenste in
being head of the faction, he so daunted them with incounters and sieges,
during the space of eight years, as having taken some Towns by force and
others by composition, he so terrified the rest, as they willingly submitted
themselves, and craved pardon.

After which ALBERT of Saxony transported the wars into Frisland, the which
(in reward of his great service, and recompense of his charges) MAXIMILIAN
(with the consent of the Princes of the Empire) gave unto him and to his heirs
for ever, whereof although he subdued a great part, yet being prevented by
death, he left the victory imperfect to his sons. But the event of this
Frisland was, that although that GEORGE and HENRY brethren, Dukes of Saxouy,
had subdued the greatest part of the country, yet afterward they fell into a
new rebellion, not able to endure a strangers yoke: wherewith the brethren of
Saxony being tired, this Province lying far from their hereditary
possessions, the enjoying whereof would be more chargeable then beneficial,
they afterward past it over by transaction, to the Emperor CHARLES the Fifth,
for a certain sum of money.

MAXIMILIAN being in the City of Bruges, in the year one thousand four
hundred eighty seven, upon certain discontentments the Burghers rose against
him, and in this tumult apprehending his person, with certain of his train,
they held him prisoner the space of four months: whereof when his father had
intelligence, leuying the best forces that he could, he hasted to him, and
notwithstanding that his son before his coming was at liberty, yet he
severely punished the Burghers of Bruges and of Gaunt, and so the king of the
Romans peaceably enjoyed the government of the Provinces of the Low Countries,
and of that which he held in Burgundy, and his father the Emperor being now old
and tired, returned into Germany, to maintain peace and justice, and to
provide for defense to be made against the Turks. For the preservation whereof,
notwithstanding that MATTHIAS King of Hungary had taken Viena and other towns
in Austria, he endured it, and attempted not by force to recover the same: but
within short space after King MATTHIAS died, without any heirs, when he had
reigned seven and thirty years. His death being made known to MAXIMILIAN King
of the Romans, he with great speed departed from Flanders; and through his
fathers aid, leuying a puissant Army, in short space recovered Viena, and all
the rest which King MATTHIAS had usurped.

Whilst these matters were in handling, LADISLAVS son to CASIMIR^ King of
Poland wholly recovered the kingdom of Bohemia, for which both he and his
father CASIMIRE had warred with king MATTHIAS, from the time that GEORGE
POGIOBRACCIO died. After this, both he and MAXIMILIAN pretending to be King of
Hungary, each of them sought to marry the Queen widow, the Lady BEATRIX of
Arragon, daughter to FERDINAND King of Naples, who was of great authority in
that Kingdom. MAXIMILIAN being somewhat slow in the matter deferred the time;
but LADISLA^S making more haste, married her and was received for King of
Hungary, and crowned in Alba Regalis, and presently between him, the Emperor
and MAXIMILIAN a peace was concluded, wherein it was ordained by the consent of
those of the kingdom, that if LADISLAVS died without lawful issue male, then
MAXIM. and his heirs should inherit the kingdom. But LADISLAVS reigned 22 years
after, and his son JEWS succeeded him, who married MARY sister to the
Emperor CHARLES the Fi^t: and FERDINAND brother to the Emperor CHARLES,
married his sister ANNE: by which marriage (King JEWS being in the year of
our Lord 1526. overthrown and slain by SOLIMAN the great Turk) this FERDINAND
succeeded in the kingdoms of Hungary and Bohemia: and so the covenant by
means never thought of, came Jews king of Hungary overthrown and slain by
the Turk, anno Dom. 1526.
to take effect between LADISLAVS and MAXIMILIAN; which passed in the year
1490.

Returning to our history, after this agreement, MAXIMILIAN coming to
Norimbergh, by the consent of his father he treated of a marriage between him
and the Duchess of Britain, who after her fathers decease without heirs
males, succeeded in that Dukedom: and CHARLES the French King in like manner
sought to have her, notwithstanding that he was already betrothed to MARGARET
of Burgundy, which was but a child, and whom he had in his power, as has been
declared.

The French writers excuse him herein, and yield reasons for what he did;
whereof those Kings are never to seek which have not the fear of God before
their eyes. They alleged that the Kings contract with the young Lady MARGARET
was of no force, for that she was under age; and also for that King CHARLES
never consented thereto: and notwithstanding that he had consented, yet he was
likewise under age, and afterward revoked the same; And that the contract of
the Duchess of Britanie with MAXIMILIAN was of no effect: for the Duchess
gave thereto no sufficient authority, for none of the Ambassadors being four
in number, had any authority in solidum to make any contract; neither had the
Duchess any meaning to do it: and that which she did was but to temporize with
the Britains, to the end they should not yield themselves to King CHARLES of
France. And admitting that the contract had been made by men having sufficient
authority, not being confirmed it was of no force, for that the conditions and
covenants were not afterward performed. Finally, by these and other reasons
they excuse him, holding their arguments for true and sufficient in their
opinion. And the French King going into Britain, the Princess MARGARET (who
was nothing sorry for it) returned: for (they say) she never liked of the
match, yet yielded thereto by the persuasion of the Flemmings: and so a very
furious and cruel war began between the Emperor, his son MAXIMILIAN, and
the French King. And forasmuch as his father was now old, MAXIMILIAN Wars
between the Emperor and the French King.
had the sole government, and had already undertaken the charge: but after some
bickerings, a fained peace was made between them; whereto MAXIMILIAN by reason
of the great and excessive charges of the war, and for some other respects, was
constrained to condescend; but principally for that at the same time, which was
in the year 1492, the men of war which had served the valiant MATTHIAS King
of Hungary, which kept still together (and for that they wore mourning colors
for their King, were called the black Regiment) through want of pay, or some
other insolence, making war in Austria, had the spoil of some towns: for the
relief whereof, MAXIMILIAN leuying forces, went into those parts, and without
any great trouble brake and scattered the mutiners, and for example to others
severely punished them.

This year was much noted above others for three special things: the first
was, for that therein died Pope INNOCENT the 8, in the eighth year of his
Papacy; whom RODRIGO de Boria a Spaniard, borne in Valencia in Spain
succeeding, was called ALEXANDER the Sixth: GVICCHARDIN writing of his election
says, that he came to be Pope by briberie, having cotrupted some of the
Cardinals with money, and poisoned the rest with promises of offices and great
preferments; which made him hateful to the world; and drew upon him the
vengeance of God. But his election was not so distastefull, but his conditions
were more odious: who although he were sharp witted, excellent* in counsel, a
good Orator to persuade and of great Judgment in the greatest affairs, yet
these virtues were wonderfully blemished by his vices: for his manners were
dishonest, in his actions was no sincerity, there was no modesty in his
countenance, small truth in his words, little faith in his heart, and less
religion in his soul. Al his actions were stained with insatiable covetousness,
immoderate ambition, barbarous cruelty, and a burning desire to advance his
children (by what means soever) being many in number, among the which there
was one no less detestable then the father, to whose cursed counsels he became
a wicked instrument. The second was, for that the great city of Granada in
Spain, was in the beginning of that year, by FERDINAND and ISABEL King and
Queen of Castile taken from the Moors: the third was, for that in the same
year, by the commandment of the same Princes, the West Indies were discovered
in the Ocean sea.

This being past, and the year 1493 being comn; Germany and Italy being,
through the Emperors wisdom and good government, in peace, and himself at
peace with all Princes, in quiet possession of the Duchy of Austria, and his
son MAXIMILIAN being King of the Romans, and Governor of the states and
provinces of the Low Countries and of part of Burgundy, in the behalf of his
son PHILIP; when he had reigned 53 years and four months Emperor (wherein no
Emperor but AUGUSTUS CAESAR, who reigned three years longer, could be compared
with him: but yet FREDERICK did far exceed him in age) at this time The death
of the Emperor Frederick the third
it pleased God to take him out of the world. This Prince is reported to have
had many virtues: for, besides that he was courteous, desirous of peace,
temperate in his diet, and very devout, he was in all his life time never heard
to swear but twice, which he could not avoid; once was, when he was crowned in
Aken; the other time in Rome. He had great care for the preservation of the
lands of the Empire: and to the end not to hazard the same, or to bring them in
question, he sometimes made peace with the loss of his own estate; neither
would he ever inuest FRANCIS SFORCE nor his son GALEAS MARIA in the Duchy of
Milan, notwithstanding that they were in quiet possession thereof: which when
FRANCIS SFOSCE saw it would not be gotten without much money, he gave over the
pursuit, nothing fearing the Emperors force, who was diuerted without other
war. He had by his wife ELENOR (who died long before him) three sons and two
daughters: his first sons name was CHRISTOPHER, who died a child: his second
son was MAXIMILIAN, who was afterward Emperor: the third was JOHN, who also
died a child. Of his two daughters, the one, called HELEN, died in her
infancy; and the other, called HVGRADA, was married to ALBERT, Duke of Bauiere,
and was afterward mother to the Dukes, WILLIAM, JEWS and ERNESTVS.

THE LIFE OF MAXIMILIAN, THE FIRST OF THAT NAME, AND HVNDRETH AND FOVRTEENTH
ROMAN EMPEROR.
THE ARGUMENT.
FRederick being dead, his son Maximilian, who in his fathers life time had
the government of the Empire, was without any contradiction made Emperor. In
the beginning of his Reign, he disposing himself to go to the wars against
the Turk, who had kept a great stir in Hungary, made him to flee. He took
to wife Blanch, daughter to the Duke of Milan, and made great wars against
the Swissers. In this Emperors time the Pisans in Germany made an insurrection,
which was one of the greatest tumults that had been seen: but they being soon
suppressed, he subdued many other Rebels. Then began to grow the causes of
the dissension between Spain and France for the Duchy of Milan. This Emperor
made war against the Uenecians: then followed the terrible battles of
Rauenna and Marinian, with diverse accidents of war, which ended in a fained
(yet for a time durable) peace. When the Emperor Maximilian departed out of
this life, he had reigned 25 years.

AFter the peaceable FREDERICK, followed his son, the warlike and victorious
MAXIMILIAN, who in his fathers life time was crowned King of the Romans. The
same year that his father the Emperor FREDERICK, died, the Turks made an
incursion into the country of Croacia, a province of Hungary, which bordereth
upon Dalmatia: and the new Emperor desiring to prevent the danger, speedily
raising his forces, went to fight with them, but they having intelligence of
his coming, retired: whereupon he dissolved his Army. The Emperor MAXIMILIAN
having bin a good space a widower; when as his father was dead, he contracted
himself to the Lady BLANCH, the daughter of GALEAS, and Niece to JEWS SFORCE
Duke of Milan; who being Uncle and governor to his Nephew JOHN GALEAS (who in
right was Duke) usurped and held his estate. This BLANCH being the fairest
woman of her time was wooed by many Princes, yet to her was the Emperor
married. To whom LODOVVICK promised in dowry 400 thousand ducats, to be paid
within a certain time and 40 thousand in jewels and other ornaments: and
MAXIMILIAN (regarding money more then the alliance) tied himself to inuest
LODOVVICK in the Duchy of Milan (to the prejudice of JOHN GALEAS his new
brother in-law) to hold it for him and his successors, as if the estate had
been without a Duke since the death of PHILIP MARIA visconti. At the same time,
which was in the year of our Lord 1494. the French king CHARLES the Eight made
preparation to come into Italy, who a little before had given out in speeches
that he meant to make a conquest Charles the eighth, King of France, came into
Italy.
of the kingdom of Naples, which he pretended to belong to him, by the last
will and succession of RENE Lord of Prouence, and his ancestors Dukes of Aniow:
whereto he was chiefly induced by JEWS Duke of Milan Uncle to the right Duke
JOHN: For FERDINAND King of Naples, and his son ALONSO, had required him to
leave the government of Milan, to Duke JOHN GALEAS, who was married to King
FERDINANDS Niece, and upon this quarrel they determined to make war upon
him: by reason whereof he by all means possible persuaded the French King to
come against him into Italy, and to that effect furnished him with a great
sum of money. And to the end that the Emperor MAXIMILIAN should not be his
enemy in this case, JEWS SFORCE procured this marriage of his Niece with the
Emperor. In the time wherein his coming was most bruited, died FERDINAND King
of Naples, when he had reigned seven and thirty years, and his son ALONSO Duke
of Calabria succeeded him.

At this time was the new Empress BLANCH carried into Germany, and there was
married to MAXIMILIAN; Germany being in peace and quiet, and the Emperor taking
care for the wars, and resistance to be made against the Turks. But the King
of France nevertheless took his way toward Italy: and to the end he might
pass in more safety, he gave to King FERDINAND the Earldom of Rossillion,
and the I Will of Sardinia, which JOHN, father to FERDINAND had morgaged to JEWS
the French King, father to this CHARLES. Of the coming of this King CHARLES,
although it concerns not this history, yet I will briefly write the sum:
for it was a matter very famous, and much feared by the Pope, and by all the
Princes and Potentates of Italy: and also for that it will serve for the better
understanding of what we shall speak of hereafter,

King CHARLES then with 50000. men of foot and horse, in the month of
September in the same year came into Lombardy, where he was by Duke JEWS
received with great honor, and his Army was by him furnished with all things
necessary. Being there he went to visit the right Duke, JOHN GALEAS, who lay
sick in Pauia, and within few days after died, leaving a young son called
FRANCIS: He was his cousin germane: for the King and GALEAS came of two Sisters,
daughters to JEWS the Second, Duke of Sauoy. The words he used to him were in
general, for that LODOVVICK was present, only expressing how much he was
grieved for his sickness, persuading him to hope of recovery, but in his mind
the King and all that were with him had great compassion on him, believing
confidently that the young gentleman had not long to live, by the villainy of
his uncle. The presence of ISABELL his wife did add much to this compassion:
who not only full of sorrow for her husbands infirmity and the estate of her
little son, but much afflicted for the danger wherein her father and friends
were, in the presence of them all fell at the Kings feet, recommending unto him
with tears, her father and his house of Arragon: to whom although the King for
her age, beauty and present fortune made some shows of pity, yet not able
to stay the course of so great an action upon so slender an occasion, he
answered her with shows of will to do that which he could not; saying, that he
was forced to prosecute the enterprise, being so far advanced. Then holding
on his journey he came to Pisa, and was afterward received into Florence, and
from Florence he went to Rome, no man daring by the way to make head against
him, and much less at his coming to that city.

Pope ALEXANDER not daring stay his coming in his Palace, retired himself into
the Castle Saint Angelo, so much did they stand in fear of him. Afterward
they two came to a composition of peace, although they neither met nor spoke
together: but afterward upon security they met and conferred; and within few
days after, the King with the greatest part of the forces which he brought
with him out of France, took his way toward the Kingdom of Naples, in the
month of January, in the year of our Lord 1495. where King ALONSO durst not
stay until he came; as well by reason of the great Army which he brought with
him, as for that, by reason of his vicious and dissolute life, he was ill
beloved of his own subjects of that kingdom. Whereupon, at what time as King
CHARLES was in Rome; King ALONSO having reigned not fully one whole year,
giving up that Kingdom to his son FERDINAND, went into Sicilia, where he
became a Monk, and in short space after died: by reason whereof, his son
FERDINAND being King, he raised the greatest power he was able, so that it is
affirmed he had 5000. men at Arms, 500. light horse, and a great number of
foot. Nevertheless the French had so good success, and King FERDINAND found
so great fear, and so little constancy in his people, that after some
accidents, he came to Naples, and thence fled by Sea to Ischaia, and King
Charles of Francs his conquest of the kingdom of Naples.
afterward into Sicilia; and so the French King in two months space, became
Lord of the whole Kingdom, excepting some little towns upon the Sea side,
which held for King FERDINAND.

Pope ALEXANDER seeing the prosperity and power of King CHARLES in the
kingdom of Naples, knowing his ambition, and fearing to lose his estate;
whilst he was busied in the conquest of Naples, procured a league to be made
between himself, the Venecians, and the Emperor MAXIMILIAN, whom he
solicited to come into Italy to the relief and defense of his Church. Into
this league also entered JEWS Duke of Milan (notwithstanding that by his
procurement King CHARLES took occasion to come into Italy) being grieved in
mind for that King CHARLES had so good success in Naples, which made him
stand in fear of his own estate; whereto the French King ever had an eye; as
afterward JEWS Duke of Orleans and cousin germane to King CHARLES, who
afterward was King, made apparent; who challenged that Dukedom to appertain
unto him, for that he was Nephew of the other JEWS Duke also of Orleance,
brother to King CHARLES the Sixth, and of his wife VALENTINA, sister to Duke
PHILIP of Milan, the last of the Viscounts; whose bastard, FRANCIS SFORCE Duke
of Milan took to wife, when he became Lord of that Duchy. Whereupon JEWS for
the better confirmation of his estate, obtained of MAXIMILIAN (as supreme Lord
of all Lombardy) to be invested in the Duchy of Milan: which in my judgment,
and of all those which write without passion, was his truest and best title;
for after the death of Duke PHILIP above named, neither the Emperor FREDERICK,
neither MAXIMILIAN had given the title to the Duke, or to his Father, or to his
Nephew; neither could it descend to them by the feminine sex, and much less to
this JEWS Duke of Orleans, who then sought, and afterward took the same,
when he came to be King of France; and by so much the more, for that the
descendents from this SFORCH, came from the woman being a bastard, whereby he
unjustly and without reason possessed so great an estate: he being invested by
the Emperor with great joy and solemnity, took the Ducall Ensigns. King
CHARLES having intelligence of the League newly made by these Princes, resolved
to leave such forces in the kingdom of Naples, as might suffice for the
defense thereof, and with the rest of his Army to return into France; and
marching toward Rome, giving the Pope to understand that he came to do his
duty to his Holiness; Pope ALEXANDER after some Ambassages between them, not
daring to abide his coming, departed from Rome, wherein, and in other towns
belonging to the Church, the Kings troops did much harm. The Pope not holding
himself to be in safety in Ciuica Vechia, went to Perugia, with an intent, if
he were oppressed, to go to Ancona, and thereto imbarke himself for Venice.

The French King departing from Rome, continued his journey toward France,
notwithstanding that he knew that in Lombardy the Venecians and the Duke of
Milan had an Army in a readiness to fight with him; and in Lombardy JEWS
Duke of Orleans had already taken the City of Nouarra, under pretext of the
title aforesaid: whereupon the Duke of Milan made haste A battle betwixt the
French and the Italians at Furno^.
to besiege him. King CHARLES coming near to Parma, passing the river Tarro,
found a great Army of his enemies; whereof FRANCIS GONZAGA Marquess of Mantoa
was General: with whom near to the river they came to a battle, where happened
very notable accidents. But heerin is great difference among Writers about this
matter: for, the French attribute the victory to their King; and the Italians
give it to the Venecians and to the Milanois. The truth is, that neither of the
Armies was wholly broken or overthrown, but the Italians that day seemd to be
Masters of the field: which appears in this, that they taking many French
prisoners, none of them were taken by the French; and they moreover compelled
the French king to seek another passage, by reason whereof they were reputed to
have the victory.

There died in this battle, which was fought on the sixth day of July, in the
year of our Lord 1495, a thousand men of both sides. But GVICHARDIN, writing of
this battle of Taro or Furnoue, says, that the French had not above 200
slain; and of the confederates there were slain 3000: among which was RAINVCIO
de Farneze, Leader of the Venecian horsemen. Touching the honor of the
victory, either side sought to appropriate it to himself with what reasons they
could produce; The Italians, for that their tents and carriages were not
spoiled: but, by the general opinion of all indifferent men, the French were
held to have the glory of the victory, both for that they slew more of their
enemies, they chased them over the river, and won their liberty to pass on.
But after some treaties between the two Armies, the French in a night went
toward Aste; where the King remained certain days, and a peace was concluded
between him and the Duke of Milan: and JEWS Duke of Orleans rendering Nouarra,
King CHARLES returned into France; and shortly after, FERDINAND King of Naples
recovered that Kingdom, but not without great difficulty, by reason of the
French which remained in garrison there, and of those which the King afterward
sent thither. In which war, matters of greatest importance for the service of
King FERDINAND, were guided and directed by the famous Captain GONSALO
FERNANDES of Cordoua, who for his excellency was called the great Captain of
Spain; sent thither by King FERDINAND, called the Catholic, The Kingdom of
Naples recouerd by King Ferdinand of Arragon.
for the defense of that Kingdom the first time that he went thither: and so
of all this great enterprise, there remained nothing to the French King, but
that he did much harm, and put all Italy in great fear (for, the reputation
and power wherewith he came, was very great) and making a journey, gave a bold
attempt, and therewith returned.

Whilst these matters passed in Italy, the Emperor in the same year 1495,
assembled a Council or Diet in the City of Worms; where the matter was
debated, whether the Emperor should go to relieve the Pope against the French
King, or make war against the Turk: but the Princes were so contrary in their
opinions, that nothing was concluded. The Emperor at this Assembly gave to the
Earls of Wittembergh the title of Dukes, which they hold to this day: and from
thence he sent the Ensigns and inuestiture before named to LODOVVICK Duke of
Milan; and other matters were ordained concerning the government and peace of
Germany. At that time was MAXIMILIAN daily solicited by the Duke of Milan to
come into Italy: and in the end by his importunity, and promise of certain
money for the defraying of his Army, the Emperor past the mountains but
slenderly accompanied, giving it out that the body of the Army The Emperor
comes into Italy.
which he had promised, marched after. Being entered Italy, he sent to have the
Duke of Sauoy and some other Princes come and speak with him: but his forces
were so contemptible, that not any one would obey. Then LODOVVICK Duke of Milan
persuaded the Emperor to go to Pisa (against whom the Florentines made war)
hoping by his means to get that Town into his hands: whereupon, the Emperor
sent Ambassadors to Florence, to let them understand, that intending to go with
a great Army against the Infidels, he held it necessary first to come into
Italy, for the pacifying of all quarrels. And for that it did belong to his
Imperial Authority, he required to be informed of the controversies between
them and the Pisans; commanding them in the mean time to surcease from Arms,
with assurance that he would administer justice indifferently. To whom they
sent their Ambassadors to Genoa to beseech him to think, that seeing his holy
resolution was to settle peace in Italy, there was nothing more convenient
than to restore Pisa to the Florentines, from whence sprung all the
discontentments to his Majesty and the confederates, Pisa being in that regard
the cause which made some aspire to the Empire of Italy; who to that end
labored to keep it in continual war, meaning the Venecians. Moreover, that
it was not agreeable to justice, that such as had been dispoiled by force,
should (contrary to the Imperial laws) be constrained to refer their rights
to compromise, if they were not restored to their possession; which if they
might obtain of him, they would then refer their cause to him, and wholly rely
on his justice. MAXIMIL. discontent with this answer, went by sea to Pisa,
meaning to besiege Liuorn: where doing little good, he raised his siege, and
returned suddenly with little honor into Germany, having showed his weakness in
Italy.

It happened after, that King FERDINAND having recovered his Kingdom, falling
sick, died; and for that he had no son, his uncle FREDERICK, brother to his
father King ALONSO, had the Kingdom; and many other matters befell in Italy,
which I have no time to write: and the Emperor was in peace with King CHARLES,
who shortly after in the year 1497, died suddenly; which caused a great
alteration: for, by reason that he had no issue male, the aforenamed JEWS
Duke of Orleans, being next of blood, succeeded him in the Kingdom of France;
who as soon as he was King, caused himself to be called Duke of Milan; whereby
it might be easily perceived, that he had a resolution to do that which he
afterward put in execution: and he presently diuorcing himself from his wife
JOAN, which was sister to his Predecessor CHARLES, alleging for his reason
that she was barren, and that he was forced to marry her; and also to the end
to have (as he had) the Duchy of Britain, he married the widow Queen ANNE,
late wife of the deceased King CHARLES.

The Emperor having intelligence of the death of the French King, desiring to
get the Duchy of Burgundy for his son PHILIP, who afterward was King of
Spain, entered it with an armed hand, and took some Towns: for the defense
whereof, the new King JEWS sent a very great Army; but within few days
following, a peace was concluded between them, greatly to the Emperors honor
and advantage: which was the more easily effected, by reason of the great
desire the French King had to proceed in his enterprise against Milan, for the
right which he pretended to have to that Duchy; and for that the Emperor had
resolved to make war against the Duke of Gelders. The Duke of Milan having a
watchful eye, and standing in great fear of the French Kings proceedings, as
much as was possible for him provided for his defense, principally through the
league and friendship with the Emperor; who, being of sufficient power to
protect him, was resolved to have done so: but other wars happening in the
mean time with the Swissers, who in the year of our Lord 1499, made wars in
the Territories belonging to Austria (which war, and the occasion thereof, is
written at large by HENRICUS MVCIVS and NAVCLERVS); the Emperor, leaving the
enterprise of Gelders, went to this war: for, the Swissers (called in ancient
time Heluecians) as well by reason of the situation of their country,
environed with most high hills and steep mountains, as also for their great
strength and courage, were then (and at this day are) greatly esteemed, and
reputed valiant in Arms. MAXIMILIAN coming against them, notwithstanding that
this war began against his will, yet he followed the same in such sort, that
in sundry conflicts and encounters between them, 30000 men were slain of both
parts, but the greatest number was of the Swissers; fortune inclining sometime
to the one side, and sometime to the other: in the which war he did wonders in
his own person, until that at last, through the entreaty of the Duke of Milan
and other Princes (which interposed themselves) the Emperor concluded a peace
with them. But before that this war was ended, JEWS the French King (who
procured the same) to take benefit of the time, raised his whole power; and in
the month of October, the same year, entering Lombardy, he besieged and took
the Duke of Milan's Towns; who because he was ill beloved of his subjects, and
the Emperor failing him in his necessity, and also because the Venecians were
in league with the King, he resolved by abandoning the City to give place to
the French fury; and sending his brother ASCANIVS S^ORCE before, with his
sons MAXIMILIAN and FRANCIS into Germany, he with the best and greatest part
of his treasure, within few days after followed. The Duke being in this manner
departed, the French King with very little resistance or none at all, was
received into Milan, and into the rest of the cities in that Duchy: and the
Venecians (according to the composition made between them) took the city of
Cremona and other places of that estate.

King JEWS being in this manner become Lord of all Lombardy, leaving therein
such governors and garrisons as he thought expedient, returned victorious and
triumphant into his country. The Duke of Milan being come before the Emperor
(who loved him very well) was by him very honorably and kindly entertained; and
within few days after, the Emperor assembling the greatest part of the
Princes of the Empire, resolved to relieve and succor him as a prince by him
invested, and who had the best title to that estate; and so with the greatest,
expedition that could be made, a good Army was levied, the greatest part
whereof were Swissers; wherein the Cardinal ASCANIVS the Dukes brother used
great diligence. With these men and with such others as he levied in Italy, the
Duke in the year 1500. returned into Lombardy, and his brother the Cardinal
going before, was received into Milan and other cities; who speedily conducted
thither his brother.

The French King being certified hereof, in the greatest haste possible sent
into Lombardy the greatest number of choice men that he could get, the greatest
part whereof likewise were Swissers: and the Duke who wanted neither men nor
courage to fight, attended in field the coming of the French Army: the two
Armies being at the point to have joined, the Swissers which were with the
Duke, not only refused to fight, but (as some say) corrupted with The Swissers
gave the Duke of Milan into ths power of his enemy the French King.
money, delivered up the poor Duke to the French, who was carried prisoner
into France and afterward his brother the Cardinal was taken. And so in few
days space, the French King recovered the estate of Milan, and Duke JEWS
afterward, poor, afflicted, and deprived of his Duchy; dyed in prison, having
been one of the most puissant, valiant and redoubted Princes of the world.

Pope ALEXANDER (who never had any feeling or compassion of an other man's
affliction and miseries) felt tragical crosses in his own house, the fruits
of lust and unnatural cruelty; for he still desiring to advance the Duke of
Gandie his eldest son to all temporal greatness, the Cardinal of Valente
ambitiously affecting his brothers place, and withal envying him that he had a
better share in the love of the Lady LVGRETIA their common sister; thrust on by
lust and ambition, he caused him to be murdered as he rode one night alone in
the streets of Rome, and his body to be cast into Tiber. GVICHARDIN writes,
that it was reported, that The Duke of Gandie murdered by his brother.
the father was a concurrent with his two sons in the love of his daughter
LVCRETIA, who being made Pope took her from her husband, as too mean, and
married her to JOHN SFORCE Lord of Pesaro: but not able to endure her husband
to be his corriuall, he dissolved this second marriage, suggesting that JOHN
was cold by nature, and unable to cohabit. The death of the Duke of Gandie
afflicted him so, as with tears in the open consistory he accused his own
actions and life, and promised reformation.

In this year 1500, upon Saint Matthias day, being he five and twentieth day
of February, CHARLES who afterward was King of Spain and Emperor, and was
called CHARLES the Fifth, was borne in the city of Gaunt in Flanders. Duke
JEWS having in this manner lost his estate, the Emperor received his sons
which the Cardinal ASCANIVS brought with him: what became of them, you shall
hear hereafter. In the yer 1501, prodigious sights, much to be admired,
appeared in Germany; for certain crosses of sundry colors, and some black,
were seen upon men and women's apparel, upon their heads, and upon the beds
whereon they did lie, made so perfect and so lively for the time they lasted,
that it was wonderful to behold; after which, ensued a most grievous and cruel
Pestilence. In those days also in Asia began the Empire and dominion of that
great Prince, called the Sophi of Persia, who had his beginning from one called
SCHIN, or SECHIN, who was said to be descended from the ancient Kings of the
Persians: this Prince by Arms made himself Lord of all Persia, and of great
part of Armenia, of Mesopotamia, and other Provinces: and afterward the
Kingdom of Persia was established in his successors; which since increasing,
is in some sort a bridle to the unmeasurable rapine and power of the great Turk.

At the same time, JEWS the French King standing in some doubt of the
Emperor, by reason of his late conquest of Milan, and the enterprise of Naples,
which he purposed to undertake, sought to enter into a league with him, and to
give his eldest daughter CLAVDIA in marriage to young CHARLES, who afterward
was Emperor and King of Spain, being then but one year old (she being also
an infant) to whom appertained the succession and inheritance of the Duchy of
Britain: with this match, the Emperor and his son PHILIP were well content:
and Queen IOANE and the said PHILIP being then to go into Spain, by the
leave and consent of the said French King, went through France, and in the
city of Paris this marriage was solemnized; and so they passed into Spain,
where they making their abode not fully two years, returned by the same way
they came through France, as through their friends country. Which marriage
afterward was not accomplished, for King JEWS married his said daughter
CEAVDIA, to FRANCIS Duke of Angolesme, who was afterward King: by reason
whereof King JEWS lost the title which he pretended to have to the Duchy of
Milan; for at the making of the peace, it was decreed, that if this marriage
took not effect, that then the Emperor, should give the Duchy of Milan to the
said young Prince CHARLES. The French King being in this manner in league with
the Emperor, sought also to enter into the like with FERDINAND King of
Castile, with these conditions; that they two making a conquest of the kingdom
of Naples, and deposing King FREDERICK should divide the same between them:
which conditions were accepted by King FERDINAND (as says SABELLICVS, a writer
of that time) for that King FREDERICK showed himself ungrateful to A league
between the French King, and the King of Castile.
his Nephew, who sent him aid and succors; and the fame went, that he
secretly practicing underhand with the French King, offered to pay him tribute,
to the end he should not make war against him, but suffer him to live in
peace; and that he promised (...)his help for the taking of the I Will of
Sicilia, which appertained to King FERDINAND, and to the house of Arragon.

This being concluded, the two Kings sending thither their Armies and Generals,
the war began; and after some matters (which I have no time to relate) King
FREDERICK abandoning the Kingdom, yielded himself into the French Kings hands,
who used him very kindly: but his Army nevertheless took all his Country,
Calabria and Pulia excepted, which the Spaniards seized on in the behalf of
King FERDINAND. And so for a while the peace continued between the French and
the Spanish, until that the French seeking to intrude themselves into the
Spanish limits, they made war one against the other, which war was one of
the most cruel and famous that ever was, and wherein the French employed the
greatest force and power: and GONSALO FERNANDES of Cordoua, being General for
King FERDINAND, in the space of three years that this war lasted, obtained so
many notable victories, and performed such exploits in Arms, and used so many
policies and stratagems, that he purchased the name of a great Captain; and
wholly expelling the French out of that Kingdom, made a conquest thereof for
his King: and so it remains until this day subject to the house of Castile. In
the time of this war, which was in he year 1503, died Pope ALEXANDER, when he
had been Pope eleven years. He died (as it is written) of poison; which,
GVICCHARDINE relates after this manner: Going the 18 of August to sup in a
Vineyard near to the Vatican, he was suddenly carried away dead to the Palace,
being (according to most men's opinions) poisoned after this manner: The Duke of
Valentinois his graceless son had resolved to poison ADRIAN Cardinal of
Cornette in the wine they should have at supper: for, it is most certain, that
both father and son were well practiced in poisoning; not only to be
revenged of their enemies, or to be freed from iealousies, but even of a wicked
desire to get the goods of the rich whosoever they were; As happened to the
Cardinal of S. Auge who was very rich, yea they would poison their greatest
friends and most faithful servants, such as were the Cardinals of Capua and
Modena. VALENTINOIS had sent certain flagons of poisoned wine before, giving
charge to his man that no man should touch them. The Pope coming thither
before and some what altered with heat, called for drink, his own provision
being not yet come: he that had the charge of the poisoned wine (thinking it
had been recommended unto him for the rareness thereof) gave the Pope thereof
to drink; and his son VALENTINOIS, arriving at the same Instant, drank also
of the same wine. The father died instantly: but VALENTINOIS by the vigor of
his youth and the help of strong counterpoysons recovered after a long and
grievous sickness. Al Rome rejoiced to see the body of this monster dead; a man
full of ambition, infidelity, cruelty, luxury, and strange couetousness, selling
both holy and profane things without distinction, with which vices he had
infected the whole world. In his place was chosen Cardinal FRANCIS
PICCOLHOMINI, Nephew to Pope PIUS, being his sisters son, and was therefore
called PIUS TERTIVS; but he being Pope but thirty days, Cardinal IVLIAN was
chosen, and called JULIUS the Second.

The Emperor intermedled not in the affairs of Naples, as well for the
preservation of the league and friendship with France, as also the better to
provide for other matters in the Empire, wherein at the very same time, which
was in the year of our Lord 1502, befell a strange adventure in the country
of Spire; wherein an infinite number of people gathering themselves together
under the name of liberty, addressed themselves against the temporal Lords and
Princes, and also against the state of the Clergy: these men having made them
two Captains, began An insurrection of the Commons of Germany, in the Country
of Spire.
to war, rob, and to commit all manner outrages and insolences; having
first determined to observe certain articles, which they meant to hold
religiously for a law: the first was to purchase liberty, and to make
themselves free, or to dye in the action: another was, to say every day a
certain number of Pater Nosters, and other prayers; upon another day, to
destroy all the Princes, and to kill all those which should resist them, and
some others they purposed to rob, and to make all the clergy goods common;
with other strange and dangerous devices. These men within few days gathered
themselves together in so great a number, that if the Emperor had not very
speedily sent an Army against them, which brake and overthrew them; they had
brought the estate of Germany in hazard, if they had continued as they began;
but through the Emperors endeavor this combustion was pacified, and the
offenders were, for examples (...)justly punished. Nevertheless, at the same
time the city of Basil (which was an Imperial cit^ and tributary to the
Empire) gat liberty, and making it self free, entered into a league and
c^deracie with the Swissers, which was a matter of great importance and danger;
as well for the charge to provide for such a case, as for the war against
PHILIP, the County Palatine, and his son ROBERT, which sprang through this
occasion.

GEORGE Duke of Bauiere, called the rich, having no more but one daughter,
whose name was ISABEL; and marrying her to ROBERT the eldest son of the Count
Palatine of Rhine, who was also called Duke of Bauiere, for in ancient time
both had been but one house; he gave him with her for her dowry, the
inheritance and succession of his whole patrimony, which was against law and
reason, and a wrong done to his brother ALBERT, who was also Duke of Bauiere,
and had married the Emperor MAXIMILIAN'S sister. This marriage being made, Duke
GEORGE, father in-law to ALBERT, in the year 1503, dyed: and ROBERT having
ISABEL to wife (being by his father in-laws last Will made his heir general)
with the help of his father, the Count Palatine of Rhine, began to take Towns
and Castles in Bauiere, and to make himself Lord of a great part thereof; and
so began the war. The Emperor seeking means to bring them to an agreement,
ROBERT would not accep the conditions: whereupon the Emperor proceeding
against him, and against his father the Count Palatine (who notwithstanding
that he had bin often required and persuaded to the contrary, counselling his
son to proceed, assisted him both with men and money) confisked his goods, and
exposing the same to him that would take them, made presently cruel war upon
him: and by his order, the like was done by the Lantzgraue of Hessen, the Duke
of Wittembergh, the Marquess of Brandenburgh, and the said ALBERT and
ALEXANDER Dukes of Beuiere, and other Princes: against all which the father and
the son armed themselves, with the help of the king of Hungary and Bohemia,
from whence many men came to their aid; and so between them began a most
cruel war; wherein the Emperor warred in his own person particularly in the
country of Bauiere (whereof ROBERT was in possession:) And WILIAM Lantzgraue
of Hessen, and the Duke of Wittenbergh, either of them for their portion,
together with their friends and kinsfolks made wars in several parts of the
countries, subject to his father the Count Palatine of Rhine.

The Emperor warred with such force and courage, that obtaining certain
notable victories against ROBERT and the Bohemians, he recovered all the towns
which he had taken; but ROBERT saved himself by flight; and the Emperor
giving those towns to his cousin ALBERT, went with his Army into the Count
Palatines country, wherein the Princes above named had taken some towns: and
coming with the like foree and fury as he had recovered the estate of Bauiere,
he took the greatest part of that dominion: and PHILIP being unable to defend
what he held, sending to the Emperor for pardon, promised from thenceforth to
be his loyal servant. CHRISTOPHER Marquess of Baden, together with certain
religious persons being intercessors; the Emperor considering that if he
should wholly ruin him, being a Prince Elector, there would be great
controversy about the right of the election, he thought it best to pardon him;
and so ceased the wars on all parts, and the Count Palatine returning to his
obedience was pardoned: but his country and estate was much diminished. His
son ROBERT after the wars were ended, being of the age of five and twenty
years, seeing himself overcome and dispossessed, dyed of sorrow and his wife
also, by whose right he challenged that which is above specified.

Whilst the Emperor was busied about these matters, the great Captain of
Spain, GONSALO FERNANDES, wholly conquered the kingdom of Naples, and (as
writes SABELLICVS) The Spanish conquered the kingdom of Naples from the French.
a truce being taken between King F^RDINAND of Castile, and JEWS the French
King for three years, Italy was in peace for a time. In this year, 1504, died
ISABEL Queen of Spain, whom Queen IOANE succeeding in that kingdom, was with
her husband PHILIP called to the Government: but their coming was deferred
until the beginning of the year 1506. In which time the Emperor summoned a
Council to be held in the City of Colen; from whence he went with an Army
against the Duke of Guelders; and taking some towns from him, brought him to
such distress, that he was constrained to sue for pardon, and he forgiving
him, returned to the Council or Diet at Colen.

This CHARLES Duke of Guelders, by the provocation and support of the French,
with whom after his fathers death he had been bred up in hatred of the house of
Burgundy, violating his faith by the which he was bound to MAXIMILIAN, did
infest the Brabantines, committing great spoils and murders. This young
Prince was of a sour and proud disposition, whose Grandfather ARNOLD, was
son to MARY, daughter to JOHN Lord of Arkell, by the death of REYNOLD the last
of the Dukes of Iuliers and Guelders, of the house of Nassau, his mothers
Uncle, it was conferred into the family of EGMONT who still was an enemy to the
house of Burgundy, in favor of the French.

The next year following, the Emperor being displeased with the King of
Hungary and Bohemia, for the assistance given to the Count Palatine against
him, and for his rebellion against the Empire, levied an Army and went against
him; and entering Hungary, did great spoils there, and put the king thereof in
such fear, that he (with great humility sued to him for peace, which was
granted upon such conditions as pleased the Emperor; and so the war ended.
In the mean time, JEWS the French King, having no meaning to marry his
daughter CLAVDIA to Prince CHARLES, who being afterward Emperor, was called
CHARLES the Fifth, shortly after married her to FRANCIS Duke of Angulesme and
Dolphin of France, who afterward was King: and fearing wars with the
Emperor about the Duchy of Milan, made a perpetual league with FERDINAND King
of Castile, who was upon his departure from Arragon to return to Naples; for
he expected King PHILIP who went thither in the beginning of the year 1506:
this league being made between them, King FERDINAND married the Lady GERMANA,
sister to the Earl of F^ix: and in April, in the year 1506, leaving Spain,
he went to Naples: and upon the five and twentieth of September in the same
year, King PHILIP being of the age of eight and twenty years, departed out of
this World: his death was much deplored by all his subjects, but more by the
Emperor his Father, who was extremely sorry for the same. After his decease, for
that the Queen was sickly, and the Prince CHARLES a child, King FERDINAND of
Naples was called to the Government of those Kingdoms; whereupon the year next
following he came into Spain to that effect: and the Emperor, to the end he
should undertake the Government of the Low Countries, was by Ambassadors
from the States thereof, solicited to come thither; who accepting the
Government, went presently into Flanders.

The French King having levied an Army to go into Italy to suppress the
rebellion at Genoa, the Pope and the Venecians were in some doubt that he had a
further design: whereupon they sent their Ambassadors to the Emperor and
Princes Electors, to let them understand that the French king had an intent to
oppress the state of the Church, and to usurp the dignity of the Empire. This
caused MAXIMILIAN to assemble a Diet of the Princes and free Cities at
Constance; giving them to understand that the French Kings intention was to
advance the Cardinal of Ambois, and to receive of him the Imperial Crown.
The Princes were herewith much incensed with disdain; that through their
negligence the Majesty of the Empire should be translated into another Nation.
After much consulation, in the end they concluded to furnish the Emperor for
his voyage into Italy, with eight thousand horse, and two and twenty thousand
foot, paid for six months, and 6000 slorens of the Rhyne for the charges of
the Artillery monthly: But the French King having dismissed his Army and
himself retired into France, the Pope and the Venecians grew cold in their
hot pursuit; the Pope giving charge to his Legate to persuade the Emperor, in
his name, to pass into Italy, without an Army, offering to do him more
honor, then had been at the crowning of any former Emperor: and the Venecians
upon great instance made by his Ambassadors to that State, for the passing of
his army through their Territories, made answer; That their resolution was to
grant him passage, if he came without an Army, but coming Armed, to deny him
that liberty: Wherewith the Emperor being discontented drawing his forces
toward the Frontiers of Italy, he sent a Herald to Verona to publish his
intent to pass into Italy, to receive the Imperial Crown, and to require
lodging for 4000 Horse; whereunto the governor made answer, that if he would
pass for no other occasion then to receive the Crown, they would honor him
with all offices of observance: but they saw contrary effects, having brought
so great forces with Artillery upon their Frontiers. This voyage of the
Emperors produced no great effects: for after some spoils don in Friuli and
some places taken, which the Venecians soon recovered, in the end he sought to
have a truce with the Venecians, the which was concluded for three years, and
so the Emperor retired into Germany.

In the mean time, CHARLES Duke of Guelderland, through the aid (as it was
surmised) of the French king, made wars in Brabant, whereupon the Emperor
was constrained to give over the war against the Venecians, and with his
forces to go to the relief of that Country, wherein he making head against
the Gelderois, put them to the worse. In the year 1508, JEWS Duke of Milan,
called the Moore, being deprived of his estate, dyed prisoner in France; his
sons MAXIMILIAN and FRANCIS, living in the Emperors Court in Germany.

This year the Emperor and French King being either of them much discontented
with the Venecians, they resolved to contract a league secretly against them;
sending their deputies A league made at Cambray.
to Cambray to that end, where they concluded (contrary to the covenants with
either of them made with the Venecians) with the consent of the Pope and king
of Arragon, to make war against the Venecians, every one in his own right, to
recover those towns which they had usurped from them. As, for the Pope Faenza,
Rimini, Rauenna, and Seruia: for the Emperor Padua, Vincenza, and Verona,
belonging to the Empire, and Friuli and Treuisa as the inheritance of the house
of Austria: for the French King Verona, Guiaradada, Brescia, Bergamo, and
Crema: And for the king of Arragon the Towns and havens which had been
morgaged by FERDINAND king of Naples: That the the French King should begin
the war in person by the first of April, at what time the Pope and the
Catholic King should enter into the action: And to the end the Emperor might
have some color of excuse for not observing the truce which he had made with
the Venecians, The Pope should demand succors of him as from the protector of
the Church. There were many other Articles contained in this league whereof
GVICHARDIN makes an ample relation.

The Pope being resolute, and loath to see the Emperor too great in Italy, he
desired rather to obtain part by accord, then the whole by Arms; laboring to
induce the Venecians to restore him Rimini and Faenza; letting them know that
the danger which threatened them by the union of so many Princes, would be far
greater if he did concur with them, and pursue them both with his spiritual
and temporal Arms; but if they rendered those towns he should have just cause
not to ratify the league, which without his Pontifical authority would easily
vanish. The Venecians were herewith much perplexed, there being great
contrariety of opinions amongst the Senators: but in the end the worse counsel
prevailed, which was not to yield unto the Popes desire, whereupon his
Holiness ratified the league.

In April 1509 the French King advanced his Army into Italy, sending a Herald
to Venice to denounce war against them, whereunto the Duke and State answered;
That since the king his master was resolved to make war against them, in a time
when they hoped most for the observation of the league which they had never
violated, whereby they had made the Emperor their enemy, they would stand upon
their defense, relying upon the equity of their cause. They having drawn
together a flourishing Army went to field, and after some days the two Armies
met at Guiradada where there was a furious battle fought, and the Venecians
were overthrown. But some write that only the Venecian rereward came to
blows, where they were in a manner all slain having fought very valiantly,
their commander BARTHOLMEVV d' ALVIANA being taken prisoner. Many towns in
Lombardy followed the Victors fortune and yielded to the French King. The news
of this overthrow being come to Venice, it cannot be written what a general
lamentation there was in the city, and how much they feared the ruin of their
country. Thus in 15 days after the battle, the French King having conquered
all that belonged to him by the league of Cambria, the Pope played his part with
the towns of Romagnia, and the Emperor MAXIMILIAN sending diverse troops
into Friuli, took diverse towns there.

The Venecians, seeing their estate desperate, resolved to abandon the
jurisdiction of the firm land, and to contain themselves within the salt water;
commanding their Magistrates and Officers in Padoua, Verona, and other places,
to retire, and leave the Towns to the peoples devotion. They also sent an
Ambassador to the Emperor to pacify him by their humble submission, and to
obtain peace under what condition soever: but they could not move him. They
also sent to restore the Ports to the King of Arragon: and they sent a
Secretary into Romagna to deliver up to the Pope whatsoever they held there,
upon certain conditions; which the Pope did not allow. Thus were they stripped of
all their great power, being almost out of hope for the preservation of their
liberty. This ruin of theirs was very sensible to many; who foresaw that the
estate of Italy would be very wretched, if it should be brought under the yoke
of strangers. The Pope above all others began to be much grieved for their
fall; who, fearing the power of CAESAR and the French King, resolved to do all
he could to cross their courses, accepting the Letters written unto him in
the name of the Duke of Venice with great submission, humbly entreating him to
pardon and absolve them.

The Emperor delaying his coming into Italy, the Venecians began to recover
some Towns in the firm land which they had abandoned; and the French King
prepared for his return into France. In the mean time the Emperor came into
Italy with no great forces, so as he spent the time in enterprises of small
moment with little honor to the Imperial Name: yet at that time he did
solicit his confederates to ioyn their forces together, for the taking of the
City of Venice; but they could not agree: but in the mean time Friuli and
Istria were pitifully afflicted by the Emperors forces; and he went in person
to besiege Padoua with a great Army, which the Venecians did fortify with all
the men, artillery and munition they could; so as all the young Gentlemen of
Venice with their friends and followers put themselves in Arms, and went to
guard the City: but after seuenteen days siege he raised his Camp, and retired
toward Verona with much discontent; and then presently returned into Germany
to give order (as he said) for the wars he intended to make the Spring
following: After which, the Venecians made their submission to the Pope; who
gave them absolution, and enjoined them for penance to visit certain Churches.
The war continued still betwixt the Emperors forces and the Venecians: and
the Pope, seeking to reconcile them; the first that gave over this war, was
Pope IVLIO; who, being sued unto by the Venecians for peace, granted the same,
and therewith withdrew his forces.

Pope IVLIO (as he was a subtle cunning Prelate) having gotten what he
desired, mistrufted that the Emperor and the French King having brought the
Venecians to ruin, his own state would be in danger: for, his meaning was,
that no man should be of greater power in Italy than himself. But as the French
Kings purposes were to the contrary, so he took his agreement between the
Venecians and the Pope in very ill part; and after many Ambassages past between
them, in the end they two fell at variance. The Pope, practicing under hand
with the Genoais, made them rebel against the French King; and the King (in
requital) made a schism in the Papacy, and to that effect drew the Cardinal
of S. Cross (who had been Legate in Germany) together The French King caused a
schism in the Poped^me.
with some other Cardinals, to his devotion; who, calling a Council against
the Pope, appointed the City of Pisa for the place of their meeting. The
Emperor, notwithstanding the league between the Pope and the Venecians,
desisted not from warring against them: but he was advertised that the French
King had induced the Duke of Guelders to take Arms against him, and to that
effect had with money supplied his want: for, the King although he would that
all should aid and assist him, yet he would not that any one but himself
should have the victory.

Upon this occasion, the Emperor, leaving the friendship of the French, joined
with the Pope: and the French King, persisting in his resolution, caused many
Bishops and other Prelates to go to Pisa; where he procured the Council to be
assembled, which the Cardinal of Saint Cross had already begun: but, holding
themselves to be there in no safety, they went afterward to Milan. And the
Pope in like manner sent to the King of Castile, requiring his aid, which
presently was promised, and afterward sent him: and then he began with his
fulminations to persecute the French King. And to the end to defeat this
Council, he summoned a Council general to be held in Saint JOHN de Lateran
in Rome, the year next following, which was in the year 1512. The war between
the King and the Pope being very cruel, the King mightily engrossing his
Army, made MONSIEUR DE FOIX, General thereof; who going to Bologna, took it;
and taking Brescia, sacked it.

The Cardinal of Saint Cross, and those which joined with him, cited the Pope
to appear before them: and the Pope, after many protestations proceeding
against them, deprived them of all their ecclesiastical dignities and
benefices. King FERDINAND'S forces coming to the Popes aid, after some
encounters the two Armies (meeting near to Rauenna upon Whitsunday, in the year
1512) came to a battle, which was as cruel and bloody as ever was any; and
although the French obtained the victory, yet twice so many of them were there
slain, as of those which were overthrown, if they may be accounted overcome;
whereof one squadron remained whole and never broken, and so past through the
midst of their enemies, none daring to charge them.

In this battle MONSIEUR DE FOIX the French General was slain, together with
many of the French Nobility. Finally, the French were reduced to such an
estate, that notwithstanding A battle betwixt the French and the Popes forces
near the river of Carre in Italy.
they had the victory, yet it fared with them as though they had been overcome:
for, they departing from Rauenna, and taking their way toward Milan
(MONSIEVRDELA PALISSE being the General) Pope IVLIO recovered the City of
Rauenna, and in like manner Bologna: and understanding the issue of the battle
(though at the first he stood in great fear) yet being certified of the truth,
and how much the French Army was distressed, he after his accustomed manner
leuying new supplies, wrote to all the Kings and Princes of Christendom to
stir them up to war, and to that effect sent a Cardinal to the Emperor;
who, being discontent with the French King, within few days after sent into
Italy by the way of Verona, an Army of Swissers and Germans, with MAXIMILIAN
SFORCE the son of Duke JEWS, to recover the state of Milan which was his
fathers. MAXIMILIAN SFORCE entering Italy, and being come to Verona, joining
with the Spanish Army, and with those which were in league with the Pope, the
French were stricken with such fear, that the Cardinal of Saint Cross, and
the rest of the Council of Pisa (which had withdrawn themselves to Milan)
with all speed possible departing thence, fled into France: and MONSIEVRDELA
PALISSE the French General, leaving such garrisons as he thought good in the
Castles of Milan and Brescia, and other Towns in Lombardy, abandoning the City,
retired to Pauia; and the enemy coming thither, he departed from thence, and
went also into France. And so MAXIMILIAN SFORCE, in short space recovering the
Duchy of Milan, was with great joy (through the Emperors aid and favor)
received into the City: to whom presently came Ambassadors from Genoa to do him
honor, and to congratulate his return: for, the Genoais then rebelling against
the French, and having chosen them a Duke, besieged the Castle of the Lantern,
which was at the French devotion. In the process of his war, the King of
Navarre, for that he held with the French King against the Emperor, against the
Pope, and the King of Castile, and would not give passage to the Spanish
Armies, was bereaved of his Kingdom; and the Kings of Castile possess the same
unto this day.

After these things, and other which succeeded, in the beginning of the year,
upon the three and twentieth day of February, in Rome Pope IVLIO died, in the
tenth year of his Papacy; and in his place was chosen JOHN, Cardinal de
Medicis, who being taken at the rout of Rauenna, and afterward set at
liberty, was called LEO the Tenth: in the beginning of whose Papacy, the French
King, the Lord of Tremouille, and the Duke of Albania, with a great Army came
into Lombardy against MAXIMILIAN Duke of Milan; who with aid from the Emperor
and the Swissers, coming to a battle near to Nouarra (where his father was
taken prisoner) obtained the victory, with the death, overthrow, and
imprisonment of many of them: so as he, driving the French out of that Duchy,
remained Lord thereof in peace.

Presently after this in the same year, the Emperor (resolving to let the
French King know that he had committed an error, in not keeping the peace made
and concluded with him) came to a composition with HENRY the Eight King of
England (who was enemy to the French King) to enter France, and to make war
against him: for performance of which conditions, the King of England came to
Calis; and entering France, the Emperor with his Army came and joined with him:
and although the French King durst not fight in battle, yet there passed many
notable skirmishes between them: and notwithstanding that the King of England
lay two months before Terrouenne, yet the French King in all that space not
daring to come to free it, the town was constrained to yield: and so the King
after the taking of some other places, went to Tournay, which he battered with
such fury, that it yielded, together with the Castles and other towns near
adjacent; whereof the King of England being Lord, made great spoil in the
country, without finding any Army in the field to make head against him. The
Emperor in like manner by another way, sent VDAL^ICK Duke of Wittembergh, with
great troops of Swissers into Burgundy; who besieging Dijon, and having
brought it to that distress as it was thought the province would have been
lost; the Swissers (according to the accustomed manner) in consideration of one
hundred thousand Ducats, sent them by the French King, and moved with the hope
of a promised greater sum, raising the siege, returned home to their houses,
maugre the Duke of Wittembergh their General: who with his people seeing
himself abandoned, returned also into his country. It lkewise happened, that
whilst the King of England made war in France, the King of Scots (through
the instigation of the French King) entered England; against whom in person came
KATHERINE Queen of England, accompanied by some of the Nobility and Commons of
that Realm, and fighting with the Scots (notwithstanding that the victory was
very doubtful and unequal, by reason of the great multitude of them) yet their
King was slain in the battle: and the Scots not daring any longer to hold
the field, returned home; and the English entering Scotland, took certain
places there, in such sort that the King of England through his wives means in
England, and the Emperors aid in France, returned victorious into his
country. And the Emperor, for that his presence was very requisite in Germany
did the like; for in Worms was much debate and contention between the estates
Ecclesiastical and Secular. There was also great controversy between WILLIAM
and JEWS, Dukes of Bauiere, the Emperors Nephews, the sons of his brother
in-law ALBERT. Whereupon the Emperor went to them, and in some sort mitigating
the contention, brought them to be in peace. In the same year 1513, the
Venecians made a league with the French King, which was effected by means of
BARTELMEVV D'ALVIANO their General, who was taken prisoner by the King, and
ANDREW GRITTI a Venecian gentleman, who was afterward one of the most
excellent Dukes that has been in Venice, who likewise was prisoner.

After this, a peace being concluded between England and France, the French
King took to wife MARY the King of Englands sister, with whom he lived but a
while after his marriage; for he falling extremely sick, died upon the first day
of January, in the year of our Lord 1514. and the 17. of his Reign; whom
succeeded the often named FRANCIS Duke of Angulesme, who after his Coronation,
procured a league to be made with the Emperor: whereupon the Earl of Nassaw
came to Paris, and so a new marriage was concluded between CHARLES who then was
Prince of Spain, and RENATA sister to CLAVDIA the new Queen of France; which
Marriage afterward took no effect. The Emperor consented, and liked well of
the march, as well by reason of the troubles he had in Germany, as for the
peace and common good which was expected to ensue thereof. And for the better
preservation of the particular peace made with LADISLAVS King of Hungary and
Bohemia, he resolved to marry his niece MARY to JEWS, the eldest son of the
said King, notwithstanding that they both were very young: whereupon in July in
the year 1515. a meeting was appointed to be held in Viena in Austria, whither
came SIGISMVND King of Poland, LADISLAVS King of Hungary and Bohemia, with his
son JEWS, the Emperor, the Dukes of Bauiere, and many other Princes of
Germany, where the said JEWS prince of Hungary was betrothed to MARIE the
Emperors niece: and it was also agreed, that FERDINAND of Castile, should
marry with his sister ANNE, which afterward took effect; who reigned in those
kingdoms after the decease of his brother in-law JEWS; which marriages were
accomplished after the Emperors decease, in the year 1521. The French King
FRANCIS knowing the Emperor to be inclined to peace, feasting and banqueting;
and having a little before confirmed a peace with England, and with the
Venecians, as he had also done the like with the same Emperor; within short
space after he levied a very great Army of Germans, and Lantzknechts, with a
resolution to invade the Duchy of Milan; and being with his Army past the
Alps, near to Turin, he joined with his Uncle CHARLES Duke of Sauoy; and then
coming to Verselli, thither came 2000 soldiers sent him by the Genoais, at
the request of OCTAVIAN FREGOSO their Duke: from thence he went to Nouarra,
which yielded without assault; and passing on toward Milan: and knowing that
the Duke had an Army of Swissers sent him by the Emperor; and that he intended
to give him battle, he sought to have corrupted the Swissers with money, as
king JEWS did when he took the said Dukes father; but failing thereof (for it
was discovered to his enemies) he fought with them between Milan and Marinian,
near to a Village called Saint BRIGETS: the battle was so fiercely fought,
that before any sign of victory, they were overtaken by the night, which was
so dark, The battle of Marinian.
the Moon being down, that when they left fighting, neither party knew how to
retire, and so they stood all the night armed, expecting the day; which being
come they again renewed the battle: at which time, a rumor was spread over the
Camp, that BARTHOLOMEW DALVIANO was at hand with the Venecian Army, and that
he had marched all the night to come to join with the French King. Whereupon
the Swissers fearing so great succors, fled: and the victory remaining to the
French King, a most cruel slaughter was made of the poor Swissers.

GVICHARDINE writes, that the Swissers grew proud of the first days fight, it
being bruited throughout Italy, that they had put the enemies Army to flight,
and the King was careful to provide for all things fit for his safety. At the
break of day, the Swissers (who not only despised the French Army, but all the
forces of Italy united) returned to the charge with like fury and rashness,
and the French entertained them with great valor and discretion: and withal
ALVIANO commander of the Venecian forces coming with his light-horse-men,
charged the Swissers on the back, so that they despaired of the victory,
sounding the retraite, and retyring in good order toward Milan, to the great
astonishment of the French men, who durst not follow them. This was one of the
most furious battles that ever was seen in Italy.

The King having obtained so notable a victory; Duke MAXIMILIAN abandoning the
city of Milan, withdrew himself into the castle; whereupon the city yielded to
the King, and the other cities did the like. The Duke being besieged and
assaulted in the castle, (notwithstanding that the Emperor certified him that
he would speedily send him relief) compounding with the French King for a
certain sum of money, which the king promised to give him yearly, he
resigned the title and state of Milan; and so putting himself into the Kings
power, he went into France, where he afterward dyed. The French King hereupon
was received The French King in possession of the Du^hie of Milan.
into Milan, and into all the other cities without resistance; wherewith the
Emperor being much displeased, made preparation for his coming into Italy:
whereof the King standing in some doubt, sought to enter into a league with
Pope LEO; who seeing him victorious was glad of the match; and appointing to
meet him in Bologna, the league was confirmed; which being ended, the King
returning into France left the Duke of Bourbon with his Army in the state of
Milan.

At this time upon the five and twentieth day of January in the year 1516, dyed
King FERDINAND in Madril near to Guadalupe in Spain; and to the government of
those kingdoms they called CHARLES, (who was afterward Emperor, being then
but sixteen years old) who went thither the year following. The Duchy of
Milan being conquered by the French King, in such manner as is said, within few
days after the Emperor MAXIMILIAN by the way of Verona, came into Italy with
so flourishing an Army, that he would have bin glad to have met the French King:
and the Duke of Bourbon in Lombardy not daring to keep the field against him,
shut up himself in Milan: the Emperor finding no resistance, held on his way
until he came before the city, and besieged it: which together with all the
rest had been soon recovered, if he could have stayed some while in the
country; but the treasure and revenues of this great Captain, were not
sufficient to maintain the wars which he undertook, and to pay the
ordinary troops which he should need in the action; which was the occasion
that he that he oftentimes lost great occasions. Besides this, LADISLAVS King
of Hungary falling sick and dying, there arose after his decease, such
discord, that to establish peace in that kingdom, and for the defense thereof
against Turk, the Emperor was sent for; for JEWS, son to the deceased
King, was but a child of little more then thirteen years old: wherefore being
constrained to leave the wars of Milan, and to return into Germany, the French
King continued in possession of that Duchy for a time; as you shall hear.

The Emperor upon so urgent occasion being come into Germany, could hardly
keep the peace in Hungary: the occasion whereof was, for that King LADISLAVS
before his death nominated for tutors and governors for his son, in the
kingdoms of Hungary; and Bohemia, the Emperor MAXIMILIAN, and his own brother
SIGISMVND, King of Poland: wherewith the Hungars were very much discontent, for
they stood in fear that these two Princes would have practiced to have had
those kingdoms to themselves. But as the Emperors intent was but for the good
of the country, so he took not so great care to have the government, as he did
that those Kingdoms should be governed with equity, and for the defense of
Hungary against the Turk, which was put in effect so long as he lived: for he
gave the government to certain great personages of those Kingdoms: but not
without great difficulty and trouble; which plainly appeared, by the the
calamities which ensued in those kingdoms after his decease. A hundred years
were now past since the conclusion of the Council of Constance, when JOHN HVSS^
foretold would come a fatal change in the Roman Hierarchy, which no fury nor
fire should be able to prevent. Wherefore this year 1517, MARTIN LVTHER an
Augustine Friar, began to impugn the Popes trade of Indulgences, the which were
carried about in Germany to be sold for little money, (under the title of
ALBERT Archbishop of Magdeburg) by TICELIVS an impudent sycophant. LVTHER being
moved with his wicked Sermons published certain propositions concerning
Indulgences: against whom TICELIVS did spett out his poison, and burnt his
propositions, which forced LVTHER to write more copiously for the defense of
the truth; yet in the beginning he did not wholly reject Indulgences, but
desired some reformation. The Elector FREDERICK Duke of Saxony having read
LVTHERS writings and duly considered of his authorities, favored and supported
his doctrine, neither could he be diuerted with any terror or threats, being
straightly enjoined by MAXIMILIAN and CHARLES Emperors and by the Bishops of
Rome not to grant LVTHER any place to teach in: yet he would not of himself
judge of his doctrine, but craved the opinions of many learned men. And among
others calling ERASMUS of Roterdam unto him, he said that he had rather the
earth should swallow him up, then he would adhere to any false opinions,
entreating him earnestly to deliver his judgment freely. To whom ERASMUS
answered pleasantly, that LVTHER had committed two great sins, he had been to
busy with the Monks bellies, and with the Popes Crown, but he added
seriously, that LVTHER had justly taxed the errors, and that reformation in the
Church was necessary, and that his doctrine was true, but he wished more
mildness in his proceedings. After which there were many disputations touching
diverse points of doctrine held by the Church of Rome, which LVTHER did impugn,
whereof diverse have written, and diversely, to whom I will refer the
impertiall Reader.

At this time also it behooved the Emperor to take order for the going of his
Nephew CHARLES King of Spain into his Country; by reason whereof, he was
constrained to give care to a new peace motioned by the French King, which was
concluded; and it was also decreed that CMARLES King of Spain should take to
wife the daughter of King JEWS. This friendship and alliance being made
(although the marriage took no effect) King CHARLES taking shipping sailed
into Spain, where he arrived the nineteenth of September, in the year 1517.
And so Peace being between the Emperor and the French King, and generally
through all Christendom, he spent the rest of his time in ministering justice,
and reforming the laws and customs of the Empire; and so lived in peace and
good estate.

This year one thousand five hundred eighteen, the Emperor called a great and
his last assembly of the Princes of Augusta (where they treated of the Turkish
wars; for Selim, having ruined the Sultans of Egypt) struck a great terror
into all the Princes of the Christian World) and desired to settle the
succession of the Roman Empire upon one of his Nephews, which he wished might
have been FERDINAND the younger brother, thinking it better for the supporting
of the honor of his house if two personages were great, then one alone: but
being otherwise persuaded by some about him, and by the Cardinal of Syon, he
commends his Nephew CHARLES to the Princes Electors, who could not be chosen
King of the Romans in his life time, for that he had not received the
Imperial Crown from the Pope. After this The death of the Emperor Maximilian.
he was taken with a Dissenteria, which bereaved him of his life upon the
twelfth day of January, in the year of our Lord one thousand five hundred
nineteen, being of the age of nine and fifty years (as says CVSPINIAN) and
after others, threescore and three, and in the five and twentieth year of his
reign.

Thus have I briefly past over the great acts of this Emperor (for as I said in
the beginning of his life) if I should at large have described his prowess and
excellency, I should have been driven to have run a long race, and have needed
an excellent wit and much eloquence, whereof I know my self as naked and
destitute, as this Prince was abundant in all virtue: for he was so bountiful,
that if he had been Lord of all the rents and revenues of the World, he would
have needed them, considering his gifts and expenses, according to the
greatness of his mind; and notwithstanding that what he had was great, yet was
it ever too little in regard of his liberality. He was endued with such
magnanimity, that he never was seen to be timorous what danger soever he were
in; and there with was one of the most redoubted Princes in the World: he was
very devout, and as he lived so he died, he was of a most singular wit, and
sound judgment, as well in Peace as in War: and notwithstanding that he was
well able to counsel others, yet he never disdained to ask and take counsel
of such as he thought loved him, and were able to give him counsel. And as he
loved learning, and learned men, so he gave great gifts and pensions to such as
were well seen in the Liberal Sciences: and it grieved him much that he had
not in his youth been instructed in good Letters, and in the pure elegant
Latin tongue: for as he had a barbarous schoolmasters, so was that which he
learned of him; yet he afterward, having many learned men in his Court, came
to the knowledge of many things. He was naturally inclined to Poesy, so as he
compiled a notable piece of work in his own vulgar tongue, of the many dangers
wherein he had been, and another book called the price of honor. Besides his
excellent wit, he was of a wonderful memory: for whosoever had once conferred
with him about any business, although in long time after he came not into his
presence, yet as soon as he should see him he would know him.

He was so honest and bashful as it was strange, for he never consented that
any one should see him naked; neither did he at any time take the Vrinall to
make water, in the presence of any Chamberlain or Page, or any such like
thing; neither would he permit that any should see his Urine, except some few
very excellent Physicians. He was of an excellent and strong complexion, and
was seldom sick; and then but lightly; whereto this was a great help, in that
he was very temperate in his diet; yet he kept a very bountiful table; and did
take his meat so neately and comely as it was a pleasure to behold him. He
could so well endure travail, that heat, cold, hunger, thirst, or any other
want or discommodity did little annoy him. He much exercised his person in
bearing Arms, especially at Tilt and Tourney, besides the wars and battles
wherein he fought in person; and above all he was exceeding mild and courteous
in his behavior toward Princes, and toward all his servants and familiars;
and was so friendly to those which had to deal with him, that with his looks
and countenance he won their hearts, which put them out of the fear and
bashfulnesse wherein they were, by reason of his presence: for which
excellencies and other which I leave to write, he attained to be the most
honored Prince of his time, and was both obeyed and beloved through the whole
Empire, and saw all his sons and Nephews Lords of the greatest part of
Christendom. After his death CHARLES the Fifth was chosen Emperor, whose great
wars and acts require a more eloquent and exact writer.

THE LIFE OF CHARLES, THE FIFTH OF THAT NAME, AND HVNDRETH AND FIFTEENTH ROMAN
EMPEROR.
THE Author, writing the life of this famous Emperor, passes over his
memorable acts cursorily, both for that (as he says) they were then fresh in
memory, as also they were related at large by GVICHARDINE, IOVIVS, and other
Writers. But, holding it an indignity don to so noble a Prince, to neglect him
more in the writing of his life than other his Predecessors, or to send the
Reader to seek satisfaction from other Authors, I am bold somewhat to enlarge
the History of his life.

The Emperor CHARLES was by his fathers side of the Imperial House of Austria;
and by his mother he descended The descent of the Emperor Charles the Fist.
from the ancient Kings of Spain; and his grandmother by his father, was of the
house of France, in this manner: CHARLES the Fifth, King of France, surnamed the
Wise, gave the Country of Burgundy to his younger brother PHILIP. From PHILIP,
who had to wife the only daughter of JEWS Earl of Flanders, descended JOHN,
who was father to PHILIP which begat CHARLES the Hardy, Duke of Burgundy; whose
wars with JEWS the Eleventh, King of France, are written by PHILIP de
Comines, Lord of Argenton. This CHARLES, being slain at the battle of Nancy,
left his only daughter the Lady MARY, heir to his whole estate: this MARY was
married to MAXIMILIAN the Emperor, father to PHILIP; which PHILIP took to wife
the Lady JOAN, the daughter of the Kings of Castile and Arragon, and by her he
had the Emperor CHARLES the Fifth. And forasmuch as FERDINAND King of Castile
had never a son, he adopted his son-in-law PHILIP for his son; who, after
the decease of his father-in-law FERDINAND, became King of Spain: and by these
means the house of Austria obtained the dominions of Burgundy, Flanders and
Spain. As for his mother, her grandfather FERDINAND, King of Spain, had to wife
the Lady ISABELL, the only daughter of JOHN the Second, King of Castile; and
after the conquest of Naples, he gat by her JOHN, ISABELL, JOAN, MARY and
CATHERINE: but JOHN and ISABELL dying without issue, the succession of the
Kingdom, by the laws of Spain, came to JOAN, as to the eldest of them; but
Austria, by the division of the inheritance, came to FERDINAND brother to
CHARLES the Fifth; which FERDINAND was afterward Emperor also, and father to
the Emperor MAXIMILIAN the Second.

CHARLES was born in Gaunt, a City of Flanders, upon Saint MATTHIAS day, being
The birth of the Emperor Charles.
the four and twentieth of February, in the year 1500: which day was noted to
be ever very fortunate unto him; considering that upon that day many accidents
happened to him in sundry parts of the world, and he obtained upon that day
honorable victories; as by his actions, written by GVICHARDINE and IOVIVS,
plainly appears. Being come to years of discretion, although but a youth
(for, his father, dying, left him but sixteen years old) he was sent to
Mecklin, a city in Brabant, to school, his Masters name was ADRIAN of
Florence; then whom, none in all that province was more famous, for many
qualities, as the issue of his life made manifest; for he becam a Cardinal,
and afterward being made Pope, after the death of L^O the tenth, was called
ADRIAN the Sixth. But in his exercise of arms he was instructed by CHARLES de
Cheures, a valiant man at arms in that Age. It seems that he profited little
in learning, yet he attained to the Spanish, Dutch, and French tongues, the
Latin tongue he understood somewhat grossly. Three books only he loved to
read, which he caused to be translated into his own vulgar tongue; of which,
one was the Institution of a civil life, which was the Courtier of the Earl
BALTASAR de Castilione; the other was of matters of state, which was the
Prince, with the discourse of MACHIAVEL: the third was the Order of Knighthood,
which was the history of POLIBIVS. But he most delighted in arms, which
besides religion, are the foundation of kingdoms; and he more esteemed the
wars then any man in the world. He was skillful in the managing of
Artillery, and very expert in the marshalling of an army, and lodged the same
very skilfully, and knew all the means and devices how to batter and assault a
City: so as all his attempts, or the greatest part which he undertook, might
well have good success. The constitution of his body was neither fat nor
gross, but of a gallant proportion and strongly sinued. His hands were great
and strong, fit to wield weapons and to manage Arms. His legs were straight
and of a due proportion, which chiefly appeared when he was on horseback: for,
he rode with such majesty when he was armed, and managed his horse so
gallantly, that it seemed no gallanter Knight could be found, or more fit to
bear Arms than himself. He was of a fair complexion, with clear azured eyes;
which (although he were angry) were not terrible, but accompanied with a grave
bashfulnes and manly modesty. He was somewhat hook-nosed, after the manner of
the ancient Kings of Persia, which was a sign of the greatness of his mind. He
had a long chin, and a yellow beard: his hair was yellow of the color of gold,
after the use of the ancient Emperors of Rome. It was thought by those which
were wise, that never was man of better constitution, better advised, or of
riper judgment than he: for, with a certain motion which accompanied his
speeches, he made men to wonder at his proceedings. He was very courteous in
discourse, but double; so as his speeches might have diverse constructions: and
so he ever saved himself by the interpretation, fitting it to his purpose;
alle^ging, that his meaning was to be understood in this and in this manner. He
was never thoroughly angry; but telling the truth, and grounding his speeches
upon reason, he satisfied the hearers. He was never ouer-hasty in his answers:
for, he first consulted, and then concluded; but the conclusion must depend of
him only. He made great account of those which might either pleasure, or annoy
him; but made no show thereof in outward appearance, to the end to maintain his
reputation in greatness. He was neither bloody nor vindicatiue upon his
enemies, but reformed them without ruin.

He seldom punished his servants and officers, but vpheld them in their
defects. And although that by his enemies he was noted of cruelty, in the
matters of Rome, and in the death of the children of France, yet was he mild
and pitiful, and they of malice slander him wrongfully. As for his friends
which were made great by him, he constantly maintained them, and would not
endure to hear them ill spoken of; giving more credit to his own judgment
then to other men's reports; reputing them to speak of envy or malice. He was
an earnest defendor of his Ambassadors; notwithstanding that they did ought
that were not tolerable; for he loved to have good intelligence, and knew all
that passed in all parts of the World. He used to discourse of his affairs the
space of four or five hours together, and wrote down the reasons pro and
contra, the better to consider thereof; and his arguments were so well
compounded, and all of one poize, that who so understood the beginning of the
matter, might presently comprehend the end thereof.

He knew the natural inclination of those Princes with whom he had to deal,
and spent much money to have full notice of them; by reason whereof, he
negociated with them, with lively reasons and sound arguments, and not with
generalities; and had his business in all parts in readiness, attending
opportunity and fit occasion to put them in execution: Hence it grew, that in
regard of his affairs, he was mortified in all his pleasures: concerning the
laws, he was just, and made profession to maintain and hold his word, and to
prefer his honor before all things in the World; wherefore whosoever desired
to get his favor, was to use the means of honor, and of modesty, with show of
Religion: whereto he was so much addicted, as he communicated four times in
the year. He was very patient in hearing causes, and gave audience as well to
the mean as the great, with much attention: and notwithstanding that he was
slow to resolve of his own affairs, aswellas of other men's; yet he concluded
very prudently. But he that will blame him may say, that he was remiss and
irresolute; and he that will commend him may affirm, that he was well advised
and politic.

Touching his liberality, he was held rather niggardly and sparing, then
bountiful; especially toward his servants, whom he entertained with hope many
years; but when he did reward, if enough were enough, he gave enough; for he
had great means to give, of the three orders of Knighthood which are in
Spain, besides Bishoprics, Abbeys, Titles, Offices, and other revenues:
nevertheless, it seemed that in giving he much more favored the Flemmings
then the Spaniards or Italians. He was bountiful to such Captains as served
him in the wars, and to such as he loved; but it came but slowly. He made show
to love peace, and not to desire wars, but when he was provoked. Briefly, he
gave example for all to follow, and abstained from all such vices as might
stain his Conscience, or good name. He effected great matters by negotiation,
wherein he was more then in Arms; notwithstanding that in Arms he was
invincible and peerlesse.

He rose late in the morning, and after he was ready (clad in no better then in
silk, or cloth, close made, more like a private Gentleman then a great Lord,
but yet very neately) he heard a private Mass for the soul of the Empress;
and then gave audience and dispatched much business; then going out of his
chamber, he heard another Mass openly in a Chapel, which being ended, he
went to dinner: Whereupon they used this proverb in his Court, From Mass to
Mess.

He was a great feeder, and did eat such things as did breed gross and
viscous humors, whereof proceeded the Gowte, and the Ptisick; which infirmities
in his later days greatly tormented him, especially the Gowt; which was of so
malign a condition, that it sent the vapor thereof from the stomach into the
head, which put him often in danger of his life, which he assured himself could
not be long: but yet when he was well, he made small reckoning of Physicians, as
though he should never be sick again. He did eat little at night, thinking to
make amends for disordering himself at noone. After dinner he gave audience,
and sometime retiring himself into some secret place, he passed the time in
drawing the plot of some fortress, or other edifice; but most commonly he used
to jest with a Polonian dwarf which he had, or with one ADRIAN a groom of
his chamber; and often with the Baron of Monfalcon Steward of his house, in
whose company he took great delight, for his ready and quick wit. He sometimes
rode on hunting, not with above eight or ten horse at the most, and returned
oftentimes with a brace of stagges, or wild Boares. And sometimes he used to
shoot at Pigions, at Choughs, and such like birds; and in all these his
disports he spent not an hundred crowns in the yeete; so much did he apply
himself to matters of importance. He used the like sparing in cladding his
court, in his table, in the furniture of his house, and such other ornaments;
insomuch that if in trussing himself a point brake, he would tie it together,
and keep it, not to lose so much time as till another were fetched. His sparing
was such, that there was no man that spent ten crowns by the year, but
spent more then he: but for other expenses, passing through other men's hands,
he did as other Princes do, which refer the same to other men's trust; yet he
used all possible diligence to understand every particular, and would know how
his money was issued, even to a crown; so careful was he for what was his.
The virtues and fair conditions of this Prince, together with his power,
excelling all the Princes of his time, moved the Electors in Germany to create
him Emperor.

But before we come to relate what his actions were after he came to the
Empire, it shall not be impertinent to make a brief repetition of the most
memorable accidents which happened in his kingdoms of Spain. FERDINAND King
of Arragon dying, left Queen IOANE his only daughter to succeed him in all
his Realms and estates: CHARLES Archduke of Austria and Earl of Flanders her
eldest son was to inherit all those great estates after her; by reason The
death of Ferdinand King of Ar^gon.
of whose absence and the Queens disability (being possessed with a melancholy
humor) FERDINAND thinking that Prince CHARLES would not come in person to
govern the Realms of Spain, was desirous to appoint FERDINAND his Nephew,
brother to Prince CHARLES (whom he loved dearly, having been bred up with
him) to govern those Realms, for his daughter Queen IOANE; but he was
diuerted by the wise advice of some of his Council, showing the inconveniences
that might ensue: whereupon he nominated Cardinal FRANCIS XIMENES of Cisneros
for governor, until the coming of Prince CHARLES, giving great testimonies
of his fidelity and loialty: who took upon him the government of Castile, with
the consent of all the Council, and Nobility; only the ministers of the
Infant DON FERDINAND, sought to have him intrude himself into the government
of affairs.

The first care of Cardinal XIMENES was to make an accord with Doctor ADRIAN
of Florence who had been Shoole-Maister to Prince CHARLES, having bin sent
Ambassador from him to King FERDINAND, touching some negotiation; but with
secret authority, that the King dying he should take upon him the government
of Castile; but the Cardinal Accord for the government of Castile.
and he made an accord that until they had other news from Prince CHARLES,
they should jointly sign all dispatches.

The Cardinal with the Council remaining at Madrid, there grew some tumult in
Andalusia, A tumult in Andalusi^.
the head whereof was Don PEDRO GIRON eldest son to the Earl of Vregna, who
entered the Duke of Medina Sidonia's country with forces, pretending a title to
the whole Duchy: which tumult the Cardinal sought to suppress, proclaiming
them troublers of the public peace and guilty of high Treason, wherewith Don
PEDRO GIRON retired for a time; But soon after he returned to his first
frenzey, being countenanced and supported by Don FERNANDES of Velasco,
Constable of Castile, by the Duke of Benauent, the Duke of Albaguerque, by the
Earl of Midina Celi, the Bishop of Segutnea, with diverse others, who hating
the Cardinal entered into a faction: But by the wise advice of of the Duke of
Infantazgo (whom they sought to have drawn unto them) and by the constant
resolution of the Cardinal these practices died; and they returned unto their
first obedience, the greatest of them seeking to ins^uate themselves into the
Cardinals favor.

This wise Cardinal knowing that he might be crossed in the government of
affairs, by the Nobility which did both hate and envy him, he sought to
procure from King CHARLES Letters patents for the confirmation of his
authority, and that he might have free liberty in matters of state to do what
he should think profitable for the safety of the kingdoms; requiring the like
authority over justice and the treasure; but before the dispatch of these
Letters patents, he put one thing in execution which bred some alteration in
the State.

The Cardinal after the death of King FERDINAND ordained for the defense of
the Realm, as well against foreign inuaders, as homebred rebels, Legions and
bands of soldiers Cardinal Ximenes institutes legion^ry Souldier^.
taken out of the citizens and Burgesses of the good towns of Spain, men of
good fame, having both house and family. Some seditious men and desirous of
innovation were much scandalyzed at this edict, and many towns began to oppose
themselves against the execution thereof, but especially at Vailledolit, where
they took Arms against Cardinal XIMIN^S as against an enemy, offering violence
to his officers who were sent to make the inrolments, wherein they were
animated Sedition at Vailledolit against the Cardinal.
by the Admiral of Castile who had some hereditary rights in the government of
the town, and the Bishop of Astorgia who had been Schoolmasters to the
infant, Don FERDINAND. These alterations did much trouble the Cardinal; yet
would he not proceed rigorously against them until that he had received
approbation from King CHARLES, the which was sent him the year following; so
as at the coming of these Letters into Spain, the inhabitants of all the
mutinous towns, submitted themselves and gave over their factions.

In the year 1517 there grew a mutiny in Malaga against the officers of the
Admiralty, the townsmen being desirous to free themselves from that
jurisdiction, pretending that it did but A tumult at Malaga.
hinder the course of justice, and give way to ill livers, to avoid deserved
punishment. This multitude of Malaga having no patience to attend an answer
from King CHARLES of Austria, did tumultuously chase away the judges, and
defaced all the marks of the Admiralty in their town and jurisdiction. The
Admiral of Castile complained to the Cardinal and Council, who sought by
admonitions and threats to suppress the fury of this people: but they persisted
still in Arms and planted the Artillery upon their walls. But the Cardinal
seeing no mild courses could prevail, sent 6000 of his legionary foot and 400
horse against them, under the command of Don ANTONIO de la Cueua, upon whose
approach the Malagins fainted, and sued for mercy: whereof the Cardinal being
advertised, he commanded him to proceed with mildnes and clemency, preserving
the Kings honor and dignity; So as there were five of the chief authors of
this sedition hanged and the rest pardoned.

Cardinal XIMENES was much troubled with the pitiful estate of IOANE Queen
of Castile; for this Princess being possessed with a sharp melancholy humor led
a most lamentable The state of Queen Ioane of Castile mother to King Charles.
life in the Castle of Iordefillas whereas King FERDINAND her father had lodged
her, being a very pleasant place: yet JEWS FERRIER of Valencia who had the
chrge of her could never get her to lodge in any wel-aired chamber, but she
would still lurk in some dark place near the ground, fit to entertain her
malancholy. She did abhor soft beds, and would ly upon the ground, or upon a
board covered with a carpet by importunity. They could not get her to wear a
furred gown in winter, nor any thing that was rich: She was many times three
days together without eating, complaining often, that she was kept like a
prisoner, and that they withheld her from the government of affairs like a
private person. The Cardinal was much grieved hereat: and somewhat to redress
it, holding that the negligence of JEWS FERRIER did feed the malice of her
infirmity, he removed him, putting in his place FERDINAND DVCA of Talauera, a
man nobly borne and wise, who by his discretion in a short time did moderate
this violent humor in the Queen, getting her to be content to have her chamber
made clean, which grew unsavory by reason of the meat which she would not
suffer them to carry away, and by little and little he persuaded her to ly in a
bed and to go abroad to Church, and he made her to have some feeling and
apprehension that she was a Queen, and so acknowledged. And in time he made her
familiar and brought her to a more mild and humane kind of life: The which did
much please K. CHARLES her son, who thanked Cardinal XIMENES by his Letters.

Cardinal XIMENES found many crosses and oppositions in his government: yet he
was so impatient of any injury, as whatsoever King CHARLES ordained touching
the affairs of Cardinal Ximenes impatient of injuries.
Spain, if it proceeded not from him and his counsel, he held it done in
contempt of him, and condemned it as a subject of sedition; accusing the
Noblemen and Council of Flanders of rashness, who being ignorant of the manners
of the Spaniards meddled with the government, the which did wholly depend of
the Viceroyes authority and of the kings Council which was in the country: he
did much honor ADRIAN FLORENT who was joined with him in the government: for
that he yielded unto him.

The Spaniards who are by nature hauty and proud, could not long endure the
integrity of Cardinal XIMENES, neither were they well pleased with the
Flemmings, who entertaining the King in Flanders were too busy with the
affairs of Spain, so as all things tended there to a combustion. But to
prevent all disorders which were feared by reason of the Kings absence, it was
resolved to send the Lord of Chaux thither to have the third place in the
government with Cardinal XIMENSS, and Doctor ADRIAN, who had A third
governor sent into Spain.
formerly been the principal cause of his sending; for that (as he said) he
was not sufficient to resist Cardinal XIM^S a hauty man, who did manage all
things at his pleasure, and could in no sort endure any companion; His coming
was very pleasing to the Noblemen and people of Spain, who were much
discontented with the Cardinal; and they all went forth to receive him with
great honor, being the first that ever had been sent into Spain with
authority, since CHARLES of Austria took upon him the title of King. But the
Cardinal maintained his authority resolutely, and held still the first place
in all dispatches; as may well appear by that which follows: for, the other two
having on a time signed certain Letters, leaving a space for the Cardinal to
sign under them; he tore them in pieces, causing others to be made to the same
effect, which he signed above: and thus he continued until the Kings coming.
It was often resolved in Flanders to have sent some great man into Spain to
manage the government, and to check the sour and harsh disposition of the
Cardinal. JEWS Count Palatine was propounded both to take charge of the
State, and of the Infant D. FERDINAND: but the Cardinal could endure no
corriuall, beseeching the King by his Letter, not to send any one into Spain
with whom he must be in continual quarrel; but rather to give him leave to
retire himself to his Diocese, where he would live religiously in peace,
foreseeing that many would seek maliciously to cross his good designs to serve
the Commonweal; they having no other end but to breed some great tumults in
Spain, he desired not to be engaged therein, but rather to be a spectator;
aduertising the King, that the only means to prevent all dangers, was, To
commit the whole affairs of the estates government to his tried faith, and to
rely wholly upon him, seeking to divide the royal Sovereignty betwixt the King
and himself: for, he said the Flemings understood nothing in the affairs of
Spain, and the King for his tender age could not undergo so many cares: but the
Cardinals proud courses bred him much hatred.

The King was greatly desired in Spain by the Nobility, who thought thereby to
supplant the Cardinal in his government: and this voyage was much pressed by
the Emperor MAXIMILIAN, The King much desired in Spain.
who held it very necessary; and to that end came to see the King at Bruxelles,
and to confer with him, fearing that his long stay in the Low Countries would
breed some alteration in the state of Spain, where he was much desired. This
conference bred some jealousy in the Cardinal; who wrote, that the enteruiew
of great men did never bring profit to themselves, nor to their affairs. The
Spaniards, seeing the time spent in vain hopes of their King's coming, began to
grow into mutinies, making great complaints of the greediness of the
Flemings, who disposed of the affairs, and wasted the Kings treasure,
transporting it out of the Realm. Many of the best Towns of Spain, being
incensed with these complaints, sought how to prevent the disorders, and to
curb the greediness of the Flemmish Courtiers. The Cardinal and Council,
knowing well, that what the Towns had desired was just, yet fearing some
popular tumults, they persuaded them to forbear all Assemblies till there were
certain news of the Kings coming, who they understood made preparation to
imbark speedily: and in the mean time they advertised the King of what had
past. But the Cardinal and Council were again importuned for an assembly of
the States, promising only to solicit the King to come into Spain, to
maintain the laws and customs of the Country, and to reform such disorders as
were crept in; or else the people did protest to send Ambassadors to the King,
and to provide that the Commonweal should take no prejudice. The Cardinal
could not refuse their just demand, appointing the Assembly in September 1517,
hoping by that time the King would be arrived in Spain; having to that end sent
him a fleet of ships, and sending Post daily to advance his coming, the only
means to maintain peace: for, the Cardinal held it a dangerous thing when as
people (having cause of grieuance) presume to complain publicly: for having
once lost the respect due to the magistrate, there is no more any restraint;
and popular complaints are easily believed by such as have a desire to trouble
the State.

Pope LEO about this time, by virtue of a decree made in the Council of
Lateran, demanded the tenth of all the revenues of the Clergy, upon color to
defend the Christian religion against Infidels; for that SELIM, Emperor of the
Turks, threatened Christendom, and especially Italy: whereupon the Pope sent
out his Bulls to exact this money for three years, with many Exactions of Pope
Leo hindered by Cardinal Ximenes.
indulgences to such as should contribute willingly. The Clergy complaind
heerof to Cardinal XIMENES, being at Toledo; who undertook their protection,
and by his authority (which was great with the Pope) freed them from that
exaction.

At one Instant there were three of the greatest Noblemen of Spain conspired
together against the Cardinal upon sundry discontents; which were, the Duke of
Infantazgo, the Duke of Alua, and the Earl of Vregna. The Duke of Infantazgo
had offered violence to a Promoter Violence committed by the Duke of Infant^go.
sent by the Cardinal touching some proceeding at Guadalaiara, threatening to
hang him. The Cardinal gave it out, that he would call the Duke in question,
for that he had violated religion, and broken the public peace: and the Duke,
desirous to brave the Cardinal, sent a Chaplain of his unto him, with a
message full of disgraceful reproaches and vain threats. To whom the Cardinal
(hearing him quietly without any alteration) answered, Go back to thy master,
whom thou shall find repenting the foolish words which thou have deliuerd: and
in truth before his return, the Dukes choler was past, and he very sorry for
his rashness; but he was afterward reconciled to the Cardinal by the Constable
of Velasco.

The Earl of Vregnas excess was of a higher strain: for, Don GVTTIERE of
Quixada having a suit against him for the restitution of Villafratte, a Town
near to Vailledolit; and certain officers of justice coming thither by order of
the Court to put him in possession, they were outraged and beaten by RODERIGO
GIRON the Earls son, BERNARDIN of Velasco the Constables The court of
Parliament violated.
son, BERTRAVD de la Cneua son to the Duke of Albuguergue, FERDINAND
HENRIQVES son to the Admiral, with other ill advised young Noblemen then
present. The Court being much incensed heerat (the Bishop of Malaga being
President) commanded certain legionary soldiers to arm to assist justice, and
to punish those rebels, getting himself in person toward the place. The
Constable, foreseeing the danger, posted thither before, and caused them to
give way to the Sentence of the Court: for which good office, the Bishop of
Malaga gave thanks to the Constable, and dismissed his soldiers. But the
Cardinal was not so tractable, but sent out his warrant to apprehend these
young Noblemen; who, seeing him proceed criminally against them, returned to
their old frenzy, putting themselves again into Villafratte, meaning to keep
it. This business tended to sedition, many blaming the Cardinals severity,
whereby the whole Realm might be drawn into combustion: but the Cardinal held
it a glory to oppose himself against great men, seeking such occasions
ambitiously to show his magnanimity and courage. Finally, they proceeded
against these young Noblemen by course of justice; and their names were
proclaimed, and they cited to appear and to give an account of the action.

The Fathers of these young men were much troubled: who knowing the Cardinals
power and sour disposition, resolved to pacify him by all fair means,
sending to entreat him to have regard unto the youth of their children,
complaining notwithstanding by their letters unto the King of the Cardinals
harsh disposition, whereby Spain was filled with combustions; The Cardinal in
like manner did aggrauate this action unto the King, complaining of the
disobedience and contempt of these Noblemen, who made many assemblies tending
to some great tumult: But in the mean time, they proceeded against them, that
were within Villafratte, whofearing the Viceroyes power, left the place and
dislodged by night. The town was by sentence condemned to be burned, and the
ground to be sowed with salt: And the Earl of Vregna with his son and their
other confederats were convicted of high treason, which sentence was presently
put in execution: The town was burnt to Ashes and seven of the inhabitants
publicly whipped. This severity bred great hatred against the Cardinal. But the
Admiral HENRIQVES coming to MADRID, told him with great mildnes, that he did
himself wrong, and the whole Realm (being Archbishop of Toledo and Primate so
to blemish the honor of the greatest houses of Spain, so well deserving, both
in these public executions and in many bad offices which he had done them with
the King; persuading him for the good of the Realm, and the kings service, to
temper his austere behavior, and to entreat men with more equity, and less
choler. The Cardinal (with a settled countenance) answered, that he had never
sought to win favor of Kings or to maintain his reputation in the world by
doing wrong to any, but had ever indeauored to acquit himself duly, of the
government which had been committed unto him: neither had he done any bad
offices to the king, as many did maliciously publish.

The Duke of Alua's discontent grew upon a suit depending betwixt Don DIEGO,
of Toledo his son, and D. ANTHONY of Estunigea, brother to the Duke of Beiar,
for the Priory of Saint JOHN of Jerusalem. D. ANTHONY, who had it at the first
by resignation from his Uncle The causes of the Duke of Aluas discontents.
the which Pope LEO confirmed with consent of King PHILLIP, and now again
having sewed at Rome, he had won his cause, and gotten letters of execution
from the Pope, who recommended him with other favorable letters to King
CHARLES, who sent him into Spain to Cardinal XIMENES, giving him charge to
sequestrate all the places of the Priory into his hands, commanding the Duke
of Alua and his son to retire their men, and to refer the cause to his
compromise, and if they should refuse then to execute the Kings letters, and
the sentence. The Duke of Alua was loath to dispossess himself, conceiving
that the Cardinal did not affect his cause; And therefore he reicted such
reasonable conditions as he offered unto him; and falling into choler and
rage, he mustred up his friends and forces, thinking to maintain that by Arms
which was not justifieable by law or reason: wherefore the Cardinal, seeing
his furious proceeding, was forced to come to the last remedy, calling together
his legionary bands, as well to guard and fortify the counsel and justice, as
to suppress and disperse the mutinies; of whom they encountered about a
thousand foot and some horse, drawn together by the Duke of Alua, and put them
to rout. The Duke presently saw his own error, employing the favor of his
best friends for his reconcilement; submitting himself unto the Cardinal, into
whose hands he yielded up the Priory: which controversy was after ended in
friendly manner.

This year the Inhabitants of Algier (a Town in Afric) being much afflicted
by the dissension of two brethren Moors, who contended for the Signory, they
had called unto them FLORVSCO BARBAROVSSE, a famous Pirat, to defend their
liberties; who having seized upon Algier attempted by the Spaniards.
that City, fit for theft and Piracies, he made himself king of Algiere,
having slain CELIM the lawful Prince, and then he began to spoil the coasts
of Spain, and to tyrannize over the petty Kings of Afric, of his own sect,
seeking to dispossess ALEVZEVEN, King of Tunis; whom having slain, he forced
IAHIA his son to fly into Spain, who imparting his miseries to Cardinal
XIMENES, entreated him to assist him in the recovery of his Kingdom. The
Cardinal caused men to be levied to send against this Pirat BARBAROVSSE,
giving the charge of the Army to DIEGO VERA, a rash and indiscreet man. This
Army, being about eight thousand strong, came near unto Algier in October, the
Moors being advertised, and prepared to hinder his landing. The Town was
manned with very good soldiers Turks, which HORVSCO had brought with him out
of Asia. DIEGO VERA, coming near the Town, divided his Army into four parts,
contrary to advice: for, the Barbarians were in all places stronger than the
Spaniards; so as the whole Christian Army was chased and dispersed with great
slaughter. DIEGO VERA abandoned all, and hid himself with his son among the
rocks till the evening; when as he found a vessel lying at anchor, with which
he returned into Spain, with much disgrace and dishonor; the children
singing, that DIEGO was too weak to wrestle with HORVSCO, who had but one arm.
Cardinal XIMENES made small account of this loss; saying, that by this means
Spain should be purged of a great many of lewd insolent companions.

The Cardinal was much importuned to send a fleet into Flanders to transport
K. CHARLES into Spain: whereupon he prepared a good number of ships, appointing
GOMES of Buiteron A fleet sent into Flanders for king Charles.
for Admiral. He caused the Ports of Biscaie, Asturia and Galieia to be
visited for fear of infection, and victuals with other refreshings to be sent
unto all places where the fleet should arrive: he himself went unto Arando of
Duero, there to attend the Kings coming, having in his company the Infant Don
FERDINAND, Doctor ADRIAN now made Cardinal, and ARMASTOF. Dining at
Boleguillas, a Borough in the mountains, it was thought that he was poisoned;
so as he fell into a lingering consumption. Having dined, he found himself
very ill, the blood coming out at his cares and nails: this suspicion was
augmented by an unknown horseman, who that morning having near unto the
village met with the Provincial Cardinal Ximenes poisoned
MARQVINE and other Monks which went unto the Cardinal, he willed them to make
haste and to advise him not to eat of a great Trout which would be set before
him: for, without doubt it was poisoned. If you arrive, said he, too late, then
care for the health of his soul, for his body will be past recovery. This
message was delivered late to the Cardinal; who answered, that if his
infirmity came of poison, he thought it proceeded from Flanders, and that he
had been infected by the eyes in reading of a Letter which came from that
Country; since which time he had not been well.

Being in this estate, he caused himself to be carried to Aranda, and in the
mean time, the A tumult (...)Vailledolit.
town of Vailledolit fell into a new tumult, the people having a conceit, that
the report of the kings coming was but counterfeit, and that this great
preparation, was to send the infant Don FERDINAND into Flanders; so as Spain
remaining destitute of her Princes, being in the hands of an old Monk, half
rotten and near his end, must of necessity be ruined by homebred seditions,
or become a prey to foreign Nations: But to pacify this mutiny, and to assure
them of the kings coming, the Cardinal sent unto them, and satisfied them:
The Cardinal had resolved Resoemation of Don Ferdina^ds house by the cardinal.
to do one act more which he held necessary, but was full of envy, and that
was to reform the Infant Don FERDINAND'S house, and to take from him those
which had bred him up and served him, either for some private dislikes, or for
some other considerations which he pretended, wherewith he acquainted the King,
who a little before his coming, sent his Letters of command to the Cardinal,
to discharge D. PEDRO NVGNES of Guzman, the Infants Governor; D. ALVARO OFORIO
bishop of Astorga his Schoolmasters; Don GONZALO of Guzman his chamberlain,
and SANCHO de Puredes his steward, and to send them home to their houses,
letting them know that the King was well satisfied with their good services;
but their ages required rest, referring the rest of the Infants house to the
Cardinals disposition.

The secret of this packet was divulged before it came to the Cardinals hands,
which bred a great alteration in the Infants house, they giving the Infant to
understand that this was a practice of the Cardinals, to debase him and keep
him under; whereupon he came in choler the next day to the covent of Aguillera,
where the Cardinal lay sick of his infirmity, to whom he complained even with
tears, of the wrong he did him; seeking without any just cause to deprive him
of such faithful servants, and therewithal he entreated him and coniured him,
by Entreaty of the Infant D. Ferdinand to the Cardinal.
the memory of Queen ISABEL, not to suffer such an indignity to be done him, as
to take from him such worthy personages which had attended him so faithfully,
and now to see them so ignominiously disgraced.

The Cardinal sought by mild words, to pacify the incensed courage of this
Prince, laying before him the King his brothers pleasure, which tended to his
advancement, if he would show himself obedient and tractable; he told him that
he loved him dearly, and that he had no will to wrong him: he confessed that
his care for the good of his servants was honorable, but he must withal know,
that the king his brother was dearer unto him: and therefore he exhorted him,
that laying aside those passions which his servants had bred in him, he should
wholly rely upon him who was the greatest king in Christendom, against whose
will it was neither safe, nor fit for him to oppose himself; using many other
reasons to the like effect; But the young Prince was not so satisfied, but
answered the Cardinal with these words: Seeing you are resolved to ruin me
and mine, I must of necessity find means to preserve our selves. The
Cardinal being touched at these words; Do (said he) what you please, but I
swear by the life of king CHARLES your brother, that tomorrow shall not pass,
before his commandments Speech of Cardinal Ximenes to the Infant D. Ferdinand
be executed, the which it behooues you to obey before all other; yea, though
all Spain had conspired to hinder it. Hereupon the Infant went from the
Cardinal without any show of perturbation, and so returned to Aranda, where he
found himself with the Town and all the approaches, guarded by two Captains
of the Guard, and their troops, which bred great discontent in the Infant, but
he could not help it, nor avoid the removing of his servants, as you may read
at large in the History of Spain.

King CHARLES having taken shipping in Flanders in the beginning of September,
arrived about the end of that month, upon an uneasy coast of the Asturies, a
Rockie place and not Arrival of K. Charles at the Asturies.
frequented; The mountain-people having retired their wives and children into
the Rocks, betook them to their Arms, and came down in troops to take the
Seashore, thinking there had been some enemies; which the king perceiving, he
caused his royal Standard to be advanced, that he might be known, and the
Asturians discovering the arms, knew it was their king; so as laying down
their weapons, they came to salute him upon their knees, accompanying him to
Villa Viciense; where he rested himself after his travel by Sea, being
accompanied by his sister D. LEONARA then Queen of Portugal.

The Cardinal, who lay in his covent very sick, was so much joyed, at the
news of the kings coming, as he left his bed and sang Mass; and the
Flemmings, on the other side, were as much discontented, wishing him dead
before the king should confer with him, for they knew well that he sought to
chase them from the Council, and from the managing of all affairs: Practices
of the Flemmish courtiers to keep the king from seeing of the Cardinal.
wherefore they were very inquisitiue of his life, and practiced delays to
stay the King upon the way, wishing he were dead before the King should see
him: There were diverse devices to have drawn the king first into Arragon,
which the Cardinal hindered, humbly beseeching him not to determine any thing
touching his public or private affairs, before he had given him a full
information of the estate of his Kingdom: and he also counseled him to send
Don FERDINAND his brother as soon as might be into Germany to the Emperor his
grandfather, holding it the best course both for his own affairs and the good
of the Infant, and to be a means that all or the greatest part of MAXIMILIANS
estates might be conferred upon him, seeing that he was King and Lord of so
many Realms and rich estates. This advice was followed after the Cardinals
death: but it seems the Flemings had other designs; for, the Lord of Cheures
sought to keep him under, and would have had him give water to the King his
brother; who (being discontented to see his brother so debase himself) said,
that XIMENES counsel was better: whereupon he ordained, that the Infant should
be conducted into Germany.

The King, upon his way toward Vailledolit, had a desire to go and visit his
mother Queen JOAN at Tordesillas; writing the causes which moved him thereto to
the Cardinal and to his brother D. FERDINAND: his resolution seemed full of
piety; but, considering the indisposition King Charles visits his mother
of this Princess, it was not needful to confer so long with her of
affairs and matters as he did.

The Court coming to Vailledolit, the Cardinal found that his credit began to
decay, and that he was not so respected in the making of his lodging as he
ought to have been, wherein he thought himself to have been disgraced; saying,
that it was a poor recompense after so much Sight of the Cardinals disgrace.
toil and sweat to receive a wrong, in the place of a reward, blaming the
Kings officers, who were ignorant of the customs of Spain: But the receipt of
the kings Letters touched him nearer, by which he was commanded to attend him
at Moiados, upon the way to Tordesillas, where he desired to have his advice
touching the affairs of his Realm and house, to the end he might discharge
him of so great a burden, and suffer him to retire to his own house to live
in rest, where God would reward him for the many good offices he had done to
the Realm, which he thought was not in the power of man to do, and that for
his part, he would ever remember it, The Death of Cardinal Ximenes.
and honor him as his Father. He conceived so great a grief upon the receipt
of these Letters, to see himself kept back, and, in a manner, disgraced, as
within few hours after he died.

The King having called the estates of Castile to Vailledolit, he was there
proclaimed king of Castile, Toledo, Granado, and other Provinces depending in
Spain, where he received and took Coronation of King Charles the first of
that name.
the oath after the accustomed manner: at which there was some question made by
some of the Grenades, for that Queen IOANE his mother was yet living, but
notwithstanding they proceeded. Having there ordained some things touching the
Government of Castile, he went into Arragon to have the like assembly called
and solemnly performed in regard of those countries and provinces: during his
abode there, he had news of the death of the Emperor MAXIMILIAN: for which
great dignity, there were two great Princes in competition; FRANCIS the Death
of Maximilian, and 2. concurrants for the Empire.
First, King of France; and CHARLES King of Spain: In the beginning they
proceeded with great modesty, each of them laboring by his Authority and
means to draw the Electors unto his side.

The King of Spain thought the Empire did belong unto him by right, as having
continued by a long succession in the house of Austria, and that it had not
been the custom to deprive the descendents of the dead, without apparent cause
of disability, having diverse other reasons to feed his hopes to attain unto
the Empire.

The French King on the other side had no less hopes, grounded upon an opinion
he had to purchase the Electors voices by money, whereof some were his ancient
friends and pensioners, to which enterprise they encouraged him, as a matter
easy to effect: He also knew well that it was very grievous to many great
houses in Germany, who held themselves capable of so great a dignity, to see
the Empire continue so long in one house, and become as it were hereditary; and
that they might call that Election a succession, which durst not leave the next
descendents of the deceased Emperor. These humors of the Germane Princes made
him hope, that the iealousies among them might help his cause.

The Electors were assembled at Franckford to agree upon their election. The
French King was still abused by the promises of the Marquess of Brandenburgh,
who was drawn thereunto by offers of great sums of money, for the which he
did not only bind himself to give his voice: but he also promised that his
brother, the Archbishop of Mentz should do the like; and the French King was
in hope that some other of the Electors were well affected to his party. But
the Germane people had no will to see the Imperial dignity transferred to a
stranger, entreating The German^, lovers of their countries.
the Pope that he would not favor any one in that election, that were not of
the Germane Nation; yet in show he seemed to favor the French King, but in his
heart he desired not to have either of them chosen Emperor, fearing their
great power, but labored to cause some other of the German Princes to be
elected. During all these practices and the Electors differences about the
election, they were advertised of an Army put to field by the King of Spain
(who was more ready to levy Soldiers with his money then to give it to the
Electors) which Army drawing near to Franckford upon color to bridle such as
should offer to force the Election gate courage to those Electors which
favored his cause, and drew such as stood doubtful unto them. The Marquess of
Brandenburgh who stood for the French King, was so amazed, as despairing of the
other Electors, and fearing the hatred of the whole nation, he durst not
discover his intention; so as coming to the act of Election, CHARLES of
Austria King of Spain was chosen Emperor by four of the Electors, only the
Archbishop of Treues gave his voice Charles the Fifth chosen Emperor.
for the Marquess of Brandenburgh who was also concurrent in the Election for
himself.

This election did much trouble the French king, so as many conceived that
these two young Princes, between whom there were so many causes of jealousy
and debate, upon sundry pretentions, would in the end grow to some great and
dangerous war, as you shall hereafter understand. King CHARLES being at
Barcelona, he had news of his election to the Empire of Germany, by an
Embassage sent from the Electors, whereupon he went to make preparation for his
journey, and to set order for the affairs of Castile, which were very
confused. But he was forced to make haste and to leave many things undecided,
being advertised of the conspiracies and leagues betwixt the towns and
Noblemen of the Realm, for the defense of the privileges of the country,
against the greediness of the flemish Counselors. The king was loath to be
engaged in the Spanish mutinies with whose humors he was not yet acquainted:
wherefore he embarked suddenly at the Groyne, leaving for governors Cardinal
ADRIAN and the Constable VELASCO, with whom afterward he joined FREDERICK,
HENRIQVES great Admiral of Castile: And so passing by sea with a great fleet
he landed in England, to see king HENRY the Eightth, with whom he was in good
correspondence, where he was very honorably entertained for some days, and
then passed over into the Low countries, from whence he went with an honorable
train to Aix, where he made his entry with all the Princes Electors, and many
other Princes Ambassadors and Noblemen, so as some write there were in the
train 15000 horse, and there he received the first Imperial, crown of Iron.

In the mean time the combustions increased daily in Castile, many towns and
Noblemen complaining of the breach of the laws and privileges of the Realm,
and of the bad government of the Flemish Lords, most of the chief towns fell
to Arms and actual rebellion, having Civil wars in Castile.
joined with diverse Noblemen and Knights and committing all sorts of riots and
insolences, refusing to obey the Kings officers, but of themselves they set
down a form of government, which was made by the general multitude, and they
called it, la Santa Iunta. The governors seeing this general revolt, levied
forces to suppress the rebels, in the which there were many exploits don,
which I omit. But in the end the two Armies met near to Villa Lara, where the
rebels were defeated, and thereby al tumults pacified, and the confiderate
cities labored to recover their former favor. The Bishop of Zamorra one of the
chief of the confederates was taken and strangled, and some other condemned to
lose their heads: and thus their civil wars ended, which grew by the excess
and violent government of the Flemings.

During this rebellion in Castile, the governors being weak, were forced to
draw the garrisons out of Navarre, and to draw away some of the ordinance out
of Pampelona, whereupon the Navarre entered by the French.
Lord of Asperant brother to the Lord of Lautrech, with some French well
affected to HENRY of Albret, the right heir of that Realm, entered the
country and took some places, and in the end was received into Pampelona: yet
being abandoned by the Duke of Nagera, who was Viceroy, and finding no
resistance in the whole Country, during the civil wars, he unadvisedly past
the river of Ebro and laid siege to Logrogna: but the Governors having gotten
the victory at Villa Lora, marched toward him, and forced him to repasse the
river, following the French until the Armies came near to Pampelona, where
the Lord of Asperant resolved to hazard a battle and would not attend such
forces as were to join with them the next day, in the which the French were
defeated, and the General taken prisoner; whereupon the whole country of
Navarre was easily recovered by the Castilians. The Lord of Asperans and the
French defeated in Navarre.


The heart burning betwixt the Emperor and the French King began now to
discover it self, for the Duke of Bouillon (having put himself under the
protection of the French) sent to defy the Emperor being at a Diet at Worms,
and his son the Lord of Florenges having levied some Duke of Bouillon d^est
the Emperor.
forces in France, went to besiege a small town in Luxenburg, but the king of
England dissuaded the French King, from entering into quarrel upon so small a
subject; there was nothing done, and the Duke of Bouillon dismissed his Army:
but the Emperor raised forces, and took diverse places and towns from the Duke,
who finding himself too weak obtained a Truce for six weeks. After the
Emperors coronation the first act he did, was to suppress, if he could by mild
means, the doctrine preached by LVTHER the which increased much in Germany. To
this end, and for some oath rcauses of importance concerning the Empire, he
caused the Princes and estates to assemble at Worms, whither LVTHER came,
having a pasport, and was heard disputing against Doctor ECKIVS and diverse
others, but there followed small fruits of this A Diet at Worms.
Diet.

King FRANCIS being much discontented with the overthrow of the Lord of
Asperants army, he sent the Lord of Bonguet admiral of France with a greater
power, who entered by Guipuscoa and besieged FONTARRABI the which after some
days he took by composition, and manned it with a garrison of 3000 Gascoines,
under the command of the Earl of LVDE: and about Fontarrabi taken by the
French.
the same time the Viceroy of Navarre received commandment from the Emperor,
to ruin all the walled Towns and forces of Navarre, to prevent another
rebellion, the which was executed but at Pampalona and some few other places.
Both these great Princes in like manner were in Arms upon the frontiers of
France and Burgundy, where there were diverse exploits done but of no great
moment.

This year the Emperor hearing of the alterations which had been in Spain
against the governors; having consulted with the Princes Electors he disposed
of his affairs there and of the Netherlands, and took shipping at Flushing,
who finding a prosperous wind he touched in England where he concluded an
alliance with King HENRY the Eightth, to marry with The ^mperours second
voyage into Spain.
MARY his daughter (being then but seven years old) when she should come to
age but it succeeded not, from whence he sailed into Spain and arrived at S.
Ander the 25 of July. The Emperor being gone into Spain there fell out great
combustions in Germany, the Pesants taking Arms against the Nobility, who
being assembled in great numbers, made spoil of religious houses, and
committed a thousand insolences having no subject, but only abused by
certain false preachers, who said, they had a revelation from God, that they
should root out that tyrannous Nobility and enjoy their full liberty; but they
were defeated, and put to rout by the Count Palatine, the Archbishop of Mentz,
and some others. Their leader was publicly The peasants war in Germany.
executed, and those poor wretches that escaped from the battle, returned
home to their houses.

The Emperor being in Spain, had sent an Army to infest FONTARRABIE: the
Earl of LVDE the governor wanting things necessary for the defense of a
town of war, which attended a siege hourly, he advertised the king his
master, entreating him to relieve him and to send another to take the charge:
whereupon the Marshall CHABANES came and victualled Fonbarraby taken by the
Emperor.
the town, and changed the garrison, leaving captain FRAVGET, in the place of
the Earl of LVDE, and the next year 1524 the Emperor sent an Army to besiege
it, and FRAVGET having neither want of victuals nor endured an assault,
yielded the town by composition, for the which he was degraded of his
Nobility, upon a scaffold in the city of Lions. In the mean time the wars
began to grow hot in Italy, whereas the Pope and the Emperor had made a secret
league against the French King, seeking first to supplant him in the Duchey of
Milan by secret practices, and then by open Arms, where after many exploits
done in the end the Imperialists took the city of Milan. After with the
Swissers under the French Kings pay, and M^lan taken by the Imperialists.
under the command of the Lord of Lautre their General, would needs go and
change the Imperialists at Bicocca where they were repulst, yet they retired in
good order with their Artillery, the enemy not daring to pursue them; in which
conflict the Swissers lost 3000 of their best The incoun^ of Bicocca.
men and 22 Captains: after which they returned home; and the French, into
France. The lord of Lautrec having given order for the defense of Cremona,
Genoa, and some other Towns in Lombardy, in the mean time the Emperor made a
league with the Venecians: the Articles were, that between the Emperor
FERDINAND Duke of Austria, and FRANCIS SFORZA A league between the E^peror, and
Venecians.
Duke of Milan, on the one part, and the Senate of Venice on the other, there
should be a perpetual peace and league, with diverse other Articles for the
joint preservation of their estates. And in August following there was another
league concluded at Rome betwixt the Pope, the Emperor, the King of England,
the Archduke of Austria, the Duke of Milan, the Cardinal of Medicis, together
with the state of Florence, and the Genoais; where it was concluded, that this
league should continue during the confederates lives, and a year after the
death of any of them, referuing place for any other to come in, so as they were
admitted by the Pope, the Emperor, and the King of England: the rest of the
Articles you may read at large in GVICHARDIN.

The French King was nothing danted with these leagues, nor the union of so
many Princes; The French King prepares to go into Italy.
who being come to Lions, resolved to go in person with a great Army into
Italy. His Army passed the mountains: but the King was staid by the
conspiracy of the Duke of Bourbon; who, being the greatest officer of the
kingdom, and of a noble Family, seeing himself in some disgrace, made a
league with the Emperor and the king of England, by which it was agreed, that
as soon as the king should have passed the Alps, he should enter Burgundy
with twenty thousand Foot; But this could not be brought to pass, before it
was discovered to the King being at Lions, who sent to apprehend him, but he
was fled away in a disguised habit. This accident of importance stayed the king
from his intended journey; who keeping certain troops about him prepared for
the new war, he sent the Lord of Boniuett Admiral of France, into Italy,
with one thousand eight hundred Lances, and thirty one thousand Foot, of
several Nations, with which he drew near to the confines of the Duchy of
Milan, where he took some Towns, but attempted Milan in vain.

The Duke of Bourbon, not able to do the Emperor any service in Burgundy, for
want of money to pay his Lance-knights, retired to Milan, where the Emperor
(having no will he should pass into Spain, to marry his sister the widow
Queen of Portugal) sent to entreat him that he would stay there, giving him
the title of his Lieutenant general in Italy; the Emperors affairs were not
successful upon the coasts of of Spain, for having a great desire to pass
in person into France, and thither to transport the wars, having to that end
sent his Army under the The Emperos design to go into France made frustrate.
Pirenean hills, the which had taken Doluaterra: But his designs were greater
then his power, being unable for want of money to entertain such great forces
as were necessary for such an enterprise: for which cause he could not draw his
Army together before the later end of the year, which bred him great
difficulties in that cold season, for which consideration together with the
want of victuals he was forced to dissolve his Army.

But to return to Italy, the Emperors Army was now on foot, under the leading
of the Duke of Milan, the Duke of Bourbon, the Viceroy of Naples, and the
Marquess of Pesquera; what success these two Armies had, I leave to the
relation of GVICHARDINE: part of this Army was sent in France, under the Duke
of Bourbon, and the Marquess of Pesquiera, they entered The duke of Bourbon
enters into Prouence with an Army.
Prouence and took Aix, the chief City of that Province, with some other
towns. The Duke of Bourbon would gladly have passed the river of Rhosne, and
entered farther into France, giving diverse reasons for his advice: But the
Marquess and the Spaniards desired rather to take Marseilles a haven of the
Sea, lying very commodious for the Emperors passage out of Spane, into Italy,
the which they went to besiege, lying forty days before it; but despairing to
be able to take it, and fearing some great danger if the King should approach,
they raised their siege: the king being comn to Auinion with his whole Army,
and marched with all speed toward Marseilles; the French King; seeing a fair
occasion offered him for the recovery of the Duchy of Milan; having a puissant
Army, and his enemies being weak, he resolved to embrace the occasion,
wherewith he acquainted his Captains; saying, I have resolved to pass in
person into Italy, The Frenck king resolves to pass the mountains and follow
the enemy.
and whosoever shall advise me to the contrary shall much displease me. Let
every man therefore look carefully to his charge, for God is a lover of
justice, and the rashness of our enemies, has at last laid open a means for
us to recover that, which has been violently taken from us.

After which he caused the Army to march immediately, shunning to meet with the
Lady Regent his mother, who came to persuade him not to pass the mountains in
person: But he went on, and encamped with his Army before Pauia (having first
taken the City of Milan) during which time, the Pope did mediat a Peace betwixt
those two great Princes, but it took no effect.

The French King continued still his siege before Pauia which was reduced to
exremity, but the Imperialists drew all their forces together to relieve it:
and the Armies lying near together, they joined battle upon the four and
twentieth day of February, where the French Army The battle of Paui^ where the
French king was taken prisoner.
was overthrown; and King FRANCIS, fighting valiantly and long in the midst
of the battle, had his horse slain under him, and himself lightly hurt in
the face and the hand, being fallen to the ground, he was taken prisoner by
five soldiers who knew him not: But the Viceroy chancing to come, he
discovered himself unto him, who gave him his hand with great reverence, and
received him prisoner in the Emperors name. In this overthrow there were many
Princes and Noblemen of France slain and taken prisoners, the particularities
whereof I omit for breuities sake.

The Emperor being advertised of this overthrow, and of the kings
imprisonment, the news were very pleasing unto him, yet he made no show of
pride for this great success, but carried himself very modestly; For, being
informed of the victory, and receiving Letters of the French Kings own hand,
which were humbly written, rather in the condition of a prisoner then of a
king: He went forthwith to the Church to give God thanks, and the next morning
The Emperors moderation upon the news of the Victory.
received the Sacrament with great devotion, and so went in procession with his
whole Court, but he would not suffer any Bells to be rung, or bonefiers made in
sign of joy; saying, That it was fit to rejoice for victories obtained against
Infidels, and not for those which were gotten against Christians. Whereupon he
called his Council together to advise in what sort he should deal with the
French King, and to what ends he should use the Victory, commanding every one
to deliver his mind freely in his presence: Whereupon the Bishop of Osma, who
was his Confessor, making a grave speech and showing three deliberations which
might be taken, touching the French King; the first to keep him a perpetual
prisoner; the second, to deliver him friendly and brotherly without any other
conditions but such as might settle a perpetual Peace betwixt them; and the
third to deliver him, but to draw as great profit thereby as he could,
concluding that the safest course was to bind the king unto him by a free and
brotherly deliverance. But on the other side the Duke of Alua persuaded the
Emperor to make as great profit of this Victory, as possible he could, whose
advice was applauded by the whole Council without any reply, the which the
Emperor himself also approved: Whereupon there were certain Articles drawn
and sent with all speed unto the King, who rejected them as unreasonable.

The Viceroy doubting of the Kings safe keeping within the Duchy of Milan, he
resolved to transport him to Naples, whereat the King was much grieved: He was
conducted to Genoa, and The french king transported into Spain.
from thence to Portofeio where he should imbarke, but the Viceroy having
certain French Galleys, sent him by the Queen Regent, he changed his advice,
and transported the King into Spain. The Emperor, hearing of his arrival,
gave commandment, that he should be received with great honor in all places
as he passed: what followed during his imprisonment until his delivery, you may
read at large in the French history.

In the year one thousand five hundred twenty six, after many consultations, in
the end was a treaty concluded for the delivery of the French King; but the
Emperor tied him to such The delivery of the French king.
conditions as were very unreasonable: yet he promised upon his oath to observe
them faithfully, having left his two sons in Hostage, and contracted himself
to Queeene ELENOR the Emperors sister. This accord held all the Princes of
Christendom in suspense, for they considered that if he observed the treaty of
Madrid; all Italy being unable to defend it self, would fall into servitude,
but the world was soon satisfied of the French kings intention; For, being
arrived at Bayonne, he was required to ratify the Accord, which he had
promised to do when he came to a free place, but he delayed it with many
excuses: giving the Emperor to understand that before he proceeded to such an
act, it was necessary he should pacify his subjects, who were discontented
with bonds which tended to the diminution of the Crown of France: But
notwithstanding all difficulties he would observe what he had promised;
notwithstanding the Pope and the Venecians sending messengers unto him, he
complained much of the Emperors inhumanity unto him, during his imprisonment,
not using him like a Prince, nor with that commiseration His complaint against
the Emperor.
of his calamity that befitted a Prince. That he had not found him any mildlier
disposed toward others, but perceived by his speeches used at M^drid that he
affected nothing more then how to bring the Church, Italy, and all other
Princes into servitude: and therefore he wished them to be careful of their
own safeties: which if they did, he would concur with them for the common
good, and make a league with them against the Emperor, not that he had any
intent to recover the State of Milan, or to add any thing to his own
greatness, but only by war to recover his children, and assure the liberty
of Italy, seeing the Emperors great covetousness had left him no color to
bind him to observe the treaty: For that both at the first when he was in the
Castle of Pisqueton and afterward in Spain, he had often protested to the
Emperor, by reason of his exorbitant demands, that if through necessity he
were driven to compound upon unjust conditions, or such as were not in his
power to perform, that not only he would not observe them; but holding
himself wronged in that he had forced him to make impossible promises, he
would be revenged if ever occasion were offered, and that he had often told
him, that it was not in the power of a French king, to bind himself to the
alienation of any thing depending of the Crown, without the consent of the
general estates: that the Laws of Christians did not allow, that he which was
taken in war should be detained in perpetual prison, which was a punishment
proper for malefactors, and not for such as had been beaten with the cruelty of
fortune; that all men knew that bonds made by constraint in prison were of no
value; and that the capitulation being of no force, the faith likewise which
was but accessory, and the confirmation of the same, could not be bound; that
by the oath which he had taken at Rhemes at his coronation, he was bound
(according to the custom of other Kings of France) not to alienate the
patrimony of the Crown: and therefore for these reasons he was no less free
than ready to abate the Emperors pride.

The Emperor, growing jealous of the Kings delays for the ratification, sent
one unto him to be certified of his intent, who found him very unwilling to
leave Burgundy; which, being The Emperor sends to the French King touching the
treaty.
very prejudicial to the Crown of France, he said was not in his power to
observe: but desiring much to entertain the amity begun with the Emperor, and
to give perfection to the marriage, he would be contented (observing all other
Articles) to pay him two millions of crowns for the resignation of Burgundy.

The Emperor, hearing this answer, was much troubled in mind, yet he resolved
not to alter any thing touching the restitution of Butgundy, and rather to
accord with the Pope, and to consent to the reintegration of FRANCIS SFORCE;
being more fitting for him to pardon a Prince less than himself, than by
yielding to the will of a powerful Prince, and one that envied his greatness,
to make as it were a confession of fear. But the French King hearing that the
Eimperor would alter nothing touching the Articles of the capitulation, he
presently began to hearken to the treaty of the league, the which was concluded
the tenth of May 1526, between the French King on the one part, the Pope and
the Venecians on the other; that between the Pope, the French King, the
Venecians, and the Duke of Milan (for whom the Pope and the A league concluded
between the Pope, the French King and the Venecians.
Venecians assured their ratification) should be a perpetual league to
restore FRANCIS SFORCE freely to the Duchy of Milan, and the French Kings
children to their liberty; that the league should be signified to the Emperor,
to whom was given power to enter into it within three months, with condition
to deliver the Kings children, receiving a competent ransom, such as the King
of England should arbitrate, and also to leave the whole Duchy of Milan unto
FRANCIS SFORCE, and the other estates of Italy as they were before the last
war began: there were many other Articles touching the managing of this war,
which I leave to GVICHARDINE.

The Army of confederates being in field, they came and sat down before Milan,
and soon retired again without any effect: and in the mean time the poor
Inhabitants of Milan were wonderfully oppressed by the rigor and cruelty of the
Spaniards; and the face of this City appeared very miserable and almost naked
of Inhabitants, many being wasted by the plague, and The miserable estate of
Milan.
many fleeing away daily to avoid the fury of those merciless Spaniards. They
were somewhat revived by the coming of the Duke of Bourbon; persuading
themselves, that seeing he had brought some provision of money, and that the
confederates Camp was retired, their necessities and dangers would decrease,
and they should not be so much oppressed and cruelly handled: furthermore,
they had a conceit, that the Duke (to whom it was said the Emperor had given
the Duchy of Milan) would provide for his own profit, that they should be no
more so miserably afflicted. Wherefore, assembling themselves together, they
came to the Duke, and delivered their grieuances unto him by the mouth of one
of their company, with tears and lamentations. The Duke seemed to be much
grieved for their miseries, promising to do his best to relieve the City,
which had been so much oppressed contrary to the Emperors will and pleasure: he
told them, moreover, that he had brought some provision of money, but not so
much as might content the soldiers; yet if the City would furnish him with
30000 Ducates for the pay of one month, he would cause the Army to retire out
of Milan; assuring them, that he would not break his faith and word, upon
which they might confidently rely; praying God, that, if he failed of his
promise, his head might be taken from his shoulders by the first shot of
Cannon from the enemy: whereupon, the poor Citizens with great difficulty began
to make provision of the money. But the Duke of Bourbon made no reckoning to
keep his word and promise, or at the least it lay not in his power to curb the
pride and insolency of the soldiers.

The Castle of Milan was all this time besieged by the Imperialistes and
reduced to great extremity The Castle of Milan yielded to the Imperialists.
for want of victuals, the confederate army under the command of the Duke,
promising still to relieve them, and they came and planted their Camp within a
mile of Milan: but they delaied the execution so long, as the Duke of Milan was
forced by extremity of hunger, to yield it up unto the Duke of Burbon upon
certain conditions, the which were very ill observed. Provisions of the Emperor
against the confederats.
The Emperor began to fortify himself in Italy against the confederates: he
sent the Viceroy of Naples out of Spain, with 6000 foot, Lanceknights, and
Spaniardes, and he sent directions into Germany for new succors of footmen:
but by reason of the want of money that Leuy came slowely.

After the success of these matters in Italy with diverse events, Ambassadors
came unto the Emperor in September from the Pope, the french king and the
Venecians, to signify unto him the league which they had made; with the
liberty which was left to him to enter, according to the conditions: at which
act the Ambassador of England being present, he delivered a Letter from the
king his master, who persuaded him to enter into the League. The Emperor
having heard their charge, answered, that it agreed not with his dignity, to
enter into a league, made principally against his estate and honor: but having
been always desirous of the universal peace, he made offer to accomplish it
presently if they had sufficient commissions for the same.

This year the Duke of Burbon went out of Milan with part of the Imperial
Army, being 1527.
persuaded by the Duke of Ferrara to address himself to the head, and attempt
Florence, or Rome: and in like manner the Viceroy of Naples, who also had an
Army for the Emperor, was desirous to invade the territories of the Church: the
Duke of Bourbon marched near to Bologna, where he was in great danger of his
life by reason of the mutiny of his soldiers for want of pay: But The Pope
maket an accord with the Imperialists.
the Pope seeing these storms approach, began to faint and to lose all
courage, so as he resolved, to make an accord with some whom the Viceroy had
sent to Rome, to that end: which was, That there should be a surceasing of
Arms for eight months, the Pope paying to the Imperial Army 60000 Ducats;
with diverse other Articles. The Duke of Burbon was persuaded by the Viceroy to
accept of the truce: the which he refused, saying that the Army could not be
stayed but by the advancing of a greater sum of money; so as having no means
to entertain the Army longer without money (for until that day he had carried
them through many difficulties, with fair promises and vain hopes) being
constraind either to try his fortune or to perish, he resolved to march with
all possible speed to surprise Rome: where the reward of the victory would be
inestimable; and he was encouraged with hopes of good success, for that the
Pope had unadvisedly upon the treaty of the accord dismissed his troops. The
Duke of Burbon, leaving his artillery and baggage behind, marched with
incredible speed, and drew near to Rome, the Pope being scarcely advertised of
his coming: what passed within the City, I omit for breuities sake. On the fifth
of May he sent a Trumpet to demand passage through the City of Rome, to go with
his Army to the Realm of Naples: and the next morning at the break of day he
resolved either to die or vanquish, giving a furious assault to the suburbs; in
which he was much favored by a thick mist. At the beginning of the assault,
the Duke of Bourbon, being in The duke of Burbon slain (...)the assault of
Rome.
the head of the troops to draw them on, was shot through the head with a
bullet, and slain. This did nothing daunt the resolution of the soldiers; who
after a little resistance forced the rampires, the Defendants all fleeing away:
whereupon Pope CLEMENT with certain of his Cardinals fled into the Castle; and
the same night the soldiers entered the City, where they Rome taken and sacked
by the Imperialists.
made a pitiful spoil, without respect of person or place, were they holy or
profane. The spoil was infinite for the wealth and riches which they found, and
for the quality and number of the prisoners, who were to redeem themselves with
very great ransomes.

On the sixth of June the Pope compounded with the Imperialists: the conditions
were, that he should pay to the Army 400000 Ducats, that he should deliver up
to the Emperor the Castle Saint Angelo, the Forts of Ostia, Ciuita vecchia, and
of Ciuita Castellano, with the Cities of Parma, Placencia and Modena; that the
Pope, with thirteen Cardinals which were with him, should remain prisoners
within the Castle until the first payment were made of 15000 Ducates, and then
they should go to Naples or to Caietta, and there attend the Emperors pleasure;
that for assurance of the other paiments he should give in hostage certain
special men whom they named. This sack of Rome drew all the soldiers of the
Realm of Naples thither; so as there were at that one Instant 24000 men, who
lived there tumultuously and insolently, and would not depart: but a great
number of them were devoured by the plague.

Matters being treated of before for the preparation of a new war, in April a
league was concluded betwixt the Kings of France and England, upon certain
conditions set down: and it was resolved, that either of them should send
Ambassadors to the Emperor to acquaint him with A league betwixt the kings of
France and England.
the league they had made, and to summon him to restore the Kings children, and
to enter into the peace with honest conditions; which if he would not accept
within one month, then to denounce war.

This league being concluded, the two Kings sent two Gentlemen in post to make
this summons to the Emperor; which act the two Ambassadors performed. And in
like manner, on the fifteenth of May 1527, the French King (having news of the
sack of Rome, and the death of the Duke of Bourbon) contracted with the
Venecians and the Duke of Milan, for the leuying of an Army in Italy. Of this
Army of the league, MONSIEUR de Lautrech was made Captain general; who, having
passed into Italy, took Genoa and Alexandria, and sacked Pauia. After which he
was importuned by the Pope to advance with his Army: whereupon the
Imperialists, fearing his descent into the Realm of Naples, which they were of
necessity to defend, made an accord with the Pope. The Articles were, that the
Pope should make no enterprise against the Accord betwixt the pope and the
Emperors agents
Emperor, either in Milan, or the Kingdom of Naples; that he should grant him
a Croisade in Spain, and a Tenth of all the Clergy-reuenues in those Realms;
that he should leave in the Emperors hands (for assurance of the observation)
Ostia, Ciuita vecchia, Ciuita Castellana, and the Castle of Furlie, and give
for hostages his nephews, HIPPOLITO and ALEXANDER; that he should pay to the
Lance-Knights 67000 Ducats, and to the Spaniards 35000: which being performed,
they should release him with all his Cardinals: and they should go out of
Rome, and the Castle; conuaying the Pope in safety to Oruietta, Spoleto or
Perousa, until the rest of their money were paid.

The night before the tenth of December, which was appointed for the Popes
departure, he fearing that some sinister accident might happen unto him, stole,
in the closing of the evening, secretly out of the Castle in the habit of a
merchant; being attended by JEWS de Gonzaga, who was in the Emperors pay, and
conducted him safely to Oruietta: from whence he wrote a Letter to MONSIEUR de
Lautrec, thanking him for that which he had done touching his delivery.

Most part of the former year there had been treating of a peace betwixt the
Emperor and the Kings of France and England; and taking no effect, the
Ambassadors being retired, their Heralds 1528 Answer made by the emperor to the
French King.
came to denounce war against the Emperor: whereto (as some write) he made
this answer, that the French King could not denounce war against him being his
prisoner, although he were at liberty, having given his sons for hostages: if
he could not observe his promise which he had solemnly sworn, being hindered by
his subjects, he should return again to prison; and that he could not by the
law of Nations, being not yet freed from his oath, denounce war against him:
and GVICHARDINE writes, that he told some of the Kings ministers, that he
would end all quarrels with the French King by single combat of both their
persons, and that he had dealt villanously and cowardly with him in falsifying
his faith. The King, hearing heerof, held it a dishonor to pass it over in
silence: and therefore on the twentieth of March, in a great assembly of all his
Princes, all the Ambassadors and his whole Court, calling for (...)the Emperors
Ambassador, after some speeches he desired him to carry a Letter and deliver a
message to the Emperor from him of this tenor, that whereas the Emperor had The
French K. gives the Emperor the ly.
told his Herald that he had falsified his faith, he had spoken an untruth; and
that as often as he had spoken it, so often he had lied; and not to defer
the trial of their quarrels, that he should assign him the place where they
might together perform the combat. The Ambassador refusing to carry this
Letter or deliver the message, told him he would signify as much to the
Emperor by an Herald: and although he were not ignorant that he had spoken
against the honor of his brother the King of England, yet he would say
nothing therein, knowing that the King was well able to defend himself: but if
through the indisposition of his body he had any lawful impediment, he offered
to adventure his body for him. But not many days after, the King of England
gave him the like defiance with the same solemnities. The Army of the league
under the command of Monsieur de Lautrec their General, entered into the Realm
of Naples, being still followed by the Imperial Army, cutting off their
victuals: but in the end of April 1528 Naples besieged.
he came to Naples, which he resolved to besiege both by sea and land; where in
the beginning there was a great fight at sea between PHILIP DORIA who served
the French, and the Imperialists; in which Don HVGO de Monarda Viceroy of
Naples, with above 1000 Spaniards, were slain, and many Noblemen and others
taken prisoners. The siege of Naples proved very The Spaniards defeated at sea.
fatal for the French: for, ANDREW DORIA with his galleys left the Kings
service, and fell to the Emperor, whose Army was fortified with new forces. The
French Army was distressed for victuals, and much infected with the plague,
whereof many great Commanders and Captains died, and in the end Monsieur de
Lautrec the General himself; which was the overthrow Death of M^ns. de La^rec.
of the French Army in the kingdom of Naples, having as bad success in
Lombardy under the command of Monsieur de S. Pol, who was overthrown and taken
prisoner by ANTHONY De Leua, at Lauidriano. These many crosses caused the
French King willingly to give ear to a treaty of peace, the which was debated
at Cambray in the year 1530 by JEWS of Sauoy, the French Kings mother, and
MARGARET of Austria the Emperors Aunt, where after much debating the two
Princes were reconciled; by the which the Infants of France were to be
delivered in regard of two millions and 500000 crowns, paiable at several
times, whereof part was in discharge of the Emperor to the King of England,
that the King should renounce The Emperor makes a peace at Cambray with the
French king.
the Sovereignty of Flanders, and Artois, and his pretentions to the Duchy of
Milan and Naples, with diverse other Articles which did not hold. During the
negotiation at Cambraye, the Emperor passed into Italy with great forces,
which amazed all the States of Italy: he landed at Genoa, and went to Bologna,
whereas Pope CLEMENT attended him and received him with great honor, Coronation
of the Emperor at Bologna.
and lodged him in the same palace with him, where by their outward
demonstrations they seemed to have been always in great amity. There he
received the imperial Crowns, one of Iron, which the Emperors have bin
accustomed to receive at Milan, and the other of Gold which he should have
taken at Rome: and during his abode there, by the Popes mediation, the
Venetians, and the Duke of Milan, upon certain conditions, were reconciled to
the Emperor, who restored to FRANCIS SFORCE, Milan, with the whole Duchy: from
whence he passed into Germany, to an Imperial Diet which was held at
Ausbourge, where assisted FERDINAND King of Hungary his brother, with the
Princes of the Empire. There the Protestant Princes, Noblemen, and Imperial
towns besought the Emperor to hear the confession of their doctrine, where
were many disputations by the Doctors on both sides: where the Protestants
seeing they could not prevail any thing, made a protestation that they could
not contribute to the wars against the Turk who threatened to besiege Viena:
After which, King Ferdinand chosen King of the Romans.
FERDINAND was chosen King of the Romans, with whom the Emperor went to Aix
where he was solemnly crowned, in January 1531. And from thence the Emperor
went into the Low countries, where he made a very severe Edict against them of
the reformed religion; and then he returned into Germany and went with his
brother FERDINAND to a Diet at Ratisbon, where the Council of Ausbourg was
allowed until a Council were called: and so a peace was concluded in Germany,
upon certain Articles; so as the Protestants for their parts, being seven A
peace betwixt the Emperor and the Protestants in Germany.
Princes and 24 towns, offered obedience to the Emperor, and promised him
succors against the Turk.

This treaty was ratified by the Emperor the second of August 1532, commanding
the Imperial chamber and all other Judges to obey it. The Emperor leaving
Germany returned into Italy, and had an enteruiew with the Pope at Bologna, in
show to treat of a general Council, which was nothing pleasing unto the Pope:
but the chief end was, to make a league between A league betwixt the Pope and
the Emperor.
them and the other Potentates of Italy, for the assurance of their estates
against the enterprises of the French: which done, the Emperor returned to
Genoa and from thence passed into Spain.

The Emperor being in Spain, he was solicited by MVLEY HASCEN King of Tunis
who had been dispossessed by HARADIN BARBAROVS^E, to restore him to his Realm,
promising Muly Hascen restored by the Emperor.
to hold it of the Crown of Spain. This occasion was willingly embraced, as
necessary for the good of Christendom, and very honorable for the Emperor in
particular. Having resolved upon this enterprise, he advertised all Christian
Princes, inuiting them to contribute men, money and ships to this war, whither
he would go in person: the Rendez vous was in Sardinia, The Emperors forces
going to Tunis.
where he shipped his Army being near 40000 men, with the which he landed
happily within six miles of Tunis: he first assaulted Gouletta which was a
strong Fort set upon the mouth of the lake, the which was taken by assault, in
which there were slain in fighting or in flying away above 1500 Turks and all
BARBAROVSSES ordinance and Galleys taken. There was great Go^letta taken by the
Empero.
consultation touching the enterprise of Tunis, which some held difficult and
others made it easy. It is written that BARBAROVSSE being much grieved for the
loss of Gouletta was once in mind to have slain all the Christian slaves:
from which cruel resolution he was diuerted by some, showing him that so foul
a fact would not only blemish his name perpetually, but bring him in disgrace
with SOLIMAN, who was a generous Prince, and hated all such base actions, as to
kill people imprisoned which could not offend him. The Emperor marched with
his Army toward Tunis, and BARBAROVSSE came forth of the city in show to give
him battle, having (as some write) twenty thousand horse, 100000 foot, Moors
and Arabians, with 7000 Turks on whom he did chiefly rely. The two Armies
drawing near, the charge began: Battle between the Christians and
Barbarousse at Tunis.
but the Barbarians upon the first charge, fled away basely, neither did
BARBAROVSSE show any courage that day, but fled speedily to the City, where the
slaughter in this battle was not great, the Barbarians flying presently.
BARBAROVSSE being in Tunis entered into a new resolution to murder the Christian
slaves, which moved two Renegados (much favored by him) to campassion, who
opened the prison doors to these wrethes, who (as some write) were 10000: and
they having broken their chains, got staves and such other weapons and became
Christian slaves seize upon the Castle of Tunis.
masters of the Castle, driving away those few Turks which were left there in
guarde, seizing upon the treasure, victuals and Arms which BARBAROVSSE had
left there, who posted to the Castle seeking to be let in; but they chased him
away with reproaches. This happened the day after the battle, when as those
slaves made sign unto the Emperor to approach, but by reason of the distance
they could not be seen: yet the Emperor finding there was some alteration sent
to discover it. In the mean time BARBAROVSSE fearing the inconstancy of his
Moors, left the city, and went toward Bona with his 7000 Turks: the
Christian Army marching toward Tunis, they were met by Ambassadors from the
city, who offered to yield unto the Emperor upon what conditions he would
prescribe, so as he would secure them from sack, the which was granted: But
soon after the Emperors entrance the Spaniards and Germans fell to spoil and
kill, committing all acts of hostility. After all this MVLI HASCEN was restored
to his kingdom by the Emperor, upon certain Articles set down, doing him
homage: and then the Emperor dismissing part of his Army from Gouletta he
returned with the The Emperor returns into Sicily.
rest into Sicily, and so came to Naples.

The Emperor being returned to Naples there began a new war betwixt him and
the French king, for the Duke of Sauoy brother in law to the Emperor, whom the
French sought to dispossess of his estate. The Emperor consulted with his
captains of the manner how he should begin this war, whether he should stay in
Piemont or pass presently into Prouence: where after diverse opinions it was
concluded to invade Prouence; for the which enterprise he made preparation of a
mighty Army, having (as some write) 24000 Germans, 14000 The Emperors passage
into Prouence.
Spaniards, 12000 Italians and 5000 horse, with which he marched into Prouence,
where he attempted Marselles in vain, neither did he any thing in that voyage
worth the memory, but was forced to retire with his Army with great loss and
dishonor, the particularities you may read at large in the French history.
After the Emperors retraite out of France the war being still hot in
Piemont, Pope PAVL considering what miseries it brought unto Christendom, and
foreseeing the ruin of Italy if it continued, he labored an enteruiew of these
two Princes and himself An enteruiew betwixt the Pope, Emperor, and French
King at Nice.
at Nice, where they could not be reconciled, there being a truce only for
ten years concluded.

The Emperor returning toward Spain, was stayed by foul weather about
Marselles, where the King sent to entreat him to enter and to rest himself
until the wind were fair; for which he gave him thanks, letting him
understand, that he desired they might meet at Aigues mortes: whereupon the
king went thither from Auignon; where the Emperor landed, and dined The
Emperor and French king met at Ague^mortes.
with the king, and he afterward entered confidently into the Emperors Galley
where they conferred long together, and parted with great shows of friendship.

In the yeeare 1539. the Ganthois in the County of Flanders began to mutine:
the Companies of Trades and occupations, assembled in their several Halls, and
then went to Arms, seeking to extort many things from the great Bailiffe, and
the Magistrates of the Town; they committed many to prison, and one they
publicly beheaded of their own authority. The Emperor hearing of this
rebellion, (upon the French Kings word and safe conduct) he posted The Emperor
passes through France to suppress the Ganth^is.
from Spain, to come by land, into the Netherlands through France, The Prince
Dolphin and the Duke of Orleans, were ready to receive him at the foot of the
Pyrenian mountains, who conducted him to Paris, being in great state, in all
the towns where he passed: approaching near unto Paris the King met him
having a godly train of Princes, Noblemen, and Gentlemen; and being come to
the Loure both the King and Queen ELENOR his sister, gave him a very Royal
reception, from whence he was conducted to Valencienes in Henalt: and from
thence he went to Brussels, where hearing many complaints of the Ganthois
rebellion, he went thither with 4000 men, where coming near the town the
Magistrates met him, and brought him into the town with great honor. Being
duly informed of all matters, he caused many Burgesses to be apprehended: and
their process being made, there were nine of the The Ganthois rebellion
punished.
chief beheaded, and the inhabitants were forbidden to carry knives, unless
the points were broken: and the better to keep the town in awe, the Emperor
caused a strong cittadell to be built; their privileges were taken away, and
many other indignities were done them, which I forbear to relate.

The wars continued hot betwixt the Emperor and the French King, who had
entered Brabant, and spoiled the Country until they came to Antwerp, being
assisted by the troops of The French enter into Brabant.
the Duke of Guelders. The Emperor having settled his affairs in the
Netherlands, he went to Ratisbone, where he had appointed an Imperial Diet, as
well to provide for the war against the Turk, as to bring the Protestants
under the obedience of the Church of Rome: and under the color of Religion, he
thought to stay the French King from making war (being much incensed, for
that his Ambassadors had been murdered going to Venice) by undertaking the
Conquest of Algier; for which attempt he assembled his Forces, rejecting The
Emperors voyage to Algier.
the wise counsel of his best Captains, who advised him to defer the
enterprise until the Spring following: but the enterprise proved very fatal;
for the Army was not only annoied by Land by the Barbarians, but his Fleet was
miserably torn and spoiled at Sea by Tempest, whereby the Army was driven to
great extremity for want of victuals, and the Emperor forced to retire,
embarking his Army in those few ships and galleys that remained; His return
from that miserable attempt.
himself shaping his course for Spain, where he found himself engaged in a
difficult war against the French King, who pretended the truce had been
broken, by the murder of The French king inuades the Emperors territories.
his Ambassadors; whereupon (as I have said) he had sent troops into Brabant,
and the Duke of Orleance into Luxenburgh: the Dolphin HENRY went with a goodly
Army to besiege Peruignan, but he prevailed not: he also made war in Italy,
and sent the Duke of Vendosme into Picardie.

The Emperor fainted not for all this; but that which troubled him much was to
hear that SOLIMAN had newly repulst the forces of the Empire from before Buda,
and that he prepared to return this year into Hungary with a mighty Army:
and that which did afflict him more, was to understand that BARBAROVSSE was at
sea with a great fleet; meaning to invade his countries of Naples, and Sicily,
or Spain if he could. To prevent all these mischiefs he past into Italy and
made a league with the King of England, from whence he went into Germany, and
so into the Low Countries, and then began the war in those parts betwixt the
two Princes: for after many incounters, and sieges of towns, the two Armies
being near, and ready to give battle, by the mediation of some good men, a
peace was concluded betwixt them, and the Emperor retired to Brussels in
October, whither came in the same month Queen ELENOR the French Kings wife,
with the Duke of Orleance, where they were received and entertained with great
state and magnificence.

The Emperor went from thence to an Imperial Diet at Worms, where he meant
to treat of matters of Religion; Pope PAVL and he having made a league in June
1546, A league between the Pope and the Emperor against the Protestants of
Germany.
concluding, that seeing the Protestants would not allow of the Council of
Trent, nor submit themselves unto it, the Emperor should force them by Arms,
and if he entered into any treaty with them, he should not prejudice the Church
of Rome: That the Pope should consigne 100000 crowns at Venice, besides 100000
Crowns which he had already paid, to be employed in this war; that he
should also intertaine 12000 foot, and 500 horse, for six months; That the
Emperor might for this war, take the one half of the reuenew of the
Clergy, and sell of Abbey Lands, to the value of 500000 crowns: And if any
Prince should seek to hinder their resolution they should join their forces
together to resist them. Then they began to make preparation for this war,
both in Germany, Spain, and Italy.

The Emperor (as it seemed) had a further design; Viz. that having ruined the
protestants, which made the greatest power of Germany, he would subject the
states of the Empire to his will, that he might keep the Empire in his family,
and make it hereditary: and for some proof of this absolute power which he did
affect, he had mad a truce with the Turk the better to attend this war,
without taking the advice of those Princes and States, who had contributed
great sums of money, to make war against the enemy of Christendom.

Finally; after many conferences, and refusal of peace, which they had
demanded; the confederate Princes raised a mighty Army, whereupon the Emperor
proclaimed them guilty of high treason. The two Armies lay near together, and
the protestants offered battle to the Emperor, but he would none; assuring
himself that they could not long continue together. The protestants Army had
two commanders, the D. of Saxonoy and the Lantgraue of Hessen, The Duke of
Saxony defeated and taken.
who did not concur well in their consultations, besides they wanted victuals,
and money; so as they were forced to dislodge and retire further off:
whereupon, diverse protestant Towns compounded to pay money, and to receive
garrisons. The Emperor pursued the Elector, and forced him to fight with
disadvantage, where he was defeated and taken. Within few days the Emperor
gave Sentence of death against him, which was revoked upon suit made; yet upon
condition, that he should resign the dignity of Elector; which was given to
MAVRICE, with all his Lands. There were many other conditions imposed upon him,
all which he signed; only he would not promise to obey the decrees of the
Council of Trent, protesting constantly, that he had rather die than yield to
it: whereupon the Emperor caused that Article to be left out; yet for all this,
FREDERICK continued prisoner to the Emperor.

D. MAVRICE being now Elector of Saxony, and the Marquess of Brandenburgh,
sons-in-law to the Lantzgraue of Hessen, were suitors for him; who obtained a
promise from the Emperor to pardon his life, to remit all other punishments due
to the Rebels, to leave him his Country, with one Fort furnished with
artillery, so as he did renounce all leagues which did prejudice Conditions
propounded to the Lantzgraue.
him or his brother FERDINAND, obey the Imperial Chamber, deliver up the rest
of his Ordinance, pay 150000 crowns within four months for the charges of the
war, and deliver the prisoners which he held, and come and crave pardon of the
Emperor. The Lantzgraue accepted these conditions, and presented himself to the
Emperor upon his knees; who returned him an ambiguous answer: yet, thinking
that all went well, he thanked the Emperor. Then going to sup with the Duke
of Alua, and thinking after supper to retire with his two sons in law, he was
detai^ed prisoner, and given in guard to Spaniards, the which ministered matter
of great discontent, Duke MAVRICE and Brandenburgh charging the Emperor with
breach of his promise. This act deprived the Emperor of the fruits he
pretended of his enterprises, and was a means to chase him out of Germany.

Prince PHILIP, being sent for by the Emperor his father, came from Spain into
Italy; and so passing through Germany, arrived at Brusselles, the Emperor
inuesting him in the Duchy of Brabant, the County of Flanders, of Henalt, and
of Arthois, and afterward of the Town of Antwerp, and the Marquisate of the
holy Empire: all which was performed with great pomp and Prince Philip take
possession of the duchy of Brabant.
ceremonies. In May 1550, the Emperor parted from Brusselles with the Prince
his son, to go to an Imperial Diet held at Ausbourgh where he pressed his
brother FERDINAND to resign to Prince PHILIP his son his right and dignity
of King of the Romans; whereupon The Emperor solicits King Ferdinand to resign
the dignity of the Romans for his son Philip.
they grew to a quarrel: for the pacifying whereof, MARY Queen of Hungary,
their sister, was forced to return to Ausbourgh. He pursued this resignation by
all means possible: but FERDINAND would never yield, thinking that if he made
this dangerous alienation, all his sons (having many) should remain without
estates: and he had sent into Spain for MAXIMILIAN his son to come to the
Diet, being a mild and courteous Prince, and very pleasing unto all Germany.
Prince PHILIP, having failed in this attempt, returned toward Spain the same
way he came;

Duke MAVRICE and Brandenburg, being assisted by the king of Denmark, the King
of Romans, and by many other Princes, who had written their Letters to the
Emperor for the Lantzgraues delivery: But it seemed the Emperor respected all
these Princes little, referring the answer of their request, to the coming of
Duke MAVRICE, whom he said he expected to come and treat with him. WILLIAM
eldest son to the Lantzgraue did importune him much: But Duke MAVRICE and the
Marquess of Brandenbourg much more, speaking very boldly unto him, and putting
him in mind of their bond and promise.

The Emperor, being puffed up with his good success in Germany, gave distaste to
all, as well Catholics as Protestants, by his exactions, upon diverse
pretenses: of some to be satisfied for the charges of the war, which he
pretended to have made for the liberty of Germany; of other by the way of
chastisement, for that they had revolted: wherein he said he proceeded mildely,
quitting much of his right to ease and spare them. By this means there was
neither Town nor Country, estate nor condition amongst the Germans which were
not vexed by taxes, and by The Germans begin to grow diccontent with the
Emperor.
sour speeches and threats, if they presumed to put him in mind of his
conuention and promises. It is said, that he wrested from those Princes and
protestant Towns, above 500 pieces of great Ordinance, wherewith he furnished
his Forts in Italy, Spain and Flanders. Duke MAVRICE remembering the captivity
of the Lantzgraue his father-in-law (whom he had brought to the Emperor upon a
promise that he would not detain him prisoner, yet notwithstanding he carried
him up and down as it were in triumph) resolved to compound the wars with the
town of Magdeburgh, which had been straightly besieged for that they resisted
the Emperors edicts; so as they had means to free themselves upon honest
conditions; Duke MAVRICE being the chief in that action: who seeing the
Emperor reject his many motions unto him for the Land-graues delivery, he
entered into league with ALBERT of Brandebourg, the Land-graues children and
others, and all they jointly with HENRY the Second, the French King (son to
FRANCIS the First, who died before in the year one thousand five hundred forty
seven) who marched speedily with a great Army toward the Rhine, publishing
that it was to restore the Germans, his good neighbors, and ancient friends,
to their true and ancient liberty, which A league betwixt the Princes of
Germany and the French King against the Emperor.
was taken from them by CHARLES of Austria, tearming himself Emperor: the
Protestant Princes went also to Arms, and took many Towns in Germany, into
their protection yet forcing them to furnish both money and artillery inioyning
the towns of upper Germany, to meet at Ausbourg in the end of April.

Duke MAVRICE had taken Ausbourg, finding small resistance; from thence he
marched The Emperor flies to Vilacco for fear of Maurice.
toward Inspruch, to overtake the Emperor, who (seeing this new taking of
Arms in Germany) had retired thither to draw men out of Italy. Hearing that
the enemy approached, he sent some few soldiers to defend Chiusa, a very
strong passage in that Country, but it was soon forced by the Germans;
whereof the Emperor being advertised, he parted suddenly from Inspruch, in the
night by torch-light, in a rainy season, and retired to Vilacco, a Castle
belonging to the house of Austria, upon the confines of Friuly. It was a
miserable thing to see the Emperor and his Court depart in such haste, at such
time, and in such a season, having left behind them most part of their
baggage, many walking on foot for want of Horses, whom the Emperor comforted
what he could. Duke MAVRICE came the same night to Inspruch, but followed the
Emperor no furrher, making spoil only of what the Court had left there. But
this war had an end by the Land-graues delivery, and by a peace concluded by
FERDINAND'S mediation at Nassau, the which the Emperor himself signed.

The French king was discontented with this accord, yet hearing that the
Land-graue was in great danger, if it had not been concluded, he yielded,
sending back the hostages (which the Protestant Princes had given him) safe
into Germany, and retired with his Army, retaining for his charges, Metz,
Thoule, and Verdun, Imperial towns. The Land-graue was set at liberty
according to the accord, having been a prisoner five years at Macklin in
Brabant, and returning The Duke of Saxony and the Land-graue set at liberty.
homeward, he was again stayed by the Queen of Hungaries commandment, who
pretended that the Peace was broken.

The Emperor set JOHN FREDERICK Duke of Saxony at liberty, having first
deprived him of his Electorall dignity, and his estate; And in September the
Land-graue was absolutely discharged, and returned to his house: And the
Emperor finding himself bound to recover those towns which the French had
taken, came with a goodly Army, and laid siege to Metz, in November, the which
he battered with 40 Cannons. The winter was very sharp, Metz besieged by the
Emperor.
and the town well mand, and valiantly defended, by many good captains,
Princes, and others of great houses, under the command of the Duke of Guise: so
as seeing his Army ouer-toyled, and diminished daily, through hunger, cold,
nakedness, and want of all things, being pressed by necessity, he retired his
Army with loss and dishonor; from whence the Emperor returned to Brussells,
and the wars continued betwixt him and the French King, upon the Frontiers of
Arthois and Picardy, where there passed many encounters and taking of towns.

In the year one thousand five hundred fifty four, HENRY the French king,
sent three Armies against the Emperor, the first into Vermandois under the
Prince La Rochesur Yonne: the Three French Armies against the Emperor.
second toward Crely led by the Constable, and the third was commanded by the
Duke of Neuers, who entered the Ardennes, took Orchimont, and burnt many
villages, and passing into the country of Leege, he assured the passage of the
River of Meuze, by the taking of some strong Forts. The Constables Army took
Marreimburg, and Rocroy, with diverse other places; The Prince of Roch sur
Yonne, with the Duke of Neuers, entered Henalt, and Brabant, where they burnt
all the villages, and carried away a great Prey, leaving the country miserable
and desolate; They besieged the Castle of Ranty, which the Emperor came in
person to relieve, whereupon the French retired their Army.

During the wars in Germany and the Low Countries: the Turks and Pirates of
Afric, spoiled the Coasts of Naples, Sicily, and Spain: whereof the chief
commander was DRAGAT RAYS a famous Pirate, who surprised the town of Afric,
which then was well peopled and of great traffic, whereby he made himself
fearful to all the Coasts of Italy and Spain. So as the Emperor was daily
importuned to dislodge him from thence, who gave charge to Don JOHN de Vega,
Viceroy of Sicilie, and ANDREW DORIA, to gather an Army together with all
speed for this action, who came in June, one thousand five hundred Afric a
Town in the Realm of Tunis taken by the Spaniards.
fifty two, with 54 Galleys well mand with soldiers and mariners, and landed
near to the town of Afric, but they first attempted Ministerio a little
town near it with a good Castle, the which DRAGVT had fortified with a good
Garrison of Moors, and Turks: the which they having battered; in the end,
after a long defense they took it, all the Turks being either slain, or taken
prisoners: Then they turned toward Afric, the siege whereof they found to be
of greater difficulty, it being environed on three parts by Sea, where they
could not easily batter it, and the fourth side upon the Land, was very well
fortified, yet they planted their Cannon against a rauelin and made a breach
which the Spaniards entered with great courage and resolution: but there being
no diuersion made by the Galleys, as it was ordered, they were oppressed by all
the forces of the Town, and repulst with great loss, the which did much
afflict the whole Camp, there being small hope in this siege; for the Moors
and Turks were grown proud, and in the Camp they wanted both men, munition
and victual; but sending to Genoa, they were supplied with 1200 Spanish foot
from Milan; and the Duke of Florence, and the State of Genoa, fortified them
with munition and victuals.

DRAGVT was resolved to relieve them by Land, having gathered together many
Moors, which he joined to seven hundred Turks, who making often attempts, did
much annoy the Christians: But in the end, having lost many of his men in a
furious skirmish, he despaired, and retired himself to Gerbe; after which they
concluded to make three batteries, one by Sea, and two by land, where having
made sufficient breaches, they came to the assault and took it, the Turks
having defended it very valiantly: In which Town (some write) there were 10000
prisoners taken; it was afterward to be razed by the advice of the Emperors
Council, being held a place of great charge, and not guardable.

After all the wars upon the Frontiers of France and the Netherlands, betwixt
the Emperor and the French king, they sent their deputies, who met in a Plain
betwixt Ardres, Calais, and 1555 An assembly to treat of a peace.
Graueling, having Tents set up for that purpose, whither came Cardinal
(...)from England, to assist as a mediator and vmpier betwixt them: The demands
on either side were so excessive, as they could not agree, and so the assembly
proved fruitless.

This year, on the ninth of May, news came to the Emperor of the death of
Queen JOAN his mother, in the Town of Tordesillas, having been always troubled
in her senses and distracted The death of Queen Joan the Emperors mother.
since the death of King PHILIP her husband, until she was 75 years old. This
Princess troubling herself infinitely for that she thought she was contemned
and kept as a prisoner, this ambitious humor of command would not suffer her
to take any rest; so as this sharp and violent humor of melancholy (which she
had as it were by inheritance from Queen ISABELL of Portugal, her grandmother,
wife to JOHN the second King of Castile) was continually augmented in her: her
funeral was deferred until the coming of King PHILIP, who was then in England
with Queen MARY his wife, who arrived at Brussels in September. At what time
the funerals were celebrated with great pomp and state.

This year the Emperor performed an act, which bred admiration in all the
World; for, being broken with the toiles and cares of the World, and willing to
free himself of so great a burden, he renounced the absolute Government, with
all the titles of those Realms and Estates, except the Empire, in the which
his brother FERDINAND was to succeed. And to this end he called all the
Knights of the order of the Golden-fleece to Court, in whose presence he pulled
the Collar of the said order, from his own neck, and put it about his sons;
saying, I do now make you Sovereign of the noble order of the Golden-fleece;
maintain it in the like dignity that I, my Father, and predecessors have done.
Then turning to the knights he said, The Emperor re signs his government to his
son K. Philip.
Prince my son, these are the faithful servants, which have been the support
of my Empire, by whom I have ouergone many perils and dangers, and therefore I
have loved them dearly. If you do the like, I assure my self they will carry
you the like affection and obedience: but if you entreat them otherwise, they
will be the cause of the ruin of your estate; wherefore love and honor them.

On the twenty fifth of November, all the States being assembled in the great
Hall at the Palace of Brussels, the Emperor came thither, being accompanied by
the King his son, Queen MARY the Regent, with many other Noblemen; whereas
the Queen caused all men to depart, of what degree soever, but such as were
called to this solemn Act.

The Emperor, King, Queen and all the deputies being set according to their
degrees, PHILLIBERT of Brussels the Emperors Orator, made a long speech to them
in his Majesty's name; giving them to understand, that he had governed those
his hereditary countries long, and An Oration to the states in the emperors
name.
had always endeavored to maintain the public quiet; that he had undertaken
many paineful and dangerous voiages to come unto them; that he had been
careful to govern them with justice, to maintain their rights and
privileges, and to do all other things whereunto a good Prince is bound; All
which he held well employed, being done for such faithful, dutiful, and
obedient subjects. But his age and the weakness of his body making him unable
to undergo his forepassed toils, he was resolved to give over that burden and
to commit it to another, who might continue as he had begun; and so retire
himself into Spain, from whence he had been long absent, the climate being
more agreeable to his health then any other; wherefore he resolved to substitute
in his place, his dear and only son, and their Lord and lawful Prince, to
whom they had given their oath; his majesty knowing well, that the king his son
was not only sufficient to undergo the charge, but also had a will and a desire
to employ himself for the good of those countries: wherefore his Imperial
majesty trusting that they would like thereof, and that for the love of him,
they would willingly accept in his place the king, their Lord and Prince, he
did then give over those Countries, and resign them into his sons hands,
entreating them earnestly to receive him willingly and cheerfully. And
accordingly he did freely acquit and discharge them of their oath of fealty and
homage, that they might take the same unto their king at the reception of their
estates and offices.

His Majesty did also entreat them to take in good part the affection which he
had showed by the effects, having omitted no travail nor care belonging to his
duty, confessing withal that they had been good and loyal subjects, and had
assisted him faithfully and dutifully. He used many words more, admonishing
them of diverse things which concerned their estate. After which speech the
Emperor began to speak unto them in French, saying;

That he had forty years since in the same place beeen emancipated by the
Emperor MAXIMILIAN his Grandfather, and put in possession of those Countries,
since which time he The emperors speech unto the States.
had run through many fortunes, and endured much as well in Spain, touching
the affairs of Queen IOANE his mother, and the government of her kingdoms, as
in his other estates: he showed also how many troublesome, long, painful and
dangerous voyages he had made in passing and repassing the Seas, as well into
Spain as into Italy, to the great peril of his person; namely in the voyages
to Barbary, Tunis and Algier; he showed also into what danger he had willingly
thrust himself, passing through France, to prevent the troubles which were
like to grow in the Nether-lands, which he ever had in great recommendation.
And as they had always been to him loving subjects and faithful vassalls; so
he entreated them to be the like unto his son, into whose hands he had
resigned those Countries. In speaking of which words he showed such passion, as
sighs interrupting his speech, the tears trickled down his cheeks, which
moved many to the like compassion: having made a little pause, he took his
Spectacles, and looking upon a remembrance which he had in his hand, he said
that his sight and memory were not so good as they had been, and that he felt
himself to decline, and grow weak hourly, unable to endure the travail that
was requisite for the preservation of the Country and of them all, the which
did move him chiefly to return into Spain, and not to prolong his life, the
which he referred into the hands of God. Lastly, he entreated them to continue
in the Christian Religion, as they had done, and to observe justice. After
these words, the king kneeling down before his Father, said unto him that he
was unworthy of so great a favor: but seeing it was his Majesty's pleasure; he
humbly thanked him, accepting the charge, protesting to be so careful to
govern his Subjects with justice, as he hoped they should rest satisfied with
him, reserving to make manifest by his deeds the love which he bare them: And
turning to the assembly, he spoke in French, saying; I would, my Lords, that my
skill in this language were more then it is, to the end I might make you the
better understand what affection I bear you; but for as much as I cannot
express it in such terms as were fit, the Bishop of Arras shall speak for me;
who rising up, delivered the Kings mind at large: which being ended, King
PHILIP retired to his seat. After which, Doctor MASEVS an eloquent Orator,
deputed to that end by the The Deputies answer to the Emperer.
States, made answer to the former speeches, saying, that they knew well his
Imperial Majesty had for many years governed that estate carefully and
religiously; that he had undergone great and many toils in many accidents; that
notwithstanding his Majesty's great and urgent affairs, yet he had alwais
carried a fatherly love and affection to those Countries of his inheritance,
whereof the people had tasted the fruit whenever they stood in need: all
which duly considered, they found that his Majesty was well advised in that
which he had propounded. And therefore the Nobles, Prelates, and Deputies of
Towns there present (although it were a sword which did wound their hearts to
hear of his Majesty's departure, yet desiring to conform themselves in all
things to his good will and pleasure) did humbly thank his Imperial Majesty
for the great honor and favor he had done them; every one being very ready to
consent irreuocably to the said Cession or resignation made by his Imperial
Majesty of all those Netherlands to the behoof of the King there present, whom
they did acknowledge for their natural Lord and Prince, the lawful son and
only heir of his Imperial Majesty, being ready to renew the oath which they
had formerly made unto him, with all other duties requisite in the like case:
and so, after thanks given, he ended his speech.

During this action, Queen MARY of Hungary, the Emperors sister, and Gouernesse
of those Countries, rising from her seat, said reverently to the Emperor, that
she had ever endeavored The words of Queen Mary to the Emperor.
to govern those Countries in such manner as she thought most expedient for his
Majesty's benefit and the public good: but if peradventure, according to his
desire and her good intent she had not attained thereto, she humbly besought
his Majesty to pardon her. To whom the Emperor, both with his hands and his
countenance, made great show to be well pleased: and then she, turning herself
toward the States, used in a manner the same words which she had done to the
Emperor.

After all these speeches, the Emperor by a public Act resigned to his son K.
PHILIP the Kingdoms of Spain, Sicily, Sardinia, Maiorca, Minorca, the Indies,
and all others depending upon the Crown of Spain, reserving only a small
yearly revenue for the maintaining of himself and a few servants. The next
morning the Deputies of the Duchy of Brabant coming to Court, King PHILIP in
their presence renewed the oath which he had formerly taken in the year King
Philip takes the oath as Duke of Brabant
1549, to keep, maintain and preserve them in their ancient rights, privileges
and customs, without breaking them, or suffering them to be broken in any sort
whatsoever. And the Deputies of the chief Towns of Brabant did also take the
oath of fealty and homage to him, as to their Lord and Duke of Brabant.

About this time there ended an Imperial Diet held at Ausbourg, where king
FERDINAND did preside in the Emperors name; in the which, after much debate, it
was concluded, Resolution of the Imperial die^ held a^ Ausbourg.
that neither the Emperor, King FERDINAND, nor any other Prince, or State
should do wrong to any of the Empire, in what sort soever, by reason of the
confession of Ausbourg; that from thenceforth they should not force by edict or
other means, the allies of this confession, to abandon their Religion; but
should suffer them to enjoy it freely with their goods, rights, and
possessions, with many other privileges, granted in favor of their Religion.
It was thought that the Pope was wonderfully discontented with this decree, and
that he did solicit the Emperor to disannull it. Before the Act of the
Emperors resignation, he gave instructions to his son PHILP, touching the
government of his person and estate; the which being very long, would take up
too much room in this Volume: but I will only make mention of the reasons
which moved him to this resignation, who speaking unto him, said:

I have resolved deer son, to come to the point of resigning into your hands,
the absolute government of all my Realms and estates; wherefore my pleasure
is, that against the The Emperors speech to his son.
morning you give order for the performance of this Act, with all due
Ceremonies: you shall give order with speed, that all Governors, Magistrates,
and all other persons, acknowledge you for their superior; that all persons
(except the subjects of the Empire) take the Oath of allegiance: the more rare
this president is, the greater are the signs, both of my love to you, and of
the assurance I have of your good inclination, and also of the great care I
have to see your estate settled. I could defer this Act (as most Princes do)
until my death; but having a desire rather to imitate the smaller number of
Fathers in this point, I have chosen willingly by this Act in my life time, to
make my self a superior, rather then a companion to any. It is a weak trial
of the valor and resolution of a Prince, to subdue kingdoms by force, in
comparison of conquering himself, being not only content to bridle all
ambition and desire of Rule, but to submit himself to a certain kind of
obedience: Against this course, sensuality does strive with all her force; and
in exchange of all worldly satisfactions, which are enjoyed by the prerogative
of absolute authority, sets before our eyes the rigor of the Laws; to which
(Princes setting their authorities aside) must level all their actions, as
well as private men. To blind our understanding with like veiles, the same
sensual consideration stirs up, by way of admonition, a provident forecast
of diverse inconveniences, whereinto many fall, which have made themselves
subject to the will of other men, by the diversity of their conceits and
censures, the which by the corruption of the care of private interest, are apt
to swerve from the right rule of integrity. It may be that some will be
terrified with this common supposition, that Princes which are once possessed
with authority, may resign it at their own pleasures; but they must resume it
at the pleasures of other men: yet fatherly love and affection has prevailed
more with me, then all these worldly considerations, and duty also in some
sort; for, finding my self now aged (which may be accounted greater, in regard
of my sickly estate) my satiety of glory in this World, and weariness of
toil; finding moreover that by my continual tr^uaile unto this day, I could
not satisfy in any part the duty which belongs unto the profession of a
Christian; I find my self enflamed with a most earnest desire to free my
self from so many troubles and incombrances, and then retire to a more
religious kind of life, and more fit for a Christian. On the other side the
consideration of your age being now ripe, and fit for government, together
with the expectation which you have gotten in the World, by managing the
greatest affairs of Spain with great judgment, move me now the rather to
proceed in my resolution. Being incited with all these good considerations, I
have thought it fit to lay this weighty burden upon your shoulders, and to
ease mine own, which time and travail have now weakened and disabled. I do
confidently hope, that the subjects of all my countries, shall have cause to
thank God first, and then me for this resolution, in respect of the gracious
usage they shall receive at your hands, succeeding in my place: neither is it
hurtful unto your self, that by this occasion, during my life, you shall
settle your self more firmly in my Dominions. And so he proceeded to his
advice and counsel, touching the government of his Estates.

After that the Emperor had resigned all his kingdoms unto king PHILIP his
son, and disposed of his affairs in the Netherlands, being desirous to free
himself from all temporal cares, and to spend the remainder of his days in
peace, applying himself wholly to the service of God; he resolved to retire
himself with his two sisters, ELENOR the French Queen, and MARY Queen of
Hungary into Spain: But before his departure, he would also dispose of the
Empire, the which he would resign unto his brother FERDINAND King of the
Romans, The Emperor writes to the princes Electors
and to that end he wrote his Letters unto the Princes Electors and States of
the Empire; giving them to understand, that finding himself ouercharged with
age, and continual infirmities, which had disabled him for the managing of
affairs; having long before resolved to resign all his Realms of Spain to
the Prince his son, having taken leave of the Court, being ready to imbarque
with the first prosperous wind; and seeing that by his absence, the
government of the Empire did of right belong unto his dear and well-beloved
brother FERDINAND king of the Romans, of Hungary and Bohemia, as his lawful
successor in the said quality of King of Romans; which government he had for
many years well deserved in his absence, supporting the burden with a
brotherly love and affection; wherefore lest the holy Empire should fall into
some dangerous inconvenience, he had resolved that his said brother, king of
Romans, should have absolute and irreuocable power to treat, negociate and
command in all things that he should find requisite and necessary for the
greatness, prosperity and increase of the Empire, as absolutely as he himself
being Emperor might do: and for that he could not come unto the Imperial Diet
at Ratisbone, there to have resigned the government of the Empire unto the king
of Romans, as he had intended; he thought it good by those Letters to acquaint
them with his resolution, inioyning all men by his Imperial authority to show
all loyalty and obedience unto the King of Romans, and to honor and respect
him in all his commandments, and Decrees, without any contradiction, as they
would do himself, if he were there in person.

After this, the fleet being ready in Zeland, he took his leave of PHILIP his
son, and of all The Emperor departs with his two sisters out of the
Netherlands.
the Princes and Noblemen: then he embarked with his two sisters, and arrived
within few days in Spain; where, after some days rest, he retired to a
Monastery of Saint JEROME the Hermit, in Estremadura near Placencia, an
unfrequented place, and fit for heavenly meditations, where he lived not above
two years, spending his time in holy and godly works. And the better to attend
the service of God, he would have his sisters to live from him at Vailledolit,
that they might not trouble him. He reserved but 100000 crowns a year to
himself, whereof he employed only 4000, for his diet and entertainment: the
rest he disposed of, for the marrying of young maids, and to relieve widows
and orphans, and for other works of Charity.

This Act of renunciation, being one of the rarest presedents, that had bin
seen for many ages, ministered occasion unto the world, to discourse of the
reasons that might induce him to deprive Diverse opinions touching the Emperors
renunciation.
himself of so great a dignity. Some held opinion that his infirmity of the
gowt being very grievous; and foreseeing that it would shorten his life, was
the cause that moved him to that resolution. Others said that he did it upon
discontent, seeing himself bearded and ouermatched, by HENRY the French king:
and some affirmed that to avoid the crosses of fortune, which (by the relation
of certain Astrologians) he knew would befall him, he with great judgment
resolved to retire himself before it should in that sort obscure the
brightness of that glory, which he with so much toil had gotten. There were
also some which said that fortune began to frown on him when as he made his
retreat to Vilacco and went to besiege Mets: so as some commending and others
blaming his resolution all did censure diuersely thereon.

THE LIFE OF FERDINAND, ONLY OF THAT NAME, AND HVNDRETH AND SIXTEENTH ROMAN
EMPEROR.
THE ARGUMENT.
THis present life of the Emperor Ferdinand, contains his country, his
parentage, his education, and where he was brought up; how he became Lord of
Austria, Bohemia, Hungary, and Transiluania; his wars with John Sepusius, the
taking of Buda, with the siege of Uiena; when he was created King of the
Romans, his agreement made with the said John, the difference between Friar
George and him; the often coming of Soliman into Hungary; the Insurrections in
Germany against the Emperor Charles the Fifth, the displeasure of Pope Paul the
Fourth, the creating of Maximilian King of the Romans, his conversation and
behavior, and the children which he had by his wife Anne, sister to Jews King
of Hungary.

AMong many Towns worthy respect, in the Kingdom of Toledo in Spain, it is
certain (as it appears by the Chronicles thereof) that Alcala Henaret in
ancient time, ever has been, and still is, one of the chief; wherein besides
the men of singular valor which in time past have lived there, in the year of
the incarnation The birth of Ferdinand, when* and who was his father.
of the son of God 1503. upon the tenth day of May, in the same year,
FERDINAND of Austria of that name the first Emperor of the West, was borne;
whose father was PHILIP the first of that name, King of Castile, and son to
the Emperor This Isabell together with her husband Ferdinand drove the Moors
out of Granada anno dom. 1487.
MAXIMILIAN: his mother was IOANE, daughter to FERDINAND and ISABEL, King and
Queen of Spain, who by reason of the unexpected sudden death of his Father
(which happened in the year 1506) remaining under the tutele of his Grandfather
FERDINAND (commonly called the Catholic) was by him (by means of the
excellency of his wit, besides the exercise of Arms) carefully instructed in
diverse languages; principally in the purity of the Latin tongue; wherein, in
short space he profited so much, that to the great admiration of all men, he
proved a most active Knight in Arms, and a perfect Orator in the Latin,
Dutch, Spanish, Italian, Hungarish and Bohemian tongues; so as all men did
prognosticate him to prove a Prince of singular valor: and this made him the
more accounted of, for that by all men generally which knew them, he was
likened to FERDINAND the Third, who by force took Seuil from the Moors, from
whom by his mother, he descended. That FERDINAND for his many virtues, was no
less numbered amongst the blessed, then reputed happy amongst all the Kings
of Spain, for being father of King ALONSO, who for his rare knowledge in
Sciences, was surnamed the Sage: who in the long schism of the Empire, in the
year 1258, being by the greatest part of the Princes Electors of the Empire
chosen Emperor; by the persuasion of Pope GREGORY the Tenth, for the common
quietness of Christendom, voluntarily resigned, and gave up his right, after
that he had enjoyed the name of Emperor the space of sixteen years,
approouing and ratifying the successiue election of RODVLPH the First of that
name, from whom from father to son this FERDINAND lineally descended.

This FERDINAND being brought up in Spain, under the Catholic King, was for
his rare qualities so much beloved by the Spaniardes, that his brother CHARLES
in the year 1520. remaining (through the death of his Grandfather FERDINAND,
which happened in the year 1516.) heir general of the kingdoms of Spain, of
both the Sicilies, of the West Indies, of Burgundy, and Austria, and in the
year 1519. through the death of his Grandfather MAXIMILIAN, chosen to wear
the Imperial Diadem, was by those which (tumultuously mutinying under the name
of the holy assembly) rebelled against his brother CHALES, by reason of the
unmeasurable oppressions laid upon them by his polling officers, instantly
requested and entreated to make himself King of Spain; whereto not consenting
(much more esteeming the preservation of his faith, by refusing those estates,
then the greatness of them, by violating the same to his eternal infamy) with
singular integrity of mind, he not only refused their offer, but used all
means possible to retain those kingdoms in his brothers subjection: for
which, he was ever after entirely beloved by him. Who returning into Spain, in
the yer 1529. not only reconfirmed unto him the donation of the Archduchy of
Austria (the ancient patrimony of their family) made over to him by testament,
by their Grandfather MAXIMILIAN, by his brother CHARLES his consent, to whom as
to the eldest son it did appertain; but he also freely gave him the
Countries of Stiria, and Carinthia, with the Counties of Tirol, Habspurge, and
Hassia: having first in the Diet at Worms, declared him (to the good liking of
the Princes Electors) his Lieutenant, and Imperial Vicar in Germany; whither,
within a while after this grant, going in the year 1521. he was honorably
received by the Germans; and as Vicar of the Empire, was with great
magnificence, met by all the Potentates: where making no long abode, he went to
take possession of his dominions, to the great good liking of that people.

In the same year he celebrated his contracted nuptials, with ANNE sister to
JEWS king of Hungary and Bohemia; renewing the oaths sworn in the year 1515.
between his Grandfather MAXIMILIAN, and LADISLAVS father to King JEWS; which
were, that JEWS dying without issue, FERDINAND, or any other begotten by him,
and his said sister ANNE, should succeed in his kingdom. But either through
the just wrath of God kindled against the manifold iniquities of the Hungars,
or what other occasion I know not, the two brothers in-law had scarcely enjoyed
the beloved fruit of the established succession two months, but FERDINAND
being molested by the instability of fortune (seldom constant in prosperity)
was advertised that SOLIMAN Emperor of the Turks, being victorious, having
subdued GAZELLES in Soria in the year 1516; and also for that his father
SELIM, had in three several battles, with incredible fortune, first
overthrown CAMPSON, and Egypt taken by the Turks.
soon after TOMOMBEY, Souldanes of Egypt; GAZELLES giving place to fortune,
and voluntarily yielding himself into the power of his victorious enemy, was
with great favor received into grace: so that notwithstanding that the Empire
of the Souldanes was extinguished in Egypt, yet he having liberty was made
Governor of Soria (not without much murmuring of the Turkish Captains, his
Lieutenants in that country). Nevertheless GAZELLES in the year 1519. being
certified of the death of SELIM, thinking himself now discharged of the oath of
fealty which he had sworn unto him only (without any mention made of his
successors) and therewith earnestly desiring to revive the ancient dominion of
the Soldiers, levied the greatest forces of Mamalukes, Arabians, and Syrians
that he possibly could; with which, rebelling, he made himself Lord of sundry
Cities in Soria: against whom in the year 1520, SOLIMAN sent FARAAT Basha with
a great Army; who fighting with him near to the City of Damasco; GAZELLES
being slain in the battle, he obtained a notable victory, which happened in
the end of the year 1520. FERDINAND (as I said) being advertised that Gazelles
ouerthrown and slain by Faraat Basha, 1520.
SOLIMAN puffed up with pride by reason of his victory, resolved to make war in
Hungary; where through the negligence of King JEWS, and want of relief from
the Emperor CHARLES, or his Lieutenant FERDINAND, the Turks (making sundry
roades and incursions into the Country) in the end besieged, battered, and
took the strong City of Belgrade, in ancient time called Taurinum, situated in
Angularie Ferme, between the rivers Sauus and Danubius, the which was held the
buckler of Christendom, and in the time of MATTHEW King of Hungary, it had
been twice assaulted in vain by MAMOET his great Grandfather, and AMVRATH
father to the said MAHOMET, and now by the negligence of King JEWS, who did
not relieve it in time (although he were much importuned thereunto by
FERDINAND) Belgrade in Hungary taken by the Turks.
after some months siege, it was forced by SOLIMAN, and a great slaughter made
of the Christians.

But FERDINAND as it seems taking more care to suppress LVTHER'S doctrine,
then for the defense of Hungary against the Turks; in a Council held at
Norimburgh, upon grievous penalties, prohibited the reading of the Bible, which
LVTHER had translated; but yet LVTHER nevertheless being countenanced by JOHN
FREDERICK Duke of Saxony published his book, wherein he touched all the Romish
Princes of Germany, but chiefly FERDINAND. Hereupon FERDINAND summoned a
Council to be held in Ratisbone in the year 1523, whither from Pope CLEMENT
the seventh, who succeeded ARDIAN the sixth, came Cardinal LAVRENCE CAMPEIVS,
to procure (although in vain) the suppression of LVTHER'S doctrine. About
which matter FERDINAND having spent the years 1523, and 1524, had intelligence
that SOLIMAN after the taking of the Isle of Rhodes (which he upon composition
entered upon the five and twentieth day of December, being Christmas day, in the
year 1522, after that it had been by the Knights of the order, held and
valiantly defended against the whole forces of the Infidels, for the space of
214 years, from the year 1380 at which time it was taken from the Infidels
until then; and after that it had been now besieged the space of six months,
in which time the Turk lost the greatest part of his Army; for besides those
which were slain at the many assaults which were given, above 30000 died of
the flix) threatened to bring greater calamities upon the Christians: among
which a man would have thought, the long troubles of the former wars, in the
year 1525, would have ended. For the imprisonment of FRANCIS the first King of
France, who by the Emperors Captains, upon the four and twentieth of February
in the same year, was taken at the battle of Pauia, made most men to think
that the Emperor would not have released him, without an assured peace with
France; by which mean, he might not only have been able to have performed any
great attempt, but also have made frustrate SOLIMAN'S designs. But as men in
future accidents are most commonly deceived in their opinions, so the affairs
of the Christians fell afterward into far worse terms; for the most part
of the Christian Princes being moved against the Emperor, either through grief
for the French kings adversity (a Prince for the worth of his person, and the
greatness of so flourishing a kingdom highly esteemed) or else for fear of
their own particular interest, doubting that he would have aspired to the
absolute Monarchy; the state of Christendom came to be so confused and out of
order, especially in Italy, that men's judgment proved not only vain, but the
troubles continued a long time after.

Italy being by reason of the war between CHARLES the Fifth, and FRANCIS the
French King miserably afflicted, the one envying the others greatness; most of
the Princes and states in Christendom were by the one or other (to the great
enfeebling of the whole Christian Commonwealth) drawn into the action; which
SOLIMAN the great Turk perceiving, was thereby encouraged with an Army of two
hundred thousand men to invade Hungary; into which (having Belgrade) he had an
open passage; thinking withal that he might Soliman the great Turk entered
Hungary with an army of 200000 men: and the reason.
easily oppress the young king of Hungary, who was ill obeyed in his kingdom,
by the discord of his Barons; having also small experience in the art of war,
by reason of his young years. King JEWS, who in regard of his tender age,
was but weak of judgment and terrified with the fame of so powerful an
enemy, sending in vain to all places for succors; he called a Diet of
Hungarians, which was according to their custom of armed men, who were bound
to assist him in the wars. The Nobility of Hungary (who had never seen the
camp of a Turkish Emperor, but had only incountred them in light skirmishes)
despised the Turks in such sort, as they bragged vainly, that if they came to
fight they would cut in pieces huge Armies of Turks: Among the which PAVL
TOMOREVS Archbishop of Colossa showed himself most vain, assuring himself
confidently of the victory, bragging that he would be the first that should
charge the Turkish troops with his lance. The King had not in his Army above
26000; and yet TOMOREVS would needs press him to fight: whose presumption all
men of judgment condemned; and the old soldiers said that it was the part of
desperate men, to join battle with such an enemy who had near eight times
as many fighting men in his Army: wherefore some were of opinion that the king
should retire himself, and STEPHEN VERBESIVS General of his Army persuaded him
to go into the Castle of Buda; but the obstinate soldiers opposed, saying that
they were not to fight unless the King did lead them. TOMOREVS The Hungarians
overthrown by the Turk.
prevailed, and the king resolved to go and meet the enemy yea, TOMOREVS
madness was such, as he would not stay for JOHN SEPVSIVS governor of
Transiluania who marched with an Army to join with the king. The Armies
joining, the Hungarians were in half an hour overthrown. And the poor king
seeing his whole Army in rout, thought to save himself by flight: but passing
through a marish fenne, his horse falling, he was smothered in the mud, there
being not half a foot of water: his page escaped and observed the place, so as
many Death of Jews king of Hungary.
days after the enemies retreat, the Kings body was found, and buried in
Alba Regalis. After the victory it is said that SOLIMAN wondered at the beastly
humor of the Hungarians, and that the kings Counselors should be possessed with
such madness, as with so small forces to encounter so great an Army. Having
seen the pictures of the King and the Queen his wife, he was grieved (he
said) for the disgrace of that young king, who having had such foolish
counselors, in a matter of such importance, had grossly made haste to join
battle; adding withal that he came not into Hungary to deprive him of his
kingdom, but to revenge the wrong done him by the Hungarians; and if he had
escaped from the battle he would only have imposed a tribute, and restored
him to his kingdom: and that he would have held it a glory to have preserved
one who was son to a brother of SIGISMVND King of Poland his friend, and so
strictly allied to the Noble house of Austria: which words he delivered with
great majesty. This battle was fought in October 1526.

For the unfortunate death of King JEWS, FERDINAND was very sorrowful: for
besides the loss of his friend and brother in-law, he was advertised that
SOLIMAN besides other places, without one blow stricken, had taken the city of
Buda; and that from thence, besides the most excellent Artillery which he found
there, he had carried the statues of HERCULES, APOLLO, and DIANA, most
exquisitely made in brass, and left there by the great MATTHEW CORVINVS: and
that with an infinite number of captives, and laden with prey and booty, he
was returned to Constantinople.

After SOLIMAN'S departure, King FERDINAND went into Bohemid, and there was
crowned together with his wife, who a little before was delivered of a daughter
called ISABEL, which afterward was married to SIGISMVND King of Poland: and
being in peace King of Bohemia, he challenged to be King of Hungary. But
knowing that JOHN SEPVSIVS Vaiuode of Transiluania, after the celebration of
the sumptuous obsequies of King JEWS, notwithstanding FERDINAND'S former
election, aspiring to the kingdom, had made himself John Sepusius Vaiuode of
Transiluana crowned king of Hungary.
to be crowned King of Hungary; and at the same time had bestowed upon those
Lords which had assisted him in the action, the principal estates of that
kingdom, to the end that being obliged to him for received benefits, they
should not after their accustomed manner practice ought against him; FERDINAND
made himself in Bohemia to be crowned King of Hungary, Ferdinand in Bohemia
crowned king of Hungary.
in the presence of Doctor STEPHEN, and other Hungarian Lords his friends,
which after the death of king JEWS came to see him.

After this coronation, FERDINAND having levied an Army, presently marched
therewith against JOHN SEPVSIVS: who by reason of the inequality, of their
powers standing in some fear of him, departed from Buda, which after SOLIMANS
departure was again recovered by the Hungarians; and retired himself on the
other side of the river Tiss^, to Toccay, a place both by nature and Art very
strong; where, sending to his friends in sundry parts for aid, he wrote two
Letters, one to the Princes Electors, entreating them to give no aid to
FERDINAND against him: the other to the Emperor, therein exhibiting sundry
complaints against FERDINAND. But FERDINAND pretending the kingdom of Hungary
in right to be his; marching forward with his Army, without any resistance took
Buda, and other principal places in that kingdom: and being unwilling to give
his enemy time to recover heart and courage, Ferdinand entering Hungary with an
army against John Sepusius, takes Buda.
he without any great difficulty, passing the river Tissa, upon a bridge made
of boats brought thither for that purpose upon carts, went to seek him at
Toccay; and within sight of the castle making an Alt, made VALENE TVRAC
General of his Army; who in the day of battle divided the Cauallery of
Stiria and Austria into two squadrons, in the midst between which he raunged
his maine Battaillion, which of both the one and other Army, were Hungarian
footmen. Which order when FERENCE BODO, who was General of King The battle
of Toccay Fought between John and Ferdinand, both pretending to be King of
Nungary.
JOHN'S Army perceived, he marshalling his troops in the like manner, persuaded
King JOHN with certain troops of choice horse, to withdraw himself to some
place from the Army, where he might, notwithstanding any sinister accident,
save himself. After whose example PHVL BARCHIT a Seruian, one of the chiefest
Captains of king FERDINAND'S Army, retired himself to a close place, a good
distance from the Army; with a determination to charge his enemies in flank.
To be brief, the two Armies joined in a battle, wherein for a space the
fight was very doubtful: for the left wing of King JOHN'S battle charging the
right of the Stirian horse, and gallantly ouerbearing them, had put king
FERDINAND'S people to rout, had not the men at Arms of Austria in rescuing
them, with such fury charged the enemy, that they were constrained to retire
fighting.

In the mean time the footmen, which of either side were almost all
Hungarians, fought with such obstinacy, that it was hard to judge whether
party should have the better. So as, if BARCHIT with his troop, which until
then lay close in an Ambuscado, had not risen and suddenly charged at unawares,
FERDINAND (as the report went) had had the worst of the bargain; but BARCHIT
giving a fresh charge, BODO, notwithstanding that he that day, showed himself
no less a valiant Soldier then a prudent Captain, often attempting in vain
to have rallied his squadrons, being ouerborne by his enemy, was taken prisoner
together with many other very excellent Captains: and their camp being
assaulted, their Ordinance and Colors were likewise lost, and the whole
troops were so much disordered, that they running away, left all their baggage
to the Austrians. Which when King JOHN perceived, he as fast as his horse could
bear him, fled: and not holding himself in safety in his own country, he
fled into Poland, where by IEROM LASKY a Nobleman of that country he was
honorably King John flies into Poland.
entertained. And FERDINAND'S Captains entering Transiluania, all the country,
together with what in Hungary held for him, without any resistance yielded to
be at his devotion. But forasmuch as BODO, upon promise of liberty, would not
renounce his oath made to king JOHN, and so bear Arms against him, he was by
king FERDINAND'S commandment cast into a dungeon, where of grief and sorrow
he died miserably.

After this victory FERDINAND made himself together with his wife in Alba
Regalis, to be solemnly crowned king of Hungary by the Archbishop of
Strigonium, who forsaking king JOHN came to FERDINAND, bringing with him the
Crown of STEPHEN king of Hungary, which amongst the Hungarians was held in
great veneration. Shortly after, FERDINAND leaving STEPHEN BATOR for Viceroy of
that kingdom (to be assisted by the Bishop of Strigonium) went to Bohemia, and
thence into Austria, where upon the first day of August in Stephen Viceroy of
Hungary for King Ferdinand.
the year 1527. his Queen bare him a son, who was christened MAXIMILIAN, and
in process of time coming to be Emperor was called MAXIMILIAN the Second.
FERDINAND having so happily gotten the kingdom of Hungary, was very earnest
with his brother CHARLES the Emperor to release Pope CLEMENT the Seventh,
taken prisoner by the Duke of Burbon General of the Emperors Army in Italy,
the same year, upon the sixth day of May, a fatal day in ancient time in Rome:
which he did to the end to avoid further cause of coffeehouse amongst the
Christian Princes: for the greatness of the house and state of Austria being
grown odions and suspect to all Christendom, it seemed that by long detaining
the Pope, the hatred and ill will conceived against it, would daily increase:
which reasons induced Pope Clement the Seventh released out of prison.
the Emperor after seven months imprisonment to set Pope CLEMENT at liberty,
although upon hard conditions.

King JOHN after the battle of Toccay, being expulsed his kingdom, sled as we
have said to JEROME LASKY, a Nobleman of great account among the Polonians, by
whom he was most honorably entertained, with the consent of SIGISMVND King of
Polonia, who notwithstanding their affinity was nothing pleased with
FERDINAND'S greatness. To be brief, IEROM LASKY counselling king JOHN to crave
aid of SOLIMAN the Emperor of the Turks, went himself Ambassador (King
SIGISMVND winking thereat) to Constantinople, where he so behaved himself
amongst the Bashaes, that SOLIMAN taking JOHN into his protection, John
Sepusius sueth to the Turk for aid.
with promise to restore him to his kingdom, proclaimed war against Hungary.
Wherewith FERDINAND seeing himself destitute of sufficient forces to withstand
the Turkish power; and that by reason of the wars amongst the Christians,
chiefly in Italy, he could not have such aid from his brother the Emperor as
the necessity of the cause required, he was much grieved: nevertheless to
clear himself from blame, acquainting the Emperor with all matters, he
sought means to obtain of SOLIMAN (according as LADISLAVS and JEWS, Kings of
Hungary Ferdinand sueth to the Turk for truce, but in vain.
had done) truce for some years; and to that effect sent JOHN OBERDANSK, a
very wise man, to Constantinople; who after many practices could bring no other
answer from SOLIMAN, but that if FERDINAND did not restore JOHN to the kingdom
of Hungaria, he would make him to know how much the Turks power was to be
feared: with which answer, OBERDANSK being driven out of Constantinople
returned into Hungary; where relating SOLIMANS proud answer to the Council,
he went to Spire to FERDINAND, who at that time was busied at the Diet, about
matters of Religion.

FERDINAND, upon this answer, standing in great doubt of the Turks forces,
made all the provision that the breuity of the time would permit: but the year
1529 being come, in the beginning of the Spring, SOLIMAN commanding his Bashaes
to draw his Forces to an head, came in person with 140000. men to Belgrado;
where, by means of his favorite JEWS Soliman with an Army o^ 140000. men
enters Hungary.
GRITTI, son to ANDREW GRITTI (at that time Duke of Venice) and of ABRAIM
Basha, gently receiving JOHN with many other Hungarian Lords, he again
promised to restore him to his Kingdom: wherewith JOHN being very joyful, with
many his friends followed the Turkish Army; which marching from Belgrado was
already before Buda. Those in Buda being in extreme fear, presently yielded to
SOLIMAN; who entering the City, sought with as great speed to have had the
fortress, guarded by THOMAS NADASKY a Captain for FERDINAND; who valiantly
resisting the enemy, was within few days (to the great reproach of Christian
Soldiers) betrayed by those Germans which FERDINAND left there in garrison:
who perceiving that the enemy with Mines and other Military stratagems, sought
to force the place; willing to provide for themselves, and to the end that
NADASKY should be ^o impediment unto them, bound him; and then yielding to
SOLIMAN, with their lives and goods saved, gave up the Fortress. Whereinto
when the Turk came, knowing the treason of the Soldiers, and moved with a
noble disdain, he presently set NADASKY at liberty, Soliman contrary to his
promise, put to the sword all (...)Soldiers in the Castle of Buda.
and made his Soldiers cut all those in pieces which had committed so
shameful a villainy; making no conscience to break his faith with men so base
and so unworthy to live.

SOLIMAN having (without effusion of blood) gotten the city of Buda presently
sent his Army toward Viena in Austria; and coming before the same upon the
six and twentieth day of September that present year, he besieged the city in
five parts; having first by the way taken Altenburgh and the five Churches.
From thence with great speed he made his horse troops to ouerrun the country
as far as Lintz, (many miles distant from Viena); where doing much harm, and
laden with booty, and many prisoners, they returned to the camp; which being
divided into many parts, continually infested Viena. The Count Palatine of
Rhine, with many other excellent Captains, being therein for the defense
thereof in the behalf of FERDINAND, used all means to frustrate the enemies
attempts; who besieging the City by land, had intelligence that the Fleet which
came up the River Danubius with great store of Ordinance to batter the City,
was for the most part by WOLFANG of Oder Governor of Poson, beaten Vienna
besieged by Soliman.
and sunk in Danou, which then was swollen extraordinarily high, by reason of
much rain which fell at that time. Whereof when SOLIMAN was certified, he with
the rest of the Artillery which escaped WOLFANGS fury, so beat Viena, upon
the fifteenth day of October, that he mist but little to have taken it: but he
was repulsed by the valor of those which had the guard thereof.

SOLIMAN lost at the assault in this one day thirty thousand Turks, with many
famous Captains: who thinking with himself, that if he should have the like
success in two other assaults, he should have a small Army remaining; hearing
withal that FERDINAND came with a great Army to succor them, and that he was
not far off, he resolved to retire from that Solimans loss at the assault of
Vienna.
enterprise; sending word unto them of Vienna, that if they would yield, he
would not enter in to the City, and their goods should be saved, giving them a
perpetual exemption, for that he was not come to do them any harm; but only
to meet with FERDINAD, to end the quarrel for the possession of the kingdom
of Hungary by battle: whereat, the people of of Vienna made a scorn; so that
the day following being the thirtith day of the siege, he was constrained
(after that he had given many fierce assaults) to retire with the loss of
80000. men; and the sooner, having intelligence that FERDINAND with a great
number of Bohemians and Morauians came to the relief thereof. Which making him
to doubt that his people being weakened with the wars, would be unapt to make
head against FERDINAND'S fresh troops he resolved to raise his siege and to
depart. And being departed with so great loss of his people, Soliman raises
hi^ siege from before Vienna.
and having in vain sought to allure those of Vienna to give up the City upon
composition, he went to Buda; where confirming King JOHN King of Hungary,
calling him his friend and vassaile, and leaving JEWS GRITTI with him for his
counselor, he with a determination to return again the next Spring with
greater forces, leading with him about 4000 captives, returned to
Constantinople.

Shortly after SOLIMAN'S departure, FERDINAND came to Vienna: from whence
aduertising his brother the Emperor of all what had happened, he took order
for the reedifying of the City, which together with all the country round
about was in a manner wholly ruined, and then shortly after returned into
Germany, very joyful for the news of the peace concluded between the Christian
Princes, hoping that the Emperor being free from wars, would now have
suppressed LVTHER'S supposed heresy, which daily increasing, was in such
manner dispersed, that many Princes of that country were of his opinion; by
reason whereof there was nothing but Councels in Germany concerning Religion:
which to abolish was FERDINAND'S chiefest care. But the year one thousand five
hundred thirty, being comn, and CHARLES being with the Imperial Diadem, by
the Pope solemnly crowned in Bologna in Italy, upon Saint MATTHIAS the
Apostles day (an auspicious day to him) and afterward going into Germany, and
there celebrating the Ausburgh Diet, he took such order, that FERDINAND by the
Electors (after some contradiction) was chosen King of the Romans; who being
crowned in Aken, and the Emperor being gone into Flanders to visit those
Countries, he went for fear of SEPVSIVS to Vienna: for SEPVSIVS by the
counsel of JEWS GRITTI, daily incensed the Turks against FERDINAND, who in
the end of the year coming into Hungary, spoiled such countries as held for
him: but King JOHN being desirous to bring those troubles to an end, he in such
manner solicited GRITT^ to be an intercessor for him, that SOLIMAN in the year
one thousand five hundred thirty two, much displeased Soliman came into Hungary
with ^00000 men.
with FERDINAND, proclaimed open war against Hungary; and coming shortly
after thither with an Army of three hundred thousand men, he committed such
spoils in the country, that more could not be done. Which FERDINAND
understanding (who at that time was with the Emperor at the Diet at Ratisbone
about matters of Religion) was greatly troubled: and having no sufficient power
to resist the Turks forces, imploring aid of all the Potentates in
Christendom, he (by the Emperors means) obtained some of the Germane Princes:
and the Emperor causing a great number of his footmen to come into Germany,
resolved with the assistance of other Christian Princes, in person to join
with him; particularly with the aid of Pope CLEMENT the Seventh, who with nine
thousand men paid, sent his Nephew the Cardinal HIPPOLITO de Medicis, with all
the succors that possibly in time of such discord (especially between France
and Italy) could be gotten. And in such sort the matter was handled, that the
Emperor and his brother FERDINAND having ninety thousand foote-men, and thirty
thousand horse, taking their way toward Vienna, resolved to fight with
SOLIMAN; who proudly rejecting FERDINANDS Ambassadors sent to treat with him
of a league, he with such fury assailed in many parts, such places as held for
FERDINAND in Hungary, that he did infinite harm; for besides the desolation of
towns, he in person with great fury bent his forces against the City of
Guinz: The charge of which siege, was given to ABRAIM Basha, Captain general
of the Turks Army; who understanding that NICHOLISSA (a man well known to
him) was Governor within the Town; he sent to persuade him not to hold so
weak a place against him, promising him all honest conditions: but NICHOLISSA,
who was a soldier, having resolved either to die or win honor in that
service, answered him courteously that he could not do it: whereupon the place
was battered many days, and valiantly defended, but the Turks had no great
Ordinance; SOLIMAN giving it out that he came only to fight a battle against
the Christians, and therefore had brought none but field pieces.

A^RAIM, seeing what difficulty there was to force this place, he drew
NICHOLISSA to his Camp upon a safe conduct: where having much commended his
valor, he laid before him the great danger wherein he was, if he attended the
great Ordinance which was near, persuading him by the friendship that was
betwixt them, to yield him the place, the which he must for his honor take.
The governor seemed to esteem his words little, telling him that his garrison
was strong, and that he had many Germans and Spaniards within the place, who
would not accept of any accord: but through the importunity of ABRAIM, he
suffered some Guinz freed from the Turkish Army.
few Turks to enter, to give him some satisfaction for his honor, and so Guinz
was bravely defended against this mighty Army: and ABRAIM retired to SOLIMAN'S
Camp, from whence he dismissed FERDINAND'S Ambassadors; to whom he wrote that
he was come into Hungary, to revenge the wrong done unto JOHN his friend and
tributary, and that he would be soon with him to give him battle: wherewith
he was not much troubled.

JEWS GRITTI (left in Hungary with SEPVSIVS after the siege of Vienna)
likewise assailing Strigonium, and making incursions by his Captains into the
country, did put the Hungars in such fear, that many of them abandoning their
houses, retired to the Christians Army lying entrenched without the walls of
Vienna; whither it was thought that SOLIMAN in the end would have come: but he
failing of his purpose to get the City of Guinz, and fearing the Emperors
fortune; after that he had harried the country, and taken many prisoners,
retired to the other side of the River Mura into Carinthia; and from thence
leading his Army in great disorder, and with dishonor to Belgrado; and there
not holding himself fully in safety, he shortly after went to Constantinople;
being first greatly annoyed by the Christian Cauallery, which then did follow
his Camp to Belgrado, and did often fall upon his rereward.

SOLIMAN being departed out of Hungary, FERDINAND used all means to draw the
Emperor to attempt the recovery of Buda; but for as much as he could not
persuade him to stay in that Country, he obtained of him to leave the Italian
footmen, together with Cardinal HIPPOLITO there in Garrison, against the
Turks: but they unwilling to stay any longer, The Em^eror Charles le^t the
wars against the Turk in Hungary to go to war against Christians in Italy.
mutyning, by the persuasion of one MARK da V^lterra putting themselves in
order, in a great rage returned into Italy: with which their departure
FERDINAND was so discontented, that coming to a composition with JOHN
SEPVSIVS, he granted him during his life, peaceably to enjoy such part of
Hungary as then was at his devotion; by reason whereof the wars for that time
being ended in Hungary, FERDINAND bent his forces against the Lantzgraue
PHILIP: who being an enemy to the house of Austria, induced VLRICH Duke of
Wittembergh (assisted (by FRANCIS the French King) to take Arms against
FERDINAND, for the recovery of his estate taken from him by the Emperor, and
given to FERDINAND at the Diet at Ratisbone; in which action the Duke so
valiantly behaved himself, that to FERDINANDS great loss and prejudice, he
recovered his Duchy: in whose behalf sundry Princes in Germany carried
themselves so toward the Emperor and FERDINAND, that they permitted the Duke
peaceably to enjoy his estate: Yet upon condition, that from thenceforth the
Duke should never take Arms against FERDINAND or the house of Austria.

After this peace, FERDINAND received Letters from JEWS GRITTI, importing a
request; which was, that if FERDINAND would be content to permit GRITTI during
his life to enjoy the Kingdom of Hungary, he would so deal with SOLIMAN, that
he should confirm the same after GRITTI his decease to FERDINAND and his
heirs: which his demand, refused by FERDINAND, did much offend G^ITTI, who had
been sent into Hungary by SOLIMAN who favored him very much, to the end he
might assist JOHN Jews Gritti sent by Soliman into Hungary.
SEPVSIO as his Protector, and have a care of the confines of that Kingdom
against FERDINAND and the incursions of the Christians, giving him full
authority both in peace and war. JEWS GRITTI parted in great pomp, SOLIMAN
having given him certain companies of Ianisaries, with seven thousand other
soldiers, bringing with him two Hungarian Captains his friends, who were in
SOLIMAN'S pay; called JOHN DOCCIA and URBAN BACCIANI, with two companies of
horse for his guard.

Being come into Transiluania, he made a public proclamation, that as absolute
Commissioner for SOLIMAN he was comn into that Kingdom to compound all
differences. AMARIGO Bishop of Varradine was Gouerner of Transiluania for King
JOHN SEPVSIO, a Noble Gentleman, endued with many virtues, of great judgment
and generally beloved of the people, with whom he had great credit; who came
not to meet and honor GRITTI as he thought he was bound, representing the
person of SOLIMAN. JOHN DOCCIA, one of his Hungarian Captains hated this Bishop
of Varradine, of whom he had spoken much evil in their voyage, and that he
was in secret a capital enemy to SOLIMAN and all his ministers; whereof he had
always showed effects, speaking much of his haughtiness and pride: And
GRITTI, seeing the Bishop stay long before he came unto him, did easily believe
his malicious suggestion; who being of himself proud by nature, and very
glorious, desired to be honored at his first entrance into the Kingdom:
whereupon, he grew much discontented with the Bishop; which DOCCIA perceiving,
he thought it then time to be revenged of AMARIGO; telling him, that he
should never govern freely during this man's life, offering to go and kill him,
or to bring him bound: whereto GRITTI consented. AMARIGO was then upon the way
to meet with GRITTI, marching softly with 12000 men to do him honor: for, the
season of the year was very hot, which caused DOCCIA to breed more jealousy in
GRITTI; saying, that he came for no good intent with such forces: whereupon he
grew into choler, and gave him order to go and do the effect; so as, taking
with him some companies of horse, he came in the night to the Bishops Tent, his
people lying scattered abroad, and cut off his head. The Bishop of Varradine
slain by order from Lowes Gritti.
Then going to horseback, he returned and presented it to GRITTI; whose choler
being now past, and he better advised, repented the fact. The Bishops Tent
with some others were spoiled by the Turks; and his people rising at the noise,
found him dead, and understood the manner: so as he being greatly allied in
that Country, many of the chief Barons conspired against GRITTI, and resolved
to be revenged for that Noble Prelate: for whose death all the Transiluanians
were so much grieved, that they ran generally to Arms without calling; so as in
an Instant there was an Army of near 40000 men, horse and foot. GRITTI hearing
heerof, retired himself to Mega, into which he was received with some
difficulty, where he meant to defend himself. The Army coming, the multitude
ran rashly to give an assault without battery, but they were repulst with
loss. MAIALATO (who was General of this Army, and a great friend to AMARIGO)
resolved to take it by siege, knowing they had no store of victuals. GRITTI
seeing no succors come, both for that the Turkish Captains which lived on
those frontiers, excused themselves that they could not leave their charges
without express commission from their General who was far off; and King
JOHN (who hated him much, both for that he was come to be his competitor in the
government of the Realm, as also for his great cruelty committed upon his
Gouerner, and so worthy a man) in words made show that he would assist him, and
began to levy men to send him; but they came not in time.

GRITTI seeing himself thus abandoned, and all things desperate, fell sick and
had recourse to the Moldauians who were in the Camp, entreating them to receive
him and his sons into their Quarter; which, PETER their Prince promised: so
as, coming forth at a little Port the next night, he was encountered by MAIALATO
and the friends of AMARIGO; who laying The death of Jews Gritti.
hold on him, they led him to the Generals Tent, where they caused his head to
be cut off by a hangman; his children were taken, and (as some think) were
secretly put to death by PETER the Moldauian. DOCCIA (who was the cause of this
foul fact) was tormented and cruelly slain, with most of the Turks. Some
write, that when as the hangman stripped GRITTI, he found in his breeches a bag
of jewels, to the value of 100000 crowns. This death of GRITTI was pleasing to
many, especially to FERDINAND, for that he might now with more facility contend
against King JOHN his enemy, being no more supported by him.

After the death of GRITTI, King JOHN entered into Transiluania, and within few
days became Lord thereof: but being still molested by FERDINAND, he was
forced to sue to SOLIMAN for aid; who, hearing of the miserable death of
GRITTI, was much displeased: but being certified that K. JOHN had no hand in
it, and supposing that King FERDINAND had been the author, he sent MAHOMET
IAIAGOLI, an old expert soldier and wise, to defend the Frontiers of King JOHN
against FERDINAND; who being very diligent, had in short time taken many
places, joining with the Sangiac of Bosna, FERDINAND being unable to resist him
for his many hindrances. Among others, they took a Castle in the Province of
Possiga called Essechio, very commodious for the passage of the River of Draua,
to enter into The Turk entes into Hungary.
Hungary; the which he fortified very well, and manned with a good garrison:
from whence he made incursions into FERDINAND'S Country, notwithstanding that
there was a truce betwixt SOLIMAN and him, made before the coming of GRITTI;
whereby he was content that JOHN SEPVSIO should be called King, and enjoy that
which he held, during his life. FERDINAND seeing the spoils which the Turks
made, and being importuned by his subjects, he drew an Army together of eight
thousand horse, and sixteen thousand foot, and gave the charge of General to
JOHN CATTIANIER an old soldier, who had won much Ferdinand sends an Army
against the Turk
honor at the defense of Vienna; and the Earl of Lodron was General of all
the foot. This Army marching toward the enemy, being much staid upon the way
by their great Ordinance, they began to grow in distress for victuals, their
Commissaries failing them; yet being a little supplied, they marched toward the
enemy, their foot companies being much decayed: yet the younger men cried out to
fight; whereto the General CATTIANIER consented: so as they marched near unto
the enemy lying at Essechio, where there passed many skirmishes betwixt the two
Armies.

The Turk, seeing the Christian Army in great distress of victuals, would not
suffer his soldiers to go out of their Camp: wherefore the Commanders
consulting together, they resolved to rise and march to Ermando, a Castle ten
miles off, whereas MAHOMET had drawn together much victual, the which they
thought would satisfy their hunger; but having yielded, they found little corn
and some wine, which would not suffice the Army two days: wherefore they
resolved to pass the river of Bodrogo, and to go to Valpiano, where they heard
there was great store of victuals. The Turks pursued them, and annoyed them
continually with skirmishes, and the Christian Army grew into a general
amazement. At night the Captains went to council, to consult what course they
should take, and which way they should go. CATTIANIER was of opinion they
should part that night toward Valpiano, a place of safety not far off, where
was store of victuals to refresh the Army, giving order for the troops to march
away at midnight: but there fell our great disorder, diverse troops going away
upon the first watch before the word was given, every company taking his own
way. CATTIANIER hearing this, was much amazed; and thinking that all the troops
had taken the same course, he went away unarmed and without his baggage. They
write, that these unfortunate news being delivered The flight of Cattianier.
to the Earl of Ladron (who slept, being oppressed with toil and watching) he
returned to his rest until that some of his Captains awaked him, assuring him
that their General was sled: wherewith this valiant man being troubled, he
stood for a time in doubt, and could not believe that a man practiced in so
many wars, and who had never yet deserved the name of a base coward, should
with so great impiety do an act contrary to his honor. Then calling the
Captains and chief of the companies together, he comforted them, and exhorted
them either to die gloriously, or to win perpetual honor by the victory: and
being entreated by them all to take charge of the Army, he gave order for their
march, that they might recover Valpiano if it were possible. Being ready to
march, at the break of day they discovered the enemies troops, with whom they
continually maintained skirmish, and continued their march: but being oppressed
still with fresh troops of Turks, having lost many men, the footmen being tired
with fighting, The Christians ou^owne by the Tu^ks.
and almost dead with hunger, they were in a manner all cut in pieces. Count
LODOVVICK, being sore wounded, retired himself into a narrow lake adjoining,
with three companies that remained: being oppressed with his hurt, and
entreated by the Turks to yield, he submitted himself.

MAHOMET, grown proud with this victory, sent the Earl of Ladron's head, and
many of the chief Captains, with a great number of their noses which were
slain, unto SOLIMAN. The death of the Earl of Ladron.
FERDINAND, hearing of this unfortunate success, was wonderfully grieved,
considering that it happened by the baseness of his General, and other fugitive
Captains who were grown a scorn both to women and children. CATTIANIER,
hearing heerof, wrote to FERDINAND, that he understood his honor was much
blemished in Court by his adversaries; desiring, his Majesty would be pleased
to give him a safe conduct to come to Court to justify himself; the cause of
this great ruin proceeding not from him, but from the Commissaries who had not
according to their duties brought victuals to the Camp. FERDINAND granted his
desire, and CATTIANIER came; but he had such cold entertainment from the King
and the whole Court, that he repented his coming. He spoke much in his own
excuse: but not able to defend his going from the Army, and having given no
sign to depart, the rest were slain, every man called him a base Traitor.
FERDINAND having committed him to custody to punish him as he deserved, fearing
with the loss of his honor, his life would be in question, he made an escape
by night, and fled to MAHOMET; who received him kindly, promising him great
entertainment if he would bring Austria under SOLIMAN'S command: the which
having promised, he parted and went to NICHOLAS SADEINIO, a man of great power
in that Country, seeking to draw him to serve the Turk: but NICHOLAS, having
given him good words, slew him. Having cut off his head, he carried it to
FERDINAND, making an ample relation of his wicked design: for the which the
King honored him much, and rewarded him with the estate of CATTIANIER.

About this time 1538, PETRR governed in Valachia or Moldauia: he was nephew to
DRACOLA, who had made the league with King MATTHIAS against AMVRATH. This PETER
Peter, Prince of Moldauia, inconstant and faithless.
although he were a Christian of the Greek Church, yet was he a man of an ill
disposition, faithless, inconstant, greedy of spoil, and without any
conscience, to make his own estate great. He was Tributary to SOLIMAN: but he
carried himself so, that when any occasion was offered whereby he might annoy
him for his own good, he had no respect so as he might do it covertly, or
have any color to excuse it. He had friendship with King JOHN, and likewise
with FERDINAND, and yet he laid wait to murder them. He assaulted FERDINAND'S
Camptraiterously, near to Brassouia: for which, King JOHN gave him great
thanks, thinking he had done it for his relief. PETER (who never took Arms but
for his own profit) grown proud by that former victory and the artillery
which he had taken, soon after he invaded Transiluania, took many places, and
spoiled the Country. King JOHN sent to expostulate with him, why he did him
wrong under the color of friendship; requiring restitution. The Moldauian
answered, that he meant to be his friend; whereof he had given him good proof
when he relieved him against FERDINAND. And if he had made use of VESTRICK, it
was to secure CIZOVIO, against whom FERDINAND had a practice. He invaded the
confines of Poland often: but at the last he was encountered by JOHN Earl of
Tornau a valiant Captain who fought with him, and overthrew his Army, and took
forty pieces of Ordinance with FERDINANDS Arms; he himself was wounded and
fled into his country. King SIGISMVND was importuned by his subjects to make
war against him, and to ruin him, the which he would not do without
SOLIMANS leave, being his tributary; who at that time hated Soliman hated Peter
Prince of Moldauia.
PETER much, for that upon his faith, JEWS GRITTI had gone forth, and was
slain, and also he had murdered his innocent children with great cruelty. And
moreover he paid not his tribute duly.

They write, that SOLIMAN took this request of SIGISMVND very kindly, showing
him such respect: to whom he made this answer. That he knew well the deserts of
the Moldauian, but it did belong to him as well to punish his seditious and
wicked tributaries, as to defend the good; and soon after he entered Valachia
with an Army, but PETER fled out of the country: whereupon SOLIMAN made
STEPHEN his brother, Prince in his place; and then returned, freeing both King
JOHN and FERDINAND from the fear of his Arms. PETER being fled into Cizouia
with his wife and children and chiefest treasure, King JOHN (who hated him very
much) went to besiege the place; which being very strong, and well furnished
with men and victuals, continued four months, until that he had withdrawn
the Transiluanians who were his subjects: whereat PETER being amazed, and
seeing the danger, yielded himself and the place. King JOHN (who was pitiful
by nature) although he knew his treacherous disposition, yet had he compassion
of his miserable state, and received him courteously. Soon after, SOLIMAN wrote
his Letters to King JOHN to send PETER to Constantinople: to whom JOHN made an
humble relation in what manner PETER had yielded, and that he had promised him
his life; beseeching him, that, as he was a Noble and generous Emperor, he
would not suffer him, being his vassal and tributary, to fail of the faith he
had given to that wretch, promising so to keep him as STEPHEN should have no
cause to fear. But SOLIMAN was not so satisfied, sending sharper Letters for
him; and King JOHN, fearing to incense him, resolved to send him; but in such
sort, that SOLIMAN, being a generous Prince, should be forced to use him with
all clemency: and therefore being well accompanied, he wrote, that he had sent
him as an Ambassador, not as a prisoner; recommending him much. SOLIMAM upon
his submission, and the faith which King JOHN his friend had given him, was
moved to mercy, and confined him only to P^ra. STEPHEN his brother, who
reigned in his place in Moldauia, began to grow odious to all his subjects for
his covetous disposition and cruel extortion of money; whereupon they slew
him, which gave good hope to PETER to recover his Country again: but the
Nobility made choice of a young man called ALEXIVS, of the same house of
DRACOLA. But soon after, those Noblemen which are called Boiari, who made
choice of him, cut off his head, and sent it to PETER, who was upon the
confines with an Army of Turks, to restore him into his estate; who by degrees
put all those traitorous Peter restored to his Country.
Boiari to death.

In the beginning of the year 1538, DEVELS ASSEMBER (a man of great account in
Bohemia) seeing the negligence of SEPVSIVS his people, gathered together
certain companies of foot and and horse; and going toward the Countries
guarded by the Turks garrisons, particularly to the City of Toccay, situate on
the other side of the river Tissa, there having easily surprised those which
had it in guard, in few hours took it: and having almost sacked it, he went
through to the Citadel against a squadron of the Turks horse; who understanding
of the surprise of Toccay, came to relieve the garrison: and coming to blows
with them, he so distressed them, that they were constrained to retire;
whereupon, returning to the City, and making an end of sacking it, laden with
the spoil, and having gotten certain pieces of artillery, he returned: whereat
FERDINAND greatly rejoicing, bestowed many gifts upon him. The Emperor, the
Pope, and the Venecians being joined together in league against the Turk, he
was comprised in the number of the confederats, in the year one thousand five
hundred thirty nine. FERDINAND helping his brother the Emperor to suppress the
Gantois, which rebelled against him, and tired with the continual wars of
Hungary, he came to an agreement with King JOHN, upon condition, that each of
them should continue in possession of what he held in Hungary, and that JOHN
should freely enjoy the title of king: and if that JOHN should have no heirs,
that then the kingdom should fall to FERDINAND and his heirs: provided
always that king FERDINAND should conceal this agreement from SOLIMAN, of
whose displeasure JOHN stood highly in fear.

The matter was not so secretly handled, but that SOLIMAN had full notice of
all their agreement. Whereupon being angry with JOHN, he often times charged
him with ingratitude; and had it not been for his friends, and (that which did
more import) the war with the Persians, he had without doubt troubled him for
it: who either for fear of SOLIMAN, or upon some other occasion, being a while
after displeased with FERDINAND, he took to wife ISABEL, the daughter of
SIGISMVND King of Poland; who within few months appearing to be with child,
induced him to seek to drive STEPHEN MAIALTO and BAILASSO out of Transiluania,
both governors of that Province: the one of which, which was MAIALTO,
notwithstanding that he knew that SOLIMAN deadly hated him; yet he sundry times
instantly sued to have been by him crowned King of Transiluania: whereof JOHN
being advertised by SOLIMAN himself, who hated traitors and treason
wonderfully, he sent to king JOHN the Letters which MAIALTO had written,
blaming him for his carelesnes, to have given the government of his Provinces
to so faithless a man, exhorting him to repair it, and to be more advised
hereafter when he should have any occasion to make choice of the like
governors: And to MAIALTO (whom he hated for the death of JEWS GRITTI, and the
Turks which were slain with him) he gave a sour answer, more by his
countenance then his words; MAIALTO seeing himself rejected by SOLIMAN, and
his treachery discovered to King JOHN, he entered into practice with King
FERDINAND, who easily entertained it, by means of THOMAS NADASKY, brother in
law to MAIALTO: who being received into FERDINAD'S protection, were assisted by
him against King JOHN; but neither of them being of equal power to him, they
were constrained, the one which was BAILASSO, to retire himself; and the other
being in Megest (a most strong place) was by King JOHN'S soldiers besieged:
but King JOHN understood that his wife Queen ISABEL in the mean time whilst
he was about Megest had borne him a son.

During this siege, King JOHN lay at Sabin^, being fallen into the relapse of a
former sickness; The Captains of the Army whom the King favored most (being
but a days journey off) came to him to rejoice with him. Upon this happy news
of having a successor to his kingdom, the king would needs be brought forth of
his bed unto the banquett, where eating more then was fit, in the regard of
the fever which had newly left him, his stomach having no strength to digest
it, he fell again into a fever, whereof he died. By his testament (contrary to
the Accord made with FERDINAND) he left his son heir to his kingdom; giving
him for tutors PETER VI^CHIO his kinsman, whom he had left for his Viceroy in
Buda with the Queen; and Friar GEORGE Bishop of Varradine a man very faithful
and wise, under the protection of SOLIMAN. Who being nobly born in Croatia,
after some time spent in the service of King JOHN, became a Monk in Buda; where
he had not long remained, but waxing weary of the Monastical life, he
retaining still the habit, went out of the Covent, and returned to the service
of JOHN in Polonia: to whom (being expulst his kingdom by FERDINAND, and
remaining with IEROM LASKY) he did many services of importance, so as being
very highly respected by him, he created him after the recovery of
Transiluania, and the rest of Hungary, Bishop of Varadin; and at his death,
left him together with the Queen (mother unto the child) Gouerner of the
Kingdom: who in the year 1540, compounding with MAIALTO, in the name of the
Queen refused to stand to the agreement made between JOHN and FERDINAND; and
temporising with him, levied certain companies of horse and foot: and to the
end to be in the more safety, suing to SOLIMAN for aid, as to the Protector of
the pupil, he together with the Queen and the young King retired to Buda:
wherewith FERDINAND being highly offended, and therewith hoping to recover
that Kingdom, he levied an Army: and in the mean time, sending Ambassadors to
SOLIMAN, he offered to give him that tribute which King JOHN was wont to pay;
but he first persuaded Queen ISAEELL, that she contenting herself in peace to
enjoy Transiluania, should resign the rest to him, according to the agreement
made between him and her husband. But seeing that he could obtain neither the
one nor the other of his demands, he sent LEONARD VELSCH one of his Captains,
with a great number of men of war, to molest the Queen. VELSCH, entering the
Country of the young King, went from Strigonium to Visegard, which he took
without any difficulty; and, having taken it, staid there certain days to
refresh his Army.

Then passing the river Danuby, and with the like celerity having taken Pesthe
and Vaccia, he presented himself before Buda; wherein VALENTINE DVRAC (who in
former time had served FERDINAND) lay then in Garrison. This DVRAC to his great
credit, withstanding VELSCH, defended the City, until that constrained by the
Turkish soldiers, sent by the Saniacque of Belgrado to the relief of the
young King, VELSCH retired to Visgard: where having in few days space taken
the Citadel, and garrisonized it, in the name of King FERDINAND; and wintred
his soldiers in the same place, without any molestation by the Turks, until
the end of that year: in the year one thousand five hundred forty four, the
Turks took the field with such fury, as having suddenly taken Vaccia, they
sundry times attempted Pesthe; where being resisted by the valor of the
defendants, they departed, fearing that FERDINAND'S Army (which being much
increased, was come to make head against them) would have defeated them, whose
assaults they could not so well avoid; but being in ill plight, they lost many
of their Arierguard. By reason of which good success, FRRDINAND hoping to have
taken Buda, gathered together 40000 men, which he sent under the conduct of
WILLIAM ROCKENDOLPH, a Captain of great worth, to take that City. ROCKENDOLPH
Rockendolph sent by Ferdinand to attempt Buda.
coming thither, gave many attempts: but being ever valiantly repulsed by the
besieged, he saw that by assault he could not take the City; he therefore
resolved to try what he could do by siege: and besieging it round, he so kept
victuals from the City, that had not Friar GEO^GE used great diligence, the
City doubtless had yielded. Nevertheless ROCKENDOLPH with words and
threatenings frustrating the devices of some seditious persons, continued the
siege, till it was freed by SOLIMAN.

The Queen, being thus distressed in Buda, sent her Ambassadors to SOLIMAN to
crave aid; who calling them into his presence, said unto them, that he had
invested King JOHN in that Realm of Hungary, the which should pass to his
heirs; and that he would, his promise should hold perpetually, as long as the
heirs should remain obedient to him, and perform that whereunto they were bound:
wherefore he confirmed his vassal and tributrry STEPHEN the pupil, giving to
the Ambassadors the Ensigns of the confirmation of friendship with the Infant;
which were, a round shield, an iron mace with the handle of gold, a Semitar
with a scabberd enriched with jewels, and a long robe of crimsin velvet and
gold; saying, that by those Ensigns which he sent him, he took him into his
protection. These Ambassadors being thus happily dispatched, LASCO, sent by
FERDINAND, arrived, and demanded the inuestiture of that Kingdom for him, with
an offer of tribute, showing the agreement which he had made with King JOHN;
but he could not be heard: and for that he did often name the Emperor CHARLES,
magnifying his power, SOLIMAN disdaining it, caused him to be put in prison.
SOLIMAN understanding that Buda was in great distress, sent MAHOMET Basha with
many men of war, and a great quantity of victuals, to the relief thereof;
promising to follow himself in person, as within few days after he did.
Which (...)much troubled ROCKENDOLPH, that they forced him to retire into the
I Will of Comer: for, MAHOMET having victualled Buda, and being encamped within
sight of FERDINAND'S Army, after many skirmishes Rockendolph overthrown and
put to flight by Mahomet.
he so much provoked his enemies, that they joined with him in battle;
wherein, after sundry accidents, ROCKENDOLPH being overthrown, was constrained
to flee, and many of his Captains were taken prisoners. And MAHOMET Basha,
sending to visit the young king and Queen mother, persuaded her to hope well of
SOLIMAN the great Turk; who, coming from Adrianople into Hungary, shortly after
came to the Camp, bringing with him a great number of soldiers, with a
resolution to free himself from troubles, and wholly to put FERDINAND out of
all hope ever to recover that estate.

SOLIMAN being come near unto Buda, he sent unto the infant king three goodly
horses, with their furnitures of gold, set with jewels, and three Royal Robes
of Gold, and to every Hungarian Baron a Robe with a chain of Gold: by his
Ambassadors he sent word unto the Queen that she should send the child with
those Barons, unto the Camp, excusing him that he came not to see her, being
not the custom of the Ottomans to see women in another house; neither would he
in respect of her honor (being young and beautiful, the daughter of a King his
friend, and the wife of his confederate) that she should go into his camp.
The Queen (they say) was much amazed; fearing for her son: but FRIAR GEORGE
persuaded her to send him speedily, least she should show any distrust of that
great Emperor. Being brought to SOLIMANS pauilion he embraced him lovingly,
the Hungarian Barons were honored, and dined with the Basha: but in the mean
time SOLIMAN had given order, that some of his captains (making show to visit
the city) should seize upon a port and draw in their men; the which they did
before it was discovered: whereupon they disarmed the citizens, and lodged
their troops, but with great modesty and shows of friendship.

SOLIMAN being advertised that the city was at his command, he sent the Infant
back unto The city of B^da in the power of Soliman.
the Queen, but retained five of the Barons, which were FRIAR GEORGE, PETER
VICCHIO, VALENTINE STEPHANIO, VERBESIO the head Chancellor, and VREAN BASHIANO
who had the guard of the city. The Queen seeing the city taken by fraud, and
her Barons deteyned, sent humbly to entreat SOLOMAN that he would not blemish
his great name of clemency and magnaminity, but observe the faith given, and
send back her faithful Barons, who had always deserved well of his greatness
and of the Turkish name. SOLIMAN was three days in counsel touching this
action. Some persuaded him to put the Barons to death and seize upon the whole
state. But ROSTAM Bashaw his son in-law whom he favored much, was of a milder
disposition, aduising him to restore unto the Queen the city and the Barons,
and that SOLIMAN being a just Prince should not unjustly take from that poor
pupil his kingdom, seeing that the father was his tributary and the Queen had
offered it for her son: that he should remember he had taken the Infant into
his protection, and had confirmed him in that Realm with the usual ensigns
and ornaments; the which if he should now take away, he should purchase
himself perpetual infamy with the world, to have by fraud usurped the
Realm of a poor pupil, who had recommended himself unto him, and had been
confirmed by him; giving many other reasons to the like effect. SOLIMAN took a
middle course, sending word unto the Queen, that she should part from Buda,
for that he meant to hold it as a Bulwark against FERDINAND; and that she
should go and reign at Lippa beyond the river of Tiuisco; that he would
receive nothing of that kingdom, but his ordinary tribute, and defend the city
and castle at his own charge; whereupon all the Barons were sent back, but
VALENTINE whom she could not obtain by any suite: yet he promised he should
have no harm, and withal he assured that the young king should be no sooner
able to govern, but he would restore whatsoever belonged to him and was in his
power.

The Queen departed from Buda to Lippa with her son and all her Royal
furniture, accompanied with all her Barons, except VALENTINE, cursing the
infidelity of such a Tirant, The Queen driven out of Buda.
and repenting in her heart, that she had not accepted the conditions offered by
FERDINAND, to give the province of Sepusia, and other places which he had
taken, where she might have lived with more quiet of mind, then to have her
son king of the whole Realm, subject to so perfidious a Barbarian, as she
might doubt hourly he would deprive him. She said that this happened for her
sins, to have rather trusted in the friendship of a cruel Mohammedan then in a
Christian King, who was mild, just, and of the same faith: but she durst not
discover her thoughts. FERDINAND hearing of the defeat of his Army, in fear of
some greater loss, being also sorry for the loss of Buda, a place of great
importance for the defense of Christendom, he resolved Conditions propounded
by Ferdinand to Soliman.
to send Ambassadors presently to conquering SOLIMAN, with conditions of peace,
who were dispatched unto him with very rich Presents; and falling down the
river of Dannow, they came to the Camplying before Buda, and were honorably
entertained by ROSTAN Basha, and brought into the presence of SOLIMAN: to whom
they delivered their Embassage, requiring in the name of FERDINAND, that he
would grant him the Realm of Hungary for the same tribute which King JOHN had
paid; promising to satisfy the Queen in the behalf of her son; showing also
that the said K. JOHN moved in his conscience, who told him he had no title to
that Kingdom, having unjustly usurped it, had promised it him after his death;
whereof they produced the contract: by reason whereof, FERDINAND made war.

After two days pause, SOLIMAN gave answer to the Ambassadors by ROSTAN, that
he was content to give peace to FERDINAND whenever he should restore the
Forts, Cities, Solimans answer to the Ambassadors.
and places in Hungary; and for that he had been often provoked to war, and
spent much, yet he would impose no other penalty, but the payment of a small
tribute yearly for the Arch-duchy of Austria, and that he should quit his
pretensions to Hungary; threatening, that if FERDINAND did not accept of these
conditions of peace, he would not fail to take those places by Arms which were
unjustly usurped. The Ambassadors said, that FERDINAND could not resolve to
accept of these conditions without the priuity of the Emperor his brother, and
therefore they craved some time of truce that he might write to him, and receive
his answer. But SOLIMAN knew well that their design was only to win time, to
the end that winter might approach, and the war be deferrd; assuring himself,
that FERDINAND would never accept of such unreasonable conditions, and
therefore he would not grant any truce. After twenty days stay at Buda he
retired to Constantinople, having given charge to the Sangiac of Belgrado to
make an incursion into Austria, and to put all to fire and sword; and he
commanded CACON General of the Adventurers to spoil Morauia: but God had
compassion of his people; for, there fell such abundance of rain, that they
could not do any thing to annoy the Christians.

This year 1542, King FERDINAND lost Marano, a place of great importance, and a
Port of the sea upon the Adriatic Gulf, near to Aquilegia and the confines of
the Venecians: it was Marano trecherously surprised.
treacherously surprised by BELTRANIO SACCHIA of Vdena who pretended to be a
great friend unto the governor, promising to bring him two barks of corn,
whereof the Castle was in want: by which color he brought in diverse soldiers
and became master of the Castle, and put the governor his wife and son in
prison: but soon after, SACCHIA himself was shut out of the Castle by his
companion TVRCHETTO da Naue, and forced to flee to Venice. It was besieged by
FERDINAND'S forces which lay at Gradisca and there abouts. TVRCHETTO did
pretend to hold it for the French King, sending to PETER STROZZI (who was then
leuying of men for the King) to send him some troops. FERDINAND, being
advertised heerof, caused men to be levied in the County of Tirroll and the
bordering places, for the recovery of Marano, sending also a little Army of
Barks, besieging it by sea and land. Having after a long siege reduced the
Castle to extremity for want of victuals, in the end there appeared certain
Venecian Galleys; who gave the Commander to understand, that they should depart
from thence, for that the Segnory of Venice had bought the place of the French:
and so the Venecians entered presently, and it was yielded up unto them.

The Emperors Ambassador complaining heerof to the State, they answered that
they had bought Marano (that is to say, the circuit as it stands in the water,
not meddling with the firm land) to avoid a greater scandal, the French King
being else resolved to deliver it to the Turk; which they hoped FERDINAND being
a wise Prince would not take in ill part. And thus Marano continued in the
hands of the Venecians, and does to this day.

This year 1543, there was a great Assembly of Princes and Noblemen at
Noremberg, where they conferred touching the aiding of FERDINAND in his Turkish
wars; so as they had drawn together from the Noblemen and free Cities 30000
foot and 7000 horse, all Germans. CONRAD HESSIVS commanded the foot, and
THEODORICK VOLFANGO Ferdinands preparation against the Turk.
the horse; and IOACHIM Marquess of Brandenburgh was General. Coming to
Vienna, the Gouerner of Stiria came to them with ten thousand horse; and there
were almost 15000 Hungarians on horseback, under the command of PETER PERENO,
who had always commanded the old bands. The Council being now assembled at
Trent, King FERDINAND sent his Ambassadors thitherto demand aid: whereupon Pope
PAVL sent him 3000 foot commanded by ALEXANDER VITELLI and SFORZA PALLAVICINO:
and fearing the Turk, he had great forces on the frontiers, before commanded by
the Marquess of Marignian.

The Army being assembled at Vienna, they marched in good order along the banks
of the river of Dannow, and went to besiege Pesta near unto Buda; where were
many encounters and skirmishes, with great loss of either side, but especially
of the Turks. The Town was battered, Pesta besieged, and the Christians
repulst.
and a furious assault given by the Italians and the Hungarians: but in the end
they were repulst with the loss of 700 men. It is written by VLLOA, that upon
their retreit a Ianizary cried unto them in the Italian Tongue, saying; You
valiant Italians, retire and save your selves, The words of a Ianizary.
and let come those cowardly Dutchmen: for, we desire to draw the wine out of
their heads, and to give you all possible respects. After this repulse, the
Commanders and Council hearing of the coming of ACCOMAT Sangiack of Belgrado,
and winter growing on, they resolved to retire the Army, and return to Vienna,
much against the will of the Hungarians, the Marquess of Marignas and Vitelli;
who persuaded them to batter it again the next day without giving any assault,
to the end it should not seem that the amazement of the former days The end of
the war of Pesta.
success had made them depart: which done, they withdrew their artillery; and
the Army marched away in good order, being sometimes annoyed by the Turk, but
still to their loss: and thus ended that shameful enterprise.

At this time PETER PERENO, a Nobleman of Hungary, of great account, who had
always commanded the Hungarian horse, and done great service, being accused
that he practiced to make himself King of Hungary, was by FERDINAND'S
commission taken in the Castle of Strigonium by LESCANO a Spaniard, and given
to MARIGNAN, who conducted him Pereno imprisoned by Ferdinand.
to Vienna; where he was put in prison, and could not be admitted to justify
himself publicly. Which much discontented the Hungarians, seeing he was a
valiant Captain, greatly beloved of them; some thinking he was falsely accused by
such as were near FERDINAND and enui'd him.

FERDINAND, employing himself to the affairs of Germany, used all means to
hinder the meeting of the Princes of Germany in Smaleald, with the Ambassadors
of the free Towns, who (as the fame went) were assembled to the prejudice of
the Emperor. Which for that he could not effect, he assaied to make peace
between the Emperor and the French King, notwithstanding that both in the one
and the other he found great difficulty: nevertheless, he so handled Peace
between the Emperor and the French King.
the matter, that in the beginning of the next year they agreeing upon sundry
conditions, in the year 1544 the articles of peace were confirmed by them both.

In the beginning of the year 1545, FERDINAND sent his Ambassadors to the
Council of Trent, to the end that the disagreement in matters of religion in
Germany might be reconciled according to the Emperors desire: but he seeing
the ill will which the Assembly at Smalcald bare to the Emperor, and that the
same increased, by his Lettrs he persuaded each of them to quietness: which
persuasions taking no effect, the Emperor came from Flanders into Germany;
where he obtained aid from the Duke of Florence, the Duke of Ferrara, and from
every Potentate in Italy some, but chiefly from Pope PAVL: who seeing that the
war should be waged against the Lutherans, coutemners of his Holiness, sent
him twelve thousand footmen and six Ths Pope sent 12000 foot and 600 horse to
aid the Emperor against the Protestants.
hundred horse, commanded by his nephew OCTAVIUS FARNESE the Emperors
son-in-law, with his brother the Cardinal ALEXANDER FARNESE, Legate a Latere
for his Uncle the Pope. With which supplies, the Emperor having in the year
1546 and 1547 distressed his enemies, he restored the Duke of Bruinswick to his
estate; who from the year 1543, had by the Lantzgraue, and JOHN FREDERICK Duke
of Saxony, lived deprived of his duchy: and notwithstanding the promise made to
Duke MAVRICE, assuring him that the Lantzgraue should be restored to his
Countries; yet he nevertheless was likewise taken prisoner the same day that
according to the agreement they spoke together; so as Germany being in short
space in quiet, Duke JOHN FREDERICK was deprived of the dignity of Elector, and
together with many other Captains of the league committed to prison in the year
one thousand, five hundred, forty seven.

In the year 1545 SOLIMAN came again into Hungary with a great Army, sending to
besiege Soliman comes into Hungary.
Valponio, a Town belonging to PETER PERENO (who at that time was prisoner with
FERDINAND) in the which his wife was, with agarrison of Hungarians: but she
yielded the Valpanio taken.
place upon good conditions, the which were duly observed. After which, they
besieged So^lo, another Town belonging to this Lady; the which was valiantly
defended, and many Turks slain: but being forced in the end by their continual
assaults to retire into the Castle, they offered to compound. ACCOMAT who
commanded that Army, disdaining that so little a place should make such
resistance, said, that he would accept of no other conditions, but discretion:
whereupon, yielding they were all slain, to terrify the rest. SOLIMAN being
comne to Buda, he sent to besiege Strigonium: in the which, SALAMANCA and
LESCANO, two Spaniards, commanded for FERDINAND; the one having charge of the
City, the other of the Castle: where, after many exploits of war and assaults
given, the Commanders began to faint, and resolved to yield (as it was thought)
to save the wealth which they had gatherd together; which the soldiers
discovering, cried out, that they might yet defend it valiantly; but they could
not preuail: whereupon, the Town was yielded to SOLIMAN, upon condition to have
their liberties Strigonium taken.
and lives.

From thence the Turks went to Tatta, a Castle near to Gomora, the which was
commanded by HANNIBALL TASSO of Bologna, and ANTIO a German, with a garrison of
800 men; who despairing to defend so small a place against so great an Army,
yielded it without fight, Tatta yielded to the Turks.
being suffered to depart freely. The Earl of Torneillo, who commanded in
Gomora, put these two Captains in prison, and cut off TASSO'S head, leaving
ANTIO to FERDINAND'S censure, who referred him to the same Sentence which
Torneillo had given of the Italian Captain: and so they died both of one death.
Then the Turks went to besiege Alba Regalis; which they battered, and gave
diverse assaults: but in the end it was yielded to the Turks by the wilfulnes
Alba Regalis taken.
of the Citizens, contrary to the will of the Commander and soldiers, upon
condition to have their goods and liberties: the like was granted to the
Italians and Germans, but not to the Hungarians; and they departed without the
loss of any thing. After which, the Turk retired with his Army to
Constantinople.

FERDINAND went against the Bohemians, which in the behalf of the Duke of
Saxony had rebelled against him: and being comn into the Kingdom, after much
resistance and apparent danger of his person, he at length got the Castle of
Prague; wherein being entered, he put the Bohemians in such fear, that,
notwithstanding the many difficulties, yet he subdued them in such manner,
that they yielded themselves absolutely to his mercy. And so having
accomplished this enterprise, he sent his eldest soune MAXIMILIAN with certain
gallant troops of horse to the aid of his brother the Emperor; and he himself
in the mean time never desisted, together with Duke MAVRICE, to trouble Duke
JOHN FREDERICK. In the day of the battle beyond the River Albis, he not only
assisted his brother with his forces, but with certain very good troops of
horse came thither in person; where he showed himself no less a valiant man
at Arms, than a most prudent Commander. After which victory, returning into
Bohemia, he celebrated the obsequies of his wife ANNE, who in the beginning of
the year died in childe-bed: which obsequies he could no sooner solemnize, by
reason of the wars in Germany, and the insurrections in Hungary.

FERDINAND, having ended the wars of Bohemia, and helped his brother to
suppress his enemies, in the year 1548, houlding a Synod with the Emperor in
Ausburgh, there were fifteen Institutions published appertaining to religion,
with express order, that the same should be observed till the dissolution of
the Council of Trent; which ordinance was called an Interim: wherein was
contained what was commanded to be believed till the determination of the said
Council. After which publication, the Emperor desirous that his son PHILP,
Prince of Spain, should be acknowledged by the Netherlanders for their
legitimate and natural Lord, he married his daughter MARY to MAXIMILIAN
Archduke of Austria, eldest son to his brother FERDINAND, to the end that they
should make their residence in Spain until the return Ferdinand^ gave Bohemia
to his son Maximilian.
of PHILIP: and purchasing a dispensation from the Pope, he publishing the
nuptials, sent him into Spain, accompanied by the Cardinal of Trent, and the
Earl of Mansfelt, and many other of the German and Bohemian Nobility. But
first, before his departure, he obtained for him of his father FERDINAND the
Kingdom of Bohemia, to the end that he should come into Spain with the
greater dignity; where, as Gouerner of those Countries, he remained till the
return of Prince PHILIP.

In the year 1551, FERDINAND received Letters from SOLIMAN the great Turk;
wherein showing himself discontent both with FERDINAND and the Emperor, for
that ANDREW DORIA had taken the town of Africa from DRAGVT RAISE a Pirat, he
protested, that if it were not rendered, he would cruelly revenge the injury don
to his Captain DRAGVT. Whereto FERDINAND made answer, that for as much as
Pirates were not comprised in the Articles of agreement, neither he nor his
brother were bound to any thing. With which answer dispatching the messenger,
in the month of May he sent JOHN BAPTISTA CASTALDO into Transiluansa, to
assist Friar GEORGE against Queen ISABELL; who having in former time drawn
great part of the Transiluanians to her devotion, and sought to preserve
Castaldo sent to aid Friar George against the Queen.
that Province for her son, fell at open variance with the Friar: who,
ambitiously desiring to continue his government, gave FERDINAND to understand,
that the Queen hoping by the Turks means to hold that Country, was again risen
against him, and sought to drive him out of that estate: which for that he knew
to be very prejudicial to all Christendom, he had advertised him thereof;
therewith entreating him, that for the preservation of the country, he would
be pleased to relieve him against the Queens invasions, which daily troubled
him.

FERDINAND, induced by these reasons, sent (as before is said) Castaldo to the
Friar: who as his Lieutenant General coming to Agria, levied 5700 foote-men,
and 1700 horse; with which passing the river Tissa, he went to Debrezen, where
finding Andrew Battor, and Thomas Naclaidi, principal Lords of that kingdom,
he went into Transiluania: where having for the space of three months besieged
Colosuarre in the behalf of the Friar, he was advertised that the Friar
through a new composition with the Queen, having taken Alba Iulia, was retired
from the wars; and that he had nevertheless sent him word, that if he would
meet him at Egnet, he would speak with him. Whither Castaldo being come, after
many discourses and treaties past between them, obtaining of the Friar the
City of Alba Iulia to winter his people in; he had word from the Queen, that
she would come to an agreement with FERDINAND, according to the covenants made
with her husband: so that after many conuentions, coming to Colosuarre,
whither were already come the most part of the Lords of that kingdom, Isabel
in the name of her son renounced, and gave up the kingdom and estate of
Hungary to Castaldo, who in the name of FERDINAND accepted the same. After
which renunciation, she granted to the most insatiable Friar all his demands,
which were unreasonable, together with the Archbishopric of Strigonium, being
at that time void. Castaldo accommodating that Province according to the order
received from FERDINAND, and as he thought most expedient, celebrated the
nuptials between one of FERDINANDS daughters, and John, at the first called
Stephen, the Queens son. But the ambitious Friar, not content with the
agreement, by the means of a Frenchman, who was a spy for the Turk in that
kingdom, he acquainted Soliman with the whole agreement and composition made
between FERDINAND and the Queen. Wherewith Soliman being highly displeased,
shortly after sent the Beglerbey of Grecia; who passing with great celerity to
Belgrado, came to Beche, and took it, with Bekerque and Senate: and having
without any resistance, upon composition taken Lippa, he went without any
opposition made by the Christians, to Themesuar; where encamping himself, he
understood that Castaldos Army was come. Who with much ado, having induced
Friar George, then made Treasorer of that kingdom, and Vaiuode of
Transiluania, to levy forces against the Turk, he brought it so to pass that
he constrained the Beglerbey to raise his siege from before Themesuarre;
notwithstanding that the Friar ever endeavored all that he could to hinder
Castaldo's proceedings.

The Friar understanding of the Turks departure, went to Lippa; where he
stayed not long, til by Pope Iulio at the request of FERDINAND, he was made
Cardinal; yet he sought to cross Castaldos designs, and to betray him and
FERDINANDS whole Army into the hands of the Turks: hoping by this means, not
only to reconcile himself to Solsman, but to become absolute Lord of
Transiluania. Whose wicked practice being made frustrate, Castaldo Lippa taken
by Castaldo.
continued the siege of Lippa: which after many skirmishes and assaults,
coming into Castaldos power, was given in prey to the Soldiers, who laden
with spoil, presently besieged the Fortress; about which having spent some
days, they had taken the same, together with Oliman Governor thereof, if the
Friars villainy had not frustrated Castaldo's purpose; Who desiring by these
means to obtain the Turks good will, dealt so, that he set Oliman at
liberty: wherewith Castaldo being infinitely displeased, sought to abate the
Friars authority: but failing of his purpose, he dissembled the matter.

Winter being come, FERDINAND'S forces leaving Transiluania (he being unwilling
they should remain there) stayed upon the frontiers of the enemy. After whose
departure CASTALDO conducting the Artillery into the kingdom, discovered to
SFORZA PALLAVICINO that FERDINAND had commanded Friar GEORGE should be put to
death; but being unable, without great circumspection, to bring it to effect,
he willed PALLAVICINO to be in a readiness until he gave him further
direction. In the mean time repairing to the Citadel at Lippa, he stayed near
to Varadin: and sending his Army before, he joined with the Friar riding
together in one Coach to Buise, in which place being again solicited by
FERDINAND to make away the Friar. CASTALDO speedily wrote to SFORCE PALLAVICINO
that as soon as he might, he should with his troops come to confer with
Mean^ used by Castaldo totra^ Friar George.
him, about what course was to be taken in that business. Whereupon PALLAVICINO
coming to Buise, and having laid the plot for the Friars dispatch, he went to
seek him just at the time when he should have said Mass: with whom CASTALDO
holding a long discourse showed him ever a good countenance, notwithstanding
that he was in all occasions crossed by him: and his insolency was such, that he
forbear not openly to negociate with the Turks. Whereupon CASTALDO directing
those which should kill him, in what manner they should dispatch him; he
appointed his secretary MARC ANTONIO FERRARI of Alexandria (under color to get
the Friars hand to certain Letters which SFORZA PALLAVICINO should bear to
FERDINAND) to come to him, upon the eighteenth day of December, the same year.
Who coming in the company of Pallauicino into the Castle with certain
Harguebuziers, and presenting the Letters to the Friar, to the end he should
subscribe them; after that the Frierhad advisedly read them, stooping down to
write upon a little table which was in the chamber, Ferrari drawing his poynard
stabbed him twice; which being of no sufficient force to kill him, it behooved
Pallauicino (who upon the noise ran into the chamber) to set his helping hand
to the work: for the Friar was a gallant strong fellow; who turning to him
that stabbed him, threw him to the ground, and therewith made so great a noise,
that Pallauicino coming into The death of Friar. George.
the chamber and seeing Ferrari down, setting hand to his sword, gave the
Friar such a blow on his head, that he cleft the same in two: an act truly
worthy of great reprehension, if the behauior of the man had not deserved it.
For Friar George was endued with such excellency of wit, and therewith was of so
generous a spirit, and so diligent in all matters of importance, that FERDINAND
himself (who caused him to be slain) would often say openly, that he enuyed
the Vayuode for nothing, but Friar George.

The Friar dying in this manner suddenly, Castaldo imprisoned his great friend
Francis Thendi, who to escape from FERDINANDS forces, had after the Turkish
manner clad himself in Scarlet, whose imprisonment was a great help to
Castaldo: for Thendi being reconciled, was the cause that the Sicoli, a most
fierce people of Transiluania, yielded obedience to the King of the Romans;
which people with others, through Castaldo's endeavor, within few days
submitted themselves. But in the year one thousand five hundred forty two,
Soliman understanding of the death of Friar George, sent two Armies into
Transiluania, to invade the same in two several places: where Castaldo
thinking by fortifying the frontiers, to entertain the Turks until the
coming of an Army out of Germany, he sent Friar Georges treasure to FERDINAND;
and taking Seghedin, had sundry supplies from the Lords of that kingdom; and
fortifying Lippa and Themesuarre he gathered those men together which (to
avoid the rage of the Turks) came to his Camp.

The death of Cardinal George bred great rumors and discontents in
Transiluania: the inhabitants being much affected to their King, imagined that
the death of Friar George did not proceed of any treaty he had with the Turks,
but that FERDINAND taking away the dog which kept the flock, he might (as
they said) with more ease afterward devour it: but in the Consistory at Rome,
they were much scandalized, and FERDINAND blamed to have committed so great an
excess upon a sacred person, and of that eminency. The matter was much
aggrauated: and although that FERDINAND was otherwise well respected, and held
for a just Prince, and of great bounty; yet the Pope would not absolve him,
being excommunicate, without the consent of the Cardinals: but making the
truth appear by his ministers, and the danger wherein those Realms were, if
he should not have used that prevention, in the end he obtained absolution,
not without the contradiction of many Cardinals, whereto the Popes facility
was a great help: And not long after, Sforza, and all the rest that were
actors in the death of Friar George, were in like manner absolved, but with
far greater difficulty.

FERDINAND unable to send such succors as he had promised, by reason of the
wars in Germany between his brother the Emperor and Maurice Duke of Saxony,
persuaded Castaldo to bear his fortune in the best manner that possibly he
could; promising with all possible speed to relieve him. Who perceiving that
the Moldauian, and Mahomet Basha were with a great Army come into Hungary, to
invade Transiluania; he sent Felix Earl of Arco, to defend the Castle of
Brasouia. And obtaining great relief and victuals, from the City of Zibonio,
he endeavored to reinforce his troops, and to fortify many places; but this
nothing furthered FERDINAND'S proceedings: For by reason that the Articles of
agreement were not observed to Isabel, many of those people rebelled against
him, and after much contention, he was constrained to come to blows with
them: For spending much time, both in losing, and in recovering, the Turks
daily conquered more and more. Who taking Lippa, and Themesuarre, with many
other places, by an order from Mahomet; the Basha, together with the Basha of
Buda, marched to the Castle of Drigall; before which lay Sforza Pallauicino
with six thousand men, Germans and others: who valiantly assaulting the
Castle, was at unawares set upon by the Basha; with whom coming to fight, and
performing the office both of a valiant Soldier, and prudent Captain, he was
in the end overthrown, and shortly after with many Sforza Pallauicino wounded,
ouerthrown and taken prisoner by the Turks, before the Castle of Drigall.
other Captains taken prisoner, and brought (by a Turk which charging him in
the flank with his Cimitare had wounded him very sore) to the Basha: from whom
he was afterward ransomed for a great sum of money. After which, Mahomet to
the great slaughter of his men, took Salonch, built by FERDINAND in a strong
place beyond the river Tissa; the loss whereof greatly troubled FERDINAND. Who
seeing that his affairs notwithstanding the valor and wisdom of Castaldo
daily went from ill to worse, and understanding that the people of Transiluania
were wholly revolted to the Queen, greatly favored by Mahomet Basha, and that
they had often practiced to kill Castaldo; he commanded him that
notwithstanding Mahomets retreit, despairing to take Agria, long attempted by
his people, he should retire. Which Castaldo putting in execution, placed the
Spanish and Dutch soldiers in Zibinio, and other places near adjacent: and
having fortified Deua, after much provision made, he went to Alba Iulia to
winter the rest of his Army. In the mean time, absolution came from Rome for
those which killed Friar George. And the year 1553 being come, Francis Thendi,
favoring the Queens cause, brought it so to pass, that notwithstanding the
many Councels, wherein Castaldo was ever present, a great number of the Lords
of Transiluania in the behalf of the Queen, took Arms against FERDINAND,
and expulsing FERDINAND'S forces, reestablished her, together with her son in
her estate.

That year being ended, and the year 1554 begun, FERDINAND sent his Ambassadors
to his Nephew Philip in England, to congratulate his marriage with Mary Queen of
that Country, who succeeded her brother Edward. And in the year 1555 dyed
Ioane, mother to FERDINAND, and the Emperor Charles the fifth, in Spain; whose
death FERDINAND took very grievously. In the mean time taking a truce with the
Turk, who upon an ack nowledgement of a tribute, suffered him peaceably to
enjoy all that he held in Hungary. King FERDINAND (as some write) did upon the
conclusion of this truce yield to pay unto the Turk a yearly pension of
30000. crowns, but not by way of tribute; for the confirmation whereof, he
sent his Ambassadors to Constantinople. But the Basha of Buda had no will to
peace: for in the beginning of the year, 1556 he complained of wrongs done
unto them by the Garrisons of Sigeth, Babott, and other neighbor places;
whereupon he drew together 10000. men, and surprised Caposuiuer and Babot
suspecting no danger; with the like hope he went to Sigeth, but tarried not:
yet he returned soon after with a great Army and began the siege. The town
was defended by valiant souldiars, under the command of Mark Horuato a worthy
gentleman, Sigeth attem^ted in vain by the Turks.
and of a noble family. At that time FERDINAND was troubled with tumults in
Transiluania, procured by Peter Vtcchius: who not only persuaded Soliman to
cause Transiluania to be restored unto him, belonging unto him as he said by
hereditary right; but he also dissuaded all the subjects from their obedience
to the young Vayuode. Moreover George Bebequius infested the confines of Agria,
taking certain castles with the help of the Valac chians. FERDINAND being
oppressed with so many enemies, he sent to the Princes of Germany being
assembled at Ratisbone, to crave aid, and in the mean time he levied soldiers
with his own revenues. His troops being ready, the rendez vous was appointed
at Canitia a town in Stiria, where they resolved to besiege Babot, thereby to
relieve Sigeth. The Turks left the siege, and went with all speed to encounter
the christians, where notwithstanding that they were more in number and had the
The Turks ^ut to Rout at Babot.
advantage of the gound, yet they were beaten and forced to retire with very
great loss; wherein 300 Austrian horse which they called the black bands, did
so charge the Turks in the retreat as they confessed they never dealt with more
fearful enemies.

FERDINAND being advertised of this encounter at Babot he did much honor the
Earl of Serine and the other commanders: and being desirous to finish the
wars he levied new troops and made his son FERDINAND General of the Army,
but before he could attain to the Camp, the Turks had again invested Sigeth
with a new siege: assuring themselves to carry it, they planted their
battles, and used all persuasions and threats to draw them to yield, but the
governor nor his soldiers would not be moved, although they were in some want
of powder and victuals, but made daily sallyes and returned with much honor,
and great spoils, which made the Basha despair of the event, and resolved to
leave it. They write that the besieged showed such valor, as the Basha wept,
hearing that he had slain but one christian in five The Turk^ leave Sige^.
days, and so he retired. The Archduke FERDINAND being come to Canisia to
the Army, they took Carioth, Babot, Saint Martins, and diverse other Towns in
those parts: and the Exploits of the Archduke Ferdinand in Hungary.
garrison of Sigeth being now at liberty, went as far as the walls of
Quinqueecclesia, and brought away great spoils. Charles Serotin, a Baron of
Morauia, was sent to refresh Sigeth with victuals, powder, and all kind of
warlike munition: the which having performed accordingly, he returned within
few days to the Archduke; who hearing that the Turks drew all their forces
together, and seeing Winter approach, and diseases to creep into his Army,
having freed Sigeth from Seege (which was the chief end of that expedition) he
resolved to return to Vienna, being also called home by Letters from FERDINAND
his father, who received him ioifully about the end of November. In the
Archdukes retreat, the Turks (contrary to their usual custom) never
followed, but like men amazed kept themselves within their defenses: soon
after A truce made with the Turks.
Soliman made a truce with FERDINAND, but the affairs of Transiluania would
not suffer it to hold.

There came a Turkish Ambassador into Transiluania, who bringing (as he said)
hope of peace, they entreated FERDINAND to give them leave to treat with him. A
conference then being appointed by his sufferance, the Turk delivered a far
other charge then they expected: which was, that expelling FERDINAND'S
soldiers, they should presently receive John, (who was baptized by the name of
Stephen) son to the first Vayuode, for their King: which being done Soliman
would accept of their tribute, and vouchsafe them his favor; but if they did
otherwise, he would take revenge of them. He did also write unto Andrew
Battori, a man of great credit amongst the Transiluanians, complaining that
they had received foreign The Turks threatens the Transiluanians.
forces, who committed many insolences, and that he would come with a great
Army, to expel them, punishing them severely, if they did not obey his
commandments. The Transiluanians being terrified with these threats,
acquainted Castaldo withal: who came unto the assembly of the Noblemen; where
he refuted all Solimans threats, persuading the Transiluanians, rather to dye
honorably, then to live basely in the Turkish servitude. Wherefore, it was
concluded to pay him the promised tribute, the which if he refused, then to
command him to depart out of their confines; but the Ambassador seeing he could
obtain no other thing, received the tribute and returned.

After which, Isabell mother to John the Vaiuode, expelling all that favored
FERDINAND got the whole government into her hands, partly through the peoples
favor, and partly relying upon the Turks, and Polonians friendship: which she
might effect the more easily, for that the plague had consumed many thousands
of men, and made the whole country in a manner desolate. FERDINAND did
forbear to take Arms against her though justly incensed, knowing that the
king of Poland and other Princes, would treat with him about a peace.

CHARLES the Emperor having given up the states of the Low Countries, the
kingdoms of Spain, and all his other kingdoms to his son Philip; FERDINAND
sought to suppress and extinguish the preaching of the Gospel in Germany; and
receiving Letters of his brothers renunciation made to his son, he infinitely
commended his resolution.

That year being ended, and the year 1556 being come, he was advertised that
his brother the Emperor having renounced the Empire unto him, was retired into
Spain, to lead a solitary life; for which yielding him thanks by his Letters
and Ambassadors, he went to Viena to make provision for the wars, which (as
it was said) Soliman would make in Hungary: where spending the rest of that
year, he remained until the year 1557. In the beginning of which year, he
interposed himself between King Philip and the Pope, persuading them to
peace: for the Pope induced by his Nephew the Cardinal Carassa, made war
against the King. And that year being ended, in the beginning of the year
1558, he was by the Electors according to the will of his brother Charles,
chosen and proclaimed Emperor; no man but the Pope contradicting his election,
who affirmed that the resignation made by the Emperor Charles could not be
done without the Popes consent: but his exception being rejected, FERDINAND was
chosen and proclaimed lawful Emperor. Not long after, he had news that his
brother Charles was departed out of this world: for whose death he with his
whole Court were very sorry; nevertheless suppressing his grief, he
celebrated the exequies with great pomp, and presently sent his Ambassadors
to King Philip, to condole the common loss. Soon after the decease of the
Emperor Charles, in the beginning of the year 1559, FERDINAND used all his
Peace between King Philip of Spain and Henry of France.
endeavor to make a peace between King Philip, and Henry the French King;
which after many treaties being concluded, and an alliance made, he was
exceeding glad, for that after seventy years continual dissension, peace was
now made between those two mighty kings, which was proclaimed through all
Christendom. A little while after, in the beginning of the year 1560,
FERDINAND was confirmed in the Empire by the new Pope, who willingly approved
his election, and held it an unworthy thing, after a peace so long desired,
again to bring The Emp. confirmed by Pope Pius 4.
Italy into new combustions: and so following the desire of that Prince, he
consented to the calling of a Couneell. In the year 1561 he made proclamation
to all Prelates and Nations, of a Council to be held the year following,
wherein the Articles proponed by the Lutherans should be determined. And in the
year 1562 a Council was again called, to be held in the city of Trent,
whither FERDINAND sending the Prelates of his dominion, persuaded all the
Princes of Germany to do the like: and writing to his Nephew King PHILIP, and
to the King of Portugal, and to all the other Princes of Christendom, he used
such means that all the Princes according to his desire, sent the Bishops
oftheir countries with their particular Ambassadors to that Council, wherein
the matters of greatest importance were handled concerning religion. In which
time FERDINAND desiring that some one of his sons after his decease might
succeed him in the Imperial dignity, he called the Princes Electors to a
Council held at Franckford, where propounding to them his desire, he alleged
that in respect of the Turk it was requisite it should be so; and after the
matter had been loug debated, he obtained his purpose to his content: which
being concluded, he made his son MAXIMILIAN within few days after to be
crowned King of the Romans. After which ceremonies, going to Ispruch to see his
daughters, he understood that the truce lately treated of with SOLIMAN, not
only took effect for ten years, but that at his suit Don ALVARO de Sand was
released out of prison, together with three other principal Knights, taken in
the year one thousand, five hundred sixty, in the enterprise of Tripoli, by
DRAGVT RAISE. At that time were great wars in France between the Papists and the
Huguenots, which the Emperor sought to have pacified: but that nation was so
extremely incensed, that the Emperors persuasions could nothing preuail among
them.

In the year 1564, the Council of Trent being dissolved, FERDINAND came to
Vienna; where falling sick of an Ague, and knowing by the vehemence of his
disease that his life drew The death of the Emperor Ferdinand.
near to an end, he sent for all his children, which then were dispersed into
sundry places: to whom after he had given his blessing, together with many good
exhortations, he rendered his soul to God upon the fifth day of July in the
same year. He was a Prince by all men reputed to be of singular bounty and
piety, and of a most gentle and pleasing disposition, not very strong of body;
but replenished with so much majesty, that whosoever saw him could not but
respect him: for, being of a pleasing and affable condition, he would most
courteously incline himself to every one that came to salute him. He was
naturally merry, free from surfeiting, and wore his beard rather short than
long; and his hair so long, that it covered his eyes, with some bauldnes. He
was in all his actions (prosperous or adverse) always constant, houlding all
things to happen to him by the will of God. He confessed himself three or four
times in the year, and with great devotion received the Communion, willing that
every one in his Court should do the like: so that his house seemd to be
rather a regular Monastery, than a Court of secular men. He left behind him
many children, and had in all fifteen; four sons, and the rest daughters,
which were married to sundry Princes in Christendom. ISABELL, which was his
first, was given in marriage to SIGISMVND King of Poland: ANNE was wife to the
Duke of Bauier; MARY, to the Duke of Cleue; MAGDALEN; a chaste Virgin;
CATHERINE, to FRANCIS, Duke of Mantoa; ELENOR, to WILLIAM Duke of Mantoa:
MARGARET was a Nun: BARBARA was married to ALFONSE the second Duke of Ferrara;
VRSVLA a Virgin and a Nun: HELEN lived but a little while; and JOAN was wife
to FRANCIS the great Duke of Tuscane. Of sons, besides the Emperor
MAXIMILIAN, he had FERDINAND and CHARLES, Archdukes of Austria; and JOHN, who
died very young. He had but one only wife, and (as it was said) never before
nor after knew any other woman but her; whom he loved so entirely, that he
would not marry the second time. He much loved learned men, and gave them
great pensions for their maintenance. He never undertook any wars but for
religion; either against the Turk or the Lutheranes, whom he vehemently
persecuted.

FERDINAND having been King of Hungary and Bohemia four and thirty years, and
Emperor seven; to the great grief of his people, and of all the Princes of
Christendom, ended his days: After whose decease, his obsequies being
celebrated with great pomp, sundry funeral Orations were made by diverse
learned men: and his body being carried through Morauia into Bohemia, was
buried in Prague by his wife.

FERDINAND seeing his end draw near, called King MAXIMILIAN his son (who was
to succeed him in the Empire) to whom he made a long speech, touching the
government of himself, and state, the which according to Vlloa's relation, I
have presumed to Ferdinand's speech to his son Maximilian.
set down Verbatim, for that it deserves to be written in gold, for a
perpetual president for all Princes to imitate: his words were these. Dear
son seeing it has pleased his divine majesty to call me unto him, and that my
soul shall leave these earthly spoils, I have thought good to impart some
things unto you, which I hold very necessary: the which I entreat you to hear
with an attentive ear, seeing I deliver them with a joyful heart: know then
son that I leave this world joyfully, for that I found my self in a lodging
which was not firm nor constant, wherewith I was much troubled: I repent not
the time that I have lived, having employed the whole course of my life in the
service of god, and the increase of his holy faith; and I depart contented for
that I leave thee my son, in whom as in a lively image of my body and soul, I
trust, although I be dead, yet I shall in some sort live, and that thou will
imitate me in all my actions, according to my desire. The which I entreat thee
to do if thou love me and thy self; and let it be thy chiefest study and
care, to the end the world may know that thou art my son, and the strong pillar
and firm support of the house of Austria: The which shall be easy when as thy
counsels and actions, shall be squared by the rule of honesty and honor. Next
if thou shall set before thine eyes the reputation and glory of RODVLPHVS (a
great Prince, the honor of our house, and an excellent Emperor) of FREDERICK
thy great Grandfather, of MAXIMILIAN thy Grandfather; of Charles the Fifth thine
Uncle, invincible Emperors; and of my self who am thy father; and if like a
good child, thou shall imitate their famous and worthy deeds, they will make
thee glorious in future ages: but if thou shall do the contrary, thou shall
reap nothing but in famy and dishonor; For they which spring from noble and
glorious Princes are held base and unworthy, when as their actions do not
concur with their progenitors whose deeds are not without great judgment
recorded in writing to posterity. It shall not be needful to tell thee what
helps the valiant and worthy deeds of our progenitors have given to me and
the Emperor my brother, in the laborious course of our lives, for that our
actions do show Princes should in their actions imitate their predecessors
virtues.
them. Know then son, that I leave thee a heavy burden, that is the
government of the Empire and of my kingdoms: but if thou prouest a good and
virtuous Prince, they will seem light unto thee: be then my son such a one, as
thy subjects may not lament the loss of thy father: that is to say, strive to
exceed me in their good usage and government. And to the end (with the Empire
and state which I leave thee) thou may have Arms to defend them, I will put
thee in mind like a good father what thou art to do, the which will be happy
and valiant Arms. Those things which I loved in my life (if thou will show thy
self to be my son) do not contemn after my death: I recommend strictly unto
thee the worship of religion, reverence to the Sea of Rome, honor to God, and
justice, if thou will have thy government continue long. Consider, all wisemen
direct their actions to purchase fame in this world and eternal glory in that
which is to come. I mean a good name, not by their vain glory, but that God may
be honored, and by their good example of life and works, others (which shall
succeed) may take example; Thou must consider that a good Prince may attain
to both. Seek not that fame which he had that burnt DIANA'S Temple, or that of
ALEXANDER, and JULIUS CAESAR, which was so prejudicial to the world. A good
fame is purchased by good works, not by bad; If thou would truly attain to
that which all others seek, strive rather to be called a good Prince then a
great, have a care rather to better, then to increase thine Empire, endeavoring
to imitate such as govern their estates well, not those which got them or
increased them: for that many seeking to gain another man's, lose their own:
what the Prince is, such are his subjects: strive then to be such a one as thou
would have thy people. If thou be a gamester, all will play: if thou
followest women, all will be luxurious; if ambitious every man will seek to
rise, at what rate soever: and if thou be superstitious thou shall see
superstition reign. But if thou be religious and a good Prince, O what
profit will it bring thee? If thou would free thy self from the heavy
burden of importunities, show thy self to be much displeased with ambition.
If thou can do this thou may call thy self happy: If thou shall propound
virtue for the reward of all thy labors, thou shall never live discontented,
and thy subjects will do the like. If thou can attain to this, thou may
sleep securely: finally I put thee in mind that what thou art, such will thy
subjects be: strive then to be good if thou will have them good.

The greatest want we Princes have, is of men that will tell us the truth;
wherefore give liberty to all men, that they may admonish and reprove thee;
and they that do it freely, hold What Princes chiefly want.
them for thy truest friends. As thou do exceed other men in honor and
dignity, so must thou exceed them in virtue. Remember son that a
commonweal is not instituted for a King; but a King is ordained for a
Commonweal: For that many Commonweals, have flourished without a Prince;
but no Prince has continued long without a State. Strive rather to be beloved
then feared, for that no State is long preserved by fear. Whilst thou art
only feared, thou shall have as many enemies, as subjects: But if thou art
beloved, thou shall not need any guarde, for that every vassaile will be a
Halberdier. If thou will be beloved, Love; for that Love is not purchased but
with Love. Love thy subjects in such sort, as thou may always prefer a
general good, before thine own affections, or thy private intrest. Be such a
friend to truth, as there may be more credit given to thy bare word, then to
another man's Oath. Have more care to govern thy self, bridling thine
affections, then thy subjects; for if thou will not obey thy self, why
should thou be obeyed by others? Maintain thy gravity in such sort as
becomes a prince; and on the other side, be pleasing, courteous, and affable.
Remember how other Princes have lived, imitating the good, and flying the
evil. Let nothing proceed out of thy mouth, that may be injurious or
dishonest. Punish no man, being angry; for choler gives no way to reason, and
thou may afterward repent it. Be not carried away with the opinion of the
Vulgar, but always embrace the advice of wisemen: For, those Commonweals may
justly be called happy, which are governed by the wise. Govern thy subjects in
such sort as all thy care may be, that no man shall exceed thee in good
Government, and justice. Whilst thou art young, set always before thine eyes,
that thou art not only a Prince and Pastor: but reverence the Christian faith,
making account that it is most necessary for Princes to follow it. Strive to
seem a Christian, not only in outward Ceremonies; but with Christian works.
Offend not God, seeing thou have sworn him to be thy Lord. With what face
dare thou punish one that has betrayed thee, if thou be a Traitor to thy
Lord? The more powerful a Prince is, the more stayed and circumspect he should
be, not respecting what he may do, but what he ought to do; imagining that he
stands upon a high Tower, whereas all the World beholds him, and that no vice
can be concealed. If thou may defend thy State without prejudice to thy
subjects, hold it the best course; for that the Prince was ordained for the
Commonwealth, and not the Commonwealth for the Prince. Remember CODRVS and
OTHO, who (although they were Pagans) desired rather to die, then to defend
their estates with the loss of humane blood. Hold it better to be a just man,
then an unjust Prince; for that a good Prince deserves a great reward, and a
wicked merits grievous punishment. If thou will be held a good Prince, strive
to be like unto God, not doing any thing which he would not do. There are
three things chiefly attributed unto God, Power, Knowledge, and bounty; He that
has the first, and wants the rest, is no King but a Tyrant: Know that the
difference betwixt a King and a Tyrant, is not in the name, but in the actions.
If thou shall do the works of a Tyrant, they may well, whilst thou live,
term thee king, but when thou art dead, they will call thee Tyrant. Would
thou know the difference that ARISTOTLE sets betwixt a King and a Tyrant? A
King affects the good of the Commonwealth; and a Tyrant seeks his own
profit. Endeavor to leave thy kingdoms better then I now leave them, and this
shall be thy true glory. Consider there is a contract and conditions betwixt
the Prince and the people: if thou do not that which thou oughtst unto thy
subjects, they are not bound to perform their duties unto thee; with what face
can thou demand thy rents, if thou do not pay them? Remember that they are
men and not beasts, and thou art a sheapheard of men, and not of sheep. Seeing
that all men learn the Art whereby they live, why should not thou learn the
Art to become a good Prince? the which is the most excellent of all others. Be
contented with the name of King or Prince, not striving to be so; for it may be
they will call thee Tyrant: For he is no true Prince, to whom a kingdom
comes by succession, but he who by his actions strives to be so. He is a free
King which gouernes and commands himself; and the other is a slave, who cannot
restrain and bridle his affections. If thou vauntst thy self to be free, why
should thou obey thy passions, which is the most infamous and brutish
servitude of all other. I have seen many freemen serve, and many slaves to be
served: A slave is a servant by force, and cannot be blamed if he be so, seeing
it is not in his own power; but avicious man, who is a voluntary slave, ought
not to be put in the number of men: Wherefore love liberty, and learn to be
truly a King. Be so careful of the good government of thy subjects, as thou
may never sleep one whole night without it: Study not how to pass away thy
time; but how to loose it. Barbarous Kings, especially in Persia, maintained
their Majesty by hiding themselves from their subjects; but thou on the other
side (following my example) shall keep thy gates always open to the poor,
rather then the rich; for they have more need of thy favor then these. In thy
answers follow the advice of ARISTOTLE, Those which be good and mild give thy
self: the bitter and sour leave unto thy Ministers, and let no man depart
from thee justly discontented. What thou have to give, give it speedily and
cheerfully, of thine own free will; and give them no cause to thank others,
for the favors which thou thy self do them. Banish from thee such as seek
out new means to oppress and grieve thy subjects, and remember that the
poor, not the rich, pay tributes and exactions. Be so desirous to do good, as
thou may think to have lost that day, wherein thou have not assisted some
one. Honor the good and virtuous, more then the rich and powerful, and thou
shall make all men to follow virtue. Admit no idle men into thy kingdoms, for
they will breed a world of mischiefs. Be tractable to pardon thine own
injuries; for, if an equal to thy self has done it, thou can not take
revenge, without prejudice to thy subjects and his, who have not offended: If a
private man does thee wrong, the greater thy power is to revenge, the better
will thy clemency appear. Let thy exercises be honest, holy, good, and
profitable to the Commonwealth. O how well it becomes a Prince, to hear the
afflictions and grieuances of his subjects, and to redress them! Imitate not
those who unburden themselves, all they can, of matters of justice; for it is
thy chief office. Think always of the means, by the which thou may govern
thy subjects: endeavor always to know the nature and manners, not only of thine
own subjects, but also of strangers. Be always in peace and friendship with
thy neighbors; contend not with them, lest it breed thee war and discord.
Learn rather by Histories, then by experience, how dangerous and pernicious
war is: Let this be a special remembrance unto thee, that thou never
undertake war, for hatred, or private interest; and when thou shall be forced
unto it, let it not be so much for thy self as for thy subjects. Consider
first of all (which will be most comodious) whether to undertake it, or leave
it; and being forced unto it, let it be with extreme necessity. But first
endeavor to make an accord: for, peace is better then just war; from the
which thou must endeavor to fly, if it were for no other respect, but for the
honor of the name of a Christian, being much opposite unto it. Make war against
Turks and Infidels; for otherwise they will not only make Christians slaves,
and force them by torments to deny the faith of Christ; but also ruin
Christendom, and profane the Temples of Christ: But let it never come into
thy mind, to make war against them, for thine own private interest, or for
Ambition. Consider, that under this color of making war against Infidels,
there lurkes much poison: and when thou have conquered them, labor to convert
them to the faith of Christ, principally by good works; For, with what face
can thou advise them to become Christians, if thou and thine in your actions
be worse then Infidels? It will be no great matter to conquer the Moors and
Turks, if they shall see Christian virtues to shine in thee and thine,
wherefore with these labor to convert them: It imports much whether thy
conversation be good or bad, and with whom thou do converse; therefore strive
always to draw into thy company good and virtuous men, and chase away the
wicked and vieious, which may corrupt thee and be very hurtful. Love them
which reprove thee freely, and hate such as flatter thee. Do not observe what
company is most pleasing unto thee: but what will be most behoouefull for thee;
for there is no beast so venomous. nor creature so pernicious and uhrtfull
about a Prince, as flatterers, and ambitious persons: For, the vulgar sort, who
know not the disposition of their Prince, do always think that he is like
unto his favorites; if they be virtuous, they hold him for virtuous; if wicked
and vicious, they esteem him the like: Consider then how careful thou
ought to be in making choice of such as shall converse with thee; chiefly
make choice of a Confessor that is sincere, pure, incorrupt, of good life and
fame, and not ambitious. The principal part of the good government of thy
kingdom consists, in that thou be good: and the second, that thou provide
good Ministers; wherefore consider well how thou give thy Offices, thy
Benefices and thy Bishoppericks; there is none worthy of any administration in
the Commonweal, but he that takes it by constraint, and against his will.
Wherefore it would be very profitable unto thee, never to give any Office,
Benefice or Bishopperick, to him that seeks it; but to him that being
virtuous, and full of bashfulnesse, will not sue for any thing. And know for
certain, that such as seek them, are insufficient to govern them; for either
they know what they demand, or not. If they know not, they deserve it not; and
if they know and demand it, they discover themselves to be proud, ambitious,
and wicked. Never commit matter of justice, but to men that are vncorrupt and
good, and who accept them being entreated: for, committing them to others, thy
subjects shall suffer oppression; for there is nothing more pernicious, then to
have covetous judges, who affect government to oppress the people. Let the
judges keep their residence, and forget not sometimes to ouersee them,
rewarding the good and punishing the badde; where I would not have thee use
clemency, nor with thy servants, which shall forget their duties: but punish
them with more rigor then other men, both for that they are more bound to be
good, being near unto thee; as also for that part of the infamy redounds upon
thee. Punish false-witnesses and scandalous accusers by TALION'S Law. In making
of Laws, have more respect unto the public good, then to thine own
particular. What thou shall see profitable to thy subjects, do it before they
entreat thee. Be diligent and resolute in that thou have to do, lest in the
action thou losest the occasion, and in the benefit the thanks. Strive ever to
purchase a good name rather then riches or great estates: for, the one, wicked
men attain unto by money; but the other good men only purchase by virtue. Love
and fear God, who will teach thee all the rest, and guide thee in all thy
actions. I have long desired to speak this unto thee, but I never had
opportunity; wherefore I entreat thee (dear son) so to imprint it in thine
heart, that thou may never forget it. Lastly, I commend unto thee thy
brethren, sisters, and kinsfolks: entreat them in such sort, as they may not
be disgraced, their old father being dead, nor grow proud seeing their
brother Emperor. Moreover I recommend unto thee my old servants, to whom my
long cares, my troubles, wars, affairs, and my long infirmity, have been
the cause of much toil. And if they served me faithfully unto death, it is
reason they should be rewarded: and although my body remains in the grave
with the Worms, yet will I be always mindful of them before God. Herein
thou shall show thy self a good son, rewarding those which served thy
Father. Above all things I will put thee in mind, and hold it for good advice,
Be ever in peace and league with PHILIP King of Spain, my Nephew, and thy
Cozen, and son to that father whom I loved much; from whom thou may always
receive good assistance. And when it shall be fit for thee to make a league
with him against Infidels, I exhort you to do it, for that with your two
forces, you may with more facility ruin the common Enemy. I commend unto you
your brethren, whom I have enjoined to be obedient unto you. Love them, and
live in Peace and Charity, like good brethren: It shall be a great joy unto
me, and my blessing shall be with thee, and with you all together, with the
Grace of our Lord GOD: to whom I give infinite thanks, that he has done me
this favor, that I might speak this unto thee, and bless thee with my hand,
as I do.

THE LIFE OF MAXIMILIAN, SECOND OF THAT NAME, AND HVNDRETH AND SEVENTEENTH
ROMAN EMPEROR.
THE ARGUMENT.
THis life contains little else, but the Country, Parentage and Noble
descent of Maximilian, with his acts in the wars in Germany against the
Lantzgraue, his going into Spain to govern the same for King Philip, his
assumption to the Imperial dignity, with his wars with the Turks at Sigeth,
and the Election of his son Rodulph for King of the Romans, with some other
occurrents concerning the Turkish Wars.

THE house of Austria, amongst the chief houses of Germany, is every way very
Noble, and has been so of long time (as it evidently appears) not only
through the hereditary succession of the Empire, from the father to the son,
in ten Emperors, from the year 1273, at what time RODVLPH the First was
chosen Emperor of the Germans; but also in that it has since that time in
short space, with admirable felicity, not only in Germany enlarged the small
confines of Habspurge and Hassia (the ancient inheritance thereof) but through
the singular protection of the heavens, it has by inheritance attained to the
kingdoms of Bohemia, and Hungary, the Duchy of Austria, the County of
Flanders, with the estates of the lower Germany, the kingdoms of Spain, The
dominions of the house of Austria.
with all those countries of the East and West Indies (to the wonder of the
World, by CHRISTOPHER COLVMBVS a Genowaies, and AMERICVS VESPVSIVS, a
Florentine, newly found and discovered; which for their greatness, and the
nouelty of the action, are called the new world) together with the kingdoms of
Sicilia and Naples; and lastly the Duchy of Milan, far excelling all the
other Dukedomes in Christendom. Of which family, in the year of our Lord, one
thousand five hundred twenty seven, the Emperor MAXIMILIAN the Second of that
name, borne in the City of Vienna in Austria, had to his father FERDINAND,
brother to the Emperor CHARLES the The lineage of the Emperor Maximilian.
Fifth, son of PHILIP the First, King of Spain, Nephew to MAXIMILIAN the
First, son of FREDERICK the Third, Emperors of the Almaines: his mother was
ANNE the daughter of LADISLAAS King of Hungary and of Bohemia, Nephew of the
great SIGISMVND, son of CASSIMIER King of Poland, and sister to that JEWS
which through the unadvised counsel of PAVLVS TOMOREVS Archbishop of
Colossa, in the year of our Lord one thousand five hundred twenty six, coming
to a battle with SOLIMAN King of the Turks, was not only through the
innumerable multitude of the Ottomans lamentably overthrown; but also when he
sought to have saved himself from his enemies, was (through the weightinesse
of his Armor, wherewith he was oppressed, and the stumbling of his Horse,
which fell upon him in a passage over a Marrish or Fenne) most miserably
drowned.

This Emperor showing even from his infancy the excellency of his wit, was by
his father the Emperor FERDINAND committed to very learned men, by them to be
instructed in good Literature, but chiefly in variety of tongues; wherein in
short space he so much profited, that he not only spoke Latin very elegantly,
Spanish, French, Italian, Dutch, Hungarish, and Bohemish; but also very
perfectly attained to the knowledge of the Sciences, particularly the
Mathematics. So that all men did confidently hope that he would prove no way
inferior to his progenitors. And he no sooner came to years fit to bear
Arms, but that he sundry times gave no less testimony and proof of his noble
valor, seeking to imitate his Grandfather MAXIMILIAN whose name he bare: which
he expressly manifested when in the year one thousand five hundred fifty six,
in the wars which his Uncle the Emperor CHARLES the Fifth made against JOHN
FREDERICK Duke of Saxony, and PHILIP Lantzgraue of Hessen, he went to that
war, sent thither by his father with the command of twelve thousand horse;
having before that time, been ever present in the wars which his father had
with the Turks. In that service of his Uncle the Emperor CHARLES, he so nobly
behaved himself, that he therein sundry times deserved to be compared with his
Grandfather MAXIMILIAN; for he constantly enduring, with the greatness of his
mind, all those wants and fortunes which the troubles of the wars bring with
them, was ever the first man in all services, wherein he made no less show of
a valiant man at Arms, then of a discreet Chiefetaine: which made him so
deerly beloved by his Uncle the Emperor, that the civil war being ended
(which continued little less then two years) he considering that his son
PHILIP Prince of Spain was to be invested in the County of Flanders, together
with the Provinces of the lower Germany, and being unwilling that Spain should
remain without some man of authority to govern the same, fearing the pride of
that Nation ordinarily desirous of novelties; notwithstanding that he was his
Nephew, yet by the dispensation of Pope PAVL the Third, he made him his son
in law, giving him his daughter MARY to wife, and therewith made him governor
of those kingdoms. And those nuptial rites being celebrated, MAXIMILIAN in
the year one thousand five hundred forty eight, went into Spain, being first
by his father FERDINAND King of the Romans, made King of Bohemia, to whom the
Lords of that kingdom swear obedience as to their king and natural Lord.

Before his coming into Spain, passing through Italy, he was by all the
Italian Princes visited and highly honored; and being arrived at the City of
Genoa, and there shortly after embarked in the Galleys of Prince DORIA, he
passed to Barcelona: whence taking his way toward Vailledolit, where the
Spanish Court then lay, he was in the name of his espouse and of his
cosin-Germane oftentimes visited by the principal Lords of Spain.

Finally, within few days after his coming to the Court, having with applause
of the Spanish Nation celebrated his nuptials, he was settled in the
government of those kingdoms, in the absence of Prince PHILIP: which he with
great quietness, to the contentment of that people governed, until that in
the beginning of the year one thousand five hundred fifty one, the Emperor
CHARLES summoned a Council to be held in Ausburgh; whither being by his father
sent for, he came from Spain into Germany, having first left the government
of those kingdoms to his wife Queen MARY, and to the Council royal: and
staying there till the end of the Council, he went with his father the king of
the Romans to Vienna: where making his abode till the beginning of the year
one thousand five hundred fifty two, and then passing from Germany again into
Spain, to bring his wife into his Countries, he came from Barcelona (after
that he had been molested by the French fleet) to Genoa; and from thence
coming to Trent, he went to Ausburgh, where by the Emperor CHARLES the Fifth,
he was kindly received, and together with his wife was by the Germane Princes
much honored, but particularly by his father, who then absolutely resigned
unto him the government of the kingdom of Bohemia: which to the great
contentment of the Bohemians he ever after governed so long as he lived.

From thence in the same year he sent great troops of men to the Emperor, for
his wars against MAVRICE Duke of Saxony, who by reason of the imprisonment of
the Lantzgraue PHILIP warring against the Emperor, was proclaimed traitor: but
it was not long before the Emperor was freed from that trouble. And MAXIMILIAN
recalling his forces, peaceably applied himself to the government of Bohemia,
without that any matter of moment happened; until that in the year 1554, he
together with his father sent his Ambassadors to congratulate the marriage of
his cousin King PHILIP with the daughter of King HENRY the Eight, then by the
death of her brother EDWARD, Queen of England.

In the year 1558, he was present at the Coronation of his father, who by the
Emperor CHARLES the fifth was adopted Emperor, and accepted by the Princes of
Germany. Afterward taking his way with his father toward Viena, he returned
into Bohemia; where within a while after, understanding of the death of his
Uncle and father in law the Emperor CHARLES, he with great pomp celebrating his
Obsequies, sent Ambassadors to his cousin PHILIP to condole the death of the
deceased Emperor. In which actions ending the year present and next
following; in the year 1560, after four months vacancie, JOHN ANGELO DE
MEDICIS being chosen Pope, and called PIUS the fourth, he sent his Ambassadors
to yield his obedience to the Church of Rome. And in the year 1562, FERDINAND
desiring that his son MAXIMILIAN should succeed him in the Empire, assembled
a Council in Franckford; where proponing to the Electors his determination, he
so handled the matter, Maximilian chosen and crowned King of the Romans.
that by the general consent and good will of all men, MAXIMILIAN was chosen
and crowned King of the Romans; with great applause of the Germans and the
Italians, who for his rare qualities dearly loved him. Then being according to
his fathers desire created his successor, he departed toward Viena, first
visiting his sisters which were in Ispruch, where he remained until the year
1564, in which year his father dyed; whose Obsequies he together with his
brothers sumptuously celebrated. After which, he received Ambassadors from the
Princes, which as to the successiue Emperor and King of Hungary and Bohemia
came to do him honor: amongst many which came, were the Ambassadors of Spain
and of Portugal; MAXIMILIAN being then received and accepted by the Christians
for lawful Emperor.

Having scarce finished his fathers obsequies, news came of new combustions.
The Vaiuode Satmar taken by the Transiluanians.
of Transiluania, who was comprehended in the Turks peace and restrained with
the hope of a royal affinity, continued for a time quiet: but now either
thinking that FERDINAND'S peace had been dissolved by death, or incoraged by
the ill advice of some lewd persons, or else provoked by his neighbors
injuries, he surprised Satmaria, by a notable stratagem. MELCHIOR BALASSVS was
governor thereof for FERDINAND, a valiant man and active, who in former times,
had taken many towns from the Vaiuode upon the confines of Transiluania.
Having taken the town, the Castle (although it were very strong) made small
resistance: where the governor lost his goods, and his wife and children were
led into captivity. BALASSVS (being sore wounded) escaped, and after his
recovery he surprised Debreim, a town of good note belonging to the
Transiluanians: and having spoiled it he set it on fire. The news of the loss
of Satmaria was unexpected to MAXIMILIAN, and the more troublesome for that he
was then diuerted with other cares. The Vauoide was not ignorant that it would
be displeasing unto CAESAR, pretending that he had done nothing against the
peace, laying all the blame upon the Emperors governors, especially upon
BALASSVS; affirming that the beginning of all injuries fprang from them, who
oppressed his subjects with unaccustomed tributes, and daily incursions; adding
that he had often complained, but could find no remedy: wherefore it was no
wonder, if he had found some means to revenge those injuries and to repair
the losses. MAXIMILIAN holding it not fit to endure this insolency, sent for
LAZARUS SVENDIE, a Baron of Swethland, a man of great experience in Arms,
wise, vigilant, and valiant, to whom he Lazarus Suendie general in the
Transiluanian war.
committed the charge of the Transiluanian war. But for that he was ignorant
of the state of Hungary, he had given him for assistants ANDREW BATTORI,
MELCHIOR BALASSVS, and GABRIEL PERENE, men well acquainted with the enemies
affairs. SVENDI marched presently into the country of Sepusio, from whence he
sent to entreat MAXIMILIAN to give him leave to manage that war at his will,
and not be compelled always to send to his majesty; lest before a resolution
should be taken, a good opportunity might be lost. Hereupon the King of Poland
sent his Ambassadors to let the Emperor understand how much he was grieved with
this war, the Transiluanian being so near allied unto him: wherefore he
labored to have a surcease of Arms, and the offense remitted. The Emperor
gave him good words, but stayed not his warlike preparation.

This year LAZARUS SVENDIE, went to besiege the Castle of Toccai, a place
strong both by nature and art, standing upon the confines of Transiluania and
Hungary: The which Toccai besieged and taken by Suendie.
FERDINAND had given to a Nobleman of Hungary, for his good deserts; who dying
recommended it, and the guard of his young son to FRANCIS MENETVS. This man of
a tutor became a Tirant: he fled to the Transiluanian and delivered both the
the Castle and Pupil into his hands. This Castle being battered, and MENETVS
the Traitor slain, they yielded upon condition to depart with their swords,
and not to bear Arms against the Emperor. After which he recovered Satmaria,
the which the Transiluanian had abandoned distrusting his Satmar recovered by
Suendie.
own forces; After which he took Erdod (the which FERDINAND had often
attempted in vain) with diverse other places.

The Vaiuode finding himself too weak to cope with MAXIMILIAN, he craved aid
from the Turk, who being busy at the siege of Malta, he sent STEPHEN BATTORI
(who afterward was King of Polonia) with other Ambassadors to the Emperor to
sue for peace; The Transiluanian sue for peace.
the King of Poland did the like, and SOLIMAN sent a Renegado to Viena to
expostulate the wrongs done unto his tributarie, and to find some means of
reconcilement. But CAESAR was not ignorant, that this was a practice to stay the
course of SVENDIE'S prosperous success, and daunt the minds of the Hungarians
with a hope of peace: but for that it should not seem that he hindered the
conclusion of a peace, he commanded his Army to forbear from spoil, but upon
this condition that all the towns on this side the mountains should be his.
This was of hard digestion to the Vaiuode: wherefore he incensed SOLIMAN, who
being returned from Malta with loss and dishonor, resolved to transport the
war into Hungary, and to employ all his forces against the Emperor; hereupon he
sends a new Embassage to Viena, for the tribute which had been long unpaid:
complaining much of the wrong done unto the Vaiuode his client; saying it was
not lawful for him to make a peace with the Emperor, without his priuity,
Soliman renewes the war in Hungary.
commanding restitution of all that had been taken from him, and withal he
renounced the peace, which he ^ad observed with FERDINAND. MAXIMILIAN gave him
good reasons for non payment of the tribute; that the peace had been violated
by the Vaiuode and not by him; that all the places did never belong to the
Transiluanian, but to his predecessors, from whom they had been violently taken
away: whereupon SOLIMAN resolved to besiege Iulia. This year the Vaiuode (in
the absence of SVENDIE, who was gone to Viena concerning the wars) went to
besiege Erdod with the help of the Turks: the which being battered, and
valiantly defended, in the end they yielded upon composition to depart with
bag and baggage, but they were all treacherously slain by the Turks.

This summer 1565 AUGUSTUS Elector of Saxony sent 1000 Saxon horses to SVENDIES
Camp, promising to entertain them for five months, with whom there joined 350
Noblemen and Gentlemen. The Turkish and Transiluanian Ambassadors were still
in Viena treating of a peace, desirous as it seemed to protract time; yet
SVENDIE did often advise the Emperor by his Letters, not to trust their fair
words, nor to be abused by their false promises: but new Ambassadors coming
from SOLIMAN and the Turks having retired their Camp, the Emperor commanded
his General to forbear from al hostile attempts. At that time the Earl of
SALVI governor of Iauerin, had an enterprise upon Alba Regalis which he had a
great hope to surprise, by means of some of the town: but the Emperor
commanded him to surcease, and retire, so as his credulity made the enterprise
frustrate, and the Turks discovered the conspiracy, and put 40 of the citizens
cruelly to death.

The treaty continued still at Viena, and the Emperor sent an Ambassador to
Constantinople to conclude a peace with SOLIMAN, who detained him there until
the year 1567. In the mean time the Basha of Buda made an incursion toward
Iauerin and carried away great spoils. It appeared by probable conjectures
that the Turks made show of a peace outwardly, but prepared for war. The
which a Turk of good note being acquainted with the secret counsels of the
Basha of Buda, confessed freely, being taken, and that SOLIMAN would come the
next year with a great Army to besiege Iulia and Sigeth. STEPHEN BATTORI one
of the Transiluanian Ambassadors was yet in Viena, who at that time had the
wife and children of BALASSVS (being taken at Satmar as we have said) in
prison: wherefore BALASSVS made great suite unto the Emperor to detain him
until his wife and children were set at liberty; CAESAR importuned BATTORI very
much, but he could not prevail, and BATTORI refusing to stay any longer was
dismissed: whereat BALASSVS being much discontented, the Emperor told him that
there was a great difference betwixt their qualities, for they were Captives
taken in war, and he was an Ambassador, whom he might not stay, without doing
wrong unto his dignity.

After his departure, the Emperor imploid all his care to make provision for
the Turkish wars: and being unable to encounter SOLIMAN with his own forces,
he assembled a Diet at Ausburge, this year upon the tenth of March, to consult
with the Princes of the Empire, A Diet called at Ausburg.
touching the Turkish wars, and many other things concerning the Empire. In
the mean time MAXIMILIAN was full of cares, the fame of the Turkish war
increasing daily, and it was said the Transiluanians gathered together great
forces. The Princes being assembled; ALBERT Duke of Bauaria, speaking in the
Emperors name, promised, that touching matters of Religion, there should be
nothing changed, so as the Princes would endeavor to expel all strange
opinions which had crept into the Empire: That the public Peace confirmed by
so many Edicts, should be observed: That such as had been proscribed for the
fact at Herbipolis, should be punished, and justice done to every man in the
Imperial Chamber. But laying aside all other things, he persuaded them, first
to consider of aid against the Turks: whereupon they promised to entertain
twelve thousand horse, and twenty thousand foot, for eight months; The
Princes of the Empire aid Emperor against the Turk.
and moreover to pay four thousand horse, for two years and a half: which
the Emperor accepted very thankefully. At the same time the Archduke CHARLES,
called an assembly of Hungarians, at Possonia, and of Austrians at Vienna;
whereas every house promised to give a Florine: and the Nobility and Gentry,
were so willing to contribute to these Turkish wars, as he that had but one
hundred crowns of yearly rent, was content to maintain a horse, and the
Nobility in general promised to go in person, if CAESAR or any of his
brethren should be there. The Pope, with the Princes of Italy, and the French
king, were solicited for aid in this war.

At the Assembly at Ausburge, GROMBVCH, with his confederats, who had slain
the Bishop of Herbipolis, and afterward surprised the City, and spoiled it
in hostile manner, troubling the peace of Franconia, was by a new proscription
condemned by a general consent of all the orders of the Empire. JOHN FREDERICK
Duke of Saxony, sent his deputies, and Grombach proscribed against at Ausburg.
lawiers to plead for GROMBARCH, and to urge an abolition of the first
proscription; among which HENRY HVSAN a famous lawier was the chief: who being
partly dissuaded by his friends, and partly terrified with the weightinesse of
the cause, left it; and sought to persuade the Duke by his Letters to
relinquish their protection; but he could not be diuerted.

In the interim, the Transiluanian Vaiuode slept not: for having prepared
himself to Arms, he persuaded the Nobility of Hungary, to fall from their
allegiance, writing Letters, by the which he said he was enjoined by the
Turkish Emperor, to persuade all the orders of Hungary to yield him faith and
obedience, whereon, and their good agreement, the hope and health of afflicted
Hungary depended; and by that only means, the Turkish Army might be kept from
their confines: and alleging many other reasons, in the end he persuaded them,
to meet at an assembly at Torda; or to send four deputies with full
authority. These Letters being divulged Suendius answers to the Transiluanians
Letters.
in Hungary, SVENDIVS made an answer unto them, whereby he discovered the
Vaiuodes impostures, and gave the World to understand, that CAESAR had always
sought for Peace with the Turk and Transiluanian; but it succeeded not,
chiefly by this man's slanders, and ambition, who had often broken the peace,
the which CAESAR had so strictly observed, as he had neglected many good
occasions to advance his affairs. Moreover if there were no hope left of any
future Peace, yet the Hungarians should not fear that CAESAR would leave them:
who being assisted first by God, and then by the Germans, and all foreign
Princes, should have power sufficient to resist all their enemies attempts,
persuading them not to fail in their obedience both to their King and
Country, the war being not only just, and lawful, but most necessary; and
therefore they should not doubt of the happy event. Lastly, he commanded them
all in the Emperors name, not to have any commerce with the Transiluanian.

The Transiluanian, what he could not get by fair means, he sought to attain
unto by force: and the Turks omitting no opportunity, surprised Aiuat by
Scalado, in the absence of the Governor, and part of the Garrison, where they
slew all the Citizens and Soldiers most Aiuat taken by the Turks.
cruelly. They thought to have gotten Sigeth with the like policy; but the Earl
of Serin repulsed them with great slaughter: and afterward, making an
incursion into the Turks Country, he slew so great a number of them, that he
returned to Sigeth with two carts full of their heads. SVENDIVS besieged Hust
in vain, the Transiluanian coming with 20000 men to relieve it, but not without
great slaughter of his people; whereas SVENDIVS took certain Turkish ensigns
with much Ordinance. The Basha of Buda likewise besieged Palotta; which he had
brought, by continual battery, to extreme necessity, the Gouerner being
wounded, but yet would not yield. And thus, when all humane help did seem to
fail, God delivered them miraculously. Palotta besieged by the Turks in vain.
There were come to Iaverine twelve companies of Germans; whereof 900 horse
with ninety carts were sent out for forage on the foureteenth of June: which
the Turkish Scouts seeing afar of, and thinking them to be far more in
number, they returned amazed to the Camp; telling them, there was a great Army
coming to relieve the Besieged: wherewith they were so terrified, that they
presently left it, and departed in such haste, that they left behind them
their tents, much ordinance, powder, and other munition.

In the mean time, the Earl of Solmes, going out of Iaverine, besieged
Vesperine; the which he soon took, putting a garrison of Turks to the sword.
The like he did to Tocisa, being five German Exploits of the Earl of Solmes.
leagues from Iaverine: he also took Gesteso, with diverse other Forts upon
that Confine; the Turks being all fled to Strigonium, the which the Earl meant
to besiege: but, acquainting MAXIMILIAN therewith, he would not suffer him to
attempt so great a City with so small an Army, hearing that SOLIMAN was ready
to march.

In the beginning of July, SOLIMAN having all things ready for the war, he
commanded Soliman passes Drove with 200000 men.
the Basha of Buda to cast a bridge over the river of Drove, being very swift:
the which having often attempted in vain, he sent word to SOLIMAN, that it
could not be done; whereupon, he sent him a halter, commanding he should be
hanged if it were not finished against his coming. The Basha terrified heerwith,
setting 25000 men on work, finished his bridge in ten days; where SOLIMAN
passed an Army of 200000 men, the which he divided into three. The one he sent
to Alba Regalis, the other to Sigeth, and the third to spoil the Country. Upon
the way the Vaiuode of Transiluansa met him with rich Presents, giving him
great thanks for his assistance.

SOLIMAN, having passed the river Drove, resolved to besiege Sigeth and Iiula.
Sigeth is a Town strong both by nature and art, seated in a Marish: it was
commanded by the Earl of Serin, having 1800 foot, 200 horse, 150 Citizens,
with great store of Ordinance and munition. The Gouerner, seeing the Turks
forces approach, called all the soldiers and citizens together, making an
Oration unto them, to encourage them to constancy and resolution. After which,
he took an oath to live and die with them, and never to forsake them: the like
did all the soldiers to him, swearing to obey him, and to live and die with
him. The Turks having planted their Camp, they presently attempted the new
Town; the which, for that it could no longer be defended, Sigeth besieged by
the Turks.
he caused to be burnt. They then planted their Ordinance in three parts, and
raised three Mounts which ouer-lookt the walls. SOLIMAN, seeing this siege very
bloody, sought to tempt the Earl with gifts and promise of great rewards;
offering him the government of Illiria, and the possession of Croatia, if he
would yield him the Castle: but, finding him constant, he tried him by another
means. A Trumpetter which served the Earls son, was by chance taken by the
Turks: him SOLIMAN sent into the Castle to tell the Earl that his son was a
prisoner, and to persuade him to yield the Castle if he would preserve his
sons life. But the Earl, neither by the hope of great reward, nor the
unfortunate accident of his son (although it were false) could not be won;
respecting more his Countries liberty, and his faith given to the Emperor, than
his sons safety, lest by this fact he should lay a foul stain upon his
former deserts. This not succeeding, SOLIMAN goes to force, commanding many
assaults to be given, not with small troops, but with whole armies, one
seconding another; so as the besieged being oppressed with multitudes, and
their forces and spirits spent with continual fighting, toward night they
were forced to retire into the Castle: the which the Turks attempted twice in
vain, setting fire in one part of it which was divided from the other, there
being a bridge betwixt them.

The besieged seeing all about them on fire, and themselves brought to despair,
they resolved to open the gates, and to salie forth among their enemies, and
there to die fighting; whereunto the Earl encouraged them by a long speech,
concluding it with these words: Know then, that The Earl of Sarins speech to
his soldiers.
our Emperor, our Country, and all Europe, look upon us, and are witnesses of
our valor or baseness. Think, that here an occasion is offered us, either to
vanquish or to die gloriously. Here, necessity has set the bounds of our
labor, whereas every man, possessed with a certain despair betwixt victory and
death, must endeavor to vanquish; or if God will not suffer it, it is better
to fall fighting than fleeing: wherefore going to this war, remember you
carry, in your hands, immortal fame, religion, liberty (which no good man
loses but with his life) and your country which bare you and bred you up:
wherefore endeavor that you fall not unrevenged nor taken, or be slaughtered
like sheep; but may leave to the enemy a bloody and mournful victory: whereto
the soldiers gave a joyful consent, all vowing to die with their Commander.

At this time there fell out a memorable accident. One of the soldiers,
preparing himself to fight and die, having a wife of a Noble family and very
fair, resolved to kill her lest she should be A singular example of constancy
in a wise.
subject to the lusts and reproaches of the Turks: which his wife perceiving,
she entreated him to forbear; saying, that it was a wicked thing for a husband
to imbrue his hands in the blood of his wife whom he had loved so much; but it
was more unworthy, if a good and chaste wife should leave her husband in the
extremity of danger. I know, quoth she, I have sworn never to forsake thee:
wherefore I will be thy companion in death, that whom love in life has joined
together, death may not part; whereupon she put on man's apparel, and her
husband gave her Arms wherewith she joined herself to her husband.

The Earl of Serin, seeing his men in Arms, attired himself in his richest
robes, as if he had The Duke of Serin prepares to salie forth.
been going to some solemn feast, putting 200 crowns in his pocket, the which
he said should be a reward for some Barbarian to bury him. After which, he put
the keys of the Castle in his bosom, saying; With these the Emperor put me in
trust, and whilst I breathe no man shall take them from me. He would not cover
his body with any Arms; saying, that he had no need of them seeing, he desired
nothing but a fair death by wounds. He made choice of the sharpest of his
swords, saying; With this sword I first won my honor, and whatsoever I
enjoy, and with it I will willingly bear whatsoever God has decreed of me,
where I shall find an end of danger or of life. So, having a great Standard
carried before him, calling upon the Name of JESUS, he commanded the gates to
be opened, crying out; Follow me noble soldiers, as you have done ever, and
let us perform this last work of mortal men: and so, thrusting into the midst
of their enemies, they made a great slaughter upon the bridge. The Earl was
shot thorough, and fell as he came on the land: of 300 there were not four
which came alive into the enemies power; and the woman (of whom we made
mention) fighting valiantly, died by her husbands side. Thus Sigeth fell into
the Turks hands; but they had no great cause to joy of it: Sigeth taken by the
Turks.
for, the Earl having laid a train of powder, a great number of Turks being
gotten into it, the Castle was blown up; wherewith there were three thousand
men slain, and many others sore wounded.

During this siege, SOLIMAN died of an Apoplexy, the seventh of September; the
which, MAHOMET Basha concealed from the knowledge of the Army: and, lest it
should be discovered, Solimans death
he slew his physician, and such as had attended him. In the mean time he
caused the trumpets and music to sound after the accustomed manner, his diet
to be prepared, and his guards to be set before his tent as if he had been
living, until the coming of SELIM his son.

Whilst that SOLIMAN was at Sigeth, MAXIMILIAN had drawn a great Army
together Maximilians preparation against the Turk.
at Vienna, whereof he made his brother FERDINAND General, and the Earl of
Suartzenburgh his Lieutenant: wherein he was assisted by the Pope and many
Princes. Many Noblemen came out of England to serve in this war at their
own charge. From France came the Duke of Guise, the Earl of Brisack, Lansack,
S. Cross, and many other Noblemen. The Duke of Ferrara sent 400 Gentlemen and
300 shot; the Florentine, 3000 foot; the Duke of Savage, 400 harguebusiers on
horseback; and other Princes did the like: neither did some Princes of Germany
fail to send voluntary supplies; so as the whole Army consisted of fourscore
thousand men.

Whilst that SOLIMAN was busy before Sigeth, he sent BARTHA Basha to the
siege of Iulia, a strong Castle upon the confines of Transiluania, he having in
his Army 80000 men; Transiluanians, Moldauians, Turks and Tartarians. The
Gouerners name of the Castle was LADISLAVS SERETZIN, by whose inconstancy and
treachery it was yielded five days before Sigeth, upon certain conditions, but
not observed: for, the garrison marching away, the Turks lying in ambush fell
upon them; who making resistance for a while, in the end they were oppressed by
multitudes, and in a manner all slain; only some few (which would not consent
to the yielding of the Castle) escaped miraculously. SERETZIN was taken alive,
and carried captive to Belgrade; who afterward was put to a most cruel death
in Constantinople.

SOLIMAN'S third Army lay near to Iauerine to infest the Emperors Camp; so as
there were daily skirmishes betwixt them, in one of the which MAHOMET Basha of
Alba Regalis coming Mahomet Basha taken coming to charge the Emperors Camp.
to charge the Imperialls was taken prisoner by George THVRIGER: who presenting
him to the Emperor, he rewarded him with a chain of gold, and gave him the
honor of knighthood. There was a Spaniard then present, who having conuersed
much in the Turks court, had heard this Basha brag, that he alone would
subdue the Germane King: the which he denied not, but with an undaunted mind
answered, that such was the fortune of war, he had not only spoken this, but
might have done it, but now he was a slave, and could not do any thing.

The Vauoid of Transiluania, required to have the Castle of Iulia, which Bartha
Basha had taken, restored unto him, for that it did belong to Transiluania; the
which the Basha promised to do, if he would pay him 400000 crowns, for the
charges of that siege: which the Vauoide being not able to perform, it
continued in the Turks power.

SELIM coming to the Army was proclaimed Emperor of the Turks, and then
retired toward Constantinople: upon whose departure Iauerin was by chance set
on fire, wherewith the whole town except the Temple, the Palace, and some few
other buildings was consumed: but the Emperor knowing it to be an excellent
bulwark against the enemy, caused it to be repaired; and seeing the Turks
retired, he dissolved his Camp, and went to Viena, leaving the Earl of Solmes
governor of Iauerin.

SELIM left Bartha Basha in Hungary with a great number of Tartarians, who
committed unspeakable cruelties. The Vauoid had drawn part of them unto him,
to the siege of Toccay, whereas SVENDIVS lay sick, having formerly provided for
the siege, and received succors from the Emperor; but the Vauoide hearing
that the Tartarians spoiled his country, he raised his siege to relieve his
subjects. The Emperor being returned to Viena, he assembled the estates and
obtained a yearly aid of 138000 crowns against the Turk, and for the
repairing of Iauerin 13000. Then he gave Letters to AUGUSTUS Elector of Saxony,
to execute the sentence given against JOHN FREDERICK Duke of Saxony, who had
undertaken the protection of WILLIAM GRAMBATH and others condemned by the
Emperor: whereupon the Saxon soldiers who had served in Hungary were commanded
to prepare for the siege of the Castle of Gotha; whither AUGUSTUS went with his
forces, being accompanied by the Emperors commissioners, commanding all
gentlemen, citizens, and country men, in the Emperors name to leave 1567.
him, and to return to their houses, upon pain of loss of life and goods,
and absoluing them from their oath unto the Duke; but these persuasions could
not move them to leave him: whereupon they pressed the siege, so as on the
thirteenth of April the Castle was yielded, and JOHN FREDERICK became a prison
to the Emperor. In the Castle Grombachius (being Gotha taken, (...) Grombach
with his companions executed.
seventy three years old) with seventeen more of his confederates were taken,
and all publicly executed.

The 12 of May there was a Diet ended at Ratisbone: where although that neither
the Emperor nor any of the Princes of the Empire were present, except ALBERT
Duke of Bauaria, who represented the Emperors person, yet it was decreed that
the contribution promised at the Diet of Ausburg for three years should be
paid in two; That the defenses of the town of Gotha, and the Castle of
Grimensteine should be rased, and that the Elector AUGUSTUS should be paid for
that expedition.

MAXIMILIAN hearing that SELIM the Ottoman Emperor was tractable to a peace A
peace concluded with Selim.
if it were required, he sent his Ambassadors to Constantinople; where after
some treaty it was concluded: and then they returned to Viena, accompanied with
an Ambassador from SELIM. A peace was made for 8 years, upon these
conditions: That every one should hold what he had gotteen by war; That the
Vauoide should be comprehended; that the bordering country The conditions of
peace with Selim.
men who paid rents both to the Turk and CAESAR, should now pay only to the
Turks, and perform their works only to them; and the tribute or pension of
30000 Hungarian ducats which FERDINAND did yearly pay, should in like manner
be paid by MAXIMILIAN to SELIM. This peace was very pleasing to all
Christendom, and did much increase the Emperors power in Transiluania by the
help of SVENDIVS.

In the year 1570, the cruel war, which had continued long betwixt the
Kings of Denmark and SVETHEN, was compounded by the mediation of MAXIMILIAN,
the French A peace bewixt the Kings of Denmark and Swethen.
King and the Princes Electors of Germany, who sending their Ambassadors to a
treaty at Setina in Pomerania, a peace was concluded to the content of both the
Kings. And about the same time died JOHN SIGISMVND, the Vaiuode of Transiluania
(who had formerly been called STEPHEN) being but 30 years old: his father
was JOHN Earl of Sibinia (whom after the death of King JEWS, the Barons of
Hungary had chosen for their King, contrary to the will of the Emperor
FERDINAND) his mother was ISABEL daughter to SIGISMVND King of Poland; during
his life time he usurped the title of a King: and studying for innouations,
with the Turks aid he engaged Hungary in many miseries. STEPHEN BATTORI (who
was afterward called to the Kingdom of Polonia) succeeded him, CASPAR
BECESSIVS (whom JOHN had appointed for his successor) being rejected, and
driven out of Transiluania: but seeking to raise up a sedition against STEPHEN,
with the Emperors help he was vanquished and banished for ever; and STEPHEN
gouernd that Province being separated from Hungary, with more quiet and peace.

The peace continued stll in Hungary; and RODVLPHVS, eldest son to the Emperor
MAXIMILIAN, was chosen King of Hungary with his fathers consent, who willingly
yielded the Kingdom to him. And in the year 1575 he was declared and crowned
King of Bohemia in 1575. Rodulph chosen king of Hungary, of Bohemia, and of the
Romans.
Prague with great solemnity, having received the Diadem of Hungary three
years before at Possonia. After this, the Emperor calling a Diet at Ratisbone,
RODVLPHVS was chosen King of the Romans with a joint consent of all the
Electors; and by his fathers desire was on the first of November, one thousand
five hundred seventy five, crowned in the Cathedral Church at Ratisbone with
accustomed ceremonies.

HENRY the French King, who had retired himself secretly out of Polonia, was
now by a public decree rejected: whereupon, they called an Assembly at
Warsauia, for the choosing of a new King; in which, the high Chancellor, with
the greatest part of the Counselors, made Controversy for the Kingdom of
Poland.
choice of the Emperor MAXIMILIAN: and some others, with a great part of the
Nobility (dissenting from the Council) desired to have a King issued from the
Poland blood; and therefore they made ANNE, sister to the deceased King, a
Virgin almost fifty years old, their Queen; giving her for husband STEPHEN
BATTORI Prince of Transiluania, and proclaimed him King. Presently some write
Letters to MAXIMILIAN, and persuade him not to accept of the Kingdom of
Poland, relying upon the suffrages of a few Senators and Noblemen. On the
other side, they which had chosen MAXIMILIAN, sent to dissuade the Prince of
Transiluania from accepting of that Kingdom; whereof the Emperor MAXIMILIAN
was chosen lawful King by the general consent of the Senate of Polonia,
Lituania, and all Prussia. Such as favored MAXIMILIAN, sent to entreat him to
make haste and come into the Kingdom before that STEPHEN BATTORI should get
possession: but (whether presaging his death at hand, or busied with the
affairs of the Empire, or using his natural slowenesse) he sought delays,
requiring a more ample resolution touching the heads of his election. The
Ambassadors told him there was danger in delay, and importuned him to set down
a certain day for his coming into Polonia, and that he should signify so much
by his Ambassadors to the Nobility assembled at Leouitia. CAESAR found new
delays for his iourny, and propounded new conditions; requiring, that the
Virgin ANNE, who only remained of the family of the Iagelons (which the
Polonians honored so much) might be married to his son ERNESTVS, and he to be
crowned King in his place.

Whilst time was spent in these differences, Letters came from the Assembly at
Leouitia; whereby they complained much of his delay, the which was very
prejudicial to his affairs; and gave him to understand, that unless he came
speedily, they should be forced to give the kingdom to him that came first:
whereupon, the Emperor sent Letters to the Estates which were to meet at
Marsauia, propounding conditions touching the marriage of ERNEST with ANNE;
requiring in the mean time, that nothing should be decreed that might prejudice
his lawful election.

In the mean time, STEPHEN BATTORI, being called out of Transiluania by the
Noblemen of his faction, posted speedily into Polonia; and, taking ANNE to
wife, was crowned in Cracouia, the first of May, having first taken an oath to
observe all the rights, privileges and liberties, Stephen Battori crowned K.
of Poland.
as they had been observed by CASIMIER and other Kings his Predecessors; adding
withal, that if he should violate them in any part, he should then lose all
the right he had in the Kingdom, and the Noblemen should be freed from the
faith and obedience which they did owe him as their lawful King.

During this, the Emperor MAXIMILIAN called a Diet at Ratisbone, whither the
Noblemen of Poland sent Ambassadors to him after the Coronation of King
STEPHEN; entreating him, that seeing amidst the divisions of Noblemen, and
factious Citizens, he could not attain to that kingdom, he should take it in
good part, the Realm being now come unto a king, who was his friend, and
devoted unto him: to whom he answered, that it should plainly appear, that he
would not so easily renounce the right which he thought he had by this
election. At this Diet the Emperor confirmed FRANCIS de Medicis, with the
consent of these Princes, in the title of great Duke of Tuscane, the which Pope
PIUS the Fifth had granted to COSMO the Great in the year 1566.

MAXIMILIAN (living but few months after the election of his son to be King of
Romans) The death of the Emperor Maximilian.
departed this life on the twelfth of October in the year 1577. He left great
testimonies of his wisdom, piety, and virtues, worthy of an excellent
Emperor: he had often that symbol of ABRAHAM in his mouth, Dominus prouidebit,
and did much blame them which made fortune a goddess. He condemned those
Princes which would command over the belief of their subjects, affirming that
there was no greater sin then to force men's consciencies: for (said he) they
that wrest the soul, whilst they covet after heaven, lose earth. He desired
to suppress all controversies of religion: He was merciful to his enemies,
and loving to his faithful servants: he honored and respected Princes and
Noblemen: he was an enemy to intemperance: he loved natural Philosophy, spoke
many tongues readily, of an exquisite judgment, admirable of memory, eloquent,
grave, and ponderous in his speech; An obseruer of equity and bounty, a severe
censurer of covetousness, and much delighted in gardening: he conferred often of
the holy scriptures, of the immortality of the soul, and of the resurrection
from the dead.

To conclude, he was a Prince full of al piety and bounty: and if the troubles
and civil wars in Germany had not crossed his good resolutions, and weakened his
power, he would have left nothing unattempted to have ruined the Ottoman
Empire. He was of an ordinary stature, his countenance full of gravity, and
his head somewhat balde. He was a great fauorer of Learning, and learned-men,
to whom he gave great pensions, and especially to Mathematicians, and
Antiquaries, being greatly delighted in those faculties. He was very active of
his body: by AUGUSTA MARIA daughter to CHARLES the Fifth, and his cosin-germane,
he had sixteen children, whereof ten were living. Of his four daughters,
ISABEL was married to her Uncle PHILIP King of Spain, MARY was wife to CHARLES
the Ninth, the French King. ANNE and ELENOR were then but children. His sons
were RODVLPH and MATHIAS, both Emperors; ALBERTVS, a Cardinal and
Arch-bishoppe of Toledo (but afterward renouncing his Ecclesiastical
dignities, he married with ISABELLA Infanta of Spain, in whose right he is
duke of Brabant, Earl of Flanders, etc.) ERNESTVS, MAXIMILIAN, and VENCESLAVS.
He had but one wife, after whose decease he would not marry any other. He was,
blindely, very Religious: and respecting much the greatness of the Pope, he
endeavored also to have drawn all the Princes of Germany to have done the like.

THE LIFE OF RODVLPH, THE SECOND OF THAT NAME, AND HVNDRETH AND EIGHTTEENTH
ROMAN EMPEROVR.
THe Imperial dignity (being in a manner made hereditarie to the house of
Austria) after the death of MAXIMILIAN the Second of that name, was by a
general consent of all the Electors, confirmed to his son RODVLPH, King of
Bohemia, and Hungary; chosen a little before King of Romans, at his fathers
entreaty. At his first entrance, he gave great hopes to restore the Empire to
her ancient dignity and splendour, and to recover such countries as had been
usurped from the Empire: But he was a prince of too soft a spirit, and loved
peace and ease, referring the government of affairs to his Counselors. He
lived much in the Castle of Prague, and was much delighted in the gathering
together of precious stones, and the exquisite setting and working of them. He
bid Arms Adue, yet he valiantly protected Hungary, Bohemia, Austria, and other
provinces. Presently after his coronation (for the better settling of his new
dignity) he sent to the Pope to be confirmed by him, and to entreat him to
declare him the eldest son of the Church. Then calling a Diet at Ratisbone, he
employed all his credit and means, to have matters concerning the Roman
Religion reformed, pressing the Princes of Germany to consent to his new
reformation. After this, he sent an Ambassador to the Ottoman Emperor, to
have a confirmation of the truce made between him and his father MAXIMILIAN,
and in the mean time he persuaded his brother MATHIAS (who was gone into the
Nether-lands, with hope to make himself Lord of those provinces) to abandon
that enterprise, and to return into Germany; showing him, how dishonorable it
would be if through his fault, the troubles of those countries should be
increased: But his persuasions could not prevail against his resolution: yet
soon after (being discontented with the estates of those countries) leaving
them he returned (with little honor) into Germany.

This year SALENTINE B. of Paddeborne, and Elector of Cullen, a just man, and
valiant, more fit for war then to make a priest, being the last which remained
of the house of the Earls of Isenburg, married a daughter of the Earl of
Aremburg, and gave over both his Bishoprics. Salentine Elector of Cullen
marries and resignes his Bishoprics.
HENRY Duke of Saxony and Archbishop of Breme succeeded him in that of
Paddeborne, upon condition that he should every year keep his court three
months in the diocese of Paddeborne; as much in Osnaburg; and six months in
Breme. And to the Electorship of Cullen, succeeded GEBARDVS TRVCHSESIVS son
to WILLIAM Baron of Walbourg. STEPHEN BATTORI going to be king of Polonia, had
left his brother CHRISTOPHER to succeed him Sigismund Battori chosen Prince of
Transiluania.
in Transiluania: who being worn with continual infirmities, died, leaving
SIGISMVND his son to succeed him, the which was confirmed by the consent of
all the estates: and STEPHEN BATTORI, King of Polonia, sent an Ambassador to
AMVRATH the Turk, to entreat him, that (seeing Transiluania was tributary to
the Turk) he would suffer SIGISMVND to enjoy it, as other Princes before him
had done; and if any thing were attempted to the contrary, he said he could not
abandon his kinsman and his country: but AMVRATH yielded easily unto it for
King STEPHEN'S sake, who at that time was in war with the Muscouite touching
Liuonia which he detained. And the Muscouite in the mean time sent Ambassadors
to the Emperor RODVLPH, and to the Bishop of Rome, promising succors against
the Turk, the common enemy of the Christian Name; hoping by this means, that he
should easily obtain a peace with the King of Poland.

TRVCHSIS, having succeeded SALENTINE in the Archbishopric of Cullen (as we
have said) in process of time resolved to take a wife, and yet retain his
Electorall dignity and Archbishopric: whereupon he married ANNE, daughter to
GEORGE Earl of Mansfeld. The marriage was secretly consummated at Bona, in the
presence of her brother and sister; which marriage bred great confusion in
Germany. The marriage thus consummated, TRVCHSIS left Bona: and having drawn
some horse and foot together, he seized upon Marpourge, and tied his subjects
to him by a new oath. Then he called an Assembly of the Estates of Westphalia
and Cullen: to whom the Elector and the other Palatines, with the Lantzgraue of
Hesse, sent their Ambassadors: and JEWS Elector Palatine labored faithfully
with the Emperor, with the Chapter, and with the Senate of Cullen, for the
retaining of TRVCHSIS his dignity; which others did oppose strongly: and the
Earl of Aremberge seized upon Bona, in the name of the Chapter; whereupon
TRVCHSIS flew to Arms, and craved aid of his friends. In the mean time, the
Pope sent down ANDREW, Cardinal of Austria, to deprive TRVCHSIS of his
Electorship of Cullen, and to give power to the Chapter to choose another; but
the Elector Palatine would not suffer them to pass: whereupon, afterward the
Pope by a public decree made in Rome, dated in April, in the year 1583,
declared the said GEBHARD TRVCHSIS to be a notorious Heretic, perjured, fallen
from his Archiepiscopall dignity, and incapable of all spiritual charge: and
soon after, ERNEST of Bauaria, son to ALBERT Duke of Bauaria, was chosen by
the mediation of the Pope, the Emperor, the Duke of Parma, and others. Ernest
of Bauaria chosen Archbishop of Cullen.
Whereupon, the war grew hot betwixt them, either of them fortifying himself
with his friends: but ERNEST still kept possession, and lives at this day.

In the beginning of this year, Pope GREGORY the Thirteenth took upon him to
reform The Calendar corrected by Pope Gregory the 13.
the Calendar, for that there was some small difference or distance, the year
being not precisely fitted, equal to the course of the Sun; so as in the
beginning this little error did produce many discommodities: whereupon the
Pope, desiring to have the honor of this reformation, published his Bull for
the adding of ten days. The Emperor, being at a Diet at Ausburg, propounded
the publication of this new Calendar: which the Protestant Princes rejected;
not for that it was rashly done and needless, but for that the Bishop of Rome
had ordained it without The protestant princes in Germany refuse to admit the
new Calendar.
the priuity of the Emperor to whom that office did belong, nor with the
consent of the Princes of the Empire; the Elector of Saxony gravely admonishing
them to have a care, lest under this color of reforming the Calendar, they did
not give to the Pope a new jurisdiction and commanding power over the majesty
of the Empire and the Emperor himself. Wherefore, when as none of the Princes
or Cities which embraced the Confession of Ausburg, would allow of this
Calendar in Germany, he commanded that the old form, observed in the Imperial
Chamber, should be for that year kept.

In the year 1584, there was a truce concluded betwixt AMVRATH who had
succeeded A truce betwixt the Emperor and the Turk.
SELIM his father, and the Emperor RODVLPH, the which was to continue for nine
years. The Emperor sent his Ambassadors with Presents, who came first to Buda,
where they concluded this truce with SINAN Basha; and then they went to
Constantinople to have it confirmed. In the mean time, ten thousand Turks
entered upon the consins of Carniola, where they committed great spoils, and
carried many poor Christians into slavery: but they were pursued by two
thousand Christians, who overthrew them and put them to flight, freeing all the
captives; in which conflict there were four thousand Turks slain. AMVRATH was
somewhat moved heerwith: but, being duly informed that the wrong proceeded
from the Turks, he was soon pacified, and held them worthily slain; saying,
that he would not have his people attempt any thing upon the confines of
Hungary that might trouble the peace; commanding the Bashaes of Buda and
Temesuarre, very strictly, to contain their bordering soldiers in their
duties: the like he required from the Christians.

This year 1585, the Citizens of Magdebourg were in great controversy with
their Archbishop touching the ecclesiastical and political jurisdiction, and
for one of the Cities gates joining A controversy compounded.
to the Bishops Palace, by which he did usually come in and go out at his
pleasure. The Electors of Saxony and Brandenburgh by their intercession
compounded these quarrels; whereby it was concluded, that the City should have
free exercise of the religion of the Confession of Ausburg, with diverse other
privileges, and the Archbishop should have the gate opened whenever he
would enter; but the keys should be kept by one of the Senators, and the
Porter should be appointed by the Senate; who should enter into bonds, both to
the Archbishop and to the Senate, to give free egresse and regresse to either
party, and at all times when need should require, without any prejudice to the
other party; but yet so as no Counselors nor Ministers should be admitted,
unless either the archbishop, or the administrator, were there in person.

STEPHEN BATTORI king of Polonia, dying this year 1587, the Nobility met at
Varsouia, for the choosing of a new king. There were many Competitors for the
Kingdom; Competitors for the Crown of Poland.
namely, ERNESTVS, MATHIAS, and MAXIMILIAN brethren, Archdukes of Austria,
recommended by the Emperor RODVLPH their brother, by the king of Spain, the
Pope and other Princes, whom also many Noblemen (enemies to SAMOSCIVS the
Chancellor) did favor. The second was SIGISMVND, king of Swethland,
grandchild by the mothers side to IAGELON king of Poland. THEODORE, great Duke
of Muscouy, did much affect this neighbor kingdom. Some would have one
PIASTVS, a Nobleman of Polonia chosen; and other desired to have SIGISMVND,
brothers son to the deceased King: yea, there were some which gave their voices
to ALEXANDER FARNESE for his singular virtue, and glorious exploits.

After much contention, in the end the Nobility was divided into two parts: the
one made choice of SIGISMVND of Swethland, the other, of MAXIMILIAN of Austria,
the Emperors brother: so as either of them chalenging the kingdom they fell to
Arms; but the Swethen being a young Prince of one and twenty years of age
prevailed: being supported by the Chancellor SAMOSCIVS who was very powerful,
he came into Poland, and was crowned in Cracouia this year in December.

The year following, the Arch duke MAXIMILIAN seeking to get the possession of
the Kingdom, came speedily with 16000 foot and horse, and planted his Camp
within sight Maximilian of Austria besieges Cracouia.
of Cracouia, requiring to be admitted and crowned. The Cracouians who favored
the Swethen would not receive him, but sent unto the other to hasten his
coming, and in the mean time they fortified their City, burnt their suburbs,
and salied forth daily. During the siege many Germans died: and MAXIMILIAN
hearing, that the King of Swethen was come to Petricouia, he raised his Camp,
and marched to meet with him, to decide their quarrel by a battle; but
either knowing by the way, that the Swethen was far stronger, having thirty
thousand men in his army, or for some other consideration, he changed his
advice, and returned to Cracouia, which he attempted again in vain: and
SAMOSCIVS the Chancellor followed him with a thousand two hundred choice men;
the report whereof, did so terrify the Army, as MAXIMILIAN retired to the
confines of Silesia, putting himself into Maximilian taken prisoners by the
Polonians.
the town of Pitfense; whither SAMOSCIVS pursued him, and besieged the town:
where MAXIMILIAN (no longer able to defend himself) was forced to yield, and
so was carried back Captive into Polonia.

MAXIMILIAN being committed to custody, the Bohemians did expostulate with the
Polonians, for the breach of the League which was betwixt them, for that during
the peace betwixt both the kingdoms, the Polonians had entered in hostile
manner, into Silesia, and had besieged their friend MAXIMILIAN, and carried him
out of the province captive, for whose disgrace many Princes were grieved.

Notwithstanding the truce betwixt the Emperor RODVLPH and AMVRATH the Third,
yet the Turks did often break it: and this year they having gathered
together their bordering troops at Capanum, upon the lake of Palotta, meant
therewith to invade the confines Capanum taken by the Christians from the
Turks.
of the Christians; but they thought it fittest to prevent them: whereupon they
set upon the Castle, and forced it, wherein they took 190 men of special note,
70 women, with a great number of ordinary soldiers, whom they carried away
Captive; but ALI Basha the motive of all these broiles escaped: whom AMVRATH
afterward without any respect of affinity (having married his sister) caused
to be hanged, for that he had broken the truce with the Christians. But this
execution did not terrify them from making incursions, spoiling some towns
and many villages.

GEORGE SERIN son to Count NICHOLAS, imitating his fathers glory, was sent
against them, of whom he made a great slaughter; the which was the more
grievous to the Ottoman Emperor, for that there perished many choice soldiers
and excellent Captains: whereat being incensed, he rewarded the Governor of
Sigeth, the author of this expedition, as he had done ALI Basha. Afterward
SINAN Basha to revenge these former losses, and to wipe away the ignominy, had
gathered together ten thousand men, horse and foot, meaning to spoil all
Hungary. Near unto Sixa, CLAUDIUS RVSSELVS opposed himself with one thousand
seven hundred men, with whom the Governor of Agria joined, and both The Turks
defeated by the Christians.
together set upon the Enemy, and put them to flight; in the which there were
three thousand Turks slain and drowned; all their Wagons, with great store
of victuals, and thirty Ensigns were taken. This victory was not so pleasing
to the Emperor as was expected: for notwithstanding that he had a faithless
peace with the Turks, and knew well that they governed their counsels by the
event of things, and would willingly embrace all occasions to annoy the
Christians, yet he would not be the cause, the truce should be infringed:
Wherefore he dismissed all the Captains from their charges, pardoning the
soldiers; but when he vndcrstood that the beginning of these wrongs proceeded
from the Turks, he allowed of their excuse. AMVRATH deprived SINAN Basha of
all his goods, and committed him to prison in Constantinople.

The question betwixt King SIGISMVND and the Archduke MAXIMILIAN, being a
prisoner, was yet treated of in Poland by Cardinal ALDOBRANDINO Legate for the
A peace betwixt Sigismund of Po^and, and Maximilian and he set at liberty.
Pope, and the Ambassadors for either party. There were many difficulties, and
still new did arise; but in the end, by the diligence and care of those
Ambassadors, a Peace was concluded betwixt the Polonians and the house of
Austria, upon certain conditions, which the Emperor should confirm by oath,
and so SIGISMVND the Third enjoyed the kingdom quietly. After which, there
being an Assembly of the States called, the Emperor sent his Ambasiadour, who
complained much of a Decree made the year before, wherein it was mentioned,
that no man, hereafter, in the election of a new King of Poland, should presume
to name or recommend any one of the house of Austria; if he did, he should be
(ipso facto) infamous, requiring that this ignominious exclusion (the like
whereof had not been seen in any other Nation) might be abolished: Which done
MAXIMILIAN should take the oath he had promised, and the Emperor, with the
whole house of Austria would suffer them to levy men, and to buy victuals in
their Countries, if Poland should be invaded by the Turk. Whereunto the King
answered; that having conferred with his Council he would satisfy him; in the
mean time he could not conceal, that he had been advertised from the Turks
Court, and by the Ambassadors of other Kings, that the Emperor had pressed the
Turk to make war against Poland, being a most fit time; the Noblemen there
being then in sactions, that they had no firm peace with the Princes of
Germany, nor with the Muscouite, neither had they any store of money to levy
and entertain strangers.

When the Ambassador had excused all this, he afterward received his answer:
That the Polonians had been forced to make that constitution concerning the
house of Austria, to avoid greater dangers. But if the King of Spain, and
MAXIMILIAN would perform the promised Oath, they would do that which was just
and fit for the dignity of the Commonwealth; that the Decree did only
concern MAXIMILIAN; but if the other Archdukes and his kinse-menne did
support him, then it should extend to the whole house of Austria. Thus the
Ambassador took his leave, and departed with a sour answer: notwithstanding
afterward these houses were thoroughly reconciled, by reason that King
SIGISMVND married with ANNE of Austria, who was daughter to the Archduke
CHARLES.

The truce continued still in Hungary with AMVRATH, to the great content of the
subjects, 1592. Amurath renews the war in Hungary.
and AMVRATH was well pleased to have prolonged it eight years more: but
having made a peace with the Persian, his Bashaes persuaded him to embrace the
occasion, and to send a good Army against the Christians, they being now
engaged in civil wars. This counsel pleased AMVRATH and his son, whereupon
he commanded preparations to be made both by sea and land. In the beginning
of the year they entered unexpected, and forced diverse towns. After which the
Army turned to Camisa: but they were repulst, and put to flight by the
garrison, losing in a manner all the fruits of their former victory. AMVRATH
(being importuned by his son and others) sent ASSAN Basha with a strong Army
into Croatia, where at the first he took Castrouitium by treason: after which
he went to Vehicium the Metropolitan City of Croatia, the which after some
small battery yielded; after which he put to flight ERDOD with fifty thousand
men, lying betwixt Vehitium and Carolostad.

This Army in Croatia increased daily, which struck a great terror into all
Hungary, Bauaria, Bohemia Stiria, Carinthia, Morauia, Silesia, and all the
neighbor provinces. The Emperor The Turks proceed into Croatia.
assembled the states of Silesia and Morauia, acquainted them with the danger,
and persuaded them to join all their forces, to resist this barbarous enemy,
although he did not doubt but AMVRATH would disauow this war, and the breach
of the truce; yet he knew that the Turks property was, that having once taken
any towns never to restore them: wherefore he sought by all means, to get
aid to resist this tyrant. On the sixteenth of July the Turks came with a
forraging troop to Senderine, thinking to surprise it in a miste: but they
were discovered, and some few days after, the governor of Agria meeting them
but with small troops and forces, they put him to flight, having lost in a
manner all his footmen.

In July, ASSAN Basha, grown proud with this success, laid siege to Sisseck,
a Monastery The Turks slain by a policy at Sisseck.
standing betwixt the river of Save and Colapa, it being defended by a Chanon
of Agria, with a good garrison: this he battered six days together with four
and twenty pieces of Ordinance: but it was valiantly defended, and he was
forced to retire with shame and loss. Having lodged his Army not far off, he
attempted the Chanon with promises of reward, giving him to understand that he
knew well in what estate they were. The Chanon wondered who should discover
their secrets to the enemy; yet he brought in his Messenger and showed them
the whole Monastery, being very careful to discover the traitor: In the end,
he finds it was the Steward; whereupon taking him and the Turk, he cast
them secretly into the River. ASSAN wondering at the long stay of his
Messenger, sent to know if any violence were offered him. The Chanon answered,
he had sent him away presently with a kind answer, and if any accident had
happened unto him upon the way, he was not acquainted with it; adding withal,
that seeing there was but little hope to defend the place against the Turks
forces, he would treat with the Basha to yield it, so as he would send some
honorable persons, the which (for that it concerned his reputation much)
should receive the place, and withal appointed a day for the delivery. The
Basha was glad of this answer, making choice of a troop of the better sort to
go into the Monastery; in the mean time the Chanon planted his Ordinance,
and covered it that the enemy might not see it, lodging his garrison armed in
secret places, that when a sign were given they might fall out upon the enemy.

The Turks came on, all richly attired, and riding three in a rank; whereof
fifty were received in at the great gate: but presently the hearse was let
down, and the Ordinance discharged upon them, and at the same instant the
garrison salied forth upon such as stayed without; and such as could escape,
made what haste they could to return, cursing their entertainment at Sisseck.
The Basha wrote proud Letters to the Chanon, that he would not give over the
siege til he had taken the place, and that he would fley him alive to the
reproach of Christendom. But the Chanon was not much moved with his threats,
neither did the Basha any memorable thing there this year.

The Beglerby of Greece entered Hungary with a great Army: he attempted Toggay
a strong The Christians slain in their Camp by the Turks at Carolstade.
Castle in vain, from which he attempted Gomorrha seated in a marish, and
easily to be defended. ASSAN Basha was still in Croatia and Carinthia, putting
all to fire and sword. In September news came to the Emperors court, that
Canisa was straightly besieged with an Army of 160000 Turks, yet there was
good hope for that the Christian Army increased daily, the Archduke ERNEST
being made General. The Camp lay then at Carolostadium, where the Turks came to
view the Army from the top of a hill: and the Christians sending out 50 horse
to discover the enemies Army, found no more then what they had seen on the
hill, so as the Christians slept securely without fear of any enemy; who came
and charged them so suddenly as they had scarce leisure to put on their Arms:
The fight was long and furious, and the slaughter great on either side: but the
Christians being oppressed with multitudes fell in the same place where they
fought, so as in all there scarce escaped fourscore: the commanders and
Captains fled betimes: but afterward they lost their heads, as a just reward
for their baseness.

This victory was great, yet purchased with much blood: for many write the
Turks lost 12000 men. All the neighbor provinces were so terrified herewith,
as they abandoned their towns.

The Emperor sent to all the Princes, and Imperial towns, laying before them
the danger wherein Germany stood, unless the enemy were presently repulst from
their borders. The The Emperor craves aid against the Turks.
Princes of Germany, both to obey the Emperor, and to prevent the danger of
the Christian Commonwealth, did presently give order for the leuying of men
and money; and the Pope, the King of Spain, the Princes of Italy, and others
did contribute bountifully to so necessary a war. The citizens of Aix, of
the reformed religon, did not only enjoy the free exercise thereof, but also
required to be admitted into the Senate, contrary to an edict, made by a
general The Emperors s^uere censure against the citizens of Aix.
consent, whereby none but Roman Catholics might be admitted to be Consuls;
whereupon the ancient Magistrates complained unto the Emperor: who enjoined
them strictly to reduce their Commonwealth to the ancient form. The new
Consuls and Senators pretended that the peace of religion was infringed, and
employed all the Princes and orders of the Confession of Ausburg: the Emperor
taking advice hereupon at a Diet at Ausburg, commissioners were sent to Aix;
who hearing both parties, and leaving the cause undecided, made relation unto
the Emperor, who gave a severe sentence against the accused, disannulling all
that had been done, and reducing the government to the same estate it was in
the year 1560: That they should pay all the charges of the suit, the Emperor
reserving to himself the penalty for the offense committed etc. The execution
of which sentence, they of the reformed religion labored to stay, by the
mediation of the protestant Princes.

This year the Turks came again to besiege the monastery of Sisseck, with
30000 men. AFFAN Basha (who was there General) planted his Ordinance, and
battered it furiously The Turks besieged Sissech.
ten days together, so as the besieged were brought to that distress, as
they had small hope to defend it any longer. The most resolute did encourage
the rest: so as in the end they resolved to attend all extremes, rather then
to yield themselves to assured death and shame. They advertised the Bishop of
Agria, and the governor, of their desperate estate; whereupon the Christians
having drawn an Army of 5000 men together, after much consultation of the
danger, in the end they resolved to charge the enemy. The two Armies joined:
and although the Turks exceeded them far in numbers, yet God gave strength
unto the Christians, who defeated them, and put them to slight: The Christiant
vistory at Sisseck.
their Camp, baggage, ordinance and munition was taken, and carried to Sisseck.
They write that there were eighteen thousand slain, amongst which ASSAN Basha
was one, with many morre of special note. And of the Christians there died not
above fifty two.

The Emperor being advertised of the victory at Sisseck, he wrote unto AMVRATH
concerning The Emperor sends to Amurath.
this expedition, and to know whether he would continue the truce and peace,
which had hitherto been kept betwixt them, or that he would hereafter proceed
by Arms: and withal he sent a present to the Sultan, according to the usual
manner, commanding his Ambassador to stay at Commorrha, upon the confines of
Hungary, with the present until the return of his messenger: and if that
AMVRATH would continue the peace, he should proceed; if not, then come back to
the Emperor: In the mean time news came unto the christians camp, that SIMAN
Basha had received commandment from AMVRATH, to invade Hungary with forty
thousand men, to revenge their late loss: that he should not be moved with
CAESAR'S Embassy; and if he should by chance meet with the Donatiue, he should
take it away and distribute it among the soldiers, and so proceed in the action.

At this time the Turkish Emperor proclaimed war against the Emperor both in
Constantinople and at Buda: he gave the charge of this war to MAHOMET Basha
of Temesuarre and to The Turk proclaims war against the Emperor.
the Beglerby of Greece; SIMAN Basha being chief General. SIMAN marched with
his troops to Buda, and the Beglerby led his Army by Croatia, meaning to
besiege the monastery of Sisseck, which they had twice attempted with great
loss and shame; but now they battered it with such fury, as in the end they
took it, almost in sight of the christian Army, who were not able to relieve
Sisseck taken by the Turks.
them. The defendants were all cut in pieces, and the Monk was flaid alive and
then consumed to ashes.

The Emperor being advertised of the denouncing of this war, resolved also to
Arms, and to provide all things necessary for his defense; and the rather for
that he was given to understand that his Legier Ambassador at Constantinople
was kept in chains, and his servants miserably torn in pieces. SINAN, after
the taking of Sisseck, went to Vesperine: the which having Vesperine taken by
the Turks.
battered some days, the garrison finding themselves unable to resist so great
a power, by night fled out at a Posterne gate; whom the Turks discovering
followed, and slew many of them. Thence he went to Palotta: where having
batterd down the upper part of the Castle, the Gouerner Palotta taken.
compounded for himself and the garrison, to depart with their lives and
liberty: having plighted their faiths, the enemy being admitted into the
Castle, this perjured Barbarian taking the Governor and two others, they slew
the rest. The garrison of Pappa had the like success.

The Emperor, having by his spies discovered the enemies strength, levied new
forces, and commanded his Captains to draw all their men into one head; where
upon a muster there were found to be 18000 able and resolute men, besides the
Hungarians and the horsemen. The Army, having passed the Dannow, incountered
the enemy, and slew some thousands of them, freeing an infinite number of
Christian captives. The Turks made haste to besiege Tatta. MELCHIOR REDER with
a good troop of horse charged them upon the way, and slew many, freeing many
Christians of all Ages. These two victories struck a great terror into the
enemy. The Commanders of the Christian Army went to Council touching the
managing of this war: in the end, after some diversity of opinions, they
resolved to besiege Alba Regalis; whither Alba Regalis befieged by the
Christians.
they marched as secretly as they could, and took the suburbs: but the Basha of
Buda, being advertised heerof, posted thither with an Army of 20000 men, who
came marching directly toward the Christians Camp, who resolved to attend
them, and to fight with them; wherein God gave them a speedy and an easy
victory: for, the Turks lost, in fighting and fleeing, 16000 The Turks
overthrown by the Christians.
men, and as some write but 12000; whereof the Basha of Buda was one, and SINAN
their General was sore wounded: there were taken 40 of the enemies ensigns.
Having gathered together the spoils, they took counsel for the continuing of
the siege: but winter growing on, there being no great store of powder and shot
in their Camp, and the Town having a strong garrison, they thought it fit to
draw their men into good Towns to winter.

In November, FREDERICK DIEFF^MBACH, Gouerner of Cassouia, went with Sabat and
^illec taken by the Christians.
14000 men to besiege Sabat, a strong Castle, which did much annoy the
Christians, the which after some days battery he took. From thence he went to
Fillec, whither PALFIVS came to him with new supplies; where having battered
three days together, in the end they gave an assault: but the enemies trusting
to their numbers and strength (being 4000 choice men) defended the breach
valiantly, and repulst the Christians; who, nothing daunted therewith, resolved
either to die honorably, or to enter the Town: the which they did upon a
second assault, not without some loss. There yet remained two Castles to
force; the which, the valor of the soldiers, and the indiscretion of the Bege
of Fillec, made easy: for, in the beginning of the siege he had gone forth to
seek for aid, and had brought with him the Basha of Temesuarre, and 18000 men.

The General of the Christians, knowing that his intent was to force his Camp,
went in the night and charged him, overthrew his Army, slew some thousands of
them, and the Basha himself, The Basha of Temesuarre with an Army of Turks
overthrown.
with the Bege of Fillec. And from thence they returned to Fillec; where having
taken one of the Castles by force, the other yielded upon composition to depart
with their lives without Arms, they being in number 800 good men. The prey
which they took in the Turks Camp and in the Castles, was very great. After the
taking of Fillec, the Castles of Dylin and Homasck were abandoned: they took
the Towns of Setschin, and Brauenstein, and Salac, which the garrisons had left
and fired. PALFIVS in the mean time took Pregel and Palanc. Samose a strong
Castle yielded, with Aruac and Holac. Thus, by the great bounty of God, a great
part of Hungary was freed from the Turkish slavery: after which, the
unseasonable weather forced them to go to garrison.

A while after, the garrisons of Petrina, Sisseck, Castrouits, and other near
to them, to the number of 3000, went forth to spoil the Christians Country:
but GRASVINIVS, meeting them with 900 men, set upon them, and slew 500, and
forced all the rest in a manner to flee into the river of Collapa; so as few
escaped. The diverse victories and rich spoils which the Christians had gotten,
gave great cause of joy to the Emperor and his brother MATHIAS: to whom they
sent Ordinance, Turkish horses, with many other rich Presents to Vienna.

This year, one thousand five hundred ninety four, the Archduke MATHIAS
brother Nouagrade taken by the Christiant.
to the Emperor, was made General of the Christian Army, against the Turks:
who having intelligence by a Turk which was their captive in the Christian
Camp, that Nouagrade, a strong Town within three miles of Buda, was but
weakly mand, they resolved to besiege it. The Garrison, seeing the Army
approach, remembering that the Basha of Buda had promised to relieve them, they
prepared themselves for defense; but finding the Town too weak to be defended
against so great a power, they retired into the Castle, the which was strong
both by Nature and Art, built upon a Rock, with thick walls and high, the
ditch was exceeding deep, cut out of the Rock. Right against it there was
another hill, upon the which the Christians with great toil planted their
ordinance, with which they battered the Castle, and withal set fire on their
fortifications; wherewith being much terrified, they offered to treat:
whereupon the Archduke gave them leave to depart only with their swords, there
being 450 good soldiers in the Castle. The Governor going to Buda was committed
to prison by the Basha; and not able to purge himself was afterward hanged,
for that he had yielded up so strong a place, without loss of men.

The Emperor finding the burden of the Turkish wars to be heavy, he
demanded aid from the Duke of Muscouie, the Polonians, and Transiluanians. The
Muscouite received his The Emperor craves aid from the Muscouits and Polonians.
Ambassador honorably, and dismissed him with great hopes. The Polonians,
although they were in peace with the Turk, yet they promised the Emperor all
the assistance they could: And the Transiluanians desirous of liberty, and to
purchase the Emperors friendship, did willingly embrace the occasion. The
Earl of Serin and Nadastius, having gathered together some small forces, went
to the Castle of Precenit and Segestan which they found set on fire by the
Turks; but Serin besieged Babottes, a strong Castle seated in a marish ground,
the which the Turks basely abandoned.

Nouagrade being taken, DIFF^NBACH went with twenty thousand men to Hatuan, a
strong Town six miles from Buda, the which he battered furiously, and brought
to despair of all safety, if they were not speedily relieved by the Basha of
Buda, who had gathered together an Army of fifeten thousand men, past the river
Saua, and marched to charge the Christians behind; which the General
understanding, he left the siege, and put his Army in order, taking The Turks
defeated by the Christians.
some places of advantage: the Armies met, and the encounter for a while was
furious; but in the end the Christians put them to flight, and took their
ordinance and munition, with seventeen ensigns. After this battle they
took Iasperin, which was abandoned by the Turks, in which they found good
store of corn, great ordinance and munition for war. The Turkish Garrison
which remained in Zaboll, hearing of the overthrow and death of their men;
being terrified, abandoned the place, without any necessity: the which for
strength and bigness is compared to Toccai or Agria. The Archduke MATHIAS
encouraged with this good success, resolved to besiege Strigonium, the which
would open the way to Buda: whither bringing Strigonium besieged, in vaint, b^
the Archduke.
his Army, he battered it furiously, yet could they not keep out the succors
which were sent unto them: notwithstanding they pressed the siege, and the Turks
defended it valiantly; but the City being terribly torn with their continual
battery, and in danger to be lost, news came unto them that Sinan Basha
approached with a great Army; which did much revive the besieged, and made
MATHIAS for fear to raise his siege, contrary to the advice of many of his
commanders, whereupon he past the Dannow.

During this siege at Strigonium, the Emperor assembled a Diet at Ratisbone, at
the which he assisted in person, making them acquainted with the whole
progress of the Turkish war; that The Emperor^ speech at a Diet at Ratisbone.
in the year 1591 he had by his Ambassadors concluded a truce with the Turkish
Emperor for eight years; yet, contrary to his faith, he had in hostile manner
spoiled Hungary and the neighbor Provinces, taking many places, and carrying
away 5000 Christians into servitude: that he had often complained thereof to
AMVRATH by his Ambassador, and required restitution: but he could have no good
answer; yea, ASSAN Basha, the Author of all this war, was honored and
advanced: whereupon he fell to open war, and besieged Sisseck. Being again put
in mind of the truce, he invaded Hungary with a greater Army, forcing the poor
peasants with fire and sword, to pay him an excessive tribute; that contrary to
the law of Arms he had c^st CRECOVITZ his Ambassador into bonds; who being
brought captive to Belgrade, he there in great misery ended his days in a
filthy loathsome prison. That he for his part having drawn his forces
together, had ouerthrown his enemy in some battles, and taken diverse Towns
and Castles from him. Yet it might be well coniectured, that he was not grown
so weak but he could soon repair his forces; yea it did appear plainly,
that the Turk would employ all his power, to revenge his former losses and
overthrows. He had therefore called that assembly with the consent of the
Princes Electors, to the end they might confer of those things which did
belong to the preservation of the Empire, but especially of the Turkish wars,
how it should be managed and with what supplies: Whereunto the Archbishop of
Mentz (after conference with the Electors, and Princes of the Empire, and with
the other orders as well Ecclesiastical as Secular) told the Emperor, that he
should have aid against the Turks, and that Ambassadors should be sent unto
foreign Princes, to inuit them to put to their helping hands, to suppress
the common enemy of Christendom.

DIFFENBACH was still at the siege of Hatuan, and had brought them to that
extremity, as they sent word unto the Basha of Buda, that if they were not
relieved within three days, they should be forced to kill their wives and
children, to set fire on the Town, and to make their way through the midst
of their Enemies, by the Sword. The Basha, hearing in what danger the besieged
were, having gathered together many thousands of Turks, marched toward the
Christians, whom DIFFENBACH went to encounter, with five thousand horse; and
charging them on the sudden, slew five thousand, and returned to the Camp
with rich spoils, whereupon they were in hope the Town would have yielded; but
the besieged endured a fresh assault: wherein, the Christians being repulst,
they lost 1000 good men, wherewith The Christians raise their siege from Hatuan.
they were out of hope to take the City; wherefore fearing lest the Basha
should return with new forces, the Christian Army, being much wasted,
DIFFENBACH was forced to leave the siege.

SINAN Basha, in the mean time, entered Hungary, with an Army of 125000 men,
his first attempt was upon Tatta, a Town lying betwixt Strigonium and Iauerin,
which yielded: From Sinan Basha comes into Hungary.
whence he marched to Iauerin or Rhab, which is twelve Germane leagues from
Vienna, the Christian Army lying in sight on the other side of the River
Dannow; but they were so weak, as they durst not pass it, to fight with
Sinan; daily expecting new forces: and the rather for that they heard, there
were 2000 Italian foot come to Vienna with 90000 ducats from the Pope, for
the Hungarian war.

In the beginning of August, the Archduke MAXIMILIAN took Castrovitz, having
The Christians take some forts.
put all the Turks and Valachians to the Sword; from thence he went to
Petrinia, a Fort built some few years before by the Turks, upon the Emperors
territory: this Castle had six strong Bulwarks well fortified, which made it
seem inexpugnable; yet MAXIMILIAN battered it in such sort, as the Garrison
being terrified, set fire on the Castle, every one escaping away as he could,
leaving it to the Christians; and in like manner* they of Sissecke, setting
fire of their Fort, abandoned it. After which exploites MAXIMILIAN retired to
refresh his Army.

In the mean time Sinan Basha pressed the siege of Iauerin (in which Count
HARDECK was Governor) battering it with sixty pieces of great Ordinance, but
he prevailed little. The besieged The siege of Iauerin.
made many salies, in one of the which they slew two thousand Turks, with the
Governor of Greece. There were great difficulties both in Armies; the Enemies
forces were much decayed, both by sickness, and their daily excursions,
wanting victuals. The Christian Army was much weaker, wherefore they were forced
to keep themselves within their strength: but being not so vigilant as they
ought to have been, the Turks suddenly cast a bridge over the River, and
invaded the Christians Camp; where, aften some resistance, they were forced to
fly fearfully, to Altenbourg. The Enemy took that day great store of money,
brought for the payment of the Army, all the furniture of the Camp, one
thousand Wagons, two hundred Barques laden with Munition, and ten Galleys.
SINAN still battered the Town, and gave assaults, and was still repulst with
loss, so as within two days space (as some write) there were twelve thousand
Turks slain.

The report was, that when SINAN could not take the Town by force, he sought
to corrupt the Governor Count HARDECK: the which he embracing, he ever after,
secretly, favored the Enemies attempts, by the which they took away some of
their Bulwarks, whereby they had small hope to defend the Town. HARDECK
conferring with some of the Captains, resolved to send Messengers to SINAN to
crave a Truce for some days, that they might in the mean time treat of the
conditions of yielding: In the mean time, fearing they should be taxed with
infamy, if they should yield up a Town so well fortified, without necessity;
they wrote Letters to the Barons of Hungary, to excuse themselves, and to
justify their action.

After this protestation, hostages were sent on both sides, and in the end it
was concluded, that Count HARDECK, with his Captains and Soldiers should
depart with bag and baggage with their full Arms and colors flying, and be
conducted safely to Altenbourg. Thus the strongest fort of all Christendom, by
the treachery of Count HARDECK was yielded up to the Enemy, being abundantly
furnished with Wine, Corn, and all munition for War. For the which, the
Earl, coming to Vienna, was committed to prison: and the year following, by
the sentence of certain Commissioners, who were chosen for that purpose, he
had both his hand and head cut off; which was a just reward for so foul a
Treachery.

SINAN, full of joy for this victory, presently repaired the ruins, and
fortified the Town: after which he resolved to besiege Gomorrha, seated in the
Island four miles from Iauerine; in 1594 Gomorrha besieged by Sinan Basha.
which ERASMUS BRVNNEVS commanded with a strong garrison. SINAN, remembering how
well he had sped with Count HARDECK, sent Letters by a countryman to
BRVNNEVS, promising him mountains of gold if he would yield the place: but he
would not look on the Letters, commanding the messenger to depart presently;
saying, that he had no skill in the Illirian Tongue; neither was he made
Gouerner there to confer with the enemy, but to fight; and that SINAN was
deceived if he thought to find a HARDECK in Gomorrha. After which answer SINAN
began to press the siege with all the speed he could. The Archduke knowing,
that after the loss of Iauerine, all the hope of miserable Hungary, next under
God, consisted in the preservation of this place; having gathered together a
good Army of Germans, Hungarians and Bohemians, went with all speed to Nitrea,
not far from Gomorrha: which the enemy The Turks le^ue the siege of Gomorrha.
understanding, having set fire on his Camp, he left the siege, and went to
Iauerine. The Archduke entered into Gomorrha, repaired the ruins, fortified
the defenses, and caused new bulwarks to be made.

This year 1595, AMVRATH the second Emperor of the Turks, son to SELIM, left
his life and Empire; whom succeeded MAHOMET the Third: whom all men supposed
would The Princes of Germany assist the Emperor for the Turkish wars.
continue the war against the Christians with more violence. Wherefore the
Emperor, besides the aid which was granted at the Imperial Diet, desired an
extraordinary supply of horse and foot; the which diverse Princes willingly
brought at their own charge. From the upper Saxony came 1200 horse; from the
lower, 600; from Franconia, 1000 horse. Sueuia sent 4000 foot; Austria, 2000
horse and 6000 foot; Tirill, 4000 foot; Bauaria, 3000; Westphalia, 500 horse
and 1500 foot: the Silesians, Morauians, Bohemians and Lusatians, sent great
supplies. Besides the Pope, the Dukes of Florence, Ferrara and Mantua, the
Emperor required the Polonians to ioyn in league with him, and to make a
sociall war against the common enemy of Christendom. This proposition was
much debated; SAMOSCIVS and many other holding that they should not violate the
peace, which had continued firm 75 years betwixt them and the Turks, and
draw upon them an unnecessary war; yet for that they would not utterly deny
aid unto the Emperor, they let him understand, that they held it fit, that
the Pope, the King of Spain, and the rest of the Christian Princes should
join in a firm league against the Turk: that these counsels should be
imparted to the Princes Electors, to the end the league might be made, not with
the Emperor alone, but with the whole Empire: and soon after, the Emperors
ambassadors coming to Cracouia, Commissioners were appointed to treat of the
conditions of the league they were to make with CAESAR and the Empire.

SIGISMVND BATTORI, Prince of Transiluania, having wrested many Forts from the
A league betwixt the Emperor and the Prince of Transiluania.
Turk, did this year annoy them with many incursions: and the better to
fortify himself and his authority against the common enemy, he resolved by all
means to ioyn in league with the Emperor, sending a stately Embassage to
Prague: where a league was soon concluded upon certain conditions: that the
Emperor should constantly prosecute the wa^; that if he should conclude any
peace or league with the Sultan, he should impart it to SIGISMVND, and
comprehend The articles of ehe league.
Transiluania, Moldauia and Valachia therein; that SIGISMVND should promise and
confirm by oath for himself and all his subjects, to continue the war
against the Turks, and not to conclude any peace with him without the priuity
and consent of the Emperor; that SIGISMVND BATTORI should enjoy Transiluania,
with those parts of Hungary, as his Predecessors had formerly done, with all
their rights and revenues, acknowledging the Emperors majesty and his lawful
successors for their lawful Kings; for the which they should take the oath of
fealty when he should enter into the possession of the Province: and if the
Prince or his Successors should die without issue male, then Transiluania should
be annexed to the Kingdom of Hungary. There were many other Articles set down
in this league, the which to avoid prolixity I omit.

The reasons which moved the Transiluanian so much to affect this league with
the Emperor, was the treachery of the Turks against his own person, and the
excessive tributes wherewith The Turks seek to surprise the Prince of
Transiluania.
his Country was oppressed: for, in July 1594, the Tartarians, who had been
drawn down to aid the Turks against the Hungarians, were sent into
Transiluania to seize upon that Province by the Sultans commandment, and to
expel Prince SIGISMVND, or to send him captive to Constantinople. It was not
unknown, that he sought to fall from the Turk to the Roman Empire, by reason
of the intolerable tribute: which desertion many Noblemen of Transiluania
fought to hinder; who, conspiring with the Tartarians, undertook to deliver
them the whole Province, and to send the Prince captive to Hust, where they
were encamped: whereupon they persuaded the Prince, that the great Chancellor
of Poland attended him on the confines of the The Transiluanians conspire
against their Prince.
Kingdom with a great Army, to treat with him upon matters of importance,
delivering him counterfeit Letters from the Chancellor; whereunto giving
credit, he began his journey: but being on the way, he was advised by some that
were more honest and faithful, to proceed no further; and that he was not
expected by the Polonians, but by the Tartarians, who were resolved to deprive
him of his estate. Being amazed at the news, he retired with his company into
a place of strength, until he had drawn his forces together: and then he
called an Assembly of all the Nobility to Clausenbourg, dissembling the treason
intended against him; where at a banquet he apprehended 14 of the conspirators,
and put them to death. After which, he carried open Arms against the Turks.

The league being concluded betwixt the Emperor and the Prince of Transiluania,
the war grew hot in diverse places, and the Christians recovered Vascia with
a rich prey. SINAN, resolving to go from Belgrade to Constantinople to salute
the new Emperor, and to present him with the treasure which he had taken, was
intercepted by the Valachians, who defeated his troops, and took all his
treasure, he himself with some few others escaping the danger. MAHOMET hearing
that the Valachians, being his tributaries, were now become his enemies, was
much incensed; sending MICHAEL the Vaiuode (who was of that Nation) with great
forces to invade Valaehia, and to keep it for himself. MICHAEL goes with his
Army of Turks into Valachia: but, before he would attempt any thing, he
attended the Tartarians coming out of Hungary; but first the Valachians and
Transiluanians met with them before they could ioyn, and slew eight thousand,
the rest being put to flight: and then they attended MICHAEL with great
resolution, who contained himself within his Camp. After which, CHAMOS the
Tartarian, by the commandment of MAHOMET, entered Moldauia and Valachia with a
great Army; whom AARON the Vaiuode fought withal in three several battles, and
slew twelve thousand Tartarians.

SINAN Basha, being at Belgrade, called to him certain servants of the
Ambassador CRECOVITIVS, who (as you heard) died there miserably in prison;
telling them, that if their master The fraudulent propositions of the Turks.
had lived, he would have set him at liberty as he did them, having brought him
thither only to treat of a peace betwixt the Sultan and the Emperor: but he
being dead, he would send his servants to CAESAR to let him understand, that
MAHOMET had given him charge to besiege Vienna, the which he knew was far
more easy than Iauerine. He extolled his Emperors power, and disgraced the
Germans, wishing that the Emperor would in time advise (before the Army should
march) how a peace might be made. He then sent them to Buda to his son, being
Gouerner of Greece; who, calling the Secretary before him, he made many
complaints of the wrong done to the Turks: he put them in hope of liberty,
sending in the mean time one to the Emperor, with conditions where by he said a
peace might be concluded; that is to say, If the Emperor would restore all the
Castles and Forts which he had taken, and their Territories; if the Christians
would leave Sisseck; if CAESAR would not take into his protection the
Transiluanians, Valachians and Moldauians; and, lastly, if he would duly pay
the annual tribute that had been for many years omitted.

These conditions were given to one in writing, with this condition, that if he
returned not The Emperors answer to the Turks propositions.
with an answer in 25 days, the rest should die. BARLING returned from the
Emperor with this answer, that he never had other intent but to maintain a firm
peace with the Sultan, having always sought it with such conditions, as their
subjects might be freed from that fatal war. And making a repetition of their
injuries and the success, he said, that the Beglerbey was much deceived, if he
thought the Roman Emperor were reduced to those Streights, that he would accept
of any conditions of peace, how unjust soever; and the Turks should soon know,
that he neither wanted force nor courage to defend himself, and to recover that
which had bin lost by treachery: and as he had been always careful of the
quiet and good of his subjects, and to avoid the effusion of innocent blood,
so would he not now be auerse from a peace, if SINAN would restore those places
which he had taken. That the Transiluanians, Moldauians, and Valachians, had
for many ages past, been united to the crown of Hungary, as the members to the
body: and therefore the Turk should not take it ill, if the Emperor
undertook their protection, but rather promise never to invade those Provinces
in hostile manner. If they performed this, and made satisfaction for the wrong
done unto his Ambassador (which all Princes did detest) and set his servants
at liberty, there might besome means for a Peace, but if they did otherwise,
there were no way of reconcilement.

CHARLES Earl of Mandsfeld, son to PETER ERNEST (having spent many years
Count Mandsfeld goes into Hungary to command the Christian Army
in the wars of Flanders and France) was by the Emperor (with the King of
Spain's good liking) called into Hungary, to govern those wars under the
Archduke MATTHIAS: he carried with him two thousand horse, and six thousand
foot, most Wallons; with these forces he came to the Prague, where the
Emperor did him much honor, after which he began to reform the martial
discipline, and to lead the Army with more circumspection then formerly it had
been. He marched, being accompanied by the Duke of Ferrara and Mantoa, and
others of great note, from Vienna to Altenbourg, with fifty thousand foot, and
fifteen thousand horse, and laid siege Strigonium besieged by the Christiant.
to Strigonium, where at first assault he took the old town; the Turks flying
into the new: then he planted his Ordinance, with the which he so battered the
new Town, and Saint THOMAS Fort, as a small breach being made, they entered,
and put all to the Sword: then planting three batteries, and making a large
breach, he commanded an assault to be given to the Castle; but they were
repulst with great loss.

The Beglarbie or Governor of Greece, drew together a great Army, to relieve
the besieged: approaching near unto the Christians, MANDSFELD went forth to
meet them, having put his Army in battle: but the Basha of Buda, seeing
himself inferior, both in valor and multitude, retired confusedly, and the
Christians pursuing them, put the whole Army to flight; but coming again to
renew the battle, the Christians were disordered and fled: Count MANDSFELD,
knowing that he must either vanquish or raise the siege, resolved to give them
battle with his whole Army, in which (having made a great slaughter of the
Turks with his ordinance) both Armies coming to join, he defeated them
quite, and slew six thousand; among whom died the Basha of Iauerin and his son,
and the Beglarby of Greece (being sore wounded) fled to Buda.

The next day Count MANDSFELD summoned the Town to yield, whereunto they
answered: that although they despaired of all help, yet they had resolved to
prefer a glorious death, before an ignominious life; whereupon the Christians
(being incensed with this answer) returned again to a fresh charge. Count
MANDSFELD did not live to enjoy the fruits of this victory; for, having spent
his force and his spirits in the battle, playing the part of a commander
Count Mand^ feld dies.
with his tongue, and of a soldier with his hands, sweating and distempered,
he called for drink, so as he fell into a Fever, whereof he died soon after,
at Gomorrha, before the yielding of the Town. The siege was still continued
with great violence; the Archduke MATHIAS coming to the Camp: so as in the
end, being brought to despair, they compounded to yield the Town, and the
soldiers to depart with their swords by their sides, every one carrying a pack
at his back.

Before the yielding of the Town SINAN Basha prepared a great Army to invade
Valachia, Sinan Basha enters Transiluania twice.
Moldauia, and Transiluania: who hearing of his intent, raised an Army of
twenty thousand men, and charged the Turks at the passage of a River, where
there was a long and furious battle, being doubtful to whom the victory
would incline; but on the sudden there came a supply of six thousand horse to
the christians, which did much relieve those that were tired with fighting, by
whose help they obtained the victory, making a great slaughter of their
enemies, and many being drowned in the River of Dannow, the bridge breaking,
with the weight of those that fled. The Germane Chroniclers write, there were
25000 Turks slain, and half as many Christians.

SINAN having recovered a new Army of seventy thousand foot and horse, he
passed the River of Dannow, upon the confines of Moldauia, near to the town
of Giorgum, lodging part of his Army in the Castles and Towns, upon the
borders of Valachia and Moldauia. Thither came unto him HASAN Basha, MICHAEL
the expulst Vaiuode of Transiluania, with many other Turks and Tartarians of
note. SINAN with the rest of his Army went to Tergiuist, a famous Monastery;
which he converted into a Castle, and fortified it with all things necessary;
resolving, not to depart before that he had subdued those Provinces: but the
event proved otherwise.

In Hungary, HEBERSTAIN, Gouerner of part of that Country, burnt the Towns of
Cheringa, Maslona and Bellahina; where he slew many Turks, and carried away
many prisoners: among the which there were some of great authority. And at the
same time the Haiducs took the Town of Wakaner on the other side of the river
of Dannow, where they found a great prey. And about the same season,
ALDOBRANDIN General of the Popes forces, and PALFI, besieged the Town and
Castle of Visigrade, lying betwixt Buda and Strigonium, upon the right bank of
the river Dannow, where in ancient time the Crown of Hungary was usually kept:
this Visigrade taken by the Turks.
place the Turks held invincible, neither could they force it in the year 1543,
when as Strigonium was made subject to the Turkish yoke; but two years after,
the Christians abandoned it for want of victuals. Having planted their
Ordinance, they battered it incessantly; and having made a large breach, the
soldiers lodged under the walls: which the besieged perceiving, they began to
faint; which fear opinion increased that there was no relief to be expected.
Wherefore, on the twenty fifth of September, they made a sign of parley; and
being admitted, they offered to yield both Town and Castle, so as they might
have the same conditions the Turks had at Strigonium; but it would not be
granted: only they had leave to depart with their lives, without Arms or
baggage; which they accepted, and yielded the place.

The Turks, which were under the command of the Basha of Bosna, had an intent
to spoil The Turks slain in Croatia.
Croatia near to Petrina. The Christians living in those parts, hearing of
their resolution, making a body of ten thousand soldiers, meant to encounter
them. The Turks being twenty thousand (if that were true which themselves
report) coming to fight, the Christians showed such resolution and courage,
that they slew the greatest part of the Turks, the rest fleeing away. The
Christians returning from this expedition, their forces increased, many fresh
supplies being comn unto them: and there joined with them the horsemen of
Croatia, Carinthia, and the neighbor Provinces, and the Baron of Herbenstein,
with certain Hungarian Troops. All these forces being united, they came to
Petrina, which they battered for the space of two hours, and lost Petrina
besieged
in the assault 120 men. And finding that they should not preuail without
greater Ordinance (the which was hard to bring through the mountains) they
desisted, and retired to Sisseck, there to consult what they had to do. The
same night, one BRIBEG, very familiar with the Bege HVRSTAN, fled out of
Petrina; giving them to understand, that the Bege being shot into the body,
died soon after; that if they returned to Petrina, without doubt they should
take the town, for that the Inhabitants were so amazed, that upon sight of the
enemy they would all forsake the Town. The Christians with this hope marched
speedily away, and came to Petrina, which The Christians take Petrina.
they found abandoned; the which they entered, and fortified with a good
garrison, wherein they found ninety barrels of powder.

Whil'est that these things passed in Hungary, the quiet of Moldauia was
disturbed by SAMOSCIVS the great Chancellor of Poland, who sought to expel the
Vaiuode whom the Transiluanian had appointed, and to bring-in a new, besieging
the chief City of Moldauia. He was twice beaten and put to flight by the old
Vaiuode: in which incounters the chief Authors of that counsel were slain,
and the new Vaiuode expeld again. The Archduke MAXIMILIAN was then called with
his whole Army into Transiluania. This summer, not only men, but even the
elements did fight against the Turkish Sultan: for, after many defeats, another
mischief followed; for, Rhab being set on fire, most of the Towns victuals were
burnt: and NADASTI, meeting with a conuoy of corn going to Rhab, he slew the
soldiers, and carried away all the corn.

After Count MANDSFELD's death, his Netherland and Walloon soldiers fell into a
mutiny. MANDSFELD had brought them into a Country which did not abound with
gold and silver, like to the Belgic Provinces; but desolate, exhausted and
wasted, where there was nothing to be expected but blows, wounds, and death.
They often complained of this in his life time: but they durst not, by reason
of his severe discipline, threaten any open defection. Being now in a mutiny,
the Captains labored foureteen days together to pacify them, and to contain
them in their duties. In the mean time, many fleeing away, some were brought
back and imprisoned, others were slain by the peasants. On the tenth day of
October, four and twenty foot and horse came to Vienna: being let-in and
lodged, they were sought for, and at length found. In the beginning they
defended themselves valiantly; and one of them shot himself through. At
length they were taken, and delivered over to the Judge as Traitors.

MAHOMET, having received so many losses, especially by those who were wont to
be his Mahomet and the Transiluanian prepare to Arms.
friends and confederates, was wonderfully transported with rage and
indignation; swearing by his scepter, and by his Prophet MAHOMET, that he would
revenge those injuries, and prosecute war against the Transiluaniaus,
Valachians and Moldauians, until that he had slain them all; sending forth
into all places to levy men, and to make provision of corn and munition.
SIGISMVND the Transiluanian, being advertised heerof, fortified his Army with
new supplies: he caused five troops of Silesian horsemen, which were upon the
way, to advance; and, to have the greater forces to encounter his enemy, he
granted to a certain people of his Country, called Dockeieri (who had resolved
to forsake the Turk) their ancient liberties, rights and privileges, giving
them withal great possessions; but, upon these conditions, that during the
wars they should entertain 40^00 armed men at their own charge, and yearly
every house should pay a doller, with a certain measure of wheat, oats and
barley; and if the Prince had a son which did succeed him, then every family to
contribute a fat Ox. These conditions pleased them well; and withal they
promised a good donatiue at the birth of a son. These things were proclaimed in
the Camp of the Dockeieri; which, all did confirm by oath: and having but 25000
men in their Army, they sent to levy the other 15000, the which was soon
effected. The Prince, finding in his Army 80000 foot and horse, left the
delights of Court, and went to Camp; where his only care was, how to intercept
and overthrow the enemy. Being advertised by his spies, that SINAN and HASAN
Bashaes, with the fugitive Vaiuode of Moldauia, were encamped by Tergouista,
and threatened utter ruin to his Countries, the Prince resolved to fight with
them. Wherefore, having commanded all to Arms, he put his Army in battle, and
marched toward the enemy.

Being come near to Tergouista, the Prince called a Council, to resolve (by
their advice) what was fittest to be done. In the afternoon, two Christians
(which had been freed from the Turks) were brought to the Prince; who told
him, that there had been such an amazement Fear in the Turks Camp.
for two days together in the Turks Camp, that no man could easily believe
such an alteration: for they, which but few days before had devoured the
Prince in hope, and had resolved to meet him with his whole Army, were now
stricken with such fear, that, had not SINAN stayed his Ianizaries within the
Camp both by threats and promises, yea and by force, all had fled away: but
some hundreds brake out in despite of SINAN. In the end, SINAM, no less
terrified Sinan flies.
than the rest, fled with his whole Army, leaving in the Camp his tents,
ordinance, warlike preparation and victuals; carrying nothing with him but what
was most precious. He left HASAN Basha and MICHAEL the Vaiuode in Tergouista
with 4000 horse and foot, promising to send them speedy supplies: after which,
he fled in all haste to Bacaresta, a days journey off, to attend the event;
writing Letters presently to HASSAN, and aduising him if it were possible to
defend the Castle, or else to provide in time for his escape: which Letters
were intercepted by the Christians.

The Transiluanian, hearing that the Turks meant to send away 4000 Christians,
men, women The Transiluanian takes Sinans Camp.
and children, by the bridge into Turkey, sent 500 choice foot men to pursue
them, and to free the Christians; who got before the Turks, slew them all, and
freed the captives. The Prince of Transiluania entered SINAN's Camp, and enjoyed
what they had left. Then he summoned HASAN to yield Tergouista; who,
considering of SINAN's flight, of the great power of the Christians who had
spoiled his Camp, resolved to yield the place, and to save himself and his
soldiers: but the Ianizaries (who were 2000 in number) would not consent to
the Bashaes advice, but prepared themselves for defense. The Transiluanian
presently overthrew the walls, and assaulted the Town and Castle; the which
within few hours he forced, putting all the garrison to the sword: he spared
the Basha (whom he had taken with his own hands); and MICHAEL the Vaiuode
(who was turned Turk) was slain in the fight. SINAN a little before his flight
had sent four thousand men forth to spoil; who returning to the Camp (being
ignorant of what had past) were slain by the Christians, losing all the booty
they had taken in Valachia.

The Prince, leaving a good garrison in Tergouista, marched with the rest of
his Army to Bucaresta, hoping to find SINAN there. But he, hearing of the
loss of Tergouista (doubting of Sinans second flight.
his safety) left the place, with nine and thirty pieces of great ordinance,
and great store of powder, victuals and other munition; and fled to Zorza or
Georgia. The Transiluanian took Bucaresta without any loss or labor; and
sending some Troops of horse before, he slew many Turks in the flight,
himself following SINAN with his whole Army: but before his coming he had
removed his Camp toward the river Dannow; which seeking to pass, in this
tumultuous flight the bridge brake, where many Turks were drowned. SINAN
himself was carried into an Island from whence the year before he had
expelled the Christians, and in the Sinans third fight.
night escaped by boat.

The Transiluanian after this happy victory, besieged Georgia: the which he
battered continually, Georgia taken by the Christians.
and having made a breach entered it by force; in which were slain 30000 Turks
which could not follow SINAN in his speedy flight: they found in it 40 pieces
of Cannon, with such store of Arms, and munition, as would suffice two
kingdoms. They took many ships Ioaden with stuffes and other commodities; many
Captives were freed, with which the Prince triumphing returned to Bucaresta. It
is written, that the Ottoman house for many ages, never received so great a
loss. For which victories, the Prince commanded public thanks to be given to
God, throughout all the towns of Transiluania.

SIGISMVND Prince of Transiluania, Valachia, and Moldauia, and Earl of Doccai,
wrote The Prince of Transiluania sends to the Pope.
Letters unto the Pope, sending him certain Tartarian and Turkish ensigns,
making a relation of the victories which he had gotten, by the overthrow of
SINANS Army: wherewith the Pope was greatly pleased, promising unto the Prince
all assistance of men, counsel and money: and if need required he would send
him his Army which was in Hungary. Soon after the Pope sent a Nobleman, to the
King of Poland, to persuade him not to suffer his Chancellor, to The Pope sends
to the King of Poland for the Transiluanian.
molest the Transiluanian in Moldauia and Valachia, but especially to persuade
Cardinal BATTORI, to forget the hatred which he had conceived against his
Nephew SIGISMVND, being most unworthy in a man of the Church; and that he
should ask the Prince forgiveness both with tongue and heart. The Emperor sent
an Ambassador, with the like charge to the Polonian, and the Pope wrote his
Letters of admonition to Cardinal BATTORI, and cited him to Rome.

SAMOSCIVS the Chancellor, puffed up with ambition, without respect of religion
or Samooscius troubles M^ldauia.
honor, sought to effect his designs. He persuaded himself that Moldauia did
of right belong unto the Kingdom of Poland, persuading the King and the states
to suffer him to invade that province, to expel the old Vaiuode, and to
constitute another at his pleasure; giving them many reasons, which had more
appearance then truth. The Transiluanian he said was inferior to the Turk in
power; and therefore it was to be feared, he would be expelled out of all his
countries, and Moldauia become subject to the Turkish tyranny: whereby Poland
should have a treacherous and troublesome neighbor. Wherefore it were better
they should take it, who could better defend it, whereby the Turks might be
kept far from the Polonians: promising unto himself such favor with the
Turkish Sultan, as the Polonians should easily enjoy their de sires in this
point. The Polonians being persuaded with these and such like reasons, gave him
commandment to proceed: whereupon he expelled STEPHEN the old Vaiuode and
subregated a new, who should be for ever a tributarie client to the crown of
Poland. After this he sent to SINAN Basha, entreating him not to take it ill,
that he had seized upon Moldauia, and instituted a Vaiuode, but rather would
get his institution confirmed by his potent Emperor: promising that Moldauia
should be subject unto him, as it had been, and pay a greater yearly tribute.
SINAN (whom ambition and pride made to dare any thing) answered the Chancellor,
that it was not his Emperors pleasure, the Polonian should invade Moldauia, and
that the Sultan was able to defend it, without his help. That he had given it
formerly unto CZARI the Tartarian, who was now coming with many thousands of
men, women and children, to enjoy it; but yet the Chancellor desisted not from
his enterprise. The Prince of Transiluania soon after (finding that the
Polonians had some secret intelligence with the Turks) assisted STEPHEN the old
Vaiuode of Moldauia with good troops of horse and foot, to see if he could
expel the Polonians and recover his lost dignity. Coming to fright the
Polonians had the victory: and STEPHEN defending himself valiantly having had
two horses slain under him, and being upon the third, in the end was taken
fighting: whom the Polonians afterward murdered cruelly.

The Turkish Emperor, having received so many overthrows the year past, from
SIGISMVND Prince of Transiluania, he resolved to bend all his forces against
him; who (hearing of this Turkish preparation) assembled the estates of his
Country; whereby a general consent they resolved to prepare to war, to repel
this common enemy: and to the end that they The Emperor prepares to war.
might have the Emperor an associate with them in this difficult war, he
resolved to go to him. He came to Prague in Feb. where being met by the
Emperors Nobles, he was conducted to the Archdukes Palace. The Emperor,
understanding what preparations the Turk made, sent to the Princes Electors to
require money for the leuying of an Army; the which was granted, and forces were
accordingly made ready: but there wanted some one of great authority to command
it. ALFONSVS, Duke of Ferrara, offered to be the Emperors Lieutenant, and to
entertain eight thousand men for a year, if the Pope would grant the
inuestiture of Ferrara to his brothers base son: whereto he would not yield.
Wherefore the Archduke MAXIMILIAN was made General, the Germans and
Hungarians pressing it, for that they desired not to fight under a stranger
which differed from them in tongue and manners.

The Emperor concluded with the Transiluanian, that, having gathered together a
good Army, An accord betwixt the Emperor and Sigismund.
he would join with him; and he bound himself by secret Articles, to entertain
every year two thousand horse and three thousand foot in Transiluania: for the
payment whereof, he should give monthly four and twenty thousand dollers. And
if SIGISMVND should be expelled his Country by the Turkish Tyrant, then the
Emperor did promise to give him land in Silesia with an honorable pension: and
the Popes Nuntio promised forty thousand ducats monthly, with some Italian
Troops toward this war. SIGISMVND having settled his affairs after this
manner with the Emperor, he returned speedily unto Vienna; where the people
flocked in the streets, to see this young Prince who had won so many noble
victories against the Turks.

In Croatia there is a kind of people who know no other art but stealing;
wherein they exceed all mortal men, being Christians in show: these, being
gathered together in Troops, had concluded with two Christian Renegadoes to
surprise Clissa, a very strong Fort in Illiria; the which they effected, and
slew the garrison. The Turks presently drew their forces together to recover
this Town; where the Croatians annoyed them much, neither did the Basha of
Bosna see any means to preuail but by treason or famine. The Besieged were so
oppressed with hunger, that they sent word to the Emperors Lieutenant in Stiria,
that if they were not presently relieved, famine would force them to yield; so
as he presently gatherd an Army together, and provided shipping with victuals,
landing his men within four miles of the Turks Camp, marching speedily to
charge them; who, being terrified with their sudden approach, fled. The
Illirians and Croatians who were in the fore-ward, breaking their ranks, fell
to spoil; which the Basha perceiving, commanded his men to return to the
charge: in which, the Christians, who were the cause of this disorder, were
slain; and the rest, being amazed, were put to shameful flight. After which,
Clissa (despairing of all succors) yielded, upon condition to depart with bag
and baggage.

The garrison of Totta drew the Turks of Comorrha by a stratagem into an ambush;
in which the Gouerner was slain, with all his Troops: and the same day NADASTI,
who commanded in the lower Hungary for the Emperor, having lodged 1500 horse
in a wood, sent some of his Troops to Iauerine to get some prey, and to draw
out the Turks: who, following the Christians that fled, fell into the ambush,
and were most of them put to the sword.

The last year, the Transiluanians having taken Lippa, the Turk sent forty
thousand men to besiege Lippa besieged and left by the Turks.
it. The Transiluanian sent 5000 men to relieve it; who valiantly defended the
Town, and made great slaughter of their enemies. The Basha of Temesuarre
fearfully raised his siege by night, leaving all his warlike instruments. The
Hungarian and German Writers say, that there were 4000 Turks slain at this
siege.

Lippa being freed, the Transiluanian besieged, Themesuar sending forth 2000
horse and foot Themesuar besieged by the Christians.
to discover and spoil; these brought him word, that a certain Basha, with his
wife and children, with great store of commodities, lodged in a poor Town, the
which they scaled in the night, put the soldiers to the sword: gathering
together the prisoners and spoils, they set fire on the Town, and departed. The
garrison of Nicopolis, hearing which way the Christians marched, went to
encounter them, where there was a cruel fight: but in the end the Christians
had the victory, and slew 3000 Turks, and so returned to the Camp at Themesuar
with their spoil and captives. The Barbarians, drawing all their forces
together, came to charge the Transiluanians, where at the first the victory was
doubtful: but in the end the Christians prevailed, having A great slaughter of
the Turk^.
slain about five thousand of their enemies; but yet they were at length forced
to raise the siege.

MAHOMET conceiving that his Commanders had either been negligent or
unfortunate in the wars, and resolving to ruin the Christians, came in
person to Belgrade, where he drew together an Army of 150000 men, with which he
besieged Agria; the Gouerner NIARIVS having bin a little before supplied with
men and victuals by the Archduke MAXIMILIAN. There was a Town and two Castles:
the old stood upon the declining of a hill; and the new on the top. The
Christians left the Town, and retired into the old Castle without any force;
which the Turks having battered, they left this also, and fled into the new
Castle: where they carried themselves no more valiantly than they had done
before: for, after they had endured some assaults, and repulst the Turks, the
soldiers would needs yield to have their lives saved, contrary to the will of
the Gouerner and Captains: but the Turks, violating their faith, having kept
the Gouerner and other chief Commanders, slew all the soldiers, but such as
impiously, to save their lives, would abjure their religion.

The Archduke MAXIMILIAN, General of the Emperors Army, having joined with
the Prince of Transiluania and the Hungarians, and making an Army of 60000 men,
resolved The Archduke Maximilian fights with Mahomet.
to give battle to the Turks, contrary to the advice of his counsel. After
diverse skirmishes the Turks past a river with part of their Army, and came in
good order to charge the Christians; who attended them resolutely, and repulst
them valiantly, forcing them after great slaughter to turn their backs, and
repasse the river, the Christians following them even unto their Camp: where
falling greedily to spoil, and busying themselves in MAHOMET'S Tent, to free
the Gouerner of Agria from bonds, they were set upon by CIGALA, who led the
rereward of the Turkish Army, and put to the sword whilst they were busy in
spoiling; so as by their greedy desire they lost the glory of a famous victory.
MAHOMET, having not been so fortunate in fight as he expected, and being weary
of the Hungarian wars, returned to Constantinople to his delights and venery:
and the Christian Army was dissolved, and went to garrison.

In the beginning of this year 1597, MAHOMET resolved to return again into
Hungary as soon as the season of the year would serve, and to besiege Vienna:
but all Turkey being oppressed with famine, and MAHOMET failing of a peace with
the King of Persia, whereof they then treated at Constantinople, he was forced
to desist from his resolved enterprise. And for that the defection of
Transiluania, Valachia and Moldauia, did much trouble him, being very necessary
for the feeding of his Countries and Armies, he therefore sent Ambassadors to
the Prince of Transiluania with rich Presents, to the end he might draw him
from all league with the Christians. The Turk seeks to gain the prince of
Transiluania.
The Prince entertained them courteously; and in the beginning answered them
doubtfully, to the end he might protract the war, and discover the enemies
counsels: but hearing that the Turks were on foot, and marched toward
Valachia, he drew his Army presently together, and charged them; at which
encounter the Turks were in a manner all slain. After this exploit he went
with 40 coaches to Prague; where having had secret conference with the Emperor,
he received the Order of the golden Fleece, with many rich Presents; and then
returned into Transiluania, the Emperor having promised to assist him with 6000
foot before the end of May.

In May, PALFI, NADASTI and BERSTEIN, Bohemians, with some of the Emperors
forces, having by night forced one of the gates of Totta, a Castle in Hungary,
they entered it Exploites of the Christians.
without any loss, and slew the garrison. And the Archduke MAXIMILIAN, in
August following, after six days siege took Pappa; from whence he went to the
siege of Iauerine: but hearing that the enemy came to relieve it with a good
Army, he raised his siege, and went toward Vaccia; whereas MAHOMET Basha
offered him battle: but the Imperialists being far weaker, they kept themselves
within their Camp; which, MAHOMET attempted to force, and was shamefully
repulst, with the loss of 700 Ianizaries, a Basha, and many of his choice
horsemen. The next day, having by his messengers obtained a treaty of a
counterfeit peace, with this subtle device he retired with his Army, and went
to Beda. Soon after, the Turks returned to Totta or Totisa (taken a little
before by the Christians) and laid siege unto it. CHRISTOPHER WEIDA commanded
in this Castle with 250 soldiers; who although he performed the duty of a good
Captain with great valor and resolution, yet in the end he was forced to
yield, and to provide for his own safety and his soldiers: for, the Turks
having b^ttered it continually, and made a breach, they gave diverse assaults,
and attempted to force it; but they were always repulst by the valor of the
garrison. In the mean time they had undermined one of the Bulwarks of the
Castle, and blew it up; which made a great breach. The soldiers being moved
with this ruin, many of them being slain, some wounded, and some burnt with
the fire, they persuaded their Captain not to cast himself and them away
desperately: whereupon, in a tempestuous night they issued secretly by a
postern gate, and went to the river Dannow. The enemy The Turks recover Totta.
this while gives an assault, and enters the breach: but he found the Castle
empty, the soldiers before their departure having laid a train of powder,
which taking fire slew many of the Turks.

In March 1598, the Earl of Suartzenbourg Lieutenant to the Archduke
MAXIMILIAN, and the Baron of Palfi, laid a plot for the surprising of Iauerine:
they brought ladders, bridges, Iauerine surprised by the Christians.
and all other instruments of war, secretly by night to Comorrha, and prepared
forces fit for such an enterprise, giving to every man his charge, exhorting
the soldiers to abstain from spoiling, and to regard the general good of
Christendom more than their own profits. The Earl having prepared all things
ready for the execution, finding the drawbridge down, and the utter gate open,
they made fast their Petard to the inner gate, which they forced. The soldiers
which were in guard cried To Arms, and discharged their Pieces: but the
Christians entered, seizing on the ports, ordinance, and places of strength,
according to their directions. The Turks in this sudden amazement went to Arms:
but they were all put to the sword, without respect of age or sex. The conflict
lasted 5 hours; and the Turks fought with such obstinacy, that they willingly
offered their throats to their enemies swords: the Basha, having defended
himself long, was slain. SVARTZENBOVRG (having got this victory, not without
the loss of much blood) caused all the spoil to be gathered together, attending
the Emperors pleasure; who, reserving only the ordinance and warlike
preparation, commanded all the rest to be given to the soldiers.

The fame of this unexpected victory as it revived the spirits of the
Christians, so it daunted the Turks, who relied much upon this place; as
appeared by certain words graven in a stone, which were brought to the Emperor:
that is to say, Iauerine a Town of the Turks is the key which can open all the
Towns and Forts of the Christians. SVARTZENBOVRG was made Gouerner of the Town,
with a garrison of 10000 men; and PALFI FABACOVRT the Petardier, a French
Gentleman, with others, was honored by the Emperor with the dignity of
Knighthood, and had great rewards.

In the mean time, SIGISMVND BATTORI Prince of Transiluania, who hitherto had
The Prince of Transiluania resignes his Countries to the Emperor.
fought against the Turks with great courage and valor, and faithfully
entertained the league with the Emperor, whether now moved with the desire of a
quieter life, or drawn by some other consideration, resolved to giue-ouer the
dominion of those three Provinces to the Emperor, so as he might have some
duchy given him fit for his person within the bounds of the Empire. The Emperor
accepted of this condition, and offered him a Duchy in Silesia; and the
business was concluded in April, conditionally that Transiluania, with all the
Towns, Cities and subjects, should hereafter acknowledge the Emperor and the
Princes of the house of Austria, for their lawful Lords, and yield them all
obedience due to their natural Princes; and that they should accept of the
Archduke MAXIMILIAN, whom the Emperor had named, to be their Prince, and
should enjoy their religion as they formerly had done. This being concluded;
the Prince, calling his Noblemen together, acquainted them with this action:
and, freeing them of their oath of allegiance, he wished them to obey the
Emperor, and then went to possess his Duchy.

In May, SVARTZENBOVRG attempted to surprise Alba Regalis, but in vain. Having
Alba Regali^ attempted by the Christians in vain.
drawn together 8 Cornets of Austrian horse, ioining with them of Hungary, and
some footmen out of Iauerine, he marched secretly toward the Town: but this
project was discovered to the Turks, so as the same night they fortified the
Town with a stronger garrison, and kept good guards without it; so as the
Christians understood by their spies, whom they had sent to discover, that
there was small hope to take the Town. The Army was come within half a mile;
and for that they would not return without some exploit, NADASTI was sent
before with 150 horse to draw forth the enemy: whereupon, there salying forth
600 horse, they pursued NADASTI; who drawing them into an ambush, there were
above 250 slain. The Turks, returning to Alba, came forth again with greater
forces: whom SVARTZENBOVRG incountred, defeated and put to flight, having slain
many, and taken some prisoners.

The Prince of Transiluania, having taken possession of his Duchy in Silesia,
was not much Sigismund returns again into Transiluania.
pleased with that estate: but repenting him of his exchange, on the one and
twentieth of August disguising himself in a Friars habit, he retired secretly
with two more in his company into Tran siluania. And coming to Clausenbourg, he
found his wife at her devotion; whom having kindly saluted, he took a new oath
of the Citizens, and carried himself for Lord as he had formerly done. Then,
sending messengers into all parts, he advertised them of his coming,
requiring them to obey him as they had formerly done. He also sent Letters to
the Archduke MAXIMILIAN, The Prince of Transiluania writes to the Archduke
Maximilian.
to whom the Emperor his brother had given the government of those Provinces;
intimating, that whereas the Duchies of Opelia and Ratisbon, which the Emperor
had exchanged with him, did in no sort equal his Countries, he had therefore
great reason to return into Transiluania, and that he now held Clausenburg the
chief city of that Province; that he neither could nor would yield it, or such
other places as had continued in his power, or returned under his command, but
would endeavor to defend them from al foreign force; wherefore he entreated
him to desist from his intended enterprise, and not to attempt any thing
against him in Transiluania, but rather to bend his forces for the recovery of
Agria, lest he should force him by necessity (whilst he seeks to defend
himself and his subjects) to deserve ill of them, to whom he wished all good.
Moreover that he would honor the Emperor, and the whole house of Austria,
with the majesty of the Roman Empire; and would endeavor to do any thing that
might tend to their profit and good. His wife did also accompany them with her
Letters, by the which she exhorted MAXIMILIAN, not to attempt any thing
against her husband: which if he did, it would not only be hurtful, and
dishonorable to himself, but also to the Emperor, and the whole Christian
Commonwealth. Whilst that the Transiluanian was busy in settling of his
estate, the Archduke MAXIMILIAN intercepted ceraine wagons laden with silver
and other rich commodities, the which he caused to be brought to Cassouia: the
Transiluanian taking this very ill, laid hold upon certain Commissioners of
the Emperors, which were then in Transiluania, the which he said he would not
release, until he had restitution. This was the cause of great war, which
not only afflicted those Countries, but bred great security to the Turks.

The peace of Germany was much disquieted this year, by the Low Countries
Army: for The estates of Germany in combustion.
the Archduke under the command of MENDOZA Admiral of Castile, who had lodged
his Army in Cleues, Westphalia, and the countries adjacent, taking many towns,
and committing more then barbarous cruelties; the Duke of Cleues, who was a
Prince of the Empire, complained to the Emperor and to the Princes and
imperial towns, of the insolences committed by the Admiral and his Army: to
whom the Emperor and the Princes sent often to demand restitution: which the
Admiral neglecting, in the end the Princes raised an Army of 10000 foot and
3000 horse to force him to retire out of the quarters of Westphalia, and
Munster; whereupon the Spaniard, fearing that this would draw all Germany into
Arms, left those countries, which they had spoiled.

MAHOMET to revenge the loss of Iauerin sent OSMAR Basha with an Army of 60000
men to besiege Varadin a town in Transiluania, in which MELCHIOR REDER a
Silesian Varadine besieged by the Turk in ^aine.
Gentleman, bred up in Arms, commanded: who seeing the town unable to resist
so great an Army, set it on fire, and retired himself with all the victuals
and munition unto the Castle, drawing in such inhabitants as would run the
same fortune, making them swear, not to parley with the enemy nor to make any
motion of yielding, upon pain of death, and he himself did likewise promise to
die with them. They endured a siege of six weeks, and repulst many sharp
assaults. The History commends him, to have by his valor and diligence
recompensed the loss of about 13000 Christians before Varadine, with the death
of 13000 Turks, and forced the enemy to retire with shame and confusion to
Buda. The Emperor to encourage the Nobility to the like virtue, honored REDER
and his Lieutenant, with the order of Knighthood. On the other side,
Snatzenbourg, and Palfi attempted Buda: they took the suburbs, with the fort
of P^tentiana upon the Dannow; after which they battered the town, and made
such a breach, as the inhabitants, women and children, pressed the Basha to
enter into composition. But the Bashaes of Buda attempted by the Christian^ in
vain.
Caramania, Natolia, and Bosua coming to relieve them, and the continual
rain having made their powder unprofitable, they were content to retire their
troops in safety, having slain 15000 Turks at Buda.

SIGISMVND BATTORI Prince of Transiluania, in the beginning of March resigned
all his countries, unto Cardinal ANDREW BATTORI, showing a strange example of
humane 1599.
inconstancy: for a little before having sent an Ambassador to CAESAR, desiring
him to free his subjects from their oath which they had taken, and to restore
Varadine with the country adjacent; the Emperor refusing this, he then sent
unto him the Bishop of Alba Iulia, to renew the former contract, requiring to
have the jurisdiction of Drebnits in Morauia, added to his two Duchies in
Silesia, with a yearly pension of 50000 crowns, out of the Imperial chamber:
That the estates of Transiluania should be pardoned, for their breach of faith
to the Emperor, and The Prince of Transiluania resignes his countries to
Cardinal Andrew Battori.
have their liberties and privileges confirmed. But during the absence of his
Ambassador, he makes transaction with Cardinal ANDREW, and causes his
subjects to swear obedience unto him. This new Prince sent presently to GEORGE
BASTA the Emperors Lieutenant in those parts, promising to ratify whatsoever
SIGISMVND's Ambassador should conclude with the Emperor: That he would not
attempt any thing, but what should be for the good of the Christian
Commonwealth, hoping that BASTA would take his actions in good part, and
attempt nothing in hostile manner against him.

The Emperor was much distempered with these news, sending presently to stay
SIGISMVND's Ambassadors who were but newly departed from Prague, and to put
them in custody. The Ambassadors being comn to Terna, hearing what had past in
Transiluania, resolved willingly to stay there and attend the Emperors
pleasure. Cardinal BATTORI wrote Letters unto the Emperor, by the which he
promised to do all good offices that might tend to The proceedings of
Cardinal Battori.
his Majesty's service, and the Peace of Christendom. The Emperor delaying to
make an answer, commanded BASTA to draw what forces he could together. The
Cardinal being in some doubt sent to BASTA, letting him understand that he had
need of a Patron, by whose help he might defend his Countries, and therefore
he desired that the Emperor would explain himself, whether he would hold him
as a friend and client, or as an Enemy: That there was a Turkish Ambassador
then with him, who willingly offered him aid from his Emperor, and required
but 10000 ducats for his yearly tribute; yet he had rather join his forces
with other Christians, and do good and faithful service to the Emperor, then
be guilty of betraying of Religion, and his countries liberty, to a cruel
enemy; to which BASTA made no answer, but referred him unto the Emperor.

The Turk, seeing that the great wars he had against the Persians, did
exhauste his treasure, The Tartarians propound a peace to the Emperor.
and that the Christians daily surprised places, and slew his men; he was
desirous to have a peace with the weaker, that he might be able to encounter
the stronger: He sent thirteen Tartarians to Vienna, to make an ouerture of
peace; but this was to crave alms (as they say) by command: For, the Soldiers
did not forbear to spoil the Country; and the Imperialists desired to have
all violences and acts of hostility to cease: so as they carried no
satisfaction to the Turk; but were sent away without any answer. This
contempt thrust the Tartarians into rage, breathing nothing but rage and fury,
putting all, as they past, to fire and sword. A great conuoy with victuals,
money, cloth of gold and silver, and other sundry moueables, was coming
forwards to Buda, for the furnishing of the new Basha and garrison.

ORSIPPETER, Lieutenant to the Governor of Strigonium, set upon them unawares,
and A great booty taken fom the Turks.
defeated them that guarded this conuoy; making himself rich, both in honor
and spoil. This victory begot a second: The Fort of Walls was fallen; he
marched thither, defeated the garrison and the Governor, freed them of
Bischiac, and carried a great number of sheep unto his Garrison.
SVVARTZENBOVRG, General of the Christians Army, is commended, for that he had
always his spirits banded to some new Stratagem. He had once failed to
surprise Buda, and yet he would attempt it so often as he might advance the
Emperors affairs, by an honorable victory, over that strong Town. He drew
together twelve thousand men, and lodged them closely in a valley, that he
might surprise it at the opening of the gate: But the enterprise being
discovered, the suburbs smarted for the Town; the enemy having no will to
salie forth. And the next day he defeated a conuoy, which carried pay for the
Garrison of Agria, slew 400 Turks, and took the Bege, who was Governor of
Hatuan. These victories made SVVARTZENBOVRG to attempt Buda the third time; but
he failed to take the Town, though not the Basha; who, walking abroad, was
surprised, and sent for a trophey to the Emperor, with certain Ensigns, which
the Barrons of Palfi and Madasti, had taken from the Tartarians.

The Turk was so oppressed, on the one side by the Christians, and on the other
by the Persians, The Turks demand a Peace.
as he would willingly have embraced a peace; but he would make it with such
advantage, as he seemed to want neither force nor means to encounter both
Enemies. The Turk demanded to have Iauerin, Fillec and Serchein, restored; and
he offered nothing but Agria: whereupon the assembly brake off, without any
effect; and presently after PALFI defeated seven hundred Turks; and the
Hussars (which be Hungarian Knights) cut in pieces 3000 Tartarians near to
Fillec.

In the mean time Cardinal BATTORI, having gotten the government of
Transiluania, Cardinal Battori makes a league with the Turk, and the success.
thrust on with blind ambition, and the desire of command, treated with the
Turk, and promised a certain annual tribute, so as he might be maintained in
the possession of what he had usurped. Doubtless the nature of man is blindely
furious, and mad, being once transported with passion. The Pope foresaw the
Cardinals ruin; and, by his Nuntio, labored to retire him from temporal
Arms to his profession: God beheld his enterprise, full of injustice and
treachery, and stirred up a scourge to punish him. MICHAEL Vauoide, or Lord of
Valachia, who wholly depended upon the Emperor, having levied an Army of 30000
men entered into Transiluania and took Cronstar to stop the Polonians passage,
who he thought would assist the Cardinal.

After which he came with his Army near unto the Cardinals Camp, giving him
to understand, that he came not to shed Christian blood, but would willingly
spare it: but whereas he had refused to take an oath to the Emperor and to
restore that which he had usurped, and being forced by no necessity, had
craved aid from the Turk; for this cause if he did not presently yield himself
into the Emperors power, he would prosecute him by Arms. The Cardinal
Cardinal Battori defeated and slain.
refusing to perform this, the Vaiuode led his Army against him, and the
Cardinal did the like; in the beginning the fight was furious, but the victory
inclined to the Vaiuode, who sent to pursue the Cardinal being fled, and to
bring him back: the Valachians ouertook the Cardinal in the mountains, where
they slew him and carried his head to the Vaiuode. Which being done he brought
all Transiluania subject unto the Emperor, whose Ambassador was received by
them, upon condition to maintain them in their rights and privileges. Al
Transiluania set up the victors ensigns, who fortifying himself in the
strongest towns, ministered occasion to call the sincerity of his designs in
question: which opinion was fortified when they saw the Turk seek his
friendship, by an Embassy which he sent unto him; but he weakened that
opinion by retayning the Ambassador, which the Turkish Emperor had sent unto
him, whether it were that he doubted some fraud, or that he meant by that
policy to cover the malice of his heart: but he gave some satisfaction, by
putting to death certain spies of the Bashas SERDER and delivering the whole
estate of Transiluania into the Emperors hands.

In October SERDER Basha made a great show to affect peace, sending
Ambassadors to The turks send Ambassadors to treat of a peace.
the Archduke MATHIAS: whereupon a place of treaty was appointed, in an Island
betwixt Strigonia and Visigrade, and Commissioners were sent on either side.
The Turks demanded restitution of all those places which had been taken by the
Christians, the last five years, especially Strigonia. The Christians yielded
to all except Strigonia, which the Turks did urge much, offering Agria in
exchange. In the end, the Emperors Commissioners finding that the Turks meant
nothing but fraud, they brake off the assembly and retired: yet soon after,
SERDER Basha sought to renew the treaty again, but it took no effect.

MICHAEL the Vaiuode of Valachia, having yielded the estate of Transiluania
unto the Emperor, after the defeat of Cardinal BATTORI; The Turk knowing
him to be a man 1600. The treachery of Michael the Vaiu^de.
of service, sought his friendship. And although that he endeavored to free
himself from all show of suspicion: yet GEORGE BASTA Lieutenant for the Emperor
in Transiluania, had discovered certain secret intelligences which he had with
the Turk, whereof he gave him notice. Soon after he gave over his secret
practices, and received the Turks Ambassadors and his masters presents
publicly: and caused them to be carried before them, entering into Cronstar
with the Ambassador. And to the end they should give no sinister impression of
his fidelity to the Emperor; he told his ministers, that his desire was to
have that action performed, in view of the whole town; to the end they should
not think, he would do any thing in secret to the prejudice of Christendom.
And withal he entreated them to move the Emperor, to revoke BASTA'S
Commission, for the private quarrels that were betwixt them, and to substitute
some other of a more tractable disposition.

The Emperor being advertised, that MICHAEL would escape from him if he did
not stay him by some means, he sent him thirty thousand crowns in gift: but
he thinking it too small His demands of the empire.
a recompense for his services, told the Emperors agents that Transiluania did
belong unto him by hereditarie right; wherefore he demanded, that he might
enjoy it as his own; and for satisfaction of his services, he should give him
Varadin, Hust, Nagban, and the confines of Hungary, with other demands which
were so arrogant, and uncivil, as they did purchase him deadly hatred and were
the cause of his ruin. After which he overthrew SIGISMVND BATTORI who sought
to enter into Transiluania again, with IEREMI the Vaiuode of Moldauia; but
being annoyed by the Chancellor of Poland in Valachia, he craved aid from the
Lieutenant of the Imperial Army in high Hungary, and promised the Emperor by
his Letters, to serve him faithfully in this occurrent, so as he would but call
BASTA out of Transiluania. The Emperor would not that his vassaile should
capitulate with him. It was a president of bad consequence; and therefore he
commanded him to obey BASTA. Afterward he grew hateful to all the Polonians,
BASTA pursued him, and surprised him being encamped at Visbourg with 18000 men,
where he slew four thousand, and chased him into the Mountains, where he was
reduced to that extremity, as he was forced to go^an humble suppliant to the
Emperor, and to offer his wife and children for hostages.

The Garrison of Pappa, consisting for the most part of Walloons and French,
fell into a mutiny for their pay, having also some scarcity of victuals; they
made one called La MOTT their Puppa betray* by the garrison.
Captain, forcing their companions to sign their revolt; they seized upon
MAROT their governor, and of the other Captains: They set all the Turks at
liberty (who by the counsel of these Traitors, carried every man his host
prisoner to Alba Regalis, or to Vesperine) and withal, they promised to
deliver them SVVARTZENBOVRG, lieutenant General of the Imperial Army, or to
give them means to take him at Zolnock, when he should come with their pay.
MAROT the Governor found means to advertise him hereof, and he went thither
presently with nine thousand men; where, at his first coming, he took one of
their Captains, whom he caused to be fleyed alive, and his head to be set upon
a Pike, to terrify the rest; he took from them a Basha, whereby they did hope
to be relieved by the Turk; who could not assist them either with men or
provision: hunger pressed them, and they grew desperate, having no hope of any
humane aid; whereupon they salied out by night, and made a great slaughter in
one of the Quarters; SVVARTZENBOVRG runs thither to repair this disorder,
but he was overthrown with a shot and slain: his death caused great
heaviness in the Imperial Army, and all Christendom had cause to lament his
loss. These Wretches made a second salie; saying that before they would yield,
they would feed upon their Governor MAROT, and their other prisoners.

MELCHIOR REDER, who had won much honor in the defense of Varradine, had the
charge of the Army, and pressed the siege, and the Traitors endured the last
extremity. They had a posterne gate behind, in which they did put all the hope
of their safety, seeking to make dry a poole, which did inuiron the Town of
the one side; but for that the mudde would not easily carry them, they could
not cover it so secretly, with hardles, straw, reed, and such other
materials, but REDER was advertised. Hereupon he sent NADASTI the Earl of
Thurne and Colonits: who ouertaking them near unto a Wood, brought some of
them back prisoners, and slew La MOTT their Captain, with some hundred others
which would not yield; forcing the rest to keep themselves within the Fort.
The Governor MAROTT with certain others, who had freed themselves from their
bonds, came speedily unto the Camp.

REDER then enters the town, kills some of the remainder, and reserues the rest
for their deserved punishments, whom he sent into diverse garrisons: and that by
the horror of their example The cruel punishments of the Traitors in Pappa.
they might abhor the like treachery, some were impaled, others broken upon
the wheel, or roasted at a slow fire, basted with Larde; others had their
bowels pulled out of their bellies, and burnt before their eyes, their thighs,
shoulders, and other parts being pinched with hot pincers: Some had their
hearts pulled out of their bodies alive, others their throats and mouths stuffed
full of Sulphur and Powder and then fired, and some were buried in the ground up
to the neck, and their heads bruised with bullets. And thus were those traitors
cruelly tormented by order of martial law.

Pappa, a fort of importance, being then preserved, Babottes could not so
escape: the town was strong, and fortified with five hundred men, having store
of all sorts of necessary provision. But Babotts yielded basely ^o the Turks.
the Garrison (terrified by the descent of twelve thousand Ianitzaries, sent
from Constantinople) yielded it upon the first attempt; and by their baseness,
made the loss of Canisa easy, the which followed to the prejudice of all
Christendom. It was an ill president for the Governor of that place, being the
strongest fort the Christians had in Stiria: an example the which, it may be,
he would no^ so easily have imitated, if the Governor of Babottes had received
that punishment which martial law inflicts upon those that yield up a place of
importance, without extreme necessity; but the Christian Army, had need of a
commander of greater authority, who by his presence might contain both
soldiers and Captains in their duties.

The Duke of Mercoeur, would not accept the charge of Lieutenant general of
the Army of Hungary, but with the kings good liking: who having signified his
pleasure, the Duke came into Hungary, and was saluted Lieutenant general of
the Army in Iauerin; an Army weak in forces, but strong in courage and
resolution, to fight for the defense of Religion. He marched with fifteen
thousand men, of diverse Nations, to relieve them, being resolved either to lodge
in Canisa, or to die in the field. The first of October, he gave a sign unto
the besieged of his coming, and sought to keep from his enemy the knowledge of
his small Army; Canisa was besieged by 50000 men under the command of the
Vetzier Basha. The Duke resolves to hazard a battle to relieve the Town. The
Vetzier, understanding, by his spies, the weakness of the Dukes Army, advised
him, not to oppose his small troops, against so great forces. The Duke made
answer: That, he did not fear to assail a greater number of Infidels, with
few er Christians; and, that God favored the justice of his cause.

The Duke advanced toward Canisa, and the Vetzier attended him in his passage
with a battalion of twenty thousand men, which came to charge him with their
accustomed cries. The The Duke of Mercoeur repels the Turks.
Dukes Artillery amazed their furious clamours, staid their heat, diminished
their numbers, and beat them back toward their Trenches; the Duke, remaining
master of the field, of two Cannons, and of many slain and hurt. The next day
he seeks to draw them out of their Camp, and takes fourteen field pieces:
and on the other side, the Turks intercepted the Christians victuals, coming
unto them. The Vetzier, seeing that force could not prevail, sought to
vanquish them by necessity. The Army being in great want, they cried out to
retire: The General preached patience, and would not consent unto a retreat,
until the Colonels and Captains had confirmed their opinions under their
hands. In their retreat there fell a sudden amazement among them, which put
the army in disorder: whereupon the Turks arrived, and put many Germans to
the sword. The Duke rallied his men together, and encouraged them rather to dye
honorably, then by flight to fall into miserable servitude. Thus, encouraged
by the presence of the General, they returned to the charge, repulsed the
enemy, and made the retreat easy. The besieged in Canisa dispaired of all
succors, and PARADIS the Governor was easily persuaded by them to yield. Thus
Canisa, one of the chief bulwarks Canisa taken by the Turks.
of Christendom, was made subject to the tyranny of this barbarous enemy.
PARADIS, presenting himself to the Duke of Mercoeur, he sent him to the Duke
MATHIAS, who was Governor of the Country: And having no sufficient reason to
excuse his cowardice, he was by the Emperors commandment condemned to have his
right hand cut off, which had signed the rendition; and to lose his head.

This year the King of Persia sent his Ambassadors to summon the Emperor, the
Pope, the King of Spain, and other Christian Princes, to invade the Turks
estate with their joint forces, The Persian entreats the Christian Princes to
war against the Turks.
promising to assail him with 15000 horse, and 60000 foot; and to grant free
liberty of Religion and traffic to their subjects in his kingdoms, so as
they would not treat any peace with the Turk without comprehending him.

The Pope and Princes did thank the Sophy for his affection to the good of
Christendom; exhorting him to be a means, that the great Duke of Muscovie
might give his consent and assistance to this general enterprise. MAHOMET,
advertised hereof, sent his Physician, a Christian Renegado, into France, to
entreat the King, to mediate a truce for him with the Christian Emperor; and to
call the Duke of Mercoeur back into France: for (said he) the Turks do
greatly apprehend one of their prophecies, which says, that, The Sword of the
French shall chase them out of Europe.

The Transilvanians calling an assembly at Clausenbourge, SIGISMVND BATTORI was
there proclaimed their lawful Prince, by such as favored his party, and all
men commanded to obey him, and the Imperialists were put in safe custody. They
sent into Moldavia, to entreat SIGISMVND to come and take possession of his
inheritance; and in the mean time they made ISCHIACK, an ambitious and cruel
man, his Lieutenant General; who, in the beginning committed the wife and
son of MICHAELL the Vaivode of Valachia to prison. BASTA, having no power to
hinder this resolution, nor the effects, demanded leave of the Estates to
retire; exhorting the Transilvanians to persist in the fidelity which they did
owe unto the Emperor. They, foreseeing that this act would be dipleasing unto
him, sent STEPHEN CARKESY unto the Emperor; protesting that they were very
sorry for these alterations: that having no Prince under whom they might be more
assured, they had again opened their Arms to SIGISMVND BATTORI: That they would
always yield that obedience and fidelity which they did owe unto his Imperial
majesty, and would not conclude any peace with the Turk, but upon such
conditions as should not be any way displeasing unto him.

BATTORI comes into Transiluania: from whence by his Letters to BASTA, he
laments the miseries into which he had vnderseruedly been reduced. He craves
pardon for that which had Battori returns into Transiluan.
been done in his absence, to the prejudice of his majesty's service, and that
he might be suffered to send his excuses by an Ambassador to the Emperor.
BASTA answered him, that all depended upon the Emperors pleasure, whose
commandment he attended. The Vaiuode MICHAEL took the captivity of his wife
and son impatiently. He pretended to be able to do the Emperor great
service, if he would assist him with some forces, hoping soon to reduce the
whole Province to obedience. This Valachian had his designs apart, fortifying
himself upon diverse occurrents, both with the Turk and Emperor: But to reject
the service of this Prince, were to thrust him into fury; and make him either
seek unto the Turk, or reconcile himself with SIGISMVND, and so to cross
the Emperors affairs with their joint forces. The Emperor therefore furnished
him with men and money, to join with BASTA, who had a watchful eye over his
actions, lest he should attempt something to his masters prejudice. They had
drawn together twenty thousand men, and camped upon a mountain, attending
some horsemen from Silesia. SIGISMVND had eighteen thousand horse, and twenty
two thousand foot, with the which he resolved to charge them before their
supplies came; whereupon, both Armies joined battle; where, after a bloody
fight, BATTORI was overthrown, with the loss of ten thousand men, forty
pieces of great Ordinance, one hundred Battori def^ated by the Vaiuode and Basta
and ten Ensigns, and all his baggage. After this, Clausenbourg was taken,
paying three months entertainment for the whole Army, and, likewise,
receiving a good Garrison.

The Valachian, in this battle, performed the part of a faithful servant;
but he thought himself rather borne to command, then to obey; and thrust on
by his natural ambition, he continued, secretly, his fraudulent intelligences
with the Turks and Tartarians. BASTA informed the Emperor of all his actions,
and namely of his rigor against the inhabitants of the champaigne Country,
under color to revenge their disloyalty to the Emperor. BASTA persuaded him,
in the Emperors name, not to blemish his generous and well deserving acts,
with the infamous name of cruelty. To whom he answered, proudly; That he would
no more obey his commandments, or the Emperors; And that he meant to enjoy
Transiluania, which he had gotten by his sword and valor; doing many acts of
absolute power. Soon after, BASTA discovered by his own Letters, that he
treated with the Basha of Themesuar, and sought the friendship of BATTORI, to
deliver the Imperial Army into the Enemies hands. Hereupon the Council sent
for him, meaning to send him unto the Emperor; but refusing to come, Colonel
PETZ was commanded to inuest his Quarter, with his regiment, and some other
troops, who coming into the Valachians Tent, and telling him that he arrested
him as the Emperors prisoner, he drew out his Sword, whereupon they presently
slew him, and cut off The Vaiuode Michael slain.
his Head.

They found in his Tent, Letters which did manifestly discover his treacherous
designs: the which being imparted to the Valachians (who began to mutine upon
his death) they confessed that he had been justly slain. Most of them took a
new oath to the Emperor, and enrolled themselves under BASTA'S Ensigns.
BATTORI was again defeated before Clausenbourg, which he thought to surprise:
and being pursued by BASTA, he fled, like a Vagabond, into the Mountains and
Deserts.

The Duke of Mercoeur having drawn together an Army of 18000 men, with Cannon
and munition of war, necessary for a siege, gave it out that he would
attempt Buda, yet holding Alba Regalis besieged by Duke Mercoeur.
his enterprise so secret as the troops knew not where their General would
employ them: until that after the taking of some Castles by composition, they
found themselves in the suburbs of Alba Regalis, a small town, but of great
importance, environed with a deep marish, which made the approaches difficult.
Having observed the situation, he cast up a trench toward Buda, from whence
they might be relieved; resolving first to assault the base town and the
suburbs: where having planted his petardes and appointed a scalado at the same
instant, the soldiers entered with little loss, forcing the Turks to retire
into their chief Fort. Then he made his approaches: and having planted his
battery, within six days he made two small breaches in the walls, commanding
ROCHEVORMB Marshall of the Camp, with 1000 good soldiers to seek a passage
through the marish, to one of the breaches, every one carrying a faggot in his
hand, meaning at the same instant to give an assault to the other breach;
ROCHEVORMB was discouraged by the Country people, who assured him that there
was no passage that way: but giving no credit to their words, he sent to
discover it, and they brought him word that the passage was difficult, but not
impossible: whereupon at night they entered those fennes which they found far
deeper then was related, almost with the hazard of their lives; but they
vanquished all difficulties, and came unto the breach: which they entered, the
Turks being busy to defend the other; whereupon the town was taken and most
of them put to the sword, the Castle, and a great part of the town was blown
up by certain trains which the Turks had laid. The which did so incense the
victors, as they would not receive any to ransom, except the Basha, and some
hundred soldiers, which were retired into a Fort; who, making show to yield,
had their lives granted them.

The plague did much afflict the Dukes Army, who had retired two miles off,
as well to refresh it, as to observe the countenance of the great VETZIER, who
resolved in the absence Alba Regalis invested again by the Vetzier.
of the christian general to attempt to reduce that place under his obedience,
before the ruins were repaired and the victuals supplied. The Duke advertised
that the Basha turned head toward Alba Regalis, he approached also with his
troops: and taking with him some 120 French horse, he put himself into the
town to assure them by his presence; where he was presently invested by 8000
horse, the whole Army (being 60000 men) following after. The Duke having giving
order for the most urgent affairs of the town, returned by night unto his
Army: the which did much revive their daunted spirits; where they performed
brave exploites against the enemy, by their daily incounters and skirmishes, in
which they took 9 Cannons and slew MEHEMET TICAIA a Basha, the Basha of Buda, 6
Saniacs, one CADIZ and many other men of note in the Army; whose heads were
given in exchange, for many Christian prisoners. The rest of the Turkish Army
being dispersed here and there, the Duke had liberty to assure his garrisons,
and to return to Viena with much honor.

In the mean time the Archduke FERDINAND went to recover Canisa (which had
been taken the year before by the Turk) with an Army of 4500 horse, and 23000
foot: of which Canisa besieged by the Archduke Ferdinand in vain.
the Pope and Princes of Italy had sent 12000, under the command of FRANCIS
ALDOBRANDINE his Nephew, and the Duke of Mantua was Lieutenant General to the
Archduke. Having planted their Cannon, they made a reasonable brcach, and
summoned the besieged, with offer of all favor, if they yielded; but if they
attended the extremity, they must expect no better usage then they of Alba
Regalis. Their example did nothing terrify the Walloones, and Christians
Renegades, which commanded in the place: they found easily by their weak
attempts to force them, that either there was some trouble and badde
intelligence in the Army, or want of that which was needful to give an
assault; letting them understand that they had no more fear then if their
walls were freed. There was great confusion among the Italians: which troubled
the whole Camp. The bridge, which they had made to pass covered over the
ditch, was too weak and short. They were annoyed with rain, snow, and tempest;
and many other difficulties were in their Camp, so as many soldiers died
without help, and there was no appearance to stay any longer, without a total
ruin of the Army. Whereupon the Archduke FERDINAND resolved to retire, in the
which he wonnelesse honor then in the siege; for wanting al things necessary
to draw away their Cannons they were forced to break them, to burn their
tents, and to abandon their sick men, to the spoil of their enemies.

The Duke of Mercoeur having taken Alba Regalis the year before, it was now
again made subject to the Turkish tyranny, whereas the garrison was all put to
the sword; the governor laying the fault upon the negligence of the Soldiers.
The spoil was very great; in which they found all the old Ordinance, with
twelve pieces new cast, an infinite number of Swords, forty tun of powder,
200 tun of meal, eighty of Biscuit, with ten thousand Florens to pay the
Garrison.

After the death of the Duke of Mercoeur, RVSOVRMBE was General of the
Christian Army, preparing to relieve Alba Regalis, if he had not been
advertised of the loss. And hearing that the Turks Army was dispersed (some
gone against the Scribiano, and others into Transiluania, against BASTA) he
marched directly to Buda, the chief town in Hungary, with five thousand
horse, and twenty thousand foot; having in his company the Duke of Neuers, a
valiant Nobleman of France. At their first approach they attempted the base
Town, by land and water, and took it by night. Buda was divided from Pesta,
by the River of Dannow, having a bridge whereby they might assist one another.
The Christians resolved to cut off this bridge, the which they effected; and
whilst the Turks were busy in the defense of the River, they took Pesta by
Scalado, and put all they encountered to the Sword: the rest being retired into
Pesta taken by the christians.
some places of strength, compounded for their Lives, Wives and Children; and
promised to cause them of Buda to do the like; but there were more men, and
they had greater courage.

The Turkish Army hearing hereof, posted presently back to save Buda, leaving
the designs The Turks raise the siege of Buda.
of Transiluania. RVSOVRMB being thus surprised, puttes men into Pesta, and
prepares for his reof Transiluania. RVSVRMB being thus surprised, puts more men
into Pesta and prepares for his retraite, having first battered the town, and
made a small breach, at which there were 2500 Christians slain and wounded;
and the Duke of Neuers performing all parts of a valiant Nobleman was shot in
the left side, but it was not mortal. After which, the Army retired in safety.

The Noblemen of Transiluania favored SIGISMVND BATTORI their natural Lord:
they seized upon Bistrick and vowed to defend it against all assailants. BASTA
went speedily The Transilu^nians oppose themselves against the Emperor.
to besiege it, battered their walls, and gave an assault, but his men were
repulsed with loss. To revive their courages he promised them the spoil of
the town. The inhabitants grew amazed: and apprehending the insolences of
conquerors, they declared that they would not endure the extremity of war,
for the pleasure of some ill affected to the Emperors service: they excused
themselves to the General, that they had not consented to this rebellion, but
by force, and demanded peace: the which he granted; but with such conditions,
as the Magistrates would not accept. Whereupon BASTA renewes his battery, and
prepares for a new assault, the soldiers growing resolute with the hope of a
rich spoil.

BATTORI gives his word by an Ambassador, that he would not make war against
the Emperor, and that the citizens of Bistrick should submit themselves upon
reasonable conditions: whereupon he received the inhabitants, paying 30000
dallers for reparation, promising that all that would depart should be
conducted to a place of safety with their goods, wives and children. Upon this
assurance 300 men went out of the town with 100 wagons; the which were
spoiled by some of the Army. BASTA detesting this treachery made diligent
search for the Authors, restored what could be found, and punished the chief
with death.

BATTORI seeing his enterprises succeed ill, resolved to make his peace with
the Emperor: and during this treaty (all things seeming to be quiet) MOSES
Duke of Zeccleria took Basta overthrows Moises duke of Zeccleria.
Arms; and foreseeing that BASTA would besiege him in Visibourg, he laid an
ambush for him. After some messages past on both sides, BASTA went and joined
battle with him, in the which he slew 3000 of his men and forced MOSES to
fly to the mountains. BATTORI seeing this faction overthrown, came speedily
to BASTA, to purge himself of the revolt of MOSES: he entered with him into
Visibourg, and submitted himself wholly into the Emperors power, and so
Transiluania was for that time pacified. 1603


This year the Emperor being daily annoyed with the incursions of Turks and
Tartarians into his Countries, he called a Diet at Ratisbone: whither he sent
the Archduke MATHIAS his brother, with instructions not only to acquaint the
Princes and estates of the Empire, with the present necessities of the Turkish
wars, and the daily incursions of the Tartarians; but also to require such
aid as the turbulent estate of things did presently require: who after much
consultation, granted a good supply of horse and foot.

COLLONITS a man of great service, and who had carried himself valiantly in
the Hungarian The enterprise^ of Collonit^.
wars, did this summer take two strong forts, and had put to rout 2000 Turks
near to Comorrha, and sent thirteen ensigns to the Emperor: he beat the
garrison of Canisia, and resolved to attempt the town. There was a Frenchman
in his Army a subtle fellow and daring any thing, who counterfeiting himself
a Renegado, fled into Canisia and desired to be entertained by the Turks; the
which having easily obtained, he laid trains of powder in diverse fit
places, all which should take fire at one instant, so as when the Turks were
busy to quench it, COLLONITS might assault the Castle. The Frenchman
performed what he had undertaken, and the fire brake out with such violence as
it consumed all the houses upon the South and West parts, yea the carriages of
their Ordinance: but the Turks neglected the fire and observed the enemy; so as
COLLONITS being out of hope to take the Castle, left it wasted unto the Turks.
By the like Stratagem, the Turks soon after sought to take Strigonium.

The estate of Transiluania was much troubled by the Zecclerian; who thinking
to revenge The exploits of Mos^s the Zecclerian.
his last affront, crept into favor with the Turk, who promised to make him
his Lieutenant general, as soon as he should reduce that province, under the
Turkish obedience and religion. With this hope, he had appointed him 150000
men, for the recovery of Pesta and Strigonium: and nothing stayed the
progress, but want of victuals in Turkey. Having received 10000 Tartarians,
with a great number of Transiluanians, he besieged and took Visibourg,
persuading all men to join their Arms with his, upon hopes of great favor,
and commanding the soldiers to abandon BASTA'S Camp.

BASTA was weak both of men and money. RADVI^ the new Vaiuode of Valachia,
remembering how BASTA had succored him in his necessity against the Tartarians,
came speedily with 8000 men to requite him: without which succors, he was in
danger to have fallen into the hands of the Infidel MOSES. And BASTA armed
speedily, to join with the Valachian, that they might make the body of an
Army. He attended two thousand Silesian horse: which, MOSES resolving to
defeat, sent some part of his Army to seize upon the passages, and to stop the
entry into the Country. By chance, they encountered with 800 Valachians, led by
Colonel MARSE: who, finding his troops weak, retired, and left his Camp.
MOSES men triumphed very much at this petty victory; and, thinking that MARSE
was far Moses the Z^cclerian defeated and ouerthrown by Colonel Marse.
retired, neglected their guards. But MARSE returned presently, and fell upon
them like a whirle-winde, putting many to the Sword: the rest he chased to
Themesuar, sending 25 Ensigns to BASTA. MOSES himself, present at this
defeat, was slain; his body being found upon search by the Valachians, and the
Emperor advertised thereof by BASTA.

ALBERT NASSIVS succeeded him: who, swimming in the Gulfes of Infidelity, like
to MOSES, drew together 6000 Rebels, and other people of diverse Nations.
BASTA sent to assail him suddenly by his Caualry: who slew most of his men;
himself escaping with some few. The general Enemy of the Christian name,
might have been expelled Hungary, had the Emperor received the contribution
money granted at the general assembly of Ratisbone in March last, to
entertain an Army for six year and eight months. The Princes of Germany A
great contribution, granted at Ratisbone, ill managed.
had freely offered their contributions. The collections might have been made
without grieuance or oppression. But as the rich sought to ease themselves, and
to lay it upon the weaker sort: so the effects did not second the hopes which
were conceived. Some did contribute more then was demanded. The Elector of
Saxony gave the Emperor twelve field pieces, with the furniture necessary for a
year. The Duke of Brunswick sent 1000 horse and 2000 foot. Others assisted this
public cause, with the like bounty. Some also, under that pretext, have
extorted from their subjects far greater sums then their tax, employing it
to their own use; to the dishonor of their order, and against the dignity of
their rank.

Buda was much pressed with famine: they had eaten all their horses, and
tumultuously carried away all the victuals in the Basha's house: which
threatened some dangerous effect, if shortly Buda pressed with famine.
they were not relieved with sufficient provision. The great Vetzier brought
them victuals: but, COLLONITS with his horsemen by land, and SVLTZ and ALTHEM
with their foote-men upon the River, were always watchful to intercept it.
Victuals were so scant, as if the second convey had been lost, there had been
no hope to have furnished a third. In the end, the Vetzier put it into the
Town, but not without encounter and great loss of his men. And if SVLTZ,
fearing some ambush, had not by force retired his men, who pursued the
beginning of a victory, they were likely to have reaped great benefit of that
days service: For these Barbarians carried with them one whole years
entertainment, due to the Garrison of Buda. The Cham of Tartaria returned much
discontented: For, the Vetzier had quarrelled with him, as if by his negligence
he had hindered the victualing of Buda, carrying great forces with him,
notwithstanding that the Vetzier entreated him to stay in Hungary, wherewith
the Turkish Army was much weakened, and disabled to do any great exploits this
year. The Vetzier, after the victualing of Turks defeated.
Buda, sought to expel the Christians out of the Island of Adonis, making great
preparation both by ships and bridge, to transport their men. RVSORMB^
incountred them with his troops: where, after a long fight, they forced them
to fly to their ships in confusion. The Christians followed them unto the
River Dannow: the which for many days after was died with Infidels blood: and
they, which ran by troops into their vessels being ouerladen, were drowned.
There was slain in this battle a Basha of great authority, the Bege of
Belgrade, with many other of note, and 1500 Ianitzaries: but the number of the
drowned was far greater. Finally, it was known by a certain turk, who after
this conflict followed the Christian party, that of 4000 horse and 6000 foot
there were scarce saved 1000; and those returned without Arms. The Vetzier
began his retrait toward Belgrade, and gius means to the Christians to assail
Hatua; which hindered the victualing of Hatua taken by the Christians.
of Pesta. RVSORMB, upon his approach, summons the town; threatening them that
if they yielded not willingly (but taken by assault) they should suffer the
like miseries and indignities, as before time; where the Walloons had committed
unspeakable inhumanities. The remembrance whereof made a great impression in
these miscreants: whereupon, they yielded on condition to depart with their
wives and children, and what goods they could carry. It was a town reasonable
strong, well stored of corn, powder and cattle, with 24 pieces of Ordinance
mounted.

MAHOMET the Turkish Emperor having received many losses and disgraces in
Hungary, and troubled with the reuolts of Asia, he resolved to treat a peace
with the Christians at what rate soever: he gave charge to the Vetzier, and to
ACHMAT and MVRATH Bashaes, to move the Emperors Ministers thereunto. They had
often treated, but the issue did show they Mahomet demands a peace of the
Christians.
proceeded with fraud: to free them from which fear the Bashaes did write
unto the chief commanders, That their most mighty Emperor had a will to
treat a firm and stable peace for the ease of the poor people and quiet of
their estates: the which we in like manner did heartily desire. The which if
you neglect said they, many provinces will be desolate. Whereupon Commissioners
were sent by the Archduke MATHIAS, and they met in an Island above Pesta and
Buda. The Turks entreated that ALTHEM might go to Buda; where he was received
with great shows of joy: to whom the Basha delivered great presents for the
Emperor, and the Archduke MATHIAS, which were very rare and rich, and
likewise for himself and the other Commissioners. The Basha had reason to
press a peace MAHOMET being Death of Mahomet.
dead: and the new successor could not better settle his affairs, then by a
peace, which his father had procured before his death. Whereupon the Basha of
Buda wrote his Letters to ALTHEM, that ACHMAT succeeded MAHOMET his father, not
only in his estates, but in his intentions, for the settling of a good peace
in Hungary; that he desired to understand what had bin concluded, 1604. Achma^s
son desire^ to continue the treaty of peace.
that he might ratify it; that, if the business were not yet finished, they
should use all diligence to bring it to a good end: but yet for that time it
took no effect. Yet on the twenty fifth of Feb. they returned to Pesta, with an
intent to treat; whereas the Emperors Commissioners feasted them solemnly in
Tents without the Town, being 600 in number: but, going to repass the river,
they attempted to surprise Pesta with the help of the forces of Buda; but they
were repulsed with shame and loss, leaving their ladders behind them as
witnesses of their treachery. The Bashaes disavowed the fact, and entreated the
Christian Ambassadors to come the next day to Buda: but they were advertised,
that there was no safety for them. And thus the hope of this peace, which all
Christendom expected, was lost.

After this, they went to Arms. ACHMAT promised to go in person to the conquest
of Hungary, Valachia, Transiluania, Vienna and Austria. He sends SIGALA against
the Persian, and Achmats great preparation for war.
gives the Vetzier the charge of the Hungarian war. He commands the Beglerbey
of Greece to levy 80000 men. He sends HASSAN Basha toward Belgrade to provide
victuals for the army. He draws, from Egypt to Belgrade, an infinite quantity
of biscuit and powder: and it was conceited, that the Ottomans power was able to
vanquish the King of Persia, and to prescribe a law to the King of Vienna (as
he called him); but he was deceived in his account: for, the Persian defeated
SIGALA, and took 80 Towns, with a great Country in Asia; who continuing the
course of his victories, the Turk returns to his ordinary practices, and
demands a peace of the Emperor: who although he knew there was little to be
hoped for from so perfidious The Turks seek a peace, and their vn^ust demands.
a Nation, yet he gave charge to some in Hungary to hear upon what conditions
they would treat. The Bashaes demanded, that the Emperor should pay yearly the
tribute which had bin formerly paid; that he should send Presents to ACHMAT;
that he should keep an Agent in Constantinople; that he should yield to him the
places taken during this war of Hungary, with the Countries of Transiluania
and Valachia: which done, they would send to entreat the Sultane to restore
Canisia. To which the Emperor answered: If they would have a peace, he would
willingly embrace it, so as they would restore to him Agria and Canisia. I
cannot abandon Transiluania, houlding it by a just and lawful title: as for
Valachia, there might happily some means be propounded, which might be accepted
by both parties; so as they spoke nothing of any tribute, or of entertaining an
ordinary Agent at the great Turks Port.

The Emperors answer was received with scorn from the Bashaes. The Vetzier
approached with 10000 Ianitzaries, and a great number of Tartarians: they only
sought to divert the Christians from all enterprises until their forces were
arrived. IAGENREVTER a German, Gouerner of Pesta, hearing that the Vetzier had
charge to recover that town with other places; growing amazed, he packed up his
baggage, and retired without sight of any enemy, and went to Strigonium; having
no other excuse for his desertion, but fear and amazement. ALTHEM the Gouerner
put him in safe keeping until the Emperor had otherwise ordained. They of
Hatua with the like baseness abandoned the Town: which made the Turks undertake
the siege of Strigonium; the which was valiantly defended. They endured many
assaults with the like valor. The Ianitzaries, seeing there was nothing but
blows and death to be gotten at this siege so obstinately defended, they
forced the Vetzier and SERDER Basha with threats to retire.

BELIOGEVSE, Lieutenant to BASTA, had brought the forces of Transiluania for
the succors of Strigonium, to his General, foreseeing no enemy in the
Country. But he had no sooner turned his back but a new combustion forced him
to return: for, BOTSCAY ISTVAN, a 1604.
Nobleman of that part, had made a great levy of soldiers, and proclaimed
himself Prince of Transiluania, and demanded aid from the Sultan for the
conquest of the Country. BELIOYEVSE draws what forces he can together, and
joins with the Earl of Tampieri; whose Troops, being three thousand horse,
were of BOTSCAY'S faction, and desirous to be freed from the Imperial yoke:
who, when they came to fight, abandoned the Emperors party, and went to
BOTSCAY; yet the combat was long and furious. The Germans and Silesians
performed their duties valiantly: but, wanting powder and shot, they were
defeated; where there The Imperialists defeated by Botscay in Transiluania.
were many brave men slain. BOTSCAY sent certain Ensigns to SERDER Basha; who
in recompense qualified him with the title that he affected under the Turks
authority, upon condition that he should employ his Arms to reduce the Province
under his obedience, he furnishing him with men and money.

LIPPAY, who had been taken in the battle, and wounded, became BOTSCAY his
Lieutenant; who, in the beginning of his new authority, made proclamation, that
whosoever would undertake the defense of religion, should come and enroule
themselves: so as in few days an infinite number both of the Nobility and
others came unto them; all binding themselves by oath, not to carry Arms
against the Emperor, nor for the Turk, but for the defense of religion. They
seized upon Cassouia, took an oath of the Citizens, expelled the Imperialists,
seized upon the Churches, drove away the Priests and Clergy, and laid wait to
surprise BELIOYEVSE. BASTA, hearing of this combustion, posted thither with
14000 men, and summoned them by a Herald to return to their duties; but it was
in vain: so as the enemy growing very strong, and winter approaching, he was
forced to retire.

ACHMAT, being much crossed by the dissensions of his Bashaes in Asia, renewed
the treaty Achmat renues the propositions of peace.
of peace; and, to dispose the Christians thereto, he was content that all
prisoners should be exchanged which had been taken for three years space,
suffering his subjects to carry all kind of merchandise to the Christian
Towns. SERDER Basha made the ouerture unto the chief Commanders in Hungary. At
the same time, the King of Persia had sent an Embassage with a small train to
the Emperor and Princes of Christendom; protesting, that he was resolved to
advance that war with all his power, entreating them not to make any peace
with ACHMAT, and offering money for to continue the war, and to send great
forces to overthrow their common enemy. ACHMAT grew jealous thereat, and
entertained better correspondence with the Princes of Christendom than he had
formerly done.

The tumults increasing daily in Transiluania and Hungary, BASTA admonished
BOTSCAY by his Letters to lay down Arms, and to draw the seditious multititude,
to the Emperors obedience. Botscay his demands.
BOTSCAY made answer, that he thought a peace might be made upon these
conditions: that the whole government of Transiluania should be left to him;
that he should be Lieutenant General in Hungary; that none but Hungarians
should be there in garrison; that the Walloons and French should be retired
out of Hungary; that the Hungarians should be maintained in their degrees and
honors; that the soldiers should be duly paid; that there should be free
exercise of the protestant religion; that BELIOYEVSE, and they which had bin
the causes of their troubles, should be delivered into their hands; that the
Emperor should come in person to the States at Pounson; and that the Germans
should contain themselves within their garrisons, and not go to the Viceroy.
BASTA would make no answer to these demands, as being too rash.

The Haiduques (for, so all BOTSCAY'S soldiers were called) continuing their
enterprises, drew all the people of high Hungary and Transiluania into Arms:
and BOTSCAY having the whole Country of Transiluania at his devotion, he called
the Estates of Hungary to a general Assembly the last of April. As for BASTA,
being sick; his soldiers, wanting pay, committed greater insolences in
Austria and Hungary, than the Turks: they mutined against their General, and
offered to force his lodging; and the Haiduques and Turks spoiled and wasted
the Country as far as Vienna; so as many which dwelt abode, were forced to
retire themselves into the City.

Neither was Morauia free from these common calamities, the Haiduques entering
and putting all to fire and sword, carrying away four thousand prisoners to
sell to the Turks. And in the midst of summer there was a troop of thieves
entered into Stiria; who, finding no man to make resistance, spoiled the
Country, carried away their goods, and forced the poor country men, to fly
into Gretz. In this present calamity and danger; the Earls of Serin, Nadasti
and Buda, who had fought so valiantly many years against the Turks, for the
Christian commonwealth, seeing themselves now reduced to the extremity of
danger, yielded themselves and their fortunes to the mercy of BOTSCAY: BASTA,
having recovered his health, drew his Army together, and raised the siege at
Oedembourg, a place in the higher Hungary, then went to Camp near unto
Comorrha. During the siege of Neuheusell, upon the Frontiers of Austria, and of
Oedembourg, Hungary was wonderfully spoiled by the Haiduques, and likewise by
the Turks: Yet the Imperiallists took heart and courage in many places, and
there were many strong Towns and Forts which held for the Emperor in diverse
Provinces.

RADVIL the Vaiuode of Valachia, a partizan to the Emperor, went to field, and
seized upon the chief Fort which BOTSCAY had near unto Varadine, called
Kercie* invaded his partisans; burnt their houses and committed strange
spoils. BOTSCAY began to grow jealous of his Lieutenant LIPPAI, who was
governor of Cassouia. Some, that envied his advancement, made BOTSCAY believe,
that he went about to reconcile himself unto the Emperor, and for assurance of
his Faith, to yield Cassouia unto his hands. He takes this advice, for a
presage of what might happen. To free himself from this fear, and to pull so
troublesome a thorn out of his foot, he holds it the best course to take off
LIPPAI'S head, whom he caused to be executed, with 5 other Gentlemen of note,
by the great Turk's consent seizing on 100000 Ducats, and seven chains of
Gold, which LIPPAI had gotten being his Lieutenant. Lippa Lieutenant to Botscay
beheaded.


BASTA did still solicit BOTSCAY to forsake the Infidel; from whom he could
expect nothing but false friendship, with a dangerous Catastrophe of his bad
faith, which had been so often tried. The Archduke MATHIAS, sent commissioners
unto him in the Emperors name, to treat of a Peace: and he, to show himself
a Prince that would not make the war immortal in his own country, referred
this treaty to HELIE HASKAY; who, having A parley of a Peace betwixt the Emperor
and Botscay.
conferred with the Emperors Commissioners, gave them to understand, that his
master BOTSCAY would not refuse a Peace, if those conditions might be granted
which had been propounded; demanding moreover, that in the Senate of Hungary,
there should be but one Bishop, which should be Chancellor; that no man
should be forced in Religion; and that none should be preferred to
Bishop-ricks, if they were not borne in Hungary, and Noble; and that all that
was past should be pardoned and forgotten. If these things might be performed,
he promised to procure a Peace betwixt the Emperor, and the Turk, with the best
conditions he might.

During this treaty which was somewhat long, ACHMAT sends a Basha to BOTSCAY
with a present of eight hundred thousand Florens to maintain the wars, with
ten Horses of great price, and assurance not to fail him of his promise. In
the mean time, BOTSCAY sends to the King of Polonia, to crave aid from him in
this war, which he made for the defense of Religion. The King accepted of his
offered friendship: But, he could not approve his defection from a house to
the which he was so nearly allied; yet he would acquaint his Lords with his
propositions: who afterward decreed in Council, that no man should assist
BOTSCAY, upon pain of death. In the mean time BOTSCAYES seditious Army joined
with the Turks, being fifty thousand in their Camp, and besieged Strigonium
in the end of August: they battered it with forty pieces of Ordinance
continually during a months space. Having overthrown all their defenses, and
slain nine hundred of their best men, with the Earl of Oetinge, then they
attempted the Castle: the which they fired in such sort, as the soldiers were
scarce able to quench it. Whereupon, they came running to the Earl of
Tampiere, importuning him to yield it up: who refusing at the first, he
persuaded them to remember their oath, and to continue constant with him in the
defense of the town: but seeing the Turks press the siege more violently,
and the Soldiers to cast away their Arms, he was forced to compound: And so
on the third of October, they yielded up the Town and Castle, Strigonium
yielded to the Turk*
unto the Turks.

All the Nobility of Transiluania, Moldauia and Valachia, having sworn to
BOTSCAT, who had an Army of twenty five thousand men, he resolved during the
treaty of Peace to take in the other places of Hungary. The Archduke MATHIAS
had sent one of his chief ministers unto him; who returned with this charge:
That the Hungarians required MATHIAS The Hungarians require Mathias for their*
King.
for their King; and that he should keep his Seat at Possonia or Vienna, and
govern the affairs of the kingdom in person: and if they could not obtain
this within one month, they would choose themselves a King.

The Imperial Army had lien long about Comorrha, under the command of General
BASTA: But, they were not able to give the Turks General battle, and to
relieve Strigonium. Winter approaching, the Turks began to disband, and to
retire toward Buda; and the Christians left their lodging near unto Comorrha.
The 25 of November, 14000 Turks came and charged a Regiment of Reistres, which
made their retreite: But, the whole Army turning head, they fled back to the
mountains; but on the third of December, they came early in the morning, and
charged the foreward: but seeing the whole Army advance, they began to
retire; and being pursued to the passage of a River, there were 1500 slain and
drowned. In this charge the Earl of Laual, a young Nobleman of France, was
shot; whereof he died, to the great The death of the Earl of Laual.
grief of the whole Army.

There was an ancient quarrel depending betwixt the Duke of Brunswick and the
City, 1606. The Duke of Brunswick besieged the City of Brunswick.
touching the jurisdiction. The Duke had formerly attempted to take it, by a
Stratagem; where he lost many men: and now desirous to have his revenge,
knowing they stood watchfully upon their guard for fear of surprise, he would
try it by open force; and having raised a good Army came to inuest the Town.
The inhabitants grew amazed, and sent Ambassadors to the Duke: but they stood
so stiffly upon their privileges, as the treaty was in vain. They complained
to the Imperial Chamber; where they obtained Letters from the Emperor,
commanding the Duke to give over the siege, and to retire his Army, upon pain
of proscription: but he continued his siege. The Hanse-townes levied forces to
relieve the besieged. Ambassadors came from the States of lower- Germany: who
concluded a Truce for a month; promising to do their best indeauors to
conclude this war. The Emperor did likewise send his Ambassadors for the like
effect: where, after some treaty, the Duke retired his Army, upon certain
conditions.

This year in May, a Tower in the Castle of Buda was set on fire: the which,
being full of powder, flew into the air, and slew and hurt about 800 persons
in the ruins. In the end of Iauerin attempted in vain by the Turks.
the last year the Turks began to treat of a Peace with the Imperialls:
how pleasing it was unto them, the Garrison of Iauerin did find upon the
eighteenth of March. There was a day appointed at the Turks desire, where both
parties might meet to advance the business: for which cause, there came not
above fifty Turks to the Gate, desiring to be let in: The Garrison, doubting
no fraud, prepared to open the Gates; when as suddenly a Centinell espied
three thousand Soldiers covered with a thick cloud: whereupon, he cried To
arms, discovering the treachery of the enemies; who were forced to retire by
the great Ordinance.

Epper, a Town holding for the Emperor, was so oppressed by the seditious
Haiduques, as no victuals could enter into it; hoping that being pressed by
famine, and the want of all other necessaries, (...)taken by the Haiduques.
the Citizens would yield. By the same means they had taken Toccai not long
before; whereas the famine was so great, as they not only boiled their boots
and shoes to make food of, but the Garrison Soldiers had also slain two
children; and some of them had cast Lottes for the killing of themselves to
make meat, until that extreme necessity forced them to yield.

On the fifteenth of June, the Turkish Garrison of Alba Regalis, joining with
some other Troops, made an incursion as far as Mount Saint MARTIN: Where
they defeated and took the Governor, and carried away many prisoners of all
sexes and ages. The Governor of Breslay went presently to horse with his
troops; and pursued them with such speed, as having overtaken them. he
fought with them, and slew one thousand five hundred upon the place: He
carried away three thousand prisoners, and freed six thousand Christians from
these Infidels.

HASKIE (who had been much employed for the treaty of peace with BOTSCAY)
wrote letters from Cassovia to Vienna, giving them to understand, that BOTSCAY
could perform H^li Haskies L^tter to Vienna.
nothing touching the peace, without the consent of the States; who had often
told him, that They would rather seek protection from the Turks, then be
subject to the servitude of strange Governors: Yet he would endeavor at the
next assembly, to draw the States unto him; so, as what had been concluded at
Vienna might not be retracted: many fearing, that, what had been promised for
matter of Religion, would not be observed: and therefore they would not lay
down Arms, nor renounce the Turks protection, until they had good assurance
for the liberty of Religion, and their privileges. They would have no strange
Governor, with whom they could not confer; nor suffer Clergy men to give their
voices in matters of policy: wherefore he thought it necessary, the Emperor
should gratify the Hungarians in this point; and leaving Transylvania to
BOTSCAY, appoint such a Governor in Hunga^y as the States should require. That
the conclusion of a peace with the Turks, depended wholly upon a peace with
BOTSCAY, and the Hungarians; whereof there was no hope, unless that BOTSCAY
and the Estates of Hungary did finish the treaty.

The grand Seignior, being much troubled this year with the sedition in Asia,
and the Persian wars; advertised also of the treaties of peace betwixt the
Emperor and BOTSCAY, he sent his great Vetzier into Hungary, with charge to
conclude a peace with the Emperor and the house of Austria. Being come to Buda,
BOTSCAY sent Ambassadors unto him, to inform him fully of the propositions made
for the peace of Hungary, betwixt the Emperors Deptuies and his: And for that
he would not infringe the promise which he had made to ACHMAT the grand
Seignior, not to conclude any peace with the Emperor RODVLPH without his
privitie and consent, which he now summoned him to embrace, seeing that
matters might be reconciled: he entreated the Vetzier, not to alter the
affairs by any new siege; and to contain his Turks within their camp and
garrisons. The Vetzier, who came to no other end, was glad to see it so well
advanced: whereupon it was concluded, that BOTSCAY should send Ambassadors to
Vienna, to conclude this peace, and that of the Hungarians; and that the
Emperor and the Vetzier should send some of quality, to make a truce, whilst
that the Deputies of either side should meet, for the conclusion of a general
peace.

Ambassadors came to Vienna, from BOTSCAY and the Hungarians, in September; and
within few days after, the Articles of peace were signed by the Archduke
MATHIAS, and Articles of peace accorded in the Emperors name with Bo^seay and
the Hungarians.
them. First, that they should live with liberty of conscience throughout all
Hungary, where there should be no exercise of any other Religion, but the
Catholic, the Lutheran, and the Calvinist. Secondly, that the Archduke MATHIAS
should be Lieutenant general for the Emperor, throughout all Hungary; and
carry the title of Viceroy. Thirdly, that BOTSCAY should be confirmed Prince
of Transylvania, Earl of Sicules, and Palatine of high Hungary, to which
principality and County, his heirs males should succeed; for want whereof, all
should return to the Emperors disposition. Fourthly, that hereafter the
Palatine, Treasurer general, and all the Receivers should be chosen by the
Estates of Hungary. Fifthly, that none should hold any benefit in Hungary but
the natives. Sixthly, that there should be a general abolition of all that had
past during this last war.

In the mean time, a Truce was accorded betwixt the Archdukes Deputies, and
the Vetziers, and every one prepared to meet at the place appointed, near
unto Comorrha: BOTSCAYES Deputies for the Emperor and Turk meet and conclude a
general peace.
Ambassadors returned to Neuheusel, six French-leagues from Comorrha; to be, as
it were, arbitrators of such differences as might arise. The place of
conference, was half a league beneath Comorrha, in an Island divided in three
parts by deep Rivers, so as one could not go unto another, but by boat; being
thus chosen to avoid all treachery. The Deputies for the Emperor,
Grand-Segnior, and BOTSCAY, met often and treated, and in the end concluded a
Peace for twenty years, contained in fifteen Articies; the which they signed
the ninth of November. The same day the Articles were signed, the Basha of Buda
made a stately feast unto the Emperors Deputies, giving to either of them a
goodly horse, or some pieces of cloth of Gold, or of rare silks. The same
day, he sent three Posts to Constantinople, to aduertize the Sultan ACHMAT of
this Peace; the which news he received with so great joy, as he went
presently to a Mosque to give thanks to his MAHOMET, and the day following made
a solemn feast.

But BOTSCAY, after so many toils and labors, was no sooner acknowledged
Prince of Transiluania by the Emperor, but (in stead of enjoying the Peace
which he had propounded to himself, with hope to leave a posterity to eternize
the memory of his valor) CATTAY his Bots^ay poisoned by his Chancellor.
Chancellor conspired to poison him; hoping, by the death of his Prince, to
make himself heir of his Estate: BOTSCAY having swallowed the poison, which
made him die languishing, discovered that it was his Chancellors deed; whom he
caused to be apprehended, and being convicted he cut off his head in Cassouia,
giving that dignity to IAN IANVSI: but no pr^seruatiues could prolong his life,
but soon after he must go give an account to the Eternal, for so many ruins,
and so much Christian blood, spilt in Hungary and Transiluania. The Haiduques
which had been accustomed to live by Arms, some having neither lands nor goods
to feed them; and other knowing no trade and being now to old to learn any,
could not subject themselves to this peace; and, notwithstanding any
commandments, they trouped together, living upon the Peasant, and left nothing
but desolation where they past: But being comn into the County of Bocotsi,
having set fire upon three villages, the Commons came upon them with such
fury, as there were many slain of either side in diverse encounters.

BOTSCAY to redress these disorders, had appointed an assembly of the estates
of further Hungary, at Cassouia in December: but feeling his death approach, he
could not assist, but gave instructions to his Chancellor and others, what
order they should observe, in the assembly of the States after his death; and
what they should do for the tranquillity of Hungary, and for the commerce 1607
betwixt the Hungarians and Transiluanians; charging them not to infringe any
thing of the peace made with the Emperor, and exhorting them to keep their
faith with him. And so he died, the 30 of December, being much lamented by them
of his party: yet soon after forgetting The death of Botscay.
his advice, they made a change in Transiluania, for that he died without
children.

The estates of Transiluania presently after the death of BOTSCAY assembled at
Clausenburg, where they did choose SIGISMVND RAGOTSI for their Prince, to whom
they went presently and took the oath of allegiance in the great Church.
After which, they sent Ambassadors Sigismund Ragotsi chosen Prince of
Transiluania.
to the Archduke MATHIAS, who made their excuse for this election, humbly
beseeching his Imperial Majesty to believe, that they had done it forced by
necessity, and to prevent the practices of many Noblemen of Hungary and
Transiluania, pretending to seize upon that state: and that the election of
RAGOTSI should be no hindrance, but that they would always acknowledge the
Emperor for their true Prince. This RAGOTSI was a man admirable in bounty, and
who had not affected this election, but did accept it for the good of his
country, and left it again for the quiet thereof, as you shall hear
hereafter.

The peace was ill observed in Hungary of all sides. The Basha of Buda wrote
unto the Archduke MATHIAS, that he should be forced to take Arms if he did not
hinder the courses of the Imperials, Peace ill observed in Hungary.
the which he should be very unwilling to do, protesting to observe the peace.
The Imperial garrisons continued their courses and Nehusel was sold and
delivered to COLLONITS.

Some discontented Haiduques trouped together, and joined their numbers with
some Turks, making a body of 15000 men, which spoiled all Hungary where they
past. The Basha of Buda was the cause thereof, who gave the commanders money to
entertain this mutiny. To prevent these disorders and the murmurings of the
Barrons of Hungary, who desired to have a King that might remain in the
country, and not at Prague in Bohemia, who by his presence might disperse all
these new alterations, the Archduke MATHIAS appointed an Assembly in the
Emperors name, whither the Deputies of Hungary came: and attending the
Archduke MATHIAS long, in the end they made a solemn protestation, that
having attended the said Archduke seven weeks in vain, they were forced to
return to them that sent them; that if pleased the Emperor to assign another
day for an assembly, and publish it, they would come: and if in the mean time
their were any thing decreed contrary to the Articles of peace concluded at
Viena, although the Emperor should ratify it, they protested a nullity
against all that should be done in their absence.

The Nobility of Hungary resolved to take Arms against the rebellious
Haiduques, and Turks which were joined with them; and they sent to entreat
the Basha of Buda to retire the The proceedings of the Haiduques.
Turks. The Haiduques continued their hostilities, and proclaimed that they
were friends to the Turks, and enemies to the Germans and Walloones: They
sent to entreat HVMANOY Governor of Cassouia, to take the Diadem which had
been given to BOTSCAIE, and to be their King; but he scorned their offer:
saying, I will have no other King but CAESAR: finally, continuing their spoils
(being assisted with some Cannon from the Bashaes of Buda and Agria and with
300000 ducats) they went to besiege Fileck with 16000 men; BOSNIACK commanded
in the place: who carried himself so valiantly against all their attemptes as
he forced them to raise the siege.

During the Assembly at Presbourg the Archduke MATHIAS had called together the
estates of Austria to Viena, where there were Articles propounded unto them in
writing, touching An assembly at Viena.
the estate of the Country, whereon they were to conclude; but there were
resolutions taken by the practices of the Archduke MATHIAS contrary to the
Emperors intention.

The King of Poland and his Palatines being at wars, the Palatines sent to
ROGOTSI Prince of Transiluania for aid: who made them this answer; that it
was a wicked thing to nourish wars betwixt Christians: That his Arms should
never fight in a civil and unjust war: The answer of Ragotsi to the
Palatine Ambassadors. 1608
that it was treacherous to Arm against ones Prince, and that they which did
fight against their Sovereign were detested by their posterity, and their
memory buried in infamy; as for such as aided rebels they deserved to be called
impious, a surname which I will by no means purchase: obey your King and God
will bless you. A Diet, at Ratisbone, fruitless.


This year in the beginning of January, there was a Diet assembled at
Ratisbone in which the Archduke FERDINAND of Gretz did preside in the Emperors
name; which bred some jealousy in the Archduke MATHIAS. All their
deliberation was reduced to five Articles; whereof the first and principal
was, To make provision against the Turks, in whom there was little assurance
for the entertainment of peace: and therefore he desired, that the Princes of
the Empire would furnish yearly a certain contribution to resist the Turks
practices when there should be cause, or that all the Estates of the Empire
should entertain 20000 foot and 4000 horse at their own charge* or else, that
they would yearly lay by so much money as the entertainment of such an Army
would amount-vnto: but there was such dissension among the Deputies, that after
four months continuance they brake off, and concluded nothing.

During this Diet at Ratisbone, the Archduke MATHIAS practiced by what means
he might make himself Soueraign of Austria, Stiria, Morauia, and of all that
the Christians held in The Archduke Mathias practices to make himself a
Soueraign.
Hungary. He came to an Assembly of the Estates at Presbourg in the beginning
of the year; where, to attain to his design, he propounded to the Noblemen of
Hungary, that it would be very profitable to unite the Estates of Austria and
Hungary by an offensive and defensive league; so as Deputies being appointed,
it was concluded, that for the good of Austria and Hungary they should not
alter any thing in the Articles of peace, made the year before at Vienna; and
that an offensive and defensive league should be made betwixt the said
Countries. The Articles of the resolution were set down by the Deputies, and
they were signed by the Archduke MATHIAS, and proclaimed the first of
February. The Archduke MATHIAS, being returned to Vienna, called the Estates
of Austria together; to whom he imparted what had passed at Presbourg; and that
what he had done was for fear that Hungary should be wrested from the Empire,
as well by the Turks as by the Barons of Hungary, and that after this
distraction the whole wars should fall upon Austria; aduising them also to
provide money for the entertainment of the Army which he must levy, if the
rebellious Haiduques would not desist from Arms. The Estates gave him great
thanks, promising to follow and assist him with their lives and goods.

The Archduke MATHIAS (who knew that for the effecting of his designs he must
have a peace in Hungary as well with the Turk as with the discontented
Haiduques) gave charge unto HELI HASKAY, that at one Instant he should take
order with the Turks for the reforming of the disorders which had happened since
the peace, and to draw as many of the Haiduques as he could to his pay, to the
end the rest should be forced to disperse themselves, or be careful to live
in peace: wherein HASKAY earried himself so politickly, that he drew fifteen
companies of horse to the Archdukes pay; and the rest in an Instant were
scattered and dispersed. GABRIEL BATTORI, the right heir of the Princes of
Transiluania, having retired himself to the Turk, was now restored to his
principality. SIGISMVND RAGOTSI (who had bin chosen after the death of BOTSCAY)
yielded it willingly to him, and retired to Sarenta; assuring BATTORI by
Letters, that he had not accepted the election but to prevent the combustions
among great men, who pretended to vsurp and trouble that state.

The Archduke, seeing all things succeed according to his desire, sent
commandment to The Emperor sends to the Archduke Mathias.
have all his Troops come to the vendezvouz upon the Frontiers of Morauia by
the foureteenth of April. The Emperor being advertised of these leuies (which
they gave out was for that his Majesty did not ratify the treaty of peace made
at Vienna) he sent the Cardinal of Ditristein to the Archduke, with a
ratification of the treaty; but with this clause, that he would have the
offensive and defensive league, made betwixt the Estates of Hungary and
Austria, dissolved: whereto the Archduke answered, it could not be; and so
returned the Cardinal with certain The Emp. in fe^ of his brother Mathias.
demands; who, finding that he had another design than he made show of,
advertised the Emperor, that he might provide for his safety. The Emperor
grows amazed: he presently calls the States of Bohemia to Prague: he summons
all his forces together, lodges them about his person, and craves aid from the
Electors, Princes and States of the Empire. The Archduke, hearing that the
Emperor had taken the alarm, came into Morauia ioining to Austria, with an
army The Archduke Mathias enters Bohemia, and camps before Prague.
of 20000 old soldiers and 28 Cannon. He sent to the Estates of Bohemia,
commanding every Town to send two Deputies to Czasla, where they should
understand from his own mouth the cause of his taking Arms. The Emperor,
hearing this, exhorted them to persist in their fidelity; so as no man went to
Czasla, but the whole Country took Arms for the Emperor: who, hoping to stay
him with his Army in Morauia, sent back the Cardinal to understand his
complaints, being accompanied by the Popes Nuntio, and the Ambassadors of
diverse Princes. But he marched into the Country toward Czasla; where the
Ambassadors of Saxony and Brandenburg came unto him the ninth of May,
entreating him not to pass any further, but to grant a truce for eight days,
to the end this trouble might be compounded: the which they could not obtain
by any importunities.

The Archduke MATHIAS had a desire to see Prague; not as an humble Petitioner,
but with a commanding power, being attended by 8000 horse, COLLONITS the
Marshall of his Camp following with the rest of his Army. The poor Emperor
was in a strange distress: The Emperor in distress.
he had two enemies to encounter and fight withal; without the walls his own
brother, and within the town the assembly of the estates of Bohemia. And the
deputies were of diverse religions; where they importuned him with many
Articles, both concerning religion and the state: all which he was forced to
grant, except that which concerned religion, the which was referred to the
next assembly at S. Michaell.

The Archduke upon a safe conduct from the Emperor and the estates sent his
Ambassadors into Prague, who delivered his demands in writing to the assembly:
whereupon a conference was appointed at Debrits; where after much debate, the
Emperor obtained a peace of A conference at Debrits.
his brother; but it was with the prejudice of his estate and honor: for he
was forced to strippe off his clothes before he was dead, and to resign unto
his brother the greatest part of his patrimoniall 1608
in heritance.

This peace was concluded in 17 Articles: whereof the chief were, That he
should yield the A peace concluded betwixt the Emperor and Mathias.
Realm of Hungary, and deliver the Crown unto the Archduke MATHIAS, freeing
the Hungarians of their oath. That he should yield presently all the
Arch-duchie of Austria unto him, and to his heirs males. That if the Emperor
died without issue male, the Archduke should succeed him in the Kingdom of
Bohemia, and carry presently in his titles, Designed king of Bohemia. And that
he and his heirs should have the administration of Morauia, with the title of
Marquess, with diverse others tending to the advancement of the Archduke
MATHIAS.

This peace being confirmed, the Emperor sent the Crown of Hungary, with all
the Regal ornaments, to the Archdukes Camp: where they were received with
great pomp. And King Mathias enters into Viena
thus the Archduke, king of Hungary being pleased, raised his Camp and returned
to Viena: where he made a stately entry, and was received with great pomp by
all the estates of the country; who assuring him of their fidelity and
obedience, congratuled his new sovereignty, and he gave them great thanks for
their good affection. In October the estates of Austria were to take the oath
of fidelity and allegiance to the king, as to their Archduke, the which was
solemnly performed: but the protestants were not present, for that the king
(by the advice of the Archduke, LEOPOLD, of Cardinal MELIM the Popes Nuntio,
and of Cardinal FORGATSI) had by an edict forbidden the exercise of the
protestants religion in Austria. This bredde new troubles, for that the
protestants assembled at Horn, and made their protestation, sending a petition
unto the King, signed by 150 Noblemen, governors and Captains; writing also
to the New troops in Austria for religion.
Catholics that if they took the oath of allegiance unto the said King
Archduke, before the trouble of religion were pacified, they should not be
able to excuse themselves to be the causes of the miseries that would ensue.

The Ceremony being ended at Viena, King MATHIAS went to Presbourge, where on
the 22 of October the Noblemen of Hungary received him with great state, there
being above 10000 men in Arms, where soon after they presented diverse
Articles unto him conformable unto the edict of pacification made at Viena, but
with some explication. The protestants of Austria, sent their requests unto the
estates of Hungary, letting them understand, that king MATHIAS denying them the
free exercise of their religion, they were forced to take Arms, requiring The
Protestants of Austria crave aid from the Hungarians.
them to assist them with the succors which were promised by the offensive and
defensive League.

The Archduke MAXIMILIAN was entreated by the Hungarians, to intercede in this
difference; who having conferred with King MATHIAS, brought them answer, that
the king had never any intent to trouble the peace of Austria: but as for the
free exercise of the protestant religon within towns, that his majesty could
by no means grant it, partly in regard of his conscience, and partly for
fear of his Holiness, and of the king of Spain: yet he had his majesty's word,
that if the Protestants of Austria would lay down their Arms, and ackowledge
their fault, they should have liberty of religion allowed them out of towns;
and as for public affairs his majesty would advance his subjects, without
acception of religion. The Hungarians having received this answer, he
persuaded them to lay down Arms, and to submit themselves to the Kings will,
refusing the aid which they desired; laying before them the dangers of a
doubtful war. The Protestants returned to Austria discontented, yet
afterward by the intercession of the Morauians and others, after some little
combustion, they obtained a peace and part of that which they demanded.

MATHIAS was proclaimed King of Hungary in Presbourg, the foureteenth of
November, Mathias crowned King of Hungary.
HELY HASKAY being first chosen Palatine; and on the 19 day he was solemnly
crowned. After which, beginning to order the affairs of the kingdom, he was
forced by the Hungarian Barrons, to dismiss all the Germans which had any
offices in Hungary, and to advance others of the Country. It troubled him
much, and his brother MAXIMILIAN that COLONITS should be deprived of his office
of Marshal of Hungary, having done so great services All strangers displaced in
Hungary.
for that crown; but he was forced to endure it in regard of peace. In the
end of the year he returned to Viena, so as in seven months the Archduke
MATHIAS caused himself to be crowned king of Hungary, and acknowledged
Archduke of Austria and Marquess of Morauia, forcing the Emperor to make his
Will before he was dead.

This year the Turks notwithstanding the peace, attempted to surprise Fileck.
The Basha of Agria had corrupted ANDREW DRACO a Captain within the Cittadell,
who promised to deliver it for 20000 Ioachins: the hour was appointed at
midnight, when as DRACO should The Basha of Agria attempts Fileck.
set certain houses of fire; and whilst that every man should be busy to
quench it, he should give the Turks entry into the cittadell, and so into the
town. This enterprise was discovered, and DRACO quartered. The Basha of Buda
also seized upon above 400 villages, causing the inhabitants to take the oath
of allegiance unto the Turk. The Emperor as we have said had given his
brother MATHIAS what he demanded, and had pacified the estates of Bohemia as A
combustion in Bohemia for religion.
well as he could, suffering every one to live in the liberty of his religion,
promising to set down an order at the next assembly, which was this year in
January. The Catholics sought by all means to entertain the Emperor in
hatred with the Protestants, and to have that disanulled, which had been
formerly granted; saying, that their opinions had been condemned, and that the
exercise of their religion was but by sufferance. The Protestants sent their
Ambassadors to the King of Hungary, and to the Electors and Princes of the
Empire, to interceede for them to his majesty, for the continuance of the free
exercise of their religion.

The Emperor having forbidden the Protestants to make any assembly in the
court of new Prague, they went unto him, and besought him to appoint them a
place where they might assemble, and to write their defense, and to present it
unto him, and to let the world know the instice of their demand the which they
could not obtain: So as on the eight of May, they resolved notwithstanding the
Emperors prohibition, to go and make their assembly in the court of new
Prague; where they brake open the doors, and entered, putting themselves in
defense, if any should come to assail them. The Emperor hearing of this
alteration, sent the first Burgraue of Prague with his chief officers, who
said unto them, that his Imperial Majesty had always had a will to love them
as his faithful subjects; and that he was resolved, shortly to call an
assembly, and to end that controversy touching the liberty of religions. The
Protestants made answer by the Barron of Budouits, that they thanked his
Imperial Majesty for his good will toward them; and besought him to believe
that they had been always faithful unto him: yet they knew well what had
been treated hitherto in the states by some counselors, who under pretext, of
advancing the Catholic religion, were the cause of these troubles which had
followed; and they did hope to let his Majesty understand, that the end of such
counsels and practices, could bring nothing but ruin to Bohemia, and the
loss of his Realms, and provinces. As for the publication of the assemby of
the estates, they desired it might be within three days, to prevent many
accidents which might happen. Both parties, both Catholics and Protestants,
remained 15 days in continual jealousy one of another, fearing surprises.
But as soon as the Emperor had published the assembly, all was pacified, by
reason of the Emperors declaration; whereby he did auow, that what the
protestants had done, was for his service and the good of the Kingdom. At
which assembly, there was free exercise of religion The troubles in Bohemia for
religion pacified.
granted to the Protestants, and Temples allowed them to preach in the vulgar
tongue, declaring all them troublers of the public peace, that should any way
infringe it.

The Jesuits were suspected to have been the cause of these broiles: both
Catholics and Protestants complained, and presented a petition unto the King,
that they being strangers, and A complain against the Jesuits.
come poor into Prague, had in a short time gotten great possessions, yet
paid no tribute or contribution, neither bare any charge like unto others:
wherefore they required that hereafter they might bear the charges of the
Commonwealth like others of the Clergy, that they should not purchase any
more, nor accept any donations, by testament or otherwise, without his
Majesty's permission.

In March, WILLIAM Duke of Iuliers, Cleues and Bergh, Earl of Mark and
Rauenspourg, died without children: to whose succession there were many Princes
and Noblemen pretended; The death of the duke of Iuliers and Cleues, and the
pretendents.
which drew great miseries upon those Countries. Among the Princes of Germany,
were the Elector of Brandenbourg, who was issued from MARY ELL^NOR, eldest
sister unto the said WILLIAM deceased. The Count Palatine of Newbourg descended
from ANNE the second sister. The third Pretendent was the widow of the Duke of
Deuxponts. The fourth was the Marquess of Burgan, who married SIBILL the
fourth sister. The Elector of Saxony pretended these estates to belong to him
as masculine fees of the Empire; and that they had been given to his
Predecossors, and to their Successors for the services which they had done to
the Empire and Emperor, in case the Duke of Cleues should die without issue
male. In France was the Duke of Neuers; who maintained, that he was the only
Prince which carried the name and Arms of Cleues; and the Earl of Ma^rier, who
is the right heir of the house of Mark, whereof he carries the name and Arms.
Every one maintained his pretension, fortifying themselves by Arms, and
engaging their friends: the relation of which war I refer to diverse others
which have written thereof; the cause being yet undecided.

In October, there arrived at Prague an Ambassador from the grand Seignior with
many rich Presents to to the Emperor: among the which there was a goodly
pauilion, set with many precious stones, four goodly horse, with rich
caparisons, a Turkish habit whereon there was nothing to be seen but gold and
stone, with certain other precious stones. Having presented hi^ Letters, and
seen the Emperor confirm the truce, he returned with Presents.

About the same time, the Prince of Anhalt came Ambassador to the Emperor from
the Princes and Estates of the Empire; giving him to understand by his
Chancellor, that the Princes required 1610 The prince of Anhalt sent ambassador
to the Emperor from the princes of Germany.
to have Donauerd in Sueuia (which had been some years before taken by the Duke
of Bauaria, by the virtue of the Emperors Letters of proscription) restored
again to the Empire and to the former estate, some burdens being taken away;
that justice might be duly administered, and the peace of religion confirmed;
that Princes Ambassadors when they came, might be dispatched without delay;
that suits in Courts might be amended: and for that Princes Ambassadors had
been much neglected in Court, they required that some Protestants might be
chosen into the Senate and Council. The Emperor heard the Prince willingly; yet
excusing himself, that by reason of the troubles in Bohemia he could not then
attend it, he promised that he would soon give the Princes and States
satisfaction.

This year there was an attempt against the person of GABRIEL BATTORI, Prince
of Transiluania, by a Nobleman of that Country, being induced thereto by a
wicked religious man: whereof the Prince being advertised, and of the day of
the execution, he made show to go forth to hunt, having first laid an ambush
without the Town; into the which he drew the undertakers, who followed him to
execute their enterprise: whereas some of them were cut in pieces; and among
them the religious man. Some report, that BATTORI banished the rest: and some
being fled into Hungary, he wrote his Letters to GEORGE TVRSON, entreating him
to cause them to be apprehended, lest they should attempt the like there, being
incited by the Jesuits, and the hatred to religion.

The spirit of division had set all Germany on fire, and drawn them into
factions, for the defense of the Pretendents to the Duchy of Iuliers, either
party seeking to fortify it self; for the effecting whereof, they made
several Assemblies. The Princes Protestants Noblemen, with the Deputies of
fifteen Imperial Towns, holding the part of the Elector of Brandenbourgh and
Assembly of the protestant princes at Halle.
Palatine of Neuebourg, met at Halle in Sueuia; where there assisted an
Ambassador from the French King, who offered them protection in the King his
Masters name; and to assist them with 8000 foot and 2000 horse, with cannon and
munition, upon condition that they should not alter any thing in matter of
religion within the Country of Iuliers, and that the Catholics should be
maintained in the same rights and privileges which they enjoyed during the
life of the last Duke.

At the same time, the Princes and Towns of Germany, houlding the Emperors
part, assembled at Virtzbourg in Franconia; where they resolved of the forces
which every one should furnish The Emperor^ partisans assembled at Presbourg.
for the Army which they appointed to raise: after which, they began to levy
soldiers throughout all parts of Europe; what succeeded, you shall hereafter
hear.

The protestant Princes, having concluded of their succors for the war,
published a declaration of the causes of their union; showing, That their
confederation was for the defense of 1610
the glory of the name of God, and the maintenance of justice and peace in the
Empire; and not contrary to their obedience which they did owe unto the Emperor
or against any estate of the holy Empire: beseeching his Imperial Majesty, and
all the Electors, Princes, and States, not to give credit to such as had
maliciously published, that their union was made in contempt of the Imperial
Majesty, and to oppress the Roman religion, to profane the monasteries, and
to take again with violence those goods which their predecessors had given to
Churches, employed in pious uses, and to trouble the peace of religion. Finally
(relating the estate of the pretendents of Iuliers) they concluded that they
were united with them, to the end they should not be by force molested in their
just possession of the estates of the house of Iuliers; entreating all Princes
of the Empire, and others not to misconstrue their union; nor to hinder it, but
rather to assist them, that al iealousies and distrusts being taken away, love
and concord may be firmly settled hereafter.

The Electors, Princes and Towns holding the Emperors party, which had bin
assembled at Virtzbourg, made another general assembly at Prague, in which
assisted the Archdukes, MAXIMILIAN An Assembly at Prague.
and FERDINAND of Austria. The propositions were reduced unto 4. heads. 1. The
reconciliation of the Emperor with his brother king MATHIAS. 2. The election of
a King of the Romans. 3. The restitution of Donauerdt. 4. The composition of
the trouble of IVLIERS. The king of Hungary sent his deputies to this assembly:
from whom the Emperor demanded the restitution of Austria, and Morauia. The
Elector of Cullen, the Archduke FERDINAND, and the Duke of Brunswick, went to
Vienna to acquaint the King with the Emperors demand, and the proposition for
the election of a king of the Romans. It was concluded in the assembly, that
the Duke of Bauaria should leave Donauerdt to its former liberty, without any
exception, paying him his charges. And touching IVLIER'S trouble, all the
estates which had belonged to the last Duke JOHN WILLIAM, were conferd by the
Emperor upon the Elector of Saxony, and his house; conditionally that the house
of Saxony should prove that they had more right to the said estates than the
Princes pretending; that they should alter nothing in the exercise of the
Catholic religion; that the said Elector should satisfy the demands of the
Duke of Neuers and the Marquess of Burgau, and should pay the charges disburst
by the Emperor and the Archduke LEOPOLD in this war.

The third of July a reconciliation was made betwixt the Emperor and his
brother the king of Hungary, upon these Articles. 1. That king MATHIAS should
acknowledge his brother RODVLPHVS Articles of reconciliation betwixt the
Emperor and King Mathias.
for Emperor, and the head of Christendom, king of Bohemia, Lord of the
Marquisate of Morauia, and the first of the house of Austria. 2. That yearly
the said king should send him 2000 vessels of wine and pay him 10000 florens.
3. That the said king nor the provinces granted unto him* should not make any
alliances without the consent of the Emperor. 4. That the king should demand
pardon for those things which were past, of his Imperial majesty; the which he
should give him, in a particular form. 5. That the soldiers of either part
should be dismissed within one month. 6. That if it should be needful to make
war against the Turk, it should be done by the Emperors authority. 7. That
Germans should be put in garrison in the forts of Hungary with the Hungarians:
and that the Emperor should continue the ordinary payment, which Bohemia did
furnish for the intertainement of the said garrison. 8. That the Emperor and
King should hereafter join their forces, to punish rebellious subjects. 9.
That if any of their officers did not cause the said Articles to be presently
observed, they should be deprived of their offices. 10. That the Electors and
Princes assembled at Prague should subscribe the said Articles, and that they
should be signed by ^ther part. 11. That the county of Tiroll should be left
wholly to the Emperor, and that neither king MATHIAS nor the Archdukes his
brethren and cosins should pretend any title unto it.

Soon after, the protestants Princes of Germany, who were united in the
behalf of the Princes pretending the succession of Iuliers, seeing that Duke
MAXIMILIAN of Bauaria, the head The Protestant Princes send to the Duke of
Bauaria.
of the union of the Catholic Princes, had levied many soldiers, they sent an
Embassy unto him: where after many conferences, in the end they concluded,
that by the first of November, the duke of Bauaria should dismiss his Army; but
for that the Archduke LEOPOLD had great troops in his Bishoppricks of Passau
and Strasbourg, he might put part of them into garrison to be ready upon any
new accident: moreover that all acts of hostility should cease, betwixt the
subjects of the Archbishop of Cullen, and the States of Iuliers: and if there
should happen any difference betwixt the said parties, they should agree
amiably, and not come to Arms.

The Emperor having given no order for the payment of LEOPOLD'S Army (it having
committed great spoils in the Bishopric of Passau) they entered into Austria,
where they committed barbarous cruelties, being led by ROMEO. Many thought that
he would pass 1611 Leopolds army enters Austria.
unto Prague, to force the Emperor to pay his Army: Others were of opinion that
LEOPOLD aspired to make himself King of the Romans, and that he would employ
this Army to that effect. King MATHIAS (who was then disarmed) found presently
that it was against him: wherefore he sent for all his subjects and friends,
and sought to cross the Leopoldians enterprises: He wrote to the States of
Bohemia, that he would never believe the Emperor would break the Peace, so
newly sworn; yet he entreated them, if need were, to succor him in his
necessity. The Leopoldians entered into Bohemia, and surprised Budeuitz by
policy and spoiled it, and then marched toward Prague. The Emperor (being
required by the States) sent a Herald to the Archduke LEOPOLD, with
commandment to retire the Army to Cruman, and there to attend their pay.

Having delivered his charge in secret to the Archduke, he was brought to
ROMEO; who willed him to return to Prague, and to assure them, that they were
friends to all such as were faithful subjects to the Emperor, and were in
Arms only to defend his authority; and that being entered into Prague (the
which they hoped to do the next day) they would not wrong any man: After whose
return, they marched to Prague. Many of the Emperors Council had intelligence
with the Archduke LEOPOLD, fearing King MATHIAS; and had gotten Arms into
diverse Monasteries, providing for all occurrents. They were Armed, and had
gotten a gate at their devotion, to draw LEOPOLD'S soldiers secretly into
petty Prague; the which they surprised on the fifteenth of February early in
the morning, by the treachery of the They surprise petty Prague.
Porter: yet there was a great conflict in the Town, with loss on both sides;
but, in the end, the Inhabitants were forced to yield. After which, the Castle
of Prague was yielded to LEOPOLD, causing himself to be declared the Emperors
Lieutenant general, taking the oath of fidelity from all the Soldiers. In the
mean time, the Nobility and Soldiers within old and new Prague, resolved to
make a salie upon the Leopoldians which were in petty Prague: and they, on the
other side, threatened to set fire on the Town.

On the 18 of February, the Emperor sent a commandment both to the
Leopoldians, and to the States of Bohemia and Nobility, to present themselves
the next day in the castle of Prague, and thereto swear all obedience, and
fidelity to his imperial Majesty, and to promise not to offend one another by
Arms. The Herald having published this command to the Lepoldians, the States
would not suffer him to enter into the old Town; giving him charge to tell the
Emperor, that he should proclaim a cessation of Arms for three days, to the
end they might have time to consult of their affairs. In the end, it was
concluded, that the old and new town They of Prague compound with Leopolds army
should give 200000 Florens, so as LEOPOLD'S Army would leave petty Prague, and
depart presently out of Bohemia. During these combustions, King MATHIAS drew
together his friends and forces: he had then two great affairs in hand. For
GABRIEL BATTORI The Prince of Transiluania surpriseth Hermstad.
Prince of Transiluania, in the beginning of this year, had surprised Hermstad
by intelligence; carried away his Lieutenant prisoner; thrust out all his
partisans; and placed 1300 Haiduques in Garrison. The which did much trouble
MATHIAS, hoping to have had his revenge this summer; the which he might easily
have effected, the Vaiuode of Valachia and BATTORI being in war. But the King
running to the nearest fire, caused his troops to turn head toward Bohemia,
to succor the States which craved his aid.

The Emperor hearing that his brother MATHIAS was entered Bohemia with an Army
of 18000 men, to succor the States; he sent them word by an Herald, that if
they would not take some course for the payment of LEOPOLD'S Army, that it
might be discharged, he would deprive them of their liberties: But they,
hearing of the Kings approach, refused his demand. The Emperor, foreseeing the
danger if these two Armies should meet, caused 300000 Florens to be given to
pay the Army for three months: and so LEOPOLD retired away by night, and
Leopold with his Army retires from Prague and out of Bohemia.
recovered the Frontiers of Bohemia.

ROMEO, Lieutenant to the Archduke LEOPOLD, would not leave Bohemia as he had
done Prague, without the full payment of his Army. Whereupon, he fortifies
himself within Buduits, and furnishes it with victuals, Arms, and powder: he
melts the Bells to cast Ordinance; Romeo fortifies himself in Budritz.
and fortifies himself so well, as they must compound with him, before they
get him out. As for King MATHIAS; hearing that LEOPOLD was gone from Prague, he
sent word unto the States, that he would not arrive there before the 24 of
March. Before which time, diverse of of the Emp. Council were imprisoned; and
among others, FRANCIS DENNAGEL who was also of secret counsel to the Archduke
LEOPOLD. Being put to the Rack, he confessed the Archdukes designs, and that he
had been sent by the Emperors to some Electors and Princes, to Demagels
confession.
draw aid from them against King MATHIAS, they being at jar: That LEOPOLDS
resolution was to change many things not only in the government of Prague, but
in the whole Empire, and that some great men of the Emperors Council must be
dismissed. Whereunto DENNAGEL made answer; That it might be done in Italy, but
that Bohemia was governed after, another manner. That the Archdukes intention
was to seize upon all the towns of Bohemia, to unite his forces with those of
Bohemia, to defend the Emperor, and to employ his Arms against King MATHIAS,
whose entry into Bohemia they would hinder; And if this design had succeeded,
then by an Imperial edict they would have forbidden the exercise of the
Protestants religion throughout all Bohemia. He also confessed that he was
servant to the Archduke LEOPOLD, and that he would gladly have procured him
the kingdom of Bohemia.

King MATHIAS having discovered his enemies counsels, marched on, and came
within half a league of Prague; whither all the Nobility and others went to
honor this rising sun, leaving the sun setting. He made his entry into
Prague with great pomp: where after his arrival the Emperor sent to
congratulate his coming, by such of his Council as he thought should be most
pleasing unto him. The Elector of Saxony advised the states of Bohemia to be
well advised in the pacifying of these troubles, and not to believe that the
Emperor The Duke of Saxony writes to the states of Bohemia.
(who had so peaceably governed not only Bohemia but the whole Empire these
thirty five years) was the cause thereof; but that it proceeded from some
busy and turbulent spirits, in the punishment of whom they must use
moderation; not chastizing the innocent with the culpable; That the laws of
Bohemia be not violated, and the Imperial Majesty with the dignity of the
Electors, and states of the Empire wronged: That all their counsels should
tend to obey the Emperor only, and not suffer his age to be oppressed with cares
and discontents. By other private letters he advertised HENRY IVLIERS Duke of
Brunswick, not to abandon the Emperor, nor to suffer any thing to pass
prejudicial to his Imperial majesty, and admonished K. MATHIAS that al things
proceeding with moderation, the house of Austria would be much contented.

The Emperor assembled the States of Bohemia upon the twelfth of April: where
he gave The Emperors propositions to the states of Bohemia.
them to understand, that he could not conceal the brotherly affection which
he bare to MATHIAS King of Hungary his first brother, and his successor
designed in the Realm of Bohemia: he entreated them to resolve he might be
crowned in his life time, as many of his predecessors had done to their
successors; but with condition to suffer him to enjoy the Realm during his
life: As for certain differences betwixt him and king MATHIAS, that they
should treat thereof at the end of the Assembly. In the mean time he required
them to give him wherewith to entertain the Imperial Majesty; That his
officers might be paid their wages; his counselors imprisoned, set at
liberty: And that all the power and royal authority in Bohemia should remain
to him.

The estates in their Assembly drew many Articles, which king MATHIAS was to
swear Propositions of the states to Mathias.
before his coronation; And they were read in the presence of the Ambassadors
of Morauia: who also for themselves and the Silesians (who are incorporated to
the crown of Bohemia) presented their complaints and grieuances containing 49
Articles: And the inhabitants of Prague required the confirmation of eight
Articles, before his coronation, the which concerned the private government of
their City: all which I am forced for breuity sake to omit, and to refer the
Reader to the original, whereby he may judge what the estate of Bohemia might
be after those demandes; the Emperor (who was the lawful King) having nothing
in a manner but the title. He had a good heart; but his body was grown old
and weak: He had the the greatness of courage of his predecessors; but crossed
by fortune, he is constrained to yield to that which they desire: And he that
presses him to this consent, we see him (being half forced) to quitt some of
the flowers of the liberty of this crown, to those which did him homage,
before that heaven had taken away him, whose successor he had been without
condition. King MATHIAS having sworn to all their Articles, King Mathias
crowned King of Bohemia.
and the Emperor having freed all the subjects of Bohemia and incorporated
provinces, from their oath of allegiance, they proceeded to the Coronation of
MATHIAS; whom the whole court and the inhabitants of Prague honored much,
having much desired it. And after the Coronation, certain Deputies being
appointed to end the differences betwixt the Emperor and King MATHIAS, they
concluded (and signed unto) these Articles: Firstly, That the Castle of Prague
should remain to the Emperor, and that the king should lodge near unto it,
having the Church common to them both. Secondly, That 1611
the governor of the Castle and the guard should swear fidelity to both; and
if there were any change to be made, it should be left to the Emperors
disposition. Thirdly, That the government Articles of accord betwixt the
Emperor and K. Mathias.
of the Empire should remain in the Emperor, and that he should not be
disquieted in any thing that concerned the Imperial jurisdiction. Fourthly,
That the government of Bohemia and the provinces depending, should be left to
King MATHIAS, to whom the Emperor should yield all the right he pretended; but
as for the difference for the title of king of Bohemia it should be referred to
the next Assembly of the States. Fifthly, That in regard of the Cession, which
the Emperor made unto king MATHIAS of Bohemia and the provinces depending, he
should pay yearly unto his imperial majesty 300000 florens, at two equal
payments. Sixthly, That the Emperor should enjoy the Segniories, demeasus and
revenues of Budouits, Brandesi, Lissau, and Petzerau, during his life; the
which he should by no means engage, sell, or transport. Seauenthly, That the
Emperor should have liberty to dispose by his testament of 200000 florens.
Eighthly, That the king should effect his promise made to the Emperor, touching
the county of TYROL, and should satisfy his brother ALBERT, for his interest
in Austria. Ninthly, That the Emperor should recommend king MATHIAS to the
Electors and Princes of the Empire to be advanced to the Imperial dignity.
Tenthly, That at the next Diet they should labor by all means to obtain
contribution and succors against the Turk. Eleuenthly, That the privileges
of the Arch-duchie of Austria should be delivered into the Kings hands; with
this condition, that if the Emperor had need, the king should assist him.
Twelfthly, and lastly, That within one year the Emperor should give the
inuestiture of Bohemia to the said king.

The town of Aix (whereas the Emperor receives his first Crown) was in great
combustions by reason of religion. The Catholic magistrate, by virtue of the
Emperors commandment, Troubles at Aix.
had hindered the exercise of the Protestant religion within the town and
territory; the which the others taking very impatiently, they fell into atumult
and took Arms, seizing upon the towne-house and whole town, and dispossessed the
Catholic magistrate. The Catholics fled to the Archduke ALBERT and to the
Elector of Cullen, for support: And the Protestants sent presently to the
Princes possessing Iuliers, for aid, and to send some men of note to reconcile
their differences. In the end by the mediation of the French Kings
Ambassadors, there were certain Articles set down for their reconciliation,
but they took no great effect.

The Duke of Brunswick had (as we have said) besieged the city of Brunswick,
but had left it by reason of the hope of a peace. This year the Duke was at
the Emperors court, to pursue Brunswick prescribed by the Emperor.
the proscription of the said town, in case of disobedience. The Hanse-townes
(fearing that his favor in court would prevail more then the justice of their
cause) entreated king MATHIAS by their Letters, to favor the right of the
town of Brunswick. But the Duke prevailed: for he obtained Letters patents
for the proscription of the Senate and inhabitants of Brunswick, as violaters
of the public peace; declaring them guilty of treason, and all their goods
confiscate to the Duke, if that within one year they did not submit themselves
under his obedience. Whereunto the magistrate and citizens published a
declaration, containing a protestation of their innocence.

About the end of September the Electors had called a Diet to Nurembourg: from
whence they sent Ambassadors to the Emperor, who found not any person of
quality but the Duke of An Assembly of Electors at Nurembourg.
Brunswick about his Majesty. They acquainted him with the present estate of
the Empire; telling him, That the Electors required, above all things, a
reformation in justice; That he should make choice of more faithful officers
and Counselors then he formerly had done; That a general Diet might be called
in the Spring following; That what King MATHIAS had Propositions made by the
Electors, to the Emperor.
done, was nothing pleasing unto them; That the reason of the bad government of
the Commonweal, was, for that his imperial Majesty did not impart the
important affairs of the Empire unto them, as his predecessors have usually
done. They also besought him, in the name of the said Electors, that if he had
no will to stay in Bohemia; to let them understand the time when he meant to
depart, and the place where he would make his residence: And as for the
Election of a King of Romans, they would not treat thereof without his
consent; yet, not wishing that the Empire should go out of the house of
Austria, they desired to know which of them he would have to succeed him.

The Emperor made answer, That he had long proiected to appoint a successor
in the The Emperors answer.
Empire, but the troubles in Bohemia had diuerted him; That he desired before
they did treat of him that should succeed him, there should be a general
Diet, where he might assist; That he was of the Electors opinion, concerning
the necessity to proceed to the Election of a King of the Romans; but he
advised them to give order, that he might tell them freely in the Assembly,
what was necessary for the safety of the Commonweal. The Ambassadors being
returned, with this answer, the Electors appointed a Diet to be held in April
following, in the year 1612, to choose a King of Romans in the City of
Franckford, after the accustomed manner.

The Emperor RODVLPH growing sickly (in the end of December, after the old
computation) with extreme pains in his Legs (the which increased daily) he
yielded his soul to God, on the tenth of January; having reigned Emperor
above thirty five years. They The death of the Emperor Rodulph,
thought to have kept his death secret, until the coming of King MATHIAS, and
therefore they sent up his service at dinner time into his chamber, to the
end no man should suspect it; but soon after, being known to TRANTMANSTOR^, it
was diuulged over all Prague, and in the mean time they sent Posts to
advertise King MATHIAS, and the Electors of the Empire.

THE LIFE OF MATHIAS, THE FIRST OF THAT NAME, AND HVNDRETH AND NINETEENTH
ROMAN EMPEROVR.
AFter the death of RODVLPHVS (according to the Golden Bull, made by the
Emperor CHARLES the Fourth, 1612
in the year one thousand three hundred fifty six) the Emperor being dead,
the Elector Palatine, and he of Saxony, were appointed Vicars, Governors, and
administrators of the Empire, until there were a King of Romans chosen to be
Emperor; either of them governing in his several Jurisdiction. The Electour
of Mentz, according to his charge, gave notice to all the Electors to meet at
Franckford in May, to proceed to the Election of a King of the Komanes;
whither all the Princes came with their Trains: where, omitting the Ceremonies
which were observed in that Assembly; In the end, they jointly concluded to
choose King MATHIAS, for King of the Romans; who was crowned on the fourteenth
of June, in the said City of Franckford with the ordinary Ceremonies; and on
the sixteenth of June, the Queen, his wife, was crowned Empress, who was also
of the house of Austria, and descended from the branch of Tyroll. The Ceremony
of his Election and coronation being ended with great magnificency; the
Electors, Princes and Noblemen left Franckford, to retire home unto their
houses.

The Emperor, as Emperor and King of the Romans, has not any City or Town
within the Empire: The whole Territory of Germany, belongs to the Electors,
Bishops, Abbats, The Emperor has no Town in the Empire.
Princes, Earls, Noblemen and Free Towns: yet if the Emperor had no place
where to remain but within the Empire; the Bishop of Bamberg is bound to
give him his Town, and himself to retire to Villac. Wherefore the Emperor
MATHIAS, who had kingdoms out of Germany, desiring to retire himself to
Prague, the chief City of Bohemia, he parted from Franckford the three and
twentieth day of June, being accompanied by many Princes and Noblemen, and past
by Nurembourg in the beginning of July; where he had a very stately and
magnificent reception. Before the Emperors departure from Franckford, the
Citizens came and presented a Petition unto him; whereby they required that
they might be made acquainted A controversy at Franckford reconciled.
with the privileges of the City, which had remained wholly in the custody of
the Senate; That the Jews, whose number exceeded, might be expelled; That
there should be a course set down for usury, and a meal market erected in the
City. To whom the Emperor gave good words, and put them in hope: But when as
after the Emperors departure, the Citizens saw no point of their Petition
performed, there grew a great dissension betwixt them and the Senate: the which
would have grown to a great combustion, if some wise and temperate men had not
interposed themselves. CAESAR advertised hereof, being yet at Nurembourg, he
sent command to the Citizens to refer all controversies to him; who made
choice of the Archbishop of Mentz and the Lantz-graue of Hesse, to hear the
business, and to reconcile it; the which after many and troublesome treaties,
by their wisdom and moderation, they pacified and gave contentment to both
parties.

The Emperor, leaving Germany, returned to Bohemia. The Estates, hearing of
his coming to Prague, sent the Duke of Teschin with a thousand horse to
receive him, being accompanied by the Duke of Brunswick, and many Noblemen of
Germany, who conducted him to the Cathedral Church, and then to the Castle;
where they made great shows of joy for his happy Election. Soon after,
Ambassadors came unto the Emperor from the Persians and Muscouites: The
Persian, having delivered his Kings Letters unto the Emperor, he persuaded him
Ambassadors come from Persia and Muscouy, to Prague.
to continue wars against the Turks, as the deceased Emperor had promised;
saying, That if he could prevail nothing, he should then return speedily
home, his King having also resolved to conclude a Peace with the Turk; having
made trial, to his grief, that the Christians had made a peace with the
Turks, at such times as they might greatly have annoyed them. The Muscouite
Ambassador said; That the Muscouite entreated his Majesty, to be an Vmpire
betwixt them and the King of Poland; that he would procure a Peace to those
Countries, and provide them a good and worthy Prince: That they had formerly
required the King of P^and's son, to be their great Duke, and to that end and
purpose they had diverse and sundry times, sent unto the King: but when as they
found that he had no such intent, but that under the pretext thereof, he might
the more easily subdue them, they fell from him again; and, joining battle
not far from the City of Musco, they slew many Polonians; after which, they
had an intent to call-in CHARLES, son to the King of Swethen; but, if the
Emperor could by any other means provide for them, they would most willingly
obey him.

News came then to Court, of a controversy grown betwixt N^GRONIVS the
Emperors Ambassador at Const^inople and NASSVS Basha, about the confirmation
of the Peace which had been made some years before. The Ambassador,
persuading the Turks to entertain the Peace which had been made, NASSVS Basha
required him to show wherein the Emperor had not been satisfied: To whom he
answered, That the sixth Article of the Transaction had been violated; for that
CAESAR, as King of Hungary, having a lawful Title unto Transiluania, he
required to have that Article ratified; the which NASSVS denied, affirming that
Transiluania did properly belong unto the Sultan: upon which point there grew a
great contention betwixt them, whereby it appeared the Turks sought nothing,
but some color to infringe the Peace.

The Emperor, being aduertized hereof, gave answer unto the Persian
Ambassador, That he would by all means embrace and entertain the friendship,
which the king his master had desired of the deceased Emperor his brother:
who, although he had resolved to continue the war against the Turks; yet,
being hindered by the seditions of Hungary, he was then forced to make a Peace;
but now seeing the Turks (having seized upon Moldauia and Valachia) to
practice to invade Transiluania, he would confer with the Princes and States
of the Empire, and advertise the King what was to be done; persuading him in
the mean time to continue the wars. He answered the Muscouites, that he
would interpose his authority, for the making of a Peace, betwixt them and the
king of Poland, and to provide a great Duke for those Countries. Soon The
Emperor appoints a Dut at Ratisbon^.
after, the Emperor sent his Letters to the Electors and Princes of the
Empire, complaining of the Turks injustice, and showing how dishonorable a
thing it would be, for the Christian Commonwealth, to suffer so goodly a
Province to be invaded, and spoiled by them, without any opposition: writing
also his Letters to the States and Imperial Cities; That, being advanced to
the Empire, his first and chiefest care was to settle peace and tranquillity,
and that justice might be duly administered, and that all iealousies and
distrusts being taken away by a firm and de^ired concord, the states of the
Empire might be ready upon all occasions, with their joint forces to resist the
enemy of the christian name; specially when against the peace made with him
(having gotten Moldauia and Valachia) he practiced to make Transiluania subject
unto him: the which being lost, Hungary, and the Empire would be in great
danger; and that having made a peace with the Persian, he had not desisted to
call the treaty of peace in question, and to make a challenge to Transiluania.
Wherefore if he should violate the peace, it were necessary they should have
forces, and the sinews of war ready, by a bountiful and necessary
contribution; for the effecting whereof he appointed a Diet to be held at
Ratisbone on the 24 of April, 1613.

The Emperor going from Prague to Viena, GABRIEL BATTORY Prince of Transiluania
standing in fear of B^THLEM GABOR (who they said had craved aid against him
of the Battori sends (...)counterfeit Embassage to the Emperor.
Turks) sent his Ambassadors; and craving the Emperors assistance, he
promised him all subjection, and obedience: and withal he sent him many rich
presents. Whereupon the Emperor advertised the Basha of Buda, that this attempt
of the Turks did manifestly impugn the articles of peace, by the which it was
provided, that the state of Transiluania should not be molested. To which the
Basha made answer, that the Christians had driven away much cattle from
Iauerin: That the king of Poland had violated the peace; and that it was to be
feared, that he would seize upon Transiluania with Valachia and Moldauia; and
therefore his Emperor was not to be blamed, if he did seize upon this
province, which did immediately belong unto him. Soon after, the Emperors
Ambassador at the Sultans Port gave him to understand, that he did nourish a
monster, and that BATTORI had also sent Ambassadors to the Sultan, and had
secret treaties with the Bashaes. There came also unto the Emperor certain
Deputies from the Saxons The cruelty of Battory against the Saxons in
Transiluania.
which live in diverse cities of Transiluania who stole away in rustic habits,
lest they should have been discovered, complaining much of the tyranny and
cruelty of BATTORI; and that contrary to his faith, and the oath which he had
taken, he had deprived them of their privileges, and had in a manner ruined
them. That from the first year of his tyrannical rule and government, he had
practiced to extirpate and to root out the ancient families of the Saxons,
making a relation of all his insolences and tyrannyes: the which I cannot set
down in particular, being tied to straighter bounds. They also understood that
BATTORI did crave favor and aid from the Turks against the Saxons of
Transiluania, excusing himself that he had sent Ambassadors to the Emperor,
being forced thereunto by fear, and that he had sought to pervert and divert
the Emperors mind with presents. CAESAR hearing all this, bid them be of
good hope, promising to provide a remedy for their miseries, at the next
Assemby of the States of Hungary and the Empire.

The Emperor called an Assembly of the states of Hungary at Possouia or
Presbourg, whither An assembly of the states in Hungary.
he went in person, during whose absence SIGISMVND BATORY sometimes Prince of
Transiluania, having lived some years a private life at Prague, died there of
an apoplexy, where he was honorably enterred. At the assembly at Possouia,
there was much contention, for admitting of Germane soldiers into their
frontier garrisons of Hungary. There was great reason to endure it, for that
Hungary could not be defended against the Turks without the help of Germans;
and that an infinite number of all degrees and qualities, had lost their lives
in Hungary, it being commonly called the Churchyard of the Germans. The
Hungarians refused to subscribe to this request: but in the end the mayor part
yielded; but with a limitation, that both Germans and Hungarians should be
equally admitted; and whereas the Governor was a Germane, his Lieutennant
should be a Hungarian, and that there should be an equality observed in their
pay; that Walloones, Italians, Frenchmen, and other strangers, should be
held for The Emperors wife crowned Queen of Hungary.
spoilers rather then defenders of the country, and be wholly excluded. And
after the conclusion of all this, the Emperors wife was crowned Queen of
Hungary, with great pomp and state.

In the mean time, the Turks notwithstanding the peace had fired and spoiled
many villages and carried away many Christians into captivity; committing many
acts of hostility, so as all 1613. The Turk, meaning to war in Hungary, is
diuerted by his rebels.
men feared a new war in Hungary; but it happened by the providence of God,
that the people of Natolia in Asia brake out into rebellion, and burnt and
spoiled many places: And in Arabia a certain seditious fellow usurped the title
of a King, having drawn unto him 50000 AEthiopians, and seized on the strong
Fort of Aden, upon the red sea: this was a great prejudice to the Turks, and
very beneficial to the Portugals and Persians. Whereupon, the Sultan, being
incensed with this new rebellion, and an indignity which the King of Persia had
done him, revoked his forces that were appointed for Transiluania, to be
employed against the rebels of Asia and the Persians; disposing of an Army in
the garrisons of the Frontiers of Hungary, commanding them to contain
themselves: so as at this time the Hungarians were freed from the fear of
war.

The day for the Assembly at Ratisbone being comn, all the Princes and States
of the Empire repaired thither, and went forth of the City to meet the Emperor;
whom they conducted into the City with great pomp, as you may read at large in
diverse Authors. In the beginning of this Assembly, the Emperor delivered to
them the chief points and reasons why he had called them; setting down at large
the Turks practices to seize upon Transiluania contrary unto the Articles of
peace; the spoils which he had done, and the preparations which he had made
for war: Moreover, although there were no fear of the Turk, yet it was
necessary to levy money to supply the frontier garrisons with munition, and
for the building of two new Forts in Canisia. Wherefore, he entreated the
States, that, considering the common danger, they would consent to make some
contribution for the five next succeeding years, recommending this to the
Electors, Princes and States.

Before they came to the conclusion of these heads, the Deputies of the
protestant Electors, Princes and States of the Empire, presented a petition of
their grieuances unto him, requiring The Protestants prefer a petition of their
grieuances to the Emperor.
to be eased (as they had often done to the Emperor RODVLPHVS) but could not
obtain it: But now, seeing that his Majesty did so much desire to settle a
peace in the Empire, he would also be careful to remove all obstacles that
might hinder it; being the only thing they desired, that, being eased of their
grieuances, they might live friendly and quietly, with the rest of the
Electors, Princes, and Estates of the Empire. After which, they made a
particular relation of all their complaints, concluding again with a petition
to the Emperor for the same; and that if they might be eased thereof, they
promised to be ready to advance any thing that might concern the public good
or his Majesty's dignity.

The Emperor made answer to the Protestants petition, that he would take
consideration thereof; yet admonishing them not to prefer their own private
interest before the general good of the state: but they entreated him, that he
would not take it in ill part if they preferred a petition of their grieuances;
which they could not avoid, for that in the year 1608, when they would not take
knowledge of their grieuances, the Diet proved fruitless. Thus they pressing
relief, and the Emperor standing firm to his first answer, they forbear to come
to the Assembly; so that nothing could be concluded. After which the
Catholics made a declaration for the defense of their league, and delivered
it to some of the Council; wherein they inueighed much against the Protestants
of the Union, and labored to lay the blame of all the miseries on them, making
a long repetition of their grieuances: which contentions troubled the whole
assembly for a long time.

During these fruitless contentions at the Diet of Ratisbone, news came unto
the Emperor, that the Turks had made an irruption into Transiluania. We have
formerly made mention of the tyranny of GABRIEL BATTORI in these Countries, and
how much he had oppressed the Saxon Cities: wherefore, having by this means
diuerted the minds of the Nobility and others, BETHLEM GABOR, who (fleeing his
cruelty) had lived hitherto in exile, embracing this occasion, repaired to the
grand Seignior, and solicited him to expel BATTORI out of Transiluania, and to
substitute him in his place; promising to be his vassal and tributary, and
Bethlem Gabor is mada Prince of Transiluania by the Turk.
to deliver into his hands Lippa, Geneu, and certain other Forts. The Sultan,
yielding to his request, commanded SANDER Basha to expel BATTORI: whereupon,
he entered Transiluania with a great Army, and took diverse places, being
accompanied by BETHLEM. BATTORI, advertised heerof, sent ISTVAN his General
with a great Army to encounter him: but, being terrified with their numbers, he
returned, persuading BATTORI to provide for his safety. There entered another
Basha into Transiluania, by the straights of the mountains not far from
Cromstad, having defeated the Zecclerians who kept those passages; so as in a
manner 1613
all Transiluania was in the Turks power. In the mean time, the Turks in
Hungary forced many villages to take the oath of obedience to the Sultan;
carrying away all their goods and cattle that refused it. The Basha of Agria
having notice that they cried To Arms in Hungary, Bohemia and Silesia; to
suppress these insolences, sent an Ambassador to Cassouia to FORTGATSI,
General of the Army; assuring him, that all these things were unknown to him,
and that he was willing to entertain the peace with the King of Hungary and
the Roman Empire; that BATTORI had been the cause of all these troubles; whom
the Sultan required to have punished for his tyranny: but he would not attend
and fight with the Turks, but fled unto Varadine; saying, that he did it to
the end that he should not fall away from the Emperor, whose aid he had
implored.

The Palatine of Hungary and FORTGATSI sent him some succors, but not such as
were able to restore him; and the rather, for that the whole Province depended
now upon BETHLEM GABOR: who soon after was appointed Prince of Transiluania by
SANDER Basha; with this admonition, that being taught by the example of
BATTORI, he should not follow his steps; that he should choose his Counselors
out of Transiluania and Hungary, and should do nothing without the Sultans
priuity. He labored to free the further Hungary from the fear of invasion; the
Basha writing to FORTGATSI, that he had only charge from the Sultan, to expel
BATTORI out of Transiluania.

The Diet at Ratisbone having been prorogued until the thirtith of September,
the Emperor The Emperers speech to the States at Ratisbone.
came and made an ample relation of all that had past in Transiluania. He
earnestly entreated all the Electors, Princes and States, that as he himself
had so much preferred the public good o^ the Empire, that leaving his own
hereditary Provinces, he had come thither not without the hazard of his life by
reason of the plague; so they would fall into consideration of their common
danger, and raise a certain sum of money for forty months, to resist the
common enemy; who, hearing of their readiness, might be diuerted from his
enterprises: but, after much debating of these businesses, the Assembly was
prorogued till another meeting.

The Emperor remaining with his Court at Lintz, an Ambassador came from
Muscouy; who, having delivered his Presents, said, that MICHAEL FENDROVITIVS
the great Duke of Muscouy, issued from the great Dukes of Muscouy, and chosen
to that Empire by the general consent of all the Nobles, desired to continue
the love and friendship which the Emperors his Predecessors had with that
state; and that he would dissuade the King of Poland from his unjust attempts
against Muscouy; and be a means that (having released some Noblemen which he
held prisoners) he would live in peace with them. The Emperor, promising to be
a mediator betwixt him and the King of Poland, dismissed his Ambassador with
rewards.

BATTORI continued at Varadine. The Gouerner of Toccay brought him succors in
the King of Hungary's name; who, hearing what numbers he had brought, said,
that they would preuail nothing against the Turks forces; sending presently
messengers to Tirnauia and other places for greater supplies. In the mean time
he disdained the Gouerners company; resolving if he could obtain no greater
forces, to make his composition with the Turks, and to yield them that Fort for
his restitution. The Gouerner, understanding this, conferred with his friends;
where they resolved to cut off this incumber, dealing with the Groom of his
chamber to kill him as he slept: but when that succeeded not, he persuaded him
to go out of the gates to view the Army; where he was shot by his own
soldiers. The tumult being ended, they took consultation with the Gouerner of
Varadine to preserve the place for the Emperor: yet he persuaded Gabriel
Battori, Prince of Transiluania, ssain.
them not to put any garrison into the Castle, lest the Turks should come and
besiege it. Yet soon after, he yielded it up to BETHLEM GABOR.

BATTORI being slain, the Turks left Transiluania. BETHLEM GABOR called the
Estates Bethlem calle^ the States to Clausenbourg.
to Clausenbourg: where they first of all restored all men that had been
banished by BATTORI. They concluded free exercise of religion; that the Prince
should acknowledge the Sultan for his superior; that he should entertain peace
with his neighbors, especially the Roman Emperor; that he should make a league
with the Princes of Moldauia and Valachia; that he should choose his Council
out of three nations, and do nothing without their priuity; that he should
maintain all the ancient privileges; that he should maintain justice; and that
he should not hinder the free election of a Prince whom the Sultan should
confirm. There were many other Articles concluded at this Assembly, which are
too long to relate. After which, BETHLEM wrote Letters to the Palatine of
Hungary, of all his proceedings in this action; concluding that he was
advertised, there were some that presumed to invade some places belonging to
that Provinces the which he admonished them not to attempt, seeing that he was
ready to perform all good offices, to the Emperor, and King of Hungary: But,
if they did continue in their designs, he would not dissemble; but that he,
and the Sultan in like manner, were bound by oath to defend them, who would
have as great a care as himself of the Province, and would never suffer any
thing to be drawn away. Wherefore he entreated him, for the love of his
Country, and of Peace, to command all his Governors and Captains, not to
attempt any thing, whereby any combustions or alterations might arise, but every
man to enjoy his own in Peace.

There were some yet remaining in Transiluania, who, allied to BATTORI, had
raised some tumults; and some, desirous to draw that Province to the Emperor,
had taken Hust and The Turks admonish the Stat^s of Transiluania to yield
obedience to Bethlem
some other places in his name. The Sultan, hearing this, sent his Lrtters to
the Noblemen and States, letting them understand, that when as Transiluania
yielded obedience to his predecessors and him, they lived in quiet; and had
often craved aid from him, and obtained it; concluding that he had made
BETHLEM GABOR their Prince, to govern the Province under his protection: But,
hearing there were many things done on CAESAR'S side against the Peace, and many
Towns and Forts taken; he had fully resolved not to spoil any Fort in
Transiluania, nor to do wrong to any man, nor yet to suffer any man to do it,
but would defend that Province with all his power. Wherefore he desired the
Emperor should know, that if he would have this Peace inviolable, he should
presently make restitution of the said places, to the Prince of Transiluania,
or else signify his mind unto him by Letters.

The Emp. continuing at Lintz, called an Assembly of his hereditary Countris and
Provinces, viz. Bohemians, Austrians, Stirians, Carinthians, Carniolans,
Silesians, Lusatians, Morauians, An Assembly made by the Em peror at Lintz.
and Hungarians: To whom he propounded, that the Peace had been broken by the
Turks, by their many incursions, carrying away men and cattle, and committing
many other insolences in hostile manner: And the rather, that besides
Valachia, and Moldauia, they had now of late seized upon Transiluania, and
forrified it with Garrisons, under the command of BETHLEM GABOR; that they had
assembled the Estates, and admonished the Emperor by Letters not to meddle
with it.

In the end, he made mention of BETHLEMS design, having made himself a
vassaile to the Turks, to the end the Province might be united unto them.
Wherefore considering how prejudicial it was to the Christian state, and
behoouefull for the Turks, he held it necessary by all means to be recovered,
seeing the time was very fit to make war upon either of them. It was further
demanded, seeing the Sultan did challenge this Province as his own, and would
not suffer the Germans, to prescribe any laws to the Transiluanians, what he
should answer in this point, That if a Turkish Ambassador, contrary to the
express conditions of Peace, and instructed with no charge, should come, and
that the Sultan should refuse to confirm the sixth Article of the Transaction;
whether this Ambassador were to be admitted, and his Letters to be accepted by
the Emperor. The last question was, whether they should make a new Transaction
with the Sultan, when as he would not stand to the first; and how they should
proceed in the business of Moldauia, Valachia and Transiluania; and what they
should do, if Hungary in like sort should be invaded before an Assembly. The
Hungarians made answer, that they thought it fit to devise some means how the
Transaction made betwixt the Sultan, and the deceased Emperor might stand
firm, and the Emperors authority maintained; and as for future necessity, it
was fit some means were provided for necessary defense.

The inhabitants of Worms had many years complained of the intolerable usury
of the Jews: The Citizens desired much to be freed from this unnecessary load,
and to be unburdened of their Interests; entreating the Senate, to punish
their frauds as it was fit. The Senate therefore, The Jews expelled at Worms.
meaning to set down some course, made a new Edict: but the Jews desiring to
prevent them, sent a Petition to the Emperor; who, desiring to be better
instructed in the cause, required to have all the Acts sent unto him, with the
privileges of the City concerning the Jews, which had been granted by former
Emperors.

In the mean time, the cause was referred to the imperial Chamber; and a
penal iniunction sent, to pay again unto the Citizens, whatsoever they had
exacted, contrary to the constitution of the Empire. In the end, there was a
decree made, whereby the Senate was ininioyned by the Emperors authority, upon
a penalty of 10000 marks of Gold, presently after the receite theof, to reduce
all usury, both future, and that which was past, and not paid, to five in the
hundred; and that they should suffer them to make a defalcation of that which
was past, 1615
unless they would incur the said penalty. This Edict was published in
October the year before: which put the Citizens in good hope that all things
would be well compounded. But finding their hopes frustrate, in the end they
resolved to cast all the Jews out of Worms; the which they put in execution
upon the seventh of April, being Easter Monday: at which time, some 300 of them
coming together into the market place, they sent seuenteen into the Jews
street, to let them understand, that they must presently depart the City,
carrying with them what they held most precious, the rest should be put in
Inuentory; and whatsoever they had recovered by judgment, should be restored
to them. Having received this message, they packed away within one hour, much
lamenting their hard fortunes. The Magistrates blamed the Citizens for this
attempt; and they constantly maintained the action: and after their departure
they ruined their monuments, their Temple, and whatsoever belonged to the
Jewish Ceremony.

In May, the Emperor being at Vienna, there came a Turkish Ambassador, attended
with a The peace reconfirmed betwixt the Emperor and the Turk.
great train. Being brought to the Emperor, he delivered his Presents which
were many, with his Letters; containing in substance, that the Sultan desired
much to maintain the peace with the Emperor, and that he should send
Commissioners to the Frontiers, as he would do, to take view of the wrongs
which had been done on either side, and to make satisfaction. The Emperor,
having heard his Embassage, went to Prague, and left certain Counselors to
treat with him touching the confirmation of the peace; who said, the Sultan had
given him great charge to advance it, for that, being engaged in diverse
wars, he could not attend all together; that the sons of EMIR, Gouerner of
Saida, relying upon the Persians aid, had lately slain the Basha of Damasco;
and the son of NASSV^ Basha had been strangled in Asia, where they put all to
fire and sword. The King of Persia in like manner did not abstain from Arms:
and the Cossacks of Polonia did much annoy his subjects. Being thus assaulted
by many, he was forced to retire his soldiers out of Hungary to send them into
Asia, and to desire a peace with the Emperor; the which was concluded upon
these conditions: that the treaty of peace, made in the year 1606, should stand
firm; and for that, since the time of that treaty, there had been many
controversies for the space of eight years, it was agreed, that the peace
should be continued for twenty years longer; that, for 150 villages belonging
to the Archbishopric of Strigonia, and had been formerly demanded by the
Sultan, there should be sixty delivered; that all controversies upon the
Frontiers should be compounded within four months by Commissioners; that the
goods taken from the Turks at Pallantua by the Haiduques, should be restored,
and the Authors punished; the prisoners on either side should be released, and
the Forts built, during the last eight years ruined; that Priests, Jesuits and
Monks, might repair their Churches in the Turks Territories, and celebrate
divine service; that merchants might freely traffic to Constantinople, having
the Emperors Letters Patent to show to the Gouerners of the Frontiers and to
the Ambassador and Consul residing there; that the tribute once paid, the
party might pass on freely, and be no more questioned; that a merchant dying in
the Turks Kingdom, his goods should be delivered to the Emperors Ambassador at
Constantinople. These Articles were signed by the Commissioners, and were to be
confirmed by both the Emperors.

The Empire, after the peace concluded betwixt RODVLPHVS and Sultan ACHMAT, had
not been afflicted with the heavy burden of foreign wars: yet was it not free
from intestine combustions. The pretensions for Iuliers had drawn all the
Electors, Princes and States of the Empire, into factions: and the troubles of
Brunswick, with the mutinies of Franckford and Worms, had much troubled the
Quiet of Germany. The Duke of Brunswick being dead, there was hope of a
reconciliation betwixt his son and the City of Brunswick, by the mediation of
the Duke of Wittemberg: but, it taking no effect, the Duke presently raised an
Army, and besieged The City of Brunswick besieged by the Duke.
it; and the Besieged defended themselves valiantly. The hanse-towns raised
forces to relieve them, under the conduct of the Earl of Solmes; who,
approaching with his Troops, was advertised from the Town, that, if they were
not speedily succored, they should be forced to yield: whereupon, he resolved
to force his way by the sword; which after a long fight he effected, to the
great comfort of the Townsmen. After which, there was a truce made for ten
days, and in the end a peace concluded upon certain Articles; which were
confirmed by the Duke and the Citizens.

At the inauguration of the Emperor MATHIAS, there had been some controversy
betwixt the Senate and the Citizens of Franckford; the which the Archbishop of
Mentz and the Lantzgraue of Hesse compounded, under certain Articles: the which
the Emperor ratified, and they promised to observe. In the year 1614, they fell
into new combustions; so as a multitude, led by some of the baser sort of the
Citizens, came to the Senate House, and forced the old magistrates to giue-ouer
their places. The Emperor, being advertised heerof, sent a Herald with
commandment to restore the old Senate: the which the Citizens refused to obey,
continuing constant in that resolution. The Emperor after this sent a
proscription against the chief Authors of this mutiny: whereupon, diverse of
them were apprehended, and seven of the chief executed: some were whipped, and
others banished; being all men of base quality.

The Citizens of Worms having expelled the Jews as you have heard, and
continued all night in Arms, the Magistrates sent to the Elector Palatine (who
has always had a right of protection over the City of Worms, and in
acknowledgement whereof they do yearly pay him a certain fee) entreating him to
assist them to force the Burgesses to their duties. The Elector, considering
the importance of this innovation, sent forces presently thither, invested the
Town, and planted the cannon. The Burgesses cried presently To Arms: but the
Magistrate pacified them, letting them understand that they were no enemies,
but their best friends; assuring them, that there should be no wrong done to
any man, nor their liberties infringed: whereupon, the gates were opened, and
the guard thereof and of the walls given to the soldiers. After which, the
Magistrates making search for the heads of this mutiny, there were twelve
apprehended and put in prison. The next day, in the presence of the Electors
Commissioners, the Inhabitants took a new oath of obedience to the Magistrate:
and the Magistrate in like manner took the oath of allegiance to the Emperor
and Empire. And thus the mutiny at Worms was pacified without any disorder or
prejudice to any man.

The year before, SIGIFRIDE COLLONITZ (a man famous for the great services he
Collonitz put in prison by the Emperor.
had done the Empire against the Turk) having called the Bege of Strigonia to
combat for that he had willingly suffered the Turks to spoil his lands, was
brought in disgrace with the Emperor, and committed to prison at Newstad: his
servants were put in custody, and all his papers and secrets searched by the
Emperors command. But, finding nothing wherewith to charge him, he was
released, promising to attempt nothing against the Emperor nor the house of
Austria: but, seeking to be revenged of those which made spoil of his lands,
he was taken again by the soldiers of Landau, and brought wounded unto
Vienna; where he was again committed to prison.

The Burgesses of Worms, who had been committed to prison for the former
mutiny, did this year on the seven and twentieth of May receive their Sentence,
which was to this effect; that a Doctor of the Law, who had pleaded the
Citizens cause during the tumult, should bind himself by oath, not only to
depart the City, but also out of the Palatinate and the Bishopric of Spires;
and that he should plead no more, and moreover should pay 1000 Florenes for a
fine: Of the prisoners, one of them should be shut up in his house during his
life; yet he should have leave to go to the Church to hear divine service, and
three should be whipped and banished the Empire.

The Emperor MATHIAS, being without hope of any issue, was very careful to
leave a successor in the Realm of Bohemia: wherefore he adopted FERDINAND
Archduke of Austria The King of Spain renounceth his title to the Realm of
Bohemia.
for his son, recommended him to the Noblemen, and sought by all means to
advance him to that Kingdom. Having imparted this resolution to the King of
Spain, he easily procured him to renounce his right; the which the Earl of
Ognate the Kings Ambassador with the Emperor did by a solemn Act, in favor of
the Archduke FERDINAND: and the Archduke FERDINAND in like manner by a solemn
Act did promise restitution thereof to the King of Spain, if he or his
Descendents of the right line should die without issue male: which several
Acts, being past at Prague, the Emperor did ratify and confirm.

The Emperor, having obtained this renunciation from the King of Spain, and
from MAXIMILIAN and ALBERTVS his brethren, called an Assembly of the States at
Prague: where The States of Bohemia assembled at Prague.
the chief Chancellor made a speech unto them; that the Emperor, having found
them so faithful and ready to do him service, would not only be thankful
unto them during his life, but would also endeavor to settle a future peace in
the Kingdom, all causes of discord being taken away. Considering therefore
that he was mortal, and being dead the Realm with the Provinces annexed should
be left without a King, whereby might follow dangerous innouations, he had
therefore resolved (after the example of his Predecessors) to provide them a
good and fit King. Wherefore, seeing that MAXIMILIAN and ALBERT his brethren
were grown aged, and himself not likely to have any heirs, he had thought it
good to adopt the Archduke FERDINAND for his many good parts and virtues, that
he might be sworn and solemnly 1617
crowned future King of Bohemia; and the rather, for that his brethren would
not pretend any title to this Kingdom: and the whole house of Austrta had given
their consents to his election. Wherefore he desired them to choose FERDINAND
for their future King, and that they would appoint a certain day for his
Coronation; giving them to understand, that the Archduke FERDINAND was ready
for his part to take the oath, to confirm their privileges, and perform all
other things that former Kings were wont to do.

The States, having consulted on this proposition, soon after on the ninth of
June made answer to the Emperor; giving him first of all great thanks for his
singular care for the peace and tranquillity of the Realm of Bohemia, and
highly extolling the rare virtues of the Archduke FERDINAND. In the end they
concluded, that they had chosen the said Archduke for their King of Bohemia,
and that he should be proclaimed upon condition, that if his Majesty should die
without any lawful issue male, he should then take upon him the government of
the Realm: and the day of his Coronation was appointed on the 29 of June.
Moreover, it was added, that he should confirm to the States before his
Coronation by oath, to maintain all the privileges, charters, immunities,
municipall rights, constitutions and customs, as the Emperor and his
Predecessors had done; and for that this confirmation, during the Emperors life
could not be performed, but must necessarily be deferd til his death, he
should a month after deliver it in writing to the chief Burgraue of Prague if
he were then living, or to the first officer of the kingdom; Moreover, before
his Coronation he should promise to the States by writing, that he The
Archduke Ferdinand chosen and crowned King of Bohemia.
would not deal with the government, nor attempt any thing without the Emperors
consent, and the chief officers and Senates; that he should rest content till
the Emperors death, with the title of elect and crowned King of Bohemia: the
which if he should infringe, the States should not be bound to yield him
obedience. After which, the Archduke FERDINAAND was proclaimed King of Bohemia,
and crowned with the accustomed ceremonies.

This made the hundredth year complete after that MARTIN LVTTHER had opposed A
Iubile celebrated by the Duke of Saxony in memory of Martin Luther
the Romish doctrine, and propounded his questions at Wittemberg against
TEZELIVS his indulgences, reducing all to the trial of Gods word. JOHN GEORGE,
Elector of Saxony, a Princeful of zeal and religion, in memory heerof commanded
a Iubile to be celebrate throghout all his Electorate; writing to the Divines
of Lipsick, that whereas 100 years before it had pleased God to stir up MARTIN
LVTHER publikly to oppose the Popish doctrines, and to begin to reform
religion, which had hitherto bin maintaind in all his territories against their
devilish practices; He had decreed by good advice to institute a solemn feast,
to thank God; the which should continue 3 days, from October. 31, till Nouemb.
2, commanding them to give public notice in their pulpits, to the end the
people might prepare themselves accordingly; that upon the Eve the Psalms
should be sung, and preparation made to receive the Communion the next day;
that on either of the feast days they should have two Sermons, one in the
morning, the other in the afternoon, and their Text specially appointed out of
the holy Scriptures to that use. Which Iubile was duly observed in Saxony; and
in imitation thereof, at Heidelberg in the Palatinate, and in other Provinces
and Cities of the reformed religion, was celebrated with great solemnity: and
there were pieces of gold and silver coined, both by the Elector of Saxony, and
by some other Towns, in memory of this solemnity.

In the end of this year, the States of Hungary were assembled at Possonia or
Presbourg. The 1618.
Emperor went to Vienna with his wife and whole Court: but not able to assist
at this Assembly by reason of sickness, he commanded FERDINAND, King of Bohemia,
to supply his place. The reason of this Assembly, was, to redress many
grieuances, and to choose a King who might succeed the Emperor: in which,
relation was made to the States of the Emperors great love to Hungary, and his
desire to have bin there present, if his infirmities had not prevented his
resolution; telling them, that as the peaceful government of that Kingdom had
bin always dear to him, so he would use all means, that (peace being settled
at home and abroad) all interrupting occasions might be taken away. And
considering his great age, and the many infirmities which did accompany it, he
feared that the estate of Hungary would be very miserable, if he should die
before a new King were chosen to succeed him, of whom the safety of the Country
might depend; which otherwise might be subject to popular tumults and the
incursions of their neighbors: the which the Emperor desired might be
prevented. Imitating therefore his predecessors, he requested they would
prevent the calamities of future times, by their present counsels, and choose a
King to succeed him, and to take upon him the government of that Realm, if
his Majesty should die without any lawful issue male: for the effecting
whereof, 1618
MAXIMILIAN, and ALBERT Archdukes of Austria his brethren had not only
renounced al their pretensions by Letters to the crown of Hungary, but had
often entreated him, that (forasmuch as they were aged and without children) he
would provide for the necessity of that kingdom, by some other means.
Wherefore he held it just, profitable, and fit for the good of the State, that
FERDINAND king of Bohemia, his cousin Germane (whom his Majesty for his
excellent parts, had adopted for his son) should be chosen, proclaimed, and
crowned king of Hungary by the States. Wherefore he entreated them lovingly
(the former reasons conesidered) that they would choose and proclaim his dear
chosen son, King FERDINAND, for king of Hungary; assuring the estates that
King FERDINAND should promise faithfully by his reuersall Letters, not to
meddle with the government of that Realm, without his majesty's express will,
and the advice of the Hungarians; but should content himself with the bare
title of king of Hungary, until that his Imperial majesty should otherwise
dispose or die; and if he should attempt any thing to the contrary, the States
should be freed from their oath of obedience. Moreover: that he should do any
thing for the confirmation of the privileges of the kingdom, liberties,
immunities, and all other things thereunto belonging, as the Emperor, and other
kings of Hungary his predecessors had formerly done.

Whilst they are about this proposition at Possouia, the Protestant States of
Bohemia, made an assembly at Prague, the Emperor being absent at Viena, for
that his Letters Patents had been violated. The Archbishop of Prague, having
caused some of the Protestant Churches to be ruined, and the subjects who had
complained thereof put in prison; some Counselors which remained at Prague,
excused the fact, maintaining that there was nothing done against the Emperors
Letters, nor the provincial constitution. The Emperor being advertised of this
assembly, admonished them by his Letters to forbear, hearing that this
assembly was made against his person: That what had been done by the
Archbishop was by his command: That they had The Emperor complains of the
Protestant States of Bohemia.
exceeded the bounds of his Majesty's grant, and had presumed to take upon
them the protection of others subjects, in an unjust cause against his
sentence: That they had complained of his Majesty's Letters for the abrogating
of the transactions, and bringing in soldiers into Bohemia, whereby they bred
iealousies in the ignorant people, and had brought him in hatred with his
faithful subjects; whereby many dangers, and rumults, might arise in his
absence, which he never had expected from some of them: That they had abused
his bounty, and exceeded his grant: And that it was their duties to prevent all
innouations and combustions. He had therefore resolved, after due inquiry to
punish the authors. In the mean time he commanded them to forbear from all
assemblies, until he himself were present, or did otherwise determine: That
they should not meddle with other folks business, nor minister any occasion of
sedition and tumult.

This admonition did so little prevail, as the States were the more incensed,
seeking by all means to advance the Assembly, against those that opposed it.
The day being comn, and the States being assembled, with some of the Citizens,
out of all the Tribes of Prague, there was a Sermon in the Bohemian tongue for
the preservation of Religion, and the Churches not only in Prague, but through
the whole kingdom against their malicious adversaries who sought to subvert
them. On the 23 of May, the Noblemen came on horseback to Court, every one
having a servant with two pistols charged; where they deliuerd their grieuances
before the counselors and chief officers of the kingdom. The chief Burgraue,
and POP^LIVS the grand Prior of S. MARY'S, did seem to yield unto their
requests: but SLABATA chief Judge of Some of the Emperors counselors cast out
at a window in Prague.
the province, and SMESANSIVS opposed themselves; wherefore the States calling
away the other two, they took SLABATA, SMESANSIVS, with a Secretary, and cast
them headlong out at a window, into the court of the Castle, the which was very
deep, yet by the will of God they were preserved alive. There grew presently
in the castle a great amazement and tumult: whereupon some of the States, and
among them the Earl of Thurn, went through the city on horseback, persuading
the people not to fear, nor to attempt any thing, promising that no man should
be wronged; and that they would maintain what had been done, and presently
advertise the Emperor thereof. The people being pacified and the chief
Burgraue conducted quietly to his lodging, the States did bind the officers of
the castle, with the gouerner, and porters and all the inhabitants of the three
towns of Prague, unto them by oath: and meeting daily in the prouincial
chamber, being guarded by 800 shot, they made a league, promising to fight
against the common enemies of God, the King, and Religion; and in that cause to
live and die; to which end they provided for the leuying of a good Army.

Having afterward published an apology, and declared the reasons why they were
forced to 1618
prepare for their defense, they sent Letters also to the confederate Princes
and States of Silesia, Morauia and Lusatia; whereby they acquainted them with
all things that had past, and craved their aid in their future necessity.

By the defense or Apology which they had published, his Imperial Majesty
might understand Letters from the protestant states of Bohemia to the Ewperor.
(said they) the reasons why they had attempted to punish SLABATA, SMESANCIVS
and FABRITIVS, as troublers of the public peace; who by their traitorous
practices sought to deprive them of all the liberties granted them, and
confirmed by the Emperor RODVLPHVS and his Majesty, and of all liberty of
religion; practicing such dangerous factions, that they had been able to
overthrow the State if God had not prevented it; that they must necessarily
proceed to the punishment of some other factious people of the same quality:
where of they thought good now to advertise his Majesty, as having regard to
the dangers which threatened him in particular, and them in general, having
means in some fort to prevent these dangerous conspiracies which tended to
deprive his Majesty, of the Realm, and them his faithful subjects of their
liberties: They had sought the means to maintain the Realm of Bohemia belonging
to his Imperial Majesty: and for that the States could not always continue
united together at Prague, they had therefore chosen Directors of the State of
the three Evangelical Orders; that remaining still there, they might ordain
what they thought necessary for the preservation of the immunities and
privileges which his Majesty had granted: wherefore they hoped his Majesty
would hold them excused, having not attempted any thing with an intent to
offend him or any of his Catholic subjects that were lovers of peace; being
ready to employ their lives and goods for the defense of his Imperial Majesty
their soueraign Lord.

After this, they made a decree against the Jesuits, as the Authors of all the
miseries and afflictions The Jesuits expeld Bohemia.
which had happened in Bohemia and in many other Realms and States of
Christendom; comparing them to the Templars, and saying that they had incited
murderers to kill Kings, which would not live after their manner; that they
meddled with affairs of State, and held all them heretics which were not Roman
Catholics; that they had slanderously defamed the Protestant States, and had
made an explication contrary to the Letters of pacification made in the year
1609; that they had drawn the whole Country into the hands of certain
perfidious Catholics, by whose practices the Country was in danger of ruin.
For which causes, they baninisht them for ever out of the Realm of Bohemia;
enioyning them to depart within eight days, and never to return: and to keep
them from spoil during the time prefixed, they set 50 musketeers before their
College and Church. As for the other religious Orders, the said States took
them into their protection; and the Earl of Thurn provided daily to have the
begging Friars and the Cappuchens supplied with victuals.

The Emperor, hearing of these alterations, wrote to them, that he could not
allow of that Letters from the Emperor to the protestant states of Bohemia:
which they had done in the Castle of Prague against the Counselors of State,
before they had been accused and heard; that they ought not to have made so
great leuies of soldiers without his priuity (seeing that no man declared
himself their enemy) nor by consequence to advance the ruin of Innocents, who
knew not to what end all this tended; wherefore he enioind them to dismiss
their soldiers, and not to attempt any thing against the ordinances of the
Realm; that he would not conceal, that, hearing of their preparation to Arms,
he had also commanded leuies to be made, as well for the defense of the Realm
of Bohemia and of his faithful subjects, as for the maintenance of the rank
and authority which he held: yet he assured himself, they would rather embrace
peace than war, and not force him by their disobedience to come to Arms; the
which he would willingly forbear if they would perform their duties.

The Emperor, seeing he could preuail nothing by his Letters and declarations,
and that the And to the princes and States of the Empire.
Protestant States of Bohemia prepared still to Arms, therefore wrote his
Letters to the Electors, Princes, and other States of the Empire, thereby to
hinder them from making any leuies in the said States; aduertising them of all
that had happened in the Castle of Prague; and that the authors of these
combustions disdaining all obedience, and making no account of his
remonstrances, persisted still in in their first resolution; and that to the
prejudice and contempt of his Imperial Majesty, and of his soueraign dignity
of King of Bohemia, they levied soldiers from all parts, yea in the Roman
Empire: and for that they did it without his express command, and against the
Edicts, he advertised all the States of the Empire to take order that no leuies
of soldiers should be made in the Towns and other places of the Empire.

The Bishop of Spire had for some years labored to fortify the Town of
Vdenheim, seated upon the river of Rhine, with good walls, large ditches, and
strong rampires, against all external 1618
invasion. The Elector Palatine had often sought by persuasions to divert him
from this work: and the City of Spire had a privilege, that no castle or fort
should be built within three miles of their city. The report was that SPINOLA
had been the Author of this fortification, and that he would man it with a
strong garrison; it standing very commodiously in a marish ground, to hinder
the free passage of the river of Rhine: The united Princes and States of the
Empire after their assembly at Hilburne, sent 4000 horse and foot with 1200
Pioners to this Castle; which (being yielded unto them, without any opposition)
they raised and laid even with the ground, the Elector Palatine soon after
publishing a declaration of the reasons which had moved him thereunto.

The Estates of Hungary proceeded slowly, and were in a manner in suspense, by
reason of Ferdinand chosen and crowned king of Hungary.
the troubles in Bohemia; yet in the end they proceeded to the Election of
FERDINAND king of Bohemia for their King in Hungary; but with these conditions:
That he should religiously observe and cause to be inuiolably observed all
the liberties, immunities, privileges, statutes, rights, and customs, of the
Kingdom with the conclusions and treaties of Viena, with all the Articles
comprehended therein, and all others concluded both before and after the
Coronation of the Emperors Majesty in the years 1608 and 1609. The which
Articles, being many in number I here forbear to set down in particular,
being tied to straighter bounds. Which Articles being ratified by the Emperor
under his Letters Patents, they proceeded to his coronation according to the
accustomed manner.

All things tending to Arms in Bohemia, the Emperor sent Letters unto the
Directors for The Emperors letters to the directors of the States of Bohemia.
the Protestants Estates, whereby he assured them of his fatherly love and
affection, and gave them means to suppress the disorders and combustions
within the Realm; yet in the mean time he had been advertised of the
attempts and violences committed by the Earl of Thurn, who marching with his
Army to Budouitz, had summoned the Consuls and Senators, as he had done the
Magistrates of Cromlan, to dismiss the Emperors garrison, and to yield the
town unto him, if not he would put all to fire and sword: That it was not
fit that he being Emperor should endure these indignities: Wherefore he was
forced to command the Leaders of his Army to enter speedily into Bohemia, to
defend his faithful subjects from all oppression: whereof he thought good to
advertise them, that by the consideration of the ruins which would follow this
war, they might desist from their enterprise, and thereby avoid the assured
ruin, which threatened them and theirs.

To this Letter the Directors made answer, protesting that the Earl of Thurn
had not committed any spoils about Buduitz; but only advertised the
inhabitants not to entertain any The answer of the directors to the Emperors
Lettere.
strange soldiers; That he could not do less then signify these defenses
unto them, being conformable to the ordinances of the Realm; That in case they
would dismiss their soldiers and receive no new garrison into their town,
the estates would forget that which was past; But having made refusal, and
declared themselves enemies to the country, it was no wonder if the Earl had
used some threats, although he had no intent to hurt them: Whereof the town of
Cromlau was a good example, whereas they forced not any man, nor put any
soldiers into the town, for that they had obeyed, and dismissed their garrison;
and therefore it was not needful, that the Emperor should draw an Army into
Bohemia, in regard of Buduitz, hoping that he would never willingly consent
thereunto, not give way to the pernicious counsels of their enemies. After this
there were other replies and answers, touching the bringing in of forces into
Bohemia, which I cannot insist upon.

The Protestant States having assured themselves of many towns and places
within the Realm, resolved to make two Armies: the one under the leading of
the Earl of Thurn, which The Protestants Army in Bohemia.
should ly about Buduitz and toward the frontiers of Austria, by the which the
Emperors troops might enter into Bohemia; the other under the command of the
Earl of Mandsfieldt to besiege and force some towns within the Realm, which
would not submit themselves to the Protestants obedience. Finally their troops
increased daily both of Germane soldiers and other strangers of their
religion: And the protestant States of Silesia had levied 6000 horse and foot,
for the guard (as they said) of their province; But in effect it was to enter
into Bohemia and to succor their confederates.

The Emperors Army consisted of 10000 horse and foot, with many commanders
and The Emperors Army.
Captains: as the Earls of Bucheim, Tampierre, and Colalte, HENRY IVLES of
Landemberg Prince of Saxony, Marada, and Molart. The Earl of Bucquoy was
expected with some Troops, and should be General; the which in the beginning
bred some jealousy, and crossed 1618
their designs. It was bruited they meant to besiege Prague; where the
Inhabitants labored daily in the fortifications of the new Town: yet this Army
did nothing but preserve it self and Budvitz. The Earl of Tampierre had
commandment from the Emperor to enter with his Army into Bohemia, and to
cross the Earl of Thurn's designs upon Budvitz. Coming to Bistritz, it
yielded; into which he put a garrison, thinking to do the like at Neuhaus: but
he was prevented by a garrison the Earl of Thurn had put into the Town and
Castle. Whereupon the soldiers fired the suburbs; giving new occasion of
discontent to the Protestants against the Emp. Exploits of the Emperors Army in
Bohemia


Some few days after, he attempted to force Neuhaus by Petard: but he was
forced to retire with the loss of 200 men. Notwithstanding this disgrace, he
entered further into Bohemia, and took Pilgrum and Polna. He had a design to
seize on some place upon the river Saslaua, within 7 or 8 leagues of Prague,
there to fortify himself, and to be daily at the gates of that great city: but
the Protestants meeting him near that river, there was a great skirmish and
many good soldiers slain of either side. The Earl of Tampierre was forced to
retire for want of victuals; who in his return lost many men, slain by the
Peasants. These exploits did incense the Protestants very much against the
Emperor, for the ruins and the burnings which the Earls Haiduques had
committed.

But let us come to Vienna. King FERDINAND being returned thither with the
Archduke Cardinal Cleselius sent captive into Tiroll.
MAXIMIL. they took counsel to remove Cardinal CLESELIVS from Court, sending
him word to come unto the Castle at two of the clock in the afternoon, on the
20 of July: whereupon he took his Coach with the Popes Nuntio, having much
private discourse with him; where being arrived, he dismissed the Nuntio, and
went toward the Archdukes Cabinet. Being met upon the way, he was given to
understand that the Archduke was not well, and desired to be excused; and
being led into another room, he was told that the house of Austria had decreed
(with the Popes consent) not to suffer him any longer in Court, for his bad
government in the Province, and many other causes: wherefore laying aside his
Cardinals habit, he should take an ordinary black gown (which was offered him)
and should presently follow such as attended for him. The Cardinal (who could
not avoid it by any protestations) was presently conveyed by a secret passage
to a Coach, and so conducted unto the confines of Stiria, and from thence to
Tiroll, with 200 horse. His secretary and servants (who attended for him in the
Court) were called into the Archdukes Cabinet, where being commanded to deliver
the Cardinals keys, they were committed. This was done with such secrecy, as
no man discovered it in Court, neither did the Cardinals servants know it,
until at night they saw their Lords house searched, and his goods seized. The
Cardinal being sent away; the King and the Archduke went unto the Emperor,
whom they made acquainted with what had past.

In Bohemia the Protestant States, seeing the insolences which the
Imperialists had committed, wrote unto the Emperor, and to the Electors
Palatine and of Saxony, and to the Protestant States of Silesia, to make their
complaints of the insolences and violences which had bin done: And they did
also write unto king FERDINAND, and to the Archduke MAXIMILIAN, to move his
Imperial Majesty to give ear unto a good Peace.

All the Protestant Princes and States of Germany, or neighbors to Bohemia,
assisted them with men, money, or counsel, except the Elector of Saxony; who
did all good offices to reconcile Princes and other States assist the
Procestants of Bohemia.
this quarrel, being a friend to the house of Austria. The Protestants of
Morauia and Silesia in the beginning sent Ambassadors to the Emperor and the
Protestant Directors at Prague. The Morauians employed themselves effectually
to procure a peace, and refused to aid the Protestants of Bohemia: but at the
years end they changed their opinion. As for the Princes and Protestant States
of Silesia, they made show to have a particular interest in this war with the
Bohemians; to whom they sent 6000 horse and foot. They published a declaration
to justify their action; concluding, that they found this trouble was merely
by reason of the contrauentions and persecutions made for religion; the
Catholics having rased the Protestants Temples, and committed them to prison
which had built them; that the Emperors Officers, of causes of religion made
crimes of rebellion; that the Protestants of Bohemia had surprised Letters of
the Jesuits; containing, that The time was come that Bohemia would be assured
for the Catholics, and that the Protestants would be deprived of their
privileges; and the edicts for the peace of religion, revoked: the which the
said Jesuits had often preached in their Sermons: that if the Princes and States
of Silesia kad known there had bin any other action against the Bohemians but
for religion, they would not have succored them; desiring above all things to
be most obedient to the Emperor.

The Prince of Orange and the States of the united Provinces promised to assist
them both 1618
with men and money. The Earl of Hohenlo or Hollock brought them goodly Troops
out of the The Electors and Protestant princes write to the Emperor.
Duchy of Brunswick. As for the Electors and Princes of the Union of Germany,
who did much affect the Bohemians for their religion* they wrote to the
Emperor, that experience and nature taught how precious a thing public peace
was; that they could never have imagined, that his Imperial Majesty would have
suffered Bohemia to have been engaged in so violent and cruel a war, seeing
there had been means to preserve his royal authority, and to contain his
subjects in obedience; that the success of civil war was doubtful, and the
end ruinous and miserable; that it was greatly to be feared, that this civil
war of Bohemia would set the neighbour-States on fire, and breed a great
alteration during his Reign; that the question being touching privileges
granted to the Protestants of Bohemia for the liberty of their religion, they
doubted not but if his Imperial Majesty would grant them a favorable hearing;
all things might be well reconciled, seeing that many Electors and Princes
offered to employ themselves: wherefore they entreated him to continue the
proposition of peace which they heard he had made, to pardon his subjects
offenses, to restrain his soldiers violences, and to quench the fire which was
in his State; it being also to be feared, thar the Turk, embracing this
occasion of civil war, would break the truce, and invade the rest of Hungary.

Count BVCQVOY arrived in September with some Troops, and marched toward
Budvitz; The Earl of Bucquoy enters into Bohemia.
where, at his coming to the Army, he made a proclamation upon pain of death,
that none should set fire upon any place, nor commit any violence. They write,
that, being at Vienna, it was ^ould him that the rustic and new soldiers of
Bohemia would be easily vanquished: but he found the contrary, being at
Budvitz; where there were two Armies, one of either side the river of Maloz:
the which made the Earl to contain himself within his trenches.

The Emperor having resolved to refer the difference betwixt him and the
Protestants of Four Arbitrators appointed by the Emperor to treat a peace in
Bohemia.
Bohemia, to the arbitrament of four persons, two Catholics, and two
Protestants; that is to say, the Elector of Mentz and the Duke of Bauaria,
Catholics; and the Electors Palatine and of Saxony, Protestants: to them he
wrote his Letters, entreating them to take some pains to reconcile this
difference; appointing the place of their meeting to be at Pilsen. The Elector
of Saxony sent one presently to Prague, to exhort them to accommodate
themselves to the Emperors intention. To whom they answered, that they would
willingly refer themselves to those four Princes: but as for the place of
meeting (having resolved to besiege Pilsen) they could not yield unto it, the
Inhabitants being Catholics, and great enemies to the Protestants; desiring
him to consider, that the Directors absenting themselves, the Imperialists
might make some enterprise upon the Towns of Prague; whereof the surprise which
the Earl of Tampierre had lately made of the Town and Castle of Camnits, was a
sufficient proof.

The Earl of Mandsfeldt had commandment from the States to besiege Pilsen; and
the Inhabitants, seeing the Army approach, set fire on the suburbs. The Emperor
heerupon wrote to the Elector of Saxony, and taxed the Bohemians to have
besieged the Town, which he had appointed for the conference; desiring, that
the said Electors Ambassador should return to Prague, and propound a suspension
of Arms in the Electors name to prevent the forcing of Pilsen, and to resolve
with the Directors upon the assurance of the conditions and the place of
conference. The Electors Ambassador went to Prague, where he had nothing but
words from the directors. The Duke of Bauaria wrote also unto the said States,
that if they continued this siege, they would show the contrary to that which
they had formerly published in their apology and protestation.

The Protestants, growing then strong, made answer to the Elector of Saxony and
the Duke of Bauaria, that they had not been well informed of the causes of the
siege of Pilsen; the which they would not have undertaken, if there had not
been great occasions offered; that the Inhabitants of Pilsen had promised to
ioin with them in friendship, and had broken their faith, suffering The
directors reasons for the siege of Pilsen.
a new garrison to come into their Town; which had ouerrun the whole Province,
taken many Protestants of quality prisoners, spoiled the Country, and ruined
the Farms of the Protestant Nobility; and seeing that no warning could divert
them from these acts of hostility, they had resolved to present a siege to draw
them to their duties: but they grew more insolent, threatening to ruin all the
Protestants houses within the Province: Whereupon, they had given commandment
to the Earl of Mandsfelt to press the siege, that the Inhabitants might be
forced to unite themselves with the other Towns of Bohemia, and to live in
peace.

The Earl of Thurn in the mean time going toward the Frontiers of Silesia to
join with the Marquess of Iagerndorff and the Silesians, the Earl of Bucquoy
made an enterprise upon the 1618
Town and Castle of Neuhaus, meaning to surprise it by night; but it succeeded
not, for he found the garrison and inhabitants ready in Arms, so as he
durst not attempt to batter it. The Earl of Thurn having joined with the
Silesians, being within twenty four hours march, he returned with his troops
to Buduitz. The Earl of Thurn having recovered Pilgram, with The Earl of
Thurne comes to charge the Earl of Bucquoy.
all the places which TAMPIERRE had taken at his entry into Bohemia, he made
his Army to turn head, to charge the Earl of Bucquoy in his lodging at
Camnits; whereof being advertised he caused his troops presently to return
toward Buduits: yet he could not do it so speedily, but the Protestants
Fore-ward came to skirmish with the Rere-ward of the Imperialists, whereas
BVCQVOY had some difficulty to retire his Cannon: and if he had not broken a
bridge, and lodged some Harquebuziers in a wood, where the Protestants were to
pass, he had been in danger to have been defeated. The Protestants having
past the wood, they returned again to fight: the which was valiantly
maintained on both sides, during five hours space; but if the night had not
favored the Imperialists in their retrait, the Protestants had gotten an
absolute victory. The loss was equal: but the Protestants had the place of
battle, and 200 prisoners.

After this exploit the Earl of Thurne hearing there were 30 wagons coming
from Viena Thirty waggone taken by the Protestants.
to Buduitz, with aconuoy of 800 men, he laid an ambush for them: which
charging them within a mile of Buduitz, they put the soldiers to flight, and
took the wagons. The siege continued still at Pilsen: where having made a
breach they were upon terms of composition, but the inhabitants grew
obstinate; whereupon MANDSFIELD doubted his batteries, and made a great breach
right against a house which the Emperor RODVLPHVS had built; the which the
soldiers took by assault and lodged there. Yet the inhabitants and garrison
annoyed them much from S. BARTHOLMEVVS Church, and began to set fire on their
houses to keep them from passing: so as all things tended to a great ruin and
desolation, if God in an instant had not mollified their hearts on either side.

The Protestant commanders forseeing the ruin and inevitable loss of this
town, and the Pilsen reduced under the obedience of the protestants.
consequence thereof, sent to advise the Burgesses and soldiers not to lose
themselves, and that there was means to give them an honorable composition:
that the Burgesses should be preserved in their goods and liberties, joining
to the union of the Protestant estates, carrying all their Arms into the
palace, an delivering the keys of the towne-vnto the Earl MANDSVIELD: As for
the soldiers (if they would not serve the States) they should depart with
their Arms and be conducted to a place of safety: and so the town was
yielded the next day unto Count MANDSFIELD, and some of the soldiers followed
the Protestants Army.

After the taking of Pilsen, all the towns of Bohemia yielded to the Protestant
Estates, except Buduitz, and some few places thereabouts, which were covered by
the Imperial Army: and the Earl of Bucquoy extending his limits took
Cromlau, which he mand with a good garrison. Cromlau taken by the Imperialists.
Winter being far aduanc'r, the Directors lodged part of the Earl of Thurn's
footmen in Newhaus and other towns near to Buduitz and Cromlau. With the rest
(being in a manner all horsemen) the Earl transported the wars into
Austria, making an incursion within nine miles of Viena, where they spoiled
many Burroughes, Monasteries and Churches, and among others the Abbey of
Swethall (which was a retreat for the Austrian Boot-halers) in the which they
found a great booty: they chased away the Abbot, who retired to Vienna; and
having manned it with a good garrison, they returned into Bohemia with great
spoils. The Emperor hearing that the Silesians were in COUNT THVRNS Foreward,
he wrote unto the Princes and Protestant States of Silesia, that he would
never have thought the Silesians would have attempted to come and spoil his
faithful subjects of Austria: That the Protestants of Bohemia having demanded
The Emperors complaint to the States of Silesia.
succors to defend themselves, he would not believe that they would have
employed them to wrong him out of Bohemia, and in the view of his capital City
of Austria: wherefore he advised them to retire their troops.

The Silesians desiring to be satisfied in this point, The Protestants of
Bohemia made them answer, that they were not to be blamed for this attempt,
seeing that the Austrians had come into Bohemia, and committed horrible
insolences, and carried away great spoils; the Abbey of Swethal being their
first retraite; so as they had reason to seize upon that Abbey, to prevent
their enemies entering into their country that way: That their enterprise to
transport the war into Austria, was done for two ends. The first to force
their enemies to seek a peace. The second, that there were many Protestants in
Austria which desired to unite themselves in the cause of religion with the
Bohemians and Silesians, and to be assured of the liberty of Religion: That the
same day they had received Letters from the States of Morauia, signifying, that
they had dismissed their Governor and his Lieutenant, being Roman Catholics,
and had established Protestants, and that they desired to unite and combine
themselves with all the other Protestants of the neighbor Countries, for the
defense of Religion. That they also expected Letters from the Protestants of
Austria, both above and beneath Ense, and their answer made unto the Emperor:
wherefore they entreated the said States, and Protestant Princes of Silesia,
not to give credit to their enemies; but to believe that the entry of their
troops into Austria, concerned the general good of the Protestants of all the
neighbor Provinces to Bohemia.

The Protestants of Austria above the River of Ene, having built a Fort upon
the River of The Emperors demands to the Protestants of Austria.
Dannow, to hinder the passage of the Forest by the which they entered into
Bohemia, the Duke of Bauaria and the Townsmen of Passau, gave charge unto
their Agents to make their complaints unto the Emperor: who at their request
sent the chief Marshall of his Court to the said States, to persuade them to
raze that Fort, to leave a free passage into Bohemia by the Forest; to carry
themselves lovingly and friendly toward the Earl of Bucquoy, General of the
Imperial Army at Budvitz; to relieve him with corn and victuals, and to
suffer the Soldiers to pass 1 Answer.
freely from Bohemia into Austria, and from Austria into Bohemia. Thereunto the
said States made a long answer; That the Fort was built upon the lands of
Austria, with no intent to offend any man, but only for the defense of the
Country. That they were not resolved to open the passage by the Forest, by
reason of the Neighborhood of the Bohemians. That it would be dangerous unto
them to have any familiarity with Count BVCQVOY, seeing they were so near to
the Bohemians, who might easily invade and spoil their Country, as they had
threatened by their Letters. As for the victual and munition which was demanded
for the Army, they were ready to supply him, so as the Earl would send for it
and fetch it at his own peril.

The Protestant States of lower Austria, being pressed by the Emperor to make
head and resist the Bohemians, and to prefer the public good before their
own private Intrest, touching 1619
the point of Religion: they made answer, That they had great cause to
complain of the 2 Answer.
Catholics, for that they could not enjoy the free exercise of their
Religion, granted by the deceased Emperor MAXIMILIAN: That they could hardly
believe that his Imperial Majesty would ever have attempted a war against the
Bohemians, without the general consent of the States of Austria, and without
their approbation being then assembled, and having not made them acquainted
with the causes of that Assembly: That whatsoever concerned this war of
Bohemia, was kept hidden from them as a mystery, and that the Earl of Bucquoy
General of the Army, and the chief officers being strangers, it had given
them cause of discontent and jealousy: For that they could not obtain from
the Catholics an answer to their just demand, for the free exercise of their
Religion: That they doubted not if they had taken advice at the general
Assembly of the States of Austria before the beginning of this war, all the
ensuing miseries had not happened; as might be verified by former presidents:
That his Majesty refusing in this action to follow the ancient presidents, and
to give ear unto the wholesome counsel of the Electors and Princes, it was
reasonable that the miseries which had happened should be imputed to those
which gave him counsel to war, who should now find means to free their
country from so many afflictions: That they would not aduize his Imperial
Majesty to begin a war, knowing that the end is always doubtful, and the
errors irreparable: much less to such a war as this, in the which we may
behold plainly the ruin of Bohemia, with the overthrow of Justice, of the
Laws, and all good constitutions, and which draws after it all sorts of
miseries: That to divert all these great calamities, and more, which threatened
those Countries; they could give his Majesty no better advice, then to make
choice of some worthy personages of the States of Austria, to send them unto
the Directors of Bohemia, to exhort them to abstain from all acts of
hostility; and that his Majesty for his part would do the like, and then call
a general Assembly of the States of Bohemia, and there to consult of the
means to settle a peace in their country. An enterprise upon Cromlau.


On the 8 of January the Protestants had an enterprise upon Cromlau, where the
Hungarians were in Garrison: who were aduertized of this plot, and were in
Arms; so as they returned to their quarter near to Newhaus, without any
exploit. In this return, the Earl of Bucquoy salied forth of Buduitz with
1000 horse, to give them the chase: but he found opposition and sharp
incounters, so as the Protestants forced the Imperialists to retire toward
Buduitz: Some write that there were slain of both sides 500 men, and that the
loss was equal.

In the beginning of the year, the Emperor wrote his Letters to the Directors
of Bohemia, to induce them to a suspension of Arms; and the Elector of Saxony
(to whom the Emperor had referred the conditions) sent his Ambassador also to
the Directors, to know their will: But, 1619.
they excused themselves, that they could not give any answer, without the
advice of the States of Silesia: Yet afterward they sent him an answer, and
entreated him to consider well how this suspension might be made, and upon what
assurance, that it should not be violated: For, all these troubles (said they)
hay no other beginning, but for promises made and not observed: That the Earl
of Bucquoy, General of the Army, was a stranger, and had no dignity in the
Roman Empire: That having many times transgrest even the Emperors
commandments, and continued the burnings in Bohemia, he might when he pleased
break the suspension: And that in the last troubles of Austria, during the
Truce, the Earl of Tampierre had transgrest; to whom they only made a verbal
reprehension. Hereupon the Elector of Saxony, seeing the Emperor with the
States of Morauia, Silesia and Austria, desire a treaty for the concluding a
peace with the Bohemians; he appointed the place of meeting in the Town of
Egra, on the foureteenth of April: whereof he advertised the Directors of
Bohemia.

The Emperor was much incensed against Count ERNEST of Mandsfeldt, who had
commanded Prescription of the Earl Mandsfeldt.
the Protestants Army at the siege of Pilsen: whereupon, he caused a
proscription or banishment to be set up against him in all the public places
of Vienna; intimating, that whereas by the Imperial constitutions, all men of
what dignity or quality soever were forbidden to carry Arms against the
Emperor, or against any State of the Empire upon pain of Proscription; to the
end that the Peace of the Empire might be the more religiously observed: yet it
was notorious, that ERNEST of Mandsfeldt had not only levied soldiers without
his priuity, conducted them into Bohemia, and employed them against his
faithful subjects; but also had besieged and forced the Town of Pilsen,
whereby he had incurred the punishments inflicted by the said constitutions:
Wherefore according to the same he declared him a Proscript and banished man,
abandoning his life and goods to him that could take them.

The Directors of Bohemia, being advertised that they levied in Flanders six
thousand Foot and two thousand Horse for the Emperor, they sent forth a
commandment, That all Bohemians, having attained the age of twenty years,
should be ready in Arms; the Caualiers with two horses, and the Soldiers with
their Musket or Harquebuze, and reduce themselves into companies. Moreover,
they gave them to understand, that touching the suspension propounded by the
Emperor, there had been nothing concluded by the Elector of Saxony, who had
only said that the Assembly to treat of a Peace should be held at Egra, and
that they should begin by a suspension of Arms; the which was not very certain
to be concluded, for that the Earl of Tampierre, having levied new troops,
had renewed his incursions; putting all to fire and sword as he past, and that
coming into the town of Graetsen, and not able to take the Castle, he had set
fire of the Town. On the tenth of March one thousand six hundred nineteen, the
Emperor MATHIAS died in his Castle at Vienna, being sixty two years old and
fifteen days. After which FREDERICK the Elector Palatine, and the Electors of
Saxony, being The death of the Emperor Mathias.
Viceroyes of the Empire during the vacancy, wrote their Letters unto all the
Princes and States of the Empire, in their several Jurisdictions, for the
maintenance of the Peace of the Empire, until the Election of a new Emperor.

The Protestant States of Bohemia, by their decree, had expelled the Jesuits
out of Prague, and out of the whole Realm, who retired to Brin in Morauia,
which is a member of the Crown of Bohemia: Into the which the old Earl of
Thurn was now entered with an Army, to draw them into an offensive and defensive
league with the Bohemians; under favor of whose Arms the Protestants of
Morauia sent their Deputies to an assembly at Snaim. The Cardinal of
Ditristein, who was great Master and Captain general of Morauia for
FERDINAND, had called an assembly of the Catholic States at Brin, and with
the said Cardinal joined the Senate, the The Earl of Thurn enters Morauia.
Prince of Lichtenstein, the Baron of Tzerotine and others, who would gladly
have maintained their Faith to FERDINAND, but they wanted forces to make good
their authority: For the Burgessies and Towne-house inclined to the
Protestants, whose deputies came with a conuoy of 800 horse from Snaim to the
gates of Brin; where they entered the third of May, and went presently to
Council: and soon after the Townsmen went to Arms, drawing in 7 Cornets of
German horsemen: Then they seized upon the keys of the Town, the Ports,
Bulwarks, and all the approaches.

After this, the Protestant States came from Council to the marketplace:
Where environed 1619
by the Townes-men they invited one another to take an Oath there publicly in
the sight of heaven, to maintain the liberty of Religion, the authority of the
States and their privileges. From thence they went to the Cardinal, to the
Prince of Lichtenstein, Tzerotin, and other Noblemen Catholics, being in
their several lodgings: who seeing this alteration and apprehending the
danger, gave them to understand, that they desired Peace, and to maintain
themselves united with the Protestants, for the preservation of the authority
of the States. But this could not satisfy them: For in the end they commanded
the Cardinal to forbear to call himself Captain general of Morauia, or to
execute the charge, which he promised to do; and also to send back his
Commission to King FERDINAND, and to remain united to the will of the States:
And it is written that the same night of the third of May, they sent a
Commandment unto the Cardinal and to TZEROTIN, not to go out of their
lodgings upon pain of death, placing guards about them. Cardinal Ditristein
and Tzerotin, detained prisoners by the Protestants.


The next day, they changed all the officers, deposed the Papisticall Senators,
and placed Protestants. In ihe end, they made an irreuocable Decree to banish
the Jesuits out of Brin and Morauia, as the Bohemians had formerly done: And
on the last of July following, a general League was concluded between the
Protestants of Bohemia, Silesia, Morauia and Lusatia, upon certain Articles,
which are too long to relate.

The Directors had resolved to press the States of Morauia to chase the
Jesuits out of their Province, for two reasons which moved them. First, That
since they had been chased out of Bohemia, they had practiced to break the
union and correspondency which the State of Bohemia had with the States of
Morauia, and their neighbors: And Secondly, That they animated the The Jesuits
expelled Morauia.
people to hold good for the house of Austria. Whereupon, the Directors of
Bohemia made a Proclamation in Brin with the consent of the Magistrate, that
the Jesuits should depart out of Morauia within fifteen days, upon pain of
corporal punishment: But, for that it was not made in the name of the States
of Morauia, the Jesuits regarded it not. Whereupon the Directors of Bohemia
sent two Commissaries, who (favored by the Magistrates of Brin) went directly
to the Jesuits College; and finding them ready to sit down to dinner,
commanded them in the name of the States of Bohemia to depart the Town
presently. The Jesuits desired leave to take their refection: which being
denied, they were forced to pack up their baggage and begone. Before they were a
league out of Brin their College was on fire, and burnt with such violence as
it was wholly consumed, and some twenty houses adjoining. The Protestants said
that it was a practice of the Jesuits to ruin the Town of Brin: and the
Jesuits on the other side affirmed, that the Protestants had set it on fire to
incense the people, to massacre both them and the Catholics.

The Earl of Thurne after the Emperors death upon an advertisement given him
by the Protestants of Austria, of an enterprise upon Vienna (which they held
assured by reason of the great intelligence they had with them of their
Religion) being entered into Austria, he The exploits of the Imperials.
was aduertized upon the way that the enterprise was discovered: which made him
return into Bohemia, having received some loss by the Imperialists. The Earl
of Bucquoy, being in Buduits, with some forces more then ordinary, having
received the Troops of Hungary, and 1000 horse from the Low Countries, he
resolved to go out Budvitz with his Army to assail the Castle of Natolis; the
which being summoned yielded presently: After which, he went and forced the
quarter of Count MANDSFELDT, and defeated all his troops being 3000 men; at
which charge they took seven Ensigns, two Cornets, the one being Count
MAMDSFELDTS, Count Mansfelts qurter forced by Bucquoy.
three pieces of Ordinance, eight or nine hundred slain, one thousand four
hundred prisoners; among which there was a Captain of Horse, seven of foot,
four Lieutenants, six Ensigns, and the Sergeant Mayor to Count MANDSFELDT:
And so having taken a great booty, they returned to Budvitz: Herupon the
Protestants, being with their Army within two leagues of Budvitz, retired in
order of battle, toward Verinau and Newhaus.

The Directors of Bohemia, seeing the Imperialists fortified, and to have had
good success in some enterprises, they sent unto the Protestant States of
Morauia, Austria, Silesia, and Germany, for succors: and withal they wrote
Letters unto BETHLEM GABOR Prince of Transiluauia, acquainting him with the
estate of their affairs, and the cause of their wars; entreating Bethlems
Letters to the Directors of Bohemia.
him to assist them in the general defense of Religion. To whom he made a long
answer; assuring them, that for the pacifying of those combustions in
Christendom, he would not be an idle spectator, but would employ both heart
and hand, to find out fit and wholesome remedies: But for that his Country lies
in the very mouth of the Turk, who in his Connsells (like unto the waves of
the Sea) is never quiet, but still watchful upon the least discord of
Christians 1619
(and the rather now, when as all things were pacified in Asia and Persia) to
take from them all means to annoy, and to invade the neighbor Provinces, and
(the division of Christians being speedily suppressed) to settle a more firm
security, he had propounded unto himself two things: The one, to procure the
favor and good liking of the Ottoman Emperor, for the working of this
reconciliation; the other, that he might truly understand the state and intent
of the States of Bohemia: wherefore by the Providence of God, these occasions
did so concur, as he understood by their Letters of the seventh of August,
how they stood affected unto him: And in like manner, on the seventeenth of the
same month, he had received from the Sultan, his consent and favor (beyond
his expectation) for the preservation of Christian affairs. Whereupon, he
promised to be with an Army the next month upon the confines of Morauia,
unless some great cause should stay him in Hungary; persuading them to
preserve their forces together, and not to hazard any battle before his
coming. Bethlin goes which an Army into Hungary.


The Directors having sent an Ambassador with Letters in answer of his; upon
the receipt thereof, he presently gathered together a great Army at
Clausenbonrg: with the which, he marched into the higher Hungary, with
eighteen Cannon: Where, the people being terrified, he reconciled the
Noblemen unto him, HVMANOI only excepted; who, being too weak to make
resistance, fled into Poland.

He sent part of his Army to besiege Cassouia: the which being unable to make
resistance, Cassouia taken.
and out of hope of all succors, yielded unto him, taking an Oath to BETHLIN,
and the States of Hungary. This struck a great terror into the Hungariaus, and
made the Jesuits and Clergymen to fly the Country.

THE LIFE OF FERDINAND, THE SECOND OF THAT NAME, AND HVNDRETH AND TWENTIETH
ROMAN EMPEROVR.
THE death of the Emperor MATHIAS being published; the Elector, Archbishop of
Mentz, Chancellor of Germany (according to the duty of his charge) gave notice
thereof to the rest of the Electors of the Empire; and appointed a day for
their meeting at Franckford upon Mein, on the tenth of July this year one
thousand six hundred nineteen, for the choosing of a new King of Romans:
Whither, FERDINAND King of Bohemia, with The Electors meet at Frankford to
choose a king of Romans.
the Electors of Mentz, Cullen and Treues came in person: but, the Elector
Palatine, the Duke of Saxony, and the Marquess of Brandenbourg, sent their
Ambassadors. Before they fell to the Election, they entered into consultation
touching the combustions of Bohemia; writing Letters to the Directors,
importing that they were desirous to employ their best care and endeavors to
compound the dissensions which had grown betwixt them and the deceased
Emperor MATHIAS and their new king FERDINAND, according to right and equity,
and to settle a desired peace in the kingdom; entreating 1619
them to com to Ratisbon the 20 of Nouemb. following, removing al impediments
which They write vto the Directors of Bohemia.
might make the treaty difficult; and in the mean time to abstain from all
acts of hostility: but receiving no answer, they gave them to understand by
other Letters, that FERDINAND (being chosen Emperor) had promised to be present
at the treaty of Ratisbone, or to send his Ambassadors: wherefore they thought
good to admonish them, that they might prepare themselves accordingly; and so
moderate their counsels, as all extremities being laid aside, all men might
conceive an undoubted hope of the conclusion of a peace.

The Directors of Bohemia were careful to send 3 Ambassadors to Franckfort to
the election; but, they were not suffered to enter into the town: whereupon,
they retired to Hannaw: from The Bohemians oppose against Ferdinand touching
the Electorship.
whence they wrote Letters unto the Elector of Mentz, intimating, that King
FERDINAND had no right to the Electorship of Bohemia, for that he had never
been in actual possession of that kingdom; neither had the summation been
made immediately to the residence of Prague as it ought to have been, but was
sent directly to Viena. Wherefore they humbly entreated him to impart their
Letter unto the rest of the Electors, and take order that the Diet assigned
might be suspended and deferred until the troubles and combustions were
pacified, and the point of Election decided: If not, that they would be pleased
to call the States of the Crown of Bohemia to the Diet, for that they
pretended a proprietarie right to the Election. But, this prevailed nothing
with the Ecclesiastical Electors; who would needs proceed to an Election: so
as on the 18 of August, FERDINAND was chosen King of Romans, and crowned the
30 with Ferdinand crowned king of Romans.
the accustomed solemnity.

This Emperor was called Arc-hduke of Austria of Grets in Stiria, to
distinguish the Families. For, the Emperor FERDINAND the First had three
sons. MAIMILIAN, the eldest (who succeeded him in the Empire) had diverse
sons; all which were styled Archdukes of Austria, without any distinction.
FERDINAND, his second son, was entitled Archduke of Austria of Grets; from
whom this Emperor now living, descends. And CHARLES, the third son to
FERDINAND the First, was Archduke of Austria of Inspruck.

These civil wars of Bohemia troubled the minds of many Christian Princes,
fearing that this distraction would open a gappe for the barbarous Turk to
advance his conquests in Christendom. Our Kings Majesty of great Britannie
(who has always been a Prince of peace) desirous to see these dangerous
wars suppressed in the breeding, by some good accord; sent an honorable
Embassy by the Lord HAYS, Viscount of Doncaster, now Earl of Carlisle, to
FERDINAND newly chosen Emperor, to treat of a reconciliation betwixt him and
his subjects of Bohemia; but it did not sort with his Majesty's religious
intent and desire; for in the Interim, the States of Bohemia (being distasted
with the reiection of their Ambassadors at Franckfort, and before the receipt
of the Electors Letters after the Emperors Electors) being assembled together
in Prague with the Deputies of the incorporated Provinces, concluded and
protested by oath, never to acknowledge FERDINAND for their King, resolving to
proceed to a new Election; so as on the 26 of August Stil^ vetere they made
choice of FR^DERICK the Fifth Elector Palatine of the Rhine to be their King;
whereof they advertised him by Letters, The Bohemians rejected king Ferdinand
and chose the Elector Palatine.
and that he had been solemnlie proclaimed; yet he would not presently accept
of this election, without the advice of the Princes and Protestant States of
the union in Germany; whom he entreated to meet at Rottemburg, to assist him
with their counsels: where they were all of opinion, that he should accept of
this dignity, as necessary for the general good of Germany, and of other
Princes and states their confederates.

The manner of the Bohemians proceeding to win the Elector Palatine to allow
of their Election and to accept of the Crown, has not been written so
particularly by any Author, as The manner of the Electors acceptance of the
Crown of Bohemia.
I have received it by the relation of a worthy judicious Knight, who was in
those parts, and informed himself curiously of every circumstance how it past.
The States of Bohemia (as he says) having made choice of the Elector Palatine
to be their King, sent their Ambassadors unto him being at Heidelberg in the
lower Palatinate: whom although he entertained well; yet he gave them a
dilatorie answer, being not yet fully resolved: which was the cause of a
meeting at Walsaxon in the upper Palatinate, betwixt the Elector Palatine and
the Directors of B^hemia. At this assembly, the Elector seemed not unwilling to
embrace so brave and free an offer: yet he held it not fit to accept thereof
suddenly and rashly; knowing well to what cares, toiles, and danger, this
dignity was subject: and therefore he entreated them to have patience and to
respite him for a time, until he had acquainted the King of great Britanne his
father-in-law, with their Election; whose approbation he much desired in the
acceptance thereof: whereupon he sent CHRISTOPHER, Baron of Done, as his
Ambassador, to acquaint his Majesty with their 1619
proceedings; promising, upon his return, to give them a direct answer.

The Lords of Bohemia held themselves no way safe, vutill they had prevailed
with the Elector Palatin, and won him to accept of that Crown; being
conceited that if he were once crowned, not only himself, but all his friends
and allies would employ their forces, and be engaged in their defense.
Whereupon, they took advice, what persons they might treat withal, and who
had greatest power and interest in the affection of the Elector: In the end
they fell upon CHRISTIAN, Prince of Anhalt; to whom they made such golden
promises both for himself and for all such as depended upon him, as he forgot
the duty of a true and faithful counselor, and became one of their party;
prevailing so much by his persuasions with the The Elector accepts of the Crown
of Bohemia.
Elector Palatin, as he yielded suddenly to accept of the Crown of Bohemia,
before the arrival of his Ambassador into England.

The offers which the Bohemians made to the Prince of Anhalt and the rest,
were, That the Prince should be General of all the Army: That CHRISTOPHER,
Baron of Done, should be Chamberlain of Bohemia; That TOTHOSIVS, his brother
(who was afterward sent hither as Ambassador) should have the best marriage
in Bohemia; and (which was worst of all) that the Earl of Holoch should be
made Lieutenant general of the Army. These great offers drew all these great
persons (who aimed at their own private ends) to the Bohemians purposes:
Besides, they gave way to others in both the Palatinats, to come into those
places which these men had formerly enjoyed. The King being crowned, and these
men possessed of those places, they did as needy greedy men use to do, looking
only to their own profit, and neglected wholly the honor of the King and
safety of the State; still disgracing Count THVRN and Count MANDSFELDT, who
were the only men that ever gave good counsels, or performed any worthy and
generous Act during the war.

The news of the Electors sudden acceptance of the Crown of Bohemia, were
very distastefull to our kings Majesty, the Prince Palatines father in law; who
held it a president of dangerous consequence for all Christian Kings, to auow
this sudden translation of a Crown by the authority of the people; nor yet
warrantable by the word of God, to transfer a Crown upon any pretext of
Religion, being bound to obey our kings and temporal superiors whatsoever they
be: and therefore he protested to remain Newter touching the affairs of the
kingdom of Bohemia.

The Emperor, after his coronation, went to Ausbourg: and from thence (being
accompanied by the Duke of Bauaria) he came to Munich, the Dukes chief place
of residence; where he had a princely reception. During his abode there, as
some write, he had much conference with the Duke, touching the wars of
Bohemia; promising, that if he would assist him in those wars, he would give
him the Electorshippe of the Rhyne and the upper Palatinat, for a reward of his
labor: and for such sums of money as he should disburse, he engaged unto him
lands The Emperors promise to the D. of (...).
in the upper Austria. This was a sweet bait, able to move any ambitious
Prince to forget all the ties and bonds of blood and consanguinity, upon hope
to add a Princely title to his own dignity, and a large extent of land to his
Territories. You may presume by the future events what their conclusion then
was: After which the Emperor went to Gretz and so to Vienna.

In the mean time before the Emperors return into Austria BVCQVOY having
taken Pisseck in Bohemia, he resolved to go to Thab^r: But, being prevented by
the Bohemians, he went and encampt at Merovits. The Bohemians followed him,
and campt opposite unto him, observing all his enterprises; so as they had many
skirmishes: And the fourth of September, a troop of Spaniards, going somewhat
far from the Camp, were charged by the Bohemians, and five hundred of them
slain. Thus the two Armies lay encamped; when as suddenly BVCQVOY received
advertisement, from the Archduke LEOPOLD, of the unexpected Buc^uoy goes out
of Bohemia.
coming of BETHLIN GABOR into Hungary; commanding him to man his chief
Castles and Towns, and to return into Austria: But, before his departure out
of Bohemia he took the Castle of Resemberg; and having fortified all the
passages he left the Country. After which, the Bohemians sent part of their
Army to recover Bechin: the which they forced with the petard, slew most of the
Garrison, and took the Governor with his Lieutenant, and sent them to Prague.
After which, they recovered Thin, which BVCQVOY had formerly taken: and in the
mean time the Earl of Tampierre had taken Lundebourg in Morauia for the
Emperor; but, with great loss of his men.

GABOR, having settled all things at Cassouia to his will, sent RHEDI and
SETSCHIVS 1620
with 1800 men, and twelve pieces of Ordinance to Fillec and other places;
which yielded Fillec and other places taken by the Transiluan.
unto them. Then writing their Letters to other towns upon the Frontiers, they
exhorted them to submit themselves willingly to the Transiluanian; assuring
them that this expedition was made with the knowledge and consent of many
States of the Christian Commonwealth. After which, they subdued Vaccia,
Tirnau, Neutra, Nouigrade, Possinga, and others: The Haiduques of Iermath
delivered up their Governor with the Fort. After which, Neuheusal yielded, and
the Governor was sent bound to Cassouia. The Palatine of Hungary wrote his
Letters The Palatine of Hungary exhorts Bethlin to desist
to BETHLIN GABOR, exhorting him to remember his Faith to the Roman Empire and
his common Country, and to desist from his enterprises. And withal, writing
to RHEDI, he wished him to consider how great the powers of the Kings of Spain
and France were, who were so strictly allied to the house of Austria, and that
the Electors of the Empire (some few excepted) would undoubtedly send succors
to CAESAR. Whereunto they answered, that they doubted not of the forces of the
Kings of Spain and France, or of the assistance of the Electors of Germany;
but they did hope before their coming all should be finished, and their dinner
made ready.

In the mean time there was an Assembly of the Princes and States, held at
Preslaue in Silesia, for the confirmation of that which had been concluded by
the States of Bohemia at Prague; where they had concluded, that King FERDINAND,
now chosen Roman Emperor, had deprived himself of the kingdom of Bohemia and
the rest of the Provinces, and that the States and all the subjects were freed
from their oath of obedience; whereby they had recovered their right to choose
a new King; whereupon they had elected FREDERICK, the fifth of that name, Count
Palatine of the Rhine, Duke of Bauaria, and Elector of the sacred Empire, for
their King. This was confirmed by all the States of Silesia; who exacted a
solemn Oath from the Clergy of Preslaue, that they should faithfully observe
and keep what-soeuer had been formerly decreed in the Assembly at Prague, and
live a quiet life, free from all practices against the Protestants: That they
should attempt nothing against the Emperors Letters Patent, touching the
exercise of Religion; that they should respect no man's favor, nor hatred:
that they should not be diuerted from their Oath with any entreaties, or
rewards, promises, or threats; nor with any absolutions, treaties,
constitutions of Councels, or Decrees Not to keep Faith with Heretics, or any
other exception whatsoever. All which they did wittingly and willingly
renounce, under the penalty ordained by God and the Magistrates, and the loss
of all their benefices, faculties, and goods which they held in Silesia.

The Elector Palatine having settled his affairs in the Palatinate, and
committed the civil government to JOHN Duke of Dupo^s, a Prince of that house,
and the affairs of war to JOHN Earl of of Nassau the elder; he went with the
Princess his wife, and children and his whole Court to Amberge, from whence he
certified the Elector of Saxony by his Letters, of his resolution, and of the
reasons which had induced him to accept thereof. To whom the Elector of Saxony
made a general answer; concluding, that he referred all to the providence and
will of God, wishing with all his heart, that he might embrace such counsel,
as might be fitting for his Electorall and Kingly dignity, profitable to his
subjects, honorable to the whole Empire, helpefull to the kingdom of Bohemia
and the annexed Provinces, and might tend to the procuring of a Peace, and the
avoiding of all ruin and desolation. In the mean time, he would pray unto
Almighty God to divert all danger from the bounds of the Empire, and that no
occasion might be giuenthe Turks, to obtain that which hitherto they could not
do by Arms.

In the beginning of October, a Collonell called GOLTSTEINE, entered Bohemia
with 400 shot, committing infinite insolences and spoils in the territory
of Satser: where the Contrymen fell upon them, and slew most part. Count
BVCQVOY, being called out of Bohemia by the Archduke LEOPOLD, presently took
Horn a Town in the lower Austria, The Transiluanans join with the Bohemians.
and left it again, and then marched to Suam, a Town in Morauia, with nine
thousand Horse and Foot; which he presently summoned: but the Garrison
prepared for defense; and he, hearing that twelve thousand Hungarians and
Transiluanians drew near, marched away by night, and went to join with the
Earl of Tampierre. In the mean time, the Transiluanians joined with the
Bohemians, and Morauians; and certain companies of the Hungarians left the
Earl of Tampierre, to go unto the Transiluanians.

The Earl of Thurn, seeing himself thus fortified, having six and twenty
thousand men A great fight betwixt the Imperials and the protestants.
in his Army; resolved, with RHED^S General of the Transiluanians, to go and
fight with Count BVCQVOY; who, finding his forces too weak, left his first
lodging, and 1619.
went and encamped at the outward bridge of the river of Danuow: whither the
Archduke LEOPOLD came from Vienna to view the Army. The enemy came with great
fury upon the rereward, and slew five hundred of the Earl of Tampierre's men.
LEOPOLD pressed Count BVCQVOY to fight: but he, finding his counsel to be very
dangerous, contained himself within his Camp. In the evening they began to
skirmish; the which continued almost till midnight, their ordinance playing
continually, with no small loss on either side. In the morning, the Fight
began again very furiously; where many were slain and murdered by the
ordinance. The Earl of Bucquoy had a great loss in his Camp, there being
three barrells of powder set on fire by negligence and carelessness, and very
many slain and drowned in the river. The Fight continued until it was night:
but, being ouerpressed by the Bohemians, they abandoned a Fort at the end of
the bridge, and retired unto the other side, breaking the bridge after them.
The number of the dead bodies was uncertain: but there were very many carried
the next day unto Vienna in wagons, whereof most died soon after. Count
BVCQVOY was shot into the arm; and his Lieutenant General had three
several wounds, but they were not mortal.

BETHLIN GABOR in the mean time marched with a great Army to Presburg, taking in
the Bethlin takes Presbourg.
way the Castle of Petronel, the which he burnt. The news heerof being brought
unto Vienna, they sent three companies of foot with three piece of ordinance by
boat; which entered the suburbs of Presbourg on the 13 of October. The night was
very tempestuous, rainy and windy; and the Transiluanians embraced this
occasion, and surprised the soldiers, who slept without fear; whereof most of
them were slain, and their Commander with some few others fled away. The
suburbs being surprised, BETHLIN summoned the Palatine to answer him, whether
he would defend the Town and Castle, or yield it without force. Having some
days granted to consult with PALFI and other Noblemen; being not able to
defend it, he resolved to yield it.

In the mean time, the new elect King of Bohemia, with his wife, children, and
whole train, came to Walsacken; whither the Ambassadors of Bohemia and the
incorporated Provinces came unto him: whereas one, in the name of all the rest,
delivered the reasons why they had rejected the Emperors government in Bohemia,
and made choice of him to be their King; giving him many thanks for his
acceptance, and praying for his happy and long continuance. Which ended, he
delivered unto them his reuersall Letters: by the which he promised before his
Coronation to take the oath after the example of his predecessors Kings of
Bohemia, to confirm all the privileges, immunities, liberties, rights,
statutes, and the ancient laudable customs of Bohemia; and especially the
Charter granted by the Emperor RODVLPH the Second, as king of Bohemia, to the
States and Inhabitants of the said Realm, for the free exercise of their
religion, or whatsoever else might concern the good of the Realm and the
incorporated Provinces: which Letters of reuersall were confirmed under his
hand and seal; these being received by the Deputies, they returned to Egra.
After which, the King with his Queen and whole Court past on, and arrived at
Prague the last of October.

I may not omit the Elector Palatines course before his going into Bohemia.
Having met with The Palatine to the Archbishop of Mentz, and his answer.
diverse of the confederate Princes at Rottenbourg, before his departure he
sent to the Archbishop and Elector of Mentz; to whom he propounded, that
whereas it had pleased God that he had been lately chosen King of Bohemia, and
was resolved to accept thereof, he desired to know of his Grace, in what terms
his estate stood with the Electorall house of Mentz; and whether that
correspondency which had for a long time been maintained betwixt both houses,
should continue still firm and inviolable: and whereas the Prince Palatine
understood, that there were good forces near at hand, he demanded whither they
went, and whether his Grace would vouchsafe them passage. To these the Elector
of Mentz answered, that he would observe the ancient correspondency which the
Electors of Mentz have had with the Electors Palatines, inuiolaby in all
lawful things; that touching that which concerned the tumults in Bohemia, he
was appointed no Judge, neither did they concern him; as for the Army, he knew
nothing certain: that hitherto he had denied no man passage, and continued
still in the same mind, so as they gave good security according to the
constitutions of the Roman Empire, to repair all damages: yet he would confer
touching this Article with the other Electors. And soon after, the Vicar
general or Gouerner of Heidelberg had staid all the revenues of the Clergy,
which they of Mentz, Spire, Worms, and the Teuton Knights hold in the
Palatinate.

The Elector of Mentz, being moved with the many complaints of the Clergy,
sent unto the Vicar general and the Council of the Palatinate, to expostulate
with them for the seizure of the Clergies rents; adding withal, that hitherto
there had not only a good concord 1619
been maintained betwixt the Electorall house of Mentz and the Palatinate; but,
before the departure of the Prince Elector Palatine to Prague; he had sent an
Ambassador for the confirmation and future maintenance of the said
correspondency betwixt both houses, so as he never expected A complaint.
this prohibition would have been made by so good a neighbor. Whereunto they
made answer, That they were not ignorant of the promises made on either side;
but, being advertised that the Clergy had promised a great sum of money to
the Crown of Spain, for the oppression of the Bohemians, to whom the Elector
Palatine was especially bound; for The answer of Counselors of the Elector
Palatine, to the Elector of Mentz.
this consideration they had granted this inhibition of Ecclesiastical rents;
neither were they to be blamed, nor any man of judgment would think it fit
for aid to go unto foreign Princes, out of the territories of their own
Prince, to subdue the Bohemians, and their Lo. the PALATINE: If therefore the
Elector of Mentz, and others whom it concerned, would take a course that there
should be no aides sent to prejudice the Bohemians, and their Lord the
Palatine; then no other resolution might be expected: And soon after the
Elector of Mentz, having written other Letters to the Elector Palatine, freed
the Clergy from this inhibition.

The Elect king of Bohemia (as we have said) being comn to Prague on the last
of October, was met by the Directors and Nobility, with certain troops of horse
and foot, and so was conducted into the City, they being all in Arms; where he
was received with great joy and acclamations. The King of Bohemia enters Prague.
After which, it was decreed by the general States of Bohemia, That the king
should receive a moity of the tributes, rents, and contributions; and the
Queen, a fourth part; and every man should pay his due, yearly, at the feast of
S. GEORGE: That the Directors should be freed from their Oath, and give an
account unto the Assembly, of such money as they had disbursed for the
Commonweal; That the Directors and Governors for the kingdom, should yield
the government of Arms unto the king, who should employ them for the defense of
himself, the kingdom, and incorporated Provinces; using yet the advice of the
Governors of the A decree made.
Realm and Provinces; That Commissioners should be sent out, to examine what
harms had bin done in the Countries, that consideration might be had thereof at
the next State-assembly, etc. MANDSFELDT, meaning to recover certain places
which BVCQVOY had taken, marched to Wintenbourg; where, the Governor refusing to
yield upon summons, the Earl forced a Port with Diverse towns recovered by the
Protestants of Bohemia.
the Petard; where, entering, he put all the garrison to the sword, except some
few that were taken prisoners: After which, diverse towns and Castles yielded
willingly, the garrisons departing to Buduitz. Then the Earl marched to
Praguditz, where the garrison put themselves in defense; but he took the town
by force. On the 24 of October the Army marched to Wodean: which they knowing
was but weakly mand, and that two Noblemen of Bohemia (which had served the
Emperor) were retired into the town, having stopped all the passages, they sought
to force it; but the garrison made great resistance: yet the next day the
Governor compounded to depart: the which was willingly granted, so as the two
Noblemen might be delivered unto them, who were sent to Prague, and committed
to prison.

All things in the mean time were made ready for the coronation at Prague; a
Theater was erected in the Temple; no suspected person admitted; all cloisters
and corners searched for fear of treason; the Chanons and Clergy men removed
out of the Cathedral Church, and another The coronation of the king of
Bohemia, and of the Queen.
appointed them for divine service, and a weekly stipend allowed them: They
changed the Arms of the kingdom upon the newgate; and for those of the house
of Austria which stood upon the breast of the Lion of Bohemia, they set the
arms of the Palatinate. All things being thus in a readiness, FREDERICK was
crowned King the fourth of November, all the Citizens and soldiers being in
Arms. The office was performed by the Administrator and an Elder, who supplied
the places of Bishops in that action, the which was performed with great
pomp and zeal. The particularities whereof you may read at large in
GOTARDVS. And on the seventh of November the Lady ELIZABETH, wife to King
FREDERICK was in like manner crowned with the same ceremonies. After which, the
King made public Public declaration made.
declaration of the causes which had moved him to take upon him the government
of Bohemia with the incorporated Provinces, sending it to all Christian Princes
and States; and withal, writing particular Letters, That he had received the
government and Crown of Bohemia with the incorporated Provinces, with the
accustomed solemnities, and the general applause of all the States and people;
That no private profit of his own had induced him thereunto; but, a desire to
free the afflicted from a general ruin had moved him to take upon him their
protection; and that he would equally defend both Catholics and Protestants,
in the free exercise of their Religion; hoping they would joyfully allow of
his dignity, and not fail to assist 1619
him, with their counsel and aid, against the invasion of his Enemies.

On the tenth of November there came an Ambassador from BETHLIN GABOR and the
States of Hungary to Prague, who propounded certain Articles to the Council.
First, They Ambassador from the Transiluanian and Hungarian to the States of
Bohemia.
required that there should be a perpetual League concluded betwixt Hungary,
Transiluania, and Bohemia with the incorporated Provinces; and that they should
fight with their joint forces for the common good. 2. That no Province should
conclude a Peace or begin a war, without the priuity and consent of the rest;
and that they should not make any peace with the house of Austria, to the
prejudice of the other part: But if they would make any league with other
Kings, Propositions.
Princes or States, it should be with the consent of the rest. 3. That they
should continue the war against the house of Austria, at the common charge of
the Provinces. 4. That whereas BETHLIN GABOR had assisted the Bohemians with
his Army, to his great charge, and at their request, in consideration thereof,
they should pay him 100000 Dollers. 5. That it being necessary in this
dangerous Estate of affairs, that the limits and forts should be well mand
against the Turks invasions; they required (for that the benefit redounded to
the whole Christian World) that the Crown of Bohemia and the incorporated
Provinces, should pay yearly 300000 Dollers. 6. That it was necessary,
Ambassadors were sent in the name of the new King and States, with others from
Hungary, to the Sultans Port; and that the Prince of Transiluania was ready to
undertake that Ambassie. 7. That, whereas the treasure of Hungary was much
exhausted, they required that the hereditary lands of the house of Austria
(which in time might be conquered, in Stiria, Carinthia, Carniola, and other
places) should be annexed to the Crown of Hungary. 8. That if the Polonians
should attempt any thing against Transiluania and Hungary, in favor of the
Emperor; then all the Provinces, especially Silesia, should be bound to send
aid unto that Prince. 9. That the States should move their King to confirm
the said Articles; and that they should give caution for the performance
thereof: and they in like manner should receive assurance from them.

The King of Bohemia (before his going to the Assembly at Nuren; having heard
the Prince of Transiluania's Ambassador) made answer, that he could not
presently give him a full resolution; for that some of their demands concerned
the whole Roman Empire: That as concerning the League, the Earl of Hohenloe
should come presently to the States at Presbourg with full power and authority
to confer with them touching the raising or leuying of a great Sum of
money. With which answer the Ambassador returned forthwith to Presbourg.

The King of Poland sent unto the Bohemians to solicit them to a Peace with
the Emperor, and they returned him in wrighting a declaration of their
reiection; persuading the The Polonians persuade their King not to aid the
Emperor.
King and the States of Polonia, to remember their old treaties, and not to
attempt any thing against them. Some Counselors persuaded the King not to
engage himself in these combustions; nor to attempt any thing against the
Realm of Bohemia or the incorporated Provinces: That he should remember, that
when as Polonia was on fire with intestine wars, they contained themselves:
That they entertained friendship with the Turks and Tartarians: That the
Hungarians, the English, the united Provinces, the Danes, with many other
Princes and States were their confederates: In so much that it appeared
plainly the war would be long and bloody, and dangerous for Poland, if they
engaged themselves in it.

In the mean time, there being rumors of great preparations for war in
Polonia, and that HVMANOI (who fled thither from Hungary) would invade Silesia,
Morauia, or Hungary, with a great Army; they commanded every twentieth man in
Silesia to take Arms, and had eight thousand choice men always in readiness.
The lower Austria was wonderfully afflicted The miserable state of lower
Austria.
by the insolency of Soldiers, and the inhabitants were forced to fly with
their wives and children. About Vienna, the Earls of BVCQVOY and TAMPIERRE,
spoiled and burnt many villages, that they might not be of any use to the
enemy; which bred a great dearth in Vienna, especially when it came to be
besieged. BVCQVOY and TAMPIERRE, hearing that the governor of Heinbourg had
been defeated by the Hungarians, they went to succor him with 6000 horse and
foot, where there was a great encounter and many slain on either side; after
which they returned to Vienna: but there were 1600 Hungarians forsook them,
and went to their Contrymen.

The fire of these civil and intestine wars of Bohemia, began to flame out
in Germany; the Electors, Princes and Imperial Cities and States grew into
factions, and made particular Assemblies, to provide forces to support their
parties; either pretending a fear to be supplanted in their religion. And
although I am tied to strict bounds, and cannot relate actions at large,
considering the copiousnes of my subject, and the short time this Emperor has
yet reigned, unless I should make it exceed the lives of many of his
Predecessors; yet, to give the Reader the better satisfaction, I hold it fit
to set down in particular how they were cantoned, as you may judge by their
particular Assemblies. Assembly of the protestant Princes at Nuremb.


The Electors, Princes, and Protestant States of the Union, met at Nuremburg in
November; whither came in person the Elector Palatine newly chosen King of
Bohemia, AUGUSTUS and FREDERICK Palatines of Newburg, JOHN ERNEST Duke of
Saxony, WEIMAR, with his two brethren, ERNEST of Brandenburg, Marquess of
Olnosbach or Amsbach, with his brother; JOHN FREDERICK Duke of Wittemberg, with
his two brethren; MAVRICE Lantzgraue of Hesse, and FREDERICK Marquess of Buden:
the rest sent their Ambassadors; namely, the Elector of Brandenburg, the Duke
of Deuzponts, the Marquess of Culmbach, the Prince of Lunbourg, the Duke of
Brunswick, the Marquess of Baden, the Earls of Veterouia, the Earls of
Francouia, the Earl of Oetingen, and in the name of the Nobles and Knights.
There came also Deputies from the Imperial Cities; as, Strausbourg, Francfort,
Nuremburg, Worms, Vlme, Spire, Rottembourg, Hall, Nordlingen, Landau, Vimpfen,
Buren, and from the Protestants of the higher and lower Austria: all these
favored the Bohemian party. The Catholic princes and states assembly at
Virsbourg.


The Electors, Princes, and Catholic States which adhered to the Emperor, met
at Virsbourg in Franconia: whither came Ambassadors from the Emperor, from the
Electors of Mentz, Cullen and Treues, from the Dukes of Bauaria and Lorrain,
from the Palatine of Newbourg, and from many Princes, Bishops, Abbats and
Prelates; as, those of Saltzbourg, Ausbourg, Virsbourg, Rotuil, Worms, Spire,
Heildeshein, Constance, Strausbourg, Passaw, Ratisbone, Erisnigen, Basle,
Munster, Paterborn, Liege, Fuld, Eluangen, Kepten, and others. Thither came
also Agents for the king of Spain. In this Assembly, the means how to maintain
peace in Germany were treated of, and how to defend themselves against the Arms
of the Protestant Princes, and what leuies every one should make; so as it
seemed all tended to war in Germany, both parties being much incensed. The
Emperor sends to the Assembly at Nuremberg.


The Emperor sent the Earl of Hohensollern to the assembly at Nuremberg; who,
making a long relation to them of the troubles of Bohemia, and of his Majesty's
peaceable inclination, exhorted the Electors, Princes and States there
assembled, to give credit to his words and promises, ra^er than to false
impostures and slanders; and not to suffer themselves to be corrupted by the
false reports of the Bohemians; but rather to employ their counsels and care to
prevent so many miseries as would undoubtedly grow in the Kingdom of Bohemia,
if matters continued in the same estate they then were: the which might give a
great advantage to the Enemy of Christendom, and be very dangerous for the
Empire. Wherefore, they should direct their consultations to some good end, so
as the honor of the Imperial Majesty might be preserved; who protested, not
to do any thing that were not just and honest, and worthy of his Imperial
grace and favor; promising to recompense the pains and merits of such as had
imploi'd themselves to end so great occasions of trouble.

Heerto the Assembly at Nuremberg made answer, that they were glad of his
Majesty's good Their answer.
resolution, conformable to theirs, which was only to prevent the miserable
estate of the sacred Empire. They made repetition of the dissensions of the
Empire, and of the grieuances of the Protestants; which I must for breuities
sake omit. But, touching the affairs of Bohemia, they said that they were not
to be blamed, if, seeing the Catholics begin motions of war, they were
careful of the welfare of their subjects, and prepared themselves to some
kind of defense; knowing, that they are not only bound to chase away the
danger out of the frontiers of their Country, but also to succor the
Protestants; yea, even the Elector Palatine FREDERICK, chosen King of Bohemia,
especially when he shall be molested in his lawful inheritance and seigneuries
in Germany; being bound thereto by the Imperial constitutions, and by their
Union.

They therefore besought his Imperial Majesty to dispose his counsels for the
pacifying of the present troubles in Bohemia, and to be careful that no
disaster might fall upon the Empire. As for them, they would never suffer
themselves to be won by any contrary persuasion; hoping, that his Majesty
would not give ear to those which were more desirous to entertain foreign
forces in the Empire, than to seek the safety and authority of the Emperor; and
that he 1619
should rather give ear to the just reasons of so many Electors, Princes, and
States of the Empire, then unto the discourses of certain men, who breathed
nothing but war, and a desire to ruin and root out those whom they falsely
called Heretics.

By this answer the earl of Hoensolemn finding that this assembly at Nuremburg
was wholly bent An Apollogie made for the Emperor. j
to support the Elector Palatine in the possession of his new Election to the
Crown of Bohemia against the Emperor; hemade a long Apology, and presented it
to the same Assembly. It contained a short relation of all the troubles of
Bohemia, during the life of the Emperor MATHIAS, with answers to their
oppositions against the admission of King FERDINAND to the Election of a new
Emperor, and to their declaration touching their reiection of FERDINAND, and
their Election of a new king: finally, his conclusion was, that the States of
Bohemia had no free Election to choose a king if any male or female of the blood
royal were living, which has been the occasion of all their wars: a point
which I will not decide, but leave it to ENEAS SILVIVS DV BRAVIVS, and others
which have written learnedly thereof.

The Prince of Transiluania after the assembly at Presbourg, made an incursion
with his Army Exploites of the Transiluanian.
toward Viena, putting all to the sword: He took Ebersdorf, with other towns
and villages, spoiling some and wasting the rest by fire, and then returned to
Presbourg. In their retrait, they write that Count BVCQVOY and TAMPIERRE
charged the Rereward, and slew 2000 Hungarians.

The Emperor commanded the States of high Austria, to send their Deputies to
court, to take their dew oath of allegiance, whereby they might prevent the
imminent danger, and The Emperor requires an oath from the States of high
Austria.
give no cause of greater miseries: But they delaying to make any answer, he
sent other Letters unto them, signifying, That they had not only forborne to
send him an answer, but had also made an incursion into the lower Austria, and
surprised certain towns; which were apparent signs of hostility. Wherefore
he admonisht them again to send their Deputies to take the oath; to call back
their soldiers; and to desist from their enterprises; if not, he would use
other remedies. About that time there came out of the Duchy of Milan, into the
Bishopprick of Passau (having past the Alps through Swisserland) 9000
soldiers, leaving behind them mournful marks of their bloody cruelty; who
having no means to pass into the upper Austria, The Emperors edict against
the Bohemians.
the contrymen having stopped up the passages; part of them past into Bohemia
toward Buduitz, under the leading of Don BELTHAZER: who being entered, caused
the Kings edict to be set up in all places written to this sense; That it was
known to all men, how that his subjects of Bohemia, partly through their own
malice, and partly by the persuasion of others, had run into rebellion,
violated the oath which they had taken to him, being their elected and crowned
King, and had presumed to choose them another King, and settle him in his
throne. Wherefore to preserve his right and to defend his subjects from ruin,
he had been constrained to send in new forces; That he doubted not but there
were many who either not pleased with these attempts, or changing their
opinions, would perform their due obedience to their lawful King; admonishing
all others, that remembering the oath whereunto they were bound, and having a
care of their wives, children and families, they should speedily return to
their obedience, and give in their names, to such commanders as he should have
in the Country, and thereby preserve themselves from ruin; promising pardon
to all that should demand it in this manner.

The Emperor being come to Viena, the Hungarians and Bohemians marched with a
great Vi^na besieged by the Hungarians and Bohemians.
Army toward the City; they took Ebersdorf, and then laid siege unto Viena,
spoiling all the towns and villages round about. The Country people flying
into the City, there grew a great dearth of corn, which made the enemy hope
that in short time they should force them to yield by famine. In the mean time
HVNNAVOI made an irruption into Hungary with 8000 Polonians: but he was
incountred by RAGOTZI, whom the Prince of Transiluania had left at Cassouia,
and received a great overthrow. Then joining with Radul, and the Earl of
Althem, being in all three or four thousand men, they encountered the Polonians
again: where there was a A great slaughter of Polonians and Hungarians.
cruel combat, the which continued almost the whole night, there being slain
on either part three thousand men. The Polonians retiring, made a show of of
slight; whereupon the Hungarian footfell presently to spoil: but the Polonians
returning suddenly (the Hungarian horsemen flying away) they were for the most
part slain. RAGOTSI having escaped, cried presently Bethlin Gabor leaves
Viena.
To Arms, to repair this loss: and BETHLIN being advertised thereof, he
forbear to press Viena; and sending part of his Army into Hungary, to Rheda,
he returned to Presbourg, having taken Edenbourg, and mand it with a garrison
of 400 men.

The States of the upper and lower Austria, had many consultations for their
defense against the incursions of BETHLIN GABOR Prince of Transiluania. Under
the pretext of this defense, the Protestant States levied forces: and having
drawn together some thousands of horse and foot, they seized upon Lipsa,
which they ruined for that the citizens had made resistance. After which they
took Sibilsberg, Leisdorf and Bechling; and then they marched to the Monastery
of Melcha, which was very well fortified. The Abbat offered certain thousands
of florens, to have Diverse towns taken by the Protestants.
his monastery spared, but he could not prevail: they having three several
batteries, they cut off the water from the Garrison: and the soldiers which
fetched it from the river of Dannow, were much annoyed by the shot; but it was
relieved by BVCQVOY. Not long before, the Earl of Mandsfield had recovered
Pisseck, after a months siege, being valiantly defended by Don MARTINO a
Spaniard; who was taken prisoner with diverse other Captains, and sent to
Pisseck taken by C. Mandsfeldt.
Pilsen. The soldiers, being 400 in number, and many of them sick, were let
go freely with their baggage, and conducted to the frontiers of Austria.
Pisseck being taken after this manner, the Emperors soldiers left all the
garrison towns in Bohemia (except Buduitz and CROMLAV) retiring into places of
more safety, and carrying with them what they had gotten. There was such a
stink in Pisseck, by reason of the dead carcases of men and beasts, that both
soldiers and citizens were forced to leave the town: the which, MANDSFIBLD
caused to be repaired, and manned with a good garrison.

BETHLIN GABOR (as we have said) being retired toward Presbourg to resist the
invasion of HVMANGI, and the Bohemians being gone toward Morauia; Count
BVCQVOY, embracing this occasion, followed the Hungarians toward Presbourg:
Where having taken some places which had revolted from the Emperor, he slew
one thousand five hundred Hungarians. And the Emperor, hearing there was some
small difference betwixt the Hungarians and Bohemians, sent his Commissioners
to the Hungarians to persuade them to obedience, and to dissuade them from
entering into League with the Bohemians. During these several actions in
several places, the provincial States of Morauia met at Olmus; whereas they
seized upon all the goods of the Clergy, amounting to many millions, and put
all the plate which was in the Roman Catholic Temples into coin; wherewith
they paid their soldiers. And the States of Lusatia were also assembled to
provide for the necessity of the province: who with the protestants of Austria
(hearing that there were 12000 soldiers come out of Italy to Passau for the
Assembly of the States of Morauia and Lusatia.
Emperor) drew all their forces toward those frontiers for their defense.

The King of Poland, meaning to assist the Emperor conditionally, made a
declaration; That for as much as the troubles of Bohemia concerned Religion,
and that the Bohemians with The Poland promises to aid the Emperor
conditionally.
their confederats, had expelled a Bishop out of Silesia, and burdened the
Clergy contrary to their privileges, liberties, and immunities; he was
therefore resolved to assist the Emperor with thirty thousand Soldiers. But
if the Bohemians and Silesians would restore their Bishop, Clergy, and other
Roman Catholics to their former dignity, and maintain them in their
privileges, and withal reuerse what they had done against the house of
Austria; he was then resolved not to meddle any more in those quarrels; yet,
notwithstanding, he kept his forces ready, attending a final resolution of the
Bohemians.

In the beginning of November, certain troops of the Earl of BVCQVOY'S
meaning to surprise Odenbourg; BETHEIN GABOR posted thither, and entered the
Town, and mand it with two thousand Hungarians. That month, JOHN CHARLES the
Emperors eldest son died at Gretz; and within few days after, JOHN
SIGISMVND Marquess of Brandenbourg left this life. On the one and twentieth of
this month, all the images in the Church of the Castle of Prague, were
demolished by the kings commandment; and on Christmasse day, the kings
Preacher made a Sermon, proving by the sacred Scriptures, That images were not
to be allowed in Temples: After which, the King, with his brother, and the
whole Court, received the Communion.

On the seven and twentieth of November, the Lady ELIZABETH, Queen of Bohemia,
was delivered of a son, to the great joy of his majesty, and the whole court.
The chief officers The Queen of Bohemia delivered of a son.
of the Crown of Bohemia came unto the King to congratulate the birth of his
new heir, all the Bells rung, and the ordinance of the town often discharged.
This year in December 1620
the Earl of Fustemberg Ambassador from the Emperor arrived at Paris, where
he was received The Emperors Ambassador comes to Paris.
with great state, defrayed at the Kings charge and served by his officers. The
subject of his Embassage was, To demand aid and assistance from the King
against the Elector Palatine 1620
who had invaded his Realm of Bohemia; from the which the Duke of Bouillon by
his Letters did seek to dissuade the King; showing, that those troubles grew
not from any question of religion, but from matter of State; hoping withal,
that his Majesty would not favor and assist the house of Austrta against a
Prince of the Electorall house of the Palatine, always allied unto his Crown
and house; by whom the Kings, his Predecessors, and especially his father of
happy memory, had been assisted in the defense of his house and person, and of
his lawful succession. The King desired to let the Emperor and German Princes
know, that if he intermeddled in their quarrels, it should be only (after the
manner of his Predecessors) in sending an honorable Embassy; which, visiting
the Emperor, and the Princes and States of the Empire of both the Unions,
should labor to reconcile the troubles of Bohemia, and the combustions which
began to grow in Germany among the Princes.

The Emperor had great succors promised him by the King of Spain: and the Pope
commanded a great contribution to be made by the Clergy throughout all Italy,
Spain, Brabant, Flanders; and other Provinces, for the payment of the Emperors
Army. And in the mean time the Elector of Saxony (lest he should seem to be too
secure) took order for the leuying of certain troops of horse and foot, and the
providing of sufficient Commanders. Count BVCQVOY, making an expedition toward
the upper Austria, took the Town of Lipsa, being without a garrison.

Before his coming, STARENEERG, chief Gouerner of that Province, having left
the siege of the Monastery of Melcha, marched toward the Frontier with his
Army, to attend Count BVCQVOY. The peasants in the mean time, coming from the
upper part, moved with the zeal of religion, slew and put to flight all the
Italians which remaind of BALTHAZAR'S forces. The lower Austria was much
afflicted with hunger and other miseries. The States of upper Austria were
pressed daily to come to Vienna to take the oath, the Emperor offering them
victuals and a safe conduct: but they protracted the time from day to day. In
the mean time, the A league concluded betwixt Hungarians and Bohemians.
Hungarians, with the Bohemians and incorporated Provinces, being assembled at
Presbourg, they concluded a perpetual league upon certain Articles; which I am
forced to omit to avoid tediousnes.

The Archduke LEOPOLD went from Vtenna into Alsatia; where he levied many
troops of horse and foot for the Duke of Bauaria: and, there coming into those
parts five hundred Venetians which desired passage, they were denied it, and
sent to the Duke of Bauaria to serve in his Army. There were also great forces
levied for the Emperor and Duke of Bauaria in the Bishopric of Cullen and the
Territories adjacent. To prevent these leuies, the States of the united
Provinces wrote to the Electors of Cullen and Treues, exhorting them not to
suffer any thing to be attempted against their confederates, especially against
the Elector Palatine and his Territories, unless they would have the like done
in their jurisdiction. Part of these forces when they could not get passage
through Hassia and the County of Nassau, they entered into Franconia, where they
were forced to stay some weeks, being hindered by the Princes of the Union: and
in the end they they were constrained to repasse the river of Rhine, and to
return the same way they came. The Duke of Bauaria, being advertised heerof, he
sent to the Deputies of the united Princes and States: where there was a
transaction made for the passage of these Troops, the number where of was
certainly known; and that the united Princes and States should have also free
liberty to pass through Bauaria. The conditions were, that they should pass
away within three or four days; the footmen by the Diocese of Bamberg, and
the horsemen by Wisburgt that the Army should commit no insolences in the
estates of the united Princes: that they should march on with speed toward
Bauaria, and should pay for that which they took in their passage.

After this, there followed a truce betwixt the Emperor and BETHLIN GABOR
Prince A truce concluded between the Emperor and Bethlin.
of Transiluania, the which should continue till the Feast of Saint MICHAEL
following; that the Realm of Bohemia and the incorporated Provinces should be
comprehended in that truce if they would; and all troubles ceasing, a treaty
should be made for the conclusion of a peace: that, during the truce, all
things should remain in the same state they were in, and BETHLIN should hold
the Countries, Castles, Forts and Towns which he had subdued, until it were
otherwise disposed of; that an Assemby should be appointed at Neuheusall by the
Emperors consent and authority, and there all grieuances repaired, and all
dissensions betwixt the Emperor and the States of the Kingdom compounded; that
the commerce should be free in all places, and the passages open; that the
soldiers of Polonia should forbear to enter into the Realm of Hungary; that
the truce and league should be inuiolably kept and observed, and all acts of
hostility 1620
cease.

This year in January (for, they begin to account the year from the birth of
CHRIST) the States of Austria met again at Horn; where the Emperor sent to
press them to take the oath The Archduke Leopold raises forces in Loraine.
of allegiance: whereto they consented, so as the soldiers might be
dismissed, the league betwixt Hungary and Bohemia confirmed, and a firm peace
concluded, if not, they were not bound to do any more. About the same time, the
Archduke LEOPOLD searched all the storehouses in Alsatia, drew out great store
of ordinance, and caused many troops of horse and foot to be levied. He gave
commission to raise 1500 horse in Loraine, and some thousands of foot there,
and on the the frontiers of France; and appointed money for the payment thereof.

In February, the Emperor held a secret Council at Vienna; where there
assisted the Popes Nuntio, the Ambassadors of Spain and Florence, the Earls
of Bucquoy and Tampierre, with other Commanders at war; where they consulted
of a new enterprise against Bohemia: For the recovery of which Country, the
Emperor protested, that he would spend the last drop of his blood; and the
rather, for that the Florentine Ambassador had brought eight hundred Soldiers
to his Majesty; and moreover, there was promised from Spain, Italy and the
Lowe-countries three millions of gold, with the which the Emperor thought to
perform great matter^. During this consultation, Niclasbourg in Morauia was
besieged by the Morauians; and in the Niclasburg taken by the Morauians.
end the town was taken; but, the Castle held out, and was battered
continually for sixteen days together. The Cardinal of Dietherichstein, was
much perplexed, and grieved, pressing the Emperor to send forces to relieve
this town, for that the Emperor and others had carried much wealth into it,
as into a place of safety. Whereupon, the Earls of Bucquoy and Tampierre,
resolving to take it from the enemy, cast a long bridge over the river of
Dannow: but they were so hindered by great frosts and cold that they were forced
to desist from their enterprise.

This month of February, the King of Bohemia went into Morauia, being
accompanied by his brother and other Princes: he made his entrey into Brin;
where he was received with great pomp by the Senate and States, who conducted
him to the Jesuits Church: where having heard Divine service, he went to the
Palace, and their received the oath from the States, and confirmed all their
privileges: after which he took his way toward Silesia. He was scarce gone out
of Morauia, but there entered 4000 Cossaques from Dolonia: yet they stayed not
long there, but marched day and night until they came into Austria, sending
some which knew the Country, to discover, breaking all the bridges behind
them as they past. In their passage, they spoiled many villages and towns; and
among others, Meserits, where at that time there was celebrated a very solmne
marriage: but, they marred the feast, and carried away their ornaments; which
they sold afterward at Viena for a little money.

The Horsemen of Morauia, being advertised hereof somewhat too late, followed
them with all speed; and, ouertaking them in Austria about midnight, near unto
the banks of Dannow, they: slew 1000 of them, the rest passing over the River
unto Vienna. These Soldiers afterward committed horrible murders and spoils
in the lower Austria: they wasted fifty villages belonging to the Protestants;
forcing many of the inhabitants to fly into the woods with their wives and
Children, where they perished with hunger and cold. It was reported, that 8000
more followed them. Whereupon, the Silesians and Morauians went to Arms, and
sent to Bethlin for aid: who gave notice to the King of Polonia, that if he
attempted any thing against him or his confederates, he would cause the Turks
and Tartarians to invade Polonia: and withal he sent word unto Viena, that
unless they discharged the Cossaques (whom they had drawn in, contrary to the
truce) he would presently assist the oppressed with 16000 Hungarians.

At the same time Count BVCQVOY (having received some loss by the Bohemians at
Chiese) went with 8000 horse and foot to Langelos; where there were seven
companies of the Earl of Mandsfeldts in garrison, he himself being gone to
Prague. Coming to the town he sent some troops before, and laid the rest in
ambush: The garrison salying forth fell into this ambush, where there was a
great fight: but the Bohemian horsemen being dispersed, there were 900 footmen
slain, where the Imperialls also lost 400 men.

Some write that this enterprise of the Earl of Bucquoi's was upon a quarter
of the Bohemians Army, where the Barron of Fettz Marshall of the Army
commanded, and who in the charge was slain and their troops put to rout; That
there were slain upon the place 600 horsemen and 300 foot, among which were
many Noblemen, Captains and Commanders, and namely a Duke of Saxony who served
the Bohemian party. There were almost 300 prisoners taken; most gentlemen and
officers, and as they write BVCQOIS loss was very small.

Some few days after, they charged a troop of the Earl of H^lochs and slew
600. So pursuing their victories, they forced Laam, and slew 200 which were
there in garrison. The Earl of Tampierre, hearing of this success, joined his
forces with Count BVCQVOY: and then they resolved to go to Prague, commanding
the soldiers to make sufficient provision of poulder and victual for six
days. But the Prince of Anhalt, having presently gathered together the
Bohemian and Morauian forces at Egenbourg, stopped all the passages; commanding
all the officers and soldiers which were in Prague, to return to the Camp
within 24 hours. The Spaniards, which came under BALTHAZAR, made an incursion
toward Wodian, and Pragodits, spoiling the country with fire and sword. After
which they went to besiege Muldau: but, the garrison, not able to keep it,
yielded it upon composition. Whereupon, there was a new commandment, that
every twentieth man in Bohemia should be always ready in Arms.

FREDERICK K. of Bohemia coming to Pressau, the Princes and Noblemen of
Silesia met The king of Bohemia enters Vratislauia.
him with a great train: entering into the City, there marched before three
Senators, with many citizens, who had presented him with the keys of their City
by their advocate; after whom, followed the Gentlemen of Preslaue; then the
Barrons, and after them, the Princes of Selesia: After whom came the kings
brother, betwixt the Duke of Lignits, and the Marquess of Iagerndorf. The
Marshall of the Realm, carrying a sword, marched alone: and the King followed
him; and after him, the whole Train. There were 50 shot at the gate: and all
the Citizens were in Arms even to the Kings court. Coming to the market
place, there was a triumphant Arch, with very rare music. From whence, the
king was conducted to S. ELIZABETH'S Church; where he was entertained by the
chief Pastor, with an Oration in Latin: and having heard Divine service he
went unto the Palace; where, on the seven and twentieth of February, he
received an oath of the Noblemen; and the day following, four Chanons, the
Abbats and Priors of the monasteries, came to court and took the same oath:
after whom, the citizens did the like. All this being happily performed, and
certain Deputies being appointed by the Princes of Silesia to go in Embassage
to Constantinople and Poland, in the behalf of the Realm of Bohemia and the
incorporated provinces; the king having viewed the city and the bishopps
Palace, and confirmed all their privileges, he prepared to go unto Lusatia:
but, hearing of Count BVCQVOI'S attempts, he deferd that Journey and returned
to Prague.

The Bohemians having resolved to assemble the States at Prague, by the kings
commandment; Count Bucquoy defeated by the Prince of, Anhalt.
the Emperor resolved to do the like at Buduitz, to hinder and direct the
assembly, meaning to prosecute all the States which should not come to Buduitz
with fire and sword, and in like manner to besiege Prague. BVCQVOY and
TAMPIERRS marched forward with their Army meaning to seize upon Horn, and the
Castle of Echenberg, places near adjoining; but being ready to assail the
castle, the States of that province thinking it would be very prejudicial unto
them, entreated the Prince of Anhalt (General for the king of Bohemia) to
relieve the said Castle: who although he were inferior in number to the
Imperialists, yet knowing how much it did import, he resolved to stop BVCQVOIS
passage toward Buduitz: to which end he marched forward with his Army being
fortified with certain troops which came unto him, so as he was esteemed to
have 12000 men. The 10 of March the Armies met and joined battle. BVCQVOY
thought to terrify the Bohemians with a stratagem, causing the bodies of trees
to be laid upon cariages, as if he had had many Cannons; which at the first
sight amassed the horsemen: but having discovered his slight by their nearer
approach, they charged valiantly. The Prince of Anhalt used another policy,
causing his Artillery to be charged with small shot behind his horsemen; who
were commanded after they had set upon the enemy, to open their ranks in the
midst: which being speedily executed according to direction, all their
ordinance was discharged together, which made a great spoil upon the enemies
horsemen, and forced their Army to retire into a wood. Whereupon the P. of
Anhalt, finding his advantage, planted his ordinance upon certain hills; which
did so annoy the enemy as he forced them to leave the wood, and at their
coming out pursued them so hotly, as they were forced to fly to Crembs a Town
15 English miles from thence: the pursuit continued diverse days. By report of
prisoners they lost above 2000 men most Polonians and Cossacks, with their
munition, baggage, bullets for Cannon and many horses. The Sergeant Mayor of
the Army was slain, with the General of the Cossaques with his Lieutenant,
and diverse other Captains and officers: The Earl of Tampierres horse was
slain under him, and he was relieved by a Cossaque who mounted him upon his
own. At his coming to Vienna he made great complaints to the Emperor 1620
of Count BVCQVOY; who they write was so much grieved for this loss, that he
would not for three days together speak with any man. It is thought, the
Bohemians lost not above 100 men in that fight, and some hurt.

In the mean time, there was an Assembly of the States at Prague; where they
consulted of An assembly of the States at Prague.
the confirmation of the league with the States of Hungary and the Prince of
Transiluania, and to offer it to other Princes and States, for the sending of
an Ambassie unto the Turks Port, and to make a perpetual peace with the
Sultan; to provide for the charges and presents of this Ambassie; to provide
money for the necessary defense of the frontier Forts in Hungary every year,
for the punishing of those traitorous rebels of the Country, which refused to
acknowledge the King for their head; for the repelling of the enemies forces,
and refuting of Edicts published within the Realm; for the providing of present
money (after the example of the united Belgic States) for the payment of
soldiers; for the providing of a storehouse with arms, victuals and horses for
public service; for the making of hospitals for sick and wounded soldiers; to
make a necessary provision against all unexpected irruptions, to prohibit the
insolency of soldiers, to reform the provincial constitutions, to appoint a
place for the keeping of the Crown and Regal ornaments, and to assign revenues
for the King, after the presidents of former Kings and Princes.

This year in February, the Emperor sent forth an Edict against the election
and crowning of the Elector Palatine K. of Bohemia; in the which, after a long
deduction of the troubles and tragedies An edict against the King of Bohemia.
committed in Bohemia, and of the insolency and rebellion (as he terms it) of
the Bohemians, both against his Predecessor the Emperor MATHIAS and himself,
notwithstanding their fatherly care and affection to the good of their
subjects, and their desire to reduce them to their obedience by all mild and
friendly courses; which they had obstinately refused, and (contrary to all law
and equity) had rejected him for their King, and chosen them another: this
their election by his Imperial and Royal authority he disannulled, and
declared void and of no effect; protesting before God and the world, to bend
all his thoughts and means to recover the Provinces usurped from him by force
and rebellion, and to revenge his Imperial and Royal Majesty so much wronged
in his authority. Lastly, he implored the favor and aid of all Kings, Princes,
and Christian Potentates, to whom the news of this dangerous example of the
rebellion of these traitorous subjects should come. But chiefly he exhorted and
required the Electors of the sacred Empire, with the Princes and States thereof
(much wronged in this election, made against all justice) to give him aid and
assistance; promising to require them with the like favor and courtesy, and to
employ his Imperial authority for the defense of their estates and segniories.

This year, the Electors and Princes of the Empire, adhering to the Emperor,
assembled at Mulhus in Thuringia: whither came in person the Electors of Mentz,
Cullen and Saxony; and he Assembly of the Catholic Electors at Mulhus.
of Treues sent his Ambassador: the like did the Duke of Bauaria, and JEWS
Lantzgraue of Hesse. Being come together, they treated of the means to free the
Empire from so many dangers which seemed to threaten her ruin; sending their
Letters to all the Princes, States and Their Letters to the States of the Union.
Imperial Towns whom they held opposite to the Emperor; namely, to the Elector
Palatine (whom they did not style King of Bohemia in their superscription) to
the States of Bohemia and incorporated Provinces, to the Princes of the Union,
to the States of Austria, to the Earls of the Vet^rauia, to them of the
country of Sueuia, to the whole Nobility of the Rhine, Franconia and Sueuia,
and to the Imperial Towns of Nurembourg, Strausbourg, Vlme, Spire and Worms
(all, Estates depending upon the Empire) and likewise unto the States of
Hungary: All which Letters were dated upon the eleventh day of March, and did
wholly concern the great troubles of Bohemia.

In their Letters to the Elector Palatine King of Bohemia, they made a relation
of his acceptance of that Crown, contrary to their former admonition and
expectation; whereby he had To the King of Bohemia.
approved the Bohemians attempts against the Emperor whom they had wholly
rejected. They exhorted him to consider of the great error he had committed,
being the first Elector; who had never been wronged by the Emperor, but rather
honored; having chosen him with the other Electors to treat of the peace of
Bohemia: the which charge he had accepted, and often promised to perform; being
his duty to aid the Emperor his fellow Elector, and to endeavor by all means to
see peace maintained throughout all the States of the Empire; wishing him to
consider what prejudice might befall the Roman Empire and the neighbor
Kingdoms, especially that of Bohemia, by this reiection and the new Election,
which could never be approved either by God or men. That his posterity thereby
would receive infamy, and his family in general 1620
danger. Lastly, they exhorted him, that as a Christian Prince born of German
blood, and an Elector, to consider carefully of these things, and not to give
way to these miseries, but rather apply his counsels, that the Bohemians might
lay down Arms; that all leuies of Soldiers might cease; That Bohemia and the
incorporated Provinces, might be restored to the Emperor; That all things might
be again compounded by a friendly Peace, according to the wishes and desires
of all good men; and that he, being Elector, would make it appear to the
World, that he had more regard to the safety of his Country, then his own
particular.

The Electors Letters, to the States of Bohemia and the incorporated Provinces,
were to the To the States of Bohemi^.
same effect; wishing them to give way to their wholesome admonitions; and not
to give ear to those who (rather seeking a remedy for their crimes and
offenses in confusion) had more respect to their private profit, then to the
public good of their Country: which if they did, it was to be feared that
the other States, faithful to the Empire, by the Emperors commandment, would
seek means to revenge the loss of that kingdom of Bohemia, and free the
Empire from danger and ruin,

Their Letters to the Princes of the Union did import; that They did not
believe that, being Princes, they were pleased with these combustions, hoping
they would not do any thing To the Princes of the Union.
which might increase them, or hinder the Emperor from recovering his Realm
of Bohemia; being bound, by the constitutions of the Empire, to assist the
Emperor as soueraign head of the Christian World; That it was a dangerous
thing, if they allowed of this reiection, and the new Election which the
Bohemians had made; That if they continued these troubles, not only Bohemia
would be ruined, but also Hungary lost; and, in the end, Germany it self
exposed to the spoil of the Barbarians, at the tyrannous discretion of the
Turk. In the end, they entreated them so to employ themselves, both to the
Elector Palatine and the States of Bohemia; that the miseries, which threatened
these Realms, Provinces, and Frontiers of the Empire, might be diuerted; and
that the complaint might not pass to their posterity, that they had been the
cause that their country had been shamefully reduced under the yoke of the
Ottoman servitude.

FREDERICK Elector Palatine, chosen King of Bohemia, made answer to the
Electors Letters, The Electors Answers.
whereby he complains that they had not given him the Title and quality of
King; That the Emperor could not be judge and party in his own cause; That
they should forbear to counsel him any more to quitte the Realm of Bohemia,
and that they should assure themselves he would not forget any thing to
preserve the right of his vocation to the said crown. The The States answer.
States of Bohemia made answer; That by the Letters sent (as well to their
King lawfully chosen, crowned, anointed and sworn, as to them and the States
of the incorporated Provinces) appeared how diversely the Electors and Princes
assembled at Mulhus, had thought of the State of Bohemia, after so many
publications made by Letters and Apologies, which justified the equity of their
cause; That they had seen threats made to their King, and them contained in
the said Letters: But the question being now not only touching the preservation
of their Country and Liberty, but also their Religion and Consciences; they
would not resolve alone, but as all things had been formerly managed by their
common consent with the incorporated Provinces, so they would attend to send
them an ample answer, with their joint advice. What answer the Protestant
Princes made unto their Letter, you shall hear hereafter from the Assembly at
Vlme.

After that unfortunate battle with the Prince of Anhalt; the Earl of
Bucquoy, being returned to Cremau, the Cossaques went to their ordinary
spoiling in the lower Austria: where, sparing neither Catholics nor
Protestants, they grew so odious to all men, that their own fellow Soldiers,
namely the Wallons, slew some of them, and carried some Captives to Cremau, for
the Sacriledges which they had committed. The Emperor, publishing another
Edict, The Emperor calls the States of Austria to take the Oath.
commanded the States of Austria to appear at Viena on the 8 of April, there
to take the Oath of obedience; saying, that he had now obtained from the
Archduke ALBERT, a full cession of his right; threatening, that he would hold
them for treacherous contemners, if they appeared not, and would force them to
obedience. The soldiers, which had remained in Veterauia, and could get no
passage, came into the territory of Treues, being very troublesome to the
inhabitants: and, seeking in vain to pass into the territory of Cullen, the
Peasants armed withstood them: and though they had set some villages on fire;
yet they, neglecting the fire, slew many of them, and put the rest to flight.
Many which had got passage, being come to the confines of Bauaria, fell into a
mutiny, who tearing their colors asunder, went to the Marquess of Onoltzbacs
camp, and 1620
most of the rest returned home.

The Marquess of Durlac commanding the Army for the Princes of the Union, went
and planted his Camp betwixt Brisac and Fribourg, giving notice to the
neighbor States, that he had received commandment not to suffer any soldiers
to pass into Asasia. There went before in this expedition, three troops of
horse, with four piece of ordinance, and 100 Carts full of Arms. Then
followed four troops of Armed men four companies of foot, with ^0 Carts
with Arms, and then three troops of horse, with 150 wagons laden with Arms
and other warlike instruments; amongst which there were some wagons with six
wheels to turn every way. Soon after, the Archduke LEOPOLD sent to crave
passage for these troops: to whom the Marquess made answer, that it was not
in him to grant; that they must go to Onoltzbacs, and that having obtained
leave there he would not oppose.

The Christning of the Kings Son of Bohemia, was performed with great
solemnity on the last of March. There were present the King himself, his
brother, two Princes of the house of The Christening of the Kings son at Prague.
Saxony, the Prince of Anhalt, the Earl of Hohenlo, with many other Noblemen.
There were Deputies sent to be the Godfathers for the Duchy of Silesia for
BETHLIN GA^OR Prince of Transiluania, for the States of Bohemia, and for the
Marquisates of Morauia and Lusatia.

On the thirtith of April, the Emperor sent out his monitoriall Letters to
the Elector The Emperors monitoriall Letters to the King of Bohemia.
Palatine, for that the Bohemians had chosen him their king: where after
relation of the whole proceeding of these Bohemian troubles, by his absolute
power and Imperial authority he did ^nioin and expreslie command the Elector
Palatine, upon pain of his indignation, and the rigor of justice, and the
laws and constitutions of the sacred Empire, to lay down Arms and cease from
al Acts of hostility toward his Imperial and Royal Majesty; and by the first
of June next coming without all delay to relinquish all pretensions and wholly
to abandon the said Realm of Bohemia. And if after that time expired, the said
Count Palatine should continue obstinate and refractarie, he was then resolved
to proceed against him according to the constitutions and ordinances of the
Empire. And to the end he should not have any excuse or pretend any cause of
ignorance, he sent unto him a copy of the said Letters.

There were also three other Monitoriall letters. The first directed to the
Protestant Princes and States of the Empire which did adhere to the Bohemian
party; containing, that against the Edicts of the deceased Emperor MATHIAS,
some Princes and Estates of the Empire favored his rebellious subjects of
Bohemia, and assisted their new King unlawfully chosen, with men and money: and
contrariwise would not give passage to such soldiers as he had levied for his
just defense, and to recover his realm: To prevent the which he might justly in
this rebellion execute that which was ordained by the Imperial constitutions:
But he preferred his clemency before rigor, admonishing them to abandon this
faction, especially of the Elector Palatine their pretended head, and rather
strive to maintain the imperial authority.

The second Letter, was to all the Colonels, Captains and Officers atwar,
following the Bohemian To the Colonels and Captains of the Bohemian party.
party, enioining them to abandon it, and to return unto their houses, upon
pain of proscription and the loss of life and goods. And in the third, he
admonished the Imperial Towns, that having bin advertised that some of them
did aid his rebels of Bohemia and the Palatine there head, with men, money and
means, and to that end had leauied contributions upon the inhabitants of their
Towns (a just subject for the which they had incurred the penalties of the
Imperial constitutions) preferring his clemency before his justice, he
admonishes them hereafter to give no succors nor aid in any sort whatsoever
to the said Elector Palatine and Bohemians, upon pain to incur the said
Imperial punishments. The Prince Palatins answer to the monitoriall Letter.


To this declaration or monitoriall Letter of the Emperor, the Palatine chosen
King of Bohemia made an ample answer, containing diverse points, which in
brief are these: That the Emperor has not any right to the crown of Bohemia
but so far fourth as it is a fee of the Empire. That the judges of the
Emperors court are no competent judges in the cause of the Bohemians, neither
can they determine of the right of the Princes and States of the Empire. That
the Emperor cannot cause his pretensions to the crown of Bohemia to be
decided before his counselors, but must seek the jurisdiction of his adverse
party and there demand judgment: when as any one commenceth an action
against the Emperor as he is Emperor the action is judged by the Elector
Palatine. The Emperor according to the constitutions of the Empire cannot
denounce banishment or proscription before the parties be first heard. The
Elector Palatine as King of Bohemia is not bound to obey the Emperors
monitoriall Letters. This he thought good to make known unto the world, as he
ought, for his necessary defense: 1620.
That he hoped that such as should know the vanity of this the Emperorus Edict
would not undertake the execution thereof, if he commanded any, nor employ the
charge, but rather refuse it; remembering what one owes unto another being
unjustly oppressed in the Empire: that is, that they should repel all violence
from their Provinces, and do their best endeavors to maintain the Country in
peace: which he required of all the Electors, Princes and States of the Empire.

On the twenty eightth of April the States of Bauaria having ratified the
league between The State of Bohemia declar the kings son his successor after
his death.
them and the Hungarians* in the presence of TVRSO Ambassador to Prince
BETHLIN and the States of Hungary; it was propounded in council, that their
King having a son of six years of age, he should be declared King of
Bohemia, after the decease of his Father; the which would for ever assure the
peace, prevent all troubles, and settle the State of Bohemia: The which the
Deputies as well of the States of Bohemia, as of the incorporated provinces
thought expedient to be done: whereupon they made a decree which they caused to
be proclaimed. Their King was so well pleased with this declaration made in
favor of his Son, as feasting the States the next night at supper, he
caused all the Cannon at Prague to be discharged in sign of joy.

Soon after there happened a strange sedition at Tabor in Bohemia; for many
thousands of A sedition at Tabor pacified.
Pesants being drawn together, demanded either to be discharged from
soldiers, or that they should prescribe them laws whereby they should
abstain from all force and violence to their wives and children. Commissioners
were sent from Prague who reduced them to their duties. They also required to
be freed from all impositions, alleging that it was offered them by the
Emperor; the which they verified by Letters which they produced: Moreover, that
part of the Jesuits goods and others, which had been wholly consiscated,
should be appropriated unto them. The first point of their demand was
granted, and likewise the third: As for the second it was refered to another
consultation: By which means they were pacified, and returned to their
country labors; many of them enrolled themselves and became soldiers.

MANDSFIELD seeing his troops increased by 2000 Hungarians, made a road
toward Buduitz, where he took great store of Cattle, and entered into the
Abbey of Guldencrone and took the Town of Thein: the Hungarians, committed
great insolences, and entreated the Monks and Churchmen very roughly.

The war continuing in the lower Austria, the Earl of Tampierre of the
Imperial party, The Bohemiant defeated Carstein*
hearing that 5 companies of Bohemian foot and 2 of horse were lodged in
Carstein, he went from the Imperial Army with 1000 horse and 1500 shot, making
such speed, as entering the Town by night, he put all to sword which he found
in Arms. Some seeking to save themselves in the Castle, he pursued them so
hotly, as the bridge being drawn many casting themselves into the ditch to
avoid the sword were drowned. On the other side the Bohemians encountering a
great number of Cossaques seeking for spoil after their accustomed manner in
Gillesdorf, they charged them so furiously as there were 200 slain upon the
place and the booty The Cossaques defeated.
recovered.

The Wallons and Cossaques of the Emperors party, running between the
frontiers of Hungary and Moravia, surprised Marcoucen, belonging to the Baron
of Landau, which they wholly spoiled. Soon after on the eightth of June, the
Baron recovered it again, and put all the Imperial Garrison to the sword. In
like manner the Morauians being advertised that in Sonneberg there lodged a
Conuoy of many carts which went unto the Imperial Army under the escorte A
Conuoy of the Imperials taken.
of 200 soldiers, who being so near unto their Army, thought themselves to
be secure; they made such speed as they surprised the town by break of day,
slew all which made resistance and carried the conuoy to the Bohemians Army.

The Inhabitants of the lower Austria, bearing the whole burden of the war
and sustaining Lower Austrias complaints to the Emp.
great losses by both parties, made the States of that Country to send
Deputies to Viena, to present a Petition unto the Emperor, showing their
complaints against the ruins, spoils, burnings, murders and rapes, committed
by the Wallons and Cossaques: and therein they represented the ruin of
Stoccerau which was wholly inhabited by catholics, and did belong to his
Imperial Majesty, whereas on the fourth of May after that the Wallons and
Cossaques had committed all the villainies that can be spoken, they set fire on
the town and ruined it quite. They knew well his Imperial Majesty was not the
cause of these miseries, but they besought him by the mercy of God and by the
wounds of our Savior JESUS CHRIST, that taking pity of his subjects, he would
be pleased hereafter to free them from soldiers, that they might once again
taste of Peace and quietness; but the Deputies, which presented this 1620
petition, were forced to return without answer, for that they joined in league
with the Bohemians, and would not take the oath of allegance to the Emperor;
whereto they had bin often called.

The Earl of Strum, having levied 500 horse in the Territories of the united
Provinces for the Bohemian party, matching through Westphalia, he was set upon
by the Peasants of the country, who defeated part of his Troops: yet he
continued on his journey with the rest, and came into Bohemia. Soon after, JOHN
ERNEST of Saxony, Prince of Weimar, having also levied in the same Countries
200 horse and 2000 foot for the Bohemians, found not any one to oppose his
passage, but only the Earl of Bucheim; who (being not able to make head) was
forced to let him pass toward Bohemia: where he arrived without any let, and
had his Quarter near to Egra; where the Peasants, discontent with such guests,
would have risen.

About the same time, Colonel GRAY, a Scottish Knight, levied a Regiment of
2200 foot, Voluntaries, English and Scottish, for the King of Bohemia's
service. They landed at Hambourg in a manner all together, of which there were
not above eight hundred Scots. They marched unarmed, and, most, without Swords,
through the Duke of Lunebourg's Country, where they found good usage; then
they passed the River of Elbe into the Marquisate of Brandenbourg's, where they
had very kind entertainment, and so continued their journey without any
cross (but by their own divisions) until they came into Lusatia, where they
reeceiued their Arms, and so passed into Bohemia.

The French-king being desired (by the Earl of Tustembourg the Emperors
Ambassador, as we have related, in the end of the last year) to give his
Majesty aid and assistance; being resolved Ambassadors sent from the French
King into Germany.
to procure Peace, and reconcile the troubles in Germany, rather then to add
matter which might entertain the war; he made choice of the Duke of
Angoulesme, Earl of Annergne, base son to CHARLES the 9, to go into Germany
as his extraordinary Ambassador, accompanied with the Baron of Bethunes and
the Abbat of Preaux; to go as well to the Protestant Princes and States (who
are all ancient Allies to the Crown of France) as to the Emperor; to exhort
them, first, to take some course that the said Protestant Princes and States,
on the one side, and the Catholic Princes and States on the other, might not
fall to war as it was very likely; and that they might only give succor to
the Emperor, or the Bohemians, according to their affections, and that within
the Realm of Bohemia and Austria, and not elsewhere. And, Secondly, to labor
for some good reconciliation between the Emperor, and the States of Bohemia,
and the Elector Palatine, whom they had chosen for their King.

These Ambassadors, being honorably attended with 400 horse, parted, in May,
and arrived Assembly of the Protestant princes at Vlm.
at Vlme the sixth of June, where the Protestant Princes of the Union were then
assembled. The French Ambassadors, coming into the Assembly, and having the
place of precedence given them; the Duke of Angoulesme gave them to understand,
that the king had commanded them to visit all in particular, and to assure
them of his love as his good friends and Allies, and to let them know. That,
hearing of the contributions in in Germany, he was desirous (like unto other
kings his predecessors) to be a mediator in their controversies, and to let
them know, as a most just Prince, that after he had given Peace to his own
subjects, he would be most glad if he might procure it to his good friends,
neighbors and Allies, whom he coniured to contribute what was necessary for
their parts; considering, that if the General suffer by the fury of civil
wars, whereas Religion and temporal interests have a share, with greater
reason reason private men shall be much oppressed: A fear which should touch
you near; seeing, that besides the miseries which are prepared for you by this
present danger, the success is most perilous and without remedy, but by
reconciliation; the which undoubtedly will come out of season if you suffer the
Enemy of Christendom to make use of your divisions: It is in you, my Masters,
to lay open unto us the means of your rest and Peace: the which we will gladly
embrace, as well to perform the commandment of the King our Master, as to
discharge our Consciences for the general good of all Christendom, and the
particular affection we bear to all your interests.

The Princes having given thanks to the most Christian King, for his love and
affection toward Their answer.
them for the Peace of Germany; there were many propositions made, touching the
grieuances which they suffered, and whereof they had often complained to his
Imperial Majesty, and to the Catholic Princes, whereof they gave
instructions to the said Ambassadors, which was the subject of a second
speech, made by the Duke of Angoulesine on this manner: My Masters, It were
superfluous to offer any new matter on his Majesty's behalf; seeing that his
intentions being so good, and his assurances so certain, there wants not any
thing, but that his good offices might be seconded with a happy encounter, for
the good and quiet of all Germany; which must be furthered by the just and
reasonable propositions of the parties interessed, 1620
and not to stand upon such things, which only seem to color the pretenses of
war, and to make it not only more bloody, but also less just in their eyes,
which, having no passion unto the business but the general good, might
rightly condemn them: That if the King had believed, that, from the complaints
of the united and correspondent Princes and States, these present troubles
would have sprung, he would not have failed to have carefully embraced any
occasion to have used all good offices for remedy thereof; well remembering
himself of the good affection and services which they have done to his Crown:
Which, the more easily they may believe, seeing that (following the glorious
actions of his Ancestors) as well in the case of Wesell, as that of Gulich, he
had contributed all the power and authority he had, and joined it with the king
of great Britain; which had surely brought forth a profitable agreement for
both parties, had not both the one and the other seemed unwilling to make any
use thereof: a subject, verily, which might have occasioned the King to slight
the course of their affairs, but that his bounty and goodness has herein
surpassed all common sense; for that being yet willing to do the like through
all Christendom, he has now sent us to procure the Peace and rest of all
these people which are in combustion, and whose ruin is very near if it be
not prevented. That to stand talking of grieuances past, will no way provide
for the cause present; and yet we will willingly receive your memorialls, which
promise to give all your assistance therein: which, when the Emperor shall
defer, the business will not be decided without an Assembly of both parties;
in which, each forming his complaints, it will rather be a renewing of the
causes of division, then a re-establishment of former order: That herein there
is question of a Crown taken from off the head of a Prince who was in
possession thereof; here is the ground of the business whereupon depends not
only the Peace of Germany, but may prove the opening of a gappe unto the
general enemy of the Christian Faith: That the leuying of Arms by the
neighbor Princes on either part, do intend the defense of the Palatinate:
That verily it would not be just the Emperor should be Judge in his own cause,
and invade the Palatinate, and forcibly appropriate it unto himself, without
any other subject then by virtue of the Imperial Ban. But, in this Action, we
must carefully observe by the progress of the business, who shall be in
fault; from whom shall proceed the first offense; and, in a word, bend the
eyes of equity and not of passion upon the first motive of these calamities.
For, although it may be alleged that the Elector Palatine (without any
practice of his) has been chosen by the States of Bohemia for their King: yet
it does not follow, that, in receiving it, the Emperor has not a just cause to
seek a remedy for this mischief which so nearly touches him, transferring
it upon him from whom he received it; seeing it depended upon the free will of
the Elector Palatine, to refuse or accept the Crown as others had done: yea,
BETHLIN GABOR Prince of Transiluania, showed himself more staid; seeing, that
refusing the Title of King, he only admitted of that of Prince; less
significant, but as powerful: That for these reasons we need not doubt that
the Emperor and all his house will sooner lose all they have, then leave
things at this stay: That the enemies of your Peace and quiet will be very glad
that the troubles of Bohemia happen to hazard that Crown, whereby they may
have means to invade that which is next at hand and most commodious: That the
foreign forces, whereof you make reckoning, some of them are without vigor,
and the other without power; seeing that opposition in Arms will impeach the
one, and the other will want means to entertain those which they have levied:
That the zeal alone which we bear to their good, according to our Kings
commandment, has given us this freedom of speech, which we pray you to
accept as from your most affectionate friends and well wishers, as we have
favorably received what was presented unto us by the Elector PALATIN'S
Deputy: unto whom if our Presence might be ought available, and the causes
why we do not visit him were removed, we should be very glad to assure him by
word of mouth, of the King his good intention, and of the good affection which
in particular we all should have, to do him service, as we will make known when
occasion shall serve; assuring you that we will be ever ready to be of the
like mind toward you all.

The Duke of Bauaria, General of the united Catholics in Germany, having sent
his Ambassador The Duke of Bauaria General for the Catholics, send to the
Assambly at Vlme.
to Vlme, they began to treat of the means how to maintain the peace in the
Empire, and that the Armies levied by the Catholics united and the Protestant
Princes (whereof the Marquess of Anspach was General) should not encounter:
In the end by the mediation of the French Ambassadors, after a months
consultation, an accord was made, as you shall hear hereafter.

There had been levied many troops of Horse and Foot by the Catholic
Union, and the commandment of the Archduke LEOPOLD Bishop of Strasbourg and
Passaw, to the 1620
number of six or seven thousand Foot, and one thousand five hundred horse, in
the Countries of Tre^es, Mentz, Luxenbourg, Alsatia, Lorain, and even in
Flanders: But, GEORGE FREDERICK of Brandenbourg, Marquess of Durlach (whose
lands ly near unto Strasbourg) as Lieutenant to the Princes of the union,
prepared himself to oppose their passage which they would make at Brisach,
betwixt Basile and Strasbourg; and, having gathered some forces together, he
went and encamped on the other side of the Rhine. The Archduke LEOPOLD,
advertised of this contradiction, sent him many Letters; but had no other
answer, but that he The Marquess of Durlach in Arms to stop the Catholics.
must obtain a passage from the Marquess of Ansbach, General for their
Union; which obtained, he would not hinder them: So as the Archduke was forced
to send unto the Marquess; who, with the other Germane Princes (who are very
wary in their resolutions) seeing that the Emperor had written unto them,
that all the soldiers should pass without doing any wrong unto their
Territories; they gave charge unto the Marquess of Durlach, to suffer them to
pass, according to the constitutions of the Empire: whereupon the passage was
open for their troops, being seven or eight thousand men, who marched speedily
toward Bauaria.

At the same time the Princes of the Union, assembled at Vlme, made answer to
the Letters sent from the Electors and Princes assembled at Mulhus, to this
effect; That the troubles and The Protestants answer.
dissensions happened in Bohemia, and which had spread farther, had amazed them,
for the danger which might befall the whole Empire; wishing they had not
happened or were pacified; That they had foreseen these inconveniences when
the Bohemians were rejected at the Election of the Emperor, and were not
suffered to enter into Franckfor^: Which, being done contrary to the law of
Nations, had incensed them, and given them occasion to choose another King;
That, matters being as they were, there was no remedy: they were grieved, and
left the event to God, who would call them to an account that were the cause of
so many miseries; That it was a fearful thing (as every man might conceive)
when as in matters which concern Conscience they found no ease, and yet they
would have been glad they had applied milder remedies, to this evil, then that
of War; being willing to have employed themselves therein, if they had
thought their labors would have been taken in good part. To Judge whether the
reiection or election of a new King had been done according to the laws of the
Country; they could not do it, being a point of too high a strain; neither
would they, by their censure, prejudice the whole Roman Empire, leaving that
business: yet, notwithstanding, they would preserve the authority of the
Emperor, wherein their Union might assist him; That it had been more expedient
for the Empire, if the Electors and Princes had suppressed all complaints,
settled a general peace, and reconciled the troubles of Bohemia; That they
were doubtful whether the threats, published against them, might bring any
remedy; Finally, they did not see what might be desired more of them which
directed all their actions to the glory of God, to the preservation of the
Empire, and that Justice and concord might be maintained throughout all Germany.

The Duke of Bauaria, having drawn his Army together, being twenty five
thousand Foot and Horse, passed the River of Da^ow at Oonauerd. The Marquess
of Ansbach, General for the Union, having thirteen thousand Horse and Foot,
marched toward them, being fortified by some other troops from Virtemberg and
Vlms: The two Armies came so near together that they might talk one to
another: In the mean time, this accord was made at Vlme, by the mediation of
the Ambassadors of France;

We, MAXIMILIAN Duke of Bauaria, Count Palatine of the Rhine; and We, IOACHIN
ERNEST, Marquess of Ansbach and Brandenburg, make known to all men, that
considering An Accord between the Princes of the Union, and the Catholics,
made at Vlme.
the disorders, miseries and calamities which are crept into the Roman Empire
and neighbor Nations by means of combustions and wars, threatening a total
ruin and desolation; by means whereof, not only the Electors, Princes, and
Catholic States united, but also the Protestants have taken occasion to make
Leuies and prepare to war: the which has bred a bad intelligence betwixt
them, mixed with jealousy and distrust; with this persuasion, that this raising
of Forces by the Unions, is to molest one another, and so to disturb the common
peace of the Empire, and to bring it to the extremities of war: To prevent
the which, and to take away all occasions of bad intelligence, jealousy and
distrust; by the mediation of the Ambassadors of the French King, they
concluded these Articles following:

First, We promise for our selves in particular, and for all the Electors,
Princes and States associated of both the Unions, that not any of them (upon
any cause or pretext whatsoever) shall 1620.
assail or molest by way of hostility, force and arms, the persons and
territories of the other party, nor innouate any thing concerning religion and
the public peace.

Secondly, it was agreed, that if any one upon urgent necessity should require
free passage (giving good and sufficient caution, according to the
constitutions of the Empire) for defense of his person and subjects, it should
not be denied, provided the demand were made in time and place, and not
suddenly when they are upon the Frontiers, or entered into another man's Country;
which would be an oppression to their subjects.

Thirdly, the Duke of Bauaria and the Catholic States united did exclude out
of this Treaty the Kingdom of Bohemia and the incorporated Provinces, and did
only comprehend the principalities, lands, countries and segniories belonging
to the Electors, Princes, and States of both Unions; yea, the Palatinate and
other lands adjacent and annexed by successiue right, in regard of the good
intelligence and correspondency which was between the said Palatinate and the
other principalities (the continuance whereof is in a manner assured): and the
said Treaty shall not extend further, or have any other interpretation.

And We, IOACHIN ERNEST Marquess of Ansbach, with the Electors, Princes and
States united, refer our selves wholly to the declaration which the Electors,
Princes, and Catholic States have made, as also to the exception of the Realm
of Bohemia and the incorporated Provinces; not meaning to comprehend them in
this Treaty, leaving those affairs to their ordinary course.

Fourthly, it is agreed, that in regard of the shortness of time, and the
absence of the greatest and soundest part of the States of the Empire, both
Catholics and Protestants, they shall defer the restitution and
compensation of losses and oppressions happened by reason of Leuies of soldiers,
to a more convenient time.

After this accord, the French Ambassadors with their whole train embarked upon
the Dannow the sixth of July, and arrived at Vienna the twentieth; where they
found a hundred caroches attending them, every one having six horses, which
conducted them to their lodgings. As for their audience with the Emperor, their
stay at Vienna, their mediation to accommodate the affairs of Hungary with
BETHLIN GABOR, it belongs to the following History.

In the beginning of June and during the assembly at Vlmes formerly spoken of,
diverse reports went throughout all Germany of the preparation of 2 royal
Armies to be levied in Flanders: the one under the leading of Marquess SPINOLA
consisting of 30000 men for the conquest of the Palatinate; the other of 12000
foot and 3000 horse under the conduct of Don LOVIS de Velasco to oppose the
Prince of Orange and the States of Holland, in case they should undertake any
thing in SPINOLA'S absence upon those places which the Spaniard holds in
Cleueland or upon the Archbishopric of Cullen.

Upon report of the diligence which SPINOLA made to compose his Army for to go
into the Palatinate, the two Armies we formerly said were encamped near unto
one another upon the other side of the Dannow; to wit, that of the Duke of
Bauaria which was of 25000 at Vending: and the other of the Corespondent
Princes led by the Marquess of Anspach consisting of 15000 at Langenau near
Vlmes, raised their Camps: and turning tail one upon another, the Duke of
Bauaria marched along the Danube into Austria: and the Marquess of Anspach
advanced to get the Rhine, to the end he might come into the Palatinate to
defend it if it were invaded. What followed you shall hear hereafter.

The Emperor having received great forces both of horse and foot which had
been levied Soldiers come to the Emperors service into Austria.
in Croatia, Istria and Carinthia, with those which were sent him from Italy;
and the Duke of Ba^aria approaching the frontiers of upper Austria, desiring
(before he would use extremities against the Protestants of Austria) to know
whether they would persist in their rebellion, he sent them his monitoriall
Letters; importing, That the Protestants of the lower Austria having confirmed
the League with the Bohemians (which was contrary to all divine and humane
laws and the constitutions of the Empire) against him and the Princes of his
house, there was no reason he should make any favorable answer, to their
petitions, if they did not first desist from the said league with the
Bohemians, and acknowledge it by some loyal action. Wherefore his Imperial
Majesty desired that without any further delay, the Catholic States should
come to Viena, and the Protestants send their Deputies, to witness unto him by
a public Act that they renounced the confederation and League of the
Bohemians: This done, he would answer their petition to their contentment.

Then the lower Austrians seeing no color of using any more delays,
perceiving the forces 1620
of the Emperor ready to execute his will upon them, both the one and the
other sent their Deputies The Protestant^ of the lower Austria renounce the
confederation of the Bohemians.
to Viena. The Protestants presented unto his Imperial Majesty, their Act of
renuntiation of association with the Bohemians, and besought him to give them
equality with the Catholics and free exercise of religion throughout all
Austria.

Upon this supplication they had answer, that they ought not to doubt, but
that his Imperial Majesty would be a father unto his faithful and loyal
States, and that he would spend his The Emperor gives them his word for the
free exercise of the confession of Ausbourg.
life to preserve and maintain them in peace one with another; And as for what
concerned the free exercise of the confession of Ausbourg in Austria, he gave
them his word it should be observed as it had been in the time of the deceased
Emperor MATHIAS his predecessor.

Having received this answer, the States of the lower Austria, both Catholics
and Protestants which were at Viena, stayed there to take the hereditary oath
unto the Emperor as Archduke The Duke of Ba^ria enters with his Army into the
upper Austria.
of Austria. As for the upper Austria, the Protestant States were assembled at
Lintz to oppose themselves against the Duke of Bauaria: who before he would
undertake any thing against them, sent a Commissary to let them understand that
he was advanced with his Army by the Emperors commandment to reduce them to
their obedience, requiring them to renounce the League they had made with the
Bohemians, and to take the hereditarie oath of allegiance, giving them only
five days to resolve. In the mean time he sent HASLANG the chief Captain of
his guards with 1500 horse and a regiment of foot into the upper Austria:
where having defeated 300 soldiers and many Pesants near to the castle of
Hagen, he burnt the village where they were fortified: the Castle yielded by
composition.

The Castle of Starnberg was also summoned, and the Captain threatened to be
hanged if he yielded not presently: wherewith being terrified, he gave up the
place; and so did many other Castles and Churches whither the Protestants had
retired themselves.

At the same time, ERNEST JEWS Duke of Saxony, of the house of Lauvemburg,
going down the Dannow by boat, having landed at Aschar four miles from Lintz,
and telling certain The Duke of Lau^burg slain by Pesants.
peasants that they should shortly have other guests, they fell violently upon
him, and murdered him.

The Protestant States of the upper Austria, assembled at Lintz, sent to Count
MANSFELT Marshall of the Bohemian Army, to entreat him to come thither in
respect of the danger they feared, in regard the Duke of Bauaria was so near
them with his Army. To whom he made anwer, that, being so weak of men, he could
not aid them; but that daily he expected greater forces, and then he would most
willingly come unto them: whereof he advertised the King of Bohemia, giving him
advice what was to be done for the fortifying of the Country; but his advice
was not followed, there being envy and iealousies between the Commanders of the
Bohemian Army. In the mean time, the Austracians seeing no hope of relief, and
that their ruin was apparent if they made any show of resistance against the
Duke of Bauaria's great forces, that they had no expert Commanders, and that
their confederates of Bohemia would not be able to relieve them; they sent
their Deputies to the Duke of Bauaria to crave pardon, and to intercede
Submission of the Protestants of the upper Austria assembled at Lintz.
for them to the Emperor, that they might be entreated like to those of the
lower Austria, and that they would renounce their confederation with the
Bohemians. Answer was made them, that they should return to Lintz, abandon the
Castle, dismiss their soldiers, and that every man should retire to his
house.

They of Lintz heerupon having taken up the chains which cross the river of
Dannow, they not only opened the passage, but exhorted all the people not to
resist the Duke of Bauaria, lest Lintz yielded to the Duke of Bauaria.
they should cast oil into the fire. Thus, the Duke of Bauaria, having taken
the chief Forts and Towns which the Protestants held, seized upon all the
passages, and defeated about eight hundred men which would have joined with the
States troops: he entered Lintz with his Army the fourth of August, where the
States excused themselves as well as they could, promised to yield obedience,
and took the oath of allegiance.

Mean while, the Bohemian Army lay at Thyme; where they framed their camp and
spent all the month of August unprofitably: during which stay the soldiers
grew discontented for their pay, and Count MANDSFIELD much more; both for the
vain promises he had received Coffeehouse of Count Mandsfield and his
troops.
from the directors and officers at Prague, whereby he had been disappointed
of means to effect his designs, and disabled to do any service for the
crown of Bohemia in time to come; as also for an affront he had received in
Austria, which was after this manner: The Barron of Feltz Marshall of the Army
having been slain (as you have formerly heard) Count MANDSFELD, General of
the Artillery, pretended the place due to him by the order of war: whereupon, he
wrote to his Majesty, to the Officers, and to the Prince of Anhalt Lord
General for 1620
the same; the which was granted him, and he executed the place of Marshall of
the Camp at Egenbourg, during the space of two or three weeks, without any
contradiction.

Soon after, the General, coming one day to visit him, told him, that in
truth he had been made Marshall of the Bohemian Army; but, as touching the
office of Marshall of the royal army, it was reserved for the Earl of Hohenlo
or Hollock: whereupon, complaining of that wrong, he grew so discontent, that
he desired the Prince to give him leave to depart, and to withdraw himself
elsewhere; the which he could not then obtain. Shortly after, the Prince of
Anhalt came again to visit him, persuading him to rest satisfied with that
office limited as aforesaid, and to suffer Count HOHENLO to execute the charge
of Marshall of the Army Royal: the which he wholly refused; saying, that if
he were but Marshall of the Bohemian Army, he would go thither, and obey
Count HOHENLO as Lieutenant General: and for that there were many brave
Commanders in the Army, there was no great need of him; beseeching the the
Prince again to do him the favor as to give him leave to depart: which he
did. Count MANSFELD, being much altered with these discontents, and still
oppressed with envy, resolved to retire himself. To this end he wrote to the
King and the States; who made him a gracious answer, persuading him to continue
their friend, and not to abandon them in so dangerous a time: yet after much
importunity, and many messages sent by him, in the end they decreed, that he
should presently receive two months pay for his soldiers, who should be
entreated like to those of the Royal Army; that he should execute his office
of Lord Marshall as the Baron of Feltz had done, and not attend the command of
any other than the Lord General: whereupon he resolved to continue in his
Majesty's service till the end of October. So matters rested: yet his malicious
enemies laid a foul aspersion upon him, that he meant to turn his coat and
serve the Emperor; the which was generally bruited, and supported in Court: but
the King would never harbor it in his thought, but still persuaded the Lord
Marshal not to respect such malicious reports, assuring him of his royal
favor. I have been bold to make this little digression, to show what
jealousy and division was among the Commanders of the Bohemian Army; which no
doubt was very prejudicial to the Kings affairs and to the State.

We have formerly made mention, that at the truce made between the Emperor and
Prince A general Assembly of the States of Hungary.
BETHLIN, it was concluded, that an Assembly of the States of Hungary should
be held at Neuheusal to treat of the means how to reconcile the dissensions
betwixt his Imperial Majesty and the States. It began in July; whereas Prince
BETHLIN propounded the Articles following: that He BETHLIN GABOR, Prince of
Hungary and Transiluania, desired nothing more than to settle a peace in the
troubled estate of Hungary, and the liberty of religion: and to show that he
desired nothing but peace, he had refused the Crown which had been presented
Propositions made to the States of Hungary by Beth. Gabor.
to him; that the ground of a peace was to ratify the league with the
Bohemians; that the truce made with the Emperor, and that which should be
treated of in that present Assembly, might help much to a peace; that during
the truce he had justly assisted the confederates, seeing that the Emperor had
refused them a truce at their request. As for the resolutions they were to take
with the Emperors Ambassadors, he desired the States to advise speedily; that
he had always desired peace, but sincere and without fraud; that to obtain it,
he was com to assist his confederates miserably oppressed and afflicted; that the
Emperor desired not peace but war, the which appeared by many signs; yea,
for that his soldiers the Cossaques had entered into Hungary, and ruined
diverse places with fire and sword:

That the Emperor having stopped and denied all passage to the Deputies of
Bohemia and Austria, they ought not to treat of any peace with him, but of
war; that they should advise by what means they might conveniently begin it
and continue it; how to find money, which is the sinews of war, to repair
the Frontiers, and furnish them with things necessary; to send Ambassadors to
the Turk, lest that the States being employed elsewhere, they might receive
some loss and prejudice that way; that it being lawful for the States
according to the laws to punish their bad affected Countrymen who had done
great harm to the confederates, they should do justice.

The Emperor sent Ambassadors to this Assembly. They demanded to have the
league, made between the Bohemians and their new chosen King with the States of
Hungary and the Prince BETHLEM, broken: but it was in vain. The Ambassadors of
France which were at Vienna, sent also Letters to this Assembly, making offer
of their endeavor to reconcile the differences between the Emperor and them.
But Prince BETHLIN made answer, that there was no appearance 1620
of speaking of peace, seeing that his Imperial Majesty having so great forces
on foot, would employ them whilst they entertained them with an accord. It
was therefore concluded The assembly resolves to beginn war against the emp.
in this assembly, at the request of the Ambassadors of Bohemia, that they
should send 10000 Hungarians to succor the Bohemians against so many Armies as
were falling upon their Country; the which was speedily put in execution: That
there should be no continuance of Truce with the Emperor; the which being
ended, they should begin war in Austria against the Imperialls, to divert
the Army marching into Bohemia: and that BETHLIN changing the name of Prince of
Hungary which he had assumed in the beginning, should take that of King and be
crowned at Presbourg in October. It is written, that the Turks Ambassadors
assured the assembly that the Sultan would give consent to this coronation; but
the chief Noblemen of Hungary Catholics opposed themselves, and continued
constant to the Emperor.

The Bohemians, seeing Austria wholly reduced under the Emperors obedience,
thought that the Duke of Bauaria and the Earl of Bucquoy ioining their forces,
and making an Army of 50000 men, would enter into Bohemia: They saw that the
succors which they expected at need from the united Princes of Germany, would
be diuerted to defend the Palatinate against Spinola's Army: that all their
Forces were but 20000 men (besides 10000 Hungarians which came to their aid)
commanded by CHRISTIAN, Prince of Anhalt, General of their Army; in the which
there were many Noblemen, but few good Commanders. Yet notwithstanding, they
were of opinion that with these forces they should be able to hinder the
Imperial Army from performing any great matter, if they did furnish their
Frontire Towns with men, money and munition, to stay them at some Seege,
which is commonly the ruin of great Armies: whereupon they commanded Count
MANSFELD to march with all his Forces to assure the Frontiers of Bohemia
against the Duke of Bauaria; assuring him that all the Country was in Arms,
and that great numbers of horse and foot were commanded to join with him,
near to Glats and Taux; but marching thither with his Troops, he found not
any: and complaining unto the Officers, they made an excuse that they had been
countermanded and employed in other places against Don BALTHAZARS forces.
MANSFELD being disappointed of succors and followed close by the enemy,
fearing they should take the way of Pilsen before him, he resolved to retire
thither, which he did in the end of September. He found the Town full of
wants, the fortifications little advanced, few laborers, and no money to
supply all; wherewith he presently acquainted the officers and with the danger
if they were not speedily supplied: he requested them to send him some
munition, whereby he might be enabled to hold out a siege, and money to
satisfy the officer and soldier; who being already discontented, it was to
be feared they might fall into a mutiny, to the great prejudice of the place
and cause. To these Letters he had a fair answer, but no effects. In the
mean time Count MANSFELD fortified the Town all he could, drawing-in what
provision he might. The enemy was not idle but grew daily stronger, taking
Vodnian, Prachadits, Winterberg, and Pisech with great effusion of blood: ofter
which, Scottenhofen, Taux, and Glatta yielded by composition.

The Elector of Saxony, who made great preparation to Arms, did much perplex
the Bohtmians; The Bohemians send Ambassadors to the Elector of Saxony.
for being assailed by him upon the North side, when as the Imperialls should
enter upon the South, they should then be shut up betwixt them. Whereupon they
presently sent Ambassadors to the said Elector, with particular instructions,
to induce the Estates of his Country to divert him from attempting any thing
in favor of the Emperor, from whom he had received Letters for the execution
of the proscription against them, giving him authority to do what he should
think fit; to take Towns, punish rebels, and pardon those which should
return to their duties and take the oath due to his Majesty, and not to forget
any thing for the recovery of the Realm, and settling all in peace. The
Ambassadors of Bohemia being at Dresda with the Elector, they entreated his
highness to give their King and the States of Bohemia that contentment as to
declare unto them his intention, touching the Letters of execution sent unto
him from the Emperor, and whether he desired not to remain Newter as he had
hitherto The Duke of Saxonies answer to the Bohemian^.
done. The Elector made a long repetition unto them of the progress of these
troubles; concluding in the end, that he had accepted of this commission in
regard of his duty: hoping that it might be executed without force or hostile
attempts, if they would show themselves disposed unto peace rather then to
war; That his only aim was to maintain peace, true religion, the
privileges of the Realm, and the Imperial and Royal authority; That if the
Protestants amongst them had the like affection, it was the means to attain
unto that end; That the Protestants of high Austria had lately made proof
thereof; who, accepting of the Emperors pardon, had by the same means obtained
the exercise of true religion, with all their privileges and immunities, 1620
and freed themselves from a thousand miseries which follow war. But if they
did persist in their resolution, and continued the war (which he could not
hinder) yet they should always remember his faithful advice: and it affairs
succeeded otherwise than they expected, he was to be excused, having showed
himself as well affected to their good as to that of his own subjects.

Marquess SPINOLA having levied a goodly Army in the Archdukes Territories
under the Emperors commission, but with the King of Spain's money, it bred a
jealousy in all the Princes Marquess Spinola marches toward the palatinate.
of Germany, that it was to invade the palatinat, and such princes as did
assist him. The K. of great Britanne, although he would not meddle with the
affairs of Bohemia, yet always careful to preserve his daughters dowry in the
Palatinate, and the inheritance of her children who had never offended, sent an
Ambassador expressly to the Archduke being at Brussels, to be informed of the
subject of this great preparation: to whom answer was made, that these forces
were levied in the name of the King of Spain, and that he might learn the cause
from Marquess SPINOLA; who, being demanded, made answer, that in the Letter
which he had received from Spain, he had found the Commission, but might not
open it till he came to the place of Arms; wherefore if it pleased him to be
there, he would impart it to him.

In the mean time, on the eightth of August, he took his leave of the
Archdukes, and on the seventeenth came to Aix la Chapelle; where he attended
his munition and carriages coming from Antwerp, consisting of 350 wagons
laden with powder, bullets, boats to make bridges, and all other munition of
war. He had forty cannons that came from Macklin, all with the Emperors Arms
prepared for this Army; ouens of brass, and milles upon wagons sufficient to
make bread for 20000 men in four and twenty hours. All things being ready, he
parted from Aix the one and twentieth of August toward Confluence; where he
mustered his whole Army, being six and twenty thousand foot and four thousand
horse. Then he opened his His commission.
Commission, wherewith he acquainted the English Ambassador; which contained a
declaration to make war against all those which should be confederate and
allied to the Bohemians, rebels to his Imperial Majesty. Having given his
soldiers two months pay, he past the Rhine upon a bridge of boats at Saint
Sebastians: the which being presently taken up again, coming to the head of the
Army, he made an Oration to the Captains and soldiers, exhorting them to carry
themselves valiantly; this war being for the defense of the Catholic faith
and house of Austria: whereupon, they all cried out, God save the house of
Austria, and discharged their muskets.

From Saint Sebastians, near to Confluence, he wrote particular Letters to
MAVRICE Lantzgraue He written to some Princes of the Union.
of Hesse, and to some other Princes of the Union, aduertising them of his
going into the Palatinate, and that they should assist the Emperor in his just
cause, or remain Neuters: In doing so, they nor their subjects should receive
any harm from his Army: After which, he marched toward Franckfort. The
Princes of the Union (who attended him in the Palatinate upon this side the
Rhine, with an Army of twenty two thousand Foot, and four thousand Horse)
hearing that he had passed the Rhine at Confluence, thought that he had a
design upon Franckfort and the Palatinate beyond the Rhine; which made them to
turn the head of their Army in all haste to pass the river of Rhyne, upon a
bridge of boats at Oppenheim; which Town SPINOLA took soon after (the
Princes being marched toward Worms, fearing it should be besieged) being
yielded by 800 men there ingarrison, who departed without Arms. There was found
store of Munition, Wine, Grain, and other commodities, sufficient for the Army
for half a year; with much moueables, Tents, Pauillions, and other
Implements. This Town of Oppenheim, is a very easy passage upon the River of
Rhine, for entrance into the upper Palatinate.

Whilst that SPINOLA busied himself to fortify Oppenheim, he sent forth his
Commanders He takes towns in the palatinate
with Troops, like Harbengers with Chalk in their hands, to mark out his
lodgings, as if he had feared no Enemy. Don CARLO de Colonia, Governor of
Mastric, and now Ambassador in England, went to Creutzenac; which yielded by
composition. Don GONZALES de Cordua, seized upon Canb, Bacrac, and the Castle
of Palft; and toward the River of Mozelle, Don IAQVES MESSIA, also, with his
Regiment of Spaniards, took Tarbach and other places of importance: In these
places, so taken, they put in Garrison some six thousand men: which the
Archduke ALBERT understanding, and desiring that thereby the Army might not be
diminished, he sent a supply of 6000 under the leading of Mounsieur de la
MOTTERIE Governor 1620
of Mastric.

Our King's Majesty, being assured that SPINOLA meant to invade the Palatinate,
and desirous to preserve the inheritance of his grandchildren if it were
possible, suffered a regiment of Sir Horatio Vere sent to the Palatinate with
English Forces.
2200 Voluntaries to be levied under the command of that worthy Knight Sir
HORATIO VERE their General for the Palatinate; being followed by two
honorable persons, the Earls of Oxford and Essex with private commands, and
diverse gallant Knights and Gentlemen.

These Troops past into Holland; where having received their apparel and
Arms, they marched up the Rhine till they came right against Wesel; whereas
the Prince of Orange encamped with his Army, not far from Don JEWS de
Velasco, who lay above Wesel with 12000 foot and 3000 horse, observing one
another actions. The Prince, doubting that the passage of Lip would not be
very safe for those Troops which should go into the Palatinate, caused a bridge
of boats to be made over the Rhine right against his Camp; where the English
past over with They pass the river of Rhine with Count Henry of Nassaw.
Count HENRY of Nassaw, who (as some affirm) had 1500 horse and five hundred
foot. After which, the Prince of Orange passed into an Island lying between
Cullen and Bone: where he built a Fort called Pfaffen-mutz, which might have
the command of the river, and annoy those Towns.

SPINOLA, hearing that Count HENRY and Sir HORATIO VERE marched with their
Troops, had a desire to encounter them and cut them off in their passage (and
for that intent he passed the Rhine with 9000 foot and 3000 horse) and likewise
to see, whether they of Franckfort would give them passage through their Town,
contrary to their promise: but he was deceived in his expectation, by reason of
their speedy march (going some times twenty miles a day and more) and taking
their way above Franckfort by the County of Hannaw: and so they drew near to
Worms, where they passed the river, and in the end joined with the Princes of
the Union.

The day after the coming of the English and Prince HENRY to the Army of the
Union, there was great expectation of a battle, for that Marquess SPINOLA had
drawn his Army The Army of the Union prepares to fight with Spinola.
out of his strength, and could not well retire to his trenches without
fighting, for that the Princes Army lay so near them. The Commanders therefore
resolved to give him battle: whereupon the whole Army was put in order, the
foreward being given to Sir HORATIO VERE with his English Troops, being
seconded by Count HENRY with his horse. Every soldier prepared himself to
fight with great resolution, the English being encouraged by their preacher;
who told them the cause was just, they fought for God and religion, for the
honor of their Country, and to maintain the right of their Soueraign's
daughter and her children. His speech so inflamed the resolute soldiers, that
they cast up their caps for joy, attending but the signal for battle; but,
their courages were soon danted: for, the Marquess of Ansbach, the General
(instead of crying To Arms) caused a retreit to be sounded; whereby the enemy
had occasion to recover his trenches, to the general grief of the English. He
pretended this reason, That the day was too far spent: but, by the opinion of
such as were there, they lost a fair advantage, and almost the hope of an
assured victory; their Army being far greater than SPINOLA'S, his forces being
divided. This retreit much blemished the reputation of the Marquess: of whom
men spoke diversely; some tearming him a coward, others saying he was corrupted,
and had betrayed the Army: but, doubtless, it much hindered the Palatinate's
affairs, and gave the enemy means to advance his conquests; the Army of the
Union retiring to Worms, where they were incampt: but soon after, it being
winter, and the German heat abated, their army was garisoned.

Prince BETHLIN, possessing Presbourg, and willing to bring the war on this
side of the river Dannow toward Vienna, had caused a bridge of boats to be
made there, with a Fort at the end thereof: upon which having past his Army,
consisting of 10000 men, and his cannon, he went and besieged Hambourg; but the
intelligence which he had with the townsmen being discouerd, he planted his
batteries to win it by force: but, after a breach made, and four assaults
given, with the loss of a thousand Hungarians, he raised his siege, and
retired to Volrburg.

When the Imperials perceived Prince BETHLIN'S purpose to bring the war near
Vienna, for that he had passed the Dannow, there was a goodly enterprise
propounded in the Emperors Council (if it had happily succeeded) to go and
break the bridge of boasts at Presbourg: and whilst Prince BETHLIN was on this
side of the Dannow (where he had no Town of retreit, or means speedily to
repasse it if this bridge were broken) to force the Castle and Town of
Presbourg; The Earl of Dampierre propounded this exploit so easily to be
effected, that the execution thereof was committed to him, though many held it a
dangerous attempt: but he, having a great spirit thirsting after fame, and
judging this would be a good means to reduce all Hungary 1620
to the Emperors obedience by attempting only this hazard, could by no means
be dissuaded.

The execution of this enterprise being then resolved; the Troops of ANHALT,
levied in the Country of Treues in the Spring, were embarked above Vienna at
Grifenstein and Corneburg, together with those Troops which were always
attending the said Earl, which were composed of French, Walloons and other
Nations. Four Coluerings, twelve Petards, powder, wild fire, and other
necessary munitions were embarked at Vienna; so as his Army was held to be
eight thousand foot, forty ships and boats, and two thousand horse, which
came through the lower Austria: neither could the extremity of the weather on
the river of Dannow, nor the sinking of three boats laden with men and
munition, lost under the bridge of Vienna, fear him from this enterprise.

Those which were embarked above Vienna being come thither the 8 of October,
TAMPIERRE set sail to go to Presbourg. When they were come beneath Hainburg,
one of his boats wherein there were 200 musketeers was sunk: and thinking to
arrive by break of day within two miles of Presbourg to put himself on shore,
it was nine of the clock before he had landed all his troops. At his first
approach he seized upon the suburbs, forced the Fort built upon the river of
Dannow, and brake the bridge of boats. All which succeeding well, he resolved
to attempt the Castle by Petard; conceiving that if it might be taken, the
town could not long hold out. But being advanced before the Countercarfe with
fifty musketeers and one of his Colonells called ESPAGNE, the Morauians which
were within discovering him, shot upon him without intermission: eight of his
men were slain near unto him, and a musket shot carried his hat from his
head. Heerupon they told him, that he was known and leuelled at from a
certain loop-hole; which caused him to retire: but as he went off he was shot
into the reins of the back; and being led away by two of his soldiers, one
of them was slain, and the Earl shot into the right side; which slew him
outright: whereupon, his Troops, growing amazed, retired Tampiere slain by two
musket shot.
with more confusion than good speed; which those of Presbourg perceiving, the
Hungarians issued out and slew a hundred or sixscore of the hindmost of them:
from whom they recovered the Earls body.

Prince BETHLIN being comn again before Hainburg, and having won the same, he
appointed this place for the French Ambassadors to meet at; who had sent unto
him to know if Hainbourg rendered to Bethlin
he would use their help for the pacifying of the troubles. And knowing that
they parted the sixth of October to repair unto him, he sent them a conuoy of
four hundred horse: which being defeated and put to flight between that place
and Vienna by the Imperialists, he forbear not for all that to send forth
another conuoy somewhat stronger than the former, and to receive and entertain
them two miles short of Hainbourg, by two hundred Gentlemen attired in cloth of
gould, and with many precious jewels; who presented them with the Princes
caroaches, in the which they were conducted with no less than an hundred
torches forth on to their French Ambassadors magnificently received at Hambourg.
lodgings.

On the morrow, the day of their Audience, they were with magnificence led unto
the Castle through all the soldiers of the guard clothed in blew, and found
the Prince in the Hal of the castle accompanied with 200 Gentlemen apparelled
after the Turkish fashion with long robes of velvet and cloth of gold lined
with sables; who after their reception conducted them unto his Cabinet: what
passed in this first audience and in a second afterward, is not known. A few
days after they returned unto Viena; where they endeavored themselves by all
means to reconcile and bring to an end those cruel wars, not only with
Prince BETHLIN and the Hungarians, but also with the Elector Palatine king of
Bohemia: and to that end they sent one to Prague (who had been always Agent
for France in the Palatines court at Heidleberg before he had accepted the
crown of Bohemia) to treat with Sir Richard Weston, and Sir Edward Conaway,
now Counselors of State (who were sent Ambassadors from his Majesty unto his
Son in law, and had charge to employ themselves seriously for the pacifying
of those troubles) touching these alterations, and to understand from them what
course they would take for the attaining unto a peace. But the battle being
lost within few days after by the king of Bohemia, it changed the face of all
those good intentions to treat of peace.

Whilst they stayed yet at Hainbourg, this Prince sent for the body of the
Earl of Tampierre from Presbourg, and caused it to be very honorably
interred. The Baron de Prener, taking his charge, assembled 6000 foot of his
routed Army, and all the horse; with which he staid the courses of the
Hungarians and Transiluanians, which made their incursions even to the 1620.
gates of Vienna. Let us now observe what past in the other places, and what in
the mean time the Elector of Saxony does in Lusatia, and the Duke of Bauaria
and the Earl BVCQVOY in Bohemia.

The Elector of Saxony, having composed his Army of 20000 men with great store
of cannon The Elector of Saxony enters into Lusatia, to execute the Emperors
Ban.
and munition for war, to begin the execution of the Imperial Ban in Lusatia,
he sent to the States of that Province IAQVES GRVNTHALL, one of his
Counselors, to publish an assembly of the States of that Province in the Town
of Bautsen on the seventh of September, old style, that he might communicate to
the Emperors commission.

Whereof FREDERICK Elector Palatine being advertised; as king of Bohemia and
Marquess of Lusatia, he sent to forbidd ADOLPH of Gersdorf, Governor of the
province, to make any such convocation. And withal gave Commission to the
Marquess of Iagerndorf of Brandebourg, to enter into Lusatia with 6000 men to
reserve it against the forces of the duke of Saxony: which he executed with
such diligence, as he was sooner at the gates of Bautsen then they had any
news of his coming: where being entered, he seized upon ADOLPH of Gersdorf
and GRVNTHALL with AVGVSTIN SCHMID, Agent for his Imperial Majesty: and some
other Deputies which were already come to Bautsen. This done and having left
2000 men in garrison at Bautsen, and a new Governor, he went to Gorlitz where
he did the like and in other places of this Province. Which the Elector of
Saxony understanding, he enters into Lusatia with his Army, and lays seege to
Bautsen, where he was 3 weeks before it: and then taking it by force at the
fifth assault, he caused 40 of the principal rebels to be hanged. Thus was
Lusatia reduced, and the Marquess of Iagerndorf constrained to withdraw
himself into Silesia, having attempted in vain to relieve the Town.

The Duke of Bauaria after his taking of Lintz as is aforesaid, having no more
to do in Austria, and his Imperial Majesty being also desirous that the 2
Armies, that is to say, his own which the Earl of Bucquoy conducted, and was
then upon the frontiers of Austria and Morauia, and the D. of Bauaria's might
ioin together, to enter into Bohemia and march toward Prague: He turned about
the head of his Army toward Snethall and went and joined it with the Earl of
Bucquoy.

Before he enters into Bohemia, he sent the Emperors Letters Patent to the
States; and by his own he exhorts them to accept of the grace offered to them,
to appear before him, to satisfy his Imperial Majesty's Commandment; to
provide better for their Kingdom, to receive their lawful King so liberal
and benign; and to prevent greater miseries, if they loved their own good.

To these letters the States of Bohemia made answer the 30. of August, sending
back the original of the Emperors Letters pattents; Letting him understand,
that they would defend their party, to the hazard of their goods and lives:
That they committed to God the event, and did yet notwithstanding hope, that he
whom they never had offended, but ever reputed as a friend, and a worthy and
prudent Prince of the Empire, would not suffer himself to be persuaded to use
any act of hostility against them and their Kingdom.

The Bohemians, seeing their Army nothing equal to the Emperors and the Duke
of Bauaria's being joined, they cause it to return out of Austria into Bohemia,
to unite all their forces with The Bohemians Army retiers toward Prague.
the 10000 Hungarians which Prince BETHLIN had sent to their succors. The
Prince of Anhalt in his retreit put garrisons into all places, and augmented
those which were weak, that they might make some opposition against the
Imperialists: but their Armies being thus joined, those which made any
resistance found but bad usage.

For after the taking of Horn, they made so happy a progress in Bohemia,
that the Town of Vortsmits having been succored by them (which the Prince of
Anhalt in his retreat would The Bauarians and Bucquois exploits in Bohemia.
Taking of Horn.
have forced) all the places between it and Badvitz were reduced to the
obedience of the Imperial Majesty. The 25 of September they encamped before
Budna, which they constrained to yield, having for a space held out with great
resolution: From hence the Earl of Bucquoy went and assailed Phrahalits, which
he took by force, as also Pisca which saw both the Armies before her gates;
and in the end being also forced, they held on their course to Prague, and in
the way recovered the towns of Risemberg, Sellettemhof, and the fort of Walern
which MANSFELD formerly held, with Stratonitz, Glatau, Chiffenhotten, Gratzien,
Schiuising, Witterberg, Mabren and Grimbach, all places of Note, to assure
their passage toward Prague, from whence both Armies were but two days
journey. About the 10. of October. the Emperors army with the Bauarians, began to
show themselves before Pilsen, and very near the Town. Their outworks were not
yet defensible, neither had they forces sufficient to man them; besides many
other discommodities 1620
which often happen where money wants: so as if the enemy at that Instant had
attempted the place with his great forces, he had undoubtedly carried it, or
put it to great extremity. MANSFELD intermitted no time to fortify his
works, and borrowed what money he could to content the soldiers; so as within
few days the works were in defense. The King was comn with his Army to
Rokezan, two leagues from Pilsen, toward Prague, being 24000 men, besides
10000 Hungarians.

Count BVCQVOY, seeing MANSFELD'S resolution, and that to force it would both
lose time and very many brave men, sought to get it by policy, having good
intelligence how all things were managed amongst the chief men of that party,
and of the discontent given to MANDSFELD; knowing, that nothing can sooner put
a Noble spirit from his posture than Bucquoy seeks to corrupt Mansfeld.
envy. He therefore studies how to gain him that was most potent in that place,
houlding himself sure to effect it. His device was to send IOACHIN de Carpzo a
Lieutenant, Colonel of one of MANSFELD'S regiments (who had been taken prisoner
the year before by the enemy) to persuade him to leave the place to the
Emperor, in consideration of a great sum of money which he promised him. The
Messenger accepts the Commission, and delivers what he had in charge to
MANSFELD; who sent him presently to the Prince of Anhalt, who caused him often to
be examined. MANSFELD by his Majesty's consent gave ear to BVCQVOY, and offers
to treat with him; but on this condition, that restitution should be made to
Captain LINSTAVV, whose Troops had been spoiled contrary to the capitulation of
TAVX, by BVCQVOYS soldiers; who, to further this treaty, endeavored what he
could to give LINSTAVV satisfaction; wherein he spent much time: but, finding
these practices not to preuail, he resolved to attempt it by force, and to give
a general assault; yet, changing his mind, he departed with his whole Army
about the 21 of October, and so marched toward Prague. His rere-ward being
lodged but half an hours march from Pilsen; the next day the Earl of Hohenlo
came with all the Kings horse, as well Germans as Hungarians, and 3000
musketeers within one hours march of Pilsen; where Count MANSFELD meeting him,
he propounded a means how to cut off the enemies Rere: that if it would please
him to advance his Troops, he would also ioin with him with the best he had in
Pilsen; and so, charging the enemy together, they should either defeat his
Rere-ward, or else greatly distress it: but the Earl thought it better to turn
back and take the passage, to intercept the enemies way to Prague. In the end
of October the two armies lodged within a league one of another; where there
were daily skirmishes with various success, according to the fortune of war:
and so drawing daily nearer and nearer together, it was conceived that BVCQVOY
would hazard a battle. Whereupon, the Prince of Anhalt invited MANSFELD to
come and attend his pleasure; who thanked him, and assured him he would not
fail to perform his command; assuring himself, he should be entertained as
Marshal of the field, to command according to his charge; desiring his Highness
to send him word speedily, what his resolution was, and to that effect sent a
particular messenger with Letters: but before he could be heard and dispatched,
the overthrow of the Army decided the question.

The Imperial Army advanced still, and no day past without some action. On the
fourth of The battle of Prague.
November the Earl of Bucquoy was lightly hurt with a shot; which was so
troublesome to him, that he could not well ride on horseback. On the 6 and 7
days the Armies were within cannon shot one of another. Coming within half a
league of Prague, upon Sunday morning the eight day of the month the battle
was fought; which I cannot relate in particular, being forced to use breuity.

The Imperialists being resolved to fight, the Duke of Bauaria took the right
wing, and Count BVCQVOY took the left; who, sitting armed in his caroach, went
from squadron to squadron to harten and encourage them to carry themselves
valiantly. The Baron of Tilly, who was the Leader of the left point, having
passed a little bridge and marish ground with the Bauarian Troops, was so
welcomed and entertained by the Bohemians, that he was forced to send for all
the Bauarian Troops in the fore-ward to come to succor and assist him: all
which being joined, and under the Bohemians, the whole Imperial Army was
constrained in the like manner to march upon the left hand; so as they were
much annoyed, and received great loss by the Bohemians Artillery; which did so
beat into a Battallion of Walloons, and the whole body of the Bauarian horse,
that they were routed and put to flight. The danger wherein the fore-ward of
the Bauarians and the Baron of Tilly were engaged, forced Count BVCQVOY to
second them* who (notwithstanding that he was wounded and weak) went to
horseback to (...)TILLY, who was in danger to be lost. In the end, having freed
TILLY from the 162^
danger* he caused his Battailions to march directly against the Bohemians
Army; who receiu^ (...)so gallantly, that they were in some disorder and ready
to disband, if Count BVC^ The Bohemian A^mie defeac^d at Prague.
had (...)all the ^adrons into one body, and charged so courageously, as having
overthrown 2000 Hungarians which were in the fore-ward; and the Duke of
Bauaria at the some ^stant causing the right wing of the Imperial Army to
advance, charged the left of the Bohemians; who presently abandoned their
artillery, and were put to rout: some write, there were 5000 slain upon the
place, and above 2000 drowned; most of them Hungarians, which thought to pass^
through the river of Molda which diuides the Towns of Prague. The Imperialists
took ten cannon, 135 Ensigns, with many Cornets, having lost (as they write)
not above 400 men.

Thus I find this unfortunate battle written by some Authors: but LANDORPIVS
makes the loss far greater on the Bohemian side. It is an old and true
Saying, Plus vale^ oculatus A new (...)tion of the battle
testis v^us quam aariti december, One ey-witnesis of more weight than ten which
speak by hearsay: for, f^me increases as it flees. I have therefore thought
good to set down what I received from a discreet Gentleman, an Actor in that
days service, and has delivered it on his reputation.

The two Armies having coasted one another for diverse days together, about
the end of October, the Bohemians came and lodged at Rockenzan; and the
Imperials encampt in a wood so near them, that they played continually one upon
another with their great and small shot; so as diverse were slain and hurt:
among which, one of the Barons of Dona of the Bohemian party was lost; and
Count BVCQVOY on the other side wounded: but the Imperials, having resolved to
march toward Prague, raised their Camp in the night; which the Bohemians
perceiving, marched away with all speed to get betwixt them and Prague; which
they happily performed: for, on the day of the battle (which was Sunday)
having marched 8 miles, the Army came to a place within a mile of Prague, of
great advantage, called the white Hill; where they encamped, and ranged their
Army, finding the Imperial Army advanced with a resolution to fight. The
Bohemians had a great advantage of the ground: for, their cannon might beat
into their enemies troops from the Hill; so as at their first approach they
were much disordered, and lost many men: besides, the Imperials had a marish
ground and a bridge to pass; where the Bohemians had planted 3 pieces of
Ordinance, with 700 musketeers to guard it: which passage if they had
maintained, and kept their posture on the Hill, in the opinion of all martial
men they could not have lost the victory. But the first step to their
overthrow was the indiscretion or peifidiousnes of the Earl of Hohenlo or
Holloc, Lieutenant General of the Bohemian Army, who drew away the musketeers
which were set to guard the passage of the bridge; so as the Imperials,
embracing this opportunity, past over their troops, and turned those 3 pieces on
the Bohemia^s.

After this, they marched with great resolution to the charge. The young Prince
of Anhalt on the right hand advanced with a great squadron of horse to
encounter them: but they were scattered; yet not so routed, but he gathered his
Troops again together to give a new charge, thinking to be seconded by the
Hungarians which were behind him: where his Troops were overthrown, for that
the Hungarians never advanced to assist him, but fled presently without
striking stroke. Whereupon, the whole Army on that side fell into a confusion,
every man abandoning his rank, and running away: only the Morauians, commanded
by the young Earl of Schli^, fought valiantly, and were most of them slain or
taken prisoners. On the left hand the Earl of Strum, Lieutenant Colonel to C.
MANSFELD's regiment of horse, charged valiantly with 3 of his companies and
some others who helped him, on a regiment of the enemies foot, and beat them
down to the bottom of the hill: but, being oppressed with multitudes, and left by
the Hungarians who were to second him, he was forced to get off as well as he
could. The Prince of Anhalt, with HOLOC his Lieutenant, fled with the first to
carry news to Prague of this disaster. The old Earl of Thurn followed, but
with more honor and better testimonies of his valor. The King of Bohemia (who
had bin a month together with the Army, and came but the day before the battle
to Prague) was now going forth after dinner to view his Army, ignorant of what
had past. Being some 12 score from the Town, he saw the Hungarians fleeing so
fast, that he was forced to retire speedily, or else his person had been in
danger to be oppressed by the multitude that sled. Touching the loss he
affirms confidently, there were not above 3000 slain; whereof most of them,
fleeing into the outworks of the Town (the gates being shut) were there slain
by the enemy; that there were few drowned in passing the river upon floats of
timber, and that the enemies loss was no less than theirs. There were some
companies of horse and foot which had retired themselves into Starpark, near
adjoining to their Camp; the which that night or the 1620
next day morning were either slain or taken prisoners: among which, there was
the young Prince of Anhalt, Captain of the Kings guard, and other Commanders;
who, sending a Drum to Count BVCQVOY, craved fair Quarter: which granted,
they yielded themselves prisoners.

In this great confusion and amazement, the King with his Queen and Court left
the Castle The Elector Palatine, King of Bohemia, abandons Prague.
which is in petty Prague, and retired into the old Town. The old Earl of
Thurn with other Commanders persuaded the King to stay in the Town and defend
it, wanting neither men, victual, nor munition; which they might well have
done: but the King, considering that his soldiers were danted with this
overthrow, that the Inhabitants were light and inconstant, and would adhere to
the stronger, that he was in a weak Town, and a victorious enemy at the gates,
who no doubt would employ all his forces to make his victory absolute; resolved
to retire himself, and give way to necessity: so as the next day after the
battle he left the Town by seven of the clock in the morning; the Queen taking
her caroche with her young son but nine months old, who was born in Prague.
Coming to the Port, they found it shut, and the Burgers in Arms, refusing to
let them pass; it may be with a hope to make their peace the better with the
enemy upon their retention: but by the persuasions of the Burgraue and
Chancellor of Bohemia who did accompany them; they opened the gates. Presently
after, the Queen took horse, they being accompanied by Sir RICH. WESTON and Sir
EDWARD CONNOVVAY, Ambassadors there for his Majesty, the old Prince of Anhalt,
two Dukes, of Saxony, of Weymar, the Earl of Hollock, the old Earl of Thurn,
the Earl of Lauall, son to the Duke of Tremouille, a Frenchman, the Burgraue
of Prague, and the Chancellor, with many others. That night they went to
Limpurg, 30 English miles from Prague: where they arrived late, and entered with
much difficulty; a long journey for a Queen great with child and unfit to
travel, having no time to rest or refresh herself by the way. The next day
they departed from Limpurg toward Silesia, and after eight days came to
Preslaw: during which, that Noble and virtuous Queen suffered hunger, cold, the
extremity of bad lodging (lying some nights on straw) the apprehension of a
pursuing enemy, and the loss of plate and goods which were spoiled by their
own soldiers that followd them: yet she bore all these crosses and afflictions
with a generous resolution, to the admiration of all.

The Duke of Bauaria and Count BVCQVOY entering into Prague the next day, they
sent The Imperialists pursue the King of Bohemia.
certain troops toward Brandiz fifteen miles off (a place of pleasure
belonging to the Kings of Bohemia) to pursue them, thinking to find the Queen
thereby reason of her disability to travel; where hearing what course they had
taken, and how far they were advanced, they left pursuing them, and spent their
time in spoiling of that place and the country thereabout. His Majesty's
Ambassadors took their leave of the King and Queen going from Limpurg; from
whence they gave the Duke of Bauaria to understand, that according to their
duties they had accompanied the King their Masters daughter to Limpurg;
desiring to have a safe conduct to return to Prague, which he sent them: where
finding no means to treat with a victorious enemy upon any good terms of
peace, they returned toward England.

After this famous victory the two Generals marched directly to Prague. In the
mean time, the Catholics wrote to the Duke of Bauaria, that they gave God
thanks that he had given him victory; that they would rejoice to see him come
triumphing into their Towns; that they offered to him both their goods and
lives, and that they freely yielded themselves, beseeching him to exempt them
from pillage and spoil. His Highness received them with all courtesy, and made a
proclamation that no soldier upon pain of death should depart from his
colors; and if any disbanded, their Officers should be hanged for them. The
next day the soldiers began to scale the walls: but the Duke staid their
insolency, and set guards at the gates of petty Pragu^, and upon all the
approaches. The Inhabitants of the old Town dispatched a trumpet to his Highness,
beseeching him to grant them three days space, in which time they hoped to
give such answer as should content him: yet he would not hear their demand; but
sent them word, that he would not grant them so much as three hours, but would
have them presently come forth into the field; where like a Conqueror he would
attend them to receive the obedience due unto his Imperial Majesty, in view of
all the Army. The which they performed: and the 4000 soldiers which were there
in garrison, submitted themselves, and were received into grace. The towns of
Prague submit to the Emperor.


After dinner the next day, the Duke of Bauaria and the Earl of Bucquoy entered
the town with great solemnity: and coming to the Capuchins Church, they gave
God thanks for this victory and vnhoped-for conquest. The Officers, who had bin
difmist from their charges, came to do their duties with tears of joy. They
write, that after this reduction of the three Towns of Prague, the gates were
kept shut the space of six days, to seek for the chief Authors of FERDINANDS
reiection: all that were found to be of that faction were spoiled, of what
Religion soever. The Caluinists (who inclined most to the Elector Palatine)
were entreated in the like manner, and deprived of the free exercise of their
Religion: As for the Lutherans of the confession of Ausbourg, they were
maintained. The wife and son of the Earl of Thurne, were committed to
prison, with many others. After the reduction of Prague, many Towns of Bohemia
came and brought their keys to the Generals, with all sorts of submission;
there only remained Pilsen and Tabor, where Count MANDSFELDT commanded, with
great Garrisons. The Generals, having restored the States to their ancient
places, they caused them to write unto the Count MANDSFELDT, and to his
Captains and Soldiers, which were in Pilsen; persuading them to yield up the
Town, with other places, unto his imperial Majesty, and they should receive a
certain sum of money in hand, and the rest afterward: Moreover, that The
Imperials labor to have Pilsen yielded.
seeing the King was now retired out of Bohemia, it was in the power of the
said States to discharge him; seeing they had entertained him into their
service, and to them he had taken his Oath. This offer did somewhat stagger
them; yet, considering that these were not the same States which had
entertained them (for, they were of the Religion; and these, Catholics) they
thought it not fit to give care unto them: Wherefore he wrote to the King, and
to the prince of Anhalt of all these proceedings, made a Truce with the enemy,
entered into treaty with him; and to that end sent IERONIMO de la Porta, to
Prague.

After this famous victory obtained by the Imperialists, and the reduction of
Prague; the Jesuits (who had retired themselves to Vienna) returned to their
College; where they washed over their Temple and Altar with holy water, and
sanctified it with great Ceremonies: The like was done to the Church in the
Castle; where the Images, the year before, had been beaten down by the
Protestants. And, about the same time, the States of Bohemia, to show their
obsequibusnesse to the Emperor, and their inconstancy to their new elected
King (whom they had lately chosen with such eagerness) being forced, as it
seems by necessity, to submit themselves unto the cross; wrote a long
perswasiue Letter to the States of Morauia, and renounced their confederation,
persuading them to do the like, and to obey his imperial Majesty in all The
States of Bohemia renounce all confederations with the Morauians.
things; with this commination, that if they should not give ear to their
advice, but be the occasion of greater mischiefs, they would then prosecute
them as public Enemies: But all this prevailed little with the Morauians, at
that time, who proceeded in their hostile attempts.

The Baron of Tilly being made Governor of Prague with a Garrison of 6000
Soldiers, the Inhabitants were quite disarmed: and, winter comming-on, the
Generals, seeing no enemy in field, separated their Armies by troops; some
going to refresh themselves, and others into Morauia. The Earl of Bucquoy had
advice given him to take some rest for the recovery of his health. And the Duke
of Bauaria took his way toward Munich, there to pass the Winter.

In the month of January one thousand six hundred twenty one (for then they
begin their computation) the Emperor sent forth a declaration of Proscription
against the Elector Palatine, 1621
King of Bohemia, the Marquess of Iagerndorf, the Prince of Anhalt, the Earl
of Hohenlo, The Emperors Proscription against the Elector Palatine, and others.
and the Authors of the Bohemian revolt: where, after a repetition of what had
past, he concludes; that desiring to prevent the like enterprises in time to
come, made against the laws of the sacred Empire, by this Our present
declaration of our imperial power, We have disannulled and revoked all
privileges, grants, concessions, rights and graces, granted heretofore unto
the said States of Bohemia, as well by our selves, as by the deceased Emperors
and Kings of Bohemia our predecessors; and likewise have decreed against all
those which shall be found to have procured, counseled and favored the said
revolt, and drawn our subjects to war against us; to be proceeded against
them, according to the constitutions of the Empire; declaring them fallen from
all estates, honors, and prerogatives, and unworthy for ever of our grace and
pardon. As for the Count Palatine of the Rhine, who has usurped upon us the
Title of King of Bohemia, has made himself head of our rebellious subjects,
drawn forces from all parts, and won unto him many officers and States of
the Empire, whom he has caused to enter into league to ruin our Authority,
and to invade our hereditary estates; We have, by this our declaration,
condemned the said Count Palatine, and declared him fallen from all his Estates,
namely, from the dignity of Elector, and other honors of the Empire which he
did enjoy; as also JOHN GEORGE the elder Marquess of Brandebourg and
Iagerndorf, Prince CHRISTIAN of Anhalt, 1621.
GEORGE FREDERICK Earl of Hohenlo, and others which have favored him in his
designs, adheared unto his faction, entered into league with him against us,
and assisted him with their Arms and persons in this enterprise.

Also there was another proscription in particular sent out against JOHN GEORGE
the elder Marquess of Iagerndorf, CHRISTIAN prince of Anhalt, and GEORGE
FREDERICK earl of Hohenlo of the same Tenure: commanding all the subjects of
the Empire upon pain of the loss of life, honor, and goods, not to assist
the three banished men above named, or to succor them secretly or openly, not
to lodge them, feed them or furnish them with any secret retrait, or suffer
them to escape; discharging them from all faith, homage, alliance, or
intelligence which they might have with any of them. Great Leuies of soldiers
made by the Imperialists.


The Emperor, the Elector of Saxony, and the Duke of Bauaria, made great
leauies of men in their States and countries, as well to assail these places in
Bohemia which would not yield obedience to the Emperor being under the
command of Count MANDSFELD, as also in Silesia and Hungary: yet they did not
forbear to talk of peace and to hold assemblies in diverse places upon that
subject.

As for the continuation of the conference with Prince BETHLIN and the States
of Hungary; A conference procured by the French Ambassadors.
it was so labored by the Ambassadors of France, as at length it was assigned
in the town of Hainbourg (which the Imperialists had recovered) whither
BETHLIN GABOR with the states of Hungary should send their Deputies to treat
with the Emperors. On the 25 of January the French Ambassadors with five
Deputies from the Emperor came to Hainbourg; and the next day there arrived
six Commissioners from Hungary. They write, that all the difficulty of the
accord consisted on two points: first, that the Emperor would put his subjects
of all nations into the forts of Hungary, and the States would have none but
natives of the country. And, Secondly, touching the restitution of
Ecclesiastical goods.

Marquess SPINOLA, notwithstanding the coldness of the winter, took many
places in the Palatinate, and drew great sums of money from the lands of the
Princes of the Union. They say that the Countess of Hannau made a composition
for 1800 Ricks dollers; and that The Protestant Princes assemble at Heilbrun.
the Earls and other Noblemen of Veterauia paid the like sum. The Protestant
Princes held an assembly at Hailbrun: where they consulted of the means to
make their peace with the Emperor, and to preserve the lower Palatinate from
utter ruin: necessity forced them, for that the Protestant Towns had sent
them word that they would contribute no more: neither did they come to the
assembly, or send any Deputies but one from Vlme; seeking every one in
particular to make his peace with the Emperor: namely, those of Nuremberg and
Vlme, who had sent their Deputies to Viena to that end. The Catholic States
assembled also at Ausbourg in the month of February: whither the three
Ecclesiastical Electors sent their Ambassadors, besides many Archbishops,
Bishops and Prelates; but this assembly did not produce a peace nor stay the
apparent ruin of Germany.

In the mean time, Count MANDSFELD was in Bohemia alone, without any support,
means or money to pay his soldiers: having settled his affairs there as well
as he could, he retired Mandsfelds proceedings in Bohemia.
with his horsemen into the upper Palatinate; where he supplied his wants as
he thought good: from thence, he went to the assembly of the Princes at
Hailbrun with a small train and some hopes to draw succors from them: but,
after some stay, he returned without any thing but bare hopes, prevailing
nothing with such as seemed friends to the cause, and whom the loss of that
kingdom might concern.

The enemy during the time of his absence (prevailing nothing by force) sought
to supplant him by policy. IERONIMO De la Porta, lying in Prague for his
master, became a Traitor, being corrupted by their fair promises: And as
formerly, in the absence of Count MANDSFELD, he had sought to undermine the
fidelity of the Captains by secret Letters: so now he labored to effect it
by his ambitious practices; in which design, Colonel FRANCK (who was
Governor of Tabor, and had the chief command under Count MANDSFELD) was much
engaged: giving free access unto all men on the adverse party to enter into
Pilsen with as great familiarity as could be with friends of the same party.
Having, after his return from Hailbrun to Amberg, discovered these practices
in Pilsen, he wrote unto them to continue constant, assuring them he would
find means to get them their pay and relieve their necessities. Hereupon,
his Auditor, called LOMENGER, came from Prague; who told the Lord Marshall
that he must have a larger commission to continue the treaty. Whereupon, one
was drawn, and his instructions renewed; adding unto the former Articles, that
1621
the upper Palatinate should be comprised in the said treaty. With this
commission, he was sent to Prague, having charge to look carefully to the
enemies designs in regard of a special treaty they intended with the
captains; and that he should persuade them to continue constant in his
Majesty's service: he held him honest, for that he had found him faithful in
other services: But he had supt the poison of infidelity out of PORTA his
cup; and they both became Traitors to their master. By whose means, the
Captains compounded secretly with the enemy for the yielding up of Pilsen, as
you shall hear hereafter.

The Turk in the beginning of this war had demanded of Prince BETHLIN the
guarde of the towns of Vac cia and Nehuso, upon diverse considerations,
touching the war which was made in Hungary: but he (although the Turks
vassail) fearing the Basha of Temesuar, who long since has had a purpose to
deprive him of Transiluania, and foreseeing that if the Turk should hold
Valaccia upon the Dannbe and Nehusol which is near the Carpatean Mountains
which divide Poland from Hungaria, he should find himself shut up between
the Turk and the Polander; he had always borne the Turk in hand he should
have Vaccia, but never had any mind to effect it, because of his particular
interest. But now his present weakness and of his confederates, after the
loss of such a Battle, made him procure the Hungarians to deliver up Vaccia
into the Turks hands for two reasons: first, to the end the Turk (who had
lately gotten a victory upon the Polonians in Moldauia) should not attempt any
thing in Transiluania and Hungary whilst that he was busied against the
Imperialists: Secondly, to draw succors from the Turk if fortune should still
favor the Imperialls, and that they should enter into Hungary. For these
considerations Vaccia was delivered unto the Turk at his instance.

The State of Hungary was full of combustions in the end of the year 1620;
many great personages desired to be reconciled to the Emperor, their lawful
king: but the greater number being Protestants (as BVDIANY and the Earl of
Serin) who held themselves irreconciliable to the house of Austria, desired
rather to call-in the Turk and be under his protection, then to vnitethemselues
with the Christians. Mean while, the Emp. by his declaration disannulled the
Election of Prince BETHLIN to the crown of Hungary, as unjust, violent,
seditious, The Emperors declaration against Prince Bethlin Gabor
and contrary to the laws and customs of the Realm, and therefore without
force and effect; making void also whatsoever had been concluded in the
assemblies of Presbourg and Nehusol to the prejudice of his royal rights, the
State of the Clergy, and the ancient laws and liberty of the crown of
Hungary: and withal he did revoke the Title which he had given him of Prince of
Hungary.

When the Emperor published this edict, BETHLIN GABOR came to Presbourg: from
whence he sent many troops to the frontieres of Hungary, Morauia, and Austria
to join with the Baron of Landau a Morauian Protestant, who committed great
spoils upon the Catholics. Many of the greatest of Bohemia which had escaped
from the battle of Prague, and fled into Morauia, joined with him, amongst
others the Earl of Thurne, to make head against the Imperialls which pursued
them after their victory. On the other side of the Dannow, Prince BETHLIN
having repaired the bridge of boats at Presbourg (which TAMPIERRE had broken)
he with his partisans, sent diverse troops to spoil and burn the Country,
even unto the gates of Viena. But the Baron of Prener who had succeeded
Tampierre made head against them, slew many of their men, and forced them to
retire. In the mean time BETHLIN carried the crown of Hungary and the Royal
Ornaments from Presbourg to Tirnau, and from thence to Altensol upon the river
of Gran near to Nehusol, in the upper Hungary; whereof men have written
Bethlin Gabor carries the crown of Hungary from Presbourg.
diversely: but most men were of opinion that he desired to keep it in his
possession, seeing that he had been chosen king of Hungary; a dignity which he
would prserue until death: and that his often sending to Viena for a
conference at Hainbourg (at the instance of the French Ambassadors) was not
with any intent he had to make any accord with the Emperor, but by this delay
to fortify himself with his partisans and the Turk, and to draw down the
Tartarians; and also to attend the resolution which should be taken by the
Elector Palatine and the Princes and States of Silesia and Morauia in their
assembly; to whom he had sent a confident messenger to exhort them to continue
in their confederation and to make head against the Imperialls, promising them
all the assistance that both he and his friends could make. Let us see then what
the Prince and States of Silesia did resolve upon in their assembly, being
requested on the one side by the Elector Palatine and BETHLIN GABOR to continue
their league: and on the other by the elector of Saxony to unite themselves
under the obedience of his imperial Majesty.

We have formerly made mention of the siege and taking of Bautsen, by the
Elector of Saxony; who, being entered the Town, assigned a day for the renewing
of the oath of Allegiance, 1621
the which was performed with great ceremonies: The Senate and Burgesses,
entering, made The Inhabitants od Baursen, (...)themselves to the Elector of
Saxony.
their submission upon their knees; then delivering the keys of the Town and
Castle into the Electors hands, being Deputy for the Emperor, as Marquess of
Lusatia, they were admitted to take the Oath: which done, the Elector told them
that he had received their Oath in his Majesty's name; who would protect them
in the liberty of their Religion; and maintain their privileges; and as for
himself, he would be always careful of their protection.

The Elector, camping at Bautsen, the Marquess of Iagerndorfe lay with his
forces at Gorlitz in Silesia, being but half a days journey off, yet they
were divided by the River of Ne^ss, betwixt whom there were daily skirmishes;
but the Electors Army was greater, and he had more Cannon; yet Iagerndorfe made
head against him, and stopped his entry into Silesia: for, the Inhabitants of
Gorlitz having refused to receive a Garrison from the Marquess of Iagerndorf,
they also made answer to the Electors Letters (who persuaded them to rceiue
him into their Town) that they would not suffer any one to enter to
ouer-master them, being sufficiently warned by the loss of Bautsen: But after
the loss of the Battle of Prague, the Palatines party, in Silesia, began to
decline much, and the Elector took diverse Towns. After the taking of Guben in
view of the Marquess; winter growing on, and being more annoyed with cold and
snow then with any Enemy, he returned with his Army to Bautsen: from whence he
wrote to the Princes and States of Silesia, assembled at Preslaue, to resolve
what answer they should give to the Elector Palatine; and to diverse deputies,
who exhorted them to continue their League: He laid before Substance of the
Electors Letters to the States of Silesia*
them the miseries and calamities which had befallen Bohemia and the
incorporated Provinces, by reason of the civil wars; and what pains he had
taken, from the beginning, to quench that fire, both with the Emperor MATHIAS
(beseeching him to prefer his clemency, before the rigor of Justice) and with
the States of Bohemia; putting them in mind of the obedience they ought unto
their King: laboring also with the other Princes Electors, to procure a
conference, thereby to pacify these troubles by arbitrament, and reconcile the
sovereign Prince to his subjects; which took no effect: The Bohemians
rejecting all means to treat of Peace, and disauowing the Emperor FERDINAND
their lawful King, made choice of another: whereupon the Emperor had sent him
a commission to reduce them to obedience by Arms, whereof he sent them a
copy, exhorting them to consider, First, how long their Country had been
afflicted with civil wars; Secondly, what bad success the Bohemians had had
in their Arms during these Troubles; Thirdly, that God had witnest by the
memorable victory at Prague, that he is the protector of lawful Princes; And
fourthly, that they would, with one consent, take wise counsels to preserve
their dear Country from the ruins which threatened it; the which they might
now do by obeying his Majesty's commission, accepting his pardon, and
acknowledging him Duke of Silesia, he which they had done before these
miserable troubles; having taken the oath Allegiance unto him, as their true
and lawful Prince.

He protested that he had no other desire but to see them in their former
Estate; freed from the continuance of so many ruins, and to enjoy their
privileges by the free exercise of Religion, the which his Majesty had
confirmed unto them at his coming unto the sovereignty of Silesia: But if they
continued obstinate in their leagues and former resolutions, he could not but
lament the miseries which would follow; being resolute to continue constant and
faithful to his Imperial Majesty, and to do his best endeavor to maintain
the obedience due to the lawful Magistrate, and that nothing should be
attempted to the prejudice of the Empire.

These Letters of the Elector of Saxony, and the copy of his Commission being
read in the Assembly of the Princes and States of Silesia, those of the
imperial Party were of advice, that, considering the state of affairs, it was
expedient to send an Ambassador unto the Elector of Saxony, to treat of their
agreement: The others were of opinion that it was not fit to make too much
haste; but, contrari-wise, to make new leuies of Soldiers in the name of the
States, to make it appear, in case they should enter into treaty with the
Elector of Sax. that it was neither for fear nor weakness: And to send word
unto all the Towns of Silesia and the higher Lusatia, to have great care, and
in no wise to disunite themselves; because that in all treaties and accords,
the preservation of privileges promised in general, is better maintained then
by particular yeeldings. This later advice was followed: So as the Elector of
Sax. having summoned Gorlitz and Sittau to yield obedience unto the Emperor,
lest they should fall into the 1621
misfortune of those of Bautsen: he was answered, that the States of Silesia
and the Deputies of the higher Lusatia were at Preslau to resolve touching the
Letters which he had sent them, beseeching him in the mean time not to attempt
any thing against their towns.

At the same time, Count BVCQVOY, General of the Imperial Army, marching out
of Bohemia, by the frontiers of Morauia and the Lower Austria, besieged and
took Iglaw and Trebnits, frontier towns of Morauia. He forced Snaim with many
other places to yield obedience to the Emperor: the which did so amaze the
garrisons and soldiers which the Baron of Landau held in many places in the
lower Austria, that they abandoned them to retire themselves into Hungary;
whither the said Baron himself in the end was forced to fly.

The States of Morauia assembled at Brin (who after the loss of the battle
of Prague could not resolve to send unto the Emperor to make their peace, for
that the Earl of Thurn newly The States of Morauia yield obedience to the
Emperor.
returned out of Hungary stayed them with promises of a mighty Army which
Prince B^THLIN should bring to succor all the confederates) seeing the
Imperial Army upon the frontiers; they sent the Earl of Sherotin with diverse
others to Viena, to let his Majesty understand, That they had long time delayed
to enter into league with the Bohemians and Hungarians: which they had not
done, if they had not been forced by the Earl of Thurn, who was called in by
some few which were Authors of the rebellion. 2. That they humbly besought him
to impart his clemency to all his faithful subjects, the States and
inhabitants of Morauia. 3. To maintain them in their privileges and the
liberty of religion: And fourthly, to receive with the like clemency and grace
all the Captains and soldiers which had been entertained by the said States;
who altogether protested to be ever obedient to his Imperial Majesty, and to
spend the last drop of their blood in his service. To whom the Emperor made
answer, That forgetting what was past he received them as his other subjects
into his protection, and would maintain them in all their privileges and the
liberty of religion: but, seeing there were some few which were the Authors of
the rebellion, That the Commissarie, whom he should depute to be his Lieutenant
in Morauia, should cause information to be made against them; after which the
States should understand his pleasure. The Deputies being returned, the
Inhabitants of Brin and Oldnitz (the two chief towns of Morauia) took a new
oath of fealty to the Emperor; and so did the soldiers whom they had
entertained: who* being mustered and receiving pay in the Emperors name, went
and joined themselves with Count BVCQVOY, who besieged Zradisch; which he took
and thereby stopped the passage between Hungaria and Morauia: so as BETHLIN
GABOR could not send the succors which he had promised to the Elector
Palatine; who was much afflicted for the news of this reunion, as you may
judge by the following Letter written to the Earl of Thurne which was
intercepted.

I have received Letters from Morauia with great grief: the soldiers being in
mutiny for want of pay: the States have sent to the Emperor to make their
accord; but God be thanked the affairs in Silesia are in better terms. The
Princes are resolute and have decreed to levy new forces; blaming the
Morauians for their perfidiousnesse. And for my part, I doubt not but in short
time they will receive the the due reward of their rashness. I did not
constrain the Bohemians and Morauians to choose me for their King. I could
have lived content in mine own Country: yet for all the pains and travail I
have taken; these for whom I have ventred my life and goods, and the lives and
goods of my friends and subjects, leave me, and even now treat about yielding
themselves unto another. What right they have to do this, I will leave to the
judgment of the whole world. I may truly say, that neither couetousness nor
ambition caused me to come into Bohemia: and I hope, God will so guide me by
his grace, as the suffering of so many calamities shall never make me do any
thing against my conscience or honor.

The fame of the happy success of the Imperial Armies in Bohemia, Morauia
and Lusatia, caused the Silesians (which bare affection to the house of
Austria) to take heart unto them and speak boldly in Preslau. The princes and
States of Silesia being advertised that the imperial army was upon their
frontiers, they held it necessary for them to prevent the ruin of their
country, and to enter into treaty with the Elector of Saxony; unto whom his
Imperial Majesty had given such commission as is before said: whereupon they
concluded, to send unto the King of Bohemia this resolution following.

After that your Royal Majesty (our most gracious Lord) had had many
consultations with us your faithful Nobles and States of Silesia touching the
estate of our present affairs, and The resolucion of the States of Silesia.
the enemies proceedings to cut off the assistance which the Silesians might
expect from Mora^ia and other their confederats; and having cause hereafter to
fear the coming of so powerful an Army into our Country, unprovided of
soldiers to make any resistance: It has seemed 1621
expedient (we should advertise you that it is needful for us to treat with
the Elector of Saxony his Imperial Majesty's Commissarie: which we cannot do
unless you give way unto the necessity of the time; retyring your self, for
your better security, into some such place as you shall think fittest. We
hope, your royal Majesty will not take in ill part this advice which the
Princes and States of Silesia do give you, and who protest to continue constant
and loyal subjects unto you; but rather attribute it to the inevitable
necessity of the time. Mean while, your Majesty may take order how to be
relieved with succors from your own Subjects and friends. And whereas your
Majesty has desired, that if we treat with the Elector of Saxony, you might
be also comprehended; you may believe that your faithful Nobles and States
will let your Majesty understand all which shall pass in that treaty. We also
beseech you to think of the confederation made with the Hungarians, and not to
see us plunged into the like misery as the Morauians which have been threatened
by the Turks and Tartars: As for the 3 months pay which your Majesty desires,
as well for the mustering of 1000 horse of his troops, as for his footmen, it
shall be resolved on in our first Assembly, and your Majesty acquainted with
our resolution; the Princes and States desiring nothing so much, as to continue
faithful unto you, and constant in their obedience.

On the morrow, the King sent them his answer in writing; That he had received
their resolution by their Deputies, and perceived thereby their good intention,
and the affection they The Elector Palatines answer to the States.
bare unto him; praying them to believe that his was no less: That having
observed the daily falling away of the Morauians, and that the Provinces
incorporated unto Bohemia, in that turbulent estate whereunto things were
brought, could not for the present resist the Emperors power, it was necessary
he should withdraw himself into some place of safety, not far from them;
where he might observe what was done, and provide sufficient forces to defend
them, giving way unto the Embassy they should send to the Elector of Saxony.

Before the king of Bohemia made his retreit out of Silesia, he sent the Earl
of Hohenlo to the Elector of Saxony, to propound a Truce unto him for the
obtaining of a Peace; with Letters to this effect:

I doubt not but you have seen the declarations of the causes, for the which I
have accepted the Crown of Bohemia: I have not done it by force nor practice;
but fearing the Realm His Le^tter to the D^f Saxony
should fall into the hand of strangers, and the Empire receive prejudice. I
cannot believe but God called me to the government thereof, to the end they
should not be deprived of the free exercise of Religion, and their privileges;
but I have accepted it chiefly for two reasons: First, that it might not be
hereditary; and, to the great prejudice of the Electors, fall into the hands of
the house of Spain: And Secondly, that the election of the king of Romans, to
be Emperor, might, by most voices, be in the power of the Protestants; whereby
they should no more fear to be under the yoke of the Roman Catholics. I
was confident that all the Electors and Protestant Princes would allow of my
intention, and find ^eanes to satisfy the adverse parties; and that I should
be maintained in the possession of the same Realm, by some good accord. I have
never refused to enter into treaty; but seeing my self frustrate of my desire,
I have been forced to take Arms to defend my self against the forces of
Spain, and the Catholic league: But being still desirous of Peace, I have
thought good to send the Earl of Hohenlo unto you, to treat of the means
whereby the Empire might be in quiet, his hereditary Countries (which the
Spaniards had invaded) restored, all grieuances taken away, free exercise of
Religion maintained, with the free election of the Realm of Bohemia with the
incorporated Provinces; and to provide for the defense of Hungary and Poland,
to the end the Empire might not thereby receive any danger. To attain^ unto the
which, I have given charge unto the Earl of Hohenlo to propound a general
Truce unto you for a month or two, throughout the whole Empire, the Realm of
Bohemia, and the incorporated Provinces; During the which time, there might be
some course taken to treat of a general Peace.

The Elector of Saxony made answer; That he would not dispute of the causes
which had The answer.
made him to accept the Crown of Bohemia; but he would tell him freely that he
had never approved of the proceedings of the Bohemians, and had written unto
him to dissuade him from it, foreseeing that in this action some Princes would
stand Newters, and others would follow the Emperor; That the Bohemians could
not in Conscience proceed to a new Election, their king whom they had crowned
and anointed being alive: that he had always desired he should not have
engaged himself in the Bohemian affairs, nor trouble the Emperor in the 1621
Countries which he enjoyed: and that he should have given credit to his
counsel and to the advice of many Princes who had always desired his
happiness; but seeing he could not be diuerted from the acceptance of the
crown of Bohemia, he had left it to the will of God and time, doing his best
endeavor to comfort the Emperor in his afflictions, until the memorable
victory of Prague; whereby it appeared that God would protect the lawful
Magistrate. That he could not deny but the Empire was in great danger, and
that this war of Bohemia might open a gate to let in the Turk to become
master of the frontier towns in Hungary. That he was the cause of all these
miseries; the which might have been avoided if he had given way to his
exhortation, and rejected that great desire to reign: That to prevent all
these dangers and ruins, he must take a good and free resolution to renounce
the realm of Bohemia and the incorporated provinces, to submit himself to the
Emperor and to crave pardon: but if he did not take this course, it was to be
feared he would draw himself and all his friends into great extremities; the
Emperor being resolved to pursue his victory.

The King of Bohemia finding no means to move the Elector of Saxony to
procure a truce, and finding that the Princes of Silesia had deputed the Duke
of Munsterberg and five other men of quality, to the Elector of Saxony; he
resolved to retire himself into Brandebourg, a province joining unto Silesia;
the which he did. It is written, that the Princes and States of Silesia before
his departure sent the Duke of Oschatz unto him with a present of 80000
florens, and are much commended for the good offices they did him in his
adversity.

The Deputies which were sent from the States of Silesia to the Elector of
Saxony delivered Articles unto him. 1. That they craved pardon of his Imperial
Majesty, and besought him to Propositions made by the Deputies of Silesia to
the Elector of Saxony.
impart his grace and clemency unto them. 2. That they would always
acknowledge his Imperial Majesty, for their lawful Sovereign, and King. 3.
That they would confirm it by a new oath. 4. That they would defend the Roman
Catholics and their rights. 5. That they would contribute 100000 ducats to
pay the soldiers levied for the guarde of Silesia, and renounce their new
confederation.

Hereunto, the Elector made answer: 1. That by virtue of the Emperors
commission, he would take the Princes and States of Silesia into his
protection. 2. That he would be a suter for their pardon and solicit the
confirmation of their privileges. And, 3. If the Silesians did discharge their
troops, his Imperial Majesty would revoke his. As for himself he promised
them, That, if after the oath of allegiance taken and their due obedience
performed to his Imperial Majesty, they were in any sort molested in the free
exercise of their religion according to the confession of Ausbourg, he would
then assist them with all aid and support. After 5 weeks treaty at Dresda in
Misnia (where the Elector keeps his court) and often sending to the Emperor,
who by no means would have the Elector Palatine, the Marquess of Iagerndorf,
the Prince of Anhalt, nor the Earl of Hohenlo comprehended; In the end, the
Articles of peace and reunion for the province of Silesia were concluded the
eightth of February.

1. The Princes and States of the upper and lower Silesia should be pardoned
for what was past during the troubles, and no man questioned or punished. 2.
They should love and honor the Articles of the Silesians rennion to the Emperor.
Emperor FERDINAND their King anointed and crowned and sovereign Duke of
Silesia, and should take a new oath of allegiance unto him. 3. That they
should within one year pay 300000 florens at three several terms for the
entertainment of the Emperors troops. 4. That they should renounce the oath
which they had taken to the Elector Palatine, and should have no farther
intelligence with him. They should deliver into the Electors hands the league
made with Bohemia, Morauia, Transiluania, Hungary, and others, the which should
be cancelled. 5. They should discharge their soldiers, and retain but 1000
horse and 3000 foot for their defense until the troubles were ended; the which
upon no occasion should be employed against his Imperial Majesty or the
Elector. 6. That the Elector should recall away his troops which he had then
in the principality of Sagen. 7. That his highness would intercede to his
Imperial Majesty, That all graunts made unto the Silesians with their
liberties and privileges should stand in force; All greeuances repaired; The
commerce allowed with the Morauians and Bohemians; All goods restored to the
true owners; And the Catholics maintained in their churches, monasteries and
possessions. 8. If happily the Protestants should receive any opposition in the
liberty of their religion, then his highness promised to undertake their
protection and defense. 9. If CHRISTIAN Duke of Lignitz as General of Silesia
according to his promise would be comprehended in that Treaty of peace, he
might do it within six weeks, else it was in his majesty's power to dispose.
10. That JOHN GEORGE of Brandenbourg, Marquess of Iagerndorf, 1621
and CHRISTIAN Prince of Anhalt, who had been formerly proscribed by the
Emperor, should not be comprehended in that Treaty; the which was signed by the
Elector of Saxony and the Duke of Munsterberg with great ceremonies.

Let us now look upon the estate of Bohemia. The Towns of Pilsen and Tabor
would not be reduced under the Emperors obedience: they depended upon the will
of the Governors who were become Masters. Count MANSFELD was in Pilsen, as you
have heard; and Colonel FRANCK in Tabor: whom MANSFELD had placed there as his
Lieutenant, making incursions into the Country, and committing great spoils,
seizing on Tochau, Falquenau and Elenbogen: which he fortified with garrisons.
After this (as I have formerly related) he went to Heilbrun; where he
propounded to the protestant Princes, that, if he might have men and money, he
would revive the Elector Palatine's party in Bohemia, and prepare work for the
enemy for five years: that his Imperial Majesty had offered him a great sum
of money to leave Bohemia, and yield up what he held there; but he had refused
it, and would continue constant to death, and ma^ntaine the faith he had given
the Elector. They write, that he found their intentions in this Assembly
contrary to his; they aiming only at the means how to reconcile themselves to
the Emperor, and preserve their estates.

The King of Bohemia, hearing what MANSFELD had done in Bohemia in his absence,
wrote to him in February after this manner: I have received much contentment to
hear of the military The King of Behemias Letter t^ C. Mansfeld.
exploits you have performd since my departure from Bohemia, of your
perseverance in the oath of fidelity you have taken, and of so many Towns and
Castles you have made subject to my obedience. I will assure you, that I will
never yield up my Realm of Bohemia which I have gotten by so lawful an
election; but will employ all my means, and that of my friends, to recover that
by Arms which they have wrested from me by force: for the effecting whereof, I
will speedily send you both men and money. I hope, with the help of God, and
the powerful succors of some Princes my friends, to do that shortly which
shall be pleasing to God, terrible to my enemies, to the good of religion, and
memorable to the whole world. You shall find me a Prince who will acknowledge
your services with honorable favors.

TILLY being left in Prague with 6000 men to preserve the Town and Country, the
soldiers grew so insolent in their prosperity, that the Captains could hardly
keep them in obedience: to prevent the which, and to restrain the incursions of
MANSFELD'S troops upon the river of Egra, the Baron of Tilly sent forth part of
his Troops to take some small Forts where the Mansfeldians were lodged: but
being not able to recover Falkenaw and Elenbogen, they were put in garrison in
the neighbor Towns, to stop their courses.

The Emperor, having sent out his Letters of proscription against the Elector
Palatine and Commissioners appointed to proceed again^ the authors of the
troubles of Bohemia.
the rest as you have heard, appointed commissioners to proceed criminally
against the Authors of the troubles of Bohemia, according to the rigor of the
laws and constitutions of the Empire. Some of them were fled into Hungary; and
others were retired with the Elector Palatine: some were dead, and many had been
apprehended at the taking of Prague, and committed unto prison.

There were twelve Commissioners appointed to make their Process; who, coming
to Prague in February, did personally adiourn all that had absented themselves
after the victory of Prague, and had not taken the oath of allegiance to his
Imperial Majesty, that within six months they should return and submit
themselves to the judgment should be given against them in regard of their
rebellion; with this clause, that appearing or not, they would proceed to
judgment: and the heirs of those that were dead were summoned to appear to
hear the prisoners examination, and the information against their parents
deceased: you shall hear their execution in June next.

The first of February, the Emperor sent forth four executoriall Letters of
Proscription against the Elector Palatine, the Marquess of Iagerndorf, the
Prince of Anhalt, and the Earl of Executoriall Letters against the Elector
Palatine and others
Hohenlo. The first against the Elector, for the lower Palatinate, was directed
to the Archduke AL^RRT of Austria, Prince of Flanders: the second for the
upper Palatinate, to the Duke of Bauaria; that against the Marquess of
Iagerndorf and the Prince of Anhalt, to the Elector of Saxony; and the fourth
against the Earl of Hohenlo, to the Bishops of Bamberg and Virsberg; all
four Commissions being of one tenor, only the names changed: whereby he
commanded them to execute his Letters of Proscription against the before-named
FR^DERICK (who, as he said, termed himself Count Palatine) his adherents and
favorers, and to do whatsoever they should think fit for the settling of a
public peace in the Roman Empire, and the preserving of his Imperial
authority. Wherefore, he enioined all men to hold the said FREDERICK 1621
for a condemned person; not to suffer him in their Territories and Countries;
not to give him any succor or eounsell upon any pretext whatsoever; not to
relieve or converse with him, nor to suffer their subjects to do it either
publicly or secretly; but to assist his Commissary in the execution of his
Commission.

After the loss of that unfortunate battle of Prague, the Elector Palatine
had written to all his allies and confederates, imputing the cause of that
loss to the want of men and money which The King of Bobemias Letter to the
united princes.
had been promised, and that he could never persuade the Protestants to ioin
their forces to his, and make them equal to the Catholics. In his Letter to
the Princes of the Union, he prayed God not to suffer them to be daunted nor
dejected, and to give them grace to take good resolutions; that the united
Princes had now more cause to resolve to war and to ioin all their forces
together, like to the Catholic Roman league, and to attempt with all their
power to chase SPINOLA out of the Empire and the lower Palatinate, a Country
which was hereditary unto himself and his brother JEWS PHILIP; that the
Treaty of Vlmes, although it was made in favor of the Catholic league, could
not prejudice them, but rather open a way for the good of all Protestants and
the preservation of religion and liberty; that he doubted not but the
Spaniards, seeing Bohemia and the incorporated Provinces subiugated, would draw
their victorious Armies into the Empire, hold Diets by force, prescribe laws
to the Protestants, and constrain them to restore the revenues which had
belonged to the Roman Clergy, and bring under their yoke all the Countries of
the protestant Electors: wherefore they should resolve to follow the example of
the Elector MAVRICE, and prepare themselves to war, to shake off this yoke
rather than to admit it; reason it self persuading them to continue their
Union: the Imperial Cities should also remember what has been done by the
enemy in Bohemia and Austria; and believe, that if their Union did not subsist,
they should not only be deprived of their wealth, but also forced to
enterrain and feed soldiers, endure cittadels, and be reduced into servitude
tentimes more than during the Union; that if the Bohemians would have employed
toward the charges of the war but the tenth part of that which they have since
lost, they had easily prevented the miseries which have fallen on them:
wherefore he entreated them to consider of all these things, to have his cause
and that of the reformed protestants in recommendation, and to defend his
hereditary Countries: the which they should do speedily, that they might
transfer the war into their countries who had been the causes of so many
miseries.

Some Authors also write, that our King's Majesty sent to the Princes of the
Union to give The King of great Britannie persuades the Princes to continue
their vnio^.
them to understand, that this loss should not cause their disunion, but
rather make them resolve seriously to the continuation thereof: for his part he
would never fail to assist them with men and money; whereto he was bound for
the preservation of the Palatinate, which was the patrimony of his
grandchildren.

About the end of September 1620, JEWS of Hesse, Lantzgraue of Darmstat, had
written to the Princes of the Union to persuade them to consider of the means
whereby peace might be settled in the Empire, and they reconciled to his
Imperial Majesty. To whom they made this answer; that The Princes of the Union
had never opposed themselves to the Emperor, but had always honored him; that
they had faithfully observed the Treaty of Vlme, and had not participated any
thing with the troubles of Bohemia: and yet SPINOLA had not forborne to invade
many places belonging to the Princes and States united, who never had any thing
common with the Bohemians; where the Spaniard had used great exactions, which
had forced them to take Arms: that the Lantzgraue should press his Imperial
Majesty, to the end that SPINOLA with his forces might leave the Territories of
the Empire, whereby every man might return to his own house, which would be
the only means to settle a peace.

The Emperor, knowing that the union of the Princes and States which had begun
in the year 1610, was to end in May following, wrote to the Imperial Towns and
Cities of this Union, The Elector of Mentz and the Lantzgraue of Darmstat made
Commissioners to the Emperor. The Emperors Letters to the Imperial towns.
admonishing them to leave it, and not continue it. He sent these Letters to
the Elector of Mentz, and to JEWS Lantzgraue of Hesse of Darmstat, to see
them conuaied, and to require an answer; making them his Commissioners to treat
with all the Princes and States that should reunite themselves with his
Imperial Majesty. His Letters to the Imperial cities containd, that he doubted
not but they were well informed why JEWS had persuaded the Princes of the
Union to submit themselves, and to give care to some accord, for the settling
of a Peace in their Country; That hitherto God had given him many victories,
and might by the same favor hope for greater, being assisted by his kinsfolks
and friends; yet, for the love and fatherly affection 1621
he bare to Germany their common Country, he was more inclined to Peace then
War, so as they would give way to his admonitions; That the commendable
design of the Lantzgraue, to procure some accommodation, had been very pleasing
unto him: Wherefore he exhorted them to forbear to entertain the War which
was made in the Palatinate, under the name of the Princes of the Union; and
withal, advised them not to recontinue their Union, which as he understood was
to end in May following; hoping that they would give no more aid nor counsel
for the continuance of such cruel war. And therefore he offered them pardon for
all that had been done against him or his predecessors; promising to receive
them all into his grace and favor, and not to suffer any one to be called in
question directly or indirectly, or receive any loss from himself, his cosen
the king of Spain, or from any other Prince of the house of Austria: but
contrariwise he would give order that they should not be molested by garrisons
or his Armies; but would defend and protect them in all necessary occasions.
Moreover, that he would confirm all their privileges and immunities made for
the Peace of Religion, and the State; having given full power to his
commissioners to treat with them, and to give them all necessary assurances.

These Letters being sent to Nuremberg and other Imperial towns by the said
Commissionners Their answer.
which had accompanied them, with their own; They of Nuremberg made answer,
that during the present troubles in the Empire they could not have received any
thing more pleasing then his Majesty's Letter, seeing that the things promised
in them, should be confirmed by such worthy Princes. That they had also
understood that many towns had received the like Letters and sent their
Deputies unto them; That for their parts they would acquaint the towns of
Franconia their associates with his Majesty's intention, and speedily send
their answer; desiring nothing more, then to continue obedient and faithful
to the Empire.

SPINOLA, notwithstanding the sharpenes of the winter, had sent the General of
his horse into the Palatinate, on the other side of the Rhine; where he had
taken some places, and forced many Noblemen, Protestants, along the river of
Mein, to compound and give him great sums of money, to avoid their apparent
ruin. The Marquess of Olnosbac, or Anspach, General for the Princes of the
Union (who wintred with his troops at Worms and thereabouts) being gone
Westhof and Osthof taken by Spinola, and after burnt by the Princes.
to their Assembly at Heilbrun, and having put 300 horse and foot in garrison,
into Westbof: SPINOLA resolved to take this lodging from him; for the effecting
whereof, on the 15 of March, having drawn together 2000 horse, with 4000 foot,
he marched in one night with 6 cannons to Westhof, the which he took in 8
hours: The soldiers were sent out disarmed with white wands: the Captains and
officers were put to ransom: the Inhabitants paid 16000 Florens; and they of
Osthof 10000. Then he returned to Crutzenac, carrying with him 6 of the Burgers
of Westhof, who were also put to ransom. This prize being reported to the
Marquess of Ansbach, he returned speedily to Worms, from whence he sent the
Earl of Solms with certain troops to Osthof and Westhof; but, hearing that
SPINOLA was to return and fortify himself there, they burnt these 2 towns; to
the great grief and lamentation of the poor inhabitants. About this time,
there was an Assembly of the Protestants at Segenberg, in Holsatia; where the
king of Denmark, and the Elector Palatine were in person; others sent their
Ambassadors, as the king of Swethland, the Elector of Brandenbourg, from the
Princes of the Union, and the States of the united An Assembly of Protestants
in Holsatia.
Provinces; from the Dukes of Brunswick, Holsatia, Lunebourg, Meclebourg and
Pomerania, with other Earls and States of the Circle of the lower Saxony, which
began and ended in March: They have written diversely of their conclusion in
this Assembly. Some hold that it was resolved to assist the Elector Palatine
with 2000 foot, and 6000 horse, to chase SPINOLA out of the Palatinate; but it
took no effect. Others have written, and with more appearance of truth, that the
king of Denmark undertook to send an Ambassador to Vienna, to beseech his
Imperial Majesty to revoke the Proscription thundered out against the Elector
Palatine, and to restore him to all his Estates and dignities; which would be
the means to attain unto a firm Peace throughout the whole Empire. (This
Ambassi was sent to Vienna, and we shall hear what answer the Emperor made)
And secondly, that the said King should write to SPINOLA to exhort him to
retire out of the Palatinat, and the Territories of the Empire; the which he
did as follows. Letters of the K. of Denmrke to Spinola.


I have understood with much grief and affliction of mind, by Letters from
many Princes of the Empire, my Cozins, Allies and Friends, that you are entered,
with an Army, into the heart of the Empire, and the midst of high Germany;
whereas you have taken many towns, castles and forts in the Palatinate by
force, and continue the like violence against the countries and territories of
many other Princes, Earls, States and Towns of the Empire; yea, against those
1621
which belong to Widows and Orphans, who have no ways offended the Emperor;
exacting grievous contributions: which has made the neighbor Princes grow
jealous, lest you should use the like violence against them, their countries,
and territories, as they have bin threatened by you, if they would not discharge
the garrisons they entertained for the safety of their places and countries, if
they did not renounce their unions and leagues (which have bin alwais allowd by
Divine and humane laws, and especially by the golden Bull of CHARLES the 4) and
did not give free passage to your Army, both by water and land, and through
your towns, castles, forts and passages, according to your will and pleasure.
These proceedings are not only repugnant to the imperial constitutions, the
liberty of Germany, and the public Peace; but also to the Letters Patent
which his imperial Majesty has caused to be published for the public safety:
wherefore it was not to be suffered, that the States of the Empire, our cosins,
and kins-folke, having done wrong to no man, should be abandoned for want of
defense, under the yoke of an unjust oppression: And therefore we entreat you
lovingly, that we may have no cause to undertake their just defense to free
them from the violence which they suffer; but that you would desist from all
these invasions, and abandon that which has been taken by force from the
States of the Empire, and restore it to their Princes and Lords: which done,
posterity will commend you to have bin a wise and prudent Prince, and all the
Princes of the Empire, and my self will thank you.

As for the Assembly of the Catholic Princes and States held at Ansbourg, and
that of the Princes of the Union at Heilbrun, and their conclusions; may be
seen in this Letter following, written by one of the assembly of Ansbourg.

I am returned from the Diet at Ansbourg the 19 of March, where the Princes and
Catholic States of the Empire have been assembled the space of 7 weeks: We
have resolved a continuance of contribution for a defensive war, so long as
the troubles shall continue; for the which there shall be an advance of 10
months, for the entertainment of 12000 foot, and 3000 horse, under the Duke of
Bauaria their General. I can assure you that the said Princes and Catholic
States are so well resolved as they were never; and that if they had bin of the
like mind some few years since, the Protestant States had been at a low Eb.
They being assembled at Heilbrun, sent an Embassage to our Assembly; the
subject was, that having no other aim nor intent but Peace, which they called
the observation of the treaty of Vlme; the Catholics have granted them the
said observation. They are all upon the point of reconciling themselves unto
the Emperor and to abandon the Elector Palatine. My L. Bishop of Spire stands
upon his guard on the defensive; because he is assured the said protestant
Princes cry out against his Fort of Vdenheim, having caused the Elector of
Mentz and D. of Bauaria to be moved to persuade him to give over that new
fortification; but they have given them answer in writing, showing the just
occasions and rights, for the which the said Bishop had reason to seek the
assurance and quiet of his country, after so many oppressions and wrongs which
he had endured from his neighbors.

In the beginning of March, the Princes of the Union, and the Imperial Towns
of their party, began to reconcile themselves unto the Emperor, promising to
give no more succor unto the Elector Palatine, and not to prolong their Union,
nor to make any new. There were some of them which treated for their own
particular, being thereunto pressed; and the rest in general. And thus you
see, that all they which had advised and persuaded the Elector Palatine to
accept of the Crown of Bohemia, for the general good of Germany, as they
pretended, and so engaged him in a most dangerous war, contrary to the will and
advice of his best friend, when as he might have lived happy and peaceful
days in his own Country, much honored and respected; do now, after some
frowns of fortune, abandon him and his, basely and cowardly, to the affronts
and oppression of a proud and insolent enemy; who, no doubt, in time will make
them know the danger of their disunion, and repent their rash resolutions.

MAVRICE, Lantzgrave of Hesse, seeing SPINOLA'S expedition in the Palatinate;
and his Army ready upon the first occasion to enter into his country; the
tediousness of the Princes Maurice Lantz grave of Hesse submits himself to the
Emperor.
in their resolution to treat with the Emperor; and that he should be the
first in danger: he was also the first which sent unto the Emperors
Commissioners, and to Marquis SPINOLA, touching his reunion. The place of
treaty was at Bingen; where, after many consultations of their Deputies, in the
end these Articles following were concluded.

First, that Prince MAVRICE, Lantzgrave, should promise, not to attempt by
himself or any other, any act of hostility against his Imperial Majesty, or
his Army; and not to give any assistance, directly or indirectly, of men,
money, munition, victuals, or counsel to the Count Palatine; nor to the united
Princes, and other Kings, Electors, Princes, and Estates which had 1621
relieved the said Palatine, and the Palatinate, the Realm of Bohemia, and
other Provinces incorporate. 2 That the said Lantzgrave shoud withdraw his
Troops and Soldiers from the Princes Army, and from the Palatinate. 3 That
by the fourteenth of May (which would be the expiration of their Union) he
should send an Ambassador expressly to give notice to the other Princes, that
he did renounce the said Union, or any other new Union which might be made,
against his Imperial Majesty, to succor the Palatine and Palatinate, and
should keep these present Articles inviolable. 4. That Marquess SPINOLA
should also promise, that neither he nor his Army should commit any act of
hostility, make any eruption, nor exact any contribution upon the Lands,
Principality and Segniories of the said Lantz-graue MAVRICE, nor upon his
vassailes, Ministers and subjects, nor their goods, moveable or immovable; but
should keep them from all molestations, and suffer them to live in Peace, both
for Religion and policy, according to the Imperial constitutions: But if any
of the said Lantz-graues subjects should do contrary to this transaction, they
should be excepted. And lastly, that this Treaty should be signed by Marquess
SPINOLA, and the Lantz-graue MAVRICE; and that within three months the said
Marquess should cause it to be signed and ratified by the Emperor, and the
Archduke ALBERT: which he should deliver to the Lantz-graue, and in the mean
time these Articles which were concluded, the 23 of March, should be observed.

The three chief Imperial protestant Cities, Strasbourg, Vlme, and
Nurembourg, having at the Strasbourg, Vlme and Nurembourg, renounce the Vnio^.
same time sent their private Deputies to the Elector of Mentz, and the
Lantz-graue JEWS, treated of their reconciliation with the Emperor, and
promised to renounce the Union of the Correspondents: which was concluded and
signed the 9 of April, and proclaimed afterward in their Cities.

They of Worms feared a siege, for the great preparations which SPINOLA made,
so as they carried what they had, most precious, to Spire, as to a place of
refuge: They would gladly have imitated Strasbourg and Vlme, but the Princes of
the Union were too near them; who, desiring to treat in general, had sent
their Ambassadors to the Emperor: but considering that the state of their
affairs required a more speedy remedy then the return of the said Ambassadors,
there was a meeting appointed betwixt the Lantz-graue JEWS, and the Marquess
of Olnosbach, General of the Union, and JOHN FREDERICK D. of Virtemberg, at
Veinheim; where, after many discourses of the means to treat an accord for the
Peace of Germany, the D. of Virtemberg went alone to Worms, to impart it to
the Marquess of Baden; from whence, being returned, they went all to Mentz;
whither SPINOLA also came, and the Articles following for the Peace and
reunion of the Princes and States correspondents were concluded and signed the
12 of April. First, it is agreed betwixt the above named Princes, that they
shall forbear to use any acts of hostility one against another; that the
Princes and States of the Union, and The Princes of the Union, reconciled to
the Emperor.
their Soldiers shall not offer any wrong to the Marquess SPINOLA or his Army
and troops, nor to those places which he has made subject to his obedience, or
to any which are comprehended in this treaty, their countries and states. 2.
They shall not give any succors of money or men, to FRED. Count Palatin of the
Rhyn, be it directly or indirectly, by themselves or by others in any sort
whatsoever. 3. They shall not continue the Union hertofore made by them;
neither in favor of the Palatine, nor hatred of his Imperial Ma.: Nor shall
make any new; but they shall retire their troops out of the Palatinat by the 14
of May next to come; whether they belong to private persons or to the general,
and they shall al continue faithful to his imperial Ma. 4. The Marquess SPINOLA
does also promise not to use or cause to be used, any hostility against the
Princes and united States Protestants, their soldiers, officers, subjects,
castles, towns, and territories. 5. That in this treaty of Peace shall be
comprehended, as well those mentioned in the Treaty of Vlme, as all the other
Electors, Princes, States and Knights of the Empire; except the country
(...)territories of the house of Iuliers. 6. Touching the Count P. FREDERIC;
the Mar. SPINOLA, having been required by the king of great Britan not to
execute his commission against the countries which remained under the Palatins
obedience, till the end of the union, which should expire the 14 of May, nor
against his subjects or their goods; he promised that no Act of hostility
should be committed by him or any other until that day; conditionally, that
the Princes and united States shall take order that the particular troops now
in the Palatinat and neighbor places, shall not attempt ought against the said
SPINOLA or his Army, nor the Towns and places which he now holds, or
against any State of the Empire that is faithful to his Majesty. Seventhly,
and to the end that the neighbor Princes and States and their subjects may not
be wronged by the Soldiers of either party; the Princes above named 1621
promise, every one for themselves, to hinder all incursions, robberies, and
thefts, and to assure the highways for the free liberty of commerce. These
Articles being signed and sealed by all the Princes; SPINOLA having promised to
cause them to be signed and ratified by his Imperial Majesty, and the
Archduke ALBERT; the Electour of Mentz made them a stately Feast: and on the
morrow after, SPINOLA did the like with great magnificence.

But afterward it was added to the said treaty; that if the King of
Great-Brittaine should demand that the suspension against the execution of the
Palatinat should be prolongd till the second of June; that SPINOLA would yield
unto it, so as his Majesty did promise that his son in law should not attempt
any thing against those places which he held, nor against his Army. Moreover,
if the Kings Letters could not come by the foureteenth of May; that the
Marquess of Olnosbach, having given notice thereof to Marquess SPINOLA, and
if he required a longer delay of ten days, that he would grant it: the which
was again signed by the two Generals SPINOLA and BRANDENBOVRG OLNSBACH.

After these treaties of Peace, MAVRICE Lantz-graue of Hesse retired his
souldies from the Army of the united Princes; and they also countermanded their
troops which were in the Palatinate under the command of CNIPHVS; so as for the
guard thereof, there remained no Germans but OBERTRANT with his horse, Sir
HORATIO VERE with his English, and some Troops of Holland, who were lodged in
Heidelberg, Manheim, and Frankendale, where they fortified themselves against
the enemies attempts, as well as time and their means would give them leave.

A brute dispersed over all Germany touching a great Army which was levied in
Denmark and the lower Saxony, in favor of the Palatine, was the subject of
this following Letter; written by the Elector of Mentz, to FREDERICK VLRICK
Duke of Brunswick. Being advertised A Letter from the Elector of Mentz to the
D. of Brunswic.
from many parts that there are great numbers of soldiers levied in the
circle of the lower Saxony to go into the Palatinate; I thought good to
advertise you of the treaty of pacification which has been made betwixt the
Marquess SPINOLA on the one side, and the Marquess of Olnosbach, with other
of the confederate Princes on the other; whereby a Truce is concluded for the
Palatinate, as you may see by the Articles I send you. There is no man of
judgment but foresees, if these soldiers (levied in base Saxony) shall go
into the Palatinate, that all the pains so many Princes have taken to settle a
Peace in Germany, and Truce in the Palatinate, will be vain and without any
fruit; if we return again to war, and that the fire of civil dissension
be again revived. We conjure and entreat you so to deal with the Princes and
States of Saxony, that nothing may be attempted which may minister subject to
break the treaty of Peace; in which you and all the Princes and States of the
Empire are comprehended: you shall herein do a commendable work for the good
of the commonweal, whereof we thought good to advertise you, etc. this 24 of
April.

The Emperor wrote also at the same time to the Duke of Brunswic, concerning
the same subject, as also against those which had published in the lower
Saxony, that SPINOLA'S intent was to march thither to dispossess the Princes
of that circle of the Arch-bishopricks and Ecclesiastical revenues which they
held: the which his Majesty, by his Letters, did auerre to be a ^launder;
assuring him that his Majesty would maintain the Peace as well in causes of
Religion, as of State, according to the Letters of assurance which he had
caused to be published at his coming to the Empire: and as for the excess
committed by SPINOLA'S Army, against some Princes and places in Veterauia, and
upon the Rhine; he had written unto him to make satisfaction for the same, and
to forbid the doing of the like hereafter: wherefore he advised him not to
believe such false reports, but rather to give credit to the words and promises
of his Imperial Majesty; to keep himself in Peace and not to enter into an
unnecessary charge; seeing the intention of his Majesty was like that of his
predecessors, desiring nothing more then to continue his good affection unto
the Princes and States of the Empire.

Let us now return into Bohemia, and see what exploits were done there during
the months of March, April, May, and June. The Emperor had caused two Armies
to be levied, the The proceedings in Bohemia.
one on this side of the river of Molda, toward Pilsen, whereof the Baron of
Tilly was General, to besiege such places as held yet for MANDSFELD; and the
other beyond the River, commanded by Don BALTHAZAR, to set upon Tabor.
MANDSFELD was returned from Heilbrun into the upper Palatinate to levy new
Troops, and to attend others which the Duke of Weimar levied upon his Lands by
order from the Elector Palatine, to ioyn with him, and succor those 1621
places which held yet for him in Bohemia. The enemy made profit of his
absence; and by the treachery of Colonel FRANCK, IERONIMO de Porta, and
LEMINGER his own instruments and servants, TILLY entered into a particular
Treaty with the Captains for the yielding up of Pilsen, while that in outward
show he seemd to desire a Treaty with Count MANSFELD: so as the Captains,
having already past the bounds of duty, began to speak more openly. They
wrote to their Commander Count MANSFELD, that they purposed to expect no
longer, but would either be presently paid or assured of their pay; and, if
they had not a speedy resolution, would provide for themselves.

His Auditor LEMINGER, after conference with Monsieur TILLY about his last
Commission, returned to the Lord Marshall without any effect; excusing it, that
he was sent back with threats, and denied audience; pretending, that the enemy
took it ill, that, changing the Contents of his first Commission, he had
inserted this last Article concerning the upper Palatinate (as you have heard)
which had no dependency upon Bohemia. Being now assured of the Captains
dispositions, he had no will to treat with the Lord Marshall; it being only to
entertain time, and to stay him from further proceeding. LEMINGER, aduertising
him of this secret Treaty, and that his Captains inclined to the Emperors
party, did what he could to procure money to satisfy these traitors: but, all
was in vain; for, those whom he trusted most, betrayed him: and the Letter
which he sent to Pilsen to divert the Officers from so foul a fact, was
intercepted by the enemy, and not delivered; so as on the twenty sixth of March,
the treaty that Pilsen sold by the treachery of the Captains.
had been long a-working was concluded at Mies betwixt the Baron of Tilly,
General of the Emperors Army, and the Captains of the Garrison of Pilsen:
where it was assured, that in regard of their absolute departure from the said
Town, the Captains should receive 140000 florens from his Imperial Majesty to
be divided equally among the seven companies of the Regiment. Colonel FRANCK
made his treaty apart, and got a promise of 3000 pound starling for the
restitution of Tabor; that all the soldiers, which would retire to Count
MANDSFELD, should be conducted to a place of safety with their Ensigns, Arms
and baggage; that in going forth, they should not molest the Clergy nor
Inhabitants in any sort; and that they should leave all the cannon and munition
within the Town in the same estate they were. Thus was Pilsen presently
delivered, and these merchants received the price of their accursed sale; and
every one departed whither he pleased.

The Lord Marshall, after the conclusion of this Treaty, wrote kind Letters,
thinking to draw them into the Palatinate: but, their guilty consciences would
not suffer them to appear before him. His Auditor LEMINGER, having received
4000 Ricks dollers (the hire of his perjury) thought to conueigh it secretly
through the Palatinate; thinking by his wit so to justify the rest of his
actions, that the Lord Marshall should receive good satisfaction: but he soon
discovered his money and his villainy; causing both the money and the man to be
attached, and made him to be questioned at a Marshals Court: where, being
condemned to die, he was executed according to martial law.

Colonel FRANCK grew much amazed at his imprisonment. The Lord Marshall,
being come to Amberg, called him before the Earl of Solms, Lieutenant Gouerner
of the upper Palatinate, and the Lords of the Council, to clear himself
concerning the yielding up of Pilsen. Being summoned by the Lord Marshall, he
came thither in his caroach; but was surprised with such fear, that he returned
presently with all speed, leaving both caroach, servants and baggage behind
him. He got to Nuremberg, from thence to Regensburg, and after to Tabor, where
he hoped to be received by the garrison: but he was prevented by the vigilance
of the Lord Marshall, who sent a command to the contrary. Finding himself thus
frustrate of his expectation, he went and staid some time in the enemies Camp,
and then retired to Prague to make his apology. Some well-willers to Colonel
FRANCK, who presume to know him and his actions well, and were employed in
those wars, said that these are scandalous aspersions laid upon him without
cause. They confess, that he gave way to the enemies Captains and Officers to
come familiarly into Pilsen, where they had all good reception; which was only
to prolong the treaty by delays, that in the mean time they might get some
relief from the King of Bohemia or Count MANSFELD: but they absolutely deny,
that he made any composition for himself upon the yielding up of the Town.
They also confess, that he retired himself secretly from Amberg: and the
reason was, for that, seeing how LEMINGER was entreated, he feared the like
although he had not deserved it. And touching his retiring to Tabor, they say
he came thither during the time it was besieged, and past through the enemies
Camp by night; where, coming to the Port, they would not receive him, having
been formerly advertised to the contrary 1621
from Count MANSFELD; that in the morning the enemy discovered him, and took
him prisoner: with whom he continued till the Town was yielded, and then was
released, it being one of their conditions, because they then held him for an
honest man. Thus have I written the opinions on both sides touching Colonel
FRANCK; the censure whereof I leave to the judicious Reader.

The enemy seeing himself freed of this thorn, being master of Pilsen which had
so much annoyed them; General TILLY led his Army to ioin with the Troops of
Saxony which were come to the river of Egra, and had forced a Town of the same
name to declare it self for the Emperor, and receive a garrison: which Town is
the proper inheritance of the Elector Palatine. There remained no more on that
side but Falkenaw and Elenbogen. They went first to Falkenaw, where Colonel
GRAY commanded with certain companies of English and others: they battered and
assaulted it diverse times; so as the Colonel, having defended it many days,
and performed the part of a brave soldier, was forced to treat and depart with
Arms and baggage. This place being yielded, there remained nothing in those
Quarters but Elenbogen; being not great, yet strongly situated by nature. There
were in it three companies of good soldiers, besides the Citizens, which were
much affected to the Kings party. Count HENRY of Ottemberg, a brave and
generous young Nobleman, commanded in the Town by the appointment of the Lord
Marshall. The siege began the second of April, and continued till the six and
twentieth with as much resolution and obstinacy as could be devised, employing
all their forces and stratagems. The cannon played continually, and they shot
balls of wilde-fire incessantly: yet, notwithstanding all their fury, they
within the Town, encouraged by their young Earl to continue constant in his
Majesty's service, were not tired with any labor; but, the more the enemy
pressed upon them, the more resolutely they carried themselves to repel them:
so as, had they not wanted powder, without doubt they had made good the place.
The Lord Marshall, during the siege, did what he could possibly to succor
them; still giving advice to the Earl, that (in case he saw himself pressed
before that succors came) he should treat in time, rather than be brought to
extremity, and lose the hope of an honorable composition to save the Troops.
About the six and twentieth of April the Lord Marshall went with his Army (which
was but small) with an intent to raise the siege at what rate soever. His
Fore-ward entering into Bohemia, they had news that the Town was yielded upon
composition; the Gouerner being forced by the forenamed want and other
inconveniences. The Articles were honorable: that the garrison should depart
with bag and bagagge, bullets in the mouth, matches light, drums beating,
colors fleeing, etc: but the enemy (accustomed to break his faith to those of
the religion) used them as they had done others before at Tacchau; for, as the
soldiers came out, they spoiled them one after another: which particular loss
was very sensible to the poor soldiers. Elenbogen being lost, the Lord
Marshall retired again into the upper Palatinat to go on with his Leuies of
soldiers, and to prepare himself for some better design. Some write, that the
Inhabitants of Elenbogen were taxed at 100000 florens by TILLY to redeem their
Town from spoil, and that he seized on the chief Burgesses till the sum were
paid.

At the same time Don BALTHAZAR forced the garrisons of Varling and Clingenberg
to yield those two places to him, upon condition that the soldiers should not
thrust themselves into Tabor, but depart out of Bohemia, and should be
conducted to the higher Palatinate with all safety: which was duly performed.
There now remained no more in Bohemia but Tabor and Vitingaw, which fortified
themselves to endure a siege wherewith Don BALTHAZAR threatened them: you shall
hereafter hear what passed there. Let us now see the executions of justice
which were done at Prague both upon the Directors and the chief Authors of
those combustions and troubles.

We have formerly related how that his Imperial Majesty had appointed the Earl
of Lichtenstein and other Commissioners to proceed against the Authors of the
Bohemian troubles. On the three and twentieth of April, a Sentence was given
against the deceased (who were then named) in the presence of their heirs;
whereby they were convicted of high treason, and their memory for ever
condemned, and their goods confiscate to his Imperial Majesty, as King of
Bohemia: yet their condemnation should not touch their kinsfolks with any note
of infamy; the which his Majesty of his special grace would have inserted.

On the 13 of May, JOHN ANDREW Eearle of Schlic (one of the greatest Lords of
Bohemia and chief of those combustions) being retired to certain lands he had
upon the river of 1621
Egria, and from thence into Voyeland; he was encountered by the Elector of
Saxonie's horsemen, who carried him prisoner to Dresda: which being known unto
the Emperor, he sent to demand him of the Elector. Whereupon, he was
delivered to his Commissarie; who conducted him to Prague under sure guard:
where his process was made with the other prisoners, they being in all forty
five: whereof seven were condemned to perpetual imprisonment in Prague; two
The condemnation of the prisoners of Prague.
to be sent in chains to Iauerin; two to remain in prison for a year: three
were to be hanged: three to be whipped and banished for ever, and one to have his
tongue nailed to a Post for an hours space, and to be banished for ever to
Iauerin: All the rest were to lose their heads, and many of them to have their
right hands cut off, and set upon the towers of the bridge. All their lands and
goods were by the same judgment confiscate to his Imperial Majesty; only
their wives dowries excepted.

The manner of their execution I will be bold to relate more particularly,
because it was The manner of the execution of the prisoners.
somewhat extraordinary. After their condemnation they were returned to
prison: where every man had liberty to visit them, and confer with them. They
were all Lutherans, except one Baron (who was a Caluinist) and a Captain which
was a Romish Catholic. There was a scaffold built in the accustomed place
near unto the Towne-house, four else high and twenty two spaces square, and
bourded round about. This scaffold was afterward covered with black cloth:
upon the which, on the day of execution, there was a man set in a long black
robe and his face covered, holding a Crucifix in his hand, to present it to
every one of the condemned as he should come up on the scaffold. There were two
others attired in like manner to receive the condemned as they went to die, and
to spread before them a black cloth, whereon they kneeled when they were
executed; and, thirdly, six men in like attire with their faces covered,
appointed to take up their bodies being dead, and to wrapped them in the black
cloth whereon they had kneeled, to deliver them to their kinsfolk. On sunday the
20 of June (the day before the execution) many of their wives and children cast
themselves at the Prince of Lichteine's feet, to sue for their husbands: but
he made them answer, It was not in his power, but only in the Emperors, to
give.

At five of the clock in the morning, at the shooting off a Cannon from the
Castle, all the gates of Prague were presently shut up, and the execution began.

First of all the Earl of Schlic, attired in a gown of black silk, houlding a
book in his hand, went up to execution. The man, appointed to that office,
presented him the Cross: his servant unclothed him; and, after his prayers
ended, the Executioner cut off his head: which done, his own servant laid his
right hand upon a block; the which, in like manner, was cut off, and laid
apart with the head: the body was wrapped up in the cloth whereon he had
kneeled, and carried from the scaffold by those six men appointed to that
purpose; so as the body was never touched by the Executioner. The like form
was observed with all the rest which were beheaded. NICHOLAS DV^IS, whose
tongue was nailed for an hours space to the gallows, died with the torment
within three days after.

The Countess of Scklic, did so much lament the loss and death of her
husband, as she did not survive him many days. As for the bodies of such as
were executed by the sword, they were delivered to their kinsfolks and
friends, to be enterred some in their Segniories, and others in Prague.

At the same instant, there was the like inquisition in both Austrias, against
the chief which had held the Bohemian party. The Commissioners did summon many
to appear personally before them at Lintz, to justify themselves. Some came:
other (who thought there was more safety in absence) forbear. Some, which came
in, were committed: against such as stood out, they proceeded, by seizure of
their goods; the which, as LVNDORPHNIS writes, were restored for money, and upon
other conditions. FREDERICK, Baron of Tieffembach, one of the chief actors in
Morauia, had been taken at the Bathes in the County of Tiroll: being brought
to Oenypon^, the Emperor sent Commissaries, who made his process, and cut off
his head.

The Marquess Iagerndorf (who had not been comprehended in the treaty of
Silesia, but proscribed by the Emperor, and the execution thereof committed to
the Elector of Saxony) thought, by these terrible executions at Prague, to put
the Silesians in fear, and to make them return to Arms against the Emperor.
At his departure out of Lusatia, he marched with his troops being 3000 men
into the County of Glats; resolving, that the States of Silesia (in whose name,
and for whom, he had levied these forces) should pay them what was their due.
He 1621
required the States therefore to give him satisfaction: but, they so delayed
him, as he well perceived they desired to be rid of him.

The County of Glats is a frontiere of Bohemia, Lusatia, Silesia, and Morauia.
The river of Iegerne, upon which lies Iegerndorf (that is to say, the
Bourrough of Iegerne) is betwixt Nisse, Tropau and Glats. This Marquess seeing
all the Emperors forces employed either in Hungary or beyond the river of
Molda, and that round about the County of Glats, there were none but enemies,
where his soldiers might get good booty; he resolved to surprise some such
places, as they should be forced to demand a peace of him: all which succeeded
happily. For, the Elector Palatine King of Bohemia hearing of his design, sent
him his Letters, by the which he made him Commissarie General in his Realm of
Bohemia and the incorporated provinces, with full power to govern those
Countries according to his discretion; to make leuies of soldiers, and to do
whatsoever he thought necessary; commanding all his subjects to yield obedience
and assistance unto the said Marquess his Commissarie. Having this Commission,
he gave liberty The Marquess takes Tropau and Nisse.
to his troops to commit all acts of hostility: whereby his number so
increased as he made himself Maiester of Tropau and Nisse, and forced the
inhabitants of the whole Bishopric of Nisse to pay him 100000 dollers, and the
four receivers of the Country (who were his prisoners) to furnish him with
10000 Hungarian ducats within two days. After which, going with his horse and
some part of foot (being in all 1500 men) he entered into Bohemia: where he
committed great spoils* and, making use of the Pesants which were in Arms, he
seized upon diverse places. After which, he went to besiege Glats: which being
yielded, he furnished it with 3000 good soldiers and 13 Cannons.

The States of Silesia desirous to stop the course of these sudden
incursions, and surprising of Towns, sent their Deputies to the Elector of
Saxony, Commissary for his Imperial Majesty in Silesia. It was resolved
betwixt them to levy an Army of 1500 horse and 11000 foot to stay the said
Marquess. The Elector sent them 3000 foot and 1000 horse; the States of Silesia
were to furnish the rest. They had resolved to recover Glats: but the Marquess
had taken such order, and his new enterprises upon the territory of Preslau
(from whence he drew 60000 dollers to retire his troops) made them in the
beginning to stand upon the defensive, and to assure their other Towns without
attempting any thing against the Marquess: who having retired his garrisons
from Nisse and many other places, which he held not able to resist their
forces; he made the body of an Army; which he led into the principality of
Tischin upon the frontiers of Morauia: where after great spoils committed by
his troops, the inhabitants were forced to give him certain thousands of
Hungarian ducats to leave them and to pass on to BETHLIN GABOR.

Before he left the Country, he wrote two Letters to the States of Silesia
touching the execution of the prisoners at Prague. The first did intimate that
it was notorious to the whole The Marquess his Letters to the States of ^lesia.
world, that the cruel and barbarous execution made at Prague of the chief
Noblemen of Bohemia (the true pillars of the State) and of many honest and
worthy persons and good country men, was only in regard of their religion
and constancy to keep their faith unto their King, whom they had chosen: a
cruel execution, which God would revenge upon the Authors. That he was truly
advertised that the like would shortly be done to the chief of Silesia, at
Preslaw and in other places (if God diuerted not the design) notwithstanding
the transaction and treaty of grace and pardon made with the Electour of
Saxony. That this cruel inquisition of Spain having no other end, but the
oppression and extirpation of the Protestant religion, he thought good to
advertise them all, and especially the inhabitants of Preslau and Schueitnitz,
to be wise by other men's examples; and not so much to regard that which
concerns their private profit, as that of the public; to the end they might
maintain the faith given to their King, and to the league which they had
sworn; and to join with him to free themselves from so many tyrannies: but,
if (contrary to his hope) they would willingly remain in danger, let them
accuse none but themselves to be the Authors of their and the Countries ruin,
and the breach of faith which they had sworn to their elected King. And,
withal, he advertised them, that if in his absence any violence were offered
to any of his Counselors, officers, ministers and subjects which were in
Silesia, or to any Protestant in the Bishopric of Nisse, or if they did put
any garrisons into the Towns which did particularly belong to him, or that
they received any wrong; that they should assure themselves, that the
administrators and receivers of the Bishopric of Nisse (who were in his
custody) should have the like usage. The second Letter was to the same effect.

The Elector of Saxony made answer to these Letters, showing the justice of
the Emperors proceeding in the execution at Prague: And as touching the breach
of the transaction which he The Elector of Saxony answers the Marquess his
Letters
had made with the Silesians, he gave them his word a^ Electoral faith, that it
should be faithfully kept and observed; and that there was never any ^tent,
neither should their be any search or execution upon any color whatsoever, so
long as they contained themselves within the 1621
bounds of the said transaction.

The Emperor also made answer to those Letters: by which, he assured the
Silesians that he would never forget the grace and pardon which he had imparted
unto them; promising, to maintain the transaction made with the Elector of
Saxony: which he did confirm by those presents, so as they continued in their
fidelity and obedience. He also exhorted the Princes, States and all his
subjects of Silesia, not to suffer themselves to be seduced by the invention
and fraud of that proscript or any other person; but, to remain within the
terms of the transaction, and to employ all their forces to oppress that
rebel and his partisans, by whom they had been often seduced; to the end that
Silesia might be restored to her former estate and enjoy a full and absolute
peace.

The first of April the Emperor appointed a Diet of the Electors and Princes
to be held at Ratisbone on Saint JOHN BAPTIST'S day following, to consult of
the means how to settle a general peace in the Empire. The Elector Palatine
King of Bohemia, advertised hereof, sent his Letters unto all the Electors and
Princes which had been called thither; by which he complained that he had
been advertised, how that some imputed unto him (that contrary to The King of
Bohemias Letters, to the Electors and Princes of the Empire.
his Imperial Majesty's intention, who had called a Diet of the Electors and
Princes of the Empire at Ratisbone on the 24 of June, to resolve how peace
might be settled in the Empire) he was more pleased in the actions of war,
then in treaties of peace; but contrariewise his conscience did witness unto
him, that he rather desired an honest peace then war. That, touching the
troubles then in the Empire, he had not engaged himself through ambition, or
to wrong any private person; but by the persuasion and promise of a lawful
calling and a just defense. That he confessed truly, and ingenuously, to owe
unto his Imperial Majesty, obedience and honor, as to the sovereign head of
the Empire. That he was deprived (contrary to his hope and expectation) of his
Electoral and hereditarie countries, which was the cause of great
inconveniences and prejudice to many States of the Empire, entangled in these
wars; for the which he was much afflicted, especially for the great miseries
which had befallen, the Turk preparing to enter into Germany. That he hoped,
God would so direct the hearts of the Emperor, Electors and Princes which
should assist at this assembly, that all their counsels and consultations
would tend only to the restoring of peace in the Empire, to banish ielousies
and distrust, and to settle a new confidence. That he doubted not, but in this
Diet they would treat chiefly of the means of his reconciliation with the
Emperor, as many kings and Princes have formerly done by their Ambassadors: to
whose good counsels and advice he would always submit himself, so far fou^
as his dignity and conscience might not be wounded. That he would always
witness, and desired the world to know, that he never had a thought to offend
his Imperial Majesty, but desired to yield all honor due unto him according
to the constitutions of the Empire. That he hoped his Imperial Majesty would
procure a remedy for so many mischeefes by a general Amnestia or forgetfulness;
and so moderate all things, as the Princes and States of the Empire, his
friends, counselors, officers, and subjects might be freed from the insolency
of foreign soldiers, and all things restored to their former state and
liberty. This was the tenor of his Letter. Let us now see what passed at Viena.

You have formerly heard how that the Princes of the Union had sent their
Ambassadors to the Emperor, touching their reconciliation; which in the mean
time was concluded at Mentz, with the Elector and the Lantzgraue L^VVIS: so as
after their arrival at Viena, they had no other charge but to entreat his
Imperial Majesty to confirm the treaty of reconciliation, and to command the
Execution for the restitution of places taken and detained from the Earls and
Noblemen of Veterauia: whereunto, according to their instructions, they added
the restoring of the Elector Palatine to his countries, or to stay the
execution of the Imperial proscription. Whereunto they received answer the
sixth of May, That his Imperial Majesty was very well pleased that the
Protestant Princes had abstained from defense of the Elector Palatine, The
Emperors answer to the Ambassadors of the united Princes.
whom he had proscribed; and for promising not to continue the Union or to
revive it any more; which will be a principal point for the establishing of
peace in the Empire. That his said Imperial Majesty desired not to spare any
pains for the restoring of peace, but could not yet see how he might satisfy
their demand of reestablishing the Palatine, or at the least to retract the
execution of the Imperial Ban denounced against him. That although it be not
1621
lawful, by the constitutions of the Empire, to make intercession for a
proscribed person; yet for so good a thing as the settling of peace in the
Empire, his Imperial Majesty would be well pleased the said Princes should
endeavor that the Elector Palatine should acknowledge his fault, crave pardon
of him, and (as the said constitutions require in matters of less importance)
make offer to satisfy the charges and loss he has procured. That hitherto it
has not been observed that the Palatine is willing to take this good course;
but, on the contrary, he saw both within the Empire and without, in Holland
and other places, that through his practices and on his behalf, many leuies of
soldiers were made: which constrained his Imperial Majesty also to make
preparation to keep the faithful States of the Empire from the oppression of
the said Elector Palatines adherents. And touching the delay of the execution
which they demanded, he did not think that all the Protestant Princes consented
thereunto. And as for the restitution of the Towns and Castles which had been
taken from diverse Noblemen of Veterauia, his Majesty had declared his pleasure
by his Letters Patents, that he had no desire the innocent should suffer with
the nocent; but contrariwise would repel the violence which had been done
them, by force. That if they did not give them satisfaction accordingly, he
would cause them to have all content.

In the same month of May, Ambassadors came to Viena from the King of Denmark,
with Ambassadors sent from the King of Denmark to the Emperor.
instructions from the assembly at Seneberg, demanding a disannulling of the
Palatines proscription and of all the rest, and that they might be restored to
their lands and estates: without the which, there was no hope of any peace in
the Empire. The Emperor, having sent this proposition to the Electors, and
receiving their advice, made answer to the Ambassadors, that the proscription
could not be made void, but rather to be executed with all speed according to
the constitutions of the Empire. The Ambassadors replied, that their kings
intention was not to meddle with questions of times; but only to procure a
peace in the Empire, and a firm confidence between the head and the members:
to which end the Emperor said, he had appointed an Assembly at Ratisbone, to
resolve upon all things concerning that question.

In the mean time, the conference at Hainbourg grew to such length, and both
parties so full of distrust, as the French Ambassadors were not able to
reconcile them. The Emperor had resolved in counsel, upon the seventh of
April, that he would accept of a peace upon these conditions: That BETHLIN
GABOR should be again confirmed Prince of Hungary, and Propositions at the
treaty of Hambourg.
have for his entertainment 100000 florens yearly, and 100 marckes of silver
from the mountain Towns. They write, that Prince BETHLIN was content to
accept of these conditions; but he demanded Cassouia and many other towns of
safety, with these clauses: That his Majesty should pardon all the confederates
of what province soever; who should be restored to their estates; and that no
question should be made for what was past; whereueto the Emperor would not
yield; so as the conference brake off: before the which, BETHLIN GABOR was
retired from Presbuurg to Tirnaw, and had drawn his Chancellor from the
conference, upon some pretexts. His partisans said, that the Imperialists made
show by their daily practices, to draw the Noblemen of Hungary to their party,
and by the preparations they made at Viena, and by their prosecutions against
their confederates in Bohemia, Austria, and Morauia, that this conference to
treat of a peace, was but a snare to entrap them, and suddenly to shut Prince
BETHLIN into Presbourg. The Imperialls on the other side gave out, that Prince
BETHLIN, having carried away the Crown of Hungary, desired to have the title
of King: and if he had had any good intent to make a peace, he would not have
made leauies of Transiluanians and Tartarians, which were marching into
Hungary; writing his Letter unto GALGA Prince of Tartary: which for breuity
sake I must omit.

GEORGE SETSCHY, one of the chief Noblemen of high Hungary, who had been a
powerful Partisan to BETHLIN (having made his peace with the Emperor) gathered
together Setschy reconciles himself to the Emperor.
two thousand men; and, upon the ending of the Truce, surprised Altensol and
Vesprin, where he put all the Transiluanians which were in Garrison to the
sword. It is an usual thing when treaties end, some change their party. The
victory of Prague, and the Earl of Bucquoy (who had wintered upon the river
of Marc a days journey from Presbourg, making account to have twenty thousand
men) was the cause that many Noblemen of BETHLIN'S party expected but an
opportunity to reconcile themselves to the Emperor. The breach of the
conference and of the truce, made Count BVCQVOY advance with his Army to inuest
Presbourg. Prince BETHLIN who was at Tirnaw, seeing SETSCHY fallen to the
Emperor and joined with PALFY, and to be betwixt him and Cassouia at his back
(who bragged he would take 1621
him alive and present him to the Emperor, or at the least stop his return
into Transiluania, and Count BVCQVOY to come in Front) relying upon the
Garrison which he had put into the Castle of Presbourg, he resolved in this
reviving of the war to stand upon his defense* to furnish the places he held*
and to put himself into Cassouia, there to assemble the body of his Army,
whilst the Emperors men should cool themselves at some siege. Having left
some men in Tirnaw, and STEPHEN TVRSO with a strong garrison of Hungarians and
Transiluanians in Neuheusol, he carried the Crown of Hungary to Cassouia.

In the mean time, FORGATSY Palatine of Hungary, with other Noblemen which
were in Presbourg, seeing themselves invested by Count BVCQVOY, desired to send
Deputies to the Emperor; which was granted: Who having obtained from his
Majesty a treaty of their reduction, by the which they were all maintained in
their Dignities* Estates and Offices, with abolition; the Town of Presbourg,
was yielded to the Emperor the second of May; into the which they put a great
Garrison. The Castle only remained; in the which there were many Presbourg
yielded to the Emp*
Germans and Hungarians, who demanded their pay and a general pardon. There
were some hours of Truce to hear their demands: The which being ended, and
nothing granted to the besieged, they shot continually from the Castle; so
as many of them were slain and hurt.

They defended themselves bravely for the space of ten days: but, on the tenth
of May, seeing a new battery planted of seven double Cannon, they demanded a
Parley; which was granted. After many contestations, they promised to yield the
Castle, and they were suffered to depart with Arms and baggage, their matches
dead, and their Ensigns folded up, the Hungarians to be conducted to Neuhusol,
and the Germans to the Frontiers of Morauia. Count BVCQVOY having assured the
Town and Castle of Presbourg with new Garrisons, Tirna^ yielded to Bucquoy.
he led the Imperial Army (being two and twenty thousand men) toward
Tirnaw: upon the way, diverse Towns and Castles submitted themselves. The
Garrison of Tirnaw, finding themselves too weak to make resistance, accepted
of a composition to depart with their Arms and baggage.

Count BVCQVOY being aduertized, that there was dissension between the Soldiers
and the inhabitants in Neuhusol; it was resolved in Council to lead the Army
thither: yet they which were of a contrary opinion, gave them to understand
that the soldiers should find no Bucquoy (...)Neuheusel.
victual for themselves, nor forage for their horses, for that the whole
Country was ruinated, and the Towns and Villages burnt: And in truth this
siege had like to have ruined the Emperors party in Hungary.

In the beginning, the Imperialists had some advantage at their approaches: and
the batteries being well planed, did somewhat annoy the besieged; They mustered
their Soldiers; and to put courage into them, they gave them three months
pay. FORGATSI, Palatine of Hungary, was come unto the Army before Neuheusol,
who wrote unto the besieged to yield; he entreated and threatened them; but all
was in vain: for they made him answer, that they were true Hungarians, which
would fight even unto the last drop of their blood, to preserve the honor of
their Nation, and to free themselves from the yoke of the Turks and Germans.

Thus were they in Arms in two places of the upper Hungary: that is, at the
siege of Neuheusol, and toward Filec, whereas SETSCHY and PALFY made head
against the Partisans of Prince BETHLIN GABOR, and defeated eight hundred men,
which the Prince sent to Neuheusol, conducting a conuoy of Victuals, Money, and
Munition; but soon after they had their revenge. In the lower Hungary between
the Dannow and S^irria, BVDIANI a Protestant and a Nobleman of great power,
having made himself an irreconcilable Enemy unto the house of Austria, held
many places upon the lake of Newdsiller, and the Rivers of Robniz and of
Rechiniz, which did much annoy Vienna, by the incursions of the Budianits: to
prevent the which, the Emperor sent the Earl of Colalte with eight thousand
men, and some Cannon to take those places of retreat from BVDIANI, who retired
toward Canisia: from whence we shall see him return with Turkish succors,
and fire diverse parts of Austria.

During the siege of Neuheusol, the Imperialists were but ill entreated in many
salies by those that were besieged, the which had no want of anything; for the
Gate toward the River of Ouiar was free; and on the other side of the river
lay encamped ten thousand men com to their succou^s: that is to say, four
thousand sent by Prince BETHLIN from Cassouia, and 1621
and six thousand which the Earl of Thurn and others (fled out of Bohemia and
Austria) had brought. During the exploits of Neuhusoll where the Palatine
FORGATSY died, Prince BETHLIN held an Assembly of the States at Perein, near
to Cassouia, letting them see that he had the Crown of Hungary in his
possession: the which encouraged them to follow his party; and it was resolved,
first to free Fileck, besieged by PAIFY SETSKY and others, and to hazard a
battle to raise that of Neuhusoll.

The Barons of Palfi, Setsky and Posniasi, being lodged with their troops at
Mitarlin a mountain Town, Prince BETHLIN entertained them with good words,
touching a peace which he desired to make with the Emperor, and in the mean
time surprised them suddenly; where, after a bloody fight, PALFY, was found
slain upon the field, with two thousand Imperialls: SETSKY and the rest
escaped; but wholly defeated. After this expedition, all the mountain Towns
returned to BETHLIN's party. This was the first unfortunate cross of the
Imperialls; let us now observe the second. The siege of Neuhusoll continued:
The Port of Carniola toward the river of Ouiar was still free for the
besieged, they being always relieved (when they had need) with 10000 men
which lay encamped at their gate; who, when they past the river, did so stop
the passages and approached so near unto the Imperial Army, as nothing could
be conueighed to them without very great forces. Count BVCQOY was therefore
often constrained, for want of forage for his horse, to send out many companies
both of horse and foot. The tenth of July all his foot which he had sent a
forraging (except two hundred musketeers) being returned with the Carts, and
the horse being in number fifteen hundred, consisting of all the nations of
the Army (except Walloones which they had left in Morauia for safeguard of the
Country) being yet a Cannon sho^e from their quarter, fifteen hundred
Caualliers Hungarians, divided into Troops, left their Camp and past the river
of Ouiar, under the favor of the Town Cannon, and began to charge the
Imperial horse. Upon this Alarm, Count BVCQVOY went to horse: and being
accompained by some officers, he came to the head of his Troops, to encourage
them by his presence, to maintain the brunt of this important skirmish, and to
avoid the disgrace of any ^osse. Having observed the order of the assailants,
he presently drew his men into diverse squadrons, and commanded the Earl of
Torquaty, Lieutenant Collonell to the Earl of Valslein's Regiment (which
consisted of low Dutch and the Emperors troops) having the point of the
vantguard, to go by charge: which he did resolutely, and forced into the
enemies squadrons being pell mell amongst them; But, the squadron, which
followed, wheeled about; and discharging their Pistols, betook themselves to
flight; whereupon the low Germans were enclosed and defeated, and Count
TORQVATI and all the Captains taken prisoners: All the rest of the squadrons,
appointed to second him on both sides, ^ed also by their example; so as the
Earl of Bucquoy was left alone.

The Earl, seeing this disorder, did what he might to stay them, riding from
squadron to squadron with his sword and Pistol in his hands, thinking to make
these runnawaies to turn head again: but, nothing could prevail. At the same
instant the Earl of Bucquoy was invested by fifteen Hungarians which were
best mounted; who charged him on all sides. He defended himself a long space
very valiantly, until he had received a pistol shot through the body, and a
blow with a Lance, which overthrew him from his horse. Hereupon, the Marquess
of Gonzagua, followed by some of his people, came in to sucour him: and
pressing in to the midst of these Hungarians, he slew two of them, and gave the
Earl leisure to rise and to retire on foot some fifty pases toward the
Army. But, the Marquess being presently forced to retire, these Hungarians
overthrew the Earl again with their Lances: and then discharging their
Pistolls upon him, they left this brave conductor of Count Bucquoy found dead
w^b 13 wounds upon him.
Armies dead, with 13 mortal wounds.

In the mean time, the said Marquess, thinking yet to succor him once more
and preserve him alive, joined himself with Mounsieur CAMARGVES and some of the
low Germane troops formerly broken, and drove them back, pearcing through them
even to the place where the Earl was, but found him dead. Then did the
Marquess take time to alight, and laid the body on his own horse, and
brought it to the Camp, where was great mourning and lamentation. The cowardice
of these horsemen which had thus abandoned their General (unto whom their
very enemies gave the title of incomparable valor) was even as much blamed as
the courage of two hundred musketters which were with them, was highly
extolled: for although they were in an open field, they defended themselves
with such resolution, 1621
that the Hungarians were in the end forced to leave them, they receiving
little loss.

The Emperor, and all Kings, Princes and Catholic Lords, much bewailed this
death of Count BVCQVOY: his body was carried to Viena; where on the twentieth of
July, it was sumptuously interred with all military pomp; which was a sad and
heavy day there, both for these obsequies, as for two other heavy tidings: the
one of raising the siege of Neuhusall the seventeenth of July, the other the
death of the Archduke ALBERT Duke of Brabant and Death of the Archduke Albert.
Prince of Flanders, who died at Brussels, the 13 of the said month of July.
It is observed, that in four years, five great Princes of the house of
Austria have deceased; namely, PHILIP third king of Spain, The Emperors eldest
son, and three brothers, The Emperor MATHIAS the Archduke MAXIMILIAN; and this
year, The Archduke ALBERT.

After the death of the Earl of Bucquoy, The Hungarians, and Bohemians, Prince
BETHLINS Partisans, were much encouraged, and the Imperialists as much dejected.
The continual rain also at this time, contrary to the season, seemed to
augment this sorrow, and minister occasion of the loss of the Cannon which
they left behind them at the raising of the siege of Neuhusall.

RODOLPHVS TIEFFENBAC, a Lord of Morauia, whose father had been General in
the wars of Hungary 1594, succeeded Count BVCQVOY, in his charge, and had
been himself Sergeant mayor at the battle of Prague. Through the divisions
which grew among so many nations which were in the Army; it was resolved in
Council, that the siege should be raised, and that they should march toward
Gutta upon the Dannow three miles above Comora. Moreover, upon advertisement
that the Hungarians and Bohemians which were fled out of their country, being
fortified with new Troops, were resolved to pursue them in their retrait; it
was resolved they should abandon 15 Cannons which they had for that siege, to
the end they might march away with the more speed; being impossible for them
to draw them away by reason of the abundance of rain which had fallen, and
spoiled the ways.

On the 27 of July the siege was raised in a tempestuous rainie night, so as
the Hungarians could discover nothing before the morning. This retrait has
been diversely related: and thus they write on either side. At the rising of
the Camp, the Hungarians (being fortified with new Troops) were resolved to
charge the Imperialls, who had abandoned their Cannon, and to defeat the
better part: but four hundred musketieres, Walloones, defended a passage so
valiantly, as the whole Army recovered Gutta without loss: from thence they
went to Presbourg and to other necessary places for the preservation of the
Emperors provinces. GOTHARDVS says, That the Hungarians seeing the siege
raised, pursued the Imperialls with great fury, who had set Captain MAREBREIN
at a passage to favor their retreat; who after some resistance was forced and
slain with three hundred of his men and some of the Rereward. The Army came to
Gutta and was very well entrenched: yet many French and Walloones fled toward
Presbourg: part of the Army was sent to Comora and the rest toward Iauerin. As
for the fifteen Cannons which they had abandoned at Neuhusoll, they were
carried into the Town in great triumph.

All these happy exploites in favor of Prince BETHLIN made him to march
speedily to Neuhusoll to pursue so many victories and to recover Presbourg: but
he found a stop at Tirnaw, where there were four companies of Imperialls and
five hundred horse in garrison: Tirnaw taken by Prince Bethlin.
having planted his batteries, and made a breach, at three assaults he lost
seven hundred of his best men. Afterward the batteries being continued, the
besieged observing that they might easily be forced, and knowing well they had
small store of victuals remaining in the Town, they demanded composition:
which was granted, and they departed with Arms and baggage.

From Tirnaw, Prince BETHLIN went to plant his siege before Presbourg, whither
all his Partisans with their troops came to join with him: The Marquess of
Iagerndorf brought his from Morauia: the 19 of August he caused incursions to
be made into Austria; whereas on either side of the river of Dannow, there was
nothing to be seen but effusion of blood, flight of the inhabitants, spoil
and fire; and of one day they might see from Vienna, on the other side of
Dannow, 20 villages on fire: and on this side 14, by BVDIANY.

This BVDIANY having drawn together 6000 Hungarians and Turks; seeing that
COLALTE had been countermaunded by the Emperor to put himself into Presbourg
and to defend it, he followed him, and took from him one of the lodgings of his
Rere-ward; committing so great cruelties and inhumanities, that they write he
ruined above a thousand villages in 1621
Hungary and Austria. As for the siege of Presbourg, it was continued by
BETHLIN, whom the Imperials called ATTILA King of Huns, for that there was some
conformity, being both Hungarians born, commanding one Nation, like in humors
and conditions, both scourges to Christendom, having both put all to fire and
sword as they past. He pressed Presburg to yield; in which there was a great
garrison of horse and foot: the besieged were forced to make salies to fetch
forage for their horses; where there were diverse encounters, with variety of
success according to the hazard of the war: but on the fifteenth of September,
there entering into the Towna supply often Cornets of horse and two companies of
foot, sent from Morauia, Prince BETHLIN with his Partisans was forced to raise
the siege, and retire unto Tirnaw, sending to refresh their Troops in many
places of high Hungary, for that they had ruined the champaine Country.

Let us now return to Vienna, and see what good success the intercession has
had which many great Princes made for the restoring of the Palatine to his
hereditary rights. Ambassadors had been with his Imperial Majesty from the
King of Denmark and the Princes of the Union, and received their several
answers as you have heard, with small success. Our Kings Majesty of great
Britanne, who intermitted no care nor charge to repair this breach of disunion
between his Imperial Majesty and his sonne-in-law the Elector Palatine, and to
save his hereditary Country for his posterity, which now lay in danger to be
ruined, being invaded by potent enemies, under the Emperors Commission; he
dispatched the Baron of Digbie, now Earl of Bristowe, Vice-chamberlain to his
Majesty, in embassage to the Emperor; who, arriving at The Lord Digby sent to
the Emperor.
Vienna in the beginning of July with an honorable train, was received with
great state, and had his audience on the fifteenth of July. Some Writers
relate, that the two chief points of his ambassie were, first, that the Elector
Palatine, son-in-law to our King's Majesty, might be received into grace and
favor with his Imperial Majesty, and restored to all his hereditary estates
and titles which he had enjoyed before the troubles of Bohemia; and, secondly,
that the Imperial Proscription given out against him might be revoked, or the
execution suspended. Which being performed, the King's Majesty of great
Britanne would cause the Elector Palatin to yield all due obedience to his
Imperial Majesty, and submit himself to all honest conditions of satisfaction.

To this demand he received an answer in writing, that his Imperial Majesty
had a great desire to gratify the King of great Britanne, and other Kings and
Princes who had made the like intercession for the Elector Palatine; but the
whole business consisted upon two points: first, that he should cause the
Elector Palatine to yield due obedience unto his Imperial Majesty; and,
secondly, that he should make satisfaction. His Imperial Majesty having also,
during these troubles, used the advice and counsel of many Electors and
Princes, to the end they should not think that in this important business he
would do any thing which might prejudice them, he had appointed an Assembly at
Ratisbone; that he would let the King understand the resolution that should be
taken touching this business by the common consent of the said Electors and
Princes; that in this war which had been continued with justice by his
Imperial Majesty, there was no proportion between the parties for the
continuance of hostility; that there was a difference between his Imperial
Majesty who was feudatorie and sovereign Judge, and the Elector Palatine who
was condemned; that, according to the Kings request, his Imperial Majesty had
granted a truce: but as soon as there was a suspension of Arms in the lower
Palatinate, at the same Instant he caused war to be revived in the upper
Palatinate; and persisting in his enterprises, he had sent his Commissions unto
MANSFELD and the Marquess of Iagerndorf, to cause new combustions in Bohemia,
Silesia and Morauia; that he left it to the Ambassador to judge whether he
could do otherwise than oppose his just Arms against those who were raised
against him: yet if FREDERICK the Elector Palatine did yield and consent unto
the admonitions of the King his father-in-law, all matters might well be
compounded; freeing his Imperial Majesty and the obedient Princes of the Empire
from the iealousies which they had justly conceived. And thus much writes the
French MERCVRIE touching this Treaty.

There is another author (who has written a discourse called, Viua
Demonstratio) relates, that upon my Lord DIGBIES second audience, his Majesty
made answer; That touching the suspension of Arms, which was the ground of
the treaty, there seemed many difficulties: First, that he was not well
acquainted with the state of the lower and upper Palatinate; whether 1621
a Truce might be made without prejudice: for that he understood, in the lower
Palatinate, Sir HORATIO VERE had invaded the Bishop of Spires Countries, and
broken the Truce; yet, for that he would not omit any thing which might tend to
a Peace, and satisfy the Kings desire, he would presently write unto the Duke
of Bauaria for his counsel and consent touching this Truce; and Letters should
be delivered unto the Ambassador for the Arch-duchesse at Brussells; who
should have full power to conclude a Truce, unless there were apparent cause
of danger: Whereunto his Majesty did the more willingly incline; for that he
promised, in the kings name, that as soon as a Truce were concluded, he would
cause MANDSFELD to observe it: Or if he should commit any hostile Actagainst
his Imperial Majesty, or the Princes of the sacred Empire, during the said
Truce; both the King and his son in Law, would declare him an enemy, and
assist his Imperial Majesty, against him: Moreover, he would procure, that if
Iagerndorf had any power and authority given him to offend or invade, that it
should be presently revoked: But especially he assured, that the King his
Master would so deal with his son in Law, as that Tabor and Vintsgaw, with
all other places which were held by that party, should with all speed be
restored to his Majesty. Furthermore, that if his Imperial Majesty would pass
his promise, that the execution of the foresaid Proscription, in the upper
Palatinate, should be suspended during this Treaty; he would faithfully
endeavor, that all MANDSFELDS Soldiers should be discharged, and Arms laid
down; with this condition, that if the said treaty of Peace should not have a
desired end, his Imperial Majesty (before he should go to Arms for the
execution of the said Proscription) should be bound to give notice thereof,
three months before to his Majesty.

To this effect the Emperor wrote his Letters to the Infanta, and to the Duke
of Bauaria; which Duke by his Letters, of the 27 of September, unto the Lord
Ambassador, seemed to have no enclination to a suspension of Arms, as
appears by these words contained in the said Letter.

His Imperial Majesty, in the first entrance of our Army and beginning our
work, has given notice unto us of a motion for the suspension of Arms, and
required our advice: but to return presently and suspend the business, it was
neither safe, nor possible; especially for that the suspension was chiefly
referred to the Infanta of Spain; neither have we conferred with those it does
concern, having also MANSFELD with an Army at our doors, who might invade our
Province, and so object other difficulties to frustrate the said suspension.
The Lord Ambassador did much press the Emperor and the Duke of Bauaria by
his Letters for his suspension of Arms; but he prevailed little: for the
Emperor changed his mind, as it appeared by his Letters unto the Duke of
Bauaria, dated the thirtith of September; by the which he commanded him to
invade the Palatinate by virtue of his Commission, and to reduce it unto his
obedience, and to take an Oath of Allegiance in his name. This Author writes
much concerning this business, and of the transferring of the Electorate to
the Duke of Bauaria, long before proiected at Rome; to the end they might
fortify the Catholic party, and have alwais an Emperor at their devotion.

And, although they be Arcana Imperij; yet I hope I shall incur no blame, if
I lay open The Pope send to the Emperor touching the Electorship.
what I find written by my Author. The Pope (much affecting this translation
of the Electorshippe to the Duke of Bauaria) gave Commission to a Capuchin
Friar called HYACINTHVS to go and treat with the Emperor at Vienna: He had
Letters of recommendation from Cardinal LODOVIGIO the Popes favorite; his
charge was to persuade the Emperor to continue the wars, being against
Heretics, dangerous enemies to the holy mother Church of Rome, and
disobedient to his Holiness; and that the Emperor should confer the
Electorall voice upon the Duke of Bauaria, for that he was a Catholic Prince,
and had well deserved it for the aid and assistance he had given him in his
wars against the Palatine; whom he entreated to dispossess of the
Electorall voice, and to punish him as his rebellion and offense had deserved.

The business being resolved at Vienna, the Friar was sent into Spain, and
Letters of credit The Friar (...)into Spain.
sent after him, from the Emperor, writing to the King, and referring him to
the Friets Commission; but especially to Don BALTHAZAR of Zuniga (a great
Counselor of State, who died lately, being Uncle by the mothers side to the
Earl of Oliuares the kings favorite) by the which he gives him to understand,
that he holds it most necessary, for the preservation and greatness of the
holy Faith, and consequently of the house of Austria, to transfer the (...)
ship upon the Duke of Bauaria; aduertising him withal that he was so much
bound unto the said Duke for his good deserts, and for the many promises he had
made him as well by word as 1621
writing, touching the translation of the Electorship, that he could not by any
means retract it, without offense to God and a blemish to his honor, the
which he hoped he would endeavor to preserve. This Letter bare date from Viena
the fifteenth of October 1621.

In a second Letter unto Don BALTHAZAR of the same date, the Emperor set down
many reasons why he should not make a peace with the Elector, nor restore unto
him the Electoral dignity: in the end he concludes, that before that famous
battle at Prague, he had fully resolved, that the Palatine, being once
proscribed, could not be restored to the Electorall dignity, without prejudice
and danger unto all Catholics and to his house; That he had willingly offered
it unto the Duke of Bauaria, a stout Champion of the Catholic religion, whose
aid and assistance he had employed in the recovery of his Realms and
provinces: wherefore the very time did seem to press him more then the Duke
himself, that he should perform his promise without any further delay; and the
Electorship being conferred upon him, the Palatine should be deprived of all
hope, and they in like manner which had so earnestly desired his restitution,
and his Majesty freed from further trouble. Which business requiring the King
of Spaines aid (although he knew him to be well enclyned to any thing which
concerned the honor of God and the safety of their house) yet would he not lose
this occasion to persuade him, not to neglect so fair an opportunity for the
settling of their house and religion. And in a Postscript to the same Letter he
adds another motive of no small consideration: which is, that by his
translation they should have a Catholic voice more then formerly they had;
whereby they should be assured, that the Empire should be always in the hands
of the Catholics, and by all reason in their house; wherein the Duke of
Bauaria would willingly concur, in requital of the benefit he had received,
to be advanced to so great adignity, by an Emperor of their house.

The Capuchin Friar HYACINTHVS, having received his Commission sent him into
The Emperors Letter to the ^ryer.
Spain, had a Letter of advice written with the Emperors own hand, whereby he
wished him not to speak any thing in that Court, that the Duke of Bauaria had
gotten the inuestiture of the Palatinate; but should persuade them to concur
with him in his opinion, and give those aids whereby they might effectually
attain unto it, being so profitable and necessary for the preservation of the
holy faith, and consequently of their house; doubting that if he should say
that his Majesty had given away the inuestiture, it would much prejudice the
cause; knowing well, that if he should be abandoned by the crown of Spain,
he should not be able with his own forces to effect that which he had promised
to the Duke of Bauaria: And he was in a manner assured (according to the daily
speech of the Spanish Ambassador there resident) that this would undoubtedly
follow; that he should be abandoned by the crown of Spain, if the King should
know he had given the inuestiture, before he had imparted it unto that Crown.
The continuance of this war, and the translation of the Electorship, was much
pressed by the Popes Ministers and the Emperors. Cardinal LODOVICIO wrote his
Letters unto the Popes Nuncio resident at Brussels, wishing him to employ all
his means and credit with the Cardinal Lodouicios Leters to the Popes Nuncio
at Brussels.
Infanta, that no suspension of Arms might be granted; adding withal, that
touching the Palatines person, being justly deprived of the Palatinate, he
might hold it for a great favor if he might be admitted to humble himself at
the Emperors feet* the which if he did, yet should not his children enjoy any
part of his patrimony, unless they were bredde up in the Catholic religion;
being a capital error to restore those territories to heretics, especially
in regard of the Belgique provinces to which they ly so near.

The Popes Nuncio at Viena, wrote his Letters to the Nuncio at Brussels;
intimating that there was no doubt of the Emperors inclination to confer the
Electorship upon the Duke of Bauaria; The Popes Nuntios Letters at Viena to the
Nuntio at Brussels.
but the business depended wholly upon the Spaniard: other^wise, it had been
before this time decided. The Spaniards oppose the Elector of Saxony against
the Bauarian, making that their (...)* but the truth is, said he, they are not
pleased with his greatness, and desire to retain the lower Palatinate without
any further war. And for that they doubt that the Elector of Saxony, who
desires to have the constitutions of the Empire (which admit no strangers) to
be religiously observed, should oppose himself to their desires, they seek by
all means to please him, and give him some colorable satisfaction: but, in
case he should be withdrawn, and become an enemy, by their cunnning they seek
to persuade all the world, that this was not the true cause, that they have
retained the lower Palatinate; but, for that the Electorall (...)was conferred
upon the Duke of Bauaria. To free them from this excuse; the Archduke CHARLES
is gone to the Duke of Saxony upon another pretext, and we shortly expect his
answer. If it be indifferent or neutrall, and not directly contrary, then it
is thought (and 1621
I will do my best endeavor) that the Emperor shall declare himself for the
Bauarian, without any further delay; especially for that the Earl of Ognate
has declared that the king of Spain would consent that the Electorship should
be conferred upon the Bauarian, if the Saxon did not oppose. But for that we
fear the obstinacy of the Count of Ognate (although the Saxon should not
oppose) we have sent Father HIACINTHVS secretly into Spain to oppose himself
against the actions of OGNATE and the Baron of Digby the English Ambassador,
who is to go to that Court. It would much please the Spaniards, both to curb
the power of the Bauarian, and to have the lower Palatinate at their command,
in regard of the Belgick-warres: As for our intentions, it is all one whether
he or any other Catholic Prince has them. And although it may be doubled,
that this may breed some tumults in the Empire; yet, matters standing as they
do, there is not cause of fear: for as for the Catholics, BAVARIA (to do
his own business) will easily pacify most of them, being Clergy men. The
Caluinists are disbanded; neither can they hope for any succors from France or
Holland, being in both places in danger of their own Estates. The Lutherans
or Neuteralls have neither force nor courage: so as I think the Spaniards have
a great opportunity to attain to their wished end: without the which, I cannot
persuade my self, that they will ever suffer the Bauarian to obtain any
thing; notwithstanding that Marquess SPINOLA the last year at Mentz in the
presence of the Cardinal of Z^ern did affirm that the Catholic King did not
affect the inuestiture of the lower Palatinat, which the Earl of Ognate did
seek to procure him. But to conclude, it is thought the Spaniards (upon whom
all depends) will give their consents upon these four conditions: First, that
the Bauarian should restore the upper Austria. Secondly, that in regard of his
expenses, he should have the Electorshippe, with the upper Palatinate; whose
revenues did exceed his charges. Thirdly, that the Spaniard should have the
lower Palatinate, and that the Bauarian should renounce all pretensions which
he might have to that State in regard of the Electorship. Fourthly, that there
should be an offensive and defensive league made betwixt the Catholic league,
his Imperial Majesty and the King of Spain, against any that should oppose
themselves. Thus I have set down the contents of several Letters touching the
transferring of the Electorship to the Duke of Bauaria: for confirmation
whereof the Reader may observe the events which have succeeded.

After the taking of Pilsen, Ealkenaw and Elnbogen; MANDSFELD, having no more
places of retreat in Bohemia, lodged, with his Troops, in the upper
Palatinate; where, having joined with the forces of the two Dukes of Saxony and
Weymar, he made an Army of eighteen thousand men, which he led into the
Bishopric of Aichstat, and the Country of the Lantz-graue of Luchtenbourg.
The Emperor, being aduertized hereof, gave charge to the Baron of Tilly, to
stop MANDSFELD'S courses: Also JAMES BAVVER, of Essenet, General of the Bishop
of Virsbourg's Troops, being joined with Tilly, they went to encounter
MANDSFELD; who was camped and enrrenched at Verdha^s: From whence he made
incursions upon the Frontiers of Bohemia. TILLY and BAVVER, having imbattailed
their Army right over against his, seized upon a neighboring Hill, and Wood;
where they had many skirmishes together. Upon the conjunction of TILLY'S and
BAVVER'S Troops; MANDSFELD, as Commissarie to the Elector Palatine in Bohemia,
published a declaration against the Bishop of Virsbourg, and the Deane and
Chapter of Bamberg, to this effect:

Seeing it is well known unto all men, that the Troops of the Bishop of
Versbourg were Mansfelds Letters to the Bishop of Versbourg.
joined with the Duke of Bauaria's, in the wars of Bohemia; and that they do
give us occasion enough (as Commissarie to the King of Bohemia) to pursue the
said Bishop and Chapter by Arms, according to the Talion Law; I thought it
better to use grace and clemency, then force, and to send them a Trumpet to
aduertize them to call back their Troops from Bohemia, and to admonish and
enjoin them not to meddle with secular affairs, but contain themselves
within the bounds of their Ecclesiastical function: Which if they do, they
shall have me their friend; otherwise they must expect that I will bring Fire
and Sword into their Countries.

MANSFELD, having intelligence that the Imperialists meant to force him in his
Camp, resolved to prevent them, and to charge them in their lodgings, the 14
of Iulie: He began first with Heseldorf; where the horsemen salied forth with a
hundred and fifty Musketier^ Germans, to defend the approaches: but the
Mans^eldians charged them with such fury, that they slew many, and put the
rest to flight. Some of their chief commanders were taken prisoners in the
Town; which they spoiled and burnt: From thence they went to their second
lodging, 1621
which was at Saint CATHERINES; the entry whereof was more difficult by reason
of fens and ditches which they were to pass, the bridges being also broken: In
this place were five Mansfeld takes ^dgings from (...)Imperials.
hundred Soldiers: who, seeing themselves so resolutely set upon, abandoned
the same, to retire themselves into a Wood; where twelve thousand of
MAFDSFELD'S Soldiers pursued them so speedily; as, having no leisure to
recollect themselves, they cast away their Arms and fled: in which flight,
there were 300 slain, and many taken prisoners, with much cattle which they
carried to their Camp.

TILLY and BAVVER, seeking to repair this disgrace, put all their troops in
battle, on the sixteenth of July, with an intent to charge him; which,
MANDSFELD finding, he did the like as well as he could in those mountainous
places, having twenty Cornets of Horse, and fifty companies of foot: This day
was spent in skirmishes from eight of the clock in the morning, until nine at
night: but MANDSFELD, having four field-peeces, shot directly upon the
Imperialists; who received a far greater loss then the Mansfeldians, and yet
they came not to a general battle: Some write that MANSERLD lost but 100
men, and the Imperialists 1000, six Captains, and their General BAVVER who was
shot in the head, being afterward General Bauuer (...).
embalmed at Egra. As they conducted his body to Virsbourg with a small train,
they were charged by the garrison of VALEXEN, who took all his baggage and
thirty three horse. Afterward, his body (at the request of the Bishop of
Bamber) was delivered, and solemnly interred at Virsbourg with a military pomp.
Upon the nineteenth of July, some of MANSFELD'S Army took a conuoy which went
to the Imperials; in which there was a good quantity of powder and other
munition, with many carts laden with wine, and sixty horse. On the first of
August the two Armies stood in battle one against another, from noon till
eight of the clock at night. General TILLY did what he might to draw the
Mansfeldians to a general combat: but there was nothing but light skirmishes
with many cannon shot; in which the Imperials had the better. Some write, that
a bullet of five and twenty pound weight fell so near unto Count MANSFELD (who
was with two Princes of Weimar and the Earl of Solms) that it covered his horse
with dust.

The Emperor, being aduertized of the war which MANDSFELD made in the upper
Palatinate, caused a second Edict of Proscription to be published against him;
containing, That it was well known to all the World, how that his Predecessor
the Emperor MATHIAS A second Prescription against Mansfeld,
had Proscribed ERNEST, bastard of MANSFELD for his felonies and crimes; and
that the said MANSFELD, continuing his disobedience, threatened to put the
Countries and Princes of the Empire (which had continued faithful in their
obedience unto his Imperial Majesty) to Fire and Sword. That some Princes and
States, against the constitutions of the Empire, favored him and gave him
passage through their territories; induced thereunto by the Palatine, an
apparent enemy to his Imperial Majesty, and by him also Proscribed: Which
Palatine, the said MANDSFELD, by his last Mandats, did still term King of
Bohemia. That his Imperial Majesty had well hoped that hereafter the said
MANDSFELD should not find any one to favor and protect him, fearing the
punishment inflicted by the constitutions of the Empire; which had not
succeeded. That to show his natural clemency, he thought good again to
advertise all the Princes, States, and members of the Empire; that upon the
Penalties contained in the said constitutions, they should not give any passage
through their Territories to the said MANSERLD nor his soldiers. As for the
Captains, Officers and Soldiers, which followed the said MANSFELD; that they
should abandon him upon pain (for such as were subjects to the Empire) of the
loss of all their dignities, privileges and immunities, and for those which
were strangers, upon loss of life.

The Town of Nuremberg having submitted it self to the Emperors obedience (as
has been formerly said) would not suffer any soldiers to be levied, nor go
out of the Town, before they ^oiles committed by Mandseld about Nuembourg.
had taken a new oath to the Duke of Bauaria in the name of his Imperial
Majesty. Moreover, the Imperial Ban against MANSFELD had been proclaimed
there; whereat he was wonderfully incensed: and, to take revenge, he went into
the Territories of the City near unto it with 500 horse and 1000 musketeers on
horseback; who, dispersing themselves round about it, and upon all the
approaches, committed infinite spoils.

The Duke of Bauaria was entreated by the Bishops of Virsbourg, Bamberg, and
other States of the Empire, to free them from the oppression of MANSFELD'S
incursions and spoils: whereupon, leaving his instruments of music (which is
his greatest delight) he gave the Rendez-vous for all his troops, his cannon
and munition, at Straubin, to march into the upper Palatinate. 1621


MANDSFELD (as we have formerly related) being encamped with his Army in the
upper Palatinate, they were not only much afflicted with pestilent diseases,
by reason of the dead carcases both of men and cattle, but the Bauarians did
also much annoy them with their ordinance and daily assaults. To repair which
loss he gave money to certain Captains to levy new soldiers, and he took
4000 men, who hiding their matches under their hatts, marched all night to
surprise the Bauarians in their Camp: but it happened that being near, a
Frenchman by chance discharged a piece, which made the whole Camp cry To
Arms; so as this attempt being made void, he resolved to fire a wood which
the Bauarians held, spreading great store of powder on the one side with pitch
barrels burning: but there suddenly fell so great a shower of rain as it took no
effect.

The Duke of Bauaria, having prepared all things ready to march into the vper
Palatinate, he parted from Munch or Munich on the 13 of July: and having past
the river of Dannow and joined with TILLY his Lieutenant, he mustered his Army;
in which were six and twenty thousand men. What his exploits were, and how
MANDSFELD left the upper Palatinate you shall soon hear.

In the month of May, the soldiers which remained in the Palatinate for the
Elector, fell upon certain Towns and villages belonging to the Bishop of
Spire: as Forced, Hochdorf, Niderkich, Stein surprised by the Spaniard
Hamlot and others: and the twenty two of August following, Don GONZALES de
Cordua, General for the Spaniard, put in execution an enterprise which he
had, upon the Castle and Tower of Stein, a strong place, situated in a marish
ground betwixt Worms and Germensheim; whereas fifteen Pesants which kept it
were all slain. This Castle being one of the keys of the Palatinate on that
side, the Army which was left for the guard of the Palatinate with fifteen
hundred Boors, ran presently thither to recover it if they might: but they
found that the Spaniard had fortified it well with a good garrison and
munition. At their first approach they recovered a Rauelin: but most of them
being forced to stand up to the waste in water, and so to fight with the
enemy, being also beaten by three cannon which the Spaniard had planted on the
other side of the Rhine, they were after three days forced to raise their
siege, having lost 300 men, and 70 hurt. What number of Spaniards were slain is
uncertain: there were many hurt in the Castle, which they carried away with
them: and since, they have so fortified this place, that they have made it a
receipt of contribution; to the which they have made the towns of Northeim,
Wartemhem and Byblisc with their territories, subject.

The Duke of Bauaria being entered with his Army into the upper Palatinate,
hearing that MANDSFELD received most of his victual and refreshing from Amberg;
meaning to deprive The Duke of Bauaria (...)Chamb.
them of those helps and to cut off that passage, he surprised certain rich
monasteries upon the way, and went to besiege Chamb, which he summoned to yield
by his trumpet. The Governor made answer he had no commandment from them of
Amberg to yield; whereupon he battered it with four Cannon: whereupon the
Governor mistrusting his forces began to persuade his soldiers, that it were
better to depart with their lives then to endure the discommodities of a siege
and prevail nothing; so as in the end they made their composition, and
departed with Arms and baggage, and joined themselves to MANDSFELD with three
companies of foot and two of horse. Having taken this Town, the Duke went on
and made himself master of diverse others. In the mean time MANDSFELD having
intercepted a messenger with Letters, whereby the Duke advertised the
Lantzgraue of Luchtemberg that his intent was to send certain troops of
Bauarians to cut off MANDSFELD'S passage; hereupon The Lantzgraue of
Luchtemberg taken by Mandsfield.
sending some forces to Sfremds, he forced the Town and took the Lantzgraue in
it; whom he brought to Amberg.

The Noblemen and States of the upper Palatinate, seeing that they received
more loss and prejudice from the Mansfeldian soldiers, who should have
defended them, then from the Bauarians; having received monitorial Letters from
the Duke, that they should abandon MANDSFELD, who would ruin their country,
they resolved to leave him and to submitt themselves unto the Duke; with this
Prouiso, that he should not alter any thing in point of religion nor policy.
MANDSFELD knowing the resolution with the States of the vper Palatinate had
taken, and seeing that his passage would be cut off by the Bauarians, and that
he should find little means to relieve his Army: to avoid this danger, being
pressed by a Potent adversary and in want both of money to pay his soldiers
and of other means to relieve them, he made offer to submit himself to the
Emperors obedience, promising to serve him with his Army, so as he 1621
might receive a certain sum of money to give them content; whereupon,
having received Mansfeld offe^eth to submit ^self to the Emperor.
part, he delivered up his fortification at Verdhause (which he could no
longer keep) to the Bauarians.

This treaty of MANDSFELD has been diversely censured. Some have thought that
he did it in policy, only to entertain time and to find means to slip
down into the lower Palatinate. Others affirm, that he treated seriously
being in great wants; That his soldiers pressed him for money and were ready
to mutine, which might have been dangerous to his person; and that the Lord
DIGBY his Majesty's Ambassador, having sent to the Duke of Bauaria, and
finding no hope of any suspension of Arms, came by MANSFELD; with whom he had
conference, putting him in mind of his oath to the Elector Palatine, chosen
King of Bohemia, of the honor which he had formerly gotten by Arms, the which
would now be quite blemished by this act of infidelity; persuading him to be
constant, and withal supplying him with a good sum of money to give his
soldiers some content: whereupon, he forbear to conclude the Treaty, until
he had gotten a passage with his forces into the lower Palatinate. Being freed
from this danger, he brake off the Treaty, and declared himself an enemy to the
Bauarian Ambassadors who had still followed his Camp. This news did frustrate
their joy at Prague which they had conceived for MANSFELD'S reduction to the
Emperor.

The Spaniards in the lower Palatinate under the command of GONZALES de Cordua,
going out of Steim, and seeing that Sir HORATIO VERE had fortified Heidelberg,
Manheim and Frankendale, with strong garrisons, went and took most of the Towns
toward the mountains, and then returned to Luthra a Town not well prepared to
endure a siege, nor the citizens inured to labor and danger: wherefore, the
Gouerner and his garrison being let out at the upper port, they receiued-in
troops of Spaniards.

The truce between the Spaniard and the States of the united Provinces being
now ended, Marquess SPINOLA came down with a powerful Army, and lay near unto
Wesell, sending Count HENRY of Vandenberg to inuest IVLIERS a Fee of the
Empire, disputed by the Marquess of Brandenburg and the Duke of Nuburg, as
heirs to the Duke of Cleues; but now held by the united States, as Cleues is by
the Spaniard. There was a strong garrison in the Town; who, seeing themselves
besieged, made a great salie on the four and twentieth of September, and took
their nearest Trenches in despite of the Spaniard. In the mean time there grew
a great Fire in the Camp, many Tents were burnt, and the besieged annoyed them
much with their Cannon; and, making a new salie, they spoiled Count HENRY'S
quarter, carrying what they got into the Town. The Earl following them with
most of his house, the Townes-men lost a Captain with thirty six horsemen;
which, being slain, they had leave the next day to bury them.

In the mean time, the Spaniards in the lower Palatinate took the strong
Castle of Landstule; which having fortified with a great garrison and munition,
they turned their forces to Frankendale, under GONZALES de Cordua's command;
they being, as some write, twelve or thirteen thousand men: They pitched their
Camp on the twenty seventh of September, toward Spire and Manheim, and
fortified themselves both against the besieged, or any foreign Enemy; which
done, they began to plant their Ordinance. This Town has been built of late
years by Wallons, which were fled out of the low Countries for Religion, during
the time of the Duke of Alu^, when as the Elector Palatine protected them with
their families, and gave them leave to build and fortify it, being before of
no import.

Upon the approach of the Spanish Army, the Town being under the command of
the English, Captain BVRROVVES being Governor; Captain FAIRFAX, a gallant
Gentleman, who was there slain, and buried in the bed of honor, having
command of the outworks of the Town, encouraged his Soldiers, telling them
that the Town was a part of the King of England's daughters iointure; and the
wars they undertook were for two reasons: first, for that being Protestants
the Papists came to assault them, and to take the place; and, secondly, they
were sent to defend her right, which was the place whereon they stood; and that
for his part he would not lose one foot whilst he breathed, neither did he
doubt but they would do the like: whereat they all protested they would die in
her defense. The enemy, having made his trenches and fortifications, came late
in the evening being very dark, and surprised a sentinel: who, being amazed,
cast away his Arms and fled; and, mistaking the out-work from which he was
sent, ran to the half Moon which lay under the Town-wals. They within the
outworks, having no advertisement of the enemies approach, were for the most
part slain, being 1621
sixty English and Dutch. Captain FAIRFAX, then Sergeant mayor, hearing the
alarm, came to the half Moon, takes a pike, asked what Gentlemen would go with
him; and being in haste, went without his corslet with his pike and sword
only, and entered the trenches, which he found strongly guarded by the enemy;
where he charged and hurt diverse: but, the night being exceeding dark, he was
thrust through his buffe coat into the left side, and was carried off by one of
his Followers; of which wound he was soon cured.

The enemy played upon the Town with his cannon: and on the thirtith of
September the besieged made a salie, overthrew their trenches, and had taken
four pieces of ordinance if they had been assisted by any horse: but they were
forced to retire. They continued their battery; but did not annoy the Town,
shooting still over it: whereof being advertised by two boys which went out
to gather grapes, they planted their cannon lower, and did much annoy their
houses; so as they hoped it would so terrify the Townsmen, that they would
soon yield. The enemy, having taken the out-work, approached near to the half
Moon where the English lay; whither Captain FAIRFAX came, being somewhat
recovered: where encouraging the soldiers, and offering to make a musket shot
into the enemies work, he had his thigh broken with a demi-cannon; wherewith
falling down, he cried, Gentlemen, I have lost my leg: yet be not dismayed, but
fight like brave Englishmen; for, my heart shall be always with you.
Whereupon, he was carried away, and died that night, and was buried with an
honorable funeral pomp, to the great grief of the soldiers and the Burgers of
the Town: who, to show their love, erected a monument in remembrance of so
worthy a soldier.

The enemy (seeing he could preuail nothing by force nor by his cannon) upon
the ninth of November began to shoot fiery bullets into the Town: but the
Besieged with their wives and children used such diligence to quench the fire,
that it proved fruitless. The same night they made an asault upon the Port of
Spire: but it took no effect, being repulsed by the Besieged. The next day
there fell a great rain, which was very prejudicial to the Spaniard: for,
their trenches being made in a moist ground, and grown dry for want of water,
their fortifications fell, and their trenches were full of water. In the mean
time, Count MANSFELD came out C. Mansfeld resolves to relieve Frankendale.
of the upper Palatinate with his forces and ten pieces of ordinance, toward
Nuremberg; where hearing that the Spaniards had besieged Frankendale, he
marched on speedily with his forces to relieve it.

On the thirteenth of October the Spaniard sent a Trumpet to the Town to
require them to yield in the Emperors name, with promise that the Burgesses
should enjoy their liberties with free exercise of religion; and that the
soldiers should depart with their colors fleeing, their Arms and all their
baggage: but they had an answer sent them from Captain BORROVV^S the Gouerner,
that the Town was not his, but had charge from General VERE to keep it, and
that they must bring his consent from Manheim; that he could not trust their
promises, having seen the contrary by the example of others. The Trumpet having
received this answer, with many threats he returned to the enemy, who renewed
his battery against the Town. The same night the Besieged heard a great noise
of horses in the wood, nothing suspecting the Spaniards rising, who had so
lately summoned them to yield: but they being advertised that Count MANSFELD
and General VERE made haste to raise the siege, departed suddenly, leaving
Frankendale rescued.
many sick and wounded, with much Arms and munition behind them. At the break
of day the English which guarded the outworks went into their Camp, where they
found some Italians; whom they spared for that they were not Spaniards. The
Spaniards being gone toward Worms, the Besieged threw down their fortifications
and trenches. The Citizens were very resolute to defend the Town, sparing
neither cost nor labor. Of the Spaniards there were slain 3000, by the report
of some prisoners. The Besieged lost 109 soldiers: among which were Captain
FAIRFAX and his brother, and the brother of the Gouerner BVRROVVES.

During this siege of Frankendale, Don GONZALES drew out some of his forces to
break off the Bridge at Manheim. Sir HORATIO VERE the General (who was never
daunted at the sight of any enemy) commanded his men to come into the out-work
before the bridge, and there to be quiet till the enemies approach: who coming
on with a great resolution, they gave them such a volley of shot, that they
were forced to retire with the loss of many; yet being not daunted heerwith,
they came to a second assault, where they were entertained in the like manner,
and with as great loss: so as, despairing of any success, they retired,
casting most of their slain men into the river of Rhine. Count MANDSFELD, being
ignorant of the raising of the siege at Frankendale, marched over the bridge at
Manheim with 108 companies of foot, 1621
56 of horse, and four pieces, to relieve the Besieged; with whom joined
General VERE, MERVIVS Gouerner of Heidelberg, OBEMTRAVD, and others with their
forces. The Citizens of Frankendale gave to MANDSFELD 12000 florens for raising
of their siege, to the end he might give some content to his soldiers. He
followed the Spaniards toward Steim: but finding them well fortified, and not
able to attempt any thing without danger, he dismissed General VERE and the
other Commanders; marching himself with his army into the Bishopric of Spire,
to get what he could.

The Duke of Bauaria, seeing himself circumuented by Count MANSFELD (having
taken an oath from them of Amberg, Newmark, and others) sent 47 Troops of horse
and 85 companies Tilly sent into the lower Palatinate.
of foot, under the command of General TILLY, to follow him into the lower
Palatinate: whereof some Dutchmen ran away, others fell to robbing and spoiling
without respect of friend or foe. At his first coming into the Palatinate, he
took many places toward the Mountain: and, drawing near to Heidelberg, he sent
Letters unto them; signifying, that he had commission from his Imperial
Majesty and the Duke of Bauaria, to reduce the lower Palatinate to the Emperors
obedience; to the which end he had brought an Army: but before he would proceed
to force, he would admonish and require them not to oppose themselves in so
just a cause, whereby they should draw ruin upon themselves and the whole
Province; that he expected a kind answer from them, hoping that they would
willingly submit themselves to the Emperors command; whereby he promised them
all safety and good usage, and that they should receive no wrong from the
soldiers, but should be defended like to the subjects of the upper Palatinate:
but if they should do otherwise, and not obey the Emperors commandment, he
would ioin his forces with Don CORDVA, Lieutenant General of the Spaniards,
and subdue them by force.

The Citizens of Heidelberg made answer to these Letters, that they were much
grieved to receive them by night by a Trumpet; that it was not in their power,
neither could they by their oath resign a government to another which was
committed unto them by the Magistrate: wherefore they did hope, that he would
excuse them if they did not satisfy his desire; that they would speedily
advertise their Magistrate thereof, and expect his answer: in the mean time
they did hope, that he would not attempt any thing by force. This answer, being
given by the Counselors of Heidelberg, was not pleasing to the Gouerners, who,
staying it, sent another to TILLY after this manner: that they had received his
Letters which were sent by night contrary to the discipline of war, and seen
with admiration what he desired from the Counselors of Heidelberg; that the
government was committed to them, but referred to them by General VERE their
Commander; that they could not gratify him, nor dispose of any thing in so
difficult a business without his consent, especially for that the whole
Electorship was committed to General VERE, and the City of Heidelberg to their
guard: the which they resolved to defend to their last gasp; that if he or any
other desired to try their valor, they could not hinder it: but he might come
and see whether there were less worth in the soldiers, than in the garrison
of Frankendale.

The Elector of Saxony, coming to Preslaw to receive the oath of allegiance in
the Emperors name from the Princes and States in Silesia, was received with
great pomp, and brought into The Elector of Saxony comes to Preslaw to receive
an oath of the Silesians.
the City the 22 of October by the Princes of Lignits and Munsterberg. The next
day, the Princes and States being assembled in the Castle, he caused the
Emperors proposition to be read unto them; whereby he let them understand,
that his Majesty was glad the Princes and States of Silesia had so willingly
come to that prouincial assembly; neither could any thing have bin more
pleasing to him than to have been present there himself: but being diuerted by
many affairs of importance, he had committed that business to the Elector of
Saxony to represent his person; the which, for his obedience toward his
Majesty, and his love to the Princes and States of Silesia, he would not
refuse. He wished them as much happiness as they had inioyed in the time of
his Predecessors: and seeing the Provinces were now settled in peace by the
grace of God and his great care, he hoped they would continue constant, and
give him aid to repel his barbarous enemies: to which end he desired a speedy
contribution of 500000 dollers, for that many other poorer Provinces, and which
had been much exhausted, had dealt bountifully; that they knew how much it
concerned them to have the bounds of Hungary preserved. To the which end both
their Ancestors and the States of Bohemia had spent much: and now the danger
was very great: for defense whereof, the Emperor required 100000 dollers yearly
for 6 years. As for the tribute or excise of beer for the maintenance of the
Court, he desired they would 1621
continue it as they formerly had done, his treasure being exhausted by reason
of civil wars. And for the removing of all occasions of war in that
Province, he advised them not to entertain any more soldiers than were fit to
defend their Frontiers, and to send the rest against the Turk with a yearly
contribution. The next day the Elector coming to the Castle, the Princes,
States and Citizens, took a new oath to the Emperor.

During this Assembly, the Marquess of Iagerndorf sent two Trumpets unto them,
with Letters to persuade them not to take an oath to the Emperor, but to
continue constant in the league The Marquess dissuading from the oath.
and faith which they had once sworn to FREDERICK their King, and not to hasten
the ruin of their Country by an unnecessary defection: they could not be
ignorant how grievous it would be to them who knew his good disposition, having
defended Silesia from hostile invasions. And being bound to satisfy God and
the league they had sworn, he persuaded them to send their Deputies to
BETHLIN GABOR, and to himself as Commissary to the King of Bohemia, within 14
days with a declaration of their intents. But if any thing happened to the
contrary, he should be very much grieved for the ruin of the Country, but the
cause should be imputed to them who had been the motives of these combustions
by their ambition and couetize.

Notwithstanding these threatening Letters, the Princes and States of Silesia
made answer to Resolution of the States of Silesia.
the Emperors proposition, that they were ready to pay 400000 Imperials or
dollers at certain days; that they would contribute 70000 dollers yearly
during the space of six years for the defense of the Frontiers of Hungary: for
the excise of beer they were content to supply his Majesty for ten years, and
for their auxiliarie forces according to the present estate of the Country.
This answer being pleasing to the Elector Palatine, a general peace was
proclaimed in Silesia.

CHRISTIAN, Duke of Brunswick, and Bishop of Halberstad, cosin-germane to the
Queen of Bohemia, having a desire to relieve the Palatinate, gathered what
forces he could together in Brunswick goes into the Palatinate.
the Lowe-countries, and on the 18 of October departed from Emericq with his
Army. Having sent 2600 foot and 300 horse before into the territories of
Minden, Hildesheim and Brunswick, they committed great spoils: and being
commanded from the Bishop of Halberstat's brother, the Duke of Luneburg, and
the Administrator of Magdeburg, to remove their Camp, they would not obey; so
as they were suddenly set upon by the soldiers of the Country, and most of
them slain, losing their Arms and Ensigns. The Duke was not daunted for this
misfortune, but continued his resolution to go into the Palatinat with thirteen
companies of foot and five hundred horse.

MAVRICE, Lantzgraue of Hesse, at this time invaded the jurisdiction of the
Earls of Waldec, for that they had demanded their fees from the Emperor, and
not from him; as also for the ancient contentions for the City of Corbac. He
took the Castle of Esingbourg, drove away the Gouerner, and manned it with a
good garrison, leaving all to the spoil of the soldiers; who tare in pieces
all their Registres, Letters, Seals and Documents which did concern Mentz,
Cullen, Patterborn and Hesse, which had been kept there for many years in an
original form. From thence he went to other Castles, Cities and Towns, making
them subject to him. He called together the Knights and other States of
Corbac; letting them understand, that the Earls of Waldec had lost their fee by
their own fault: wherefore they should not assist them against the
jurisdictions of Corbac and Hesse, but ioin with his Officers. The Earls in
the mean time fled to some places of safety; one of them posting to the
Emperor to acquaint him with the whole business.

In the Palatinate, TILLY with his Bauarian Army made hauock in the
mountaine-Countries, spoiling all places; so as the Inhabitants were forced to
flee away for extreme want and penury. MANDSFELD committed no less spoil on
this side of the river of Rhine in the Bishop of Spire's Country, causing
the Town of Brugsel to redeem it self for a great sum of money. TILLY and
CORDOVA with their joint forces might easily have relieved it: but there was
some distaste between them; so as he had good means to escape them: and on the
thirteenth of November, passing the bridge at Manheim, he besieged Didesheim,
and took it, finding in it a great booty; committing the guard thereof unto the
Duke of Lauenbourg of Saxony: after which he took the Town and Castle of
Kerchweil; where the Captain and garrison followed his colors. Afterward he
seized upon Lawterbourg, which was very rich, because those which inhabited the
Country had brought their wealth into it; all which he gave to the soldiers
for spoil. Planting his Camp there, he caused 6000 foot and 16 companies of
horse to be levied. 1621


The Spaniards and the Bauarians on the 21 of November, being 18000 men,
marched toward Lauenbourg to recover that Town: to relieve which, MANSFELD
posted thither with four pieces of ordinance; but seeing the Spaniards lodged
upon advantage, he retired: after which the Town yielded. After Count
MANSFELD'S departure out of the upper Palatinat, though the garrison of Tabor
could hope for no relief, yet they refused to yield unto Don BALTHAZAR;
protesting, that they would defend it to the last gasp. Having planted his
cannon, he sought by all means to make a breach. The thirteenth of October, the
Besieged endured an assault the space of three hours: they repulst the
Imperials with great loss, there being three Captains and many soldiers
slain, and 200 sore wounded. They had resolved to defend it till S. MARTIN'S
day, and to expect succors if happily any might come; as appeared by their
Letters intercepted to Count MANSFELD. The day aforesaid being comn, and no
succors appearing, the garrison being in great want both of wood and salt, and
the Gouerner a little before dead, they did capitulate, and left the Town on
the 18 of November, going out with their colors fleeing. Arms and baggage:
which the Imperials mand with a strong garrison, the Citizens redeeming
themselves from spoil for a sum of money: but yet they were not suffered to go
out of the Town. The Noblemen of Bohemia which had fled thither, and continued
there during the siege, were apprehended and put in prison.

CHRISTIAN the younger, Prince of Anhalt, who had been hitherto kept prisoner at
Newstad, Christian the younger, Prince of Anhalt, reconciled to the Emperor.
after many intercessions was brought to Vienna the 26 of November with a
conuoy of fifty horse. He was lodged in an Inn, and had free liberty to walk
up and down the City. The 12 of December he was admitted to the Emperors
presence, and humbly craved pardon for his offense; the which he obtained after
some repetition made by the Vice Chancellor.

Some months before, CHRISTIAN the elder, Prince of Anhalt, sued to the Emperor
for pardon, writing Letters to this sense:

The mercy which his Majesty had showed to offenders against him in this
Bohemian war, had made him (plunged in great miseries) to flee to his
Imperial Majesty, hoping that the gate Christian the elder, Prince of Anhalt,
craves pardon of the Emperor.
of grace should not be shut against him; especially for that he had this more
peculiar than the rest, having been neither the author nor beginner of these
combustions, but was lately drawn into them: neither was he absolutely subject
to his Majesty as a great number of others, but mediatly as a Prince of the
Empire; neither was he at that time tied to him by oath; that he could truly
affirm, he came not to those wars with any bad intent to his Majesty, being
his supreme Magistrate: but the care and love to religion which the Bohemians
so much complaind would be oppressed, and the faith which he had vowed for many
years to the Elector Palatine, had engaged him in these miseries; neither had
he ever any will to oppose himself against CAESAR, but only to prevent the
falling of those countries into any strangers hands, and to see the combustions
pacified by some honest Treaty: to which end he had used many grave
admonitions. But, all hope of composition being taken away, he could do no
less than became the General of an Army; preventing as much as in him lay all
unnecessary deuastations and spoils, and preferring the recovery of peace and
public safety before the discommodities of war. In the end finding that God
had not only given CAESAR victory, but made it known to the world that he
would not have religion always defended by the sword, he had speedily laid
down Arms, and persuaded the Palatine to make his composition, although in
show he had great means to renew the war. He would not deny, but the love of
the reformed religion and of the Elector Palatine had drawn him into this
error: yet it was true, no man lived without fault and never erred; God only
was free from sin, it was not given to men. It was common for all men to
err: if he in like manner had failed, he humbly besought his Imperial Majesty
to cover his error with the cloak of his mercy and clemency, and to pardon all
his offenses, to receive him and his again into favor, and restore his captive
son to liberty and his former dignity; which should be an honor to his
Majesty, and bind him for so great a favor to do him perpetual service.

The 21 of Nouemb. the Spaniards (who lay claim to any thing lying fit for
them) attempted the strong Castle of Reinsfeld in the Earldom of Catenelnbogen;
which was out of the Palatinate, nor depended thereon, meaning to surprise it
by night, sending certain companies of men with a guide who knew all the
passages, and brought them by night to their fortifications on the other side
of the Castle: which having surprised, and discharged some pieces, they
required them in the Emperors and the King of Spain's name to yield: the
Garrison, being moved at this sudden surprise and importunate demand, fell to
Arms; and so plied the Spaniard with shot and wild 1621
fire, as they forced them to abandon the place which they had taken, and to
retire. The Spaniard sought to excuse the fact, upon a pretense of the Duke of
Brunswicks coming, desiring only to hold this Castle for a time, to the end
they might stop his passage through Hassia.

CHRISTIAN, Duke of Brunswick, Bishop of Halbarstad, passed on the eighteenth
of November Brunswick spoils the Bishop Mentz country.
through Hassia, into the Elector of Mentz Country; where he took Anenbourg
by a stratagem. Whilst that the Captain treated with some Officers for the
lodging of his Troops, certain soldiers going before with a guide, who knew
the place, crept up a Hill, and got into the Castle by an old Privy which was
ruined: Being in possession thereof and giving a sign to some horsemen which
were near, they left their horses and went up with their pieces. The
Townes-men, hereupon, went to the walls to defend themselves; but BRVNSVVICK'S
forces, salying out of the Castle, took the Town; whereupon they fled, leaving
a great booty unto the Enemy. After which they took Newstad, with all that
tract, with some Towns belonging to the Lantz-graue of Darmstat, and other
Noble-mens Castles in the valley of Busec, spoiling the Country thereabout.

In the mean time JEWS of Hassia, Lantz-graue of Darmestat, sent his
Deputies to the Datmstat send^ to Brunswick.
Duke of Brunswick; signifying, that whereas he and the Elector of Mentz, had
received great spoils by the passage of Soldiers; his Imperial Majesty had
expressly forbidden, that no soldier should be suffered to pass, upon the
penalties prescribed by the Imperial constitutions; persuading him to forbear
to appoint them any lodgings, and that he should return the same way he came.

The Duke of Brunswick made answer, that he would willingly (as much as in him
lay) His answer.
forbear his Country; yet he was advertised that he took Arms to oppress
his Soldiers: which he could not believe, having not deserved it; but if
hereafter any wrong should be done unto them, he would revenge it by what
means soever.

Hereunto the Lantz-graue made answer, that he was glad he would neither do
wrong to Lodowick of Hassia denies passage to Brunswick.
him nor his; yet he understood, by faithful relation, that his soldiers had
entered into diverse places of his jurisdiction, slain his subjects, and spoiled
them of their goods: which fact he also understood he had detested, and
therefore he entreated him to seek out the Authors, and punish them for
examples sake. Touching his resolution and end, he would speak nothing. As for
his passage, so it was, that the General of the Burgundian Army, in the
Palatinate, hearing that the Baron Dona was marching up with some troops
against the Emperor, had entreated him and other Princes to be careful that
no Army, opposite to the Emperor, should pass by the Rivers of Main and
Rhine; whereby it may be easily gathered, that he makes himself a partaker of
the wars which should give passage to strange Soldiers, and therefore he did
advise DONA, that he should not molest him in his passage; the which he easily
obtained. The like cause he had now for this admonition, neither did he hope
that he would willingly offer any violence to his Country: And whereas he had
with the neighbor Electors and Princes, levied some Soldiers to prevent the
imminent dangers which might ensue; he hoped he should be blamed no more then
the Saxon Princes, who had denied passage to many. That the Spaniards and
Bauarians, prepared themselves to meet him and stop his passage with all their
forces, whereby his Countries might receive much spoil; the which he might
easily prevent, if he would retire and leave those upper parts of the Rhyne:
Wherefore he entreated him that he would take the safest and most excusable
way, and desist from his enterprise; That before he understood of his
expedition, he had entered into treaty with the neighbor Electors and Princes,
not to give passage to any Soldiers; wherefore he should not take this his
declaration in ill part; wishing well to him and his whole family.

That he meddled not with the affairs of the Palatinate, but sought only to
stop the passage of Soldiers, which would be a prejudice to his Country. That
he might turn his forces against the Enemy of Christendom, where he should
reap more honor; for in these places he should but afflict his friends and
innocent subjects. He entreated him therefore to change his mind and to
return into the Lowe-countreys, and to free his territories from danger, not
doubting but he would give more ear to his fatherly admonition (which honor
he had once vouchsafed him) then to the persuasions of others which were not
so well affected unto him.

The young Duke of Brunswick expected another answer: but being moved
therewith he wrote unto him like a soldier; that whereas he understood (beyond
his expectation) that he with his subjects and other soldiers intended to
stop his passage, he feared them not, nor the 1621
Spanish forces; but resolved to proceed in his resolution by the grace of God,
notwithstanding any opposition: wherefore he should rest resolved, that if he
or his soldiers should receive any wrong, both he and his posterity should
repent it.

Before the receipt of these Letters, the Lantzgraue had written unto MAVRICE,
Lantzgraue of Hesse, informing him how that he had advised the Duke of
Brunswick to abandon those The Lanizgraue of Darmstats Letter to the Lantzgraue
of Hesse.
upper parts of the Rhine, and not to molest his subjects; which he seemed not
to regard: it being therefore to be feared, that if he should continue in his
resolution, and try the doubtful event of war, the seat of the war would
be drawn into Hessia, and their Countries afflicted with all discommodities,
he could not but entreat him to deal with the Duke of Brunswick, and to
persuade him to depart; the which if he would effect, he would do his best
endeavor to stay the Emperors Troops, being ready to march into those parts
against him: it being also necessary in these dangerous times that some
agreement should be made between neighbor Princes, how passage should be
allowed or denied, it agreeing both with the law of nature and of nations; and
therefore he did hope, and likewise entreated him, if he should be any way
pressed by the Bishop of Halberstat, or in danger, that he for their old
contracts would come to succor him, as he would do for him in the like case.

The Lantzgraue MAVRICE made answer to these Letters, that whereas he entreated
him to cause the Bishop of Halberstat to retire with his Army, thinking it to
be in his power, he did Hi^ answer.
not doubt, but he understood well by his former Letters, that those Troops
were not only levied in the King of Bohemia's name, but by the States of the
united Provinces, and sent to those parts: wherefore to set upon those
soldiers, and thereby to offend such potent Princes, was not safe; that he was
advertised, the Bishop was passing to another Territory; that he was
unacquainted with his counsels, neither had he advertised him of his course;
that it was not in his power to prescribe or command any thing to the Bishop of
Halberstat in this action; that both they and all Hessia were bound by the duty
of their fee unto the Palatine, of which see the said Lantzgraue LODOVVICK was
in possession: wherefore, as he desired not to meddle in the affairs of Bohemia
against the Emperor, so he could not forget the oath he had taken to the
Palatine. And whereas he required his aid against any force which should be
offered him, according to the ancient contracts of neighborhood and
consanguinity, the like he expected from him to whom his innocence was well
known; assuring himself, that if by the league of the Catholic Princes
against the Protestants he should be invaded, he would not fail to assist him
according to the said Treaties: yet he could not forget, that of late he had
been wronged by the Spaniards, who had attempted to surprise the Castle of
Reinsfelt, and summoned them to yield in the Emperor and King of Spain's name;
from the which they were forced to retire; for which attempt they had no
color, having never been wronged by him. He therefore entreated him to employ
his credit with the Spanish soldiers touching this business, for that delays
were dangerous; and that they would appoint a meeting for their Deputies.

Many Letters past betwixt them touching this action of the Duke of Brunswick;
the which I must for breuities sake omit. In the mean time, the Duke of
Brunswick, hearing that the Baron of Anhalt approached with forces to stop his
passage into the Palatinate, and to drive him out of those parts; being
fortified with some troops from the Bishops of Mentz, Virsburg, and the
Lantzgraue of Darmstat, and hearing that ANHALT approacht near the vallie of
Busec, he attended him there in open field (the weather being exceeding cold,
about the end of December) meaning to fight with him: but, finding his forces
too weak, he retired, spoiled Anebourg, and burnt Newstad, and then marched with
his Troops toward Westphalia, as you shall hear.

The Preachers and Ministers of Gods word in Prague being taxed, that during
the Bohemian combustions they had exceeded the bounds of modesty, and incensed
the people by their The Ministers and Preachers of Bohemia banished.
admonitions and preachings, and so made themselves partakers in these broils,
were now banished the Kingdom of Bohemia, by an Edict made by the Prince of
Lichtenstein, as follows.

For that the Ministers and Preachers of Bohemia had been the first sowers of
sedition in the Kingdom, and published scandalous books both against the Emp.
MATHIAS then living, and since against FERD. now Emperor, as also against his
Lieutenants, Officers and Counselors, and drawn the people into actual
rebellion, and approved the election of a new King, laboring by all persuasions
to have him crowned: for these and other causes specified at large, it was
ordaind, those seditious men (as they said) chiefly those who made the edict
an. 1618, or approved the Coronation should be banished for ever out of
Bohemia, the incorporated Provinces, and all the jurisdictions of the house of
Austria, having deserved a far greater punishment; whereby they 1621
were commanded to depart out of Prague the day after the proclamation made,
and within 8 days out of the Kingdom of Bohemia, the incorporated Provinces,
and all the jurisdictions of the house of Austria, and never to return during
their lives: yet they did them this favor, To suffer them to carry away their
moueables; and, if they had any lands, they were suffered to sell them by their
Deputies within three months. This clause was annexed, that If after the time
prefixed any one was found in Prague or any place aboue-mentioned, and
convicted of these crimes, he should without all exception lose his head. The
like punishment was inflicted upon all those who should entertain them, lodge
them, or conceal them after the time prefixed. This Edict being proclaimed,
there were fifty Ministers of the Hussits (whereof some were exceeding old)
forced to abandon their Country.

Count MANSFELD, hearing that Don GONZALES de Cordua (after the recovery of
Did ^heim) had put his Troops into garrison, marched with his Army toward
Haguenaw; where Mansfeld takes Haguenaw.
he forced from the Catholic Inhabitants and Jews a contribution of above
100000 dollers: the which they were willing to pay, hoping to avoid any further
oppression. But returning in 14 days with greater forces, he got entrance into
the Town, the Citizens being unable to endure a siege; the which he fortified
with a good garrison. Having got this Town without any loss of men, and
thinking that others in Alsatia would follow their example, he sent a Trumpet
to Elsaszabern, summoning them to yield: which they denying, he drew great
store of munition from Haguenaw, and marched thither with his Army; which he
battered with such fury, that he Mansfeld besieges Elsas^abern.
thought they would have yielded the first day: but, finding the Gouerner
resolute to defend it, he continued his battery 12 days; having made a breach,
but not fit for an assault. The Besieged defended themselves resolutely, and
slew 300 of his men who had entered the suburbs, and in a salie took some
prisoners, carrying some into the town, hanging others over the walls.

The weather growing so exceeding cold that they were not able to endure it,
having lost many brave men, there was a truce made for ten days at the
intercession of the Duke of Lorraine; but with this condition, that they should
choose whether they would pay him 100000 PHILIP'S dollers, or endure the
extremity of a siege. The besieged accepted of this condition: but having in
the mean time received a supply of 2000 shot, they sent an answer unto Count
MANDSFELD (who was gone to Haguenaw) that they had bought powder and bullets
with their money, and that he might return if he desired to smell of them. After
which, they burned their suburbs, sent their wives and children into Lorrain,
mured up all their Ports but one, and prepared themselves for a siege.

Count MANSFELD, seeing the Town thus fortified, and that the continuance of a
siege in so unseasonable and sharp a time of winter would be the ruin of his
Army, lodged some of his Troops in those parts, and past with the rest into the
further Alsatia and the hereditary Countries of the house of Austria: where he
put all to fire and sword; and where he struck such terror into the
Inhabitants, that they thought of nothing but flight, leaving much cattle in
their stals and stables: whereof some died for hunger, and others were carried
away by the soldiers; which bred a great dearth of victual through all the
Country, Colonel (...)on the other side being in Brisgo, made an incursion to
Brisac and Ensisheim; where he spoiled the Country, and put all the garrisons
to the sword.

Mean while, the Emperor sent out another proscription against Count MANDSFELD
to this sense: that whereas ERNEST of Mandsfelt had some years before been
proscribed by A Proscription against Count Mansfeld.
the Emperor MATHIAS his Predecessor, for that he had presumed to take Arms,
and been a chief actor in the Bohemian rebellion; hoping he would have
acknowledged his fault, and yielded him due obedience as the supreme head of
the Empire, to which dignity he had been advanced by the joint consent of all
the Electors: yet it was known to all men how that MANSFELD had persisted
still in his resolution, used all means to entertain the rebellion, giving all
aid and assistance to the head thereof who was also a banished man, and after
that memorable victory of Prague had not forborne to levy new soldiers, and to
annoy those who were faithful to him and the States of the Empire, especially
upon the Rhine, with murders, spoils, burnings and grievous exactions; whereby
it was easy to be coniectured, that he would never cease (although he had
nothing of his own) to trouble the Empire during his life. Wherefore to
preserve his authority, to maintain peace in the Empire, and to free his
faithful States from this his tyranny, he did admonish all Electors, Princes,
and Commonwealths, to observe him carefully, and wheresoever they should take
him to keep him safely, and not deliver him at any man's intercession without
his command. He also commanded them not to lodge him, feed 1622
him or relieve him, and to call presently back their vassailes and subjects
which served under him, by public proclamation, upon pain of the loss of all
their goods, privileges and dignities and the banishment of their wives and
children.

BETHLIN GABOR, in the mean time, having miserably spoiled Morauia, there
being nothing left to relieve his soldiers, he retired into Hungary, where
there was a treaty A treaty of peace between the Emperor and Bethlin Gabor
of peace propounded between the Emperors Deputies, BETHLIN'S, and the
Hungarians at Nicholasbourg, upon these Articles following. That the Emperor
should grant a general pardon to all the Hungarians. That BETHLIN should
forbear to use the title of King. That he should restore the Crown of Hungary
to the Emperor, restore the frontier forts, yield up the kingdom, and attempt
nothing against the Emperor nor the house of Austria. On the other side, he
should have from the Emperor the title of a Prince of the Empire with seven
jurisdictions and the town of Cassouia during his life: he should also hold
the Principalities of Oppell and Radiborne in Silesia; with the forts of
Moncats, Toccay, Sagmary and Eschet for a certain sum of money, and 50
thousand florens yearly for the entertainment of his soldiers; but upon
condition they should as well be bound by oath to the Emperor as to BETHLIN.
That the Crown of Hungary should be left in the Castle of Trinchin until the
assembly of States. To the which, the composition for grieuances and the
admitting of Germans unto public offices should be referred. That matters
concerning Religion should remain in the same estate, they were in, when the
Emperor came unto the Crown. That the Jesuits should be again received, but
should enjoy no lands etc.

The Marquess of Iagerndorf, being absent from his Camp during this winter
season, the States of Silesia began to treat with his soldiers, persuading
them to dissolve their Camp and The Marquess of Iagerndorfs Army dispersed by
the Imperialists.
be gone for a certain sum of money; but they requiring too great a sum
persisted in their resolution. In the mean time there was so great a want of
victuals among the Imperialists in Silesia, as they should be enforced to
abandon their lodging or endure all extremities: whereupon the commanders
resolved rather to die valiantly then to retire shamefully; so as on the
sixteenth of January they marched away in an extreme cold night, with 30
companies of horse and foot, and four Cannon (besides six companies under
Collonell BOD^RHVS) and came early in the morning to Wagestad; where having
seized upon all the approaches, they summoned the Town to yield: but the
Governor making answer, the Town was given him to defend and not to yield;
they began to batter it, the besieged answering them in the like manner.
During which, they had news that two miles off, there lay certain of the
Marquess his soldiers: whom they suddenly surprised, disarmed, and bound them
by oath, that for six months they should not carry Arms against the
Emperor, the Elector of Saxony, the Prince of Bauaria, nor the States of
Silesia, and so dismissed them. The next day the garrison of Wagestad yielded
and took the like oath. After this they marched toward Odera, whereas there
lay seven of the Marquess his troops: but before their coming to the place,
they had news by a trumpet, that if they might obtain the same conditions
they would depart. The report hereof being brought to the Earl of Ortenbourg
who lay at Tetschin with six companies of horse and foot, abandoning the place
he departed. Other Captains and soldiers followed this example, so as in five
days 40 companies of horse and foot were disarmed, and all those places
except the Castle of Glats reduced under the Emperors obedience.

There had been a marriage treated of between the Emperor and ELIANOR the
Duke of Mantuas Sister, by JOHN VLRICK Baron of Egenberg. When as they had
agreed upon the The Emperor con^racted to the Duke of Mantuaes Sister.
conditions and dowry, the Duke of Mantua conducted her with 300 Noblemen and
Gentlemen and a great band of soldiers from the monastery of Saint VRSVLA to
the Cathedral Church: where she receiving the keys of the City from the
Bishop, as the Emperors future wife, and the ceremonies being ended, on the 26
of January she began her journey with a great train, and passing through
the Vene^ian territories came to O^ipont; whither also the Emperor came with a
great Troop of Princes, Earls, Barons, and Noblemen: where finding his spouse
the fourth of February, the marriage was afterward solemnly celebrated with
great Pomp.

The King of Bohemia, remaining in the Low Countries, had resolved to return
into the Palatinate, and to attempt if he might by force recover his
inheritance and free his poor afflicted The King of Bohemias Letters to the
Protestant Princes.
subjects from the cruelty of his insulting enemies. But before he undertook
his journey, he wrote Letters unto the Electours, to the Princes, and to the
Protestant States, after this manner. 1622


He did not doubt (said he) but they all remembered what practices had been
for many years against the Protestant Electours, Princes and States, and how
faithfully his house had always opposed it self, and ever endeavored to
maintain the liberty of Religion in all assemblies of the Empire; his Father,
Grandfather and great Grandfather, having nothing but the glory of God, and
the public good, before their eyes; as did well appear by the Acts of the
Empire. That he had followed their commendable example; and, as soon as he
came to the Electorshippe, had directed all his counsels and actions to the
same end, without respect of persons or private profit: Whereby he grew into
great hatred of the adverse party, and so continued; until at last, the
troubles falling out in Bohemia, and the alteration of that Crown, the States
desiring and pressing it, he had accepted of that Kingdom; being conferred
upon him with all their consents, coming into a void possession, not with any
desire to reign; but moved with a friendly care to relieve so many Christians,
and to free the Empire from greater dangers; and the rather, for that he was
given to understand from many Protestant States, that these persecutions in
Bohemia were for the common cause of Religion. And although there had been many
things published in Print, whereby he had been taxed that he had not only
engaged the Turk in these troubles of Bohemia; but also sought to expose the
Roman Empire, in prey, unto him; yet he hoped no man should ever prove, nor
would give credit unto those scandales. And so refuting those surmises, he said
he would not then make any Apology of his innocence, but defer it unto
another time; only he would make known unto the World, that as he never was
ashamed of his actions; so after the taking of the Crown of Bohemia, he had
always offered to submit himself to justice and right, and to yield due
obedience unto the Emperor: yea, the Electors and Princes of the Empire, with
other foreign Kings, for the settling of a good Peace in the Empire, had
undertaken that he should accept of, and do any thing which he might with his
dignity and Conscience; so as those places (which had been taken and spoiled in
his Electorall Country) might be faithfully restored unto him. That it was
never heard of, yea it was contrary to Law, and all the constitutions of the
Empire, that without any citation or knowledge of the fact, any man should be
proscribed, and the judgment begin by the Execution, inuading his Countries,
and oppressing his miserable subjects with hostile fury; having never imparted
it to the Electors, and other States of the Empire, who have received much
prejudice thereby. Seeing then the proceeding has not been lawful; neither
can the execution be just, nor restitution of the charges be demanded. Touching
this execution, the capitulations were made with some few, who were partakers
and aduancers of these combustions for their own private profit; when far
lighter businesses were referred to Diets and Assemblies of the Electors:
Neither should they make such haste to the execution, whereby the neighbor and
innocent States might receive great loss, and many poor innocent creatures be
ruined and slain.

They to whom this execution was committed, might well have excused themselves;
neither did he doubt but they would have done so, if they had not regarded
their own profit and advancement, contrary to the treaty which they themselves
had made; in the which the Palatinate was comprehended. To divert all these
miseries, and to preserve the Empire from ruin, many Kings and Princes had
interposed their Authority, but have not prevailed any thing; so as upon the
treaty propounded by the Lord DSGBY although that the Emperor had yielded to a
suspension of Arms in the upper and lower Palatinate, and MANDSFELD withdrawn
his Army out of the confines of Bohemia; yet did the Duke of Bauaria invade and
take the upper Palatinate, as may well appear by the Lord DIGBI^S Letters of
complaint to the Emperor. At the same time CORDOVA, Lieutenant general of the
Spanish Army (neglecting the Truce) took many places in the lower Palatinate,
besieged Frankendall (his wives Dowry in case she suruiued him) and sought to
force it.

To excuse these attempts, nothing could be objected against him; but that in
these grievous persecutions, he thought himself bound in Conscience to have a
care of his afflicted Subjects, and had sought some help for them from other
Princes, his Allies; the which being allowable by all divine and humane laws,
could not be denied unto him; if there had been any excess committed by his
men (whereof he was ignorant) they should have admonished him, and known if it
had been done with his will and command. They sought a pretext, for that before
these times, he had given Commission to the Marquess of Iagerndorfe, and the
Count MANDSFELD, to do all things during his absence, in Bohemia and the
incorporated Provinces, which they should think fit for his service; but no
man that is impartial will miscons^ue 1622
thereof.

It is conformable to reason and equity, that a man should hold that which he
thinks is his own, if he see that taken from him in another place, which is
his without any controversy; until that having recovered it, all suits might
be ended by some honest agreement. The vanity of those things which were
objected against him might very well appear, for that they which labored to
persecute him, under a color of settling Peace in the Empire, did so waste and
spoil it in many places by war, as it would hardly be able to recover
strength to make head against foreign Enemies; The affairs of Bohemia
standing upon those terms, as there was no necessity to trouble the Peace of
all Germany, it being only for a private pretention of the house of Austria,
and might well have been determined in Bohemia: Touching those things which
concern the Empire, they might have been compounded in a public Assembly of
all the Electors and States with full knowledge of the cause. This has not
been done, but private treaties and leagues made and confirmed with hostile
violence, and the fire of Bohemia dispersed over the noblest Provinces of the
Empire; which were exposed to the ruins and deuastations of Spanish Soldiers.

The War being continued (to the end there might be some color of justice)
there followed a declaration of Proscription against him. He did not find,
that since the making of the golden Bull, and the wholesome constitutions, as
fundamental laws of the Empire, ever the like violent course was taken
against the meanest State of the Empire; much less against an Elector, who had
always submitted himself, and does still, unto reason and equity. And it was
worthy observation, that neglecting all the Emperors promises, not to question
any State of the Empire, which had not been an actor in the combustions of
Bohemia; yet many Princes, Earls, and Noblemen, had been much oppressed and
wronged, not sparing Widows and Electorall Pupils; among others, they
dispossessed his brother of his inheritance, and lately forced his Town of
Luthra, who had never meddled with the affairs of Bohemia, but had been
declared innocent by the Emperor himself, notwithstanding the treaties of
Vlmes and Mentz, and the consent of SPINOLA himself, at the laying down of
Arms: whereby it appears plainly that they seek to draw the first
Electorall voice from the Protestants, and to transfer it upon a Roman
Catholic.

That the D. of Bauaria had planted the Mass in diverse places of the upper
Palatinat; nor was there doubt but hereafter they would plant Popery by force,
according to the resolution of the Council of Trent. That there was no liberty
for the Protestant Religion, there being no respect of the Imperial
constitutions, especially for that there was no regard had of the Emperors
promises by foreign soldiers, who hated the liberty of the Germans, and
always pretended some color of war. And matters were brought to that pass,
that it was no more in the Emperors power to make a Peace or Truce without the
consent of his confederats, as might appear by his treaty with the Lord DIGBY;
all which he left to their consideration: For his part he thought it most
necessary, that to prevent the ruin of the Empire, the Protestant States
should join their forces, and oppose them against this eminent danger. He
entreated them that they would not only consult carefully of this business,
but impart it to others, and especially to the Elector of Saxony; to the end
they may oppose themselves to the pernicious practices of the adverse party;
and so deal, that he being restored, that cruel war might be ended, and a
desired Peace settled: But if all means of composition and reconciliation were
denied him, and the gates of justice and grace shut against him; he entreated
them to assist him with their counsel and aid; and likewise, that they would
endeavor to divert the danger from themselves, and to preserve the liberty of
Religion; which had been gotten with so much labor and cost.

He wrote another Letter unto them, whereby he did intimate that the Duke of
Bauaria had sent a great part of his forces into the lower Palatinate; that his
General TILLY had summoned The King of (...)second ^ter to the ^rotestants.
Heidelberg, the chief seat of the Electorshippe, to yield; that he had
joined his forces with the Spanish Army, and had drawn so near unto the City,
as they expected news daily of the siege; That by the copies of Letters, sent
by the Emperor to the Lord DIGBY, and the Infanta of Spain, it plainly appeared
what the intentios of the adverse party were; and under what pretext they
sought to pervert all. That he had received many Letters signed by the
Emperors own hand; the which he sent unto them, that they might see with
admiration, what strange Counsels were treated of in the Empire, for the real
translation of his Electorship upon the Duke of Bauaria. Yet he did hope, that
God, who had so miraculously discovered it, would 1622
not suffer them to bring it to effect. In the mean time he entreated them to
consider of the common cause, give away to his former admonitions, and assist
him in his necessary defense.

The young Duke of Brunswick, being fallen out of Hessia, and these upper
parts of Germany, Brunswick inuades the diocese of Paterborn.
into Westphalia, he took in a manner all the Towns of the Diocese of
Paterborne with the City it self; He suffered the soldiers to spoil the
Jews which dwelt there, and exacted a great sum of money from the Clergy,
and found great treasure in the Cathedral Church, besides the patron of the
Church called Saint Liborius which was made of pure gould. To stay his courses,
the Elector of Cullen sent for part of the Bauarian forces out of the
Palatinate and Veterauia, under the command of the Baron of Anhalt: who
passing through the County of Nassau and Dillenbourg marched toward the
Elector of Cullen; whose forces hearing of Anhalts approach, passed the Rhine,
on the 21 of February, and joined with him, with 3000 foot and 600 horse.

Having formerly made mention the last y^re of the siege of Iuliers (it being a
fee belonging Iuliers yielded to the Spaniard.
to the Empire though held by the united States) I hold it fit to speak
something of the yielding of it. It having been long blockt up by Count HENRY
VANDENBERG and the Spanish Army, and distressed for want of victuals, he
summoned them to yield, threatening them that if they forced him to use
extremity he would not spare any. PYTHANIVS the Governor answered, that he was
but a servant and could not yield without the resolution of the united States,
but they consenting he would use no delay. After this answer they fell to
their Cannon on both sides: and being again pressed to yield, he said, they
should expect it at Easter; yet he began to treat with the Spaniards on the 17
of January, sending t^ree Captains out of the Town to that end. Having
conferred with them, the Earl acquainted SPINOLA therewith, and in the end
these conditions were concluded. 1. That there should be no alteration in
religion. 2. That the Captains and soldiers should depart with their Arms,
colors flying, drums beating, and their wives, children and goods. 3. That the
Ordinance and munition should remain in the City. 4. That the Gunners,
Armorers, Smiths, Carpenters, and others might depart with their soldiers. 5.
That the Governor and Captain should have horse and wagons to carry their
goods to Nemigen. 6. That the sick and wounded might stay in the Town until
they were recovered, and then have wagons to carry them to Nymegen. 7. That
the Captains and soldiers should have a whole years liberty to sell their
lands if they had any. 8. That the soldiers which were in any other Towns or
Castles should have leave to come thither and bring their wives and children.
9. That all Arms and commodities belonging to the Town and Castle should be
left behind. 10. That records and ancient writings in the Town and Castle
should remain there still. 11. That the soldiers should not be arrested for
debt. 12. That the bedds which the soldiers had brought into the Town should
be restored to their owners, and they bound to receive them. 13. That the
Elector of Brandenburghs officers and ministerrs should execute their offices
for the space of one whole yea^e. 14. That the Citizens might depart the City
and dispose of their goods within one year. 15. Thar there should be two
hostages given on either side until the Articles were performed: all which
being signed and sealed by the Governor, he should send one to the Prince of
Orange, and be bound to yield the place if they were not relieved within 12
days, with at the least 300 wagons: which timebeing expired and no relief
coming from the Prince, the Earl of Vandenberg sent 600 wagons to carry
away their baggage, wishing the Governor to hasten his departure: who, sending
the keys of the Castle unto the Earl, departed with all his soldiers and
goods, leaving two within the City until the wagons were returned. PITHANIVS
the Governor coming to the Hague, he was committed and called in question for
delivering up the Town.

The Emperor having consummated his marriage with the Duke of Mantuas sister
at Oenipont The Emperor enters Viena with his Empress.
(as we formerly related) he returned to Viena with his new Empress. Coming
to the Town all the ordinance was shot off, and a guard set on either side
from the Port unto the Castle. First, there entered six troops of horse, with
many Townsmen: then followed the Emperors servants and young Noblemen with
the Emperors horses, his officers, Senators and Counselors in great numbers.
Before the Emperor went five Heralds. LOSESTEIN Lord Marshall carried the
sword, and with him went LEOPOLD ERNESTVS, his Majesty's eldest son. The
Sindiques and Senators carried the Canopy. The Empress was in a rich Chariot,
accompanied by CHARLES WILLIAM the Emperors youngest son, 1622
and two of his daughters; being environed by seventy four Noblemens children
and many soldiers: after which, followed DETRISTEIN with some troops of horse.

As this action was joyful at Viena, so was the funeral of the Archduke
ALBERT of Austria, The Funeral of the Archduke Albert.
mournful at Brussels: the which was performed with so great pomp, as those
of the Emperor CHARLES the Fifth were not ^omparable, as some write; whereof I
must make some little mention. Omitting the ordinary ceremonies, I will only
make relation of those things which were extraordinary. Before the Hearse there
were 32 horses covered with black, having every one a Gentleman going before
them, carrying the Arms of so many provinces. Every horse had two Gentlemen to
lead them, with diverse Heralds. After which the Archiducall Diadem, his
scepter, the goulden fleece, with two swords (whereof the one with a cup of
great price was given him by Pope CLEMENT the Eightth) were carried by
Noblemen. Betwixt these, and the body went a triumphant Chariot of Liberality,
in remembrance of his great bounty, for that after the death of the Emperor
MATHIAS he had freely given to the Emperor FERDINAND eleven Kingdoms: namely,
Hungary, Bohemia, Dalmatia, Croatia, Sclauonia, Bosnia, Seruia, Halisia,
Lodomicio, Cumania, and Bulgaria, with the Arch-duchy of Austria, the Duchy of
Silesia, the Marquesates of Morauia, Lusatia, and Burgau, the Earledomes of
Habsburg, Tiroll and Ferret, the Principality of Sweuia, the Marquisate of
Alsatia, with other territories which descended unto him by hereditarie right.
In this Chariot sat Liberty (a beawtifull Nyph) and before her an altar
whereon were diverse Scepters and Crowns with this inscription, His spretis
obijt. About this Chariot were the Arms of 27 Kingdoms and provinces, which
in his life time he had so bountifully bestowed upon the Emperor FERDINAND.
This tiumphant Chariot was drawn by six horses, representing six virtues;
namely, Nobility, Mildness, Wisdom, Love, Reason and Providence; whereon sat
six boys, representing Nymphs. After the body followed the Popes Nuntio, the
Spanish Ambassador, Marqueses, Earls, and Knights of the Goulden fleece, with
the rest of the train, as is usual in such funeral pomps.

The Duke of Brunswick, having taken many Towns in Westphalia (as was said)
ERVITS (a Exploits in Westphalia.
Commander of the Elector of Cullens forces) came by night with a thousand
horse and some companies of foot, on the 8 of March, to Gisec: which he took,
with some other Towns, by the secret practices of the Inhabitants; where they
slew 900 of Brunswicks soldiers, and took some few prisoners. The Duke (to
revenge this loss and disgrace) hearing that 8 troops of horse and four
companies of foot, lay not far from Susat, he presently posted from Lippa
thither, with his Horse. The commanders of the Cullen forces, seeing his
furious approach, abandoned their foot and baggage, and fled. The foot retired
into a Churchyard: whereof 200 were slain, and 748 with their officers taken
prisoners. There were also 36 horsemen taken and four ensigns; which were
sent unto the Elector Palatine. After which, the Duke recovered some places
which they had taken, and punished some which had been authors of the Treason.

The Town of Wittengau in Bohemia held yet against the Emperor: the garrison
being without Wittengaw in Bohemia yielded to the Emperor.
all hope of succors, pressed with hunger, and seeing all the passages
stopped, they entered into treaty, and compounded to yield up the Town and
Castle, and to depart with bag and baggage whither they pleased. But the
Garrison of Clingenberg, although they saw all passages stopped, would by no
means consent to yield.

About the end of March, the Earl of Swartsenbourg, Ambassador for his
Imperial Majesty, arrived in England: where he was honorably received, lodged
in Denmark house, and defrayed The Emperors Ambassadors speech to his Majesty.
with his whole train at his Majesty's charge, during his abode in London. He
had his Audience in the upper house of Parliment: where, after the ordinary
complements, he made an expression of the Emperors love and zeal in particular
to his Majesty; That he desired to enter into conditions of an everlasting
peace, and to hold an indissoluble contract of perfect friendship with him;
That it had pleased his Majesty to give him assurance of his sincere love and
affection by many stately Embassies endeavoring still to settle the peace of
Christendom; And, whereas some ill affected had sought to trouble the quiet
state of Europe with combustions, none but his Majesty had endeauord to
reconcile them, and like a rising sun to dispel those cloudy vapors of
dissension, to the great honor of his royal name for so worthy a work:
entreating his Majesty, in the Emperors name, to continue still in the same
course; that the Princes of Europe might not only enjoy peace by his means,
but that he himself might have the fruition of his desire, and immortal fame.
1622


And, to let him understand how highly his Imperial Majesty did esteem of his
love and affection, and his endeavor to gratify him, as far as honorable
correspondence might extend; he had sent him, as his Ambassador, to acquaint
his Majesty with his gracious intent, and to assure him that he did affect the
common good of Christendom, and especially the welfare of his Majesty's house.
Although there had been some cause of discontent: ye^ it was part of his care,
that the decayed peace (which had been interrupted by some turbulent spirits)
might be restored; acknowledging, that those violent courses had been
distasteful unto his Majesty; who out of his regal piety had always
endeauored to prevent those mischiefs, as well for the general good of
Christendom, as for the settling of a peace in Germany, which had been
dismembered by dissension. And whereas his Imperial Majesty had taken Arms for
his own defense and the maintaining of his honor and dignity; so he said he
would be as easily entreated to lay them down again, and desist from all
hostility, if others without any just cause did not show themselves
refractarie: to the which, he was the more tractable, for that his Majesty
could so nobly act his part in defending the dignity of kings, and the
prerogative of monarchs. His conclusion was, that his Imperial Majesty had a
worthy intent to treat sincerely, really and without fraud, with him about
those affairs, that all might be firmly ratified and performed, whereunto the
king of Spain was also willing; and that they were both ready to harken to his
Imperial Majesty's propositions, when his Majesty should think fit to treat
about the same: neither did they doubt, but that the work being generally good,
charitable and perfitable for all the Provinces of Europe, it would have a
happy success; there being nothing intended but truth, sincerity, and the
hope of an indissoluble friendship.

His Majesty was well pleased with this proposition, and willingly embraced the
offer of a Sir Richard Weston sent to Bruss^ls.
Treaty appointed at Brussels: whereupon, after an honorable dismission of the
said Ambassador, his Majesty made choice of Sir RICHARD WESTON, Chancellor of
his Exchequer and Counselor of State, to be employed in this Action: whom he
sent presently after him, to treat of a peace for the Elector, and restitution
to his hereditarie lands and dignities; and during the treaty to procure a
cessation of Arms. And to the end all obstacles might be taken away, his
Majesty soon after sent the Lord CHICHESTER, Baron of Belface, into the
Palatinate, to acquainte his son in law the Elector with this treaty, that he
might conform himself accordingly; whereby no exception might be taken: but
there followed no such fruit of this treaty, as all good men did wish. For,
there was neither any suspension of Arms, nor any peace concluded; but after
six months treaty, his Majesty's Ambassador returned home without any
satisfaction, as the world did conjecture.

In this month the Duke of Bauaria sent an Ambassador to the Duke of
Virtemberg, requiring The Duke of Virtemberg refuses to send his Souliers to
the Bauarian.
him, to send him those soldiers which he had levied (having no need of them)
to be employed against Count MANSFELD. To whom the Duke answered, that he had
no quarrel against the Palatinate, in the defense whereof MANDSFIELD was to be
employed; and, besides, it was contrary to the treaty of Vlme, by the which it
was decreed that nothing should be attempted against the Palatinate. Moreover,
the soldiers being levied by the States for the defense of the country, they
could not be drawn away to any other place, without their consents. Count
MANDSFELD, having spoiled Wansenau, and fortified Haguenaw with two Bullwarks,
20 Companies of foot and 4 troops of horse, he returned with his Army into
Count Mandefeld takes the Castle of Maidebourg.
the Bishopric of Spire; where he demanded a great quantity of corn, wine,
and money from the Clergy: but, prevailing nothing, he caused the Castle of
Meidebourg (into the which the inhabitants of the Country had carried great
store of goods) to be besieged by the Earl of Loeuenstein: the which was
yielded the fourth of April.

After this, TILLY cut down all the trees about Ladebourg, and overthrew the
walls Tilly makes his way to Heidelberg.
and ditches, and ruined Saint MARTINS Church without the Town: and that he
might have the better means to besiege Heidelberg, he took one Town after
another: and on the fifth day of April (as GOTHARDVS writes) falling upon 20
troops of Count MANDSFELD'S horse and three thousand foot at Wingart, he
overthrew them, took a hundred and fifty wagons with five hundred horses, and
a great prey; the rest saving them selves by flight.

To prepare his way (as I say) to Heidelberg, on the fourth day of April he
laid siege to the Town of Necargemond being a mile from the same: and for
that the garrison resolved to yield upon the first summons; the next day he
forced them, and put them all to the Sword, with most of the inhabitants, their
Wives, and Children; as he had done some days before at 1622
Obernhilsbae. The same day he sent to Dilsberg to summon the Castle in the
Emperors name: the Governor refusing to yield, TILLY marched thither on the 6
of April, with all his Dilsberg besieged in vain by the Bauarians.
forces, and battered it the next day for the space of five hours; but the
Governor of the Castle (whose name was BARTHOLOMEW SMID, borne at Sed^n)
defended it so valiantly, as having endured four fierce assaults, they were
forced to retire with great loss, leaving great store of Arms and Ladders
behind them. After this a Truce was made for the burying of their dead, and
retyring of their wounded; TILLY sending a messenger to Heidelberg, with a
promise that he had no intent to annoy their Town, but only to force that
Castle: whereupon they returned to Arms, on the tenth of April; where,
continuing his battery from ten of the clock in the morning till six at night,
he had made some breaches in the walls, the which the Garrison did resolutely
defend; and the enemy ceasing to give any further assault, they were summoned
again to yield: which the Garrison refused, requiring three days respite to
consult; which being granted, they sent a Messenger to Manheim and Heidelberg
for aid; who returned on the 14 of April with these comfortable news: That
they should not only have aid, but that the Electour Palatine himself was
coming into those parts. Being again pressed by General TILLY to yield; the
Governor answered that he was yet ready to defend it 3 days longer, and then
he would come to a treaty. In the mean time, they being advertised in the Camp
that succors were coming, and that the Elector Palatine was arrived in his
country; the Bauarian retired speedily, burned his Camp, and left much
Munition, Corn, Wine and Meal behind him.

The Elector Palatine king of Bohemia, having resolved to see his Country, and
Subjects, which were ruined by the enemy; having no safe passage if he should
be discovered, being to The King of Bohemia goes up to the Palatinat
go through the enemies country: he took a generous resolution, rather to
hazard his life then to abandon his afflicted subjects; wherefore in March he
departed from the Hague, embarked himself and arrived at Callis with a small
company, he being disguised and attendant to one of them. He passed through
part of France, went by Sedan and Lorrane: at Bitssi he (coming into an Inn)
fell amongst some of the Archduke LEOPOLD'S soldiers; where, being at the
table, he heard them rail freely at the Palatine, the which he swallowed up
quietly. He past from thence in the night, and never discovered himself until
he came to Landaw, to GEORGE JEWS Earl of L^uestein, who presently gave
notice thereof to the Earl of MANDSFELD, who lay then at Germ^rsheim, and was
in treaty with an Ambassador sent from Brussels from the Infanta; who
propounded many fair conditions unto him, as GOTHARDVS writes; namely that he
should hold the Town and Province of Haguenaw in fee for him Offers made to
Mansfeld by ^he Infanta of Spain.
and his heirs; That he should be a Prince of the Empire: that he should
enjoy the lands of the Prince of Orange, during the confiscation; and, if a
peace were made, then he should have the like yearly pension; or, if it might
be redeemed from the Prince, he should enjoy it for ever in fee: that he
should receive a great sum of money for the entertainment of his soldiers:
that he should be Marshall to the Infanta, with a pension of 1200 crowns a
month, and should be subject to no man's command but Marquess SPINOLA'S. But
receiving news of the King of Bohemia's arrival, he brake off the treaty
with the Ambassador, who prepared to depart: but Count MANSFELD would not
suffer him. The King of Bohemia arriving soon after, invited him to dinner;
and told him, that, He labored in vain in seeking to withdraw a faithful
servant from him: that he had need of his help: that he was come to assist
and defend his poor subjects, miserably afflicted; and, if he had any further
charge he might freely deliver it.

The Infanta's Ambassador being dismissed, the King of Bohemia and Count
MANSFELD, with the whole Army, spoiling the Bishop of Spires Country, past the
Rhyne, with an intent to charge the Bavarians, who were lodged near to Wishloch
in a little wood, having fortified themselves upon an eminent place of good
advantage, where they had planted six pieces of Ordinance, but did not much
annoy the Kings Army, which went and lodged near unto Mingleshen which was not
above half a mile from the enemies Camp. On the sevententth of April Count
MANSFELD marshalled his Army, and marched against the Enemy; but they, having
advantage by reason of the countrey's situation, after a hot skirmish,
valiantly maintained on both A defeat.
sides, the Mansfeldians were forced to retire, with the loss of some few men.
TILLY grew proud with this success, persuading himself upon this retreat,
that he had already gotten the victory: whereupon he removed his Camp to
pursue them, crying out in great bravery; March on, they are all ours. The
weather was exceeding ^oule: yet TILLY used such diligence, 1622
as he planted two pieces of Ordinance, which shot into the Kings Army, but
did not much annoy it, for that he could not well discover it. The General
MANSFELD drew his Army out of Mingleshein, and put it in order of Battle
behind the Village. TILLY, finding that the Kings forces had left the Village,
imagined that they were fled for fear; the which he believed the more
confidently, for that Count MANSFELD had caused the Village to be set on fire,
only to blind the enemies sight, and to cover his army with the smoke until
it were put in battle. TILLY presently seized on the Village, and drew all his
forces over at a narrow Bridge to pursue the King of Bohemia's Army: which he
imagined to be fled, for that he could not well discover it.

The King's Army being in battle, he, and his General MANSFELD encouraged
the Soldiers to show some testimonies of their valor, whereof the King
himself would be a witness, resolving to fight in person: whereupon the
Vantguard marched on and charged valiantly; yet seeming a little to retire, the
enemy pu^sued them, and were so entertained by Count MANSFELD'S forces, as they
were forced to retire in confusion, hoping to save themselves by flight; but
the passage of the bridge was so narrow, as within less then half an hour
they were quite overthrown, and above 2000 men slain upon the place; where
the Enemy lost many Cornets and Ensigns, with four pieces of Ordinance, and
many prisoners taken. After this overthrow, the Bauarians which were left in
Garrison in Wishloch, Snitzen, Hilspach, and some other places, abandoned them
and sledde; of which there were 150 slain by the Marquess of Baden's
Soldiers, and three hundred taken prisoners.

On the 26 of April, General MANSFELD went to besiege Ladebourg; which,
having battered with 7 pieces of Ordinance, he summoned to yield by his
Trumpet: The Governor, Ladebourg besieged and taken by Mansfeld.
whose name was EINET, gave him thanks that he thought him worthy to be visited
by such an Army; yet he did not hold it fit to give up the Town so easily:
That he was tied by oath to the King of Spain, that he should defend it to the
uttermost of his power. MANSFELD, having received his answer, renewed his
battery, sending for 4 pieces more from Manheim, wherewith after 3 days battery
he made a reasonable breach. He then sent again to the Governor, giving him to
understand that unless he yielded, he would not spare the children in the mothers
wombs: whereunto he answered, that he had no womb, yet he would not refuse an
honest treaty, so as the Cannon might cease, that he might take counsel with
the soldiers; promising to yield it if he were not relieved within 4 days,
upon the same conditions that were granted to the Earl of Isenbourg at
Didesheim, or else that he should send Commissioners to treat, and he would do
the like: the which was performed accordingly. In the mean time the Governor
encouraged the soldies to have a care of their guard, and that the townsmen
with their wives and children should carry wood, stone and other provisions to
mend the breaches. During the treaty MANSFELDS soldiers pressed the garrison to
come unto them, if they would save their lives; wherefore seeing 7 Regiments
ready to give an assault, the soldiers neglecting their captains command, for
the most part went to them. BREDENBACH, who was sent from the Governor,
returning from MANSFELD, told him they would treat with him in person; who,
going out of the Port, and receiving the conditions, told them he would acquaint
the captains therewith but in the mean time seeing MANSFELD'S soldiers make a
violent assault at the breach, he protested against it, desiring they would
stay a little till he were retired into the town. WALDMANSHVS, who was
Co^missioner for MANSFELD, did his best to stay this furious assault, but in
vain: for being entered in troops, they slew all that bare Arms against them:
the spoil was great; having taken 8 Ensigns, store of Arms, and 10000 Ricks
dollers from the Spanish Co^missary, and then ruined the town. CHRISTIAN D. of
Brunswick and Bishop of Halberstad, greatly annoyed the Bishoprics of
Patterborne and Munster, his forces increasing daily: from the citizens of
Munster (where Bruswick gathers great sums of money ^n Westphalia.
he burnt S. MAVRICES Church, and other places without the town) he exacted
100000 Ricks-dollers: At S^sat he had 100000 dollers, besides a great quantity
of Hungarian gold, left there by a certain Bishop whose name was THEODORIC of
Furst^mberg. At Franc he intercepted 80000 dollers, belonging to the Abbess of
Herseens: but hearing that the Earl of Vandeberg was coming with great forces
to relieve them of Gise^, he was forced to raise the siege, having lost many
men. Of the money which he had gotten at Patterborne and in other places, he
caused new dollers to be coined: on the one side there was an Army coming out
of a cloud with a sword in the hand, and his name; on the other side an
inscription, whereby he professed himself a friend to God* and an Enemy to
all Papists.

Before his departure from Westphalia, he wrote unto the Bishop of Virsbourg
and Bamberg after 1622*
this manner: That he had long observed (not without admiration) how that
during these troubles The Duke of Brunswick writes to the bishop of Virsbourg.
in the Empire; against his faith given for Neutralitie, by the instinct of
Satan and the Jesuits his adherents, since that cloud in the Bohemian State,
he durst not only send his Army, remaining in his Diocese, into Bohemia, and
to ioyn with the Prince of Bauaria; but had endeavored by all means to ruin the
Protestants; which was done to no other end, but to establish the Spanish
Monarchy, decreed many years before, to oppress the liberty of the country
and the Protestant States, and to bring in the Council of Trent, with the
tyranny of the Inquisition. These counsels to the oppression of the Germane
liberty, were not to be suffered; wherefore he could not but advise him to
desist from those practices, and to call back his Army out of the lower
Palatinat; where they had committed many outrages upon wives and virgins: and
withal that he should remember, being a Scholar, that such tyrannies were
hateful to the Heathen; and that it was his duty* as a Pastor, to reclaim his
strayed sheep, rather by mild means and fair speeches, then by fire and
Sword: That this his passage into the lower Palatinat was not only contrary to
equity, but to the treaty of Vlme, confirmed by all the Princes of the Empire;
That his only end was to expel the lawful Electorall heir, and confer the
dignity on some which were removed by many degrees; whereby they might have
more voices in the Electorall College for the Bauarian party, and the
Protestant States with the liberty of Germany be the more oppressed: That he had
always disliked the Elector Palatines meddling with the affairs of Bohemia,
seeking to take the Crown from the Emperor; neither should he now allow, that
the Electorship should be taken from the Palatine, much less to cast oil into
the fire with such violence; aduising him to call back his army; with this
protestation, that he would do him all good offices if he gave credit to his
words; if otherwise he should suffer any one to be deprived of his
possessions, he would use all means of defense for the glory of God and the
liberty of Germany; calling God and posterity to witness, that whatsoever he had
done or should do* was for the peace of their common Country.

The Bauarians, after the above mentioned defeat at Mingelosheim, had their
revenge of the Marquess of Durlach* who lay apart with his Army between
Wimpfen and Heilbrun. TILLY, having sent to discover his (...)with CORDOVA'S
forces, on the 25 of April he seized on a wood and hill which was of great
advantage. Next day morning their cannon began to play on either side: but,
DVRLACH'S forces, lying in open field, were much annoied. Their Troops
encountered, and maintained the fight valiantly with equal loss, the Bauarians
still refreshing their men in the wood; which the Marquess his soldiers could
not do. After noon, ^ending some troops of horse to charge them, they were
repulst with such fury, that they were routed and put to flight: whereupon,
TILLY and CORDOVA marched against the Marquess his forces with 6 regiments of
foot and 800 horse; who attended them so resolutely, that they were forced to
retire again to the wood: but returning again with greater fury, they put his
horsemen to flight, the footmen still fighting valiantly: during which
conflict, certain carts laden with powder were by chance set on fire; which
greatly spoiled the Marquess his men, and was the loss of that days battle.
There was a Commander called HELMSTET, who maintained the fight to the very
end, and (as they write) had got the victory if he had been well seconded by
the horse. This battle continued from Sunrising till eight of the clock at
night; there being slain on both sides, as the report went, 5000 men, and 800
of the Marquess his men taken prisoners. The Spaniards opinion was of this and
of some former actions, that if they had been entertained in the beginning with
such encounters, they should never have been able to enter so far into Germany.

During these exploits in the Palatinate, the Town and Fort of Glats seized on
all the passages, repaired their Bulwarks, and fortified themselves with men
and Arms against any enemies invasion. The Elector of Saxony advised them
lovingly to submit themselves to the Emperors mercy; promising them by his
Letters, to obtain them a free pardon for all that was past: but the young
Earl of Thurn^ returned him this answer, that they could not give any credit
unto his promises; and therefore they were resolved to defend themselves to the
last gasp. After which, the Townes-men took down the roofes of their houses,
and covered them with earth, to prevent the danger of fire. And being supplied
with new Troops which came unto them after the yielding of Wintigaw, they made
a salie, and spoiled the Country four or five miles round about, carrying
away all the cattle and victualles into their Fort: and by night they
surprised Beurath, where there was a good garrison; whom they slew and set fire
on the Town.

At such time as Count MANSFELD was busy at the siege of Ladebourg upon the
River of 1622
Neccar, the Archduke LEOPOLD taking advantage of the time, thinking the other
busied, Haguenaw besieged in van by the Archduke Leopold.
marched with an Army of 7 or 8000 foot, 2000 horse, and six or seven pieces of
ordinance, and set himself down before Haguenaw, a Town belonging to the Bishop
of Spires, lying very fit for his passage into the Palatinate. Having made his
usual summon^ to yield, and the garrison refusing to parley, he fell to his
battery, seeking to get it before they should be relieved: and, for the
speedier effecting thereof, he wrote his Letters to them of Strasbourg,
requiring them to send him aid to force the Town. The Citizens (being very
wary) forbear to answer him presently: yet they sent him some victuals and
munition. Count MANSFELD had left within Haguenaw 4000 foot and 500 horse, who
defended it valiantly til they might advertise their General of the danger;
who upon the first advertisement posted out of the Palatinat with the king of
Bohemia and almost 20000 men to relieve the siege. His coming was very
seasonable: for, the enemy had gotten into the Town-ditches; so as it was
feared they could not have held it above two days longer. LEOPOLD, having
intercepted a Letter of advice which General MANSFELD had sent to the
Besieged, and finding by his scouts that his Army was on foot the 16 of May,
and seeing no possibility to take the Town suddenly, fearing to be hemd-in
betwixt the Kings Army, the river Rhine, and the town-garrison; he sent 1000
Croatian horse with some foot-companies to encounter him about Wisemberg, that
by this stay he might save the rest of his Army; with which he rose so
tumultuously, that the garrison salying forth, slew 5 or 600 of his men in the
trenches and rereward. They likewise who were sent against Count MANSFELD were
overthrown, and most of them slain or taken prisoners. The Archduke LEOPOLD
fled over the Rhine: many of his soldiers were slain in the flight: six
companies of horse retired into a wood; where, after 3 days hunger, they
yielded themselves to Colonel OBERNTRAVDE, and served the King. Some companies
^ed into Lichtenaw which they fortified, bringing with them six pieces of
ordinance from before Haguenaw: but they were in great fear of the Marquess
of Durlach; who although he had received an overthrow, and lost his baggage
and cannon, yet he drew together again his dispersed regiments, and swore the
companies he had cashierd before, to the king of Bohemia; so as he had again
an Army in field of 6000 foot and 1500 horse.

After the relief of Haguenaw, and the overthrow of the Archduke LEOPOLD'S
Army, Mansfeld seiseth on Darmstat.
Count MANSFELD retired with his Army to Germensheim, Frankendale and Manheim;
where putting the soldiers in hope that he would bring them to good pastures,
and leave all to their spoil, so as they would abstain from firing and murder;
upon the two and twentieth of May he with the King of Bohemia went with 16000
horse and foot to Darmstat, a Town belonging unto LODOVVICK, Lantzgraue of
Hesse; and having environed the Town by night, early in the morning they
summoned it to yield. The Inhabitants, being amazed at this sudden access,
opened their gates. The King's and MANSFELD'S guards being within the walls, the
one went to the Court, and the Kings to the Castle: the rest of the soldiers,
gaping for prey, spoiled the Town, Villages and the whole Country, driving away
their cattle, some to Hannow, and some to Frankfort; where the Burgers were
suffered to buy them on this condition, that they should restore them to their
owners, paying the same price. The misery and lamentation of the Inhabitants
was great, the soldiers sparing no man. Having continued 7 days in DARMSTAT'S
Country; MANSFELD, hearing that TILLY, who had bin supplied with 6000 men from
the Duke of Bauaria, came to encounter him with an Army of 20000 strong, he
thought it not fit to make any longer stay there, but retired the same way they
came, carrying the Lantzgraue LODOVVICK with them, who had sought to escape:
but being known, he was brought back again, and conducted to Manheim. This
Prince had been always a professed enemy to the King of Bohemia, and was the
chief instrument to make the accord between the Princes of the Union and
Marquess SPINOLA. He had always given passage and assistance to the Spanish
forces, and dissuaded the Marquess of Durlach and other Princes from taking
Arms under a color of desire of peace, and had persuaded the Inhabitants of
Heidelberg from their obedience and duty to their lawful Prince: for the which
reasons, the King took him ptisoner, and carried him to Manheim, suffering his
country (which was very rich and plentiful) to be spoiled by the poor and
hungry Soldiers; who were well relieved and the needy garrisons supplied with
store of Beeus, and sheep, and other necessaries.

CHRISTIAN Duke of Brunswick, making preparation to march toward the
Palatinate, the brute thereof was dispersed over the whole country; which
struck such a terror into the poor inhabitants, as they carried whatsoever
they had, good and precious, into Franckfort: To 1622
stop whose course; the Baron of Anhalt, marching speedily through the Countey
of Waldec and A great fear of Brunswicks coming down.
Hesse, came to Asch^ffenbourg; where he joined with the Bauarian and Spanish
forces: who spoiled both friend and foe. BRVNSVVICK, leaving Westphalia on the
6 of May, marched to the River of Vis^rgis, over which Colonel KNIPHVS had
built a bridge; where he passed with 82 Cornets of Horse, and 15000 foot,
leading captives with him some Jesuits, and a certain President. He was
followed by the Bishop of Cullens, the Duke of Newbourgs, and the Spanish
forces: but having no means to overtake him, for that all the bridges were
broken down; they returned, and in their way recovered Susat, Alten, and other
places in Westphalia. Approaching near unto the Elector of Saxonies country,
the Duke came with good troops of soldiers to Langesalt upon the Frontiers, to
prevent all danger, and to preserve his subjects from oppression. The Duke of
Brunswick, having received victuals, past quietly by the jurisdiction of Coburg
toward the Abbey of Fuldam; where he exacted from the Chapter 40000 dollers.
The Elector of Saxony, having freed his Frontiers from fear, entered into
Lipsick in great Pomp, with his royal Standard before him, bringing with him
Captain FISCHER prisoner, for that he had exceeded his Commission contrary to
the Edict, and had spoiled certain villages about Eysfeld, belonging to the
Elector of Mentz. This Captain had many good friends which did intercede for
him, especially FREDERICK a Duke of Saxony, who loved him much; yet he could
not so palliate the offense, but 3 of his chief officers were hanged.

His Majesty of great Britain, having (as I said before) resolved to send the
Lord CHICHESTER, Baron of Belface, into the Palatinate, to the Elector Palatine
his son in Law, to dispose The L. Chichester ariues at Manheim.
him to embrace this treaty of Peace now in hand at Brussels, and to remove all
lets and obstacles that might hinder it, or a suspension of Arms, which his
Majesty so much desired: about the end of May he arrived safely at Manheim;
whereat the king of Bohemia was much satisfied, and the poor soldiers greatly
rejoiced, hoping that the presence of such a person should supply all their
wants; where, after great welcome and entertainment, the king and his General
MANSFELD, returned to the Army; which, about the end of May, marched to
Achenburg, a town of the Bishop of Mentz lying above Franckfort, to meet with
BRVNSVVICK who as they heard was marching into Franconia: But ere he could get
to the river of Main, which of force they must pass, TILLY having a very strong
Army (being newly fortified with 6000 men from the Duke of Bauaria, and
supplied with the Infanta's horse-troops from GONZALES) had got before him; so
as he must of necessity fight or retire: for, BRVNSVVICK was not yet come to
the river, neither had any notice of the Kings being so near. Finally, it was
not held convenient to fight upon such disaduantages: for, the Country was very
poor, and not able to feed them; and the enemy was strong and very well
provided, which might endanger their Army: wherefore it was thought fit to
retire; which was done in so good order, that the King himself was much
commended. Notwithstanding all their diligence, yet the enemy followed them so
fast, that he ouertook them; and their horse made such way through and about
the woods, that they were forced to skirmish, the King going from place to
place to make head against the enemy. This continued about two days, the 30
and 31 of May. During these encounters of the horse, the foot retired to
Manheim, having lost not above 100 on either side: the horse skirmisht still;
wherein the King demeaned himself so bravely, as he drew on others by his
example to noble performances; where many Gentlemen were much praised for their
valor: among which Colonel OBERTRAVNT (Commander of the Palatines horse) and
Sir JOHN MANVVOOD of Kent (a Captain of a Troop of MANSFELD'S horse) were
specially noted. The report was, there were not above 200 slain, besides the
wounded and prisoners; so as TILLY had little cause to boast of this attempt,
where they lost so few men, and no baggage, in a retreat of 30 or 40 miles,
albeit the enemy made great matters of it; giving out, that MANSFELD lost above
2000, as both GOTARDVS and LONDORPIVS write; and that this encounter was at
their retreit from Darmstat: but it seems, ignorance or passion abused them.

In the beginning of May, the Emperor had caused his Letters to be set up in
the 3 Towns of Prague, commanding all men to acknowledge honor and respect to
the Prince of Lichtenstein, as The Emperors general pardon.
his Lieutenant and Vicegerent in the kingdom of Bohemia, and that they
should faithfully obey him, as if his Majesty were there in person; and on the
other side, the Prince should Minister Justice to all men indifferently, and
take them into his protection. On the next day a general pardon was proclaimed
throughout all Prague; but with this condition expressed, that no mention should
be hereafter made of any former offenses or transgressions; neither should
death be inflicted upon any man; yet such as during that time of Rebellion had
assisted the directors 1622
of Bohemia and the Count Palatine, or at the least had been partakers in the
Bohemia^ combustions, should within 3 weeks bring in their names to certain
Counselors appointed for that business, and attend their resolution; and then
(matters being duly considered) should pay a fine: yet such were expressly
excluded out of the pardon, who had bin particularly condemned before, and
whose names had been affixed upon the place of Justice.

The Emperor thi^ month made preparation for his journey to the States of
Hungary, having resolved to leave a garrison of 18 companies in Viena. The
citizens which dwelt in the high market The Emperor prepares to go^ into
Hungary.
place, refusing to receive this garrison into their houses, and thereby showing
their small devotion to the Emperor, the soldiers entered the lodgings which were
appointed for them, by force, with the consent and approbation of the
Magistrate. Hereupon the Provincial States of Austria came speedily to Vienna;
and, amongst other things, most humbly besought his Majesty that they might
hereafter live in Peace under the shelter of the Eagles wings: whereupon there
was a new treaty propounded for the leuying of money; but by reason of his
journey into Hungary, it was deferred. On the 18 of May, he began his Journey
with 2 regiments of foot, and 12 cornets of horse, having sent some Noblemen
and Counselors of Hungary before, to confer with the States, with this
express resolution; that if the Hungarians would not be forgetful of the Oath
they had taken, he would then show them all grace and favor: if otherwise, then
for the love of Justice, he would show them the Sword wherewith God had girt him.

About the 11 of May, certain Commissioners which had been sent to Prince
BETHLIN returned to Vienna; who aduertized his Majesty that BETHLIN showed
himself not only a good and devout Imperialist; but also faithfully persuaded
his Majesty not to disarm himself of those warlike preparations, lest the
Turkish Emperor should take an advantage of this treaty of Peace, and invade
the one or other party: whereunto the Emperors Commissioners replied; That
although his Majesty had greater and more difficult war, yet he was resolved to
conclude a firm and constant Peace with all his enemies; the which he had
often sought of many, but in vain: Which declaration did so please BETHLIN, as
he concluded* that now was the wished time that all his Majesty's subjects and
rebels, for love of their country, should ioyn with the sacred Roman Empire,
and thereby break and ruin all the Turkish forces. The Emperor parting from
Vienna, the 18 of May after the new style, on the 26 he came to Edenbourg with
his Empress and children, having a guard of 5000 horse and foot; where he was
received and brought into the town The Emperor enters into Od^ bourg: and his
propositions to the States of Hungary.
by the Hungarians: two days after, he made his propositions in Latin unto the
States. 1. His Imperial Majesty did persuade them to forget all hostility, and
to resolve on a general Peace, for the love of their country; to which end he
came to them in person. 2. That the Crown might be presently brought back again
to Presbourg, and there safely kept; to which end his Majesty would appoint
certain Commissioners. 3. That a Peace should be maintaind with the Turk and
other neighbor Princes; which his Majesty would endeavor to see effected, and
that such as should break the league might be duly punished. 4. That a law
might be made against such as should treat with the Turk or any other Enemy to
the prejudice of the kingdom. 5. If any hostile invasion should be made, then
the States should take care for defense. 6. That EMERICVS LIPTAGVS, STEPHANVS
DOTRIVS, and IAMIS RIMAIVS, should give an account of their Embassy to the
Turkish Emperor, to the intent the Peace might be the better kept. 7. All
goods taken away during the time of the Rebellion, should be presently
restored to their owners. 8. That the Germans (necessity so requiring) should
be lodged again upon the Frontiers, according to the provincial
constitutions; the which hereafter should be observed with more strict
discipline. 9. That they should consider by what means, the Dominions, which
had been delivered to BETHLIN Prince of Transiluania, should be reduced to the
Crown of Hungary. 10. That their late Letters of confederacy with their
Provincial orders, should be delivered unto his Imperial Majesty. 11. That
the houses should be numbered, and that every one should be bound to pay six
Hungarian florens, until the next Assembly of the States. 12. That Trees and
Timber should be fetched out of the nearest Woods, for the re-edifying and
repayring of the decayed Forts. 13. That Corn should be sent unto the
Frontier Forts, during these turbulent times. 14. That the Articles formerly
made should be renewed and duly observed against those which did ill entreat
Soldiers. 15. That whereas there was a general forgetfulness of all that was
past; the States; to show their love unto their lawful King of Hungary, should
make a Law against such as should attempt any thing to the prejudice of the
Country. 16. That a Law should be made for the restitution of such places as
were fit for the keeping of powder 1622
for his Majesty's necessity. 17. And whereas, during the Peace, Vaccia had
been delivered; therefore the States should have a care of the safety of the
Commonwealth, lest by this avulsion; the constitutions of the Provinces might
be endangered. 18. That the fortification near to Canisia might be provided
for; to which end, his Majesty promised to treat with the other Provinces. 19.
That the passage of the River of Iauerin might be cleansed, and the new Mills
demolished, which otherwise would be a hinderance unto the defense of the Fort.
20. That such Officers might be appointed for the administering of Justice as
should remain in a certain place.

During this assembly, BETHLIN Prince of Transiluania sent his Deputies, who
presented unto the Emperor a goodly horse, with other rich presents; he
himself then remaining at Cassouia, for that his wife CAROLA was newly dead:
Some wtite, that during the consultation touching the Emperors propositions,
among other things it was debated, that the Jesuits should be no more admitted
into Hungary, at least enjoy no Lands: And secondly that they would not only
have a general pardon, but a particular for the Ambassie they had sent to
Constantinople; and in the mean time the Emperor appointed a Commissioner to
fetch the Crown from Trentschin.

Let us now return again to the Palatinate, and observe what success
BRVNSVVICK Brunswick approaches the Palatinate.
has in his march thitherwards. It seeming by all circumstances that his Army
approached near unto the limitts of the City of Franckfort, there was great
store of treasure brought from the neighbor villages and towns, the which
might serve the owners to good purpose, many of them being fled to the City. On
the fourth of June his Army drew near to Vrsell, a Town belonging to the
Arch-bishoppe of Mentz; the Governor whereof (who was busy about the
fortification of the Town) holding his greatest safety to be in flight,
abandoned it, to the spoil of the Soldiers: After which, Colonel KNIPHVS
marched with one thousand five hundred shot, four troops of horse, two
pieces of Ordinance, and some Petards to Hoest, a town seated upon the Maine, a
mile from Franckfort; where he meant to make a bridge to join with MANDSFELDS
forces. Having invested the Town by night, in the morning the Garrison fell to
Arms, shooting continually at them, so as the Colonel was hurt in the left
arm; wherewith, being nothing amazed, he summoned them to yield: but seeing
them resolute, having lost above a hundred men, he sent presently to the Duke
of Brunswick for more forces; the which the Townes-men seeing approach, they
grew amazed and fled presently to the watergate, where they all (with their
wives and children, and the best of their substance) past the Maine; some going
to Mentz, some to Franckfort: whereupon they entered the Town and Castle. The
next day the Army came thither: In the mean time TILLY and CORDOVA, lying at
Ashaffenbourg with an Army of thirty thousand men at the least, they sent two
hundred foot, and two troops of horse, by night, to relieve Hoest, but they
were met withal and defeated by BRVNSVVICK'S Troops.

On the seventh of June they passed the Maine toward Franckfort: The Duke of
Brunswick, hearing of the Enemies march, sent to Count MANDSFELD, to let him
understand in what posture he stood; resolving that he would continue so still,
until he might march unto him: for whose passage or his own retreat (if he
were forced) he prepared a bridge over the Maine. Count MANDSFELD received
these news as he was marching with a design to break the bridge at
Oppenheim; or (that failing) to make some other diuersion, thereby to draw
GONZALES homewards; commanding threescore Cornets of horse to march presently
toward the Duke, meaning himself to follow after the rest of his Army: but he
was stayed by contrary news of his overthrow as you shall hear.

On Whitsonday, the soldiers having burned many villages thereabouts, the
Bauarians marched with 15 Regiments of foot, 140 Cornets of horse and 18
pieces of Ordinance: In Brunswick defeated by the Bauarians at Hoest
the mean time, the Duke of Brunswick encamped himself, and sent some of his
carriages over the bridge. The enemy approaching his Camp, the fight began
presently, and continued six hours: the Bauarians had 18 pieces of Ordinance
fitly placed, which did much annoy his horse: BRVNSVVICK had but three, whereof
one was broken in the beginning, and another was made unserviceable by the
enemies Cannon; so as they could not make the fight good, notwithstanding that
his foote-men fought valiantly. The Duke, by the advice of his commanders,
retired himself: whereupon, the whole Army fell into confusion, and fled
presently toward the bridge: where, by reason of the narrowness thereof, many
were turned into the river, and drowned. The Bauarians durst not pursue them
which fled, fearing some stratagem. 1622
The Duke of Brunswick waded through the river with five troops of horse: they
lost most of their baggage, and many of the soldiers in their flight threw
away their Arms: which was a very great loss. The number of the dead was
uncertain, for that many both of horse and foot were drowned in the passage
of the river: But the loss had been far greater, if the Bauarians had had
any horse to pursue them on the other side of the river. They had no great
cause to brag of this victory, there being three strong Armies joined against
one, and having six times as much Ordinance. The Duke came to Mainheme; and,
gathering together his scattered troops after this loss, mustered 5000 horse
and 8000 foot. TILLY, retiring after this defeat toward Frankfart, caused a
bridge to be built by Steinheym, to passhis army over the river of Maine: which
being finished, they divided their Armies. TILLY went to Schrise, a fort which
he had taken upon the river of Neccar: and Don CORDOVA encamped at Ladenbuurg;
where making a bridge, Heidelberg was in a manner blockt up; without any
hostile attempt.

Whilst the Emperor continued at Edenbourg (during the assembly of the States
of Hungary) An A^bassadour from the King of Denmark to the Emperor.
there arrived an Ambassador from the King of Denmark, to intercede again for
the restitution of the Elector Palatine to his hereditarie Countries and
dignities; entreating his Majesty, that (for his fatherly affection to the
Commonwealth and his innocent subjects) he would change his mind (preferring
clemency before rigor) and suffer the Elector Palatine to be reconciled unto
him. That he had often showed himself ready, both to him and the States of the
Empire, to renounce the crown of Bohemia both for himself and his heirs; and
to yield all due obedience unto his Imperial Majesty; so as he might enjoy his
hereditarie possessions with the Electorall dignity, and recover that which had
been taken from him. But if his Majesty thought that his offenses were such as
they could not so easily be pardoned, and that he had cause sufficient to
prosecute the execution of the proscription; yet he could not but let him
understand, that in these extremities whereas the public safety was in danger,
it was not needful to proceed according to the rigor of the law; but,
remember that worthy saying of an Ancient, It is not necessary I should do
all things according to mine own will. Wherefore he could not but entreat his
Majesty again (seeing that the Elector Palatine was ready upon the former
conditions to make his renunciation, submission, and satisfaction) that he
would in the end vanquish himself, and forget his conceived displeasure
against him, for the good of the Commonwealth; whereby he should free many
thousands from death and despair; he should make an end of war and the
deuastation of countries; settle peace and the public quiet, and restore the
Commonweal to life; being now in the very agony of death; and as it were
breathing out her soul: And, to conclude, he should so bind all his Noblemen
and subjects, yea and his very enemies unto him, as they would not only be
ready to employ their lives and fortunes in all causes of necessity, but would
also pour forth their vows and prayers for his health and safety.

The Emperor, in his answer to this Danish Ambassador, made an ample relation
of all the The Emperors answer unto the Danish Ambassador.
proceedings of the Bohemians, and of the combustions which had happened there
since the year 1618, as he had formerly done to others: That, notwithstanding
the great victory which he had got at Prague, he had not changed his mind,
which was always enclyned to peace: That he had appointed diverse assemblies of
the Electors and Princes; meaning to assist there in person for the settling of
a general peace: the which had been disappointed by Count MANDSFELD; who,
leauying new forces in the upper Palatinate, had entered into the confines of
Bohemia, meaning to infest it again, if he had not opposed the Duke of Bauaria
against him: That both he and CHRISTIAN Duke of Brunswick had committed many
outrages in Alsatia and Westphalia: That the Elector Palatine could not excuse
himself of these proceedings; which were no signs of repentance, but of
obstinate malice: yet he had sent the Earl of Swartsenberg to the King of
great Britain, to acquaint him with the conditions whereby a suspension of
Arms might be obtained; the which he had referred to the Infanta of Spain
remaining at Brnssels. Yea, he had been content, that the Electors and Princes
should meet touching this business: Yet, in the mean time, before he could
receive their conclusions, FREDERICK Elector Palatine, neglecting the Treaty
(which his father in law had so often desired) came again into the Empire, and
joined with MANDSFELD and others, to the end they might invade the Territories
of the Electors and Princes which had been faithful unto him. Whereby the
King of Denmark might well perceive, with what patience he had endured these
affronts: finally, when he should receive advice from his Ambassador at
Brussels what was fit to be done touching this desired treaty, he would so
resolve, that the King should find that his interposition 1622
was not in vain.

The Ambassador, seeming not well satisfied with the Emperors answer, upon a
second audience The Ambassadors reply to the Emperor.
gave him to understand, that his Master would not make any question to the
troubles of Bohemia, nor the punishing of such as were the motives: but seeing
that his Imperial Majesty had now recovered this his Kingdom with the
incorporated Provinces, part by force, part by treaty, his King did aim at
nothing more than to see an end of this war and misery, that peace and
tranquillity might be restored with due obedience to his Majesty, all offenses
forgotten, and perfect love and trust confirmed among the States; that there
was nothing wanting in the Elector Palatine, who was ready to make his
renunciation and an honest satisfaction, desiring nothing but his own
hereditary Countries and Electorall dignity, as he enjoined them before the
troubles; that it was apparent to all the world, that the Duke of Bauaria alone
labored to expel him by force from his hereditary right, contrary to the
treaty of Vlm. If the Palatin according to the law of nature had used any
defense, or sought means to preserve his subjects lives, and those poor
possessions which yet remained, from cruel subversion, such as that of
Neccargemond (where they used barbarous cruelty against innocent women and
children) he was not to be blamed; neither was it to be reputed a new crime of
obstinacy and rebellion against his Majesty, if in his defense there had been
some wrong done (as soldiers can hardly contain themselves within their
bounds) to them of Strasbourg, it was that whereof the King of Denmark
complained, that the sparks of this fire did flee into the neighbor Provinces;
and if it were not speedily quenched, all Germany would be on flame, and in a
manner reduced to ashes. He did not doubt but those Provinces, which had
suffered some loss, had given counsel and assistance against the Palatine;
that SPINOLA, General for the King of Spain, had been a great cause thereof,
who had done great wrongs to MAVRICE Lantzgraue of Hesse, to the Countess of
Hannow, to an innocent pupil, the Count Palatine LODOVVICK the Electors
brother, and to diverse Imperial Towns; that he would not be troublesome to
his Majesty with a commemoration of those calamities, but would only entreat
him not to blame the Palatin if he had sought to protect his subjects, nor to
think he had done any thing contrary to the promise of the King of great
Britanne; being ready to accommodate himself to any friendly Treaty, so as he
might not be forced to submit himself to the Duke of Bauaria and the Catholic
League, to the ruin of his Country, and blemish of his dignity. Wherefore the
King of Denmark did hope, that the Emperor would give way to so many
intercessions; that he would forget what had past in the troubles of Bohemia;
that he would not tax the Palatine with any new crime, nor spoil him of his
Country and Electorall dignity: whereby the Protestants minds might be much
distempered, if, seeing all other men pardoned which had been partakers in
those troubles, and that BETHLIN (who had marched in the same steps with the
Palatine, if not worse) had been admitted to a friendly composition without any
intercession, and diverse Principalities and Earldoms granted to him during his
life; but to the Palatine all favor was denied, and a cruel revenge exercised
against him: this might easily breed jealousy in the Protestants, as if there
were some other matter intended to their prejudice by his oppression; and the
rather, for that it was commonly spoken, that the Electorall dignity was
conferred upon the Duke of Bauaria, which might be the cause of new
combustions; that his Majesty should not give credit to such turbulent men who
regarded only their own private profit, nor think that by the defeat at
Wimpfen the Palatines forces were so weakened, as he should not be able to find
means to defend himself; that MANSFELD could not be drawn to leave his
Master by the rigor of Proscriptions, but had made head against the forces of
the Bauarians with a good Army, and had beaten them at Visl^ck; that no enemy
whatsoever was to be contemned; that if all hope of reconciliation were taken
away, and (the title of rebels continued) they were brought to despair, his
Majesty might well conceive what calamities were to be feared, seeing that the
war (increasing since the Treaty of Vlmes) seemed to threaten all estates.
Wherefore he besought the Emperor, that seeing the Palatine showed himself
willing to renounce the Kingdom of Bohemia and the incorporated Provinces, he
would show him grace at the request of the King his Master and the Elector of
Saxony, who did likewise intercede for him: whereby there might be hope of his
restoring to his former dignity and inheritance; that the King would willingly
send an Ambassador to this Treaty, with instructions whereby it should plainly
appear, that whatsoever he had done was out of a sincere love to settle peace,
and to maintain the dignity of his Imperial majesty. Touching CHRISTIAN Duke
of Brunswick* the king his Master had understood by vulgar relations, that he
had made an irruption into Westphalia, and had taken diverse places, but 1622
he had not hard of his Tyranny. That what he had done was out of his mere
love and pity to the Palatine, his wife and children, being so near allied
unto him in blood, and dispossessed of all their States: wherefore, he
entreated the Emperor not to take any severe counsels against this Duke; but
rather to use lenity and mildness in respect of his youth and other
circumstances, whereby he might draw him to better counsels, and make trial
of his fidelity and valor, either against the sworn enemy of Christendom, or
in some other good occasion.

The Emperor hereunto made this answer; That what-so-euer had been attempted
The Emperors answer to the Ambassador.
by force in the Palatinate, was done by his commandment, and by the virtue of
his Commission. That the Army which was then in the Palatinate was to be
accounted the Emperors: so as whatsoever was attempted against it by the
Palatine or his commanders, was to be held done against his person. That he
persisted constant in his first resolution, touching a treaty of peace: wherein
he hoped all long disputations should be avoided, according unto the desire of
the King of Denmark, promising withal that he would have a respect unto his
(...).

During this Embassy, The Elector of Saxony wrote Letters unto the Emperor,
whereby The Elector of Saxony interceedes for the Palatine.
he gave him to understand, that he had been requested by the King of Denmark,
to be a suter unto his Majesty, for the reconciliation of FREDERICK Elector
Palatine, who seemed ready to renounce the Kingdom of Bohemia for him and his
heirs; to make his submission and give satisfaction. Having therefore found by
diverse Letters and Embassies sent unto him, that his Majesty was wholly inclined
to settle a wished peace, and had referred the whole business to the Infanta of
Spain, lying at Brussels, whereby all Acts of hostility might cease, or at
least a cessation of Arms be concluded, that they might proceed in their
treaty, and the faithful States be freed from further danger; and seeing the
King of Denmarks love and affection to his Imperial Majesty, and the public
peace; he thought it his duty to employ his best endeavor for the pacifying of
all troubles and combustions in the Empire, neither could he forbear to assist
this his commendable design by his Letters. That he held it very necessary
and high time that a peace were settled in the Empire; which could by no means
be effected, unless the Spring of all troubles were stopped and the fire
quenched. Wherefore he entreated his Majesty not to suffer this intercession of
the King of Denmark to be without fruit, but that he would vanquish himself;
and as the Palatine seemed ready to make a renuntiation and submission, so in
like manner he would suffer him to be reconciled unto him: whereby he should
preserve the love and affection of the King of Danmark, make an end of all
those miseries, settle a peace in the Empire, and purchase immortal thanks and
glory with all the States of the Empire and posterity.

About this time, those of Glats surprised the Town of Wunselburg: in the
which, were five companies of foot belonging to the Prince of Lichtenstein,
whereof they slew the greatest part; some few flying to Brun. In like manner,
they of Clingenberg, being besieged by the Imperialists, made a salie and slew
many of their soldiers. About the same time 5000 Cossacks came and offered
their service to the Emperor; they sat down within two miles of Glats,
bringing great spoils with them: of which, they of Glats took a great part
from them; CHARLES Bishop of Nisse, the Emperors brother, sending them word he
had no need of their service: yet they continued their course, and marched
toward the Duke of Bauaria, spoiling the Town of Glatta in Bohemia as they
passed.

The united States hearing that the Countries of Iuliers and Mounts (which are
a part of Demandes made by the united States to the countries of Iulitrs and
Mounts*
the circle of Westphalia, and subject to the Empire) had given great
assistance to the Spaniards, they sent an Ambassador to Dusseldorf with these
demandes following: That they should pay them one hundred thousand dollers
within three weeks, or expect the like that had been done in Brabant; That
they should make yearly paiement unto the States of half their profits. That
they should receive no Spanish garrisons into their towns as they had done the
last winter. That they understood, they had maintained the king of Spaines
forces without any charge to him; the which if they should do again this
winter, they would burn all their Towns and villages: And lastly that they
should give them as great a quantity of oats as they had done to SPINOLA.

TILLY having taken the Castle of Ladebourg without any great toil, upon the
21. of June Heidelberg besieged by Tilly.
he marched toward Heidelberg: and finding that the Town and Castle might be
annoyed from a near place which they call the holy Hill; he presently seized
upon it, and soon after took a fortification, which for some considerations
had been abandoned, and in a manner cast down by them of Heidelberg; from
whence they began to shoot against the Town: and coming 1622
down the Hill, they began to fortify against the bridge which went over the
Neccar, and to take in if they could, and withal to disturb the besieged if
they should attempt to recover the Fort upon the Hill; but they were forced to
desist from their attempt, by their continual shooting from the Castle. There
were diverse salies and Military exploits for some days together, with loss to
either side; they within having a Captain with thirty seven footmen and two
horsemen slain, besides such as were wounded. The Bauarian lost some hundreds
of his soldiers with one Captain, there being above 100 of them carried
prisoners into the Town. In the mean time two of MANSFELDS Captains, being
shut into the Town, and having no means to return unto their Army, had
drawn together a troop of 300 foot, and eighty horse of the Mansfeldians
and others, who lying sick there had recovered their healths; these men salied
forth daily, and never returned without some prey. TILLY, finding he should
do little good beyond the River of Neccar, on the 28 of June raised his camp,
and returned to Lawdebourg with his Army: where passing the River, he marched
to the other side of the Town; and put his Army in battle, showing himself
ready to fight, but to no effect: only he made the Town Gardes sometime
retire, as they did his, his soldiers spending the time in gathering up the
corn, and spoiling and burning the neighbor Villages.

In the meanetime, LODOVVICK of Darmstat Lantsgraue of Hesse was released from
his Lodowick of Hassia sent house to his Country.
imprisonment before the coming of two Ambassadors from the Elector of Saxony,
and from MAVRICE, Lantsgraue of Hesse: the conditions of his dismission were,
That he should labor to procure the peace of Germany; That he should do his
best endeavor for the restitution of the Palatinate, and other jurisdictions
belonging unto the Elector FREDERICK: That he should attempt nothing in hostile
manner against the Electour or his subjects during these troubles; and that he
should not seek any revenge for that which had been formerly done. Having
accepted and allowed of these conditions (so as they might not prejudice the
hereditarie contracts which he had with other Electors and Princes) he
presently returned to Darmstat the first of July. At the same time the
Marquess of Durlach gave over Arms and resigned his troops to the Baron of
Helmstat.

Count MANDSFELD and the Duke of Brunswick, having joined their forces
together, Count Mansfeld and Brunswick go into Alsatia.
left the Palatinate (being wholly wasted and not able to feed their Armies)
and marching into Alsatia, they passed by Strausbourg, and in the way took
diverse Towns belonging to the Bishops jurisdiction, whereof they spoiled and
burnt some and ransomed others, from whom they exacted great sums of money
besides other supplies of corn, wine and other victuals for the relief of
their Army.

The Lord CHICHESTER Baron of Belface, being sent by his Majesty of great
Britanie (as you formerly heard) to his son in law the Elector Palatine, to
dispose him to retire out of the Palatinate, and to lay down Arms in regard
of the present treaty of peace; being also pressed by Letters from the King of
Denmark, who had much labored his reconciliation with the Emperor, and had
consulted with some States of the Empire; he thought good to advise him to
desist from Arms and dismiss his forces, setting down certain conditions,
whereby they hoped this difficult business might be compounded.

The Elector (by the advice and counsel of the King his father in law, and the
persuasions of the King of Denmark) not only raised the siege from ELSAS
ZABARIN, but also freed the Army from their oath; as may appear by this
attestation which was made in the Camp, the 13 of July: He could not but
confess (said he) That his worthy General and Lieutenant general, The Elector
^reeth the Army from their oath.
the Earl of Mansfeld, with his Kinsman CHRISTIAN Duke of Brunswick, with all
their Colonels, Captains and Officers, together with the whole Army of horse
and foot, had hitherto faithfully discharged their duties: but, being now
destitute of all means to entertain them any longer, so as they should not be
able hereafter to continue in their fidelities and duty, He would not therefore
blame them for that they had required an honest dismission; but did willingly
grant it, and declared them freed from their oath, and that they might now
freely take what course they in their discretion should think fittest for their
good and safety.

GOTHARDVS writes, that Count MANDSFELD (having received this attestation Count
Mansfeld offers his service to the Emperor.
from the Elector) wrote unto TILLY, sending him a copy thereof, letting him
understand that both he, the Duke of Brunswick, and the whole Army were
discharged from the Elector: so as being now their own men and at liberty,
moved out of love and affection unto the Emperor they were ready to serve
him, if they might be sure of the remainder of their pay: or if his Majesty had
no need of his service, the proscription being taken away and a pardon granted
for his former offenses, he would speedily depart out of the lymits of the
Empire: yet I dare 1622
not warrant the truth hereof. The Assembly of the Provincial States in
Hungary continued still: in the which, they showed themselves very willing to
give the Emperor content; and among others, they concluded these Articles
following. That all persons as well Ecclesiastical as Secular, should be
restored to their goods, which had been taken away during the time of the
rebellion. That aid should be given unto his Imperial Majesty against his
enemies. That the Germans should be received into garrison, for the defense of
the frontier towns* and that the Empress should be crowned Queen of Hungary;
to which end the Emperors Commissioners should be presently sent to fetch the
Crown to Edinbourg, whereby the Assembly might be concluded* In the mean
time, Clingenberg, with the Town and Castle, was yielded to the Emperors
devotion, upon certain conditions: which don, the Garrison departed with their
baggage, and other troops entered for the Emperor: and at the same time the
Earl of Holoch was reconciled to the Emperor; and the Electorall Diet,
appointed at Ratisbone or Rainsbourg, was deferred until the first of October.

The States of Hungary, to show their devotion to the Emperor, resolved to have
his Empress The Empress crowned Queen of Hungary.
crowned Queen of Hungary upon the 26 of July; for the which, there was great
preparation made. The Hungarian Crown had been carried by BETHLIN GABOR from
Presbourg to Trentschin (as you have formerly heard) the which was now brought
back with a troop of 1000 Germans and Hungarians horse and foot: it was
carried with great solemnity in a Caroach, having many Noblemen both of the
Emperors Court and Hungarians going before and after it, with trumpets in
front. Being come to the house where the Crown was to be kept, presently the
Archbishop of Iauerin, the Lord Palatine TVRSO, with many other Noblemen
Hungarians, received it with great honor, from certain Haydukes, and carried
it into the house. Before they came unto the said place, the citizens stood on
the one side in Arms, and the Haydukes (being Armed after their manner) on the
other. The next day the Crown was brought forth into the Court and publikly
showed, being found whole and untouched.

On the day appointed for this ceremony, the Emperor went with great pomp
unto the Franciscan Church: before him marched the Gentlemen and Noblemen of
the Court, with some Knights of the Goulden fleece: then followed four Bishops
in their Episcopal habits, and six other in their ordinary attire: then came
there five Heralds: and then followed the Emperor with his Kingly Diadem, on
his head; the Earl of Solmes carrying the regal Ball, BRVNO Earl of Mansfeld
the scepter, and the Baron of Locenstin the sword; Next to the Emperor
followed STANESLAVS TVRSO, the Palatine of Hungary, who carried the Hungarian
Diadem, SETSCHIVS the regal Ball, and ESTERHASIVS the scepter: and, last of,
all came the Empress with her train and the Emperors guard. Coming into the
Church, the Archbishop of Iauerin was appointed to perform the ceremony: who,
after the ending of Mass, anointed her upon the right Arm, between the elbow
and the hand, and likewise upon the face: which done, she was conducted by the
Earl of Ditrichstein and the Countess of Porcia, into the Vestrie; where she
was attired with rich robes: and then coming forth, the foresaid Noblemen went
before her with the Crown, Scepter and Ball. Coming to the Altar, and falling
upon her knees, the Archbishop anointed her again. Then came there another
Bishop and set her own Crown upon her head, and so departed: after which, the
Archbishop returned; and taking the scepter, he put it into her right hand, the
regal Ball into her left; and the Crown of Hungary he set upon her right
shoulder: which as it seems is their manner when they crown a Queen: the
which, after some small pause, was taken off and set upon the Altar.

The ceremony being ended, the Queen taking her own crown, and carrying the
scepter and Ball in her hands, went to her appointed seat: after which they
returned with great joy and pomp in the same manner they came, the Palatine
often showing the Hungarian Crown to the people.

Count MANSFELD, and the D of Brunswick, having retired their forces out of the
Palatinate, and being discharged from the Elector Palatine king of Bohemia's
service, as you have heard; TILLY and CARDOVA remaining still there with great
forces, having no enemy able to make head against them, they had a fair
opportunity to attempt any thing they pleased, General VERE having work
enough, to man, fortify, and munition the Towns of Heidelberg Manheim and
Frankendale with some few others which remained yet untaken, and were commanded
by him under our Kings Majesty's protection. He therefore neglected not any
thing that might either hinder the enemy in his designs, or auail himself in
his defense; and therefore commanded the Gouerner of Gemersheim to seize on all
the boats he could upon the river Rhi^e, and burn 1622
them, lest the enemy should make use of them for bridges or some other
design: and those Troops which the Marquess of Durlach had cashiered when he
retired himself, the General entertained.

The Elector Palatine, King of Bohemia, having discharged his Army (as we have
formerly Mansfelds proceeding after his discharge.
related) retired himself to Sedan to the Duke of Bouillon, his uncle. Count
MANSFELD and the Duke of Brunswick in the mean time left Alsatia and the
Territories of Strasbourg, sending to the Duke of Lorrain to demand passage
through his Country: the which was granted either for love or fear; yet it
struck a great terror into the poor inhabitants, who fled with their goods into
the walled Towns, fearing the insolency of disordered soldiers, which can
never be kept in discipline where there wants pay: and therefore their
Commanders are often forced to give way to their spoils and violences. This
Army passing through Lorrain and the Bishopric of Metts, they entered upon the
edge of Champagne in France, sitting down by Mouson a small Town belonging to
the French King upon the river of Meuse, having put all the Countries round
about in alarm, and caused them to stand upon their guard; whom we will at
this time leave for a while.

The Marquess of Durlach, soon after his giving over Arms, had a great
disaster fallen upon him: for, certain Troops of Croatians and Cossacks,
coming from the Bauarian, entered his Durlach his country spoiled.
Country, spoiled where they came, and put all to fire and sword. They not
only wasted and consumed the corn in their Barns, but also that which stood
upon the ground, the husbandmen being fled, and not daring appear to reap it:
they also did beat out the heads of their wine-vessels, pouring it on the
ground; after which insolences they made an incursion toward the duke of
Virtembeag's Country: where, as many as they took of the country people, they
barbarously mangled and slew, not sparing the very infants.

The Hungarians having had many treaties in the provincial Assembly, there
were these heads following offered to the Emperor by the Noblemen to be
confirmed: that there should be free exercise of religion under both kinds, by
what name soever it should be called, and that the Palatine of Hungary should
have authority to punish the Bishops if they should attempt any thing to the
contrary; secondly, that the Emperor should have power to put Germans in
garrison into the frontier Towns and Forts, giving order for their sufficient
pay, and where they should receive it, lest they should be enforced to fall to
spoil, and thereby waste the Country; if otherwise, they would then place
Hnngarians upon the Frontiers, yet under the Emperors command: thirdly, that
the coin should be reduced to the ancient value; whereby the Hungarians might
traffic more commodiously with the Turks, and the subjects should not be so
oppressed by the Magistrates: fourthly, that all grieuances (whereof they had
often complained) might be taken away and redressed.

To these four heads the Emperor made answer, first, that they should have
free exercise of religion, were it Caluenian, Lutheran, or any other: but he
had no power over the clergy in spiritual matters; that they should try if
they could obtain that power from the Pope, to whom would he write touching
that business: secondly, that he could not excuse the drawing away of the
Germans from the Frontiers by the Princes and States of the Empire, who
supplied the charges for the defense of the Frontiers against the incursions of
the Turk: yet it would be dangerous, that they being drawn away would be
forsaken if the Turk should make any sudden irruption; but they should have two
Noblemen, Hungarians, resident in his Court and of his Council, who should
have a care that the contributions of the Empire should not be imploid to any
other use than the defense of the Frontiers of Hungary: thirdly, that touching
the reduction of moneys to their old values, his revenues had been so miserably
wasted in the charges of the Court, that they were not able to entertain the
soldiers; but there should be a care taken for the restitution and reforming
thereof, as soon as the troubles of the Empire were pacified: fourthly,
touching the grieuances of the Empire (whereof they complained) they had not
been taken away, compounded nor redrest by any former King; yet if his
Imperial Majesty should find, that they were such as concerned that Kingdom
only, and no other Provinces, he would be pleased that twelve of the Nobility
of Hungary should be chosen; who, conferring with the Palatine, all grieuances
(according to the constitutions of the Kingdom) should be examined by them,
abrogated and compounded; promising, that he would not contradict their
answers, but allow of their resolutions.

After MANSFELD'S departure out of the limits of the Empire; the Bauarians
being now Masters in a manner of the whole Palatinate, and having no enemy to
cross their designs, 1622
took Frisseisheim, Winsnig, Newstad and some other places, without any great
opposition. The Bishop Hagenau and Spire taken by Leopold.
of Spire in like manner recovered some Towns belonging to his jurisdiction:
and the Archduke LEOPOLD, being advertised of his departure, came with his
Army out of the upper Alsatia, and recovered Hagenaw; from whence he went to
Spire: where the Bishop entering on the 9 of August on horseback with two
companies of foot and one of horse, within few hours after he arrived with
great troops; to whom the Magistrates of the City presented wine as they had
done to TILLY.

After which, the Senate, submitting themselves to the devotion of the
Emperor, did p^ in a new garrison and discharged the old, causing the
citizens to bring all their (...)into the Court. Presently after, they went to
besiege Germesheim: which they battered with their cannon, and the Besieged in
the beginning defended themselves valiantly; yet, finding no hope of any
relief, they offered to treat: but in the mean time, the Croatians, on the 14
of August, getting over the walls, made a cruel slaughter of men, women and
children; mea^g The cruelty of the Croatians.
to leave none living if the Archduke LEOPOLD had not restrained their fury by
a severe Edict. And, not long after, Worms, which had supplied the soldiers
of the Bauarian and Spanish Armies with great store of victuals, was also
surprised by the Archduke LEOPOLD, to the great loss of the Citizens; where
the old garrison was discharged and a new brought in.

All things tending to ruin and desolation in the Palatinate, about the same
time an Edict was made in Bohemia, and proclaimed by CHARLES, Duke of Silesia,
concerning the goods An edict touching the goods (...)which were ^bed in
Bohemia.
of such as had been proscribed and banished; That whereas, in the year 1620,
commandment had bin made in the Emperors name, to all the subjects of
Bohemia, of what estate or dignity soever, that were any way indebted to those
Rebels and turbulent persons, by whose fault the kingdom had received an
incomparable loss, and was brought in a manner to utter ruin, or that had in
their possession any gold, plate, or other moueables, by way of trust,
borrowing, or other title, or did know were in the hands of any other, should
presently without any delay deliuerin their names and discover them: and
whereas many offending against this express Edict of his Imperial Majesty
(not carrying themselves like faithful subjects, but rather fra^dulently
consenting with those pernicious Rebels and enemies) had not been conformable
nor satisfied the contents thereof, but neglected the payment of those debts,
according to the Tenor of that and other Edicts; he had therefore good and
sufficient cause to proceed to the execution of all their goods moveable or
immovable: yet, to the end no man should have cause to complain of wrong, he
would out of mere favor and grace forbear the execution thereof; giving a
strict command in the Emperors name, to all the Subjects of Bohemia, that if
they had discovered any debts or goods belonging to those Rebels, and had not
brought them into the Treasury, or had dissembled them, and not discovered
them to himself or some others who had that business in charge; that now,
within one month after the publication of the said Edict, they should bring,
or cause to be brought, the said debts or goods committed to their charge, into
the Emperors Exchequer: If any one, neglecting this favor, should continue
obstinate, or presume in any sort to alienate the goods of these Rebels thus
condemned, or hereafter to be condemned, he should presently be censured to
pay a Fine, thrice as much as the value.

On the fifteenth of August, the Emperor with his Empress returned from the
States of The Emperors judgment touching the Marquisate of Ba^.
Hungary, to Vienna, with great content: where, soon after, a cause depending
betwixt the eldest son of EDWARD Marquess of Baden, against the Marquess
of Durlach and Baden, was heard before his Majesty; whereas the said son of
EDWARD, demanded to have the upper Marquisate granted unto him in Fee. This
cause had been long in question, and the parties were now commanded to appear
in Court: where the Emperor sitting in his Imperial Throne, the Vice
Chancellor of Vlmes made a speech, showing that his Majesty was ready to
discharge his duty, and to administer Justice to all men; especially to widows
and Pupills. And whereas the cause had been long debated before three
Emperors, and the Tutors of the dispossessed Pupills of the Marquess of Baden
had been humble suitors to have the cause decided (diverse Kings, Electors, and
Princes, having been also intercessors unto his Majesty in that behalf) he
would no longer defer it; and the rather, for that the Defendant sought many
delays, and would have more time spent to inform his Majesty's ^etter. He had
therefore caused all the Acts to be viewed by his Council: which done, the
sentence, which was to be pronounced by the Secretary, was concluded by all
their 1622
consents. His speech being ended, the Imperial Secretary read the sentence
publicly; which contained, That the Marquess of Durlach the defendant should
not only yield and restore the upper Marquisat, with all the fruits received
and to receive, to the heir of EDWARD, but also pay him all the charges of the
suit; A heavy sentence for this poor Prince after the ruin of his Country
and so great losses: but, I doubt not but his willingness to assist the
Elector Palatine in his just defense of the Palatinate, did make the Emperor
so willing to proceed unto judgment, whereby he has now in a manner ruined
another Protestant Prince.

Let us now return to Count MANSFELD, who had encamped some weeks near unto
Mouson. Mansfelds course going into the low countries
The world expecting what course he would take, every man spoke of him
according to his fancy. Some said he was a soldier offortune; that he had
more ambition in him then Religion: That he would serve him that should offer
him the fairest conditions, and that he had offered himself to the State of
Venice, to the Duke of Sauoy, to the Duke of Bouillon, and them of the Religion
in France, to the French King and to the united States. It was generally given
out, that he should serve the French King upon very noble conditions; with
which supposition, he sought to satisfy his discontented Soldiers who were
ready to mutine, telling them that he expected a messenger from the King;
whereof there was some likelihood, having treated with some of his Ministers.
This did somewhat pacify his Soldiers; yet there were many which would not
enter into the kings pay. And to make the Inhabitants of Mouson the more
confident, he put his Ordinance into their Town, desiring them to assist him
with some victuals for his Army, for that he was to follow the King. Whereupon
the Townsmen, giving credit to his words, sent him out presently Corn to
refresh his Troops; but in the mean time he contracted secretly with the
States of Holland, and entered into their pay.

The Earl being come to Mouson, the Infanta of Spain (doubting that he would
come down to assist the united States) called home Don GONZALES de Cordoua,
with all his Army (being fourteen thousand horse and foot well Armed) who
marched with great speed through Luxeubourg and the country of Liege upon the
River of Mense, to stop MANSFELD in his passage: and as LONDO^PIVS writes,
the Baron of Anhalt was sent after him with another Army into Lorraine to
prevent his return into Germany.

The Earl, having received resolution from the States, soon after demanded
his Ordinance from the Townsmen of Mouson, pretending that he would march
directly to the King. And to the end they should the more credit him, he
delivered money to certain Captains, for the leuying of Soldiers within their
Town: after which he began to march, discovering his intent to all his Army,
showing them his Letters Patent which he had received from the States, and
withal telling them that they must resolve to fight more then once. Seeing
himself out of danger, his and the Dukes Army past Auesnes; and on the twenty
seventh of August attempted Mauberg: but, being fortified with a good garrison,
they only burnt the suburbs, and so past the River of Sambre with their whole
Army. There he and the Duke of Brunswick burnt most of their Carts, mounting
their foote-men on the horses, getting also many other in the Country; whereby
he might advance with the more speed in the march. They were held to have
14000 men in their Army, horse and foot: but it is confidently reported, his
horsemen were very ill Armed, having for the most part no Arms at all but
their Swords and Pistols. They were now in an Enemies country, where there was
nothing to relieve them but what the Trees would afford; all the Boores being
in Arms watching some opportunity to set upon them, if Don CORDOVA should put
them to route. The Earl coming to Iamblours which lies between Haynault and
Namures, his Soldiers being weary and tired with long marches and want of
victuals, he caused them to rest and refresh themselves. Don CORDOVA was
encamped, near unto Fleury, in a strait whereas Count MANSFE^LD and the Duke
of Brunswick must of necessity pass, having a very good Army of Soldiers with
an infinite number of Boores. Some write that MANSFELD, coming near unto
CORDOVAES Camp, he sent a Trumpet unto him, to know whether he would give him
passage or fight: who answering that he had charge to stop his passage and to
fight, The Earl presently prepared to charge (knowing there was danger in
delays) the which his men performed so resolutely, as they put CORDOVAES men
to route and surprised his Ordinance from the Boores, the which they kept for
the space of two hours, but afterward they recovered it again; Whereupon the
fight grew very cruel: the Duke of Brunswick (behauing himself most
valiantly) was shot in the left Arm near unto the wrist; yet,
notwithstanding, he would not leave 1622
the field, but continued still fighting; so as with the loss of blood, and
heat, his wound so enflamed, as afterward he was enforced to have this arm
cut off above the Elbow. To conclude, after a long fight, Count MANDSFELD
having slain many, especially of the Boores; Don CORDOVA was forced to sound a
retreit: whereupon Count MANSFELD and the Duke of Brunswick, being Masters of
the field, marched directly toward Breda, having taken much of the Enemies
baggage and some of his Ordinance. What men were lost in this battle is not
certain: but at their coming to Breda they mustered, as it is written, 10000
men; besides many sick and weary, which came daily unto them.

I cannot relate the particular circumstances of this battle, being so
diversely reported by such as have written thereof, nor what their particular
losses were; neither does it concern this History, being out of the limits of
the Empire: But thus much I dare boldly affirm, that it was one of the most
resolute (if not desperate) exploits that has been performed in our Age, to
see a weak Army (the horsemen having no Arms but their Swords and Pistolls)
tired with long marches in an enemies country, where they had nothing to
friend but the Heavens which covered them; to encounter a powerful Army,
fortified with the best men, from the neighbor garrisons, and seconded with at
least 20000 Boores Armed; to charge them in their own strength, to force
through them, to make them retire after great loss, and then (being masters of
the field) to march almost 30 or 40 miles through the enemies country, there
being 10 or 12 strong Towns with great garrisons in their way; who no doubt
would have cut them in pieces if they had been routed. The Prince of Orrange
(being advertised of their march) sent them bread and other provision to
refresh their hungry Soldiers before their coming to Breda. At brussels they
proclaimed a Triumph before the victory, and made bonfires with a confident
assurance they were quite ouerthrown, for that certain Ensigns of the Duke of
Brunswick's and Count MANSFELD'S were brought thither; but afterward their
mirth was turned to heaviness, when they had intelligence of the truth, how
that Don CORDOVA had been forced to retire with great loss; that they were
Masters of the field, and had burnt the corn and country as they past, and
were safely arrived at Breda, where they were received with great joy by the
Prince of Orrange, the united States and the whole Army.

Toward the end of July, Count MANSFELD and the Duke of Brunswick being
retired Heidelberg (...), and taken by Tilly.
out of the Palatinate with their forces, and no man left there able to make
head against the Enemy; The Baron of TILLY, General for the Emperor, returned
again to Heidelberg with an Army of 15000 men, and laid a straight siege to
the Town and Castle. Presently after his sitting down, he seized upon a Fort,
which had been built by JOHN Earl of Nassaw; but first abandoned by the
besieged, lying too far off to be well kept. From this Fort which lay behind
the Castle, he sought to annoy the Town: and with the rest of his Army, he
block up Manheim and Frankendale to keep all relief from them. Having
fortified his Trenches, and planted certain Ordinance, he played upon the
Town, but did it no great harm; persuading himself that they would soon
yield, being given to understand that they wanted Salt and all kind of
victual but Bread and Wine. With this persuasion he spent above two Months
before the Town, and never took any of their out-workes or place of any
importance, but summoned them often, and persuaded them to yield obedience to
the Emperor: but finding that his persuasions prevailed nothing, and that his
long stay there had not yet driven them to any extremity of hunger; he resolved
to attempt some thing by force. The Town was commanded by a Dutchman, whose
name was MERVIN, under whom were good Troops of Soldiers of diverse Nations
besides the Inhabitants.

The Castle was under the charge of Sir GARRET HARBERT with 2 Companies of
English, his own and Sir JOHN WENT VVORTHS, being not above two hundred
strong, whereof there were not above one hundred and forty English, the rest
were of other Nations. On the fifth and sixth days of September, General TILLY
played with his Ordinance upon their out-workes, resolving to give a general
assault.

Those out-workes without Spire Port were defended by the Dutch, and might well
have been kept against any daring Enemy whatsoever, if they had had any
courage or valor in them: But presently after their approach, and before they
came to the foot of their Rampart; a Dutch Captain whose name was GRAY, and
had the command of the first out-worke, most cowardly abandoned it, and in
this amazement all the rest of the troup cast away their Arms and fled toward
the town, or yielded themselves to the enemy; where we will leave them a
while and turn toward the Castle, where the enemy had sent to assault an
outwork called the Phesant garden by 2000 men; which Sir GARRET HARBERT
defended 1622
valiantly with one hundred of his men: They came often to the scalado, and
were valiantly repulsed by the defendants, where as the Governor brake three
pikes, having his page attending him with 6 more: but to the loss of this
brave Captain, and as we may conjecture to the loss of the place, he was shot
in the head, having no head-peece, and was the first man which was slain upon
the work: His Lieutenant was also shot in the shoulder and retired, yet the
soldiers defended it valiantly, the space of two hours after, until that the
enemy had left shooting. The Duteh being fled from the defense of the outworks
and comn into the Suburbs, the Governor shut the Town gates against them, so
that many of them were either slain or taken prisoners.

The enemy coming to Spire Port commanded Petards to be brought to force it:
but in the mean time certain Crabats (which are aduenturing Boote-halers of
Croatia like unto the Cossaques and live upon spoil) got by the river to the
water Port, and entered; where they began to fire the houses and to spoil.
During the which, TILLY forced the Port* and in this confusion the Governor,
Captains, with many soldiers, Burgers, and women fled to the Castle; and in
the mean time, the insolent soldiers fell to slaughter and spoil in the
Town. Notwithstanding all this disaster, the English still maintained their
work until that the governor had persuaded them to retire: they also fearing
that the enemy might come upon their backs from the Town; yet they showed no
amazement in their retreat; for they drew away their ordinance and munition,
and brought off the bodies of such as had been slain being but 13 in all.
TILLY being Master of the Town, and having abandoned it to the spoil of the
soldier, he summoned the Castle to yield: where the Governor MERVIN, having
propounded large conditions for himself and his troops, in the end it was
concluded, 1. That he should yield up to General TILLY, the Castle, with the
Cannon, munition and all other instruments of war, to the behoof of his
Imperial Majesty, with all other goods, Jewels, writings The yielding up of
the Castle of Heidelberg
or any o^ thing belonging to the Count Palatine and the Princess his wife;
only that excepted which the General out of his grace should suffer to pass.
2. That the Governor, Colonels, Captains, and soldiers with all other
belonging to them, might depart with their drums beating and full Arms, and
with all their baggage, so that it were their own and not belonging to the
Castle or Town. 3. That they should have a safe conduct given them to
Franckfort or any other place whither they would go, except Manheim and
Frankendall. 4. That they should have carriages allowed them by the General.
5. That all low Dutch, French, English and other strangers which were
prisoners, should be set at liberty without any ransom: As also on the other
side, all prisoners should be restored unto the General upon the same terms.
6. All sick and wounded soldiers should be put into some convenient place, and
there maintained with necessary relief, where having recovered their health,
they should have such passeports given them as they should desire: That none
should be molested in body or goods for debt or any other occasion. This was
the Capitulation concluded upon the 9 of September: and the next day he gave
them a safe conduct; entreating all the Electors, Princes and States of the
Empire, of what dignity or quality soever, to give free passage unto Mounsieur
MERVIN sometimes Couernor of Heidelberg, with his companies and baggage,
through all their Principalities and Segniories, giving them all assistance for
the advancement of their Iouney. The next day MERVIN went out of Heydelberg
with seven hundred men of all nations; but the capitulation was ill observed:
for as they marched through the street and over the bridge, the enemies
soldiers standing in guarde on either side, stripped all they could lay hand on
to their very shirts: which bred a great tumult in the Town. Whereof General
TILLY being advertised, he came forth of of his lodging to stay the soldiers
fury, and conducted them three or four miles out of town with a troop of
200 horse, fearing the soldiers should have followed them to have cut their
throats. I cannot forget one inhumane act of General TILLY'S, who would not
suffer the body of that brave and valiant Knight Sir GARRET HARBERT to be
buried like a Christian in the Town Church, but they were forced to lay him in
the green Court in the Castle; there being nothing in the Town to embalme his
body, which they meant to have brought into England, his worth deserving a
moment of better note.

The Governor with the soldiers, being (as some affirm that were present)
700 men, came safely to Franckfort, whereas my Lord CHICHESTER then remained
attending directions from his Majesty, either to go to the Diet appointed at
Reinsberg, or to return home into England: by whose means the English
received money to conduct them into the Low Countries 1622
or home, by the hands of Master BOV^LEMACK, who was appointed Paymaster in
those parts to the English and other soldiers that were entertained in his
Majesty's name for the defense of the Palatinate.

Thus the chief place of residence for the Elector Palatine was by the base
cowardice of the Dutch lost, and with it one of the goodliest Libraries in the
world; a Jewel which cannot well be valued, for the many rare Manuscripts
which had been there gathered together by his predecessors. The Duke of
Bauaria did highly esteem this prize, and committed the guard thereof to his
Jesuits. The soldiers being gone, the Inhabitants were miserably spoiled by
the enemy; who stripped both men and women, so as they neither had clothes to
cover them, nor meat to relieve them, but what they got from Heilbrim or
Franckfort: and yet their cruelty was such as they forced the poor inhabitants
to ransom themselves, and to pay the soldiers which were left there in
garrison.

The loss of this Town did add much to the king of Bohemias other
afflictions: He was The King of Bohemia goes from Sedan to the Hague.
then at Sedan under the protection of the Duke of Bouillon, his Uncle;
desiring much to be at the Hague with that Noble and generous Princess his
wife: but the difficulty was to pass. To go through the Low Countries was not
possible; all was subject to the enemy: and to pass disguised through France
as he had formerly done, there was little hope, he was too well known; but he
was soon freed of these apprehensions: for the French king, either by the
intercession of some others, or out of his own princely and generous
disposition commiserating the distressed state of this Prince (whose house had
always been firmly allied to the Crown of France, and had assisted it in
the greatest extremity of their affairs) sent him a safe conduct to pass
freely through his kingdom to what Port he pleased, commanding all his subjects
to give him that assistance and respect which was fit for the greatness of his
person. Whereupon he took leave of the Duke of Bouillon, who gave him a conuoy
of 100 horse to conduct him to Callis: where the Governor received him with
much honor, and the people observed him with much reverence and respect. There
he embarked in some of the States Ships, and so came safely to the Hague,
where he was joyfully received by the Queen his wife and the whole Court.

Let us turn head a little toward Bohemia and the incorporated provinces,
whereas the Emperor was now absolutely obeyed, Glatz only excepted; which had
been long besieged: yet Executions in Bohemia and Morauia.
the subjects were in no great security. For they were both questioned for
their lives and states, and were in danger to lose the free exercise of
religion, the which had been promised them at the reduction of those
provinces. The Emperor sent his Commissioners both into Bohemia and Morauia,
to call diverse Lords and men of account in question, touching the late
combustions. 1. All those were to be questioned which where present when some
of the Council were cast out of the windows in Prague. 2. Those which had
consented to the League against the Emperor and the house of Austria. 3, Those
which had been at the Emperors reiection, and such as had been present at
the Count Palatines election to the Crown of Bohemia. And lastly all such as
had marched in Arms against Viena.

In Morauia many Noblemen and others of note, absenting themselves, were
proclaimed Traitors, their names fixed on the common gallows, degraded of their
honors, and their Lands and goods forfeited, which were presently seized on to
the Emperors use; nor did they spare the dead: for the Emperors Commissioners
began to examine the causes of the deceased rebels (as they termed them)
meaning to brand them with infamy after their deaths; and reduce their heirs
to misery, by the confiscation of their estates, for that is always the
conclusion; being a great means to raise money to pay the Cossaques and other
soldiers. It was also given out, that the Commissioners in Bohemia would
proceed criminally against all those that had borne Arms under the Prince of
Anhalt, Count HOLLOCH, Count MANDSFELD, or any other, his Majesty's enemies:
which Article had so large an extent, and would comprehend so many of all
degrees, that if they should proceed with rigor against them, the Emperor
should be feign to bring in new Colonies to repeople those Provinces; but it
seems they took a milder course: for, diverse Lords and Knights with other
Citizens, being condemned at Brin in Morauia to lose their heads, their
corporal punishments were turned into imprisonment; some for their lives, some
for years: but there was no grace for their goods; they were still forfeited.
And thus have they proceeded touching the examination of some Lords and others,
whom they termed rebels, in Bohemia and Morauia.

Touching matters of religion, it seemd the Emperor had an intent to root out
the Protestants in Bohemia and the incoaporated Provinces: for, the Prince or
Lantzgraue of Lichtenstein, Lieutenant 1622
of Bohemia for the Emperor, had commission from him to shut up the two Dutch
Protestant The protestant Churches shut up in Prague.
Churches in Prague, and to press the City and Country to reformation in
religion; the which was put in execution: so as they were likely to lose the
comfort of the Gospel by the preaching of their Ministers, and the grounds of
religion which the youth learned by the instruction of their Teachers: for,
both the Ministers and Preachers were commanded to be presently gone; which did
much afflict the Protestants: and the Colleges where their youth was
instructed, were shut up. There was also commandment given by public
proclamation to all booksellers and Stationers, to bring-in a catalogue of all
their Lutheran and Caluinian books to the Secretary of State, within foureteen
days, upon great penalties.

The Duke of Saxony, having notice given him of this alteration in Bohemia
touching the shutting up of the Protestant Churches, was much discontented,
both in regard of his own particular, being of that religion, and might in
time be subject to the like calamity with the rest of the protestant Princes of
Germany; as also houlding his honor to be blemished, for that, at the
reduction of those Countries to the Emperors obedience, he had promised them
by warrant from the Emperor, that the Churches should not be molested, nor they
deprived of the free exercise of their religion, having also taken them into
his protection; and therefore the Duke objected these proceedings to the
Emperors Ambassador as a wrong done to him: and being still importuned by the
petitions of the Preachers which had been driven out of their Countries, he
wrote to the Prince of Lichtenstein to this effect; that forasmuch as he could
not but take notice by sundry aduertisements from Bohemia and the incorporated
Provinces, as also by the complaints of diverse Preachers lately banished out
of those Countries, of the restraint of The Duke of Saxony writes to the Prince
of Lichtenstein.
the public profession of the reformed religion, and of the shutting up their
Churches, and the putting down of their schools: yet for that men in misery do
commonly seek to move pity by the report of their estates, and for that he had
been always better conceited of his Majesty's word, who had promised him, that
if those Countries could be reduced to obedience by his forces, he should by
his Majesty's direction pass his word to the subjects of those Provinces, that
those of the reformed religion should still enjoy their freedom of conscience:
Wherefore, relying upon the Emperors word, he would not rashly give credit to
those informations till he might hear the certainty both of the authority of
his commission, and in what manner it had been executed: wherefore he could do
no less in favor of the cause, and for the honor of his own word (whereon
the inhabitants of those Provinces had much relied) than to entreat him
earnestly to advertise him of the truth of the business; the which if he found
conformable to the Petitioners complaints, he could not but hold his own honor
engaged to take care for a timely remedy, and withal employ his credit and
power with his Imperial Majesty for the staying of all future proceedings.
Some think, these alterations in Bohemia stayed the Duke of Saxony's journey to
the Diet at Regensbourg; who, continuing his discontents, gave the Emperor to
understand by his Letters, that he was much grieved for the shutting up of the
2 protestant Churches at Prague, the which did not belong to the Bohemians, but
to the Electors and Princes of Germany, professing the gospel; who had built
and maintained them at their own charges, and procured them great privileges
and immunities: wherefore his Majesty had not to do with the Protestants of
Bohemia, but with the Electors and Princes of the Empire, which should not
suffer them of their own religion (contrary to his Imperial promise and the
privileges of the Empire) to be persecuted and oppressed. This may breed some
new combustion and trouble, unless it shall please the Emperor to restore
those Churches to their former estate and condition.

The siege of Glatz continued still: which being resolutely attempted by the
Imperialists, it was as obstinately defended by the besieged. The young Earl
of Thurne, making many salies upon the Enemy, cloyed some of their Cannons and
returned with good spoils and much honor: The continuance of the siege of
Glats.
but in September there was an accident which did much impair the state of the
town; for they setting fire of their suburbs, to the end the Imperialists
should not lodge in them, some sparks of it fell by chance into their powder;
whereby part of the Town, and much of their provision was burnt; and like wise
a part of the wall, with two pieces of Ordinance falling down, through the
violence of the fire, the Imperialists advanced to a scallado, but they were
valiantly repulsed by the Garrison.

About the midst of October, the Imperialists assaulted the Town with great
fury: and they within, suffering them to approach to their very walls, they
having discharged their Ordinance, they presently set open their Ports and
salied forth with one thousand horse and foot; 1622
where they slew six hundred of the Enemy, and then retired with no great
loss. During these factions of war before Glatz, there was a parley between
the young Earl of Thurne, Governor of the Town; the Earl of Torquato,
General of the Emperors Army; and the Prince of Lichtenstein, Governor of
Bohemia; where there were many propositions made unto the young Earl with
promises of pardon and great rewards, both for himself and his Soldiers, in
the Emperors name, if he would yield up the Town. The young Earl of Thurn
made them this answer:

That if they could procure the King of Bohemia to free him from his double
Oath (one as he was his subject, and the other as his Soldier) that then he
would not only yield up the town and castle, but would also forsake the
quarrel and lay down Arms: But, seeing they could not dispense him of his
Oath, that both he and his company were resolved to make it good against the
Imperialists; and although they might happily, with great loss and charge, take
the Town, yet they had a Castle to retreat into, the which they would defend
to the last man; and so the treaty brake off, every man returning to his
quarter: Presently after which, they made a great salie, which was very bloody
and many were slain on either side; among the which, there were thirteen
Captains of the Imperialists.

They so annoyed the Camp with their Ordinance, as the Emperor commanded all
his forces in Bohemia to march toward Glatz to re-enforce the siege, and they
sent for powder, bullets and munition from all parts. The siege had continued
almost two years, and had put the Emperor to wonderful great charges, the
which could hardly be supplied; and therefore they used a policy to make the
besieged pay for their own ruin: for, by a public proclamation in Silesia,
they enjoined all men upon pain of death, which ought any money, or had any
goods in their hands belonging to them of Glatz, to bring it presently into the
Towne-house at Preslawe: Whereupon, much money and goods was brought thither;
which extremity has been often, and is still, used against the Nobility and
Gentry of those Countries which had been executed; yea, even against such as
were dead before they had been called in question.

This Proclamation did nothing amaze them of Glatz, who held their Arms to be
their greatest wealth, the which could not be violently taken from them,
without the loss of their lives; and then their cares were past, and their
scores paid: But, to avoid tediousness, I will omit the daily skirmishes
which were before that Town, and come to the yielding of it. After a long and
obstinate siege resolutely defended by the young Earl of Thurne, they were
driven to some extremities, by reason of some casualties by fire, in the which
their salt, powder, and meal was consumed, and their water cut off by the
Imperialists: which daunted the Soldiers much, and made them mutine; so as the
Governor (although he were one thousand five hundred strong) was glad to come
to a parley, and to yield up the Town upon honorable terms on the twenty
sixth day of October. The Articles were, First, that they should have free The
yielding up of Glatz.
exercise of the reformed Religion, and their Church remain as it was, until
the Emperor shall otherwise dispose: And if any Protestant were desirous to
leave the Town, they should have free liberty to sell their goods within six
months, and go where they pleased. Secondly, that the Governor, Captains,
Commanders and Soldiers, both of Horse and Foot, should freely and safely
depart with bag and baggage, Drums beating, Colors flying, and their full
Arms; conditionally, that all the companies should be cast and dismissed about
Swainitz, and there leave their Commanders; and their Cornets and Ensigns to
be torn from their staves, and all sworn not to bear Arms against the
Emperor for six months following. Thirdly, that the Governor, Commanders*
Officers and Soldiers, should have a general pardon for all offenses and
rebellions committed against the Emperor, and suffered to depart where they
pleased. Fourthly, that all Commanders, Officers and Soldiers, which had
served his Majesty, and now born Arms against him in this quarrel, should have
Pasports given them to pass freely through the Dominions of the Empire, into
their own Countries, or whither they pleased. Fifthly, the sick and hurt should
remain still in the Town of Glatz, and there have all due attendance and
provision from the Citizens, for their cure and recovery; after which they
shall have free leave to depart, and pasports given them to go where they
pleased. Sixthly, that the Earl of Thurne should leave two Captains with the
Imperialists as Hostages until he had dismissed his Troops about Swainitz,
according to the capitulation.

These Articles, being very honorable for the Earl of Thurne and the
besieged, were very duly observed by the Imperialists, who gave them a good
conuoy to Swainitz, which is five 1622
German miles from Glatz. It was thought that they were very rich when they
left the Town, having a hundred wagons heavy laden with baggage, beside
lighter carriages: of which there were fifty belonging to the young Earl of
Thurne, which were conducted to his wife in the Marquess of Brandenburg's
Country by 500 light horse of his own, and a conuoy of 2000 Imperialists. Thus
at last the Emperor has reduced all Bohemia with the incorporated Provinces to
his obedience; and his brother, the Archduke CHALES Bishop of Nuis or Nisse,
liking well the air of the Country and the strength of the place, has gotten
the government of the country of Glatz, from the Emperor.

Heidelberg being lost, General TILLY marched presently with his Army to
Manheim, where General VERE attended him; it being the place of most
importance and best fortified Manheim besieged.
in all the Palatinate, standing near the point of a land where the Neccar
which passes by Heidelberg falls into the Rhyne, so as it commands both the
Rivers, and receives the Toll of all boats which pass. The Enemy being set
down on the one side of the Town; General VERE, considering that the guard
thereof and of the out-workes was very great, and that he was not sufficiently
provided with men, having but seven companies of English, and nine of Dutch
(all which were very weak in numbers, and many sick) he sent to Franckendale,
to have Captain BVRROVVS to send him three companies more of English and as
many Dutch: which he performed accordingly.

The Enemy, as soon as the opportunity of the swelling Rivers would give him
leave, entrenched his Camp, and planted several batteries. During his
approaches, General VERE made diverse brave Sallies, especially one which was
general; in all which he slew many of the Enemy with little loss of his own:
yet considering that in continuance he should waste his men, he having not in
all full two thousand of all Nations, sick and whole, which would hardly be
able to man his outworks, which were very great; and that after the loss of
Manheim, Frankendale could not subsist; He sent a Commissary again to Captain
BVRROVVES, wishing him to abandon the Town and repair unto him with all his
Troops: which the inhabitants understanding, began to mutine, fell to Arms, and
flue to the Ports; giving the Governor to understand, that as he had defended
them valiantly the last year, so they would now live and die with him, and not
leave him unless he would pass by force over their bellies, desiring rather
to be slain by him then by the Enemy: Whereupon the Governor advertised the
General in what state he stood; who returned him an answer presently, that he
should do as he thought good, referring it to his discretion: whereupon he
stayed in Frankendale.

General VERE, having no hope of any more supplies of men, was forced to
abandon his out-workes, suffering the Enemy to approach near to the Walls.
After some days, the Town being not defensible, he set it on fire, and retired
with those few troops he had into the Castle, from whence he so annoyed the
Enemy, as he could hardly lodge within the Town. TILLY often summoned him to
yield upon honorable conditions; but he found an Enemy who preferred his
honor before his life, and would give care to no parley, as long as he had any
means to keep it: Wherefore TILLY being loath to assault a Fort defended by
such resolute men, resolved to get it by Mine or Sap. His Pioners being come
to the very brimme of the Moate, having with other Trenches drained away the
Water, which at first was some hindrance unto them; he then resolved to give an
assault; for the which he had prepared great store of bauins to fill up the
Dike: yet considering that to force this Castle would cost him much blood, and
although they could not keep the place long, yet he should hardly get it
without great loss: He held it the safest course to summon them again, and to
get it by composition.

General VERE, on the otherside, finding that he had neither men sufficient to
man it long, and that he had not powder for three days service; considering
withal, that although they should lose themselves they could not keep the
Fort long, and knowing withal that dead men could do their Prince and
Country no service; he resolved to make a virtue of necessity, Manheim yielded
to Tilly.
and not to lose so many brave men with obstinacy, whom he might bring off with
honor: Whereupon, after summons made by the Enemies Drum, General VERE
accepted of a parley; in which, after much debating, there were six Articles
concluded betwixt Mounsieur TILLY, General for the Emperor and the Duke of
Bauaria on the one side; and Sir HORATIO VERE, General of his Majesty's forces
of great Britanne in the Palatinate, on the other: The Articles were, that the
Gouerner, Captains, Officers and Soldiers, should have leave to depart freely
with bag and baggage, drums beating, colors fleeing, matches light, and 1622
bullets in their mouth es: secondly, that they might take with them two
falconets or small fieldpieces, with munition and instruments belonging to the
same: to the which, Monsieur TILLY (after some contestation) yielded, to do
honor to Sir HORATIO VERE, because he was a General; thirdly, that they might
carry away with them thirty pipes of wine, with two hundred sacks of meal, and
prouant for three days only; the which was to go with them by land, and the
rest to be transported by water: fourthly, that they should have a conuoy of
one thousand horse to Frankfort, and there to stay foureteen days till the
English Ambassador or his Commissarie might come to conueigh them downwards:
fifthly, that all goods and moueables, which had been brought into the Castle
for safety, should be free, and the owners have liberty to transport themselves
and their goods whither they pleased: sixthly, all Ministers and Churchmen
should have free liberty either to stay in Manheim, and exercise their
function, or depart safely whither they pleased.

Upon these honorable conditions the Castle of Manheim was delivered up to the
enemy on the five and twentieth of October, stilo veteri. And so General VERE
retired out of Manheim with ten companies of English, and twelve of Dutch under
the command of Colonel WALDMANHVSE. He marched to Frankfort with a good conuoy
of one thousand horse. The General with his Captains was lodged in the City;
and his Troops, in the villages thereabouts. After their departure from
Franfort, the Dutch left them, and would go no further, notwithstanding they
had promised to march with them into the Lowe-countries: and after some stay,
the General with the English, being five or six hundred men, were conducted by
a Commissary of the enemies, through the Lantzgraue of Hesse his Country; where
they past down a river to Breme, there to be embarked for England.

After the surrendering of Manheim, General TILLY marched with his Army to
Frankendale (it being the only place now remaining in the Palatinate for the
Elector) with an intent, by Frankendale besieged.
the taking of this place, to make himself absolute Master of the whole
Palatinate: but he found the same Gouerner Captain BVRROVVES, who had so
valiantly defended it the year before against Don GONZALES de Cordoua; and the
same resolution, having vowed to lose his life rather than any jot of that
honor which he had gotten at the former siege: neither was he idle during the
siege of Heidelberg and Manheim, but furnished and fortified it by all the
means he could, having drowned the land about it on the weaker part of the
Town; so as the enemy could neither make trenches on that side to lodge his
men in, nor approach his cannon to plant his batteries: yet it seemd still he
was resolved to force it, drawing soldiers from all places thither with the
hope of spoil, having promised them the sack of that Town: but he was deceived
of his present expectation; because the approaches were so difficult by reason
of the drowned land, and the ways so slippery and deep with the continual
rain, that he forbear to attempt any thing by force, and employed his best
eloquence to persuade the Inhabitants to yield. He assured them, that they
should not be molested in their religion, nor oppressed with any great
garrison; that the commerce should be open and free, and that the Emperor would
keep no garrisons in the Palatinate, but in some important places. To these good
words General TILLY added some threats, that if they continued obstinate, they
must expect nothing but the rigor of war, and the ruins which are incident
to Towns besieged; whereas by their voluntary yielding they should purchase the
Emperors favor, preserve themselves, their wives and children, and have fair
Quarter kept with them, and be protected by his Imperial Majesty with the rest
of the Palatinate. All this could not move the resolute Inhabitants; who had
vowed to take the fortune of the war, and to defend the Town with the
Gouerner and soldiers: and therefore they gave no answer to his propositions.

The General, after all his practices to draw them to a composition, finding
little means to advance any thing by force in regard of the vnseasonablenes of
the weather, and the continual rain which made the ways exceeding deep, he
resolved to retire his camp for a time, marching toward Hannow and the
Lantzgraue of Hesse his Country, with an intent to winter his Troops
thereabouts, leaving some companies of horse about Frankendale, to keep them
from excursions and from all relief. Thus this poor Town, the only remainder
of all the Palatinate, has some time of rest and breathing, till that the
season of the year will give the enemy leave to return; who is well assured,
that they have no means to be relieved, being environed by their enemies
garrisons which ly in the Towns round about them; and that time will waste
their provisions, and necessity force the stowrest courages to yield. TILLY
retiring his Army, the governor of the Town salied forth, and slew diverse of
the enemies Rereward, and brought in good 1622
spoil. After which, he made incursions with two companies of horse, as far
as Worms and Spire, bringing-in what the poor wasted Country could afford.
But, all this will not serve to maintain the Town, for any long time.

The Prince of Orrenge, with the united States had (as you have heard) in the
year 1620 built a fort in the river of Rhine betwixt Cullen and Bona, which
was agreat eyesore unto them, and did keep the passage of the river, and the
neighbor Provinces in awe: whereupon this Summer, the Duke of Newburg one of
the pretendents to the inheritance of the Duchies of Cleue, Iuliers and Berck,
sent some forces under a commander of his to besiege it, being assisted by the
Archduchesse Infanta, who sent the Prince of Cheine with men, cannon and
munition. These forces built fortes upon either side of the river and planted
their batteries, having received some cannon from Iuliers or Gulich: they also
maintained two ships of war in the Rhine, whereby all boats which came up or
down with any merchandise were forced to discharge and carry it over land by
cart, lest the besieged should receive any relief. They have spent a long time
at this siege without any great military exploits: only they have not spared
their powder and shot, but yet made no great breach which might encourage them
to offer an assault; for the which they have made great preparation of Rhine
boats, Punts, and such like, as if they intended to force it; but the garrison
seemed resolute: Yet since, in the end of December, the garrison being grown
very weak, they have been forced to yield.

Count MANDSFELD, after his retreit out of the Palatinate, entered into the
States pay for three months: those being ended, and the siege of Berghen
raised, he marched up with Count Mandsfelds proceeding returning again into
the Empire.
his and the Duke of Brunswicks forces toward Westphalia, and the Archbishop
of Cullens country, which is within the limits of the Empire; and there took
some Towns and Castles, spoiling and ransoming the Country to revenge the
wrong which the Archbishop of Cullen had done unto the Elector Palatine in
sending the Baron of Anhalt his General with forces thither: from thence he
went into East Freezland and the County of Emden, the Earl whereof had
maintained a Regiment of foot with the Spaniard against the united States.
Being in those parts he blocked up Lingen a far off (which Town had been
taken by SPINOLA before the truce, and did belong by inheritance to the Prince
of Orrenge) and he forced the said Earl to abandon his Country and to leave
his poor subjects to the fury of insolent soldiers; so as the Bishopric of
Munster and the Territory of Emden were in a manner ruined and left waste.
SPINOLA sent Count HENRY VANDENBERO, the Baron of Anhalt, with some other
commanders, with forces to follow him into those parts: but MANSFELD, having
seized upon Neppel, Reeuen, and some other Towns about Lingen, kept all
victual from them, whereby the soldiers are in some distress: He fortifies
himself daily with new troops which are levied in those Countries for the
Duke of Brunswick, and builds sconses upon the passages by the which the enemy
might come unto him: so as there is no appearance of any great exploits to be
done by those Armies, this winter (the way in those parts being so deep as an
Army can hardly make any fair march) but that they will pass this winter and
feed their troops upon the poor man's purse until the Spring draw them
again into action.

The Emperor had long since appointed a Diet at Regensburg, for the settling
of a firm peace in the Empire, to reform abuses, and to redress all
greeuances whereof there had been many complaints unto his Majesty, and they
still referred for their answer, to the Diet; the which had been often
adiourned and put off upon some important considerations: but now it was fully
resolved, the Emperor having summoned all the Electors, Princes, and States of
the Empire, to appear there in November, and to that end both his Majesty and
all the Princes sent their officers thither to provide their lodgings. But
before the Emperors parting from Viena toward Regensberg, there arrived two
Ambassadors, one from the King of Persia; the other from the Ottoman Emperor.
The Persian desired confirmation of the League which Ambassadors from the
Persian and the Turk.
his father had formerly had with the Emperor, and to entreat him to employ
his forces against the Turk, who seemed to threaten his country this year
with a powerful invasion. The Turk sent a Basha with a stately Embassy and
great Presents (an unusual thing in them who are accustomed to receive from
all Princes which send unto them, and not to give to any) but it seemed his new
State was not so well settled as he would trust the Christians, during his
expedition against Persia; entreating the Emperor to continue the truce, or to
confirm peace, fearing least something might be attempted against him upon the
frontiers of Hungary during his absence: to whom the Emperor gave no present
answer, but told him that he might return if he pleased, and leave a Chaux
behind him to receive his answer after the ending of 1622
the Diet.

In the beginning of November, the Emperor and the Empress parted from Vienna
toward Regensbourg, with a great train of Ladies and Noblemen. He made his
entry on the five and twentieth of November in great state; the particularities
whereof I omit. There was yet a small appearance of Princes: for, there were
only comn three ecclesiastical Electors, with the Bishops of Saltzbourg and
Virtzbourg. The Dukes of Bauaria and Newbourg were expected daily; but the
Protestant Princes made some stay, and it was doubtful of their coming:
namely, the Duke of Saxony, the Marquess of Brandenbourg, the Dukes of
Brunswick, Virtemberg and Pomerania, the Lantzgraue of Hesse, the Marquess of
Durlach of the house of Baden, with many others of their religion. The Emperor
desired much to have the Duke of Saxony present at the Diet, and had pressed him
much by his Letters: but his coming was doubtful; being, as they write,
discontented for the breach which had been made touching religion, with the
Bohemians and the incorporated Provinces; wherein he said his honor was
engaged. Some, which presume to know the Secrets of Princes Cabinets, have
given out, that one of the chief reasons for the calling of this Diet, is, To
settle the Electorship of the Palatinate upon the Duke of Bauaria, with the
consent of the whole State of Germany; the which the Emperor has much desired,
the Duke ambitiously affected, and the Pope with all his Clergy instantly
pressed: but, as I have heard of no propositions, so I will not divine of their
conclusions; only I will pray to God so to direct their counsels, that they
may prefer the public peace and tranquillity of Germany before their
private interests, and not cast oil into the fire of their divisions, which may
draw a great part of the Christian world into troubles and combustions.

THus, with the end of the year and the loss of the Palatinate (one poor Town
excepted) I end this work: wherein we have seen a great Prince, the first
secular Elector of Germany, spoiled and dispossessed of his hereditary estate,
and forced to abandon his Country and subjects to the fury and oppression of an
insulting enemy. But God I hope (who is the God of battles) will in his due
time dissolve these pinching frosts of affliction by his almighty power, and
restore him, with the virtuous Princess his wife, to their former estate; and
make those Princely Imps (sprung from so Royal a Stem) flourish like
oliue-branches, to the great joy and comfort of all which honor and respect
them: for the which I will daily pour forth my vows and prayers to almighty
God; and let all good men say Amen.

A brief Discourse of the civil wars 1622
in the Valtolin.
I Had not meant to write of the civil broils in the Valtolin and the Grisons
Country; houlding it impertinent to this History which treats only of the
Emperors lives, and of those things which have past in their dominions: but,
finding that the house of Austria does make a challenge to some of those
Communalties, and have by their Arms brought the Grisons Country in a manner
into subjection and servitude, and possessed themselves of the passage of the
Valtolin; I have thought it fit for the Readers better satisfaction to make a
summary relation of these combustions, and to show the motives and the events:
for the true understanding whereof, I must rip it up from the first beginning,
which was in the year 1603.

The Valtolin is a Valley which depends upon the Cantons of the Grisons; the
which extends it self in length some thirty French leagues from the Lake of
Como in Italy to the County of Tirol which is in Germany. It is watered by the
river of Ada, and is shut up on either side by inaccessible mountains. In the
Grisons Country their government is Democraticall. The General assembly of
the Communaltie has all soueraign power. Many Boroughs and Villages make a
Communalty; and many Communalties, a Canton or League: and of three Cantons the
Commonweal of the Grisons consists. This Assembly has absolute power by
plurality of voices to make and abolish laws, to treat of alliances with
Princes and foreign States, to dispose of war and peace, and of all things
belonging to Sovereignty. But, to come to the first beginning of these
factions, you must understand, that in the year 1602, HENRY the Fourth, the
French King, had renewed the ancient alliance of France with the Swissers and
Grisons, upon the same articles and conditions as had been concluded with other
Kings his Predecessors; against the advice of some, who had propounded to make
a new league with the Venecians, which might concern the passage of the Alps:
but the Grisons which embraced the alliance of France would not yield to it.

In the year 1603 there was a new league concluded at Coire or Chur betwixt the
Grisons and the Venetians, notwithstanding the opposition of the French
Ambassador. Of 26 Communalties A new league between the Venecians and Grisons.
of the Grisons, two parts of them are Protestants Caluenists, contrary to the
Romanists. The Protestants, which favored this league, gave the common people
to understand, first, that the most Christian King was well pleased with it,
being a matter of State, and the only means to frustrate the Spaniard of all
alliance with the Grisons: secondly, touching religion, that they should not
doubt but by means of this league which allowed them liberty of conscience in
Venice without exercise, the Gospel would take root in Venice, and from thence
disperse it self throughout all Italy; and, thirdly, the yearly pension and
the Arms they should receive from the Venecians, with the particular pensions
for their captains: for, the Grisons do naturally love money.

The Earl of Fuentes, who was at that time Gouerner of Milan, grew jealous of
this league between the Venecians and the Grisons, and could by no means endure
it, by reason of the importance of the passage of soldiers which they allowed
the Venecians through the Alps: whereupon, he forbad all commerce with the
Grisons, and presently built the Fort of Fuentes at the The Fort of Fuentes
built, and (...)G^isons forb^dden com merce with Milan.
entry of the passage of the Valtolin. The Grisons, who could not live without
the commerce of Milan and Lombardy by reason of the barrenness of their
Country, fell into faction. Some prime men and Captains, with the p^otestant
Commons, would have gone to Arms: and the Bishop of Coire and many of his
partisans (favoring the Spaniards) practiced in such sort, that Deputies were
sent to Milan, to treat upon the old alliances between the Milanois and the
Grisons, to the end that the Fort of Fuentes might be rased: where, they
concluded upon certain 1604
Articles, which were rejected in the Assembly of the Grisons; who in the mean
time wauered between the doubtful events of war and the discommodities of
peace.

The Deputies or Ambassadors, who were sent to Milan, were much taxed by all
the Grisons, to have received Presents and chains of gold from the Earl of
Fuentes: with the which he sought to fetter their liberty; they having
accorded, first, that the Spaniard might levy soldiers 1622
in the Grisons Country when he pleased; secondly, that the passage should be
open for him The Bishop of Coir treats an alliance with Milan.
at all times to transport his Armies through their Country, and that they
should not suffer any other soldiers to pass through their Territories
without the advice of the Gouerner of Milan, to the end that he should consider
whether that passage might any way prejudice the Duchy of Milan; Articles
which they held hurtful to their ancient alliance with France, and to make
their new league with Venice unprofitable. The Grisons having rejected these
Articles in an Assembly at Illant, the Earl of Fuentes presently caused his
Fort to be immured, and the Grisons descent into Italy to be stopped:
whereupon, the Grisons resolved to choose the hazard of Arms, to maintain their
liberty.

Having demanded succors of men and money from the Ambassadors of France and
Venice, they both took time to advertise their Masters. The like they did to
the Swissers being then assembled at Bade; letting them understand, that the
Earl of Fuentes had taken from them the commerce which was betwixt them and the
Duchy of Milan; requiring their counsel and aid, for that the injury was
common to them: but they returned ill satisfied, for that the Ambassador of
Spain had prevailed much in that Assembly.

In the year 1605, the French Ambassador, receiving the King his Masters
pleasure, gave the Grisons to understand, that his Majesty did advise them to
end their differences by an accord, especially that they should not come to
Arms: and although the business did nothing concern himself, yet he would
willingly employ himself in regard of their alliance, to the end that the
oppression they received from the Fort of Fuentes might be taken away. On the
other side, the Ambassador of Venice told them, that the proposition to make a
Fort upon the Frontier of the Valtolin, to the end they might keep a passage
open, and free from the Grisons Territories unto those of the Venecians, was
good; and that the Segniory of Venice would defray the cost and charges of the
building of a new Fort, and would entertain a garrison of one hundred and fifty
men.

After this, the Grisons grew divided into three factions. The Bishop of Chur
or Coire, with many Romanists, supported the Spaniard; who cast much of his
Indian dust among them, and 1606
blinded the eyes of their understandings. The Protestants and others favored
the Venecians: and the ancient friends to France blamed both these factions,
and the league made with the Venecians, as the only cause of the confusion
which took root in all the members of their Commonwealth. These men knew well,
that the counsel the King gave them, Not to come to Arms, was for the good of
their Commonwealth; and that, if they opposed a Fort to that of Fuentes, it
would provoke the Spaniard to war.

The motions and alterations between the Pope and the Venecians (which ended in
the year one thousand, six hundred and seven) much augmented these divisions;
the Venecians seeking to draw succors from the Grisons, and the partisans of
Spain laboring to hinder it. Then the corruption which the Spanish gold had
bred in the Catholic Communalties, was ouerswaied by the Captains, who had
received twice as much money from the Venecians to make Leuies of soldiers in
the Grisons Country: and such as drew pensions from France, desiring to settle
an order in the Grisons liberty, in the which the basest amongst the multitude
would take knowledge of the State, and discourse thereof in tauernes and stoues
(which is not the right course to manage the affairs of a Commonweal, for that
there Secrets were as soon vented as propounded) caused a secret Council to be
erected of fifteen Deputies chosen out of all the Communalties, with a certain
limited power: but this was presently crossed by the two other factions, who
required to have this Council dissolved.

There was a combustion at Coire this year in May; whither the Communalties
which supported the Venecians came with their Ensigns displaied, and required
to have that which had been promised by the Venecian League, effected: but
presently there coming a greater number of other Communalties, by the
Spaniards practice, they demanded the contrary; as may appear by these
following Articles. 1. That hereafter no stranger should be suffered to pass
soldiers through the Alps. 2. That they should enquire who was the Author of
the putting a garrison into the Valtoline, and who should pay it. 3. That the
Communalties had not granted unto the Venecians any passage for strange
soldiers. 4. That the said Communalties had not made any alliance with the
Dolphin of France, nor promised to give passage to the French King's friends.
5. That the secret Council newly erected should be wholly abrogated. 6. That
they should renew the ancient Alliances with Millan. 7. That the French
Captains which were in the Valtolin, should be discharged. 8. That hereafter no
man should receive any 1622
pension from a foreign Prince: and that those which were received by private
persons should be distributed amongst the communalties. 9. That Churchmen and
Ministers should not meddle with the civil government, nor should be admitted
to the assemblies of the communalties. 10. That the soldiers levied by the
Venetians might not go out of the Country. 11. That the Criminal chamber
should proceed against such as should be found traitors to their country. 12.
That the Deputies of assemblies should hereafter bring the advice of the
communalties in writing and signed by them. Finally, the combustion was so
great, that the Spanish faction seized on the Castle of Coire.

The subtility of the Spanish Agents was well observed in these Articles; who
seeking to deprive the Ambassador of France of all liberty to give his
accustomed pensions openly to private Grisons, would thereby divert them from
the amity of France, whilst he practiced all he could by gifts to bandie
against them which supported the Venetians, who had also (as was written)
dispersed among their partisans above 80 thousand crowns, to maintain that they
had a free passage through the Alps. In the end of the year, the Judges of
the Criminal chamber (who were taxed to be pensioners to the Spaniard) were
changed, upon complaint of their great covetousness and injustice: but they
which succeeded them in their places exceeded them in arrogancy, corruption,
and cruelty, which they practiced against all those which they found partisans
to Spain, as Traitors to their liberty.

The French Ambassador, who had discovered the intention of the Spanish
faction, demanded Audience in a general Assembly of the communalties; where he
let them see by the reading Complaint of the French Ambassador against the
Partisans of Spains.
of the alliance which they had with France, the Imposture of those which had
published, That the king his Majesty had no free passage either for himself or
for his friends through the Alps: and that the Dolphin of France was not
comprehendended in the said Alliance. After the reading whereof and an
exhortation made to continue constant in the League, with a promise of bounty,
the whole assembly with one voice lifting their hands to heaven, cried out God
save the king, God preserve France and the Dolphin. Which done, the French
Ambassador demanded of them a declaration of their confirmation of the
Alliance, desiring to send it unto the king: the which they all jointly
promised, and afterward every communalty signed. The Venetian Ambassador, to
have the like declaration upon their new treaty of Alliance, made offer by his
partisans to give 3000 crowns to the three Grison Cantons: but his proceeding
and offer was rejected; and the Garrison of 150 Grisons which was in the
Valtolin paid by the king, Bad intelligence between the Ambassadors of France
and Venice.
was discharged: which seemed to be the subject of some bad intelligence, which
happened afterward between the Ambassadors of France and Venice, resident in
those parts, the particularities whereof I must for breuities sake omit.

In the year 1608 and 1609, the Grisons State was under the power of their
Criminal chamber, whereas the Bishop of Coir was condemned to a pecuniary
Fine; and if he would not sign certain Articles which should be imparted to
him, he should be banished. Thus the Protestants held the chief places in the
government: and the Valtolin Catholics were much discontented to be under
the yoke and government of Podestate Grisons of a contrary religion; so as it
seemed by some actions, that the Earl of Fuentes would willingly have given
them aid to have taken Arms.

In the year 1610, the French King having been traitorously murdered, the
Magistrate of Coir repaired to his Ambassador; where, after many signs of great
sorrow for so lamentable a death, he protested in the name of all the Grisons,
to continue constant in the Alliance which they had with the Crown of France:
and the same year, the Earl of Fuentes, Gouerner of Milan, died also. About
this time the Venetians pursued a continuation of their Alliance for ten yers
with the Grisons: but they were let understand, that they had sufficiently made
trial of the good and harm which this Alliance had brought them; so as they
desired no more: for there were many Articles observed in that treaty which
were directly contrary to the Alliace of France, the which I omit being very
long.

In the year one thousand and eleven, VELASCO Constable of Castile, being
newly made Governor of Milan, he sought to continue the designs of the
deceased Earl of Fuentes, not by Arms but by Treaty. He promised at first
to raise the fort of Fuentes: But the Ambassador of France gave the Magistrate
of Coire to understand, that it was but a cunning practice, thinking thereby to
revive the Treaty of Milan. Hereupon the Agents for Spain, lay de aspersions
upon the said Ambassador (to make him odious to the Catholics) 1622
in a counterfeit Letter written in the Germane tongue, and directed to the
Bishop of Coire; by the which they gave him to understand, That the reason why
the Protestant Practices of the Spanish and Venetian factions*
Ministers of the Grisons were so affected to the French King and his
Ambassador, was for that they had seen in the Register of their accounts,
that he gave unto them yearly many thousands of crowns by way of pension. And
on the other side, the said Ambassador having labored by the Kings
commandment, that the alliance with the Venetians should not be continued,
their partisans called him Jesuit, and they gave it out that he had given
money to PLANTA and others of the Spanish faction to break the Alliance with
Venice.

In the year 1613, the Grisons having again concluded that the Alliance with
Venice should not be continued, the next year they commanded their
Ambassador to depart the Country. After this in the year 1616 and 1617 the
Spanish faction got the masterie, and began to dispose absolutely of the
government of the State; so as by their practices, there was a Treaty appointed
at Coire, this year on the 9 of March to revive the ancient Alliance with
Milan, for the King of Spain. There came ALFONSO CASAT his Ambassador, in the
name of Don PEDRO de Toledo Governor of the Duchy of Milan, where there were
certain Articles concluded. Firstly, They promised that betwixt his A new
treaty of Alliance between the Milanois and the Grisons.
Majesty as Duke of Milan with the subjects of the said Duchy, and the three
Cantons, with their subjects of the Country of the Valtolin, Worms, and the
County of Chyauene shall be true, sincere and perpetual friendship: so as they
shall not attempt aught to the prejudice one of another* nor suffer any
practice to be made openly or secretly in their provinces, nor consent to any
passage, nor give counsel or aid directly or indirectly, but should oppose
themselves with all their force and power. And if the one party should know or
discover any secret practices, attempts or counsels to the prejudice of the
other, the said party should be bound to reveal it presently, and seek to
divert it with all fidelity. Secondly, And for that his excellency understood
that the three Cantons defired much that the fort of Fuentes which had been
built in the year 1603 upon the frontiers of the Valtolin might be demolished,
to the end they might thereby be assured to be restored to his Majesty's good
grace and favor, his excellency promised to treat with his Majesty with all
sincere affection in favor of the said three Cantons; and that after the
Articles of this present capitulation shall be accepted, sealed, and sworn by
his Majesty and the said three Cantons, that with out all delay, the demolition
of the said forts shall take effect; And that his Majesty shall not suffer them
to be built up again, so long as the three Cantons shall for their parts
faithfully observe the contents of the said Capitulation, and that hereafter no
such cause of jealousy be given unto his Majesty as was in the year 1603. And
for as much as the three Cantons knew well that the distrust which ministered
occasion for the building of the aforesaid forte of Fuentes, did proceed from
the Alliance and passage which they had granted unto the Seigniorie of Venice:
they promised by this present capitulation for them and The Grisons promise not
to renew their alliance with the Veneeiansns*
their successors not to renew it hereafter, nor to suffer the said Alliance
and passage in any sort, so long as this present capitulation shall be in
force. Thirdly, That both parties shall have free commerce and trafique from
one country to another, as well for themselves as their subjects, without any
exception of persons: with this reservation, that touching matters of religion
Liberty of Commerce.
they should give no scandal, nor carry with them any forbidden books. And
touching the role of cattle and other commerce which they should bring into
the Duchy of Milan, or transporte from thence, the three Cantons should enjoy
all the privileges the which are granted unto the Swissers, allies unto his
Majesty. Fourthly, If it happened his Majesty should have need of any troops of
soldiers of this nation for the defense of the Duchy of Milan, it shall
Leauies o^ Orisons allowed the Spaniard.
be lawful for him to make a leauie in the Territories of the three Cantons,
not exceeding the number of 3000 soldiers Voluntaries: and the election of the
Colonel and Captains shall be made by his Majesty's Ambassador, who shall
agree with them for their Arms and pay: And in case his Majesty would for the
preservation of his countries and Seigniories cause some troops of strange
soldiers to pass through the Grisons country into the Duchy of Milan, it
shall be allowed to his Majesty and his commanders: so as every troop exceed
not the number of 200 persons Passage of soldiers allowed them.
and a days journey one from another: Every troop also shall have his captain
or conductor to keep them in good discipline, and with them a Commissarie of
the Cantons at the kings charge to prevent all inconueniencies: and to the end
also that the soldiers may pay for their victuals and passages and carry
themselves honestly, they shall not carry any other Arms but their swords and
daggers, and the horsemen their Pistols: And in case it shall be sufficiently
proved, 1622
that the soldiers have committed any harm and spoil in the Grisons country
and their subjects, Aid promised to the Grisons.
his Majesty shall be bound to make restitution. 5. If it shall happen that the
three Cantons shall be hostilely invaded by any Prince, Potentate, or free
State; his Majesty shall be bound when soever they require him, to assist the
Cantons at his own charge with 2000 foot and 200 horse, so long as the war
shall continue: and if the three cantons shall have need of greater
assistance, his Majesty shall send it without delay. But, if the three Cantons
shall think it more commodious to have money then men; his Majesty in that case
as long as the war shall continue, shall effectually pay unto them 10000
crowns a month; and withal shall lend them 6 feeld pieces with their due
munition, upon condition that they shall be restored when the war is ended.
6. His Majesty as Duke of Milan, out of his royal bounty and in testimony of
his love and affection unto the three Cantons, does promise to pay to every
Canton yearly, at the Feast of Saint JOHN BAPTIST, the sum of 3000 florens,
every one being 15 Batzes of the money of Coire; the first payment to begin
on the said first Feast day, after the accord shall be sworn. Seventhly, That
this present capitulation shall no way prejudice the ancient League and
alliance which the three Cantons have with the Crown of France, the which
shall remain in full force and vigor. And lastly, that this capitulation shall
be perpetual and hereditarie.

This accord bred a great combustion among the Grisons (whereof two third parts
are Protestant The Grisons proceedings in the year 1618.
Caluinists) and was the chief and only cause which made them to proceed
criminally against many Catholic persons and of quality: that is to say,
against the Bishop of Coyre, the Archpriest of S^ndrio, RODVLPH, and POMPEIVS
PLANTA brethren, JOHN BAPTISTA Preuost, with an infinite number of others. And,
for the justification of their proceedings, they published a Protestation to
the world, giving all men to understand, that certain priuare persons had
sought to usurp the government of their State, and to appropriate unto
themselves those Soueraignties and powers which did properly belong to all the
Communalties in general: the which they attempted by their great wealth and
power, by corruption and presents, and by the alliances of their kindred: And
this was not done at one instant; but, sometimes in one Communalty, and
sometimes in another, as occasion was offered, to reduce them under their
particular power. Which subtle practices had succeeded so well, as not only
the free Allies with their subjects, but also if Princes and foreign States
desired to obtain any thing from their State, they were forced to receive it
from these private persons, who practiced all kinds of treason, infidelities,
falsehood, deceits, tyrannies and violences; whereby they brought their Estate
into great contempt with all Princes and foreign Potentates; who, by their
Treachery and rashness, have been promised those things which they could not
effect. These lamentable courses being observed by some men of judgment, yea
and by the common people (desiring to prevent the danger by some lawful
means) they complained in the last Assembly held at Dauos in the year 1617,
before the three Cantons, being their superiors, of these intolerable
proceedings: and there, after an ample declaration of the miseries reigning in
the State, had seriously insisted for a necessary reformation, by the most
convenient means. Which business, in regard of the great importance and for
other urgent causes, was sent by the Magistrate before the reverend judges and
all the Communalties, being the supreme power of their estate: whose intention
they followed. And whereas after, in a Synod held in April in the year 1618,
it had been resolved that a writing of the said tenor should be published to
all Counselors and Communalties of every parish, with instant prayers and
exhortations to provide by all lawful means without any commotion, for the
restoring of the liberty of their country, freeing themselves from the
fraudulent Treaties of some of their subjects with Princes and foreign
estates, to the end they might not be brought into just contempt; but rather
to carry themselves in such sort toward them, as their Ancestors had done;
and so, their fidelity and integrity should be esteemed:

All which notwithstanding, those Authors of sedition had sought to abuse the
common people, and to maintain their violent command by their ordinary
practices. Whereupon the reformed Preachers in all the parishes had earnestly
insisted for a necessary reformation of the whole State; and required, that
some good men might be chosen out of the Commons (which were no way tied or
engaged to any Princes or foreign States) to whom they might reveal certain
treacheries of some tyrannous commanders, who were no longer to be suffered,
and whose reiection might be the restoring of the estate. But the people being
out of hope, that in so small a number of Deputies they should ever obtain any
good success; 1622
and finding in like manner that these tyrants could not be vanquished but by
multitudes: not for any fear of their forces, but only for plurality of
voices, and to prevent all kind of corruptions and false persuasions; In the
end of June the year 1618, the five Communalties of Engaden The Grisons
assemble, requiring a reformation of the state.
and Valthasna the lower, together with those of Musterthall, assembled
themselves, having sent Letters and Embassies to the other Communalties of the
three Cantons, requiring them to do the like and by virtue of the Union to
assist them as being most oppressed, for that their power and authority was taken
from them, and usurped by some private persons; their laws falsified, their
statutes changed, and their goods and means wrested from them, under pretext of
public authority; to the end these new laws might be abolished, and the
ancient liberty of their ancestors restored, that also the treasures of Princes
and foreign States might no more be wasted by private persons without the
priuity and consent of the whole State, and that they might not be so
treacherously deceived by the vain promises of such men.

At their earnest entreaties, there came to their succors in the beginning
good numbers of men from some other Communalties; who willingly agreed for the
restoring of the common estate, and the election of indifferent Judges to
punish criminal offenders. Rodulphus Planta prepared to resist the Grisons.


In the mean time, the chief Author of these alterations, and Attempter upon
the sovereign authority, called RODOLPHVS PLANTA, having as it seemed a guilty
conscience, retired himself to his Castle of Vildenbourg in Zernets; the which
he fortified and furnished with victuals and all things necessary, having
drawn unto him six hundred men to defend it, and seized upon the passages,
broken the bridges, and committed all acts of hostility against the neighbors
and Allies. But, seeing the Troops of the Communalties approach, he fled into
Tiroll with some of his most confident friends. During these proceedings, the
other Communalties of the three Cantons sent an Embassy to Engaden, offering
to assist them to repair the common estate, to restore the laws, and to
settle justice, so as they would cause their Troops and Ensigns to retire; to
the end that, all violences ceasing, Justice might be administered indifferently
to all men. But, answer being made unto them, that the power of the seditious
delinquents and of their adherents was so great, that without the aid and
assistance of many men, their enterprise would be in vain; therefore they
pressed the other Communalties to assist them with such Troops as they themselves
should think good upon so just a business: which thing was granted. Assemblies
at Coir and Thusis.


Upon this resolution, every Communalty of the whole State assembled, some with
their ensigns, some without, at Coire, and from thence to Thusis in the upper
Rhetia; where, with a general consent, for the restoring of their estate and
policy, they renewed certain ancient laws, and made some new, touching the
late transgressions: whereunto also their Allies which were absent, consented,
with some little moderation. The tenor whereof consisted in these Articles: New
articles made as Thusis.
first, that the free exercise of both religions, reformed and Catholic,
should be allowed in all their lands and jurisdictions, and every man
maintained and defended by the generality in his profession; secondly, that in
all their Territories, every league, Communalty, justice, and particular
persons, noble or ignoble, should be maintained and protected in their
privileges, customs, dignities, goods and ancient possessions; and that in
all differences they should be bound to submit themselves to the decision of a
neutrall judgment: thirdly, that their subjects should be governed in equity,
and be no more exposed to tyrants, as happily some had been: fourthly, that
the treasure of the common estate should be better governed, and that they
should not suffer the common revenues to be any more wasted and consumed by
private persons: fifthly, that no particular man should presume to treat with
any Prince and foreign Estate without express commandment, upon pain of
death; but, those alliances which should be orderly made, and by a common
consent, they meant to maintain with all loyalty toward all estates their
neighbors, showing them faithful and good neighborhood, with other
circumstances, etc.

In this Assembly there was appointed a criminal chamber to proceed against
certain perfidious Erection of a criminal Court as Thusis.
persons; whereof some were prisoners, and others fled. To the which Court of
Justice every Canton deputed two and twenty Judges, nine Examiners, two
Treasurers, one Secretary, and two Vshers: and finding, that by the authority
of the reformed Preachers and Ministers, the people had hitherto been
maintained in better order, it was also thought good, that nine of them should
be admitted in this business, but not at definitive sentences: all these were
bound to swear to discover all such as had done any thing against law and
equity: That they should not respect rewards, friendship, hatred, factions or
any other thing which might draw 1622
them from the rule of Justice; but rather attend the honor of God, the free
and prosperous estate of their country, and sacred Justice.

Among the prisoners (whose processes they were to make) the chief was JOHN
BAPTISTA Preuost called ZAMBER, lying at Vespran, in the upper Pregell: who (by
the confession of certain The criminal process of Preuost.
persons executed some years before, the deposition of witnesses, and by
Letters written with his own hand) was convicted that he and his consorts had
given aid and counsel to build the fort of Fuentes upon the frontiers of the
Grisons country: To have received presents in money from Millan; and to have
been gratified with the free transportation of Corn and Wine, paying little
for the custom; and to have taken rewards to mediate the treaties made in
former time with the State of Milan; and, on the other side, to have received
money and a great pension from the Ambassador of a foreign Prince, to dissuade
the Grison Communalties from that alliance* the which being testified by the
witness of men of reputation, in the end he confessed it with all the
circumstances; and moreover said that RODVLPHVS PLANTA, wi^h some others which
were dead, had resolved the design of the said Fort of Fuentes at Dauos, in
the year 1603, during the Assembly of the league there, to the end that they
might thereby force the people to their devotion, and treat a league with
Millan at their pleasure, the which PLANTA had much affected. For which crimes
he was condemned (as a Traitor to his country to be quartered; his goods to be
confiscate to the benefit of the Cantons, yet without prejudice to his wives
portion and his creditors: His house to be rased, and two pillars set up in the
place for a perpetual infamy; but at the intercession of his friends and
kinsfolk, he being 74 years old, and having 9 children, they showed him some
favor by losing only his head; and the demolishing of his house, was referred
to the disposition of the Cantons.

NICHOLAS RVSCA, Arch-Preest of Sond^rs, being a prisoner, was accused of the
like crimes, both by the deposition of witnesses, and the confession of some
which had been executed, The process of Nicholas Rusca.
and also by Letters which were found about him: All which he constantly
denying, or seeking to avoid by subtle devices, he was condemned to the rack;
the which he endured the first day, being without any weight: but, being tied
unto it again after the same manner, he grew so weak as they were forced to
unbind him, so as he presently after died, not without suspicion of poison by
some manifest signs appearing in his body. They proceeded in like manner, by
way of contumacy, against such as had absented themselves. JOHN Bishop of Coir
was accused The process of the Bishop of Coire.
for that 11 years before he had bin banished by the judgment of certain
indifferent Judges, consisting of both Religions, chosen out of the 3 Cantons,
for many perfidious actions, and obstinate disobedience against his country;
That he had taken and given money to cross the Swissers their trusty Allies*
That he had put his Bishopric into the protection of their enemies: And,
finding himself guilty, he labored to have the title of Legate in Germany; That
afterward he had favored their perfidious inhabitants, who had usurped the
Sate-gouernment, and had returned into his Bishopric at Coire, whither he was
conducted by RODVLPH PLANTA the chief Author of the treason; and continuing in
his old train, he had assisted at all consultations which had been made against
the liberty of the country. For these and diverse other crimes objected against
him, and verefied by his own Letters, and the deposition of witnesses; they
confirmed his banishment for ever, and confiscated his goods, without prejudice
to the Bishopric; They degraded him of his Episcopal dignity, commanding the
Chapter to choose another, forbidding all men to lodge him in their
Territories; and if he were taken, to be executed by the Sword.

This criminal Court proceeded in like manner against diverse others which
absented themselves; but especially against the 2 brethren RODVLPH and POMPEY
PLANTA, who had bin The process of Rodulphn^ Planta, by contumacy.
the ringleaders of all these alterations. RODVLPH, who had been Captain
general of all the Valtolin, Judge criminal of Zernetz and of the neighbor
Comunalties, and Captain of a company of Grisons for the French kings service;
was accused of many heinous crimes, whereon I must of force insist somewhat the
longer; for that he was the chief actor and procurer of all these combustions.
The Archduke of Austria of Inspruck, has certain rights and privileges to be
criminal Judge in the lower Engaden on S. GEORGES day, with the approbation
and consent of the Commons: some years before, the said PLANTA had bin chosen
to that charge for the Archduke, wherein he had continued and never demanded
any renewing or confirmation, contrary to al custom, having audaciously usurped
this authority, as if he had obtained it by purchase or inheritance, bringing
in criminal Judges at his pleasure to be at his devotion. By which means he
drew to himself the Sovereignty of all that jurisdiction, without any
opposition; that he had reinstalled the Bishop of Coire (who for his treason
toward his Country had been banished by 1622
a general Sentence) into his Bishopric and Castle before he had obtained
pardon; that by this means he might have him at his devotion, for that the
Bishop has power to create certain Magistrates, and especially those which
have the government of the revenues of the Church. Having good intelligence
with the Ambassadors of France, not only they to whom they gave pensions were
most commonly forced to attain to them by the intercession of PLANTA; but also
by his practices he had obtained from the said Ambassadors great sums of
money, new pensions and increase of the old for his adherents; that he usually
entertained spies in their Countries and Jurisdictions, who revealed to him
whatsoever was said or done against his person, persecuting such as any way
opposed him. Moreover, to increase his authority, he had changed the statutes
and laws in his Jurisdiction, raised the amercements and fines, and for 35
years together had disposed of all things at his own pleasure. By these and
such like practices he had grown so powerful* that for many years he had the
direction of the most important affairs, and through great corruptions and
presents had at his pleasure swaied their Communalties and free Countries,
disposed (with his adherents) of many offices, presumed to make and break
leagues, and to stir up seditions against good men. His jurisdiction was
miserably tyrannized by him, the privileges of the Communalties broken;
depriving them of the free election of their Magistrates, and entertaining them
with vain hopes, that so all might depend on his favor.

When the estate of the reformed Clergy opposed it self, in the year 1617,
against the dangerous league practiced between the state of Milan and the three
Cantons; murmuring openly against it, he persecuted them, and threatened to
deprive them of their ministeries, imprisoning them, and to use them worse. His
practices against his Country were such, that he thought to deprive them of
their liberties by fraudulent and prejudicial articles of confederacy with the
duchy of Milan* After he had obtained and procured by corruption the
renunciation of the league between Venice and the Grisons, he devised new
Articles: which was called the league of Zutze; by which some Communalties,
lying upon the passage, bound themselves not to suffer any one to pass through
their Territories, to hinder all succors from the Venecians. But when, in the
year 1617, the league and passage was solicited for the Duchy of Milan, he was
one of the first to yield to a perpetual passage for the Spaniard against the
former accord; that he had forced the Venetian Ambassador to depart their
Countries, had levied Troops, and had made certain barbarous Articles, the
which they would force the Inhabitants to observe; esspecially, that no
Minister of the reformed religion should presume to reueal his intention to the
Commons, nor give his voice in any matter concerning the Country: which was
allowed to the poorest man of their free state; and that they had erected a
chamber of justice, whose principal direct^r had treated with all affairs by
the direction of the said RODVLPH PLANTA and his brother, as had been
discovered by the Judges themselves; that they had bound themselves by a
particular oath to the Bishop of Coir against the sworn customs of the country;
that they had tyrannized over the Ministers of the reformed religion,
commanding them strictly not to meddle with the affairs of Spain, imprisoning
some, and threatening them with death.

But in this year 1618, when as some Communalties did rise to prevent this
mischief, he presently forced the Magistrates of his jurisdiction to bind
themselves to him by oath, and demanded succors from others, to the end he
might raise a civil and intestine war, and the common people kill one another;
whereby he might make himself Soueraign of the Country. When he saw his
enterprises were frustrate, and that he might be called in question for his
actions, he absented himself, and did not appear. Wherefore, seeing he had
drawn unto him the greatest treasures of the liberty of their Country; that
is, To make and disannull laws, to treat and break leagues, to create and
depose Magistrates, to dispose of war and peace, and in this authority to use
all kind of treachery, force, tyranny and treason, he was condemned to
perpetual banishment: and whosoever should bring him alive, to have one
thousand crowns; and he that should bring his head, five hundred. Being taken
alive, his body was to be broken upon the wheel, and quartered; his goods
confiscate to the Communalties without prejudice to the just pretensions of his
wife and creditors; his house to be rased, and Pillars of infamy to be there
erected. The Communalty which did relieve or lodge him, should pay 1000 crowns
for a Fine: and if any private person did entertain him, he should lose his
honor, and be condemned in the like Fine; and if he had not means to
satisfy it, his body should suffer for it. Whosoever should presume to treat
of his liberty, write Letters, converse with him, or receive Letters from him,
should forfeit body and goods: The like sentence was given against his brother
and diverse others; whom they charged to have been pensioners to Spain, to make
him absolute 1620
Master of their passages, and to have taken money from the State of Venice;
with promise to second their demand touching the opening of passage for
Soldiers, and that in case no other did contradict it, they would be silent.
By these means they had gathered together the Treasure of the said Potentates,
sometimes deceiving the one, sometimes the other; and thereby had brought the
Country into contempt.

The Catholics of the Valtolin complained much of the proceedings of the
Grisons, pretending that they were not their Subjects, but their Allies, and
that it was a mere usurpation; The Apology of the Valtolins.
producing certain Articles concluded between the Bishop of Coire, and the
three Cantons on the one side, and the inhabitants of the Valtolin on the
other, in the year one thousand five hundred thirteen. First, that the
inhabitants of the Valtolin and the Communalty of Till, should for ever yield
due obedience to the Bishop of Coire and the three Cantons in honest and
lawful things. Secondly, that the Inhabitants of the Valtolin and Communalty
of Till, should be faithful Confederats and Allies to the Bishop of Coire and
the three Cantons. That in all Assemblies, when it should be fit to call them,
they should have place with them, and a deliberatiue voice touching all matters
concerning the public good of the said Communalties: and when as they should
be called to any Diet, every Communaltie of Till, should be bound to send a
Deputy. Thirdly, that the Inhabitants of the Valtolin and the Communalty of
Till, should enjoy their ancient customs and privileges, so as they were
conformable to justice. Fourthly, that the said Bishop of Coire and the three
Cantons, should be bound to give aid and counsel to the Valtolins and
Communalty of Till, in favor of his Imperial Majesty and the Duchy of Milan,
as necessity should require: And the said Valtolins should be freed from all
taxes and impositions, as well as the subjects of the three Cantons. Fifthly,
that the Valtolin and Communalty of Till, should yearly pay unto the Bishop of
Coire and the three Cantons, a thousand Florens in ready money; to be levied
indifferently upon the lands and goods of such as dwelt in the said valley.

This they made the ground of their alteration; and in the year one thousand
six hundred twenty, fell to acts of hostility, as you shall hear. They said
that God had in the end given them means to free themselves by their own
Arms, from those miseries: That the Ministers of the reformed Religion had, in
their pernicious Sermons and Writings, gotten great credit with the simple
people, disguised the truth, blamed innocence, supported crimes, and
entertained divisions and discord: That they had sought to suppress the
profession of the Romish Religion in the Valtoline: and touching the
Government of the State, That the greatest offices had been set to sale,
without respect of merit or virtue: That touching matters of civil Justice,
the poor lost their right, they were condemned with all injustice, they took
away their goods violently, at the pleasure of the Judges; who sold justice,
for money, to pay their A faction of the Romanists in the Valtoline.
purchases: These, and infinite other things, put the Romanists of the
Valtoline out of hope ever to receive any better usage from their pretended
Lords the Grisons. Besides, that which they had learned of the Assembly of
Thusis, made them apprehend many bad designs against them and their families,
and drew some of the Catholic Communalties to meditate of the means, how to
free themselves from so cruel a servitude; and therefore they gave the
Magistrates of the Grisons notice of the barbarous proceedings of the criminal
Justice of Thusis, and the cruel sentences given against some of them: But
finding no reformation, by means of the Heretical Ministers (as they termed
them) the Romanists, hoping for no better usage, resolved either to perish
suddenly, or to free themselves from the subjection of so barbarous a
Government. Whereupon the Romanists of the Valtolin and the valleys depending
of the Grisons, conspired together: their pretext was, that seeing themselves
banished and deprived of their goods, and their houses rased and demolished;
having often assembled and conferred in secret, touching so many miseries and
calamities, and finding no hope of better usage; as well in regard of those
which governed, as of the great hatred of the family of the Salici Grisons,
their deadly Enemies; who, sought to usurp the Government of the State, the
which they could not easily do unless they should banish the honestest men of
the Country which crossed their designs: The chief of this faction in the
Valtoline (whose names were ROBVSTEL a Knight, Captain JOHN GVICHARDI, ASZO
and CHARLES BESTA brethren, JOHN MARIA PARAVICIN, FRANCIS VENOST; and in the
bottom of the valleys, RODOLPHVS PLANTA, the Podesta Giouer, JOHN MOSINE, with
diverse other banished men) plotted secretly to free themselves from so many
tyranous subiections (as they pretended) and to purge their Country from
heresy, by the cutting of the Protestants throats. ROBVSTEL 1620
acquainted his friends and kinsfolk with this design, and invited PARAVICIN
(a banished man, who was retired to Como) to approach unto the Frontiers with
what men he could, to the end they might put it in execution on Sunday the 26
of July: but fearing to be discovered if he should delay his design any longer
(for that his Messenger, whom he had sent to Como, had been taken) he went only
with a hundred soldiers to Bormio, where he slew the Podesta, with all his
family, and hung him up: The like they did to as many Caluinists as they found
there, except the women and children: The like his confederats did in other
places, They kill the Protestants (...)the Valtoline.
burning and spoiling all their houses and goods; so as some Authors write,
they slew above 400 persons. After this furious murdering of the poor
Protestants, some of them marched with their Troops toward the valley of
Malingo, and assured themselves of that passage, having broken the bridges, and
made Barracadoes to stop the Grisons entry that way to Sondres, the chief
Town of the Valtolin Another Troup went toward Barben and other places, and
slew all they found of the contrary Religion. PARAVICIN came from Como with
such forces as he could draw together, and seized upon the mouth of the River
of Ada, to stop all succors which might come to the Protestants by water.
Finally, they made themselves Masters of the whole Valtolin, being fortified
daily with new Troops which came to succor them, whom they put in Garrison in
the most important places joining to the Grisons and Venecians, where they
brake all the bridges and built some small forts. These things, thus executed,
ROBVSTEL was, in an assembly of the communalties in the Valtoline, chosen
Governor of the whole Vallie; under whose protection they submitted themselves,
promising to expose their lives for the Catholic faith, and the liberty of
their Country: this acknowledgement being made, he presently disposed of all
the Magistrates and Officers for the administration of Justice.

The pitiful cries of the poor Protestants passing the Mountains, the
Cantons sent three thousand men to suppress the fury of these Rebels: amongst
the which there were many Hollanders which had formerly served the Venecians in
the Gulf; but, they were soon forced to retire without any great exploit,
doubting the arrival of some other forces. At the same time The Valtolins
crave rotection and aid from the king of Spain
the Governor ROBVSTEL sent Ambassadors to Millan, to entreat the Duke of
Feria, the Governor, to receive the Valtolins under the protection of the King
of Spain, and to assist and defend them; who willingly embraced this occasion,
and supplied them with forces, whereby he hoped in time to get an entry for his
Master in that valley: so as the Catholics power increased daily, having
drawn together, about the midst of August, an Army of six or seven thousand
foot, and seven hundred horse: And to countenance them the more, the Duke of
Ferda, Governor of Millain, had sent twenty two Ensigns of Spaniards and one
thousand horse unto the Frontiers of the Valtolin, under the command of the
General of the horse of Milan, enioyning him to have a care that no soldier
should go out of the limitts of Millane, unless that some succors should
come unto the Grisons from Foreign Princes: inferring thereby, that if it were
lawful for the Venecians to succor the Caluinists against the Romanists, it
should be as lawful for the King of Spain and his Ministers to protect and
defend the Catholic Valtolines: And if that should happen, he commanded him
to enter both with his horse and foot.

The Grisons did what they could to make head against their enemies, and had
drawn at least 5000 men into the valley, being masters of Sonders and many
other places: but they, hearing that ROBVSTELL approached with his Army of
eight thousand men, retired speedily by the valley of Malengo, and past the
Mountains: By whose flight, the Valtolin wholly remained in the power of the
Catholics, who assured themselves of all the passages. During these exploits
in the Valtolin, PLANTA, GIOVAR, and MOLINA used the like cruelties against the
Caluinists in the valley of Munstel, PLANTA desiring to make himself Governor
of that valley, and GIOVAR of that of Misuleine. This is all which has passed
in the enterprise of the Catholic Valtolins, from the 26 of July in the year
1620, till the midst of August; who being assisted by the Spaniard, forced the
Grisons succors (consisting of five thousand men) The Spaniard* possess the
(...)
to repasse the Mountains. The loss of the Valtolin, thus surprised by
banished men by the help of the King of Spain, concerned the Swissers as well as
the Grisons, and might also threaten their liberties; and the Romanists knowing
they were not able to subsist of themselves against the reformed Protestants,
the King of Spain gave charge to his Governor of Millan to defend them against
all hostile violence: Whereupon the said Governor raised some forces which he
sent to them. After diverse mili^ary exploits, the Spaniards not only subdued
the whole Valtolin, but also fortified themselves ^n such sort in the
Mountains and their valleys, as no man 1622
could safely pass. Wherefore, to prevent this mischief (for that it
concerned all Swisserland, if the Spaniard should ge^ a free passage by the
Valtolin into Germany) they appointed a general assembly at Bade: Bu^, for
that the Archduke LEOPOLD had formerly taken some places there which had
belonged to the Jurisdiction of Austria, and forced the Inhabitants to do him
homage before the ancient rights had been settled in the former State, and to
that end had leuie^ great forces in Alsatia, therefore the assembly at Bade
proceeded very slowly.

The Grisons being duly informed of the Spaniards attempts, who (under a color
to restore such as had been banished, and to plant the Catholic Religion)
sought to make themselves Masters The Grisons make an Edict touching liberty of
religion.
of their Country, they appointed an assembly at Luzerne, calling the
Protestants thither; with whose consents they made this decree: That whereas it
was apparent to all the world, what tumults had been in their Country, and
what seditions had been raised by turbulent persons to oppress their
liberties; for the preventing of these miseries and dangers, they had decreed
by oath, carefully to defend their liberties with the hazard of their lives and
fortunes; to leave religion free to every man; to maintain peace and to live
lovingly and quietly together; so as no other Religion should be admitted but
the Catholic Romish and the reformed, the exercise whereof should be free unto
them. That all vows and oaths taken or made against the liberty of religion
in these two points (That is to say, the hearing of the word of God, and the
Sacraments of Baptism and the Lords Supper) should be abrogated and held
void, neither should any man be bound to stand unto them. If any one in
contempt of either religion should forbear to come to church, to hear
Sermons, or to receive the Communion, the Church where he dwells shall have
power to punish him. And to the end that both these religions may be truly and
really exercised, it shall be lawful for every man and Church to cherish and
advance his religion, to bestow costs and to give stipends by himself or by
others for the maintenance thereof: To erect Schools and Seminaries, and to
institute ministers and Doctors in Churches and Schools, without any
distinction or difference betwixt Monks and Jesuits and Doctors of the reformed
Religion, so as neither party offend the other: That honest men and of
integrity be chosen, and that they forbear to tax or slander one another: That
Ecclesiastical persons of what Religion soever shall treat only of spiritual
things, and not meddle, with political affairs, upon pain of being removed
from their charges, and the loss of life and goods, being lawful for every
Magistrate to punish them in whose jurisdiction they shall be found; and if he
shall not do his duty, the whole Communalty may question them: or if they
shall neglect it, every pri^ate man may punish them and enjoy their goods,
unless they shall first fly to the Bishopric of Coire or to the house of
Tisiden, where they shall have Sanctuary: All judgments given at Thufis,
Ciseret, and Dauos, and all decrees made there in the years 1618. 1619. and
1620, with all conclusions made to the prejudice of the French King, shall be
abrogated, and every one shall have liberty to prosecute those which have any
way unjustly wronged them in these judgments: That the Authors of sedition by
reason of the Venetians practices should be punished: That the hereditarie
confederations and Leagues made with the house of Austria, the French King, and
other States and provinces, should remain firm; That the French Ambassador
(so as the King would stand to his promise) should be restored to his place:
That hereafter there should be no seditions raised, upon pain of the loss of
life and goods for such as should be the Authors; and any States, which should
attempt the like, should be excluded out of the League, subdued at their common
charge, and reduced into servitude. That no City nor private man should pretend
any thing against the Judges of the confederates, nor commence any Action
against them, without the knowledge and consent of the Senators of most of the
confederates, upon the like penalties: That all secret practices should be
removed, and justice equally administered to all men; and offices distributed
without respect of persons: That all care sholud be taken for recovery of the
Valtolin, Worms and other places, and reducing them to the League craving aid
from the French, the Millanois and others; and that no man should attempt aught
against this transaction and decree, vponpaine of infamy and the loss of life
and goods.

This year 1621. the French King began to labor for the restitution of the
Valtolin, sending Mounsieur BA^SOMPIERE his Ambassador to the Swissers, to
prevent the danger Articles propounded to the Grisons touching the Valtolin.
whereunto the Realm of France was subject, if the Spaniard should enjoy that
Country and stop up the passage. The Governor of Milan, to disturb this
Treaty, propounded certain Articles to the confederate Grisons: That there
should be a perpetual peace between them and the Milanois; that the Valtolin
should be left to the Grisons, with all privileges and immunities; but upon
the conditions, that there should no religion be used there but the Romish;
1622
that the ecclesiastical jurisdiction should belong to the Bishop COMO; that
they should use the decrees of the Council of Trent and the new Calendar; that
the Protestants, who had been driven away for religion, should enjoy their
goods, and return twice in the year if they pleased, but might not stay above
two months at a time, neither might they seek any occasion to dwell there with
their wives and children; that they should give no offense unto the Catholics;
that such as should break the ecclesiastical constitutions, should be punished
by the Spaniards, and that they should suffer the Valtolins and Grisons to
enjoy their laws and customs; that the Spaniards should hold the Fort at Riua
for five years: which being ended, it with the Fort of Pusin should be rased;
that they should have garrisons in the Valtolin for eight years; that the
ordinance should be taken out of the Castle of Sonders, and that the keys of
Tirano and Morbegno should be kept by the confederates; that the Spaniards
should have only a defensive passage through the Grisons Country, going
unarmed, and through the Valtolin armed; that the garrisons should forbear to
meddle with any civil or criminal actions; that Rebels should be pardoned for
their rebellion; the King of Spain on the other side should pay yearly unto the
Grisons 1500 ducats; that, desiring to have any Leuies from the Grisons, they
should not be bound to send above four and twenty companies, and not less
than twelve; that the Spaniards should defend the confederate Grisons against
all foreign invasion; that the restitution of the Valtolin should be made
only to the chief of the Grisons, and to such as should embrace these
Articles: the rest that should not within one month allow of that treaty, nor
have another, should be held for open enemies.

This Treaty did not satisfy the Grisons: for, they of Engaden, going up to
the white hill with some troops, desired to know of the Inhabitants whether they
would take their parts, renounce The Romanists defeated in the Valtolin.
the Spanish capitulation, and defend religion, giving them four and twenty
hours to resolve: who yielding to their desires, they presently joined their
forces together, and charged the Roman confederates at the passage of a bridge;
where they slew many, and put the rest to flight: who, retiring toward Hantz,
were pursued by the Engadins; but, finding themselves too weak, they slew their
own horses and fled, cloying two pieces of ordinance, leaving their arms and
all their victuals and baggage behind them, notwithstanding that 2000 Spanish
foot and 300 horse came to relieve them; who, seeing the flight of their
companions, and being much troubled with snow, returned to Milan. There were
many other military exploits performed with good success by the Grisons,
whereof I cannot insist, lest I should be too tedious. The Spaniards had
attempted Cleue in vain, being repulsed by the valor of the Besieged. The
Romanists craved more aid from the Gouerner of Milan against their enemies; who
sent them a supply of 1000 foot and 300 horse, with good store of money and
warlike preparations, until they should be further assisted with 6000 Germans
and 4000 Neapolitans, with 400000 crowns which was promised from Spain.

The war continuing still in the Valtolin, and no party willing to yield to
the other and to lay down Arms, in the end there was an Assembly appointed at
Coire to end the controversy; whither A Treaty at Coire.
the French King sent his Ambassador, who propounded these following Articles
to the Cantons: first, that all soldiers should be dismissed out of the
Valtolin; secondly, that there should be pardon for all offenses; thirdly, there
should be free exercise of religion in all the Valtolin, and the Territories of
Cleues and Vormes; fourthly, that the league with the Swissers and the Lords of
Saint Gal. should be inuiolably observed; fifthly, that Ambassadors should meet
at Lucerne for France, Spain, and the Duchy of Cleues, to confirm this
hereditary league under their hands and seals. Moreover, the confederate
Cantons were required, that having forgotten all which was past, they should
suffer those which were fled, to return into their possessions: but they,
fearing some new treason, made answer, they would take some further
deliberation; and when they of Zurich were admonished to call back their
soldiers, they promised to do it willingly when the Archduke LEOPOLD had
withdrawn his forces from the Frontiers, and the King of Spain restored the
Valtolin. But all these Treaties could not settle a good peace, the Spaniard
and the Austrian being loath to leave what they had gotten. They fortified some
Frontiers, made new Forts, and repaired Sonein and Bormeo; so as the
restitution was deferred. On the other side, the New combustions in Swisserland.
Swissers fortified themselves strongly against the attempts and hostile
invasions of the Spaniards, in building new Forts, raising Soldiers, and
preparing cannon: and although the Spaniard had attempted to surprise a
Fortneer unto Claue by treachery, yet the Swissers repulsed them with loss.
1621


This year in October, the Governor of Millan, having seized upon the county
of Cleue, he left the Earl of Serbellone there for Governor, sending his
Wallons and Neapolitanes toward Chiauenne; who not only took the place, but
seized upon the whole valley. Soon after the Neopolitans passing into the
valley of Borchyane, they slew all they met without mercy: and although that
(...)Captain of the Grisons attended the enemy with some troops, with an intent
to fight; yet finding himself too weak, he yielded with all his Soldiers to
the victor: and for that the women in the lower Engaden had prepared to defend
themselves with stones, spits, and other like womanish weapons, and had cruelly
slain above 80 Austrains; therefore the other Soldiers fell upon them, and put
very many of them to the Sword. To end all these miseries, the Grisons sent a
Commissioner to the Governor of Milan, to move him to a treaty of Peace, and a
suspension of Arms.

A little before, the Archduke LEOPOLD of Austria, without any effusion of
blood had The Arch- D. Leopolds success in the Grisons Country.
subdued Prettigau, Meinfelt, both the Engadens, Musterthall, Coire, and all
the inhabitants of the 3 Cantons; all which (although in former times they had
been held invincible) craving the victors pardon, yielded themselves; their
Captains, commanders, with their Protestant Ministers and some of their Troops,
flying into Swisser-land, and Germany: After which he placed Garrisons in all
parts of the Country. Soon after in the beginning of the year 1622, the Grison
State growing desperate, and their country in a manner wholly possessed by the
Spaniard and A pacification with the Grisons
the Archduke LEOPOLD, they were glad to sue for Peace; the which, after some
difficulty, was confirmed with these Articles: 1. That the Romish Religion
should remain firm and immutable. 2. That Cleue should be restored, and only
the Romish Religion allowed. 3. That the places in Engaden and Prettigaw,
should remain to the provincial Prince; the which heretofore did belong to the
house of Austria. 4. That the king of Spain and the house of Austria should
have a perpetual passage. 5. That there should be 30000 Florens of yearly
pension paid unto the Grisons. 6. That it should be lawful for the Spaniard to
leauie 3000 Grisons when he pleased. 7. That hereafter the Valtoli^ should be a
Commonweal, and the king of Spain have the title of Protector, allowing no
other Religion but the Catholic Roman. 8. That all Leagues should be made
void.

All these treaties gave no contentment to the poor Grisons, which grew
Jealous of their liberty and Religion: for they were given to understand that
the Articles of Millan had made The Grisons rise against the Spaniards and
Austrians.
them subject to the yoke of Spain, and divided them from the other
confederats; that their Country had lost her liberties, was reduced into
servitude, and spoiled of her wealth; and which was most of all to be lamented,
they were deprived of the food of their souls: whereupon the poor people
grew desperate, resolving rather to die then to suffer that bondage. Wherefore,
on the fourteenth day of April they (being formerly disarmed) went into the
Wood, under color of gathering green boughs, where they armed themselves
with Bats and Staves, and set upon the Spaniards and the Archduke LEOPOLD'S
Soldiers with great fury, nothing regarding their shot; so as they slew 500
of them in several places. BALD^RON had a Garrison of a hundred in the Town
of Schirsens, of which they slew fifty with their Clubs; the rest, flying into
a steeple, were smothered and burnt: The rest of the Soldiers in many places
retired themselves from the fury of these Clubs, unto Castle, Mynfelt, Coire,
and other places.

They that came to Castle, being besieged by the Prettigauers, took an Oath
to go out of the Province, and never to bear Arms against the three Cantons;
but, coming to Guttenberg, they forgot their Oath, and were again entertained
by RITNA^ER. After this these Commons went to Mynfelt, where they fortified
themselves after their tumultuous manner. In the mean time Ambassadors came
from the Swissers unto RITNAVER, entreating him to abstain from Arms, and
give ear to some honest composition, wherein they would do all good offices.
But he, neglecting their requests, made haste to Steiga to fight with the
Confederats, setting a village on fire, thinking they would run to quench it;
but the Prettigauers, regarding not the fire, marched against RITNAVER; whose
Soldiers seeing them, cried out, Comeye Cow-suckers (for so they called them
in contempt) We will this day give you a new God: To whom they answered, We
are well pleased with that only GOD which created us, redeemed us by CHRIST,
and has preserved us till this time in the unity of Faith, by the power of his
holy Spirit. For his glory we fight; and then, like mad men, they set upon
them and slew four hundred, forcing 1622
above two hundred of them into the River of Rhyne, RITNAVER himself hardly
escaping. After which, they cut off a Mill near unto Maynfelt, forcing the
town Garrison to retire with loss.

In the mean time there came about one thousand Neapolitane Soldiers to
Coire; who making an irruption into the valley of Schanfice, carried away their
Cattle, burnt the Town of Mallader, and raged most cruelly over those poor
wretches which were unarmed and unacquainted with War: Which the Confederats
hearing, they fortified themselves at Sizera, against the Spaniards; and above
Seiet about nine hundred Grisons charging them, they forced them to abandon
their Camp and retire to Coire, having slain many of them and taken two
pieces of Ordinance with great store of Arms and much Cattle: After which
exploite Maynfelt taken by the confederate Grisons.
they returned safely unto their Camp. Soon after they seized upon dives
important passages, and pressed Maynfelt with such violence and eagerness, that
the Town and Castle were forced to yield, upon composition that they might
depart with their Arms and baggage, on the twenty third of May.

After this they took a strong passage, which was held by six hundred
Spaniards: the Garrison whereof was so terrified with their Clubs, as they
compounded to depart with their Arms and baggage. This done they went to
Coire, where they seized upon a Fort before the Coir taken by the Grisons.
Town, which was very commodious for them; from whence they so annoyed the
Townes-men, that no body durst walk in the streets, having easy means to
burn the Town, for that they had cut away their Conduits: The Spanish
Garrison, being driven to great Streights, compounded to depart on the sixth day
of June, upon these conditions; That they should the next day go away with
their Ensigns, Arms and baggage; That four Captains, who were prisoners
with the Colonel RVYN^L, should be dismissed and let go, putting in caution
to the Bishop and Chapter, that none of the Confederats should be wronged in
their going away; leaving three Captains for Hostages. The Confederats, on the
other side, should defend the liberties of the Bishop and Chapter, and
protect them from all Injury; That the Soldiers should have meat and drink
for their money in their going away, and release two Captains whom they had
taken prisoners. These conditions being accepted, Colonel BALDERON went along
with the Italians toward Cleue, and the Germans (which were in number nine
hundred and fifty) marched another way, having all of them taken a solemn
Oath, never to carry Arms either against these Confederates, or against the
Protestant Cities.

After this happy success, the Confederats, having given thanks to God, wrote
Letters unto The confederat^ Letters to all free States.
all the States, Commonweals, and free Cities of Germany, to whom the
recovery of their liberty, and safety of the Church was pleasing. The tenor of
their Letters was this, that whereas they been unjustly oppressed by the
Austrian and Spanish soldiers, contrary to their liberties and privileges
enjoyed for many Ages, lost all their passages, and with them the exercise of
religion, and forced with threats to embrace another; they could do no less
than, despairing of all relief, seek to recover by the sword their lost
liberty both of body and conscience; that God had favored their endeauours
with good success, who no doubt would still assist them if they did crave it
with humble hearts. And whereas those mountain places had been disarmed and
deprived of all munition for the war by those barbarous soldiers, so as they
were not able of themselves to bear the charges of the war, they were
enforced humbly to entreat all Commonwealths and Cities which loved liberty
and religion, to assist them with some money in this commendable design;
hoping, that they would take this their petition in good part, and consider
carefully how much their preservation concerned all reformed Commonwealths,
and to have these passages free and without danger; the which, the house of
Austria had much affected, and now (hating the liberty of Germany) had brought
in a manner under their power; that with the assistance of God they had
recovered some of the chief, and doubted not (if so they might have any help)
to recover the rest: for the which they would be thankful to their
Benefactors, and pray to God to increase the spirit of wisdom, courage, and
Christian charity in all Commonwealths and free States, and protect them from
all their enemies.

After the taking and fortifying of Coire, the Grisons, reviving their former
union, put some prime men to death, without any form of Justice; for that they
had set their hands to the treaty of Millan: and they wrote Letters to the
Swissers of Lucerne, and the other four Catholic 1622
Cantons, entreating them to retire their forces which they had upon the
Frontiers: The Abbat of Disertine promised to ioyn with them, to lay open the
passage, and likewise to assist them with 20000 Florens toward the war.

The poor Grisons seemed now to be in good hope to recover their lost liberty,
and the passages which had been usurped by their Enemies: but they were ill
assisted by the French, The Arch duke pre^ailes again in the Valtolin.
Lorraine, and German, whom these passages did much import; so as they, being
destitute of help, the Enemy increased his forces: for the Archduke LEOPOLD
had good means by the retreat of Count MANSFELD, to prosecute the wars in
the Valtoline; whither he sent new supplies, and Colonel BALDERON had drawn
the forces of Millan also into the Valtolin, toward Chiauenna; with whom the
Earl of Sultz joining, they spoiled the Country of Prettigaw, and put all to
the Sword. There was an Assembly appointed at Lindaw; where the Archduke
LEOPOLD would yield to no peace without the restitution of Coire and other
places. After which, that City with the upper and lower Engaden, the
Commonalties of Dauos, Prettigaw, and the Lordship of Maynfelt, were taken by
force; and many Grisons with their assistants, sent from the Swissers, slain
at Saint MARTINS bridge near the lower Engaden, where BALDERON forced his
passage.

The Archduke was now Master of the field; whereupon the Grisons sent unto him
to treat for their lives though they had lost their liberties: and therefore
they were forced to accept of such miserable conditions as it pleased him to
propound unto them; which were, That one of the Cantons should be divided from
the other two, and after that day belong unto the house of Austria, as
hereditary subjects. Secondly, that the house of Austria should not suffer the
Inhabitants Articles agreed upon at the Diet of Lindaw.
to use any other then Catholic Religion. Thirdly, that all Leagues and
Alliances should be made void except those which they made with France; which
Article included only the subjects of the house of Austria: but the two other
Cantons should have leave to keep their old leagues. Fourthly, the Garrisons
of Spain shall be continued for six years in Coire, Mainfelt, and upon the
Frontiers, as necessity shall require; but no new fortification to be made in
those parts; except in Prettigaw, and those places which did belong to LEOPOLD.
Fifthly, all Rebels to have a general pardon. Sixthly, that free passage should
be granted to soldiers through their country according to the Capitulation
made at Millan, Anno 1617; and that all passages should be presently opened, in
regard of commerce. The Grisons murmurred much against these Articles;
pretending that the first made them subject to a family, being free States:
and that in the Capitulation of Millan in the year 1617, they treated as free
States; wherein there was no mention made of any subjection to the house of
Austria, and that Spain was to give three Objections to the Articles.
thousand florens yearly during the League. The second, they said, restrained
their Consciences. Against the third, they objected that it divided them
amongst themselves, and would breed a civil war and make them subject to any
potent Prince that should come to assist either party. The fourth they held
very dangerous, pretending that by allowing of Garrisons, they should be still
kept in fetters, having found by the fort of Fuentes what ruins the building
of Forts had brought them unto: Moreover it had been concluded at the treaty of
Millan in the year 1617, that the Fort of Fuentes should be rased, and no more
built again. They also feared that six years being expired, the Spaniard would
be as loath to leave the Country as at that present; and although their pardon
was promised; yet no man of resolution would sue for it: for that whosoever
fought for his country, would be ashamed to confess himself a Rebel to the
vanquisher; whose subject he does not yet acknowledge himself. And unto the
sixth they affirmed, that to give a strange soldier free passage through their
country, were to let-in an Enemy; and so to be subject to the insolency of
soldiers, how kind and loving soever the Prince which sends them be unto them.
Thus the poor Grisons were ouer-mastered at this Diet at Lindaw, and forced to
submit to the house of Austria, and to acknowledge part of their country to be
the inheritance of that family; so as Archduke LEOPOLD resolved to put a
Governor into the country under him. Upon the ratification of these Articles,
there was a surcease of Arms, and the Spanish and Imperial forces were to
depart the Country, all but such as should be let in Garrison. But it seemed
neither party was contented with this Capitulation: for neither did the
soldiers retire as they should have done; but continued still in the Country,
and committed great insolences, contrary to the agreement at Lindaw: Neither
were the Grisons in show well pleased, finding little ease by this accord,
being also pressed by the Confederate Swissers, and by the French kings
Ambassadors, to demand better conditions: 1622
touching the which they had a conference at Coire, where the French
Ambassadors told them, that if they accepted those Articles, and subjected
themselves to the house of Austria, the King their Master would hold them for
Enemies; seeing that whereas he had entered into League with them as free States,
they now acknowledged themselves subjects to that house. Wherefore to free
themselves from the fear of this bondage, they must be forced to fly for aid
unto such Princes as the passage of the Valtolin does most concern; namely the
French King, the Duke of Sauoy, the State of Venice, Lorraine, Germany, the
Swissers and others, who it is thought will assist them for their own interest:
for if they enjoy the Valtolin quietly, the Emperor and Spain shall have easy
passage for their Armies to join together and assist one another; there being
no obstacle, they having got these Valleys, whereby they will be fearful to
all the neighbor Princes of Christendom: But you must attend the events of
these Combustions, until the next year.

Faults escaped, correct thus;
FOlio 571: line 18: they, their. 574: 25: and 54. 579: 55: Pius 5, Pius 2. and
56: who, hoe. 582: 52: Pius 5, Pius2. 584: 2: scarely, scarcely. 613: 36:
Puolomini, Piccolomini. 640: 14: getting, going. 641: 11: Florusco, Horulco.
642: 3: Osorio, Osorio. 642: 14: Moiados, Baiados. and line 25: Grenades,
Granadins. 644141: yet, it. 645: 6: Bonguet, Boniuet 645: 40: change charge.
646: 24: in, into. 651: 1: Lauidriano, Landriano. 652: 46: being in, being
received: and line 47: godly, goodly. 660, 57: soldiers, Souldans* 679: 53:
battle, batteries. 751: 21: doubted, doubled. 766: 11: Emperor, Cardinal.
767: 33: direct, divert. 771: 3: employ, undertake: and line 7: Bauaria,
Bohemia. 772: 41: contributions, combustions. 773: 19: which, with: and 19: all
your, you all. 779: 52: Mastric, Cambray. 782: 14: reserve, preserve. 785: 4:
Captain, the Captain. 7^6: 9: your, their. 802: 8: as, so as. 806: 33: go by,
go to the. 107: 10: Philip third, Philip the third. 809: 32: object, objected:
and line 33: his, this. 812: 6: 12000, 1200: and line 34: Princes, Provinces.
813: 35: with, which. 814: 35: house, horse. 817: 23: Palatine, of Saxony. 826:
12: cup, cap. 828: 1: to yield, not to yield. 834: 46: the rest, with the rest.
842: 42: the march, his march. 850: 11: Cheine, Chimei. and 35: Neppel, ^eppel.
165, 38, they been, they had been.


