AN EXAMINATION OF CERTAIN MOTIVES TO RECVSANSIE.

By W. BEDELL.



Printed by the Printers to the University of CAMBRIDGE;

And are to be sold at London by R. Daniel, at the sign of the Angel in
Lumbard-street. 1628.

TO THE RIGHT Worshipful, my very good Friend, Sir THOMAS BARKER.
SIR,

I Send you here, an Answer to that Paper I received from you; containing a
collection of certain Reasons, conveyed into the hands of some devout
Gentlewomen your friends, with purpose to divert them from society with
Protestants, and specially in Gods service established among us. Upon the first
view of them, I marvelled at the Authors strange drawing and misapplying
Scriptures to his purpose, and at the opinions which he imputed to ancient
Heretics, whereof, to my remembrance, I had never read nor heard before. But
when I came to examine the places more particularly in his own Authors, I
found cause even to be astonished at the boldness of the man, that taking
advantage of the credulity of such good people, durst put such a packet of lies
into their hands: And I could not but pity their case, who being fallen into
the net of error, are by such a cunning, but ungodly practice, in danger to be
inwraped and snarled by this persuasion of separation, so as, if Gods mercy be
not the more, there is no means for them to come ever even to understand this
falsehood, whereby their simplicity is abused. There is not a more approoved
remedy against the stinging of a Scorpion, then the Scorpion it self bruised
in oil, and applied. I have here endeavored to bray this Scorpion; it shall
be your part to apply it. And if this Collector can and will justify under his
name his Doctrine of Separation, and his Catalogue of Heresies, and his Charge
of Protestants to renew them, he shall prove himself an honest man: if he
cannot, and will yield to the truth, at least a good Christian. If he do not
one of the two, request your friends (as our old Proverb has it) to let him
continue in their Pater noster, but cast him, and his additions to the
Catholic faith, for ever out of their Creed. Concluding, I desire God to give
you and them a right understanding in all things, and to follow the truth in
Charity; and rest

Yours in Christ Jesus W. BEDELL.

AN EXAMINATION of certain Motives to RECVSANCIE.
Society with those of contrary Religion, has always been pernicious and
unlawful. THis Assertion is very Answer.
confusedly set down. As it stands without limitation, it is utterly untrue;
and besides, nothing to the purpose; For, society of such as are of a false
religion with those of the true Religion, has been often very profitable to
them, always lawful. And the Religion of the reformed Churches is not a
contrary religion to that of the Roman obedience, but only different, as pure
and corrupt, reformed and deformed.

For the discovery of the truth, the words and terms are to be opened. This
term Religion, is not always used in the same meaning: Sometime it is put for
the persuasion of the mind and judgment, touching some divine nature, and the
devotion of the heart toward the same: as the Jewish religion, A^. 26. 5. So
religion of Angels, Col. 2. 18. sometimes it is put for some more special
observance and ceremony, as the Religion of the Paschall Lamb, Exodus 12. 26,
43. According to which sense, the rules of Saint Benedict, Saint Basil, and
others have Vulgat. edit. quae (...) ista religi^*
been called religions; although they had not a diverse faith or persuasion
touching God, nor yet a different worship in the substance, but only in
circumstances, as apparel, forms, and hours of prayer, and such like.
Contrary Religions therefore are such as have a contrary faith touching the God
they worship; as Jacob and Laban, Genesis 31. Or a contrary manner of worshipping
him in matter of substance. Circumstances and differences in opinions,
government and ceremonies, do not make a diverse, much less a contrary
religion; as appears in the religion before and after the Law written, before
and after Christ. These were different, as an infant, a child, and a man of
years, yet the same person.

As for the term Society, it is likewise of diverse sorts; one in the duties of
religion, another in common life. Wherein again some is necessary, and not at
our choice and discretion, as the society of parents and children, servants and
masters, subjects and princes, citizens, neighbors, kinsfolks, passengers in
the same ship, guests at the same table; yea, every man with another, in that
he is a man. Some again is voluntary, and at pleasure, as of contracting
marriage, friendship, familiarity, choosing our habitation and company with
whom we will consort our selves. These explications premised, I answer in these
five propositions.

First, society in the worship of God with true believers, professing pure 1.
religion, is lawful and necessary, and when it may be had, cannot long be
omitted without sin, Psalm. 122. 1. I was glad when they said unto me, let us
go into the house of the Lord, Psalm. 133. 1. Behold how good and how pleasant
it is for brethren to dwell together in unity, Act. 2. 42, 44. The Christians
of the primitive Church are said to have continued steadfastly in the Apostles
doctrine and fellowship, and in breaking of bread, and in prayers, and were
together: and Verse. 46. And they continuing daily with one accord in the
Temple, and breaking bread from house to house, did eat their meat with
gladness, and singleness of heart. Heb. 10. 25. Not forsaking the assembling
of our selves together, as the manner of some is.

Secondly, society with men that worship the true God, though in some 2.
points ignorant or misbeleevers, may be holden so long as they are not
obstinate, and God is not dishonored: Act. 19. 9. Paul resorted to the
Synagogue of the Jews, till they were hardened, and blasphemed the way of the
Lord, then he separated the Disciples. See also 1. King. 8. 41. where Solomon
prays for the stranger that was not of Gods people Israel, but came out of a
far country, and should come and pray toward the Temple, that God would
hear, and do according to his request, that all the people of the earth might
know his Name, to fear him as Israel did.

Thirdly, society with men that worship 3
a false God, or the true God with a false and Idolatrous worship in the
exercise of their religion, is utterly unlawful, Deuteronomy. 12. 30. Take heed to
thy self, that thou be not snared by following them, after that they be
destroyed from before thee, saying, how did these nations serve their gods?
even so will I do likewise. Thou shall not do so unto the Lord thy God. How
near so ever they be; Deuteronomy. 13. 6, 7. If thy brother, the son of thy mother,
or thy son, or thy daughter, or the wife of thy bosom, or thy friend, which
is as thine own soul, etc. So Exodus 32. 27. The Levites are bidden by Moses
from the Lord, to slay every man his brother, and every man his companion, and
every man his neighbor, that had committed idolatry by worshipping God in the
golden Calfe.

Fourthly, civil society with men of a false religion, or wicked life, to 4.
whom we are necessarily bound by the Law of God, or man, must be holden, and
cannot be broken without sin: as that of the subject and the Prince, Romans
13. the husband and the wife, 1. Cor. 7. 10. servant and master, 1. Pet. 2. 18.
yea, Jew and Samaritane, Luke 10. 37.

Fifthly, civil society, such as is unnecessary with men of a false religion 5.
or wicked life, albeit sometimes it be turned to good, yet it is hazardous to
the professors of the truth, as 2. Chron. 18. 31. and Chap. 19. 2. where
Iehosaphat hardly escaping with his life, is thus reprooved, Should thou
help the ungodly, and love them that hate the Lord? And Genesis 19. 15. Lot is
sent out of Sodom in haste, with this terror, Lest thou be consumed in the
(...) of the city. And Peter, while he would associate himself with the
servants of the high Priest needlessly, fell into the snare of the Devil, and
denied his master, Matthew. 26. 58. 70. And 1. Cor. 10. 27. If any of them that
believe not b^ you to a feast, and ye will go, etc. He does not absolutely
forbid it, but implies the danger in going to the feasts of Idolaters. And 2.
Cor. 6. 14. expressly forbids entermarrying with such* Be not unequally (...)
with unbele^vers, etc. But let us examine his proofs.

In the law of Nature, the ruin of all mankind in Noah his flood, came
Object. 1
of this; That the children of God kept not themselves apart from the society
of the wicked, Genesis cap. 6. verse. 2. THis is very true, but nothing to our
present purpose; for neither Answer.
does it appear by the text, that these wicked people were of a contrary
religion, and the children of God entermarried with them, which was to hold
unnecessary fellowship with them, whereby they were drawn away to their
corruptions, verse. 11, 12.

The professors of true religion did so far avoid the followers of errors,
Object. 2.
that they would not after their death be buried in the same Churchyard;
therefore Abraham bought a special place for the burial of Sara and himself,
Genesis 23. 20. THe professors of true religion never Answer.
esteemed much where their bodies were buried after death, as being assured,
whatsoever became of them, they should have a glorious resurrection. Neither
were there in Abraham's time, Churches or Churchyards to be buried in, nor was
it the use to be buried all in one place; every man was buried in his own
possession: So that the burying of Sara, in a field purchased by Abraham, is
very fondly attributed to a desire of separation from the Canaanites. Abraham
had not till then a foot of land in the country. And whereas Jacob and Joseph
gave charge of their burial in the land of Canaan, it was to confirm their
posterity in the faith of Gods promise, that he would give it them for an
inheritance, Genesis 50. 25.

Conformably to this the Israelites employed the money of Judas, to Object. 3.
buy a field for burial of strangers, Matthew. 27. 7. Thus Gods people both
alive and dead, refused in religious actions the society of those who were of
contrary religion. The true Israelites would in no wise communicate with the
schismaticke Samaritanes, Ioh. 4. 9. and 3 Reg. 12. and this, because they put
away the true Priests, and set up a new service, to withdraw men from the right
service, which was ordained in Jerusalem. THe strangers, for whose burial a
field was bought with the money Answer.
which Judas received for betraying our Lord, for any thing in the text, might
be Prosely^, and not of a contrary religion. Howsoever, the wicked murderers
of Christ (if there had been any religion to be put in the not burying the
strangers with Gods people) would not of likelihood have been the ^st, nor are
the most commendable Authors of this practice. Let them glory in this
president, that dig up the bodies of the dead, and cast them out into the
fields, or bury them in dunghills, or burn them to ashes. How much more likely
is it, that the holy Ghost would typically set forth by this story, that the
price of our Lords blood should procure to the Gentiles, (who were strangers
from Ep^s. 2. 12, 13. Act. 1. 19.
the Commonwealth of Israel) a place of sleep and rest; though the Priests
purchase was to them and Judas, a field of blood. As touching the Samaritans,
and the Israelites separation from them; first, the original of the
Samaritanes is not rightly referred to the time of Jeroboam, 3. Reg. 12.
Samaria it self was not then built, nor the ten Tribes carried away captive,
in whose place the (...) came above two hundred years after Ieroboams reign.
These Samaritanes were not only Schismatickes, but Idolaters also, 2. King.
17. 4. The cause of the Jews separation from them (even after they had a
Priest of Aarons line, See Joseph. A^t. l. 9. c. 14. and l. ^1. ^hap. 8. and l.
12. cap. 7.
and a Temple and service like to that of Jerusalem, erected by Sanballat, for
Manasses his son in law, upon mount (...)) was the express commandment of
God, appointing Jerusalem the place of worship; besides many other respects*
religious and civil. But our Lord Jesus Christ, even in the place here
alleged, communeth with a woman of Sa^ria, asks drink of her, and after,
gives to her and the men of the City, water of life: And elsewhere
impersonateth in a Samaritane the duty of mercy, which a Priest and Levite had
neglected: And rebukes the preposterous zeal of James and John, which would
have called fire from heaven upon the Samaritanes that received them not;
giving us rather an example of meekness and gentleness toward all, howsoever
exasperated against us, then of further enraging and setting off those that are
separated.

Korah, Dathan, and Abiram made a schism against the Priests of Object. 4.
God, presuming to worship the true God, as the Priests did, whereas it was not
their office: see the event, Numb. 16. 26, 30. The earth opened, and they went
alive to hell, with all that were in their company. THe rebellion of Korah and
his company, against Moses and Aaron, Answer.
is very plainly referred to the seeking the Priesthood, verse. 10. As for the
offering incense, it was by the commandment of Moses, verse. 17. I see not what
this example makes to the purpose, unless it teach men not to rend themselves
from the Church of God, or join in the despising of government, with them that
seek worldly glory, and not the glory of God.

Heresy, for the confusion and dissension Object. 5.
in the doctrine, is called Babylon. The Prophet Jeremy says of it, Fly from
the midst of Babylon; go out from her my people, lest you be partaker of her
sins, and receive of her plagues, Apoc. 18. 4. and cap. 14. 9. To be with her
in the act of her rebellion, in the service of God which she has set up, to
pull down the true service of God, is to bear her mark. ROme, for her
holding the people Answer.
of God in captivity, for her pride and cruelty answerable to the old Babylon,
(wherout Jeremy called Gods people in his time) is the mystical Babylon,
whereof Saint John speaks in his Revelation. Which is plain from her
situation upon seven hills; her rule over Revel. 17. 9.
the kingdoms of the earth; The great city where our Lord also was crucified,
Chap. 11. 8.
(viz.) by the authority of a Roman Deputy, and a Roman death. Her merchants
are the great men of the Chap. 18. 23.
earth; her merchandise is not only slaves, but also souls of men, whether
we take it of men's lives, which the court of Rome sets to sale; or the souls
deceased, which they chaff^r by indulgences and pardons. Out of this Babylon
Gods elect people are exhorted to Verse. 4.
come; these are properly the Church of Rome, not the faction which bears the
name of it, over which the Pope is now styled Monarch. To receive his Agnus
De^s, hallowed Pictures, Beads. Medalls, is to receive his mark, Chap. 13. 17
in token of special devotion to him, and his Court; and not to be content to
be a Christian Catholic, unless ROMAN be added to it, is to bear the
number of his name.

The Heretic, because he will not Object. 6.
obey the Church, must be avoided no less then a heathen, in his service to
false Gods: So says Christ, Matthew. 18. 17. and Saint Paul, 1. Cor. 10. 21. You
cannot be partakers of the table of our Lord, and the table of Devils: the
like, 2. Cor. 5. 14. 17. THe place of S. Matthew does not Answer.
speak of an Heretic, but of a brother wronging his brother, and after
private admonition, refusing to obey the Church: which may be understood of an
assembly, as well Civil, as Ecclesiastical. As for the avoiding him, no less
then a (...) in the service of his false gods, it is a very false exposition of
the text, as is piaine by the word be^hen the Publican. For the Publicanes
being such Jews, as farmed the public toles and customs of the people of
Rome, came to the service of God in the Temple, as is evident by the Text, Luke
18. 10. Such a one was S. Matthew, before his calling. These were in ill
conceit with the Jews, as were also all Gentiles, whereto our Saviors words
are to be referred. A Heathen and a Publican, is no more then Publicanes and
Sinners, Chap. 11. 19. and Mark. 2. 15, 16. The Jews did not lodge, or eat
and drink with men uncircumcised, Act. 11. 3. 18. In the text of Saint Paul, I
think very shame made the Author of these Collections to leave out clean all
the former part of the verse, which according to the Remish translation is
this, Ye cannot drink the Chalice of our Lord, and the Chalice of devils:
unless it were some respect rather, lest if he had set it down, he might
seem to have blasphemously called the celebration of the holy Supper of our
Lord, according to his institution, entire with the distribution of the
Chalice, the Chalice of Devils; although the blasphemy is the same, if he
account the Communion table, the table of Devils. The Apostle speaks plainly
of the feasts made in honor of Idols, and in the 2. Cor. 6. of marriage with
Idolaters and Infidels. Me thinks very shame, if not charity and the fear of
God, should restrain men from applying these texts to them which believe the
Catholic faith, and are farther from all show of Idolatry then themselves.

2 Thessalonians. 3. 6. 14. We denounce unto Object. 7.
you brethren, in the name of Jesus, that you withdraw your selves from every
brother walking inordinately, and not according to the doctrine they have
received of us. THe Apostle speaks of such as lived idly, and busied
themselves Answer.
about those things that pertained not to them, as many Jesuits are by Romish
Priests and Catholics said to do: such he would have to be avoided in
ordinary conversation, yet accounted brethren, Uers. 15. But the Roman
charity, though they cannot lay to our charge, that we walk not according to
the doctrine we have received of the Apostles, accounts their even-Christians,
Heretics, Schismatics, Dogs, Infidels; and requires this of those whom they
teach, To pursue them with Stapleton. Orat. 30.
all their might, as the most certain and detestable plagues of Christendom,
and fasre and wide to chase them out of their coasts.

A man that is an heretic, avoid Object. 8.
him, Tit. 3. 10. Romans 16. 17. EVen these Texts are misapplied to our present
purpose. The Apostle Answer.
in the former place teaches Titus, whom he left to order the Churches in
Creet, how to behave himself toward an heretic, that is, such as perversely
and obstinately overthrow the foundations of religion; he bids him forbear to
deal further with him, (...).
after he had once or twice admonished him, and give him up as incorrigible.
The second Text, Romans 16. speaks of society in conversation, not to be had
with those that make dissentions and scandals, contrary to Christ's doctrine.
Now let all Christians decline such.

1 Ioh. 2. 11. If any come to you and bring not this doctrine, receive Object.
9.
him not into your house, nor salute him. He speaks of all such as revolt,
and persist not in the doctrine of Christ, as in the text, verse. 9. this he
commanded under pain of being guilty of his heresy. Thus he practiced with
Cerinthus, and his disciple Policarpe, with Marcion, and the heretics of those
days. THe doctrine whereof Saint John Answer.
speaks, is not the Popes Primacy; or that God is to be served in Latin; or
the Scriptures not to be read by the lay people; or that they may not receive
the cup in the Lords Supper; or Purgatory, Indulgences, and such trumpery: but
that which he mentioned in the seventh verse, when he says, Many deceivers are
entered into the world, which confess not that Jesus Christ is come in the
Flesh. Such a one was Cerinthus, who said, That Jesus was not borne of a
Virgin, but the son of Joseph: and that after his Baptism Christ descended
into him; and that when Christ withdrew himself from Jesus, then he suffered,
but Christ suffered not. With him as ( Ireneus lib 3. cap. 3. Yet Epiphanius
says it of ^bion.
Policarpus reported) Saint John would not abide in the same bath, for fear
lest it should fall down, whiles Cerinthus the enemy of the truth was in it.
Such ^n other one was Marcion, whom Polycarpus called, The si^st begotten of
Satan. S. John speaks of such overthrowes of the Gospel. With what
conscience is this applied to them, whose whole endeavor is, to persist in the
rejecting the unnecessary additions thereto, for which the Court of Rome does
cunningly style them Heretics?

If we will be saved, we must make profession of our faith, says Saint Paul,
Ob. 10.
Romans 10. 10. THis place is very truly interpreted of the profession of our
faith. Answer.
And yet the sole Judge and Interpreter of the Scriptures, if we believe the
Romish faction, expound it of Confession of sins, in the ^acrament of
Penance. Thus Pope Benedict the eleventh teaches the whole Church out of the
Chair of Saint Peter, in a Decretall Epistle [Extravag. com. l. v. de
privileg. c. inter cunctas.] And this ridiculous interpretation, the Author of
these Collections, if ever he have professed his faith by the rule of Pope Pius
the fourth, has sworn to admit. But since profession of faith is so necessary,
why do they withdraw Catholics from this duty, which is performed twice every
day in the Commonprayers of the Church of England, in a tongue understood, in
the very form wherein it was professed in their names at their Baptism? And
every Sunday and Holy day in the Creed of the Roman Church; thirteen times in
the year in Athanasius Creed, the conclusion whereof has these words, This is
the Catholic Faith, which except a man believe faithfully, he cannot be saved.
I think this Author could not have chosen a fitter text to diswade from
Recusancy then this is, which shows the necessity of making profession of our
faith, if we will be saved. The truth is, these men have no respect to the
glory of God, or the salvation of souls, but only to the maintaining of their
own faction.

To make show to be of the Church of an Ob. 11.
heretic, is to deny Christ before men. He that is not with me, is against me;
He that gathers not with me, scatters. Matthew. 12. 30. IT is marvel he
could not remember Answer.
another speech of our Saviors in the Gospel, He that is not against us, is
for us. So much the more, because the occasion thereof was a case very like
unto ours. One cast out Devils in Christ's name, and the Apostles forbad him,
because he followed not with them; Forbid him not, says our Lord, for he that
is not against us, is for us, Luke 9. 49. What then? Is he contrary to
himself? No doubtless: But in the one he teaches us to admit and receive all
that prosesse his Name into our society; yea, and if they will be singular, yet
to rejoice that his Name is preached, with Saint Paul, Phil. 1. 18. In the
other, when it is slandered and blasphemed, as it was by those which said, He
cast out devils by Bel^ebub, not to be neutrall, but to undertake the defense
of truth and innocence against malice and falsehood; for in that case, not to
confess him, is to deny him. Now since the reformed Churches do not only
speak nothing amiss of our Savior, but are ready with S. Paul to die for his
Name, what rage is this of the Court of Rome, to cast them out, to forbid them
to preach, or others to hear them, or pray with them; to persecute them with
sire and sword, as if they were worse then infidels and misbeleevers?

Thus the Scriptures are plain, that men of diverse religions may not Ob. 12.
communicate one with another in the act of their religion. And this is
observed by the Lutherans, the Calvenists, the Anabaptists, and all other sects
in other Countries; only England admits to their society, Lutherans,
Calvenists, Puritanes, Brownists, and Catholics; whereas the general Councels
of Nice, of Sardick, of Chalcedon, of Constantinople, of Ephesus, whenever
they condemned the Arrians, and other heretics, they forbid the Catholics to
frequent their company. This means God ordained, that we may know which was
the faith which was first taught by the Apostles, which could not have been
discovered from heresies, if all the former heretics had equally been as in
show of the same Church, bearing the name of Christians, no less then the
Catholics. THe Scriptures prove no more then has before been admitted.
Answer.
Men of a false religion may communicate with those of a true; men of the same
true religion for the substance, with those that in circumstance do differ
from them; Latins, with Greeks, Aethiopians, Russians. Where he says, the
contrary is observed in other countries, I am verily persuaded this is utterly
untrue, there is never a one of these, and join the Romists to them, which if
not for reason of conscience, esteeming themselves to have the truth, and
rejoicing that another enclines to embrace it, yet out of desire to increase
their own party, is difficult to any that resorts to their assemblies, as
desirous to join with them. That which he adds touching the Councels,
besides that after the Scriptures, it is as vain a labor as to light a candle
in the Sun; it is a mere crack of names, to prove that which no man denies,
that Catholics may not frequent the companies of blasphemous heretics; yet he
sets not down any one Canon of all these for the purpose; and he mentions that
of Sardick for a general Council, where it was but a particular; and that
which we now have, not that which was anciently in Saint Augustines times. But
none of all these forbad the heretics to be admitted to hear Sermons, or to
be present at the prayers of Catholics; yea, the fourth of Carthage expressly
Can. 84.
enacts, that they should not be forbidden. And the Council of N^ce receives
the Can. 8.
Novatians without difficulty, yet promising, they would communicate with
these that had married the second time, and such as had fallen in persecution.
The latter of which two being the only thing for which the Donatists refused
society with the Catholics, they were not only invited, but by the terror of
Laws ^ged thereto, no less then Recusants are with us. A plain argument that
then it was holden, That where the Catholic faith is rightly confessed,
society in Gods worship is to be maintained. Where he adds, that God ordained
this means, that we may know which was the faith first taught by the Apostles.
I do not think he understands himself: what means could this be to discern
which was the faith first taught, when as the Apostles told before, that of
themselves should arise men, speaking perverse things, which would not fail to
challenge to themselves the names of Christians, and separate from their
opposites. And it is a speech unworthy of a man of any ordinary capacity, that
the faith could not be discerned from heresies but by names.

Christ pretending to convert the Pagans, ordained this separation in external
Ob. 13.
acts of religion, that they might know to which Church to repair, without
danger of error, in embracing Christianity. THat which must be a mark to
discern Answer.
two things one from the other, must not be common to them both. A Pagan
therefore that desired to embrace Christianity without error, how should he
know by separation whither to repair, if Arrians do no less separate from
the orthodoxall Christians, then they from the Arrians? And at this day, if as
he said right, now Lutherans and Calvenists do as well separate from others,
as others from them; how can this be a note to discern without error where
true Christianity is to be found?

In our days the Lutherans and the Calvinists, undertook to convert Ob. 14.
the Infidels in New France, both preaching Christ: but being in faith one
differing from another, the Infidels not knowing which to choose for true
Christians, they sent them both back again. THis is as true as the golden
Legend excels all other books; as much as Answer.
gold all other mettalls. I marvel out of what Country the Lutherans went
into New France, or by what way they were sent home again. The Author of this
fiction seems to have imagined, that New France is as near and accessible to
France and Germany, as the Frank County; and the Infidels there as able to
discern what makes a different faith, as the College of the holy Inquisition
at Rome. But, the blind swallows many a fly.

There is but one truth, and one only true Church wherein it is conserved, Ob.
15.
and of whom it must be learned in this only Church are Gods people, and in
this he has ordained Sacrific^, Sacraments, and a peculiar external service
to worship him, that he may be known to be their God, and they to be his
people. IN the multitude of opinions there is but one truth. And among sundry
Answer.
truths there is but one necessary to salvation, that wherein the holy
Scriptures (as the Apostle says) are able to Tim. 3. 15
make us wise by the faith in Christ Jesus. The Keeper of this truth, and of
the Scriptures in which it is treasured, is the Church: not of one City, but
the Catholic Church, that is, the fellowship of Saints dispersed through the
whole world. This is that Church, in which only are Gods people. In this he
has ordained the commemoration of Christ's Sacrifice, till his coming again;
with a service, not now consisting in rites and ceremonies, but reasonable, as
the Apostle teaches, Romans 12. which for the particular manner of it may be
diverse in diverse places; but for the general, must be with understanding and
edification, 1 Cor. 14. 15, 26 and with comeliness and order, verse. 40. Such
is (God be praised) the service used among us in the Churches of England.

That the new invented service of God is schismatic, and the doctrine Ob. 16.
now preached is heresy by the judgment of the primitive Church, and for such
condemned; see the fathers of those days, who as the Apostles ordained, have
noted all such as have taught contrary to the says, which was delivered to the
Churches by the Apostles. HItherto has been the endeavor Answer.
of the Author of this Collection, to prove it unlawful to hold society with
those of a contrary religion. Now he goes about to show, that the Church of
England is of a contrary religion. But herein he behaves himself so
superficially and slightly, as if he would have it presumed and taken for
granted, or received upon his word without proof. And for the former, he has
alleged some twenty texts of Scripture, though some of them very
impertinently, as has been seen: For this, there is not so much as one word of
Scripture where there was most need, both in respect of the matter, being the
convincing of heresy: and the men, against whom he deals, ever resting in
the authority of Scripture, and appealing to that rule and Touch stone.

He says, the new invented Service of God is schismatic.

This, if he mean it of ours, is a slanderous speech without proof.

That it is so, he bids us, See the fathers of the primitive Church. Why? how
should the Fathers (if our service be newly invented) condemn that which they
never saw or heard? This is to trifle, and presume his Readers are simple
Innocents, that will take such general proof as this [See the Fathers of
those daies] What if they be no Scholars? What if they have no leisure? What
if they be told, that the Fathers of the Primitive Church do, by their
describing the service of God in their own times, as it were in a table,
picture out ours? That for the Sea Mornay of the Eucharist. l. 1. c. 3. B.
Jewel in his Sermon at Paul's Cross upon 1 Cor. 11. 23
present service of the Roman faction, of all the old Fathers they have not
one? Well, yet in this his modesty is to be commended, that he would not say,
the service of God which we use is heretical, but schismatic. We take his
Confession; and sure it proceeded not from want of will to speak the worst, but
from lack of matter to furnish out his accusation, if he should have said
otherwise. For the substance of our Service being a Confession of our sins; the
pronouncing of Absolution to the penitent believer, according to the commission
of the Gospel; the Psalms; the Lessons out of holy Scripture; the Hymn of
Saint Ambrose, called Te Deum; that of Zachary, the blessed Uirgin, and Simeon;
the Apostles, and Athanasius Creed; the Lords Prayer; the Collects, for the
most part the same which themselves use, but in a tongue understood; Slander
it self never yet durst accuse it of heresy. The like may be said for the
celebration of the Sacraments, and the rest of the acts of the public
Ministry.

And here I desire the Reader to consider, how he shuffelleth in this second
part of his Argument; for he began with men of a contrary religion, and
heretics; now he falls to such as have a schismatic Service. Which of the
Fathers ever accounted difference in Service heretical or schismatic? when
as neither any particular form was prescribed by our Lord Jesus 1.
Christ, nor delivered by the Apostles, or yet ordained by any general
Council, to be used in the Catholic Church.

The liturgies of the Greek Church, which go under the names of Saint 2.
James, Saint Mark, Saint Basil, Saint Chrysostom, are extant, differing each
from other, and from those of the Latin Church; whether the later of Saint
Gregory, or the ancienter of Saint Ambrose. In Gregory's time it is plain,
that the Churches of France had not 3.
the same service with the Church of Rome; for when as Austen, whom he sent to
plant the faith among the English, demanded, why there was one custom
Interrog. 3.
of Masses in the Roman church, and another in the churches of France? Saint
Gregory bids him, That he should choose, whether in the Roman, or any other
Church whatsoever, might most please God, and establish it in the new Church of
the English. In this Church of England, even to the day of the reforming 4.
the Service, we had diverse orders, as of Sarum, York, Hereford, Bangor. And so
had they in Italy it self, till Pius Quintus reformed the 5.
Breviary and Missall, after the Roman 1568. and 1570.
use, enjoining all Churches to follow that, unless where they had for above
200* years, a custom to celebrate otherwise. And Pius acknowledges, that in
the reformation of his Breviary, those 6.
things that were impertinent and uncertain were remooved, and the Missall
Aliena and incerta.
restored to the ancient rule and rite of the holy Fathers. Which reformation
notwithstanding, and that Pius decrees by his Bull prefixed, that nothing
should at any time be added, taken away, or altered; yet in the time of Clement
8. it was again corrected, and in some things corrupted, as Marsilius, one of
the Uenetian Divines, shows in his answer to Card. Bellarm. Lo, the Schism
that we are blamed for. The Church of England, finding in the Service of God,
diverse things impertinent and uncertain (as themselves confess) endeavored
to restore it, according to the ancient rule and rite of the holy Fathers; as
they also after her pretend. She has brought the whole Realm to one use,
which they also imitate. She has taken, upon diligent survay of the service of
all Churches, whatsoever seemed most pleasing unto Almighty God, as Saint
Gregory advises. She has appointed it should be in a language understood by
the people, as both the use of the Primitive Church warranted, and Saint Paul
expressly commands; and the very light of reason requires. (...).


And this Service, whereat themselves cannot take the least exception, is
branded with the note of Schismatic. Albeit, the Church of England
professes to hold Communion with the Catholic Church throughout the world;
yea, with that of Rome it self in all points of the Catholic Faith. And
Christ be judge betwixt us and these politic make bates, which for no other
cause, but the maintenance of their faction, do make contention among brethren.

But the next accusation is sorer, and comes home to the quick; he says, The
doctrine now preached is heresy, and for such condemned; and instanceth in
eight points, and referres to the Catalogues in Saint Epiphanius, Philastrius,
and Saint Austin. Let us see the particulars.

Simon Magus was condemned for Heresy, for saying, That faith alone Ob. 1.
does justify. THis heresy of Simon Magus is Answer.
neither reported in Epiphanius, nor Philastrius, nor Saint Augustine, nor any
thing like to it. Ireneus indeed Lib. 1. c. 20*
relates, that he taught such as placed their trust in him, and his harlot
Selene, not to regard the Prophets, but freely to do what they list, for that
men were saved by his grace, and not by just works. With what forehead does
this man attribute this heresy to the Protestants? as if the Grace of God, and
Faith in our Lord Jesus Christ were all one with the grace of Simon the
Sorcerer, and trust in him and his Strumpet; and the shutting out of our works
from justification, with the giving liberty to men to live as they list. The
doctrine preached in the reformed Churches, is the doctrine of Saint Paul, Romans
3. 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 28. and in many places besides, where he teaches, that,
by the deeds of the Law, there shall no flesh be justified in his (Gods) sight,
for by the Law is the knowledge of sin; but now the righteousness of God
without the Law is manifested, being witnessed by the Law and the Prophets;
Even the righteousness of God, which is by faith of Jesus Christ, unto all,
and upon all them that believe: for there is no difference, for all have
sinned, and come short of the glory of God: Being justified freely by his
grace, through the redemption that is in Jesus Christ: Whom God has set forth
to be a propitiation through faith in his blood, to declare his righteousness,
for the remission of sins that are past, through the forbearance of God,
verse. 28, Therefore we conclude, that a man is justified by faith, without the
deeds of the Law. And this is the constant teaching of all antiquity, That we
are justified by the grace of God, through the redemption that is in Christ
Jesus, by faith in his blood, without the works of the Law.

Cerinthus likewise, for saying, that Ob. 2.
Children may be saved without Baptism. HEre I cannot but marvel at the
Answer.
boldness of this Collector; for, not only none of all the three Authors to
whose Catalogue of heresies he sends us, does mention any such opinion of
Cerinthus as this; but Epiphanius, relating his opinions, adds, as a report
that had come to him, that some among the followers of Cerinthus, departing
this life before they had obtained baptism, others were baptized for them, to
free them from punishment at the resurrection. Whereupon also he says, it came
to him by tradition, that the Apostle said, If the dead rise not at all, why
are they then baptized for them? If Cerinthus and his followers were baptized
for the dead, let the Reader judge how likely it is that he should teach,
children may be saved without baptism.

Ptolomeus was noted as an heretic, Ob. 3.
for saying, That it was not in man to keep Gods Commandments. THis doctrine,
whether it be true or false, I do not now examine. Answer.
None of these three Authors, to whom he refers us, do attribute it to
Ptolemeus, although Epiphanius sets down a large Epistle of his to Flora,
wherein he holds, the Law was not given by the perfect God, as being it self
unperfect; with many like blasphemies. Touching the ten Commandments he says,
They containing a pure ordinance, but not having accomplishment, needed to be
fulfilled by our Savior. If this be the Heresy which this Collector intends
to be renewed by the Protestants, that the Moral law is holy, but we could not
keep it, and therefore Christ came to fulfill it, their defense will be easy.
Now it shall suffice, that Epiphanius neither does attribute this to Ptolomeus
as a new opinion, nor note him for it as an heretic.

Montanus, for denying the Sacrament Ob. 4.
of Penance. MOntanus was one of the false Prophets, of the sect of the
Cataphryges, Answer.
of whom none of all the three Authors we are sent to, mentions any such
thing, as this Collector imputes unto him. That which I think was in his mind,
though he mistook the name, was of one Novatus, that was the ringleader of
the sect of the Cathari, or Puritanes, who taking occasion of offense, because
many which in persecution had denied the truth, were afterward admitted to the
communion of the Church by penance, separated himself; holding, that to such
as fell after baptism, there was no place for penance. Thus Philastrius, and
Epiphanius: and Saint Augustine says, The Cathari deny penance, following
Novatus. As for the term Sacrament, none of all these mention it. This opinion
is as much detested by the Protestants, as by the Romists themselves.

Aerius, for denying prayers for the Object. 5.
dead. AErius, as both Epiphanius and S. Augustine relate, was an Arrian,
Answer.
which made a faction against Eustathius his Bishop, an Arrian likewise; and
drew a multitude after him into the fields and woods. By his words set down in
Epiphanius, we may see his opinion: With what reason, says he, do ye after
death name the names of the dead? For, if he that is alive, prays, or deals
a dole, what shall the dead be profited thereby? And Epiphanius after justifies
that practice that then was in the Church of reciting the names of the
deceased, and making a memorial both for the just and sinners; for sinners
imploring the mercy of God; for the just, both the Fathers, Patriarchs,
Prophets, Apostles, Evangelists, Martyrs, and Confessors, Bishops, and
Anachorites, and all Orders, that they might sever our Lord Jesus Christ from
the order of other men, by the honor which they gave to him; and (as he says
a little before) to signify their faith, that the departed are living and yet
subsisting with the Lord, and that we have hope of them, as those that be from
home in another country, and to signify that state which is more perfect,
etc. Thus Epiphanius there. And to the like purpose, the Author of the book of
the Ecclesiastical Hierarchy, attributed to Dionysius the Areopagite. Neither
of both do speak a word of Purgatory, or the releasing of Saints out of their
torments there. The Church of England does not deny such Prayers for the dead,
as shall after appear.

Iovinian, for holding perpetual Virginity of no greater merit then Ob. 6.
Marriage. TOuching Iovinian, neither Philastrius, Answer.
nor Epiphanius say any thing, because he was after their writing. S.
Augustine, among other his damnable opinions, as, that all sins are equal;
that a man regenerate cannot sin; that fasting profits not; that the
virginity of the blessed Virgin was corrupted by her bearing Christ, reckons
also this in these terms; The virginity also of women professing holiness,
and the continency of the manly sex, in those holy men that choose a single
life, he made equal to the merits of chaste and faithful (...) ^m cas^ram
atq^e (...) meri^ ad ^avit.
marriages. By which words it is plain, that Saint Augustine takes merits for
the value and dignity, or reward of marriage chastely kept. Otherwise in the
judgment of the Court of Rome, the desert of marriage is small. But thus do
the Fathers take the word merit, and meriting, which has brought in the
opinion of deserving heaven by good works. Shortly, this opinion of Iovinian
the Protestants are free from.

Vigilantius, for denying prayer to Ob. 7.
Saints. VIgilantius is in none of the three Answer.
Catalogues to which he sends us. S. Hierome writes two Epistles against him,
very bitter, and wherein (says Erasmus) He does so take on against him with
railing, as I could wish a little more modesty in him. In them there is no
mention of prayer to Saints.

But first of Vigilantius, blaming the adoration of the relics and bones of
the holy Martyrs.

Secondly, his denying that the souls of the Apostles and Martyrs, as being in
Abraham's bosom, or in a place of rest, or under the Altar, can be present at
their Tombs, and where they will.

Thirdly, his maintaining, that while we live, we may pray mutually each for
other, but after we are dead, no man's prayer shall be heard for another,
specially since the Martyrs calling for revenge of their own blood, could not
obtain it; unless we will gather some such thing out of these words of
Vigilantius, which S. Hierome sets down, Ergo cineres suos amant animae
Martyrum, and circumvolitant eos, semperque praesentes sunt, ne forte si
aliquis precator advenerit, absentes audire non possint?
Ergo, etc. Do the souls of the Martyrs then love their ashes, and fly about
them, and are always present, lest perhaps if any should come to pray, being
absent, they might not hear him? But neither does it appear that Vigilantius
meant, or Saint Hierome understood this praying of prayer to the Saints and
Martyrs themselves, but God at their Tombs: desiring their furtherance,
suffrage, and recommendation: upon this opinion they were present with their
Relics, or at their Memories. So does Saint Hierome relate, that Constantia,
a devout woman, was wont to spend whole nights watching in the Tomb of
Hilarion, and to talk with him as if he were present, for the furthering of her
prayers. And indeed, Saint Hierome maintains against Vigilantius, they are
present. They follow the Lamb whither soever he goes: If the Lamb be every
where, they also which are with the Lamb, are to be believed to be every
where. Of which belief I do not think there were many besides himself, or
yet are; save only simple and superstitious people; as the woman that I
mentioned right now, which when she heard that Hilarions body was stolen away,
died presently. Against these corruptions and superstitions which then began to
creep into the Church, Uigilantius (recommended to Saint Hierome by Paulinus in
his travels to the East, and by him styled, a holy Priest, till he understood
he favored his adversary Ruffine) opposed himself. Neither was he blamed
therefore by his Bishop, though Saint Hierome calls him, A holy man; or by any
Council: yea, as Saint Hierome confesses, he had certain Bishops of his
opinion. What the reformed Churches hold here about, I shall show by and by.

Xenaias, for denying due honor to holy Images of Christ, and of Saints,
Object. 8.
and praying before them. XEnaias lived long after the times of those three
Authors, to whose Answer.
Catalogue this Collection sends us. He was a Persian by Nation, a servant by
Condition, ordained Bishop of Hierapolis before he was baptized, a defender of
Eutiches his heresy. But i^ no ancient history worthy of credit, reported to
have said or done any thing about Images, much less to have been condemned for
so doing. Nicephorus is brought by Canisius and Bellarmine, affirming so much;
a fabulous Author, which lived not by Canisius own account, till after one
thousand three hundred years since Christ, and was himself an
Image-worshipper. Evagrius, who lived near to the time of Xenaias, and
mentions a letter of certain Monks of Palestina, reporting his outrageous
carriage toward Flavianus Bishop of Antioch, has nothing of his opinion
against Images, or praying before them.

See the Catalogue in Saint Epiphanius, in Philastrius, in Saint Augustine. All
these heresies now renewed by Protestants Object.
condemned within the first four hundred years; whosoever communicates with
these, in giveing countenance by his presence at their Service or Sermons, as
they were cut off from the Primitive Church, so he cutteth off himself, and is
partaker of their sin and rebellion, as S. John says. WE have seen what is
in the Catalogues, to which he referres. Answer.
And for the rest, it is utterly untrue, that these opinions, or any one of
them, in that sense wherein they are defended by the Protestants, was condemned
within the first four hundred years after Christ. Which that it may the better
appear, I will set down the doctrine that sounds in our Churches, touching
these points.

First, we teach, that a sinner truly penitent for all his sins, and resting
I.
by faith upon the Redemption that is in Christ Jesus, is by that faith alone
Romans 3. 24. 28.
freely justified, without the works of the Law. Notwithstanding, true faith
works by charity, and shows it self by good works, which God does account
for righteous, and reward far beyond desert.

Secondly, that Baptism is a Sacrament, appointed by Christ our II.
Act. 22. 16. Col. 2. 12. Romans 4. 11, 20.
Lord, to wash away sin, and in stead of Circumcision, to be a seal of the
righteousness of faith. And that none despising this Sacrament, can be saved.
Yet they are not wholly to be excluded from the mercy of God, who by the
straits of time, not by the will of their Parents are deprived thereof; for
they may Act. 11. 16. See Saint Ambrose orat. de obitu valent. and S. Aug. de
Bapt. cont. Don. l. 4. c. 22. and 25.
have the baptism of the Spirit, though not of Water: as those catechized in
the Christian faith, that suffered martyrdom sometimes before outward Baptism.

Thirdly, that in the state of this III.
present life, it is impossible to keep Gods Commandments to perfection,
according to the Law; but not to acceptance, when we are in Christ.

Fourthly, that the gate of mercy is IV.
not to be shut against any sinner; penitently desiring reconciliation, but he
is to be admitted to the same, privately or publikly.

Fifthly, that Prayers are to be made V.
for all that are departed in the true faith of Christ; that is, first,
Thankesgiving, that they are delivered from the body of death, and miseries of
this sinful world. Secondly, Requests of Gods mercy, that they may have their
perfect consummation and bliss in body and soul, in the kingdom of God, at
the last judgment.

Sixthly, that Virginity, such as the VI.
Apostle describes, 1 Cor. 7. 34, 37. holy in body and spirit, and undertaken
to be free from the cares of this world, to be careful for the things that
pertain to the Lord, is a more excellent estate then marriage.

Seventhly, that the Saints in heaven VII.
pray for the Church on earth; and it is lawful for us to pray to God to hear
their prayers: but they know not our hearts; neither may we ask grace or glory
of any but God only.

Eighthly, that images of God are unlawful. The images of Christ and VIII.
the Saints may be used in way of history, or remembrance, and with reverent
respect: not to be worshipped with incense, vows, or prayers.

Lo here our Doctrine, for which never any man was cut off from the Primitive
Church, nor any counted a Rebel, till the Pope began to play the masterly
servant in the house of God, and to strike his fellow servants, and cast out
whom he list out of the family.

Objection.
The fourth Council of Carthage, at which Saint Augustine was present,
decreed, according to the ancient practice of the Church, and Apostolical
tradition, that the faithful may neither pray nor sing Psalms with heretics.
See what a sin it is to persuade a Catholic man to go to heretical service,
forbidden by holy Scripture, by General Counsels, and observed by all sects,
who do at this day repel from their service, all those that be of a contrary
Religion. THis authority of the Council of Carthage was reserved for the last
Answer.
place, and is graced with Saint Augustines name, and Apostolic Tradition; of
likelihood, because it mentions singing of Psalms, which the Church of
England, and other reformed Churches do use. It might seem odious if he should
have said, Ye may not sing a Psalm with a Protestant: and some body might
have replied, May I sing a Catch, or a merry song, and not one of David's
Psalms? may I eat with him, and not give God thanks? May we sleep together,
and not say the Lords prayer together? To this it seemed hard to make a
handsome answer with reason, therefore the Council of Carthage, and Saint
Augustine, and the ancient practice of the Church, and Apostolical Tradition
are brought in, to bear it down by mere authority. But for Tradition, even by
their own description, expounding it of doctrine not Bellarm. de verbo Dei. l.
4. c. 2.
written, he must give up his plea from Scripture, if he claim by Tradition;
unless he will acknowledge that he (as many times the ancients do) means by
this word, The same thing that was written. The practice of the Church is yet
to show; neither can it I believe, be showed ever delivered, holden, or
practiced, that such as had one God, one Faith, one Baptism, one Lord, one
Spirit, one hope of salvation, might not have one Prayer, sing one Psalm
together. Especially these same Psalms that we are speaking of, calling Jews
and Gentiles, old and young, all that have breath; yea, the bruit and
senseless creatures to the joint performance of this duty, The praising their
Creator.

Did the Council then forbid that which God commands? Did Saint Augustine
consent to it? I think not. But the Author of this Collection, whether
wittingly or ignorantly, God knows, goes about to beguile the simple with a
cunning Translation, and wrong application of this Canon, to make fear where
there is no fear.

The word which he Englisheth, To sing Psalms, is more general, To sing
Psallere.
any Ditty or Song, whether it be out of the Book of Psalms, as we do use the
term, or composed by any other Author.

Such Psalms had the Heretics in their assemblies, both the Arrians, and the
Donatists; wherein they inserted S^zomen l. 8 c. 8.
such things, as made to the advancing of their own Sect; yea, as tended to
increase contention: which moved Saint Chrysostom at Constantinople, and
Saint Ambrose at Milane, and by their example many other Churches in the world,
to take up the like use of singing also, besides the Psalms of David, which
long before were wont to be sung in the Church.

The Churches in Africa were more slack herein, as Saint Augustine Aug. confess.
(...). 9. c. 7.
relates; so as the Donatists blamed them, because they sung soberly the
divine Songs of the Prophets in the Church, When themselves Aug. Epla. 119. c.
18.
(says he) inflame their drunken fits with singing of Psalms, composed by
man's wit, like a Trumpet encouraging to the fight.

And thus did Saint Augustine Aug. Tom. 7.
(stirred up perhaps with their example) compose a Ditty for the common people,
against the Donatists, which he calls a Psalm: the first Verse, and under-song
whereof I will set down, and apply to our present case.

Omnes qui gaudetis de pace, modo verum judicate.
All you that in peace delight,
What is truth now judge aright.
Judge I pray you, all that be the children of peace, whether the case be like,
of the blasphemous and seditious songs of Arrians and Donatist, and the sacred
Psalms of the Prophets.

And for the application of this Canon, to the reformed Churches, judge whether
there be no ods between the assemblies of true Catholic, and charitable
Christians, and the Conventicles of desperate Heretics, and cutthroats,
denying the Lord that bought them, or the Catholic Church that brought them
forth, confining it to Africa, (as some do now to Rome) re-baptizing those
that come from others to them, burning Churches and the holy Scriptures,
ris^ing houses, pulling out the eyes, cutting out the tongues, and off the
hands of those that dissented from their madness, and setting upon them by the
highwaies, to kill or to be killed, upon hope of becoming Martyrs. Certainly,
these manners of the ancient heretics, do more plainly decypher the
massacres, and barbarities of the holy League in France, lately renewed also
amongst the Grisons; or, not to go so far, of our Powder Traitors here in
England, and generally of the Romish, then the reformed Catholics.

Judge again whether that be likely to be true which the Author of this
Collection would persuade by his wresting the Scriptures, forgeing and framing
to his purpose the opinions of ancient heretics, slandring his
even-Christians, making them to hold that, which it is marvel if his own
conscience did not tell him is otherwise. Whether it be likely to be a Sect,
which as himself observes, is different from all Sects, in that according to
another Canon of the self same Council which he cites, it prohibites none to
come into the Church and hear Gods Word, Gentile, Heretic, or Jew; at least,
till such be dismissed as receive not the Communion.

And according to Saint Augustines De unitate Eccle.
rules, Corrects that which is crooked, approoves that which is right, gives
what is lacking, acknowledges what is present: according to the Apostles
precept, Follows peace with all that call upon the Name of the Lord.

Judge lastly, and see what a sin it is for any Catholic to dissuade, or be
dissuaded from such meetings, wherein the Catholic Faith is confessed; the
blessed Trinity worshipped; the holy Scriptures reverently read; the Psalms
sung to Gods praise; Prayers made for all estates in a known and understood
language; where there is admission into the Church by Baptism; instruction
touching our misery through sin by the Law; our remedy in Christ by the
Gospel; the remembrance of whose perfect Sacrifice is celebrated; his blessed
Body and Blood distributed according to his institution; where penitent sinners
are reconciled; the Dead reverently recommended into the hands of God; the
Living informed according to the teaching of the Apostles, to live Soberly,
Justly, and Godly; and above all, (if that be not all) Charitably.

I say again with Saint Augustine, Omnes qui gaudetis de pace, modo verum
judicate.

FINIS.

