A SIXE-FOLDE Politician.

Together with a Sixe-folde Precept of Policy.

LONDON Printed by E. A. for John Busby, and are to be sold at his Shop in
Saint Dunstans Churchyard. 1609.

PHILODESPOTVS to his Naearchus.
Loving and well-beloved Naearchus, being often and earnestly solicited by you,
to set down a pattern of such discourses, as in private have past many
times betwixt us, concerning several and distinct affectes, and affectations
of many usurping vainglorious Politicians, as also what my conceit and
opinion was, and is of a perfect statesma^ most to be respected: And at this
time finding my self deprived through sickness of other bodily functions, I
have endeavored to satisfy your request, so well as the daily incomberance of
so unwelcome and trouble some a guest, would give me leave and leisure; What I
have set down will assuredlye offend no creature that lives within the
compass of right and perfect judgment: and if any thing herein may give you
the least taste of pleasure and content, I shall think my travel ritchly
rewarded, and be encouraged to supplye your desires in the like succeeding
motions.

Ever under the arrest of your command. I. M.

The Author to the Reader.
PHrine a Harlot, at a public feast where many Ladies and Gentlemen were
assembled, uncovering her painted face, took warm water and washed off her
Fucus wishing all other Ladies there present to imitate her plainness. I
suppose it was a grief to the Ladies to have that noted by public taxation,
which was as publicly noted and observed by all men. If al ladies and
gentlewomen should be so served at any public meeting, many would make (if it
were possible) their natural red of blushing show through their painted red and
ouerlaying mask of impudency and boldness. But women, poor souls that have
nothing to be proud of but their outward beauty, may be pardoned, if they
seek to maintain their best hold, with any devise and addition of Art, when
as men who should glory only in their inward essence of worth and virtue,
learning, providence, discretion, judgment, valor, and magnanimity, seek
to lay such painted faces upon their ambitious desires they have to be thought
worthy, in any to be admired or respected quality. Painting was in request in
Iezebels time, and her example could not, nor ever will scare away either pride
from the heart, or painting from the face. If I were of the noble science of
painters, I would put up a bill against woe-men, for their intrusion into the
profession of facemaking and coulouring: but if I were a statesman, I would
publishe some severe law, against such bold intruding professors and
shew-makers of such things, as many gain by boldness and impudency, among the
world both respect and commodity. Hereafter I may happily take occasion to
speak and set out your women painters, at this time you shall find some
painted faces of policy, deciphered.

As in meats, that which commonly likes one does distaste another: so may this
work prove like meats or banket-made-disshes, rejected of some, and happily
like Homers Iliads be laid under other men's pillowes. You rabble and ramping
idle rout auaunt, the play-house-dores are now open for you, the Author does
not inuit your company to his feast, for he knows you are apter to fashion
strange interpretations, of what was never meant, then like civil guests cut
fairly and respectively of his instructions. Howsoever he exposes this his
Philaitetes to his good fortune, and if any of the judicious rank taste of him
with pleasure, he is filled up and regorged with satisfaction.

Your friend that was betrayed to the press of your censures I.M.

In due praise of the Author.
THese speaking pictures of those Counterfets,
That would be statesemen, rather men of State,
Are such as do their life delineate,
By which the Drawers fame, still life begets.
But where he paints in Colors (rarely rich)
Tho Picture of a perfect statesman, he
Transcends himself, and makes each eye to see
His darkest Veins with judgments clearest Touch.
O nere could words, though weyed in wisedoms scoles,
And measurd by the squire of art, by Wit)
But these alone, so right the spirit fit
Of Statesmen that (obeying) all controlles,
Pass on, viue image, make all Times admire,
How earthly hands came by such heavenly fire.
Io: Dauis. Gent.

In laudem Authoris.
THy tun (dear friend) of wit and honey nows brok up,
Too long from men of Art and judgment, though locked up,
For men of Art do say, it tastes right sweet,
And men of judgments, say it is right sound,
And both a treasure, say of light is found,
A treasure sure that in extremes will steed.
And raise thee (have but patience) from all need,
O pity it is such gifts and lights of mind
Should be obscurde, and die as men do blind.
Some Scipio (or some Caesar) shade thy hiue,
That thou in spite of Waspes and Flies may thrive.
I.S. Gent.

De Authore. T. P.
BLame not his pen, though wanton in his blood,
Here uels like a Virgin newly married:
Policy is his delight, his streaming flood
To that he is married, in that he shall be buried,
And though he buried were, this nere shall dye,
And though he banished were, this nere shall fly.
The contents of this Book.
IIgnorant Politicians. Paul's news carriers, and unlettered, but wickedly
thriftie, merchants of worldly policy with their judgments. Usurping Poets
of the title of Policy. Vain and ambitious Trauailers. Seminaries and
Jesuits. Cumbersome, Turbulent, and dangerous proiectors. True Statesmen,
In the second part is treated
Concerning the secret trusts of the heart. Concerning affections. Concerning
book trust in Policy. Concerning cunning operations, and formal ordering of
wit and Policy. Concerning a Politicians Religion, how far he may wade
therein. Concerning Religion, the best help of true Judgment, and the true
Religious pollitician.
A SIXE-FOLDE Politician.
There be two sorts of Politicians.

Politicians in show: and substantial complete experienced politicians.
Otherwise called Statesmen.

Politicians in show, and outward Ceremonious profession, are of many sorts,
as you shall find them distinguished by their several employments and Chapters.

Substantial Politicians, are such (for this Treatise extends only to a
religious Common wealth) as are Divinely endued with a singular gift and
blessing of wisdom and judgment, in all occurrences that may advance the
glory of God and the common safety of that State, over which they are set as
Governors.

A SIX-FOLDE POLITICIAN.
THE FJRST SORT of vain Politicians are men void of all understanding, and
like nature, and yet repute themselves wise and politic. CHAP. 1.
THe accursed brood of CHAMS generation, were not contented in the Land of
Shinar, to make brick and mortar; but joining with NIMROD, said, Let us make
us a SEM, which signifies a name, even in despite of the blessing of NOAH
bestowed upon SEM.

All Nations, ages and States, have been, and are, much pestred with the
poisonous humor of CHAMS fugitive and unsettled seed, who shaking off all yoke
of obedience, and prescription of painful travel in any peculier calling,
never think well of the ordinary blessings they reap or may reap, by their due
and daily labors: but setting their wits beyond the pitch and model of their
honest vocations, Idleness the mother of unprofitable and impertinent business.
aim at extraordinary matters, the building to themselves some SEM, or rather
instead of a name, some BABEL or house of confusion.

And of names, none can so much please them as the title and style of witty,
crafty, politic trades, immitating herein the grand deluder: for as Satan
of all names affects most the name of an Angel of light, They which have
least wit affect most the show of the best wit.
and being worst of althings, appears most in the show of the best: so the
simplest and furthest from the light of true wisdom, desire most to seem (as
Hypocrites in religion, being hollowest of hearty sincerity, affect most the
show of holiness) and to be accounted wise.

This makes so many base mechanical fellows, to fall from their lasts and
measures, to measure out in their conceits and triuial co^ferences, the scopes,
purposes, and intents of the secretest and deepest mysteries of the most
profound statistes, and not only to set a gloss and formal interpretation
upon ordinary occurrences of the state, and to press out with them vain and
idle additions and quotations, of their own addle and worme-eaten brains, but
touching the very Edicts, Proclamations, yea, conclusions betwixt the State and
foreign Nations, The judgment that falls upon pragmatique intermedlers with
State affairs.
to distinguish and point out errors, to set upon them ominous predictions,
and many times (which is the Judgment, such pragmatique and Pythias like
spirits fall into, as SENECA noted the improuidence and unadvisedness of such
persons) Emittunt vices per iugulu^ reddituras, cast forth cut-throate words
which cost them their necks, and utterly undo them.

Idle Marcha^ts of news.
The better to maintain this opinion of self conceited Policy and wisdom,
among the simple sort, they must and will be the only intelligencers of all
new accidents, Quelles nouelles is the only orisons they use morning and
evening: their only salutations, their only graces. They know all things,
else how should they be accounted statesmen, both what is done and spoken in
the court, and in the center of the court, and which is wonderful, that which
was never done not spoken, and that makes their news ever new and fresh, for
it comes but from the gate of their own inventions.

They are privy to the consultations of the Senate: embassages of Princes are
familiar with the^: intercourse of marcha^ts affairs, scarce accounted matters
worth the discourse: France, Italy, Spain, can keep no Parliament, without
their intermixture of voices, nor this state hold any sect of Parliament,
without their verdict: these are the inseparable companions of the realto
pillars, the flies of the great feasts, Epicures third course to help
digestio^, superstitious idolaters of Saint PAVL (and yet never think of PAVL
nor any Apostle) and many of them have that famous monument in that account as
DIOGINES had IOVIS PORTICVS in Athens, who told them, which wondered that he
had no house nor corner to eat his meat in; pointing at the gallerie or walking
place that was called IOVIS PORTICVS, said, that the people of Athens had
builded that to his use, as a royal mansion for him, wherein he might dine and
sup and take his repast.

And so these make Paul's like EVCLIDES or PLATOES school (as DIOGINES
accounted it, (...) a mispending of much good labor and time, and worthyly
many times meet with DIOGINES fare, and are faithful and frequent guests of
Duke HVMPHRAY.

And surely as that wise prince who adjudged his corrupt Servant who sold
lip-labor and smoke at a dear rate, to be stiffled with smoke; so might it
be wished that these idle busiemarchants of air and ventosity of words, might
be either pricked like bladders, with the sharp rasor of some seueere law,
What punishment is fit for sellers of smoke and liplaboured lies and tales.
or Camelion like be forced to live without any other sustenance then air, the
food of their delight.

There are another sort of vnletterd ignorants, who affect the title of
politicians, and are so accounted of giddy muddye, and shallowe conceits, who
see no more then that is obuious to their outward eye sight: and judge all
things by their effects consider not the means by which they were effected: It
is an easy matter for a man most unlettered, by wicked means to compass great
matters.
these are such as by wicked and indirect means, compass many times great
matters, whereunto is required small store of learning and art: for it is an
easy matter, for him to burn and make level to the ground, a famous city
with a bal of wild fire, who never had skill to distinguish the matter whereof
that ball was composed, or wit to contriue the like: and as a careless
creature, that propounds only to praise his own humor, respects not the
mischief may ensue, may with great facility, set fire to an exquisite piece
of ordinance, and thereby beat down some famous objected building, who is
utterly ignorant of any skillful part of artillerye: so may one that fell from
a cloud, a most stupid animal, by wicked means bring to pass with as much
ease, his wicked purposes, and make himself powerful of his ungodly wishes,
be they never so unlikely, who if he were set to manage any affairs, that
might advance the common good, would bray like an ass, and (admitted to
devising, aduising, or contriuing and putting in action, any commendable and
deep designement) stand like an immooueable statua, scarce reserving the image
and representation of a man: For it is usually spoken of courtiers, and
Orators, be bold enough, and Courtier enough, prate enough, and be lawyer (I
mean cogging lawyer and cogging courtier enough) so may it generally be said,
be resolved to be wicked enough, and fear not to be acounted crafty and
worldly, politic enough, to prove an Eutrapelus, Apud. Horat.
a famous crafty companion, and to exceed others in a watch of worldly deceit,
requires only a resolution to be wicked, which will spedily enable any man to
proceed Master in the art of subtilty, and cunning deceit: hence comes it to
pass that many pettifogging knaves, many rural Satyrs, and vntutered
Hobgoblings, applying their hearts to worldly wealth, and resolving to obtain
by right or wrong what they so longingly covet and affect, prove suddenly
rich, and in that respect the simple people term any, that by forgerye,
cousning, deceit, grow a little wealthier, then their honnest neighbors,
perilous heads, shrode fellows, and (which without smiling I can never
consider) polliticia^s stand in this respect: Mischief has swift wings.
mischief is well said to have swift wings; for when the will of man gives
consent to any evil, a very brute may quickly give fire to the powder, and
matter of any mischievous purpose. Qui semel verecundiae fines transierit, in
signiter esse impudente^ oportet: So far the heathen could go, and surely we
may ad this, that he which has cast away all care of conscience, Honesty and
fidelity the chief pillars of al contracts
can have no feeling or respect of honesty and fidelity, which in all
affairs, either public or private, foreign or domestique, hold up
Atlas-like the heaven of all civil States, and these being not respected, with
what facility and ease may the subtle Courtier deceive his brother, murder
his father, if they stand in his way of some private respect, and make his
dearest and bosome-friend, only an instrument to move forward his wicked
purposes without any purpose to help him in his greatest necessities: nay, if
he think he may prove any obstacle to his rising, or that he can stand no
longer as a footstool for him to mount up to higher honor and dignity, or a
close-stoole to smother and convey with coulerable excuses his foulest and
impurest Feces of cunning and deceit, even then perfideouslie to forsake him,
when he is pressed with most irresistable difficulties.

Among the number of these (that I may not speak of nearer presidents) is
ranckt, that rank smelling Pole-cat of impure and profane policies, RICHARD
the third, for it is well known, Rich 3
that not so much a superemine^t wit and judgment in ye truest strains of
civil government, set the crown on that usurpers head, as a detestable
resolution to compass the same by any means, by poison, murder, perjury,
barbarous and unnatural cruelty, execrable slau^ders, put a regal Scepter into
his hand, and environed his temples with a glittering Diadeam.

And a second to him may be (if not a brother twinne, Alphonsus
ALPHONSVS that foul bumcard-playing Politician, and 100. like to these: those
petty Germane state, afford plenty of examples to this purpose: what should I
say when as the very Carter, under whose clouted shoes, Wicked Carters may be
accounted politicianst
may be sowed as great craft when as firm a resolution to villainy and
mischief, is settled in him, can entitle himself to his Uncles, brothers,
nephews, land and estate, and obtain it to, by leading a morice dance or two
to hell, with five or six forsworn good fellows, himself foreman, a corrupt
lawyer or two, as many bribed witnesses, an ouerseer and a servant: which often
tickles my diafragma, when I hear spruce-heere-at hands recount, conferring
most secretly among their priuatest and most hidden observations and court
collections) the wonderful wisdom or policy of some great courtiers, in
ancient time, what admirable matters they have effected by the deep reach of
their allpeircing wits, when they were noted to have used more ounces of
poison, then they had drams of true wisdom, and state learning, in the
shutting up their conclusions: for thy consider not that which daily experience
may guide their observation to, with what facility heathenish and seared
consciences, The difference betwixt the proceedings of a seered conscience and
a Religious man
never so unlettered enter into and dispatch actions of such sauadge and
abhorred qualities, as would make a man touched with the feeling of honesty and
a good conscience, stand (were he never so politic and learned) at every step
and progress of the like attempts, like a multitude of people when upon some
sudden invasion of the enemy, all the Beacons of the country are set on fire
round about their ears, al amazed, affrighted, bepusled, and distempered every
moment in his mutinous and disordered thoughts, till his plots, his purposes,
his proceedings were discovered and betrayed, though to his own ruin and utter
undoing.

But herein consists the judgment such ignorant and unlettered affectators
of the title of Politicians fall into: presumption the ground of ruin.
they many times presuming upon their own and other men's false and flattering
opinions conceived of their great wisdom and policy, enter by degrees into
matters of greater consequence then their slender apprehension s can digest,
and wrestle through, not unlike the Mastiffe, which because by chance he
killed a Hare wearyed to his jaws by quick se^ting hounds, would after chase a
fox, and so came home all be torn and rent with briars and brambles: or the
ape which by imitation, having once set fire to a piece curra^tly, came to
inure himself in the like practice, and the piece being stopped and ra^bd hard
of purpose that it might not go off, recoyled to the apes dismenbring: so these
having encountered with poorer and weaker understandings to their worldly and
evil good advantage, not contented to keep within the compass of their own
element, stretch their skill and cunning to intermeddle with men of deeper
reaches and more searching brains, whose foxlike windings and turnings, they
have no skill to trace or sent out, and therefore return from their
controversies and strifes, made with such worldly Mrs. of policy, all be
scratched and pinched in their fortunes and effates. Yea, many of these foolish
Idiots, having prospered and thriued in some domestic affairs, Apelike
intermeddle with the fireworkes of court business, and state occurrences,
employ their wit and wealth in taking part and adhering to factions, and so
many times, being ignorant to handle and finger as it were the cunning passages
and stoppings of state-learning (which depends upon such exquisit skill and
harmony, as the ripe students therein can discern (as the Jews could by their
skill in the Ebrewtung any escape concerning the history of the bible) if any
one strok be out of time or tune) through bold intrusions, disbowell and
dismember themselves and their fortunes: and so much may suffice to have spoken
of ignorant and unskillful Usurpers of the title and name of policy.

CHAP. 2. A second sort are such as through the privilege of their learning
and Schollership, attribute unto themselves the style of Politicians.
Abderitae people of Thrace, who were so foolish as they left their country
through annoyance of Mice.
ARistippus being demanded of some ABDERITAN in what respect his son should
be the better, if he bestowed cost and charges on his learning? answered,
though in no other behoof, yet that at the maygames and public sights there
might not one stone sit upon another: and to this alluded Tully in his
Oratore, making the same destinction in the degree of excellency, betwixt a
learned man and an ignorant, A distinction betwixt a learned man and anignorant.
as betwixt an ordinary man and a beast: and questionles the benefit of
learning and skill in arts and liberal sciences, is of great and invaluable
estimate, and brings to the enioyers thereof, The benefit of learning.
many unspeakable and insencible helps and furtherances, which as it was well
spoken of the benefit of health, Care^do potius quamfru e^do distingu^tur,
their use is best discerned by their want. But learning is like to fire and
water, Learning like fire and water for the use and abuse of it.
which are most necessary for the daily behoof of ma^s life, being moderately
and descretly used, otherwise experience teaches ye simplest, that if they be
applied to hurtful purposes, there are not more dangerous and dreadful
Elements.

That made Diogines very justly (in my opinion) to affirm, Man the wisest and
the foolishest creature.
that there was no living thing wiser then man, nor any living creature
foolisher: for when he considered and thought upon the governors of Cities,
physicians, and men excelling in several professions of learning, he concluded
nothing to be more sapient then man; but when he considered in his mind men of
little learning in any profession, professors of all learning, and not able to
perform any one good, undertakers of all difficult and hard enterprises, when
he considered the swarm of expounders of dreams, soothsayers, Impostors, and
deluding artizants, he plainly avouched that nothing was more foolish then
man. And surly as there are none wiser then Scholars, and none foolisher then
such like scholars, so are there none more profitable to the Commonwealth nor
any more combersome, noisome or troublesome in a state, then scholars: which
infers well this Ianuslike position, Pessimi homines pessima animalia. pessimi
Academici pessimi homines. Of all living creatures evil men are the worst, and
of all men evil Schoolmen are the most disorderly and hurtful. The wit of
man liable to good and evil


For the wit of man is appliable, and apt to all goodness, if it be exercised
and inured therewithal, but if it fall from his right kind to vice, then is a
man worse then a brute beast in regard that a beast does but beastly acording
to kind, A vicious man worse then a beast.
and a man's wit aplyed to a vicious and beastly custom trains up all the
senses, as it were so many workmen, to the practicing of naughty and lewd
purposes: and if the wit of a witty man, well seen in arts, and helped and
furthered to greater understanding by study, be applied to wicked and evil
designs, A wicked witty man most dangerous.
it will always be sitting upon Cockatrices eggs, and hatch and bring forth
nothing but serpentine and poisonous effects. with both these sorts of
scholars this state is much pestered, for it harbors many foolish, such as
seem and are indeed wise in their own conceits (such as trouble a whole state
with their conceits) and many naughty and lewd wits, that aply their cost and
travel spent painefully and laboriously in liberal arts, to the contriuance of
their countries massaker and ruin, and their own shame and utter demolition.

That I may not of these speak confusedly and without order, I will reduce the
first sort of them to these heads.

Either vain phanaicall scribbling Poets,
Or cunny-catching and prating Trauailers.
And the second sort to these heads.

Either outlandish starters and Rouers from their obedience and loyalty
usually called Jesuits and Seminaries, or close housekeeping, either
vainglorious or self pleasing, or malignant, envious, turbulent proiectors,
and plotters of policies and devises. (...) It was well noated of Hesiodus,
Idleness abhorred.
that no course of honest travel was shame-worthy, but idleness, full of
reproach and shame: and certes, if men of fashion and good bringing up, would
duly examine themselves to what honest and profitable service and course of
labor, they were fit, and accordingly would studiously endeavor themselves,
they would make this state hapy and flourishing, and their own lives
comfortable to themselves and their friends: but the iniquity of these times is
such, and so corrupted is this age with cymerian darkness and self will, as
many having any good parts, think scorn in Secundis tertijsque consistere.
Ambition and aspiring, reigns in all me^ most povverfully.
Every Crow will build as high as the Eagle, and thereby with Icarus, soaring
to high, melt their waxie wings, with the Sunbeames of too lofty aspiring
practices, which makes so many of them al their lives after, The fruits of
aspiring.
sing Icarus his ditties, Propter humum volito lie groueling in a bare and base
estate: for whilst they strive to run out of their father Adams curse, and by
him the curse which deriueth it self to all mankind (which was and is every
man in his profession, to get his living by the sweat of his brows) they run
into a greater curse, that is, either through idleness to get no living, or
through some evil practice to beget a base living.

Of Poets. CHAP. 3.
Poets lives compared to love.
TOuching POETS, their lives and business may be rightly compared, to the business
of love: for love is noated to be the occupation and business of idle folks,
that have nothing else to set them selves on work withal: for as the passion
of love especially inuades and possesses such men as are altogether drowned in
idleness, and so comes it to pass, Otis si tollas periere cupidinis arcus.
that while they give themselves wholly to lazines, they stu^ble on a subject,
that fills their heads as full of combrous business, as ever they are able to
turn themselves unto: so this frenzy of poetastring (for poetry and judicious
poets, al worthy spirits allow and love) still inuadeth the lovers of idleness,
for, whilst that wit which is pregnant, A pregnant wit wanting employment
takes hold of naughty courses.
wants all manner of employment, it falls into a most troublesome, and
inextricable maze of selfe-pleasing and deluding conceits: for it may and is
generally observed, that they which once fall into the humor of vercifiing,
their heads are always full of as many crochets, as new strooken lovers, and
surly for the respect and regard the most judicious have: of the^, The regard
the judicious have of vain poets.
they may be compared to instruments always out of tune, which yield but harsh
and iangling accents, and to men duly conversant in weighty and profitable
affairs, they are as flat and tedious, as Iarchthange, which name is noted to
be the harshest in all the Ebrew pronuntiation, and the respect which the
wantonest and vainest heads have of them, is as of fiddlers, who are regarded
but for a bandy song, at a merry meeting, and when they have done, are commonly
sent away with Butlers grace, when these write best, they are but but busily
conversant, and employed about some ill subject, which is but (...) a iugling
foolish play, Ill, the better acted, the worse liked of the good.
the better it is performed, the worse it is accounted: for: either they write
to please idle vain gentlemen and gentlewomen, and so may be placed among the
number of shitle-cocks, tennis-balles, apes, munkies, baboones parrats,
puppets, Vain poets offices.
and such like (their office having correspondence to no oother use and
purpose) or else they fashion their wits to the pleasing of a vain multitude,
and rabbell of loose livers, and prescribe to the ignorant and simple (very ill
disposed of themselves) rules, and rudiments of worse living: and as the
enterludes may be termed, Vain poets and plaiers agree in evil
the Schoole-houses of vanity, and wantonness; so these are the schoolemaisters
thereof: and me thinks they (who have tasted of the sweet fountain water,
running from their Academick mothers breasts, by this, if nothing else) should
be deterred from their scribbling profession, that they see their writings and
conceits sold at a common door to every base companion for a penny. But most
of their co^ceits are too dear at that rate, and therefore may well be had in
the same request that Tobacco is now, which was wont to be taken of great
gentlemen, and gallants, now made a frequent and familiar Companion of every
Tapster and Horse-keeper. And their conceits are likest Tobacco of any thing:
for as that is quickly kindled, makes a stinking smoke, and quickly goes out,
but leaves an inhering stink in the nostrils and stomachs of the takers,
Conceits savoring of no judgment or studdie like Tobacco smoke.
not to be drawn out, but by putting in a worse favor, as of Onions and
Garlic, (according to the proverb: the smell of Garlic takes away the stink
of dung hills, so the writing of ordinarye Play-bookes, Pamphlets, and such
like, may be termed the mushrum co^ceptions of idle brains, most of them are
begotte over night in Tobacco smoke and muld-sacke, and uttered and delivered
to the worlds press by the help and midwifery of a caudle the next morning.

They savor of no study, and less judgment, and leave to the hearers of them
only, an infecting stincke of some lewd practice or speech, set forth for the
informing of such wits, as delight in no other study but folly or wickedness,
How the common people delight in vile and vain sports.
and will not be drawn out of their mouths and mawes (for iron would be
sooner by some disgested then a foolish ribbaldrie term by some lost) till
from the like impure fountain, they have fetched some fresh mud-water of the
like, Vain poets color their evil purposes under the show of gravity and
authority, wherein they approve themselves most Devilish and though most
politic in their own opinions, yet most foolish in the true sense of
understanding.
or worse (but better pleasing, if more obscure) speech or behavior, to occupy
and fill up that room.

But some of these phanaticall heads, to exempt themselves from the number of
ballad makers, and ordinary writers of Iigs and such like stuff, betake
themselves to a grauer and more satiricall form of writing and therefore under
the pretense of whipping the vices of people, with a pen fuller of gall, as
Horace says.
Sublimi flagello, they will either set out in most lively colors, with a
winchester rod.
all the several impieties and impurities, which they have in their lives ran
thorough (for it is impossible any should so exactly to a hair set out such
bosom secrets of lewd practices, but such as have had a deep finger in the
like) or else out of a desire to be accounted great politicians, fet their wits
beyond the pitch of the ordinary tenters, and intermingle not only (as Horrace
says) Sacra prophanis silver sacers, with durty potlids, but (thinking that
Pictoribus at que poetis quidlibet audendi is still in force, that painters may
play with their pensils with great men's noses, and poets may pish in any man's
face) intermeddle with the 2. edged sword of the state, Many had rather jest
away their credits and lives then loose the opinion of a jest.
and contrary to Quintilians precept (who placed it among the virtues and
graces of wrightings, not to say all a man can) rather then they would be
accounted ignorant of the state, and matters concerning the state, they will in
their broad terms pull the greatest statists by the beards and rather then
they will loose a jest in obscurity, fix it about the Princes Diadem, that it
may be known and seen of all men, forgetting what they learnd of old Poet
Homer, (...) It is not safe drawing out of Lions teeth. Both learning and
observation teach the wise to hold their pens and their tongues from princes
and potentates affairs.


And if they had attained either learning or observation in state affairs, and
true policy (the repute whereof many of them so much affect) they would houlde
their pens from the affairs and actions of statesmen, being indeed the
Hectors and Hercules of the common wealth (according to that atribute which was
given by Homer to Hercules) (...) depulsors of evil, through their wisdom and
careful watching over the quiet and welfare thereof, from the whole nation. For
then they would have learned by their reading of histories, Both Augustus and
Alexander hated to come upon the tongues and pens of triuiall and common men.
(which is the best Booke-help for a student in policy) that both AUGUSTUS and
ALEXANDER took very greeuouslie that any thing should be made of them, and set
forth in public, but after a substantial sort. And how AUGUSTUS to the
officers of his time signified his pleasure, that they should not suffer any
point of opprobrie to come unto his name, by the meeting and coming together
of Iesters, Players, and Poets: and as well by observation in politic
courses, they would have understood that it is as fit (and more necessary for
the safety of any state) for the authority of Princes and Governors of the
commonwealth, The authority of princes and governors may not safely admit any
derogation.
every where to be maintained in their royal state, without any manner of
spot or touch of derogation, either public spread, or closly insinuated (for
in either consists laesa maiestas, or potestas Reipub: a high and capital
offense, to the Prince or his potentates) as a virgins chastity, Libelling,
and how far the offense thereof spreds it self.
and a great Ladies honor, which may not admit the least susurres or privy
whisperings of stain or defamation, and as he that should be the first author of
sca^dalizing any great Ladies unspotted worth and reputation of chastity, would
be adjudged by the parliament of women, to some infamous death, so were it fit
that some seueere law might be enacted, Scandalous libelling and taxing of
statesmen, deserves the same punishment as the abusers of a chaste Ladies
honor and reputation.
for the punishing of such scandalous libelling as is, or may be at any time
colored under the name of poetising, and play-making, Sed reprimo me, only I
cannot conclude this point without this ingenious and true apology in my own
behalf, to show that my desire is, it may not be thought that I houlde the
skill and art of poetry in base acount, poetry to be beloved* u^ the abusers
thereof to be punished
but only the abusers of it. Poetry may be both noblemens and scholars
afternoon, and successiue excercises, and remission from the bent of grauer
studies and affairs.

A special rule for poets to observe.
And if any will and must needs make it their profession, let them hold this
comicall rule concerning the state and statists, Sic haec misceant vt illa non
immisceant, Let them so use their quaint conceits as they may pick no qua rell
with the counter.

CHAP. 4. Concerning Trauailers.
THat of Horace, Caelum non animum mutat qui trans mare currit, he that
changes his soil, changes not his soul, was well noted of SOCRATES. For
SOCRATES hearing a certain person complaining, that his traveling into
strange Countries for learning and knowledge, had nothing auailed him, answered
that it cha^ced unto him very deservedly for that he either applied himself to
the company of idle runagating fellows or else mewed himself up, and kept
private, as if he took physic, thinking that the air of a strange country
would infuse strange languages, riper Wit, What makes a man's travel into
strange countries profitable, and what unprofitable.
and Judgment without conuersing with such as were wise and judicious; or
else wanted wit to observe such occurrences, as the conversation of wise and
grave judgments did afford. For one of those three makes a man's travel
fruitless, For whosoever in any ordinary profession entendeth to reap any
skill and knowledge, by intercourse with other nations, must examine his own
strength of wit, whether it be capable of the skill and art, he intends and
desires to attain, and must settle his affections, and bridle the appetites
of pleasure and raging extrauagant humors that rule in his nature, What general
lie is to be observed of a trauailer.
that thereby he may be able both to resolve himself to a studious and
paineful course of exercise and observation, and also to be wary and
circumspect of the choice of his company, least he light upon natures, not so
skillful and well seen in the Art and mystery he couets to learn, as
subtle and full of pleasing shows and delusions, which are by them made both
cunning pursnets and hartnets, to inueagle and entrap young nouices by.

This have many Iewellers, Physicians, young untamed Gentlemen, Scholars
pregnant, but unskillful of the course of the world, had woeful experience of.

What particulerly is requisite for him that intends by traveling to attain
knowledge in state learning.
But they which intend to make progress by traveling in the study of state
learning, must not only have a capacity fit for the entertaining all
stratagemicall plots and devises, that may be offered to their consideration,
and ability to quell, and suppress all disordered motions and affectes, but
must be thoroughly insighted both in the Theorie of the principal and most
substantial points of all policy, Cunning politicians are like true Alchymists
not open or free to relate their mystical and well digested positions.
and also well experimented in the particular lives, qualities and policies of
his own country chiefest and deepest Statists, that thereby in conuersing
with profounder judgments abroad (who use not in their discourses to make
Academical lectures and comments, but mistically and as it were in a cloud to
inuolue their quaint conceits and purposes, they may be able in the turning of
a hand, to unfold and discover, that which may be conveyed to their quick
understanding, worthy observation, and give unto them they converse withal, a
taste of the like judgment, The learned and skillful affecte the conversation
of their like.
and insight anto politic affairs, which breeds in great wits and men of
deeper understanding mutual content and satisfaction, and works through the
very marrowe and pericran yon of the wisest and soundest heads, and lastly must
be furnished with such judgment, as may make him able in a moment, to discern
a red from a stammell, and not to spend either time or cost upon any
vainglorious, frivolous, deluding mountibankes, and showemakers of policy, and
state-learning.

Now forasmuch as many have a good will to learn, and want wit to conceive,
and ability to temper their affections, and master and overrule their
unbridled parts, and many having a good and ready wit, and ability to fit
their humors to all occasions, yet divert, and incline both their wit and will
to sinister and bye courses, the former sort prove nothing wiser but in show,
the other only wiser in wicked and crafty contriuances, and yet both must
return great statesmen and politicians. V^ine and formal trauailers compared
to vvanton and foolish academickes.
The former like fresh gentlemen Academickes, who after they have learned by
heart, but Porpheries predicables, and predicaments, and by a sophisticated
argument can include (scarce conclude) their fathers scullio^ at their return
home in Bocardo, think themselves learned enough, but more like base timorous
motly Cross wearers (for they are not worthy the title of Soldiers) such as
Alexander had at the siege or (...) or rock in the Indies, so impregnable as
they admired, but feared to venture upon it) who having looked upon the
country, A description of prating soldiers and Braggarts.
whether they were pressed to wage war in, and gotten by heart the names of the
chief Commanders, leaders, Captains, Leiftennants, and such like, return
with as great a brag, as if by their virtue and prowess, Sa. Domingo, or some
other hold of special note had been taken: and setting upon their faces some
scuruy Deuill-like visards of sternesse, and taking into their mouths canon
oaths, will among the simpler upon their ale-benches, be accounted the only
powder and shot-men, and expertest martialists of ten thousand, being indeed
as we commonly call them hot-shots, and have more skill in the letting off a
duzzen rigglesworthes dags well filled with sack, then in discharging one
Calliuer, and know the way better, and had rather march by night to the Island
of Cranes, then sail by day to the East or West Indies: so these first sort
of foolish travelers, if they can but recite the names of many fair towns
they have past thorough, Bragging travelers desbribed.
give their friend at their return a french salutatio^ (though it be with a
french bow in the hams) and cut their meat after an Italian fashion, wear
their hat and feather after a German hufty, tell with a good grace, or rather
bold face, not a hundred and fifty merry tales, (for then they would take away
the gentleman fools office) but five hundred lies, purchase with those lies
and cogges good clothes, and alter the fashion often: they must and will be
esteemed the only wise, learned, languaged politicians: and great reason, for
why, among men of the simpler and smoother condition, who think any man (though
but as wise as a Parrat, that can change his language very learned) they stick
not to give out, that they are close and private, or rather privy
intelligencers (and yet their continual prating and taking all occasions to
keep their new found tongues, Continual prating, an argument of folly and
small judgment.
in everlasting motion, shows that they do neither intelligere, nor can give
any intelligence of worthy note) and that they may dispend of some worthy
Senators purse (who never heard of their names) so many Crowns per annum, and
there-vpon fill for more likelihood sake, their pockets full of amorous love
lines, and tailors and tauernes unpaid reckonings, and seal them up as if they
were letters of special coherence and intelligence, lately poasted, not sent,
from some great outlandish favorites: Braging trauelers discribed.
and many times among weaker judgments (not unlike petty broking merchants
that trade in the enterchange of brooches, currals, hobbi-horses, painted
babies, and dogs, who when they come into the country give out they are
substantial merchants, and so pass for current, in the belief of the simpler
(being where they dwell and are known, accounted and called but plain
pedlers:) through such slight delusions, they gain the opinion of wise and
politic linguists; but when they meet with any of worth, judgment, and
repute, they are held (as they are) base mimicke anticke affectators and mere
fashion-mongers.

But these affecting Politicians are least offensive to the state, being only
self pleasers of their own vain and idle humors, except in this regard they
be hurtful, that being like Cipresse trees, neither good for building, nor
bearing fruit: with their fair leaves they ouershadow better men's rooms and
places. Idle men in a common wealth like Cipresse trees.
Fruges consumere nati, fruitles consumers of wealth and words.

The latter sort of travelers are more troublesome and noisome to the common
wealth, for they having both wit and ability to ad to their study in
state-learning good and profitable observations, by traveling into other
countries and returning not only well furnished with many helps of learned
and foreign languages, Discontented witty and politic travelers dangerous
and noisome to any common wealth.
but with substantial matter of discourse disgested out of such general
occurrences as have happened in those parts, where they spent their time,
think now there is but one step betwixt them and the chair of state: and
therefore scorn to converse with Penelopes handmaides, will court none but
Penelope herself, whereas if they were admitted to any high place of
government, in the common wealth, and put to the test of true judgment and
knowledge in the state, they would prove so far from Troy-weight as being
balanced with a true, wise and experienced statesman, in any particular,
great and weighty business, they would not prove current to pass in any the
least affairs of a thousand, that should be propounded. They imagine not what
difference is betwixt Platoes cups and tables, and his cuppitees and tabletees,
the one fit for every ordinary scholar to discourse of, the other able to
confound the deepest judgments and profoundest artistes.

The ordinary and general propositions maximees, and enter course of state
affairs, Only wise experienced statesmen to be admitted to the grave and
weighty affairs of the commonwealth.
is matter of discourse for the trauailer and Student in pollicye, but the
cuppitees and tablettees as it were of particular I deas, and designements, in
and belonging to a state, is only matter for the ripest and most experienced
statesmen, to discover, intermeddle, and dispute of.

Every man that can look (as DEMOSTHENES said to the ATHENIANS of PHILOXENVS
his arriual) against a candle, may not think his eyes firm enough to gaze
against the Sun: only of the deep discerning politician it must be said, tam
cernit acutim quam aut aquila aut serpens Epidaurius, such as have such insight
into the State as by indirections they can find directions out, though they
were hid fathom deep.

Every man can say that a good Chyrurgion must sometimes launch deep,
sometimes infuse oil into a wound, but none but a perfect and skilful
chyrurgia^ ca^tel when to distinguish those different times and seasons. Every
Apothecarie and hearbist can discourse that this herb is good for that grief,
and that for another, but to draw poison from the root, and to make a pleasant
sallet from the upper part of one and the self same herb, belongs only to
a most skillful and experienced Physician: so these by reading, observation and
conference, had with learned and wisemen abroad, can relate that it is
prescribed sometimes to have as grave a countenance as Phoci on or Democritus,
Not to know much, but to mode rate the knowledge of much, is true knowledge.
and that Lyourg us himself allowed, sometimes a merry and cheereful
behavior: but when to be sad of gesture, and when to smile, and give place to
mirth, and laughter, they can hardly prescribe themselves that moderation. For
their mirth and pleasant Iocondnes most commonly tastes of Scurilitie,
wantonness and apish effeminatenes: and their sadness full of affectation and
harboring, not so deep, as dangerous matters touching the state.

They have observed by reading good histories and conference, that JULIUS
CAESAR said, that matters of high enterprise, He is truly wise that can
distinguish rightly the times and seasons of using his theorie in perti cular
actions.
because they are subject unto great and uncertain dangers, ought to be
executed and dispatched out of hand, and no advise and deliberation to be taken
of them, in regard that to the going through with business of that nature,
celeritie does greatly help: the casting in of many demurres to matters of
great peril, does pluck a man back from hardy and aduenturing: and they have
observed- and can discourse by the reading and conference on the contrary, that
DOMITIVS CORBVLO used much to say, Domitius Corbulo his opinion of war.
that a man's enemies in battle were to be overcome with a carpenters squaring
axe, that is to say soking lie, one piece after another, and by both these
observations laid together, can perhaps at their return in their conferences
draw out these conclusions, that a Statseman either in matters of war or
employments of peace, must sometimes be sudden, sometimes full of deliberation,
sometimes slow, sometimes peremptory, and resolute: but if they were admitted
to particular designements of such or the like state difficulties, as often
happen to the dividing Judgment of grave and experienced Statesmen, either in
matters of peace or war, they would be as far to seek when to cut with a
common axe, which goes through at the first chop, and when to use the squaring
axe, which works the same effect by little and little, as how to use the
Carpenters Square, or Axe, without cutting their legs off.

If therefore they would according to SOCRATES his precept, (who thought it most
against reason for any man to set up any handycraft or occupation before such
time as he had thoroughly learned the same, or for a Seafaring man to sit and
hold the Stern of a ship, before he had full and perfect experience in the
feate of Marinership) apply themselves to the skillful and expert Cardmen of a
state, Men that intend to prove skillful in any course must apply themselves
to the most skillful and experienced in every kind.
and become as it wear their apprentises before they set their hands and heads
to the contriuance and making of curious nests of boxes and exquisite drawers
and cubberds, belonging to the secret learning of public government;
observing PLVTARCHS rule, vide^ntes sequi potius quam caecos ducere, follow
the sound rather then like a lame cripple lead the blind, they might then
happilye attain in time, that which vainglory detayneth) profunditie of
judgment and expect skill in managing the weightiest affairs of the common
wealth.

Apothecaries have many bundles of most eccellent receipts hanging up in their
shops, such as they know have cured many several malladies: and they
understand which receite cured one sick of a fever, which the stopping of the
liver, which a cathare, but yet being not able to judge whether the cathare
proceeded from a cold and humid flux, or a hot and dry distemper in the
liver or lungs, or what original cause and predominant quality the Fever and
other several diseases-did proceed, dare not presume without the special
direction of the Doctor, whose approved skill and long experience has
attained to the depth of all causes, to minister any manner of Physic to
patient and ill affected bodies: and surely if these could observe the
Apothecaries rule, Discontent and pride, ouer-throvve many good parts.
to be contented to be ministering hands to the Doctors in policy and
State-learning, they might then perhaps proceed in time to the pulse of the
State affairs, a degree further then the discreet and wise Apothecaries ever
aspire unto: or if not so, they may settle themselves in a commendable course
of some honest and warrantable account, to their own comfortes, and the good
(in some measureand degree) of the common wealth. But when like quick-saluers
they strive to be accounted doctors, because they have travailed beyond sea,
and skimbd up two or three excellent receipts, they draw to themselves either
by vainglory, such discredit as quicke-saluers have in all their
undertakings, or run (through coffeehouse that they may not have such
dignity and promotion as they desire, and they only think they deserve) into
such base offices and courses, as discredits and disables all the worth and
repute which either their travailing or study might bring unto them, and so
become not as the other sort of trauailers were, like timorous, but like lusty
sturdy soldiers, who having been in many hot skirmishes, and behaved
themselves by sea or land like gallant tall men, yet are far from true skill
and millitarie discipline, because they may not have that place and command
which belongs to a man, not only of a stout courage, but an expert and
skillful commander, betake themselves to piracie or robbing by the high way,
the high way to their undoing: so these (application I need make little) the
meanest understanding and conceit can apply it, and I would they whom it most
concerns, would apply it to their hearts, and prove wiser in their courses,
not profusely and prodigally abusing those good parts, which if they were
purged with the fire of stayednes from vanity, would shine and glitter about
them, like the purest armor, Learning well used brings both honor and defense.
both to their exceeding glory and exaltation, and also to the defense and
propulsatio^ of many indignities, which they through their own folly sustain;
so these I say by failing of their vnderserued longings, fall either to the
secret profession and practicing with young Gentlemen, such Aretin, or such
conicatching mountebancke-like-tricks, as they have learned beyond the seas, as
drown and disapoint the fruits of all their travel and dilligent
observations, made about state business.

CHAP. 5. Touching Seminaries and Jesuits.
NVnc venio ad grauissimam et atrocissimam querelam no^ meam sed reipub.
grauissimam in respect of the follye and weakness of some, atrocissimam in
respect of the obstinate peruersenes and wilful resolution of others of this
coat and profession: The unnaturalness of our countrymen which become Jesuits.
It was said of Romulus, that he grew hardye, rough and stern, being cast
out to be bred of hardy, fierce and sauadge beasts, and that was no marvel:
and it is set down likewise that Methridates turned poisonous herbs and
receipts into wholesome nutriment, by inuring his body to take and eat poison,
and that was no marvel:

But for men bred of the sweet milk of their mother country, to turn bloody
and murderous cutthroats of her prosperity, and flourishing estate: for men
trained up among the wholesome and pure nutriments of sweet and profitable
instructions, to be either by vanity seduced, or through desperate wilfulnes
resolved, to exercise unrecoverably their wits and studies, in the contriuance
of nothing but poison, and poysonnous plottes and devises, and Serpent-like to
rippe up the bowels of their own native parent and milke-giuing soil: these
are Execranda prodigia, and prodigiosa monstra, Execrable prodegies, and
prodigious and fearful abbortiue monsters of nature.

2. sorts of monsters or monstrous Seminaries.
I have implicitiuely noted two sorts of these monsters: The former, of them are
pregnant, but weak understandings, pregnant and appliable to evil, as wax in
summer, ready of it own accord to stick to any matter: but to good, honest
and profitable courses, either concerning themselves, or their country,
pregnant but in constant and unsettled wits how affected.
as wax in winter, brickle and hard and of much difficulty to be wrought,
with either alluring persuasions, or chafing inforcements, and like children to
go from school; upon the report of many gay and pleasing sights to be seen
beyond the seas they are won to leave the land with an apple, but to sit still
at home in some stade and honest profession, like children hard to be won with
gould to go to school, and sit all day in security and quiet, learning that
which may advance their good for ever: and when they are drawn out beyond
seas, and have pleased their eyes with the sight of such deluding masse-shewes,
and such like trumpery, as are every where obuious, and have got a smacke of
that obsceene, impure, and lazy life, they prove like mongrell dogs, A
description of a lazy life.
rather persuaded (according to that saying of the Poets Canis a corio nu^quam
abster rebitur vncto, a cur cannot be whipped from the Curriers grease-box, lo
lie knawing in a chimney corner of some Monestery or Abbey (sweeete bones) then
like painful hounds to be regarded, and esteemed for their skill in senting and
laborious following and prosecuting of any commendable practice, and course of
living.

And surely I am verily persuaded, that neither the touch of conscience, nor
the sense and feeling of any religion, ever drew these into that damnable and
vntwineable train and owsell of perdition, Idleness and unlawful plesures
dravv many to that wicked course of life, and the profession of being
Seminaties.
but only a pleasing humor of delighting their senses with vain and foreign
fashions, mixed with a most pernicious resolution, to stick only to that
custom and habit of life, which they had found most repleat, with oily,
sluggish, monastical security. Discontent and ouer-weening conceit of wit
undoes many a worthy spirit.
The other sort are drawn out of this land and her obedinence, or with
pleasing shows (for they well ca^ distinguish shows from substance) but with a
profane and envious discontent, to see some others (not so wise in their
conceits, as themselves) mounted up to the seat of honor and preferment about
the state; for being not able thorough rancord malice and swelling of heart,
contracted and gathered by misconceite of their own worth and learning, in
affairs of the state, The mischief of envy.
to subdue the insurging affects and inundations of pride, to that order and
obedience as may make their good parts serviceable to men of higher place, and
by degrees minister occasions by their dutiful and painful endeauours of
their promotion and dignity, they will and must needs travail (because Nemo
Propheta in patria noe priest is long regarded (as they say) in his own
pulpit) to the popes grace, that only royal M. and sovereign lord and
maintainer of learning, and learned, wise, politic artists. And will it please
you in one view to see what preferment and reckoning this subtle painted sheath
of scholler-like promotions bestows on such his followers as go out of this
Gods grace, into that warm sun? The acount surely that Caesar had of
Rhimerales, for Proditionem amo proditores odi is the popes posie and position
concerning English starters, from their loyal and natural faith and
alleagiance: he loves the Pies tales, Treachery loved, but the betrayers hated.
but the Pie is most bitter, distastful and unsavory. And therefore he
regards them as men do poisonous Arrows, which they shoot at their enemies.
Traitors regarded of their Masters as poisonous Arrows.
If the arrows hit the party they are shot at, they shall be surely broken,
if they hit another standing by, they shall be surely broken: if they hit not
the body but light on the cloak or hat of him they are shot at, they shall be
surely broken: (unless happilye they light upon such a fool as sometimes is
reported when he was strooken through the nose, to have pulled out the man's
Arrowe patientlye, and by the way of private counsel, to have told him in his
ear, that if he shot so again, he would break his Arrow) but they meet with
no such noses of wax as will be so iested with all; for the very aiming with
their venomous and irrilegious purposes and plots, at the States heart and
peaceable government, lays them open to utter breaking: and though they never
hit (as I trust none of that abhorred, unnatural, and diabolical crew shall ever
hit so fair a white) their very intent and purpose exposes them to most
mild and just punishment. Will you see yet further the account is had of them
by the Pope, The pope a false dice-player, with our poor countrimens lives.
the same that debost Gamsters and deceitful dice-players, have of young
nouices newly come to their lands: they draw them in with a supper or two, let
them win for their better encouragement three or four bowtes of small worth,
and suddenly when they find that they are thoroughly tickled and pleased with
their nibling success, they let down the mouse-trappe, cog in two or three
false and unlawful Dice, and wipe their young gallant of all his gold, and
send him like Aristippus, his (...) his golden sheep either to some Iasons
fleece, or desperate enterprise, or home into their country to vnfleece his poor
tenants for a new supply: In like manner deleth the pope with their lives, as
the false Gamsters deal with young gamsters gold; give them pleasing content
for a time but with a purpose to make them by desperate adventure game away
their dearest blood.

Medeas Goulden Fleece is feigned by the poets to have given many worthy and
heroic spirits, occasion to adventure to their destruction; as being kept by
Giants, fiery dragons, and such like horrid monsters, as may more at large in
their poetical fictions appear but our English true Golden-Fleece, has caused
the popes to send over more foolish hardy adventurers to the Stigian Lake of
perdition; and yet could never get one lock of it through all their devises
and demonical attempts. And can they think whom he uses in so desperate and
unlikely adventures, that they are regarded of the Pope their M a. when he
sends them to fight with Lions, and death-spitting Dragons (for such are, as
every child does note) the supporters of the peace and tranquillity of
england) nay, with the Lion of the house of IVDA who has so taken into his
protection and defense, both the heart and the head of this states welfare,
with all her sweet and princely branches (which God for ever prosper and
establish) as if legions of devils and deuilish spirits should daily seek to
overthrow them, they should not be able to pull one lock, nay to hurt one
hair of her flourishing and peace maintaining Solomon, or any of his most
religious and al religious hearts comforting-seed and issue.

The popes pity toward our countriemen when they are hanged for treason
Will you see yet further the regard is had of them by the Pope? they are
trained up and nourished (as was noted before) as dogs, to make him sport by
putting them upon Lions, and when their skins are pulled over their ears by the
tallents of upright laws and Justice of the state, he gets (like a woman with
child of two twins, laughter for the fall of them, whom he fed and fatted
but to the shambles, and disdain for their il success) into his growning
chair, and pittieth them, thus:

I sent not for these English flies, their service was unsought for, and sought
for only as flies seek after bloody meat; and now if they have met with the
butchers flap, Tomeris his reward is iustly-falne upon them: sanguine
satiantur qui sanguinem sitierunt: they greedilye hunted after a shameful
service, and they are paid with the wages of a shamfull and ignominious death
and destruction.

These and the like words have been noted to have proceeded upon the death and
hanging of many of our Rooms dearest children, from the mouths of those
blood-sucking antichristian tiraunts: Will you see yet further (for I would
gladly reclaim my dear countrymen that have entered into that exorbitant
course the very Pinfould of dangers (and deter all others from entertayning
the like discontents and seducements by unmasking and laying open the fruits
and assured profits may be expected to arise to any of that sect) the best
regard is had of them by the Pope, The pope vs^th English Seminaries as
Curtizans do their loves.
even the same that curtizans have of young prodigals, who so long as their
purses are filled with ducats, and spur-royalls, shall want no royal
entertainment, are made ducklings at their lips and laps; kissed, embraced,
fed with all amorous musical sweet varieties of pleasures, and enchanting
delights, Vbi caeperint esse invtiles, eijciuntur for as, when they have spent
all, stand behind the door for a cipher or warning piece; and not only so,
but upon the least displesure, are thrust out of doors al betatterd and
forlorn in their estates, smotherd not with kisses but with grief, and
besmeared with shameful reproaches, and disdainefull terms, in stead of
sugered and honey salutations: so these whilst their heads are full fraughted
with damnable plots and practices to advance the Popes supremacy and regallity,
they shall want neither gould nor goulden words: nothing can be too dear or to
daintye for them, till they are thrust into deaths snare: but if they miss of
their wicked and unchristian like purposes, (as they have ever hitherto praised
be the keeper of Israel, and ever shall while Israel prayseth the protector of
Iaccobs house) their accounts shall be at their return (if ever they do
return) as of old and ouer-spent horses turned to graze in some pennurious
pasture for breed and trayning up of others to the like offices, who if they
boldlye attempt and be intercepted of their most abominable and hellish
undermining treasons, they meet with Dyricks diet, Dirickes diet prepared for
Traitors.
a bitter Cup prepared and stilled out of the veneficall herbs of their own,
either unsettled, or discontented and aspiring brains.

Objections fondly made concerning the death of Seminaries.
And here I must needs take occasion to answer the fond and frivolous
objections that many idle and troublesome heads make concerning the death of
Seminaries, and Jesuits, casting out, that they dye for the testimony of a
good conscience, and their Religion sake, thereby taxing the cruelty of this
state, and the late queens rigor, and the severity of some, especially that
most religious pillar of Gods truth, the now defunct, L. B. The papists term
our religion a new found and Cecillian Religion: because that worthy Senator
under the late Queen was a most resolute defender of the same
wise and worthy Counselor of this state, tearming the Religion which we under
her gratitious and soules-releeuing government professed, a new found and
Cecillian religion (O happy title, a title that will be recorded in the
register of eternal memory aere plus qua^ adamantino to his, and his
posterities everlasting fame.

True it is which few do conceive or rightly understand (for to reason of the
antiquity of our religion, The reason why the law take; the goods and part of
the lands from Recusants.
is neither befitting my function nor scope) that the reason why any law was
enacted, to take from recusants their goods, and 2-parts of their lands,
derived it self from this palpable proof, that Recusants were not contented
to enjoy the liberty of their religion and conscience, but most of them became
bye Seminaries and Mass Priests (sent over by their Cayphardicall M. to breed
sedition and disturbance of this Realms peace and quiet) reuolters in heart
from their sovereign alleagiance, and were indeed flatly reconciled to the
Pope and his jurisdiction, and supremacy.

For the Romish Church houlde an opinion, The opinion of the Church of Rome
touching reconcilement to the pope.
that for a Catholic (as they term them) to come to Church before
reconcilement to the Pope, was but Scismaticall, but to come to Church and to
be intermingled with us in divine service and participating of the holy
Sacraments, after reconciliation to the Pope, and his supremacy, (and to be so
reconciled to the Pope) what is it by their own testimony, but preferring the
popes authority before their natural princes (which is treason in the highest
degree) was plainly heretical, damnable, and utterly unpardonable; whereupon
the wisdom of the state at that time (for huic illae lachrymae, the title of
the Cecillian Religion came) perceauing, that howsoever by the private and
secret absolutio^ of the Jesuit and house priest, it could not be
challingingly proved and euicted, that they which refrayned our Church, were
reconciled to the Pope, and renounced her Maiestis power and supreme
authority, yet ex consequenti it was as clear as light at noone day, that all
they which obstinatelye refused the holy communion and divine service, were
directly reconciled to the Pope. And therefore her Majesty (as now our gracious
and dear Lord and Sovereign stands affected) loath to shed the blood of so
many subjects, held it sit in policy for the better and safer preservation of
this Realm in peace and tranquillity, only to curb and keep down Recusants
from growing mighty, powerful, and rich (being intestine ill willers to his
royal person and imperial state and dignity) by the deprivation of their
goods and loss of part of their Lands: and like a wise and religious
Chyrurgian (vt metus ad omnes, animaduersio adpau^cos perveniret) to cut off
only the infecting and poisoning parts and members, which are these Jesuits
and Seminaries, the seducers of the peoples hearts not from Religion, but from
their natural pyetie and sovereign duty and allegiance. Now let it be
weighed in equal balance, whether those times and those courses the^ held, or
which now under his Majesty's flourishing and succeeding (but more exceeding
lie peaceable) government, are held against Seminaries and Jesuits, Savor of
cruelty or desire of blood, or any other humor then a religious policy, to
keep in upright terms, and in perfect temper and tune, the sweet harmony of
this states happy regiment. And thus much shall suffice to have spoken of
Seminaries and Jesuits, wherein that I have somewhat digressed, let no man
marvel, it stands within the chief scope of my subject which is policy, and
this is one point of policy, which is the most affected to Popery (for many of
them are full of these kind of objections) would duly observe, they would
answer by this their own weak, wanton, and very womannish objections,
concerning these and the like cases.

CHAP. 6. Concerning Proiectors.
PRoiectors! why, what are they? A Description of proiectors.
I noted 2. sorts of them: they are your only, not only politicians, but
directers and plotters of state-busines (or rather continual makers of business,
and trouble to the state governors) without whom the state cannot stand (or
rather for whom the state governors cannot stand or rest in quiet.

If you desire to know them better, they are such as have not like Philosophers
made a proiection of goulde, but cast away their goulden thrifte and estates
thorough some loose and indirect courses; and to repair it again, take the
direct lineway to the court, proiecters like fishermen-
like fishermen (because they have hard, there is no fishing to the Sea, nor
service to the Court toicaste about with their hooks and nets for a new
goulden promised estate.

If you desire to know them further, they are Pedlers, or Pedling informers of
the State, men that have lapped up from the vommit of other men's wits, some
excrements of Court-phrases, and thereuppon turn Factors about the court and
contriue Proiects and strange devises of tobaco-pipes, Cardas finas, brown
paper, french wares, dunghill shrids, and a thousand of the like conceits, to
trouble the State withal, wherein they labor and trot up and down as busily
as Bees, carrying all the world in conceit, that they have such special
employments about the State, as will let them rest neither night nor day.

And truly they are right Merchants, for the trading to the East and West
Indies gets but a living, and their trading from their lodgings to the Court
with a bundell of papers, and from the Court to their Lodgings begets them,
like East and West voyages, a yearly, yea daily reuennewe. For to the
expectation of their prosperous and happy success, many healthes are drunk,
and much good cheer daily tasted: Their Mercer, their Tailor, their Shoemaker,
their ostes, their patients, are drawn by hoopes of their court adventures,
and fair shows and pretenses to trust and furnish them with all necessaries,
ad victum et vestitum, and are induced to let their fingers be keys of their
coffers while all is spent; but when their patients and their Creditors through
ouer-long deferring (for their proiects are like the hour Saturn, that
finisheth his course but once in three years, nay these scarce one of them
thrive or come forward once in three lives) are rubde to the quick; either a
new nail must drive out the other, or else being known to be sile^ced and
their proiects eiected as matters unworthy to pass the Seats of grave
Audience, much less the seats of allowance, they spitefullye fret and fume,
and in their secret corners mutter, that few or none of the state were able to
understand, or sound to the depth of their proiects.

Will you now know who are their retayners? Lice and Mice are said by DIOGINES
to be poor men's retainers and followers, Vain and troublesome proiectors
Retayners.
but these have lieftena^ts, captains, caualiers, ge^tlemen of the sprucest
stamp and edition to attend them earelie and late, whereby the grave and
ponderous affairs and business of the state is very intollerably many times
combred and tediously wronged.

The second sort of proiectors, are such as the Philosopher spoake of, but to a
better end; who were ever toward wiuing and yet married not, that were always
in a readiness to sail on the sea, and yet took no Ship, that addressed
themselves to enter into the business of the common wealth, and yet entered not
into any honest employments at all, that had prepared and framed (but like
women dum moliunter et comuntur annus est, while they are a dressing and a
drawing, one may ride to york) themselves to be in the Court, and to live in
house-holde with men of high State and great power, and yet were loath forsooth
to be tied to subjection, and daily attendance.

And yet not-withstanding they will be daily Courtiers and Politic directors
too. For either they will frame and apply themselves, though in no wise to be
daily attendants and servants (for that is too gross, and too abhorring from
the french strain) but to be followers and directors, Tutors and Instructors
of young noblemen, such as are raw and untrained in the subtle courses of
this age, preferring always matters of pleasures and delight to their pitchie
aprehensions, and in that respect prove no better many times then their
panders, or if they cannot thrive so to their full content, they vulture-like
seek out the cadauera, and ceaze upon the soars of discontented nobles, and
prescribe them lessons and precepts of more coffeehouse and envy.

And to gain nearer engagement with them, Dangerous and mischievous proiectors
they will be ever feeding their humors with the pleasing Syrene songs of
their good parts, and extraordinary skill and dexterity in state business,
and setting before them their admired valors, their worthy and highly
extolled-bou^ties, and lyberalities, and so by degrees draw the^ with the twine
threads of their own delights, (for these proiectors are casters of their
netts, always into troubled (waters) into an ouerweaning conceit of their
own worthes, and vnreuerent and undue regardes of other their equals, honest,
studious, and faithful endeavors about the states welfare, and never leave,
making them like Fish, catch at the baits of dishonorable and ignoble
misconceiuings, till they are struck with the deadlye hooks of their own,
too to much, but over late pittyed and lamented destruction and ruin.

These are the very viperous Phalangia and Cantherides of Nobility: The
Philosophers called such men (...) the little pushes and pimples of glory, and
rightly: for as they through their continual itch bred perpetual unrest, and
unquietness to such as were affected with them, so do these preceptors of vain
glory and discontent, beget in noble and free spirits nothing but an itching
humor of putting them forward to desperate and Polipus-like practices, being
made by their plotters, and instructers but the stages and actors of their
wickedly co^triued, either malicious or vaineglorious or ambitious purposes,
and like pushes they in the end prove unto them, for when they break out into
public note and view, the filthe and matter of their long harbored and
hidden hearts motions, runs about the unspotted and unblemished faces of their
fames, and honor, and so infects them, that the scarres and Cicatrices thereof
can hardly ever be salued and healed up again: but I rather liken such men to
impostumes in the throat or stomach, which as experience teaches us, are not
seen nor discerned, but take a man suddenly when the world thinks all
sound and healthful within the party diseased, and break out in a moment,
with such abundance of corruption, as dispatcheth him before his friends, who
stand all amazed at the sudden mischance, can conceive which way to seek
remedy, or what remedy to apply.

So these harboring and settling by their false surmises, and crude and
imperfect suggestions, within the stomachs and mawes of noble Gentlemen,
corrupt impostumes of envy and rancoure, apply flegmaticke matter and daily
formentall exasperations of indisgested misprisions, and unkind aspersions,
which being suffered to feed within them to a ripenes, break forth suddenly
into such disorder, (even when all is thought sound at the coare of their firm
and faithful allegiance) as irrecouerably casts them away, and leaves their
friends, to utter amazedness and discomfort. Hos tu Roman caueto, God keep
all true and Noble hearts from such proiectors, plotters and Politicians.

CHAP. 7. Concerning substan tiall Statesmen.
THere are many can talk very freely of incountring with Lions, and wrestling
with Bears, who dare look neither in the face. And as many that vainly will
predicate and boast of great learning and understanding in the deepest affairs
of the State, who can not guide the Triremes much less the Quinquiremes of of
any weighty employment. The ouerweening conceit whereof, makes some who have
read over a piece of Aristotle's politics, to deem it no usurpation, to
ascribe unto themselves the title of Politicians. And if they have turned over
some few leaves of ISOCRATES short precepts, or but 4 sides of SEXTVS JULIUS
FRONTINVS, his four books of Stratagems, superciliose contrahunt frontem,
They cast their heads over the left shoulder, they think themselves seated and
enthroaned in the breast of MINERVA, bred in APPOLLO his brains, and able to
manage any public affairs: very substantial Statesmen.

But little do they know what deep and secret mysteries, are to be found in
Court-learning, and how different from School terms.

The difference betwixt court learning and Schoole-learning.
Scholars in their professions are all of them to be reverenced and respected
in their several degrees of excellency, yet they must understand that they
who wade into the depth of generallities, cannot be fit instruments of
particular employments, especially concerning worldly affairs, much less
the occasions and occurrence; of the commonwealth. For although in the
Theoricke they understand, and can out of their understanding discourse at
full, many of them, of many things that occur in their printed Authors
touching Peace and War, yet the want of experience depriueth them of that
fitnes and agilitie in the performance of those matters, which to some by a
secret instinct of nature, helped with continual practice, comes so ready, as
when they are conversant in state-imployments, seem to be like fish in the
Sea, In loco proprio, as contrary wise mere professed scholars admitted to any
courtly function, Why mere professed scholars are not fit for public action
and employment.
about a Prince and his state, bewray most of them a sheepish stupiditie, the
best of them a want of spirit and dexterity, which adds to all actions in
every outward profession such a grace, as they who are admitted to any
public designements without it, seem but Sutores vltra crepidam: and I must
make bold to say (though I wish as well to letters and the Muses as any
unlearned well-willer of them can) that if Princes in their behauiours and
causes politic, should stand to school arguments, Princes behauiours and
actions must depend upon laws, not arguments.
order (the strict observation whereof makes a Prince most eminent, especially
in his court) would often times beg at his gates and wander like a banished
vagabond.

For howsoever the government of court and commonwealth came from the rules of
philosophy, and to them must indeed refer their offpring, yet because the
treaties of Philosophers consist in a general consideration of things, they
leave to every one that reads them a scope of his own opinion and
interpretation, whereas the Laws and particular observations confirmed and
established in either court or the universal state, make them cease as
Philosophical discourses to be adjudged opinitiuely true or false, for they
set down positiuely this is granted and approved by general consent of the
wisest and profoundest Statists good or badde, and so fouldes us within assured
bounds, which if we might pass in breach, as scholars turn them up and
down in the uncertainty of their opinions and argumentations, our natures
would range infinitely into all enormities, and disorders.

Princes affairs must not be ordered by a free discourse of reason, but the
government of their estates must be tied, either to the customs, Laws, and
municipall statutes of their countries already established and ratified; or to
the profound and discerning judgment of discreet, wise, and experienced
rulers, which being granted, they whose skill consists more in what they have
read, then what they have with a digested Judgment observed convenient for
every function and office of public government, cannot be reputed fit for
the managing of Court business, being indeed deprived of the chiefest help
of their several employments, which is a judgment pressed and always provided,
distinguishingly to order, settle and dispose all affairs and occurrences of a
State, which cannot be in him that is continually incombred, and enfolded
within the multiplicitie of contemplative studies.

For though variety of reading and turning over many learned authors, is a
great help to all other scholer-like professions; as divinity, Socrates his
opinion of book lerning how hurtful to the judgment of great statesmen.
physic, law, yet nothing hinders more a states-mans attaining of perfection
in the skill and mystery of state-learning, then the confou^ding himself and
his judgment, with multifarious intricatenes of book co^ceits: for if the
light of judgment (which in all conclusions and negotiations, is most
preualent) be inueloped and inclouded within the mists of many diverse,
scatterd and vncollected opinions, and opinitiue says and sentences, what can
it publicly produce, or perform worthy the repute of a perfect and all
sufficient Statist? I do not exclude all Scholars from the business and
affairs of the State, but my reason chiefly imports, that every man who is
well seen in STRATAGEMICALL discourses, and the study of State-learning, may
not think that sufficient to enable him in the excecution of public affairs,
but an exact examination must be had of the strength and ability of his
judgment, who intends to apply himself to grave and weighty causes in
any public function and duty, for surely it cannot be imagined that any
man who is not most plentifully inritched, A discerning judgment. principally
to be required in a statesman.
and endued with this most invaluable treasure of a discerning, observing and
applying judgment (which seldom possesses men ouer-busied and out-spirited in
contemplative studies) can be fit for the trading and negotiating in
public affairs of the commonwealth.

For, as DEMOSTHENES said of pronountiation in an Orator, so may I say in a
Statesman, that judgment is the first, the second, and the last, yea all in
all requisite, without which no man, never so well seen either in
booke-learning, or observations in any public business, can be able to prove
excellent, or almost fit to rule the Horses of the sun, or pull in and let out,
as the necessity and circumstance of time, place, and persons do require, the
raines of any state government. Many by the very help of nature without any
great insight of Schoole-learning, have proved throughout all ages worthy
and excellent States-me^


There have been many noted in all states, even by the instinct and help of
Nature and experience, to have proved most excellent and worthy
common-wealths-men, having had small or little furnishing of book learning.

And questionless a man may well applying himself to the study of
State-affaires, be furthered by conuersing and reading of Historical and
Stratagemicall studies, that has an excellent wit and Judgment to apply
and make use of the same in his particular affairs, without much expense of
time; but it is impossible for any Man, never so much backed with the
instructions of politic Authors, without this special gift of judgment, in
observing every fit and convenient Particular, touching his several
employments, to prove excellent in the study and profession of perfect
State-knowledge: and whosoever shall be admitted to state employments rawly
upon book rules, without long experience and observation, shall be found to
sinck under the burden of their deep vndertakinges, and make themselves and
their lives both a perpetual slavery and vexation, and a continual mockery and
scorn. For like rash and headdy captains employments (that may be said rather
cursibus quam victoriis nationes peragrare, course through, rather then conquer
many nations) so will all their actions appear, and be approved to the wisest
and experiencedst Statists most slightly performed. For how is it possible for
a man that intends to learn and draw out the situation of any country, to
take a perfect and exact description of the particulers, by making certain
sudden ranging, slight and cursory notes of the same? no man of sense or
judgment does conceive it possible.

What to be considered in plotting, describing, and setting forth several
countries and soiles
For there is required to the exact Cosmography of any country, a due and
careful observation of many perticulars in perticulars, which cannot be had by
running, but by walking stayedly and steadily throughout, and by resting and
residing sometimes, thereby to gather and distinguish to his conceit the
several groves, the Paludes, the valleys, the mountains, the campestrian and
siluestrian soiles and scituations. No more is it possible for any man to
prove an exact Map-man, in the perfect skill and understanding of the several
affairs of any State, except by the pensil of his observation and experience,
he have chauked and pointed out the mountanous occurrences, of and concerning
the Princes and nobles behauiours, the valleys of the peoples orders, and
disorders, with fit preuentions and aduisements concerning all, both
Siluestrian, and Campestrian, rural, and vrbane occasions, as also have a full
and general insight, into all the particular veins and mines, as it were of
foreign and hom-bred customs and commodities.

And who can recollect and draw all these accidents and a thousand more,
properlye and most necessarily belonging to a perfect and complete substantial
States-mans understanding, to their several lines and places, without an
extraordinarye reach and applying judgment, which must be the hand to direct
the pensill of every necessary and fit occurre^ce. It is the heat of clear
and pure burning judgment, which like fire seuereth and deuideth upon all
occasions the dross from the pure gold, which distinguishes solid pearls
from liquid haile-stones, manacles from bracelets, business of incombrance and
insnaring designements from employments full of honor, credit, safety, and
reputation. It is judgment, which makes a man admitted to the state
absolutely powerful, like a perfect Physician, instructed with all manner of
perfect skill, to apply a sovereign and precious salve, to every particular
sore of the commonwealth. This discerning judgment, will teach and instruct
him infalliblye that has obtained the same, how to behave himself in all the
courses and affairs of his life, in such sort, as he shall most easilye
distinguish errors from truth, and divide that which is profitable and
convenient from that which is hurtful and offensive to his future and present
estate.

This will inform him, when all schoole-points will fail him (like false
friends in adversity) how to bear himself in the most dangerous and doubtful
times, that his life shall be subject unto. Good precepts and instructions of
Philosophers, necessary rules for ordinary conuersations.


For although good precepts of wise men, and learned instructions of
philosophers, are firm grounds to set a civil man in the right way, for his
ordinary conversation, and the directions of profound Politicians may very
well, (by adding thereunto his own wary observations) point out a fit and
correspondent behavior for all sorts of people, and which in gesture, speech,
and outward graces and complements, may sufficiently warrant his carriage to
Prince, to Parents, to friends, to servants, to superiors, to inferiors, yet
let him know if ever he shall be admitted to the managing many doubtful and
scrupulous points of a public state, wherein shall depend either the ruin or
the preservation of the weal public, or if not so, a great rent or stroke
may be given by ill advise, as contrariwise a great heap of honor may arise
to himself, and good to the commonwealth, by wise and well succeeding
counsel, therein to have a clear judgment, far surpassing all others, whereby
he may be able to understand, of many courses, which (acording to the
diversity of many men's opinions) shall be propounded: which is not only the
likeliest, but certainly the best, argues not a man well red in books, or
studiously co^uersant in other men's directions, and observations, (for many
accidents fall out and are offered to the consideration of a man occupied in
the deep designs of the commonwealth whereof he shall find no likelihood of
example, or pattern to cut out his present actions by) but a singular
eminency of wit and judgment, divinely inspired from God above. And whosoever
can be able to cast, not only an eyesight but an insight into the behavior
and carriage of such a man, upon whom God has bestowed this discerning and
all-deuiding judgment, his several actions and respects shall not seem to
him actions smelling of lantern and candle, or sauouring of learned authors
and discourses (for many, yea most who can say much more (as I noated) out of
ancient histories and booke-obseruations, often see less in diiudicating
particular state-cases) but the behauiours respects and cariages of a man
through his quick and Eagle-like-sight of judgment, firmly resolved in all
doubtful causes, to stick to one course: for that is the very life of al
State-wisedome, suddenly and in a trice, to attain to a resolution in all
determinations propounded. For many are in show very wise, in conference very
profound, in matters of difference very acute and subtle, banding to and froe
now one reason, then an other, and those very plausible and likely, but for
want of this judgment or rather judicious resolution (which in a statesman
has the prime and principal seat, when sentence definitiuely is to be
pronounced, cannot so easily stick to one course and project, as find out
many.

And yet many of these nimble-headed and quicke-conceited wisemen, (which I
never marvel at, because I know by experience that the greatest hindrance to
perfect wisdom is to be puffed up with a high conceit of ones own wit and
proper understanding) having inflamed brains and heated imaginations, to a
promptnes and volubilitie of speech, account, in respect of themselves, all
others fools: so excellent seems to them the lightning (for I cannot call it
light) of their wit and reasoning (for I cannot call it reason and judgment)
and half drunken faculty of belching out at their ordinaries and pots,
ordinary and triuiall conceits: and happily (that I may give the best of them
some respect) for the invention of many plots and stratagems, these hot
brains, are far excellenter, then judicious and deep reaching and experienced
Statists, but when they come to the execution of weighty causes: such as may
either help or hinder them for ever, either in public or their own private
negotiations, such a dizinesse, and dim darnesse ouer-shadowes the true light
of judgment (which is by them sildom exercised) as you may observe them (like
birds in Snow) fall when the Sun is at the highest of his strength, into
most apparent dangers, and run with fierce speed into their adversaries nets.
And thus much may suffice to have spoken as well of the painted professors of
State-learning, as of the true and perfect Statistes of any religious
commonwealth, with their several habits, shows, offices, and distinctiue
faculties, wherein if (according to the little skill and perspection, which by
God and nature is infused into my understanding) I have shot near the mark
of your content, my content and satisfaction superaboundeth.

Howsoever, the errors I have committed you must attribute to my distractions,
the fruits of a weak and sick body, which according to the rules of
phylosophie, many times alter the temperature of the mind, and where any thing
does either deesse in necessariis, or abundare in superfluis, want in matter
or abound in form, you must supplye with the swift wings of your love, the
defects of the one, and prune of, with the skilful knife of your discretion and
applicatorye judgment, the sarmenting and ouer-spreading boughs of the other.

With these I commend my love to your loving entertainment, wishing that
(although they are but Pans-reade and rurall-songes, they might (as matters set
down by the pen of APOLLO) sound sweetlye in your apprehension, and give to
your conceit most consenting music, pleasure, and delight.

In my next (so you shall be plesed to accept these in good worth) I will
streine the strings of my best wits, to give you a relish of sweeter harmony.

Your Philodespolus. I. M.

A Sixe-fold precept, of Policy.
NEARCHVS to his PHILODESPOLVS.
I Have received from your hands the harvest of your approved love, your
sixefoulde discovery of Pollicye, wherebye I have conceived both plaustrum
lubentiarum, a carrefull of pleasing, and yet most true and vncontrowleable
descriptio^s of such vanities and absurdities as are hourly practiced in the
course of the world, and march under the Silken Banner of outwardlye professed
Tytles of vain gloriously frivolous, or maliciously turbulent Politicians;
And in your sixth and last discovery fullye perceived your judgment in setting
down, (be it spoken without flattery) such exact, perpended, and ponderous
descriptions of perfect Pollicye and State-learning, as was not expected from
your Pen. Veterem ferendo Inturiam, inuitas nouam: The pleasure and profit I
have drawn from your precedent Politic discourses, emboldeneth me to
inioyne you to a new trouble, before I have given you any content or repayment
for your former manifold courtesies.

Your pen has led my conceit into a grove or thicket of many vse-ful but
general observations, but if you leave my tender years, without your Ariadnes
thread of conduction, your love will prove wrongful distraction, and an
exposing of my unsettled thoughts, to the wild beasts of disturbance. Therefore
I must entreat your loving Conuoy, for the settling me in the safe and plain
way of some particular precepts: and as you have set down the ground work of
a true and perfect Statesman, as also the Cyclopaedia which most powerfully
rules and must be made the chief and principal workman in all affairs of
civil and politic government, by him which intends to be regarded for his
wise carriage in any religious commonwealth: so you would take pains to ad to
those general propositions, some few particular precepts, which as sea-markes
may enable me in this infidelious age, to shun and avoid such rocks and
quick-sa^ds of treachery and deceit, as high fortunes and estats are ordinary
subject unto.

For like as such persons as have to do in the game and feat of wrestling, have
in a redines certain sure points and ways both to catch hold, and also to
wind out of their adversaries foil and grapple: so must they who intend to
travel in the business and occupations of peace and war, of necessity have in
readiness (according to Erasm. his admonition) sure rules, by which they may be
put in remembrance what is in many doubtful particular cases, needful to be
don, or omitted, Show therefore without any subterfugie, your ability and
propense readiness, go give satisfaction to this my request.

You shall add hereby to mine and other my good friends opinions now had of
your sufficiency in politic observations, a large and locuplete increase of
your repute, and show me an infallible argument and consignation of your
undoubted love, and lastly set upon the Talley of my respect, and Love, such
debtes of your deseruinges, as shall make me carefully studious and studiouslye
careful to repay them with treble satisfaction and remuneration.

Your loving Nearchus. C. S.

PHILODESPO US his answer to Naearchus his request.
WHat you have received (dear sir) was your own. For whatsoever guiftes of
art or nature wear my inheritances, are by adoption your appropriations, for
I have long since in heart bequeathed and designed all the faculties of my mind
and ability of body to your command and disposing. (...)

I have wiped away from the Table of my remembrance all forms and effigies,
that first, middle and last, at all times, and above all things I might
prescribe fresh in my memory your faithful favors, so liberally and so
freelye expended upon me, a man of so little worth and respect. If any thing
in those weak judgments, proceeding from weakness it self every ways, did
sit smiling at your heart, and conveyed to your thoughts either pleasure or
profit, I care not what displeasure or diseaseful unquiet they brought upon me.
Concerning your request, it was Brut. his saying (as Plutarche in his lives
makes mention) that it argned a great want of wit, not to be able to deny
any thing requested. And surely though their breaths not on earth that man,
that might leave me sooner void of wit or power, to deny or excuse whatsoever
you should by request command (for I have ever accounted your requests, as
powerful and absolute commaundes) yet lupum auribus teneo, through this your
motion I am driven into such commotion, as my sickness more disquieteth not my
body, then this demurr and dependence disordereth my thoghts. To deny you, the
sense of gratitude, of ciuility, debarreth me; to yield, the weightines of the
imposure, a burden which I am no way able to discharge with any warrantable
account of credit, and the qualitye of the suite, and business propounded,
utterly deterres me.

For to take upon me to point out particlar lessons, and instructions, such
as may be directors to a man of that state and fortunes, (as both by your
noble order and rank, and much more by your diligence and study in liberal
Arts and faculties of the deepest mysteries of learning, is likelye, and
altogether hoped and expected to be derived upon you) were to note out a
Caesar-like ambition in my thoughts and would certainly lay my folly and
weakness open to much scorn and derision.

And again, (beloved Sir) the government of a public State, you must consider
is like to a ship at sea, continualy tossed with uncertain waves and surgees,
even as the more uncertain winds and State-tempests of sudain motions and
accidental alterations, and diuulsions daily arising one in the neck of
another, shall affect it: and therefore no sure or certain directions can be
prefixed and Prescribed to draw the particular lines of a states-mans life and
actions by, your own daily observations, when you shall be admitted to action,
will be surer and perfecter Preceptors unto you, then any the most experienced
states-mans rules and precepts: and from me, how can you think (being never
admitted to the practiue part of policy and public government) that any
note of worth or regard can be drawn? therefore I pray you unbend the strength
of this your request which I know was made by you with no other purpose then to
try and feel the forwardnes of my inclination, least running into a rash and
precipitate intrusion of weightier undertakings, then either my ability could
bear up and support, or the fitnes and congruitie of this function and
performance bear out, you shall (God willing) if herein I have not satisfied
you (as I trust I have) at my next meeting and conference, be with more
surcharging reasons sufficiently resolved to content touching your request. In
the mean time I will think of something more fitting, and I hope as fully
satisfactorie, which I may offer as an appeasing sacrifice to your
consideration, and so for this time I commend your diligent and Bee-like
studies to Gods all prospering favor and blessings.

Yours not as he would but as he may I. M.

Naearchus, his reply.
GOod friend (by the name of friend and servant both I kindly conjure you)
that you would not use me as Vetronius Thurinus used Alexander Seuerus his
poor suppliants, to smother me with lingering excuses and delays, nor make use
of your wit in putting off and declining the force of my most necessary
requests. What Brutus his conceit was, concerns not particular; you shall by
your denialls but set me into more longing, and with more forcible pursuit,
make me to arietate and press forward womanlike against al objected
allegations. In this one conclusion I will drown al your doubts and demurres,
your weakness and imbicilitie (if it shall commit any errors) shall be poyzed
within the balance of my love and kind acceptance, and within the curtains
of most boosome secrecy, shall they be intombed. And although I cannot deny
but that when dangerous tempests suddenly arise at Sea, prayer and resolution
to death is most available, and that in a tempestuous state, where all things
are continually in an uproar, and disorderly confused, through daily and
intestine war, politic precepts do as little avail, as astronomicall
observations at sea, in rough, and all skill-drowning storms: yet it were
madness for men that are to travel by sea, utterly to neglect the due and exact
observation of several sands, gulffes, cliffes, rocks, reatches, and shoares;
so were it a plain madness, for him that endeauoreth to pass through the
streights and difficulties of deep and dangerous employments, to commend his
actions to the wind, and weather of every accident, without any due and
diligent consideration what he acts, or which way his purposes shall ariue at
their propounded ends, and be crowned with his desired and expected respects.

For certainly in the most troublesome confusion of tempests, though a good
spirit and resolution has the principal place, yet ordinary rules are not by
seafaring men altogether omitted, but in a calm they are preferred before the
courage and desperate resolution, of the most undaunted hearts: so when any
state is most distressed with garboyles, Politic governors omit not the
ready and necessary windings and cranings about of the peoples inconstant and
wethercocke affections, to contrary time-pleasing points, nor any such rules
and ceremonious instructions, as experience and that present ocasion shall find
most behoofefull: but in a peaceable, tranquille, and well governed state (such
as we converse in) (happy are the governors, but more happy the people that
possess by such wise and worthy governors incessant care and vigilancie, so
great happiness and prosperity) wherein no turbulent motions of civil and
domesticke broiles daily arise, the well disgested rules of expert statesmen
may stand one, that is to lanch into the deep of deep and sea-like affairs in
stead, as wary card-cautions, to know how to beware of the manifold and
diverse tumults, and conflicts of envy, that shall be laid in the cha^nell ways
of integrity and harmless innocence, and such infinite inconveniences as
imprudence, temeritie, or improuidence, may expose a man's life and fortunes
unto.

And therefore be not nicely obstinate in yeeleding to this my so much desired
requests, (...). you shall perform to me a most kind office, and no ways (I
will undertake) wrong your self, and although that gould which is dug out
of the earth by us with greatest travel is best regarded; and benefits hardly
obtained, are usually best beloved; yet think you shall vnmyne your minds
golden collections to a heart that can distinguish the quality of gifts, and
the natures of the giuers. And be most assured, that your free and unforced
oblations, shall never pass without their most valuable and weighty
acceptance, from the Altar of my heart: so hoping that I shall not need by any
further secondings, and begging interpellations, to set Mindus his gates before
the town of your discharge and performance I leave you like a town, as I hope
conquered by the powerful charge of this my rebesieging solicitation.

An answer to the replication.
XENOPHANTVS, (right worthy sir) customably used by certain measures, which he
exercised and plaide upon a Flute, to set ALEXANDER foorthward to battle.

Xenophantus might have bin accounted an exquisite musician, if he could by his
skill have drawn Alexander from war: for to martial affairs, he was naturally
of himself inclined, and needed no provoking incitements, to stir his warlike
spirit to battle, where in he so much and so inordinately delighted. Your
perswasio^s have ever had as powerful operation in my breast, as ever either
Xenopha^tus or Ario^ his music had to delight and draw the senses of any
mortal. But surely in this kind, your importunate requests, rather ravish and
enforce my will and consent, then like Xenophantus measures persuade my
affections. For Alexander was never so willing to take an occasion to march
against his enemies, as I am unwilling to put in battle arraye such distracted
precepts, as sickness, and sorrow thereof conceived, shall be composers and
prepositors of: you should have needed small store of coniurations in any other
procurations. But howsoever, you must not be denied, and your sweet and
delicate conditions have been to me in all your requests, like CAIUS FVRIVS
CRESINVS his field-instrumentes, powerful, and irresistable bewitchings, and
therefore I will make use of that politic rule, Sapere est id sponte
amittere, quod tenere amplius non poteris, a woman were as good yield that to a
man at first, which she finds by love tobe once conquered, and by Cupids
battery beaten down and subdued: and I finding a weak heart, set against the
most powerful and puissant forces of your virtuous love, and most to be
beloved virtues) will most cheerfully recollect and erect my fainting and
languishing spirit, with the comfortable consideration of your promises, and
hope and desire to give unto your undeniable requests, all serviceable and
satisfiing content and the rather for that I assuer my self, that your
su^-shining and supporting favor, shall not be wanting to my weak and infirm
supplies, as I shall be enabled to digest and recover them, to your sight and
use.

And because (to cut of all further ambages) all rivers are said to flow from
the sea, and thither to return again, and all Actions to be measured out by
the affects of the heart, which is like the fadomlesse and vnfoundeable sea, to
the plummets of any outward appearance, I will in the first place prescribe you
Sea-rules for the sound of your heart and affections, how far you may flow
over, and how much you must restrain your surging and inundating appetites
thereof, as the necessity of special occasions and occurrences shall require.

Concerning general and particular trusts.
LEt Therefore your heart be generally affected as Chymicall glasses, or poor
men's christmas Boxes are framed and fashioned: Let down many men's hearts and
secrets into the deep bellyed Glass of observations, but let the mouth
thereof be narrow and open but to a few, parce desumpta, use them pinchingly
and sparinglye, as Gentlewomen use their secretest conuaiances (not as Clownes
their trumping alarums) as necessity shall extract and wrest them out from
you, for some further ease or advantage: use them as grave cou^sellors smiles,
not as rude Hobbinolds ger-laughters, who think they are never merry, except
they cast the house out of the Windows with extreme security, and
forgetfulness of all humanity and ceremonye of civility, as Usurers, not as
Prodigalles use their Purses, Let your heart stand, concerning the drawinges
and with-drawinges of your trustes and employments, as your Cabonet is
furnished with several and close drawers and boxes.

Your Cabonet has a general drawer below all the rest, for your loose and
idle papers, which is without any special lock or Bar, only the general
door being opened, you may with ease and no further labor draw out and
admit such general conceits as are cursorily to be used.

All the rest of your Cabonet drawers are discreetly and with good judgment
distinguished to particular secrets, some to the receipt of your Jewels, some
to one private and peculiar use, some to another, all which are restrained from
any others eye or view, being with several Keys and wards barred and
debarred your best and most indeared friends. In like manner fashion al your
both private and general demeanor and co^uersatio^.

For your ordinary followers and suitors, men of lower state and condition, let
your heart be free and open to them, by one general Key of admittance, to the
discretion of your outward carriage, which without any intricatenes of study,
will be apted and enabled by general observations to shape every man an
answer, according to his propounded ends, desires and deserts. For matter of
deeper consequence, keep a particular Key to eue^ several designement, trust
^ve and occasion.

Let not in any man of note and worthy estimate, (either for honorable place
or respective quality) through your hearts secret closet, and particular
drawer, which may concern another (as worthy to be respected) affairs or
trustye reposements, nor any to any private drawer of your hearts secrets,
but with the right Key, that belongs properlye and essentiallye to his own
particulars. So shall you in the first place, gain the hearts and
understandings of most men of special worth, note and respect.

Secondly you shall ad to ingenious men's labors and painful endeavors,
continual incoragement, and make them willing without jealousy (jealousy
which burdens and oppresses free spirits and deep reaches) to vnseame and
unrip their expensiue and elaborated observations, to your discreet and
concealing apprehension.

Thirdly through this your discreet carriage, and concealing conueyance (which
will speedely be discovered in a great statesman) you shall breed and ingendor
in the hearts of every wise and approved statist, that conuerseth with you, a
wonderful and vnremooueable conceit, of your high and admired wisdom, which
by a spreading fame, begets an entire respect and inducing opinion of worth,
and an opinion of worth and wisdom must not, in a states-ma^ be neglected,
(especially among men of wisdom) and (though of lower fortunes, yet of deep
and discerning judgments) for that being lost, a statesman ceasseth (even as
a father ceasseth after the death of his children, to be accounted a father) to
be reputed and esteemed for a grave and well deserving statist.

Fourthly and which is most in your self, and for your own good to be
respected, it will derive to your judgment an excellent method and order in
all your several cariages, and free you from such inconveniences, and
incombrances, as an inconstant behavior, vnsteadines, and an ordinary custom
of dispersing and communicating many several men's business, coherences, and
judgments, freely opened to the hearts private reservation, will throw any
man, seriously occupied in diverse and deep designs, into. For as in a
library of many of the most exquisite and profoundest treaties of plots and
conueyances of or belonging to a state, except every work and plot concerning
merchants affairs, every several accident and negotiation of french
occurrences, every project of spanish, every scope of embassages, and
intercourse of Barbary business, and so of the rest, both domesticke and
foreign occasions, be not methodically distinguished, and neatly delineated
into their special quincunces, and proper and peculiar places and orders,
(whereby upon a trise a man may find by the cast of his eye, whatsoever the
necessity of present use and employments call for) breeds more incoragement
to have such a library (though of the most excellent manuscripts) then the
benefit thereof can give contentfull satisfaction: so does the conferences had
with many wise and expert men who have laboriouslie and profitably traveled at
home or abroad, in several and distinct courses of state-busines, as also the
particular secrets of your equals, attending near about a Princes person,
offered to your hearts trust (as in the court an eminent person for favor or
respect of wisdom, shall want no private proffers, and insinuations of service,
so long as his wisdom and fortune supports that well begotten grace and
favor) if your heart be not able to clap a special key to every several men's
discourses and secrets (such as carry no matter of danger, or distaste of ye
princes behauiours, courses, or affects, (for with the concealing of such
secrets never let your heart participate) they will bring, by a confused
intermingling of one man's secrets with an others, a general distrust and
hatred of all your followers and acquaintance, and make your judgment utterly
unapt, and incapable to make particular use and profitable application, of such
conclusions and experiments, as from time to time have been offered to your
pre-eminence by private notice and conference. For your thoughts will be
evermore disorderly disposed and appointed, betwixt trust, fear, and jealousy,
and when upon any state accident, you should be admitted to action or public
advise, you will be cast into strange and extrauagant doubts, how far the
revealed trusts of this Noble may prejudice, and open your slender and
inconstant behavior to another, and how far another man's conceit (by promise
and the law of courtiership, to be locked from all others ears) and commonly
may tax and justly condemn your leuity and double neutralitye to a second,
and a second give taste and relish to a third of your uneven and vnsquare and
unskillful handling of your court-cariages: which can never suffer a statesman
to thrive or prosper, but sets by degrees in short time (time the discouerer of
all men's hearts) a daily and hourly curb and bridle upon the mouth of al his
sayings and proceedings, and in continuance makes him of a free man and
resolute, a very bond slave, and in all occurrences of special moment, to cry
mumm, standing rather like the superficies, following the lines of other men's
directions, then a rule and mathematical line, to draw all other ciphers and
superficies of a state, after his prefigured and deciphered orders and
orderings.

And as in your Cabonet you have one special drawer, which has a treble lock
not to be pict open by the cunningest Iugler: so let some secrets of your heart
be impassable, and inuiable to any trust whatsoever. Admit neither father nor
brother, wife nor mother, friend nor familiar, to keep the golden key of those
mystical and deeply disgested treasures of your hearts inclination, or your
life's conversation, let them be as your life blood, revealed upon no occasion,
where it pricks, or where it tickles, or where it settells, for you may have
some such secret greefs, some such secret delights, and some such secret
unquenchable flames, either of honor or pleasure, as may not with safty be
made known or conveyed to the most secretest trust and discovery of any man
living. So shall you make good in your own president that Italian proverb, La
lingua del sauio e ascosta nel suo euore. The tongue of the Wiseman is hidden
in his heart.

The second Precept. Concerning the tempering of affections.
Every man does wonder at an Eclipse of the Sun or Moon, and gazeth at a
blasing Star, but few men regard to understand the motions and exhalations
of their own affections and eclipses of either that he auenly instilled light
of nature, infused into the soul of man; or the wild estranginges and
aberrations from reason, apparelled and instructed deuinely, many times and in
many men, with the supernatural precepts and instructions of religion.

Two reasons may be yielded why we too negligently pass over and suffer to
grow to a head of dangerous and mischievous custom, any vice or disorder,
Lord-like predominating or rather tyrant-like lording and trivmphing, in our
natural dispositions and inclinations. The one a powerful and ouerweening
desire, we have by nature, to pry into other men's faults, and so ouerslip the
sight of our own slimye and defiling filth of foul enormities.

The other, is a natural fearefulnes, to rip up Chirurgian-like with the
instruments of severity, our hidden and inwardly putrifiing soars and
corruptions, to the coare and bottom of them, and to make often and priuye
search into the closet rooms and angles of our flattered and ouer-sliked and
smoothed follies, reigning within us.

For daily experience teaches us, that every Comet or escape in an other man's
digressions, from the perfect and exact prescript of humane civility, or other
customarye rites and ceremonies, is wondered at like a blazing star, and as well
the pure as the impure sighted, are called out to gaze and behold with scorn
and disdainefull reproach, our friends or Neighbors slips and falls, and are
by us (even many times, where there is greatest profession of kindness and
intyre familiarity) exposed to the attrectation of every passengers
scandalizing and detracting tongues, when as the Eclipses of our own most
unnatural and fowlest abuses and misdemeanors, cannot with any patience abide
the blinde-mans eyes to be lifted up against them.

And therefore these two reasons may be well said to be like HIPPOCRATES his
twins inseparable; they kiss, embrace, and nourish each other.

For questionless the reason why we so much delight like flesh flies, to
converse in the suck and contemplation of other men's errors, and like Noah's
ungodly childr^^, to take such pleasure in discovering the nakedness and
deformity of other men's imperfections and weaknesses (be they either by
natural or religious combination and conjunction as near to us, as Noah was
to his children) is, that we sildome throw open and discover our own hidden
and lurking vices, and vicious humors, or look back upon the wallet of our
several transgressio^s and transmigrations from either reason or religion: for
the due consideration of a man's own follies, is a respective cause, and
continual motive, to draw him to a sober, discreet and charitable
consideration, and interpretation of other men's digressions or relapses.

For then our Friends or Neighbors lives and conuersations, for offenses and
errors committed, could no sooner sing that forrowefull note of commemoration
Infandum regina, iubes renouare dolorem, but our re-ecchoing accents of the
like well noted, and in our selves, so often observed aptness and pronenesse
to boulder and more ouerdaring presumptions, would bear the doleful dittie of
this commiserating reply, haud ignara mali miseris succurrere disco; we would
be readyer to pour oil, and throw sugar upon our friends griefs
conceived for any fault or miscariage, then with Salt and Vinegar rub the
gauled and green wounds of their penitent and much to be bemoaned afflictions:
For by a daily and continual conflict had with our ouermastering affections,
and untameable rebellions of nature, we shall find more passion from the heat
of the like fires vented to compassion, and less leisure and scope, to score
upon the daily count-booke of our idle apprehensions and wantonlye strict
observations, the marks of other men's follies.

Therefore, first like a natural man, I advise you to enter into a serious and
sober consideration with your self and your priuatest thoughts, and to
discover to the blockhouse, and beacon of your reason, and best discerning
faculties, what maine tops of assaulting and out-daring enemies of passion,
out-braue your Capitols best ward, or what Serpent-like affections ly hidden in
the grass of your all-pleasing and delighting humors, and having discovered
the one, and uncovered the other, to employ your best volley of reasons shot,
to blow of the one, and to bestow your daily and hourly endeauours, to kill
and wound the other.

And because the secret and privy boosome vices of Nature, are most offensive,
and though least seen, yet most undermining enemies, you must redouble your
endeavor, not with a wand to alapat, and strike them only as lovers loath to
hurt, so as like a snake they may grow together, and get greater strength
again, but (according to the Italian proverb, Sel'albero ha fecca la radice,
e Impossible che possa hauer foglie verde. If the tree have his root dried
up, it cannot possibly shoot forth green leaves) to dry up the venomous
juice and roote-sap of them, and to strike them through the head and very life
strings, that they may never knit again to your offense, least like a Snake
laid warm to your bosom, they sting you with some deadlye and Irrecouerable
inconvenience, and by giving life and warmeth to them, to deny to you all life
of true and essential liberty and freedom, utterly captiuating your senses to
their slavery, and eternal subjection.

For as the Moon being lowest of the Planets, does coueigh and transport
their operation and force through her Orb into all Elementall creatures,
causing alteration and change of humors, times and seasons, yea, perturbing and
distempering man's body, the Air, and all other things under her Orb:

So do our affections, (being but the lowest and ministering servants to
reason) vnmastered and not set by the Quartill or Opposite aspect of true
moderation and discreet and well disposing order and government, carry and
conueigh disturbance and distemperature through the Orb of all the senses, and
leaves all a man's actions, subject to such alteration and change, as breeds
nothing but either fiery and violent motions, or frivolous and fantastical
inflations.

And that you may the better and more powerfully subdue, by your daily conflict
had with them, these so troublesome and so opposing enemies to reason and
perfect judgment, you must vigilantly and exactly, labor to detecte and
find out the means, that so often betray your reason to the subjection of
your affections, and having discovered them, presently to discard them (as most
treacherous and false Pirates, to the flourishing welfare and safety of your
credit and estimation) be they never so dear or beloved of your nature, and
been never so long had in request of you, for their old acquaintance and
familiarity.

For else like private Posterne doors, they will continually be ready to let
into your heart such thieves, as in time will spoil and rob you of all your
richest ornaments, of either spiritual or natural guiftes and graces, and
like Dalilahes flattering inticements, deprive your mind of all her
Sampson-like locks of resistance, and strength, and power of judgment and
discretion.

And by the way I hold it not amiss, that when your mind is lost in your
affections you may the speedier meet with her again, to point unto you
affections seats.

Love has his proper place in liver, which till it exceed, is an affection
most commendable, but when it swells over the bancks of reason, it begets the
name and title of vice, and is indorsed with additions of vanity, wantonness,
treachery.

And so likewise Joy which dwells in the spleen, if it exceed not,
cherishes the heart, releeueth the blood, quickens all the sensitive and
intellectual parts, to a promptnes and agilitie in any honest and virtuous
function, but if it exceed and get the rule and dominion of reason, and true
temperance, it begets the name of wretched and disorderly security,
dissolutenes, scurrility, inciuility, and such like.

Anger, which dwells in the gaul, the most noble and heroycall affection,
that is according to the phrase of the scripture, Be you angry, but sin not)
the fitting^st help and instrument of public government, the most sensiblest
and seuerest corrector of vice, and all vicious outrages, yet if it be suffered
to exceed, it begets the name of overmuch hastines, temerity, and sometimes
frantic madness, according to that of the Poet, Irafuror breuis est. Fear is
the child of safety, according to that saying, matter timidi nunquam plorat,
The mother of a fearful man never weepeth, the forerunner of wisdom,
according to that of Solomon, Ante ruinam exaltatur spiritus, the spirit of a
man is lifted up before a fall: but the beginning of wisdom is fear, the
truest and faithfullest companion of thrift, but if it exceed, it begets the
name of weakness, of womannish and harelike timidity, of irresolution, and
cowardly flegmatique sloth and idleness. Other gross and foul enormities, your
breeding will not suffer you to be acquainted with, therefore like Licur gus I
hold it fitter to be unmentioned, then precept wise to be enlarged. Now
forasmuch, as I right well have tried, that nothing may avail a politic man
more then to subdue and master these affects, nor any thing will, being
vnmastred, more anoy, disturb and disable a civil and public man, I am forced
to reinforce this my admonition touching your affections, as you mean to prove
a politic man. When therefore by a due and impartial examination and
discovery, made of your most impotent (and yet most potent) imperfections, you
shall find your reason and true light of judgment, most ecclipsed by the
ouershadowing power of any particular, either earthy aerie, or choleric
interposition of appetite and humor, and the wall of your defense by any of
them, made weakest and most subject to daily invasion, there, I advise you to
watch and ward, night and day, and to stand continual sentinel, with your
guarding and defensive fortification of reason, for that with in a private man
would be and is commonly termed but an odd conceited humor, admitted or
committed by a public man makes odious and insupportable such actions as are
therewith intermingled. And questionless, no actions of a natural man, much
less of one that professes himself a morrall man, but least of al, of one
that propounds to atain to high and eminent place of public government, can
have his proper demerit and estimat of praise or warrant of security, that is
glewed in with any powerful passion, or ouerflowings of natural affection:
for affections are noted by the philosophers, to be but alienations of the
mind, judgment, and reason. And a mind alienated from judgment and reason
(the true and only distinguishers of wise men and fools, yea brutes and men's
actions) what can it produce, persuade, act, advise, contriue or prosecute,
void of palpable and manuable errors? Infinite fogges, and gross mistes of
darkness, are affections inseparable and most adhering companions; Affections
unbroken and vnbackt are our enemies free passagewindowes, by which they may
shoot in all their Arrows of malice, envy, spleen, sport scorn and
derision.

They are the general forerunners and praeparatiues of every common man's woe
and misery, but Politicians and Statists particular halters of ruin and
perdition.

Therefore, as the Moon at any time being in conjunction with any of the
Stars or planets in either of the 12. constellations or signs, then do
astronomers say that the sign is in that part of the body, over which such a
constellation Sign or Star does rule, at which time it is very dange rous
to make incision, or to open any vain in any part of the body, but especially
in that part of the body, which is governed of such a sign or starr, wherewith
the moon is then joined: so of your affections, and the particular predominate
passions of your nature, either of choler and anger or desire and concupiscence
(for I fear not any other in you) if you intend to proceed to the managing
of many, or any weighty causes, you must most warily prouid and most
cautiously recollect your best strength of understanding, by restrayning your
self from such actions, and dealing with such subjects in the execution of
any public function, as by your former prescribed observation, you shall
perceive to stand in conjunction with any your present ouer-daring appetites
and affections, and never to trust and admit your wit or will to be actors
on the stage of the worlds view, in any open place, part or duty, until
that fit that rules be fullye over past, and alaied. Imitate here in ye
dolphins who (according to philosophy at the beginning of any tempest, (such
as does arise from the bottom of the Sea) are troubled with certain hott
exhalations and vapoures) mount up to the top of the water, to seek for cool
refrigeration (which is the reason why Mariners say, that when your Dolphins
appear above water, it signifies some storm or tempest to be nigh) so when
you shall find your self by any, either natural or accidental disturba^ce
and heat of passion, subject to any disorderly motions and perturbations, lie
not swelling in the heat of that passion: but get up to the top of your wits,
(before any tempest arise) your best reasons directors, from them to take
water and air of composure, and (according to Licurgus his observation, who
commended them vines most, by the which the sweet fountains of waters ran
continually) to assuage the heat of any superfluous humor, that you shall
observe most ra^ging and ouer-ruling in your nature, with the fountain water of
some contrary qualification, Hoc amo, quod possum qualibet ire via: This is
true policy to be able to make all a man's affections subject and serviceable
to any propounded advantage.

A true States-mans love is, and ought to be tied with a slip-knot, never knit
with any of his heart strings.

He must only embrace the use of men's virtues, and officious seruiceablenes,
with outward graces, favors and rewards, proportionable to their deserts,
not single out any outward affectation to any worth, nor lay open any inward
breast-detection of singular and intyre devotion, to any special quality. He
uses the benefit of his friends and followers, labors, gifts and endeavors,
so long as they may be used upon good terms thankfully and respectively, but
he will, nor may veil bonnet to his honor, for the retaining any men's loves or
labors: for to do so, would argue a weakness, and seem to spring from a
rankenesse of some unsubdued affection, which exposes a statesman to much
inconvenience.

So likewise a states-mans hate is nothing, but a wise auersion of favor and
grace, befitting some present advantage, not a settled and digested disturbance
of spleen and choler, yea most of their wrongs received, are but referred to
the brains most familiar counsell-conference, not to any deep or serious
ouercharging of the stomach, for so they would multiply his wrongs.

First distract the judgment when it should be exercised in more proper and
necessary occasions.

Secondly being admitted to lie boiling about the heart like rust and canker,
would fret and eat up the minds marrowe of truest and calmest composition.

Thirdlye, being suffered to fester about the heart, would bubble up at one
time or another such lunaticke aspersions and words offensive, as deprive him
of such ready and easy means of crying quittance for any wrong sustained,
as shallowe conceits would, of their own accord fall into, according to that
true politic rule, professa per dunt odia vindictae locum.

And lastly open to the world such an impotency, as neither policy, nor
court-ship can admit, for if a man wronged debar mutual intercourse of
phrase and familiarity, he shall be counted and marked by saying nothing, that
the breast is vlcerate and foul with rancour, and in court men say, he that
professes to catch at every Fly, seeks but matter to choke himself
withal, an error flatlye forbidden by SOLOMON himself, the wisest Politician
fatuus statim Indicat iram, qui aute^sapiens est dissimulat iniuriam. The Fool
kicketh as soon as another wincheth at him, and they which are over hasty to
kick often, light upon a sharper spur. I have dwelled the longer upon this
point, because I know your tender and springing years, shall meet oftenest with
such oppositio^s, as unbridled affections will offer to your waryest
observation and discovery.

The third precept.
THirdlye, if you desire to attain to this true wisdom and judgment, fitting
him that shall sit at the stern of the commonwealth, and so sit as he may
stand fast in all storms, abandon from your conceit this deluding opinion,
that to be furnished and formallye provided (either by the help of your own
industry and study, or daily conference with masters of policy living or
defunct) to speak and discourse pleasingly and plentifullye of business and
affairs, of many several nations, and to know (...) Ulysses like, the
fashions, habits and behauiours of Rome or Rhemes, as we commonly say, may make
you wise enough to govern the chiefest and secretest designs of a state. For
this ouer-greedy desire to be acted upon vulgar tongues, for excellency in
tongue, skill, and variety of eloquence and book discourses, begets a singular
pride in the heart, which is only delighted in an outward show of seeming
wise, never suffers a man to attain to the true and perfect knowledge of any
deep or profound mystery: or as we may commonly observe in proud women, that
so their outward habit be geerishlye and wantonly set out to the pleasure of
the worlds appearance, and their own excessive lust, they care not how poorly
and beggarly al things are furnished within the house, either for dyeticall or
costly, and rich supellecticke appendance; whereas on the contrary, wary and
provident wise Matrons, care not how homely (so correspo^de^tly) their outward
abiliments fall out, so as the inward furnishments of their pursse and
substantial lyninges of their house and estates be richly and repleatly
contentiue and comfortable to their private thoughts: So fares it with men
that are carried away and puffed up with an extraordinary vain glory of being
accounted rich in time pleasing, and unprofitable titillations of liplabored
eloquence or time-spending discourses of strange and foreign accidents; they
little respect, not can through pride and desire of ostentation, sound the
depth of any grave or weighty skill, or expres in any particular inploiment,
any profundity of judgment, or true insight in any weighty and public
negotiation, only they attain to the parings and excrement of statelearning,
the pithe and marrowe they leave behind for sapient and well tasting palates,
and you shall never see any such formalists (as most of them will be very
forward in that kind) intermeddle with deep reaching Statists, but you shall
suddenly have them come houering down ye wind, and struck dead to the ground,
like some haggard and kestrill brood, with the sharp talants of such
Ierfaulkon-like politicians well watched blows and unavoidable counterbuffes.

The fourth precept.
FOurthly cast from your opinion, that through your own witty devises (for
against this rock, many great men and highly esteemed for their skill and
knowledge in policy, have run) and certain cunning motions and operations of
your brain, you are able to turn about the wheel of fortune and all felicity,
as it were with certain skrues and machinations, to what point you please: for
certainly (as I partly noted of the judgment of the unlettered selfe-pleasing
politician, so may I affirm of the most edocte and ripest courtier in the
subtle skill of cunning contriuances) that whosoever is at any time so fowly
abused by the delusion of his self conceit of wisdom, let him know that
howsoever he may imagine himself to stand in a fair and goodly pasture of
delightful and Oxe-like security, through some few good successes had in
particulars, he is then nearest the slaughter, and environed with most
fearful gulfes and quicke-sands; and although the ground on which he stands
may seem firm to his shallowe judgment, because it shows fresh and fair,
yet he has set his stand indeed but upon a quagmire, covered over with grass
(and that only green and high in show, but not deeply rooted) which if he
persist long in, and wade with all his strength, the harder he treads, the
deeper he is like to sink.

For this politic guidings of things by rule and line of booke-cunning, are
but like eternal motionworks, if any one piece be disioynted with a greater
reach, or through some negligence, forgetfulness, or ouersights (as who can so
live in a Daedalianlaborinth of cunning, but he shall be forced to make some in
his life) all the structure of his imaginary Policies comes down together,
and throws the engine Master of the work, even when he is got up in his
conceit, to the top of his promised felicity, into the mire of all misfortune,
or like an unskillful alchimist, who having by his study and reading found out
many worthy and excellent means and medicinable receipts, puffed up with the
pride thereof, falls to a degree further, the practicing and finding out the so
much sought-for Elixar, which his conceit and skill is not able to apprehe^d
nor digest, and so after many months, yea years travel, cost, and charges,
failing either in his due proportionable stinte, and moderation of fire,
imbition, nutriment, concoction, and such like, leaves to himself and others,
that stood in expectation of his producements, stupefied to behold the same, a
mere lump of dross, for their hopeful and longing desires, or by too much
speed, negligence, or oversight in the least particular, breaks asunder his
work before it come to hatching, and thereby sends such a sulfurous and
noisome stinch into his brains, as makes him never able to recover his perfect
senses again: so these unskillful practisers by book and rule of all
politic foyles that depend as it were upon their Puncto, reuerso, stockado,
and such like observations of cunning booke-policie, failing (that I may make
no further application hereof) of some out blunt and plain down thrust
offered them, stand stabbed at the heart, in their several hopes, and leave
themselves a public spectacle of scorn and defamation to the view of the
whole world.

The fifth precept.
Fifthly, let him resolve himself to be immooueably fixed (for in this
quickesand likewise the greatest Cedars of the state have been swallowed up)
in his religion, if he be touched with the feeling of any. For though it may
not be denied, but that in many matters a wise Statesman has liberty to change
his opinion, as reason and the discretion of present ocasions, shall guide him,
yet in such actions and accidents as shall touch the trial of a good
conscience, in relinquishing the same, for any present advantage, is not only
very dangerous, and sildome admitted, but it returns in the issue much
inconvenience, and irrecouerable loss of honor and reputation; but by degrees
depriues a man utterly of his perfect judgment and distinguishing knowledge in
affairs and business of the State. Machauill therefore (whether men term him
Hatcheuil, or not to be macht in evil, it boots not) in this respect
persuades his scholars wisely (in my poor conceit) either not at all to
deuote himself to any religion, or else never to forsake their conscience;
either to be absolutely good or absolutely ill, not to hang in uncertainty,
sometimes inclining to good actions, sometimes to ill, as they best seem to
further their present use and employment.

For he which is marked with Gods signet, and priuatest stamp for his own, by
inclining to evil motions and loose digestions (the lime-twigs of honor,
safety, and reputation) is drawn by degrees into desperate attempts, which
when he has entered into, and waded chin-deepe therein, is suddenly recalled
by a better spirit to a consideration of his folly, whereby it happens that
plunged betwixt two extremes, he can neither get forward nor backward, and so
become a ridiculous obloquie to his enemies, a confusion to his friends and
followers, a perpetual sore and ulcer to his family and posterity, whereas if
he were absolutely resolved by wicked means to go through all his purposes,
he should find no interruptio^ in his courses, to countercheck his ungodly
proceedings, whereby he might effect more with greater felicity and admiration,
then any man, partly religious and indifferently affected to piety and
godliness. This made the ancient Romans Brutus, Cassius, Decij, and many more
of that rank, to deserve so well in the opinion of those times for their
fortitude and magnanimity, showed and approved in many desperate and
dangerous attempts. For they being touched with no relish of religion, made
fame and glory the chief scope, and aim of all their adventures, and
engagements, to the attaining whereof they resolved their reason to fear
nothing that could happen within the compass of mortality.

To this agrees all their heathenish positions and maximees. Aut dignitatem
retineamus, aut vita^cum dignitate amittamus, and such like, whereby it
appears, that they held true valor, and Magnanimity to consist in avoiding
of subjection, and that the quiet and patient tolleration of adverse fortunes,
drawing under the yoke of obedience, and subscribing to domination, rule, and
superiority, was baseness, and brutishnes, and therefore the desperate, and
indeed (in the true sense of reason) more brutish attempting of any thing
might tend to their self promised liberties, being restrained by any law,
power or soueraintie, to proceed from a brave spirit, a high and generous
resolution, and not only murdering of others, that stood in the way of their
wishes and aspiring hopes, to deserve immortal praise and glory, but the
cutting of the thrids of their own lives, their children and posterities, in
matters that might carry show of public reformation, or preservation of
their accounted honors or their Wives and Childrens chastities, to be actions
not only to be dignified, but to be deified. And questionless, in these ages
and times, and in these parts, where religion most flourishes they who never
had any sense or feeling of Religon, (whether they bend their minds to the
compassing of high and weighty matters, in or belonging to a publik state, or
co^triuing any extraordinary plot in their private affairs) they may with a
nimbler and prompter dexterity, pass through all their purposes, then they
which are clogged and fettered with rules and restraints of religion.

For as the profession of piety, and religion, to a man thoroughly excercised
therein, and resolutely bent to forsake any pleasure or worldly profit, rather
then to admit the least disparagement or impeachment to the same, furnishes
him with a thousand helping hands, in the profecution of any propounded
employments: So, to his purposes and proiects, that professing feligion, has,
or shall dispute within the secret closet of his thoughts, this is proper to
the furtherance of my particular, howsoever irreligious, treacherous,
dishonest, unfaithful, rebellious, and yet admits the good of his preferment
and advantage to high and great places and preheminences, before the good
warrant of his conscience, nothing is or can be imagined more interposing or
diameter like opposing, then religion. For such a man shall find, let his
project seem in the beginning never so current, the means in his conceit
never so clear, a thousand scruples and unexpected counter-maunds, that
religion and the destruction of his unsettled resolution will cast, as so many
clogs and fetters into the midway of his hasty-pac' de-intentions. For as a
man that leapeth from a high banck, over a narrow pit or deep ditch, to follow
some may game, by reason of his easy and speedy descent (for Facilis descensus
auerni) is flatteringly pleased with his smooth and current passage, but
considering not how he shall recover the hold of his sure feeting, and the
firm and known ground of his security, is forced at his returns either by
venturing to fall into the midst of the miry ditch; or to go many miles about,
or to continue as a man outed of his confines: so fares it with them, who for
the compassing any private respect, leap over the known bounds and pales of
virtue and Religion, whereby they have bin directed in there former courses. For
they behave themselves in all their actions, and enterprises, either like an
army out of rank and order, still resolved to some desperate inroads, and so
be come like a ship without his Pilots and fails, fitted for confusion, and
prepared to run into the ditches and shelues of all dissasters, or striving
to go a nearer way, either to thrift, preferment or dignity, being leapt from
their own well known and trodden paths of upright dealing, to a self
conceited course of cunning and irreligious policy, stand like me^, who have
forsaken those trades and exercises they were trained up in all their lives,
for some new fangle devises and inventions, a mazed, and to seek in every
particular, and so after much labor, vexation of spirit and anguish of mind,
return by weeping Cross to their former stands; or if they rest contented to
run on in their approved and propounded determinations of folly, (which is
the worst degree of al) in the end having outed themselves of their means and
hopes, pass by their friends like a ship fallen into the hands of Pirates,
weather beaten and dispoyled of all his brave array and furniture, which is as
ruthful a spectacle, as the eye of man can behold. Therefore I wish him
(unworthy to advise) that desires to approve his wisdom, either in not
failing in his attemp ts, or not falling by his attempts into any gross and
palpable error, never to dispense with his religion, in any matter of weighty
consequence and momente, but to make that the touchstone of all his
proceedings, so shall he be sure both to undertake and entertain nothing, the
issue whereof may prove dangerous, and also to add like a staide proficient, a
daily increase and ripenes of judgment, to his skill and knowledge in weighty
affairs and occurrences of the state.

The sixth precept.
Sixthly and lastly, let your endeavor chiefly and principally, be excercised in
such actions as may advance the glory of Gods truth, and forward by all
possible means, the peace, the quiet, and the prosperity of the Common
Wealth, For surely he that is so affected and resolved to God and his
countries good, he may assure himself that he is in a right way to the
attaining of a sound and exquisite Judgment in all weighty determinations,
and the more this resolution grows up in any man, the greater increase and
growth shall he sinde daily in state-learning and wisdom, for the spirit of
understanding, the spirit of Counsel, the spirit of knowledge, are inseparable
companions of the fear of God and the love of his name, neither shall we
find far from these companions a good estimation grace and favor with all
men, as well Prince and Peers, as the better sort of the commons. For that man
wins most inward credit and opinion of wisdom, and most outward regard
and honorable respect with all men, whose sayings and doings carry most opinon
of virtue, religion, and honesty among men; as if he shall speak or promise any
thing, men will not doubt of his truth, if he does any thing (whereof public
notice is taken) men will applaude and account it for right, and to a right and
even end: if he command any thing, men will most willinglye obey it; if he
give counsel men will respectively embrace and entertain it, and have evermore
in high account his judgment in all causes. But vain are they who think this
estimation to be compassable, or if compassed to be durable and permanent,
which is gotten by palpable and gross flattery, by dissembling, or deceit,
yea by any other means then by virtue in wisdom, and wisdom in virtue often
showed with good success, for all men's hearts are kindled with admiration of
virtue, and a supernall help and divine assistance, yea the very wicked
dissemblers, and cunningest temporizers themselves, hold such men, who are
accounted truly religious, and religiously prudent and provident for the common
good and safety, in great reverence, and fear to displease them, whereas they
make no great reckoning of such statists, whom they know to live by the like
cunning and deceit, as themselves do, for cunning they know may be met withal
by the like cunning, and ape-like deceit may be overthrown, and caught by
foxe-like craft and subtlety, but they know not what shoes to provide for
the feet of this religious statesman, nor what cunning devises they may
hammer out of their forge of knavery, strong enough to encounter with him. For
he goes on forward in a plain, even right way of honesty and fidelity,
never or sildom but upon great and urgent necessities, digressing into any
bywaies, of sly, crafty, vnder-mining Policies, so as if any man studies to
overthrow him by devilish plots, and circumuentions, he tyres himself in his
own devises, and the more he busieth himself in envious practices, the more
he lymeth, like a bird in a Snare by struggling, his own wit, and yet meets
not with him, because he runs not up and down through briars and lurking holes,
like a fox or a wolf, where the gins and nets are set, but keeps ye road
highway of upright dealing, and having fixed his resolution in the purchase and
increase of his princes favor, to use no indirect and sinister means, has
confined and circumscribed himself within the bounds of certain faithful
religious rules and propounded ends, from the which he will not start or
stray, for either the love of his own private profit or pleasure, or else for
fear of purchasing any other subjects displeasure, whereby it comes to
pass, that as in warfare, when other fresh water Soldiers upon any sudden
and unexpected skirmish, are to seek of their office and place, he presently
claps to his station and is prepared to all accidents: he medleth neither with
ambitious motions, to ouer-throwe his Prince, nor steals by indirect shows
and pretenses of public good, the favor of the people from him; his heart,
against the false alaru^s of such privy thoughts and suggestions, is ever set
as a Tenniswal, which no sooner receaueth but at the very same instant and
moment of time returns and reuerberates the ball back again, and if any loose
bent nouices (as it seldom happens) for they rather seek out mud-walles, to
fasten their wicked plots upon, strive to racket the same, or the like motions,
through the countermure of his conceit, in a trice before any chase be made in
the firm and fair Tennis-court of his consenting will, he bandees them over
the wall of his heart, so as they never return or take further fixation. He
profusely rioteth not his own, to wring and wrest away other men's estates, nor
deuiseth ouer-greedye taxations and penalties to pinch the poor commons with
all, he is not heart sick nor head sick, nor stomach sick, for his
adhabitants vinyards: he enuies nomans prosperity and honorable purchases of
his princes favors, he is not pragmatically scrupulous, nor too inquisitiuely
prying into other men's escapes and errors, such as hurt not, or disturb the
quiet of the state, thereby to purchase himself hatred, but is sorry when any
garbage of foul and treasonable actions is thrown in to the privy chamber of
the states welfare, and remooues the stinche and poisonus infection thereof from
the princes perfo^, and the pure life blood of the commo^-wealth. He makes the
laws the bounds, by which he limits all his actions, he trusts not upon
former deserts, thereby to presume to run into any dishonorable breach of
Statute or his allegiance, he lives not voluptuously, nor effeminately,
thereby to give, not only mean men example to imitate the like vices, and
occasions to base and ignoble spirts, to vilipend and neglect him, and that
reverent regard ought to be preserver in men of high place and dignity: but
to put into his equals hands, such as are his adversaries, a fit weapon to
wou^d his credit, and to diminish the opinion the prince has of his virtuous
inclination, which being violated, there lies a free passage to infer by
suspicions, iealousies, informations, any mischief may be imagined, upon him.

And this is that true wise statesman or Scipio of perfect policy endued with
this heavenly judgment, and thus have ever lived the worthy supporters of
plenty and state, making virtue and religion the bases, whereupon they set the
firm building of their worthes and honors, whereby they have been enabled to
keep between all rockye extremes, a middle channel of steeled temperance,
and by an even poysing of all their actions to stand fixed and stable in the
greatest conflicts of envy, and long may they so live, that favor in this, or
any state, Religion and piety, to the comfort of theirs, and true Religions
friends, and the confusion of all malignant, discontented, and profane spirits.
Much more I would have added, but an unusual accident forced me abruply thus
to break of.

By the imitation of Silenus there wear devised to hang up in the Galleries and
closets of Noblemen, certain strange pictures, so wrought and shut up in
prinate Tables, as if you viewed but the outward side of them, they set forth
nothing but little small il-fauoured misshapen Images, but being unfolded, they
represented some high and mistical matter: So in these precepts, although you
shall find no pictures worthy the hanging up in Princes or noblemens galleries,
but rather at the first conceit they may seem idle, and of small worth and
regard: yet if you can wisely unfold their several shut-vp, and enclosed leaves
of state-learning to your secret consideration, you shall find some things in
them worthy the hanging about your heart, as necessary Mementoes to put you in
mind of many useful observations in state business: Use them not as your
studies, but as your watch at study, when your watch is out of time, you
repair to your key to wind up the several wards, that are therein amiss,
and when your study touching State affairs are out of time, and equipage,
have recours to this watch, and in it happily you shall find some key that may
enable you to set all even, and in good temper and order again: What is herein
wanting may be supplied, but never commended to writing, for the next
particular instructions of state-busines, which I must unfold to you, may not
be admitted to any other bosom trust. Farewell.

FINIS.
Errata.
Fol. 3. l. 7 read literature for like nature f. 6. l. 21. voces for vices
read nor for not, fo. 7^ line. 17. read there for the f. 8. l. 5. please for
praise, fol. 11 l. 8 for as fol. 12. l. 11 reach for watch, l. 1. fo 13. and
for stand, fol. 13. l. 21. read not the 100. fol. 16 l 15 states for state,
fol. 16 l. 17 artizants for artiants. fol. 26 l. 1. (...), and (...) fol: 29.
line. 4 in reading (...) lean out the (...). fo. 33. l 17 piss for pish fo.
38. l, 14 and fo. 30 should be 38. read (...). thus not as it is printed fo
39. l 9 (...) thus, not as it is printed, read prericraneum for ^ericranion.
fol 49 l 16 read a dussen of R. fol. 53 l 11 read and the casting, fol 61 l.
10, read not and, l. 13 eiusd. fol. read there for the, l 15 eius fol. read
staide for state fo. 72. l. 7 sweet bones leave out the parenthesis. fol. 73.
li. 6. read to for so, line 4 eiusd. fol, read not for oc, fol. 74. l 7 and
for or, fol. 78. l* o^ the for their line 12. eiusd. fol read paucos for
paulcos fol. 89. l 13 and those, leave out those, fol 90, l. 1. if for is, fo:
90. l, 20 seals for seats, fol, 97. l 5 and 6. and for or fo 102 l 16 darkness
for darnes fo 130 l 4 consenting not with an 8 fol 132 l 9 Philodespotus, not
lus fol. 123 l 4 preserve for prescribe, fo 149 l 8 and for least, fo, 344 l 10
concerns not my particular, fol, 147 li, 15 of your obs fol 161 l 10 read
discouragement for in couragement, fol 169 l 9 community for commonly, with a
parenthesis not at ears fo, 172 l 2, they for to deny fo 126 l 6 pyroters for
pirates fol 128 l 10 in the liver fo, 129 l 18 leatcherie for treachery, 130
fol and li 2, such as does arise from the bottom of the sea, read after
vapors, so 137 and l 21 22 23, read for for or, fo, 147 l: 3, some for such
fo 149 l 9 themselves for himself, fo: 159 l 1 suggestio^s for digestions, fol
159 l 15 employment for employments, fol, 164 l 11 distraction for destruction
fol, 165: l 9 but for pit or fol 165 l 15 read after welfare, that it is so
necessarily joined with his place and office, to remove folio, 146 lin 18,
read preserved for preserver.


