A SPIRITVALL PROPINE OF A Pastor to his People.

HEB. 5. 12. You whom it behooves because of time to be teachers, hes need
again to be taught the elements of the speeches of God. IAM. 1. 19 And sa my
beloved brethren, let all men be swift to hear, slaw to speak, slaw to wrath.

21 And casting away all filth, and excrement of evil, with meekenes, receive
the ingraft Word, whilk saues your saules.

22 And be you doers of the Word, and not hearers only, beguiling your selves.

EDINBVRGH PRINTED BY ROBERT Walde-graue Printer to the Kings Majesty. 1589.

Cum Privilegio Regio

Contents of the Buik.
1 The Epistle dedicatorie. Fol. 3. 2 A short exhortation to Prayer. 5. 3 A
Morning Prayer. 8. 4 Blessing before meat. 13. 5 Grace or thanksgiving after
Meat with Prayer. 14. 6 Evening Prayer. 15. 7 The manner how to use the
Catechism in verse, pleasandly and profitably. 17. 8 A Prayer for the working
of the holy Spirit. 19. 9 A Prayer for the Sabbath at Morn. 20. 10 A prayer
for the Sabbath at Night. 22. 11 A Prayer before the holy Communion. 24. 12 A
meditation after the Communion. 26. 13 Ane exhortation anent trial. 30. 14
That Christians ought to try themselves always, and namely, before they come
to the Table of the Lord. 34. 15 A form of trial in particular, of misery
and mercy, be their several columns and points. 39. 16 The form of trial
and examination taken of all sik as presents themselves to the Table of the
Lord. 42. 17 The saules delight. 52. 18 A Poem for the practice of piety, in
devotion, faith and repentance: Entitled, A Morning vision, wherein the Lords
Prayer, Belief, and Commands, and sa the Whole Catechism, and right use
thereof, is largely exponed. 53 19 The Lords Prayer paraphrased. 63. 20
Confession of the justifying Faith paraphrasde. 73. 21 Repentance Oration. 91.
22 Precepts of Repentance. 96. 23 A pattern of true Faith and Repentance. 105.
24 Ane ample and plain paraphrase, proponed be Repentance, vp^on the Ten
Commands 116 25 The song of MOSES. Deuteronomy. 23. in verse. 134. 26 The feeling of
sin and force of faith for salvation. 140. 27 The Sea man's shout, or mutual
exhortation to go forward in the spiritual voyage. 143. 28 The way and end of
Voluptie and Virtue. 145. 29 Sundry Sonets.
TO THE REVERENDE Fathers and Brethren, Elders of the Congregation of Kilrinny,
and haill flock committed to their government; the Pastor, wishes, grace,
mercy, and peace, from God the Father and from the Lord Jesus Christ.
Receive Reverend Fathers, loving brethren, and deir flock, this Spiritual
Propine: conteiniug in short sum the substance of that exercise of trial,
wherewith ye are acquainted in daily doctrine, before ye communicate at the
Table of the Lord, togidder with the grounds of the doctrine of godliness and
salvation, contryued in a piece of not vnpleasand and very profitable Poesy.
As I hope the ha^y Spirit be experience sall make you to prove and find with
exhortationes, and allurements to the earnest and holy practice of Piety, in
Devotion, Faith, and Repentance. For understanding your custom to be, to ease
the langour of time, and irksomnes of your labors with singing* whilk is a
gift naturally given be God to many for that effect, and the matter of that
mufick amongst the common sort, to be vain and profane* serving to sop the
saul in sin and uncleanness, and steir up the corrupt and filt^^ affectiones
thereof to evil lusts, and seiking of occasiones to fulfill the wicked
desires thereof; I thought it my duty to endeavor to draw you to the right use
of Music and singing, the whilk being sanctified be good and honest matter, and
holy disposition of heart, makes meikle for godly edification and comfort. For
the measures of poesy and harmony of music (as I find be daily experience
in my awin family) delytes the mind, and sa helps the memory very meikle, to
embrace and keip fast the matter, and stirs up and sets the force of the
souls affectiones toward God, in pleasand meditation thereof. The reason is
evident and natural, because that like draws to like, and delites therein,
and that whilk delites, leaves a stamp and printe in the memory, and moves sa
the affectiones, that it is not easielie removed. Now it is certain that
measures, harmony, good order, and temperature, are like to the nature of man,
and may friendly and amiable thereunto: Seeing the good constitution of the
body, stands in the good temperature of the humors thereof; sa hes the saul
also the awin sort of temperature: If not in the nature, yet evidently in the
faculties and affectiones thereof, meruelouslie moved and disposed be the
measures temperature, and harmonious melody of Music and Poesy. And the same
also I take to be the cause why method and good order is the mother of memory,
and delectation in all things. This the God and maker of the saul and
spirits of men, knawing best, hes set down his haly will and verity in
sacred scripture: not only in plain and simple prose, as in the story,
Prophets, and writings of the Apostles: but also in Poesy and verses, meit to
be uttered with the melody of Music; be voice or instrument; And that but
question for memory and delectation, to bring forth halines, whereby he might
be rightly worshipped, and men made to atteine to that happiness that is in the
presence of his face, and inioying the light of his count^nance, where Angels
sing without cease, Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord God of Hosts, the world is full of
thy glory, as are the b^iks of Job, of the Psalms, Proverbs, Ecclesiastes, and
that may sweet and pleasand Song of songs; and that song of MOSES, commended
be God to be put in the mouth of the people, and sung continually; with many
man, both in the old and new Testament, be that renowned father of the kirk.
T. B. prettelie put forth in French meeter: The translation whereof, for your
profit also I have begun to assay. And therefore, as I cease not to commend
unto you may instantly these poesies of Scripture: namely, the Psalms of
DAVID, and other holy Prophets and men of God, whilk ye have in your hands,
set out of old in meeter, as the may precious treasure of instruction and
comfort of the saul and inward man* Sa also for the same cause, I carefully
recommend unto you, this your Catechism, and instruction in the right way of
the true service of God, and atteyning to salvation be Jesus Christ, included
in this little Poem, and framed to the common toones, wherewith ye are best
acquainted: To the end, that ye employing the misused time therein, may have
the grounds of Christian Doctrine imprinted in your memory, with delight and
pleasure, and be moved and stirred up to grow in knawledge and feeling of true
godliness, whilk is profitable for all things: And that ye may know, this is the
very will and command of God, for your special weill fare, fight, and lay up
in your hearts, their places and exhortationes of Scripture following, with the
whilk, the Spirit of Grace and sanctification might mightelie work, that ye
may practice and obey the same. 1 Timothy 4. 7. 8. Cast away profane fables and
auld wives tales, and exercise thy self in godliness. For bodiely exercise
profits little, but godliness is profitable for all things, having the
promises of this life, and that whilk is to come. Ephesians. 5. Harlatrie and
uncleanness, and greediness, let them not be named amangst you, as becomes
halie people, and foul and daft talk and bawdry, away with that: but rather
thansgiuing. Knawing this, that na harlot, unclean person, nor auaritio us,
sall inherit the Kingdom of Christ and God. Let nane therefore deceive you
with vain talk, for the whilk the wrath of God, comes upon the children of
disobedience. Be not therefore companions unto them. Evil communing, corruptes
good manners: Speak unto your selves, in Psalms, and Hymns, and spiritual
songs, singing unto the Lord with grace in your hearts. Coloss. 3. 16. 17. Let
the speech of Christ dwell amangst you rifely with all wisdom, teaching and
admonishing your selfs mutually, with Psalms, and Hymns, and spiritual
songs. And whatsoever ye do in word or deed, do it in the name of the Lord
Jesus, giving thanks to God the Father, throw him. To the whilk effect also,
receive this sentence of BASILIVS the great, in his Epistle to GREGORY. What is
more blessed (says he) then man being on the earth, to imitate the consent of
the Angels that are in heaven, soon be daybreak, to go to prayer, and with
hymns and songs to worship the Creator. Thereafter, at Sun rising, to go to
wark in na place without Prayer, and finally, with songs, as with salt to
season the actiones. For hymmick cohortationes, brings a glad and cheerful
equabilitie to the mind. Now, there are many maa things whilk I have thought
neidfull and expedient for your use and profit, as the just exposition of the
Belief, Commandes, Prayer, and Sacraments, as they are Sabbothly exponed and
teached unto you. Demands of story, and points of Scripture, that our ordinary
proceeding therein, may be the better be remembered, for profit in knawledge
and practice: Spiritual meet medecines for your accustomed diseases, that
may and oftenest moves and troubles the weak flesh: as seiknes and
searenes of body, trouble and grief of mind, loss of gear, death of the
dearest, and siklik, declaration how dangerous are the sins that are may
common amongst you, and prouoks God to wrath, and to strike with sik plagues,
that the same may be removed and amended* description of the particular duties
of superiors toward their inferiors, and contrair, and of your chief trades
and ca^ling be sea and land, that every ane knawing and doing their duties, in
their rank and ord^^r, your Kirk, common-weill, and societies may stand and
flourish ^n ane halie and happy estate: and finally, the substance of the
solemn actiones, whereby we glorify God, and edifies ane another, in our
public assemblies; as of Baptism, the Supper, Fasting, Thanks giving;
Ordination of Elders, and solemnization of Marriage: All the whilk be several
treatises, are purposed and minuted for your memory, and salbe ready as ye sal
require, that the pains taken in the doctrine of these points, and actions,
both past and to come, may be the mair profitable, when ye sal have the
substance thereof shortly abridged ready at your hand, to be re^ewed with
your eyes, and renewed in your minds, as your need sall require. It is true,
that many of their things are better done and set down be vthers: but
co^siddering that the diversity of Gods gifts, in conceiving and uttering of
the self same substance of doctrine, is als great and wounderfull amangst men,
as the variety of proportion, and lineaments of their faces and person is:
And that the form wherewith people are accustomed in daily hearing, is
easiest for their conceiving and memory in writ: Joining herewithall, the
liking ye have of your awin, and respect of that vnl^wsable conjunction in the
Love of Christ, whilk often being assayed, could never, nor hereafter (be Gods
grace) can be distolued betuixt us. I was persuaded that this little piece of
pain, would not be superfluous and unprofitable, howbeit, the like were done
of every Pastor to their flock: For I protest (the truth to al, that the
special respect of your profit, deir flock) after diverse years deliberation,
has thus put out my name in print whilk vtherwaies should either have lurked at
hame, or shawin the self with appeirance of greater profit to the common weil
of Christianity. But seeing you ar the only tallent of the Lords gudes
concredit to me: It suffices abundantly, if in any small measure I may better
you, and with sum increase present you again to my Lord at his coming.
Wherefore my earnest desire is, that you Reverend Fathers, and loving brethren
of the Eldership, mindful of the weight of your charge, and of the solemn
aith and obligation, maid before God, his Angels and Kirk thereanent. Take
faithful and diligent care that this word of life dwell plentifully, first in
your awin hearts, and nixt in your families: fra the whilk as fountains of
living waters, it may flow unto the hearts, houses and families committed in
particular to every ane of your charge, and therefore relief of your saul's at
that great day, when the chief Pastor sall appear to receive a reckoning of
your Stewartrie. And the daily wish of my heart is for the effectual working of
the quickening spirit of Christ in all your hearts, wha ala^nerly is able to
bring forth the effect of the knawledge and feeling of their things in the
practice of a renewed life, and sanctified conversation, to confirm you mair
and mair in the assurance of your election and calling to the airship of
eternal life in Christ Jesus the only Savior, Son of man, and God over all
blessed for ever. From Ansteruther, the 20. day of November. 1598.

Your Pastor, loving and faithful be the grace of God unto the death, JAMES
MALVILL.

TO THE PASTORS.
SONNET.
Without a ground, we big into the air,
And sa our wark dois vanish with the wonde:
Thought in appearance it be never sa fair:
Na profit permanent thereof is found.
If with our flocks, we lay not weill the ground
Right sure and solid, of the Catechism,
Of all our pains, na profit can redound,
To plant the truth, and banish Atheism:
And poesy, it is na Paganism:
Bot sweit in Ointment of the holy Sprit:
For sik as seikes their God in Christianisme.
To ken and keip, the matter fallen meit.
Great profit then this little pain may yield.
Our flocks in Christ till edify and beild.
M. R. D.

TO THE READER.
SONNET.
WAuld thou be sure of sovereign remeide,
Thy wearied saul may sweitly to refraiche.
Wauld thou with courage bear the deadly seide:
Against the devil, the world and wicked ^laiche.
Wauld thou be strong and stoutly bide the braiche
Of Satan's slights, and cause of Christ debate.
Wauld thou devise his shamles face to daiche.
And all his troops by faith for to defate.
Wauld thou on earth approach to heavenly state*
And being man, an Angels life to laid*
In songs to sound the praises care and late
Of him wha thee and all the would hes maid.
Employ thy time, thy tongue* and thine ingyne.
And choose, and use, this spiritual propyne.
M. I. D.

THEOCRENE.
NOn ego Parnassi cupiam iuga, non iuga Pindi:
Aut optem Aonias, aut Heliconis aquas,
Vna Theocrene, riget vnda, and recreet aura.
Vna Theocrene, satque superque mihi.
Flumine quae saturet pectus, quae flamine mentem
Impleat, hinc suadae plena medulla meae.
A. M.

GOD HIS WEAL.
I Cair not for Parnassus banks, nor Pindus stately breas,
For Theocren her streams and air, dois me refresh and ease.
Nor wish I for Aonis well, nor springs of Helicon,
For Theocren abundantly, dois me content alone.
Quhilk plennishes my breast and mind, with water and with wond:
Sa that my beams with Swadas mearch, dois fullelie abound.
TO THE BVIKE.
O Blessed book of peaper permanent!
O right resembler of a lively grace!
No barren bi^^h of coil and time misspent,
No lofty lust with false and fardit face,
Be not ashamed; thou bear^the very trace
And pattern vine of heavenly influence:
The voyage, way, and Pilo^e unto peace,
A mate for mirth* the gyde for gouernence*
Mounting on heigh unto divine essence,
Then drawing thence rare ^ew of happy store,
For Woe, for Wealth for Faith, for conscience,
Yielding in end for pain a perfect lore.
Go range about the coasts and countries all
Thou leadst aright to life celestial.
M. I. I.

SONNET.
THe lively Lamps of great Iehovaes licht
Quhilk drives the deadly smoke of sin away
The grounds of grace, the gage of glory bright
The way to wealth quhilk sall endure far ay.
As Salve for saules, a solid plat to pray
At morn, at nicht, and other seasons mei^
A truth to (...) the state where thou should stay
A healthsome hyue of heavenly songs sweit.
Behald thou hes, in weichtie, wise, discreit
And pleasant style, a schort and reddie way.
To Paradyse with pleasures all repleit,
To reign and sing O holy, holy aye.
Pray and assay herein sum space to spend.
Give place to grace, and God sall bless the end.
M. W. S.

A SONNET ENCOMIASTICK to the Buike.
O Lamp of light, and guyd for gouernence,
O booth of blis, and garden of all grace,
Leade-stearne to life, a craig for conscience
O Flower of faith, and peirles pearl of peace,
O rule of right, of truth the very trace,
O Sinayes sight, and glansing glass of glore,
For weakness strenth, for mirth a pleasand mace,
Sweit songs for Saints, of steadfast joys a store.
O key of knowledge, line of heavenly lore,
O well of wisdom, vow of virtues al,
O schield for sin, and salve for every fore,
O hearts true health, and trusty friend in thrall,
Go shaw, but aw, thy comely countenance
Naman, weill can, thy comforts recompance.
M. I. C.

TO THE READER.
GIff pleasure may persuade, or matter move,
If profit may prevail, or mirthe allure:
Heir stay thy heart, o heir repose thy love,
Heir sall thou find, quhilk may thy love procure:
Heir pleasure, game, and mirth quhilk sall endure,
Quhen earthly pleasure, game, and mirth decays:
Tak pains and prove, prooffe sall thy heart assure,
None gets the gain, bot he wha prooffe essays.
Wey, use, apply: away with fleshly stays.
Delight, rejoice in heavenly music sanges:
Sen Poesy heir warkes, and faith arrayes.
Array thy heart with all that them belanges.
Quhen grief and sorrow hes my heart oppressed:
Resorting heir, I find both ease and rest.
M. I. C.

The Author to the Reader, anent the Commendatorie Sonnets.
J Pat my papers in su^ Pastors hand
To be perus de, and censured sikkerlie.
When they returned, I lurk on them and ^ande
Them weill be-deckt with Sonnets as you sie.
Take not their praises (Reader) meaned of me:
B^t of the matter quhilk my Muse entreats:
O^ that their love, would wish my Buik to bie
Als good indeed, as in their kind conceates.
For like as honest men of their estates,
Allows not foolish flattring words and wain^
Sa certainly my ha^t extremely hates,
Sik praising as may justly move disdain.
Think weill of all, this only they profes.
To praise the TRVTH that they may it embres.
ANE SHORT EXHORtation to prayer prefixed.
PRay continually, says the spirit of God be his Apostle. 1. These. 5. 17. And
not without cause: for it is the may Godly, charitable, profitable,
comfortable, honorable, and sa the best exercise of al other, nathing can give
God mair his awing glory, procure the weil of our brethren and selves at the
hands of the only giver of al good, moderate us in prosperity, comfort us in
adversity, and make us hamely with God, aduising, commoning, co^plaining,
rejoicing, sorrowing, entreating, and putting him to charge, as his awin
friends and children, loving and familiar, nor faithful, true and earnest
Prayer. And therefore above all things for thy weil obey the halie Ghaist,
exhorting in another place, Phil. 4. 6. Be the same Apostle. Be not over
careful of nathing: bot in all things let your requests be knawin to God be
prayer and supplications, with giving of thanks, and the peace of God quhilk
passes al understanding, sall keep your hearts in Christ Jesus. Lay then the
right foundation of prayer solidely, to wit, the command and promise of God,
saying. Psalm. 50. 16. Call upon me in thy need, and I will hear thee. And of
Christ assuring. John. 16. 23. Verelie, Verelie, I say unto you, whatsoever ye
ask the father in my name, he sall give it you, ask and ye sal receive,
that your joy may be full. And Math. 7. Ask and it sall be given you, seek
and ye sall find, knock and it sall be opened unto you. What is the man amang
you, that if his son will ask him bread, will give him a stone, and if he
ask a fish, will give him a serpent: If then ye that are ill, can give good
things to your children: how meikle mair your father that is in heaven sall
give good things to them that asks. Without their warrands obeyed and believed,
we durst neither come near God, quha is a consuming fire, nor hope for any
thing at his hands: bot obeying their commands, and fixing our faith firmly on
the promises, we may bauldly frequent the throane of grace with certainty to
receive, as God kennis to be good for us.

Prepare thy self before thou pray, that thou come not rashly before God, to
offer the sacrifice of fools. Eccle. 4. 17. Be earnest in prayer, and that
whilk thou prays for, namely, in amending thy ways, preasse for to practice,
and sa sall thou find thy prayer effectual, be kindly in love and affection
toward God and his children, cleave unto God and walk with him continually
in thy meditations, yea, even when thy hands are occupied in thy calling, let
thy heart be occupied with thy God, and his good spirit shall inspire thee maire
and maire: and both teach thee what to pray, and how, and steir thee up with
sighs and sobbes, and zealous motions in the mind that cannot be expressed
be the mouth. And so what ever thy estate be on the earth, thou shall be with
him as it were in heaven, in respect of that contentment, peace, joy, comfort,
and consolation whilk shall be furnished unto thee thereby.

Now it is craved of all Christians, that they be acquainted with the voice of
Christ, speaking to them by his word, that they may be able to halde purpose
and confer in prayer with their God and father, and that in halie and heavenly
language and meeter, quhilk only is pleasant before him, and that with such
diversity and abundance, as times, places, and occasions craves, filling first
their necessity and want, and syne believing his all sufficiency and
readiness, to hear and grant their petitions. Sa that if al had attained to
that perfection, quhilk every one should preasse unto, it were superfluous and
unmeet to set down forms of dyted and conceived prayers. And I would
earnestly exhort you dear brethren, sa to hear, read, study, and meditate
the word of God, that with sanctified zealous and wise hearts, and with holy
and divine language, ye might at al occasiones, as your need and adois craved,
speak unto your God, and tell him your awin tale without a trinchman, or words
put in your mouth be others, with the whilk your mind cannot be moved before
ye read or hear them. But since sa it is, that sum mon altogidder speak be
the mouth of others, til being accustomed they learn themselves. And others
waulde have sum grounds and forms, whereby to frame and direct their prayers,
namely, at the ordinar private times of Gods worshipping, as David and Daniel
were accustomed at morning, noone, and euening-tyde to pray. That as they have
the rule and substance of all lawefull prayer set down by our master
Christ: sa they may learn to apply the same to the use of particular seasons
and occasions with thanksgiving to God, edifying of their houses and companies,
and comfort of their awin saules: for help therefore of their defaultes in
your children, families, and companies, and many of your selves; I have
conceived and set down certain forms of prayers and thanksgiving, beseeching
you in sick sort, and sa lang only to use these, till it shall please the
holy Ghaist, be the exercise of the word of God to instruct and plennish your
hearts, so that out of the abundance thereof your mouths may always speak to
the praise of God, edification of others, and your own perpetual joy and
consolation. For in this manner seems the Prophet HOSEA, to command the people
to take words unto them, and dite unto them a form of penitent prayer. Cap.
14. Turn Israel unto JEHOVAH thy God, for thou have fallen throw thy
iniquity, take with you words and turn unto JEHOVAH, and say unto him,
forgive all our iniquity, bestow thy gudnes on us, and we sall repay the
calves of our lips. ASSHVR cannot save us, we sall not ride on horses,
neither sall we say any mair to the work of our hand, O our God, for by thee
the people or fatherles find mercy.

Morning prayer before ye enter to warke.
Let the words of our mouth, and the meditation of our hearts be acceptable
unto thee, O Lord our rock and our Redeemer. Psalm. 19. 15.
O Great Creator of all things, our gracious Lord and sweet father in Christ,
we the warke of thine awin hands, thy pure seruands and children may humbly
adores and worships before the throne of thy majesty, acknawledging and
extolling thee for thy wonderful warkes, al wrought of thy gudnes, in power
and wisdom inspeakeable, in making of all, upholding of al; and ordering and
ruling of all, for the weill and comfort of man; whom thou haste appointed,
Lord over all thy creatures: that of him above all where thou might be served
and glorified. Lord, we heartely thank thee for all thy benefits sa largely
bestowed upon us, that our hearts cannot sufficiently think on the^, meikle
less our mouths express them, as for that thou have this night watched over
us, keiped us from al danger of body and saul, and given us comfortable rest
for refreshing of the wearines of our weak nature, humbly beseeching thee for
thy mercy and grace, in respect of our manifold sins committed against thee
this night, and all the nights and times of our life bypast; that in the lawer
of the precious blood of thy son Jesus Christ our Savior, al our uncleanness
of saul and body may be washed away. Suffer not Lord our sins to stay the
course of thy blessing, and bring on us thy fearful curse, as may justly
they deserve; bot rather amend us be a maire forcible working of thy spirit of
grace and sanctification: That as thou continues the course of time, the day
after the night, and night after the day: sa the course of thy kindness, and
love may be continued with us thy seruands and children beyond all time, and
sa Lord, vouchsafe to receive us this day under thy gracious government and
favorable protection: waken us out of the sleep of sin, raise us out of the
bed of security, make us to cast off the warks of darkness, and put on the
armor of light, that we may walk honestly as in the day time, yea as in thy
sight and presence, before whom the greatest darkness even of the hid thoughts
of the (...) shines as the clear light. Make the day (...) thy gospel to
lighten our minds (...) that (...) Christ ^^^^^ to shine before the eyes of
our faith, and the heat beams of thy spirit to kendel up that lively warmenes
and wholesome heat of love in our hearts, and guide us sa, be thy grace in all
thy ways, that in thought, word, and deed, we may glorify thy name, and
edify vthers be our good example in all godliness and virtue. Lord, as we are
mindful of this body to cleange, cleithe, and feide the same daily, make us
as careful of our saules and inward man, to purge it be repentance, wash it
in the precious blood of the lamb the Lord Jesus, cleith it with his
righteousness, and feide the samin be his body broken for us: that is, be true
faith in his death and passion, keep our hearts and thoughts from all ungodly,
dishonest, unlawful, wrangous, filthy and unclean devises and desires: keep
our mouths and tongues from all blasphemy, swearing, banning, cursing, foul,
evil, vain and profaine speaking, keep our hands and feet from all violent
wrang, wicked and dishonest turns and ways, and make our hearts, hands, and
feet, and haill saul and body rightly sanctified and ruled be thy spirit, to
think, speak or do nathing this day, bot that whilk flowing from faith,
directed be the square of thy law, may tend to thy praise, the we^l and profit
of our brethren and neighbors, joy and contentment of our awin consciences,
and to the forderance of the good and lawful turns of our occupation, lest
these members infected with the leprosy, and botch of sin, being a just
curse and plague upon us and all our labors. Guard us therefore by thy gracious
power fra the devil, world, and flesh: that we be not snared be their craft,
entangled with their tentatio^s, nor allured be their delitious, pleasures,
furnish us out of thy rich and unwasted store, all things needful and
comfortable for body and saul; let thy bountiful blessing be upon our
occupationes and warks of our hands, without the whilk, all our cair and
business is vain and lost, give us grace to seek and luke for all good things
at thy gracious hands allanerlie, traveling faithfully and diligently in our
vocations, and to return also the lawful and right use thereof again, with
thankful hearts to thine honor and praise. Lord, teach us sa to count and
number our days, that we may apply our hearts to heavenly wisdom, and seek
after the life everlasting, and fill us sa with thy mercies this morning, and
every morning, that we may repose and be glad in thee all the days of our life;
and finally, make us sa to spend this day: and all the days and times of this
miserable pilgrimage, in thy fear, love, and obedience, that when it sall
please thee, whair and how we may happily end it in Jesus Christ, beginning
that joyful morning in saul, first after the departure from the body, and
thereafter both in saul and body, rejoyned in ane immortal estaite, at the
resurrection of the just, that never sall have evening fallowing.

Lord, as in our prayers we have always before our eyes thy glory, whereof
above all things we beseike thee to make us zealous, that we may thereby kenne
our selves to be thy servants and children; sa we recommend to thy love and
mercy, the caire and protection of thy haill Kirk, our common mother and thy
dear spouse, and the Kirkes in special that trauailis under the cross of thy
Christ, for g^^d and faithful Pastors and Magistrates, to be steired up and
assisted be thy grace for their comfort; and for thy favor, power, and
wisdom, to be (...) to the malice, force, and craft of their enemies, and for
comfort, patience, and constancy to them whereby they may glorify thy name in
suffering, and move vthers by their good example to do the same. Hasten Lord
their deliverance, and make us both to joy and sorrow with thy people and
children: that we may find our selves loving and feilling members of the body
of thy Christ, we beseik thee for every member of that body in particular:
specially, sik as are under thy correcting hand: to give them the assurance of
thy favor in Christ, patience, strength, and comfort, acknawledging, that it
is the hand of thee their loving father, working for their weil-faire, whose
gud-will is their weill, and fra whom na hurt or evil can come unto them,
make them therefore gladly to give over themselves in thy hands, abiding
patiently thy will and leisure, with assured hope of a sweet and comfortable
end of all their sufferings: and prepare us Lord against the day of our
trial and visitation, and give us grace to use the examples of thy warks set
before our eyes, and instructions, and admonitions of thy word sounding in our
ears fruitfullie for that effect. That duty of remembrance in our prayers,
quhilk we have promised to sik as are by acquaintance, knitte with us in the
bowels of Christ Jesus, and the estate whereof is communicate and recommended
unto us, we discharge it Lord before thee, and earnestly commits them and
their estate to thy grace, beseiking thee may effectually for them as for our
selves. Lord, our prayers are imperfit, and when we have prayed, we have need
to cry mercy, for that we have not prayed aright, for neither know we what
thy glory requires in particular, nor the necessity of thy kirk, or any member
theirof, na not our awin neids, nor can we be moved for the samin as we
ought. Make us therefore Lord with understanding and right disposition of thy
Sprit to commend al unto thee, and rightly to glorify thy name, by incalling
the same in that form of prayer may perfect, that thy son our savior Jesus
Christ has teached us to use, saying, Our father, etc.

Form of blessing before meat.
BE merciful to us, O our good God and father, and bless us, and make the
light of thy countenance to shine upon us, sanctify us thy seruands mair and
mair unto thee in thy Christ, and bless thy good creatures to our use: give us
grace to take them thankfully fra thy hands, and use them moderately, that we
being refreshed thereby, may be inhabled to go for-ward in the journey of this
life, serving thee always in Jesus Christ our only Lord and Savior: in
whose name we humbly and reverently entreat thee for all things to be prayed
for as he has teached us, saying, Our father* etc.

Grace or thanksgiving after meat.
THe Lord our good God may mighty, wise, gracious, and bountiful father: wha
hes elected us before the foundation of the world was laid: wha has made us
all of a blood in our father the first Adam at the beginning of time, and at
the acceptable fulness of time, when we were utterly lost, of his free mercy
pitiing our misery, hes made us new again, and redeemed us from the Devil,
death and hell, be the precious blood of the second Adam, his awin only
begotten son, the Lord Jesus Christ our Savior: wha hes translated us out of
darkness, into this marvelous light of the gospel, whilk we sa lang enjoy:
wha hes justified and sanctified us in sum measure, by his halie spirit of
adoption, to ane assured hope of the life everlasting: wha hes kept us unto
this hour, and furnished to us abundantly all things needful, and
comfortable for body and saul, as he has now presently refreshed and fed us:
and sa ceases notto power mair and mair the plentifulnes of his rich graces and
blessings upon us: even this our good God and may gracious father be blessed,
praised, honored, and sanctified, now and for ever. Amen.

Prayer after meat.
Dear and bountiful father, as thou have refreshed our bodies, that mon decay
and turn to dust, with their things earthly, whereof we have sa great an
appetit, desire, and pleasure: sa we beseik thee to give us a greater care of
our selves and inward man, that mon live for ever, that we may hunger and
thirst for the nuriture thereof, and take delight and pleasure therein, to wit,
the Lord Jesus Christ, that bread of life that came down from the heavens,
and is offered to us in thy haly Gospel. Lord, make us sa to feed upon him be
a lively faith and warking of the spirit of sanctification; that our inward man
may daily mair and mair be nurished, refreshed and strengthened, for the
exercise and discharge of all the duties, quhilk thou requires of us to be
done for thy service and honor. Mortify we beseik thee farther and farther,
the lusts and earthly affections of our outward man; that likes always to
live here, to eat and drink and enjoy the pleasures of this world, and that
till he be even utterly abolished, and quicken and augment our inward man, till
he come to that full and ripe age in the stature of Christ: that is, meet to
enjoy the kingdom, and bliss everlasting. Amen

Evening Prayer.
WE humbly present unto thee in the name of thy son Jesus Christ,
everlasting praise and thanks (almighty God and father may merciful) for
all thy benefits and blessings sa largely bestowed upon us, all the days and
times of our life, preserving us in saul and body from all evil, and
providing for us abundantly all things needful and comfortable both for the
ane and other, blessing the warkes of our hands in that measure that thou hes
thought meetest, like as we have found these benefits in fresh and new
experience this present day. Lord, let not our sins committed against thee
this day, nor na day heretofore, procure the withdrawing of thy blessings, and
pouring of thy plagues upon us, as we confess, that they may justly deserve,
bot as of thy free mercy and grace in Jesus Christ, thou hes bin unto this
hour, a gracious and bountiful Lord and father unto us, sa of the same grace
and mercy in Jesus Christ, we earnestly beseike thee, to warke amendment in
us, be a mair effectual force of thy haly Spirit, and sa to continue thy
bounty and favor toward us. And now Lord, this night vouchsafe to receive us
under thy gracious protection and saifegard, for we commend and give over our
saules and bodies, our houses, guds, gear, and whatsumeuer perteins to us into
thy hands, watch therefore over us good Lord, and make thy holy Angels to camp
about us; that we may sa safely rest and refresh our wearied bodies with
sleep; that in the mean time our saules having their conversation with thee,
may await for the glorious appearing of Christ our King to the last judgment.
And grant O father, that when he fall come to judge ather the world in
general or in particular, to call any of us from this life, we be not found
sleeping in cairles security, nor drunken with surfeit of sin or love of
things temporal, nor blinded in the darkness of ignorance with the miserable
multitude of the world, that fall perish eternally: bot weil occupied,
watching and praying in sobriety, prepared with the precious oil of faith and
love in the lamps of our hearts burning, that we may readely and gladly meet
our Lord Jesus, and accompany him to the rest and joy everlasting. O Lord our
life is bot as a day; and a thousand year is bot a day before thee, the
evening is as the end of our life, our sleep as death, our bed a grave, our
sheittes winding sheittes, the cocks wakning bells, as the archangels trumpetes
sounding to judgeme^t. And luke how surely we know that we man die, sa
uncertain are we, whair, when, and how. Make us therefore we beseik thee good
Lord sa resolved, that we may end this day as we wald end our life, enter in
our bed as in our grave, resting in the peace of our conscience, and assurance
of thy love with a steadfast hope of that joyful resurrection amangs thy
saints, and that by true and sure faith in the resurrection of our Christ,
quha in that pleasand morning, fall change our vile bodies, and fashion them
like unto his glorious body, to be placed with him in the presence and at the
right hand of his father, whair the fulness of joys and pleasures ar for ever.
Grant us their things dear Father, and whatsoever else thou knowis to be for
thy awin glory, the weill of thy Kirk of this Congregation, and all the
members thereof, of this family, and every ane of us, and sik in special as
we have promised to remember in our prayers, asking all in that form may
perfect, that CHRIST hes commanded us saying, Our father, etc.

The manner how to use the Catechism in verse, pleasandly and fruitfully.
HEre I will insert the manner how ye may use the Catechism in verse,
pleasandly and fruitfully: as I have some experience in my awin family. The
night before the Sabbath (whilk I wauld ye should have always free from your
warldlie turns, except in necessities, and that for a preparation to the
Sabbothe) ye sall expone to your servands and children some part of the said
Catechism, as a petition of the prayer, or artickle of the Belief, or ane of
the Commandments, to make it cleir in proof to them, whilk is shortly packed
up in verse: syne injoyne that to sik as can read, to be tuned perquere the
Sabbath following, of the whilk at night thou sall take account; and on the
first day of the oulk following, after morning prayer, thou sall enter in
conference be questioning thereupon with thy children and servands, shortly, to
assay their understanding and cleir and help the ^amin: the whilk when thou
hes done, then let sik as can read, sing clearly and distinctly the same
part, that sik as can not, may tak tent and follow, and so learn: And in
conclusion, praise God with these verses taken out of 68. and 89. Psalms.

Now praised be the Lord for that,
he powers on us sik grace:
From day to day he is the God
of our health and solace.
He is the God from whom alone
salvation comes plain.
He is the God by whom we escape
all dangers death and pain.
The Lord the God of Israel
be praised evermore.
Even so be it, Lord will I say,
even so be it therefore.
Thereafter use the prayer for working of the spirit to make the word
fruitful, as ye have it hereafter, and end with the blessing, to be always
pronounced by the Father, Mother, or master of the family or company. And
siklik, after evening prayer the same pairt, and so continue all the oulk, gif
they he hard to learn, till it become familiar, but gif they be able to
learn, and have beneanes or twice through, then may ye have a pairt euer-ilk
day. This ordour, or the like being daily used without intermission, and
cairfull oversight of discipline joined therewith, by the Father and Masters
of family and companies, for a godly and honest conversation: but question,
by the grace of God, thou sal find great grouth, both of knawledge, and
godliness: and sa of al other blessings, in thy family or companies.

A may pithie prayer, for obteining of the working of the halie spirit, be
the word and Sacraments, taken out of the 1. and. 3. Ephesians. and Phil. 3.
WE bow our knees unto thee, O God of glory, and father of our Lord Jesus
Christ, of whom is named the halie family of thy Kirk in Heaven and in earth;
beseik and thee according to the riches of thy glory, to lighten the eyes of
our minds with the spirit of wisdom and knawledge, that we may understand
what is the hope of thy calling, and the riches of the glory of thy
inheritance amangst the Saints, and what is the excellency of the greatness of
thy power amangst them that believe, according to that efficacy of thy strong
power, whilk thou showed forth in Christ, when thou raised him from the dead,
and set him at the right hand in the heavens. And grant, Lord, that we may be
strenthened by thy Spirit in the inward man, that thy Christ may dwell in our
hearts be says; that we being rooted and grounded in love, may be able to
comprehend with all the faints; what is the breadth and length, the deapth and
height of that inestimable grace, redempption, and glory, that thou have
prepared for them, and to embrace that love of Christ, whilk passes all
understanding, that we may be filled with all fullness of God. Grant O Lord
and Father, that thy spirit, the true and inward teacher and comforter, wauld
by the fruitful use of thy word and sacraments, make our faith and love to grow
and abound yet mair and mair in knawledge and feeling, that we may rightly
discern, betuixte good and evil, thy will, and our will, thy Love, and the
love of this warlde, that we may be pure, and without offense, unto the day
of our CHRIST, filled with the fruits of righteousness, whilk at by JESUS
CHRIST unto the glory and praise of thee our God, and their things, as for our
selves, even sa in hearty affection, we ask for all thine, with whom in thy
CHRIST, we gladly profess that may happy communion and blessed unity.
Therefore unto thee, O Father, wha is able to do exceeding abundantly, above
all whilk we can ask or think, according to the power of thy spirit, whilk
works in us, be praise in the Kirk by JESUS Christ throughout all generations
for ever. Amen.

A Prayer for the Sabbath day at Morn.
BLessed God and bountiful father, wha hes commanded us to keip holy the
Sabbath, absteyning haliley from our awin warkes, for using of thy warkes,
word, sacraments, and other means of thy worshipping holelie and rightly, for
thy honor and praise, and the life and weill of our saules and inward man
everlasting. We acknowledge and confess, as the truth is, that we are altogidder,
wicked, corrupt, vnhalie, vain, wandering, profane, and earthly; and that thou
art good, puir, holy, constant, and full of heigh and heavenly majesty; sa
that we are vn-worthie, and may vnmeit to tred in thy courts, or approach to
thy presence; yea, to behold the light of thy heavens a moment, to let be to
set our selves to sanctify and keip holy a Sabbath unto thee: nevertheless,
since it has pleased thee sa to command us, and promise to accept of us in thy
Holy ane, the Lord JESUS our Mediator, and of thy vn-speakable mercy and
gudnesse, to give this liberty, occasion* health of body, and other things
neidful for the samin: We humbly beseik thy grace to be merciful unto us, and
purge us in the precious blood of the Lamb the Lord JESUS; to wound our hearts
with vn-fayned sorrow for our sins; and heal the samin again by a plaster
of his heart blood, applied by faith unto our conscience, and sa to sanctify
us by that holy comforter, that we may come before thee rightly prepared,
for all the holy and spiritual exercises of thy Sabbath: Disposed accordingly
in the mean while thereof, and find in end the effectual and solid fruits of
the samin, to our growth in godliness and direction aright in all thy holy
ways, with heavenly strength and vigor, to follow out the samin this oulk,
and all the days and oulkes of our jorneying in this wretched wilderness,
till we atteine till that comfortable Canaan and heavenly inheritance, whair
halelie and holelie but any corruption, impediment, or interruption, we fall
sanctify to thee a Sabbath and rest everlasting. Lord furnish to thy servands
that thou sends out this day to speak in thy name unto thy people, sik store
of sound and wholesome doctrine, prayer, praise, and thanksgiving, with the
grace of uttering the samin, with sik force, evidence, zeal, and weight of thy
spirit, as may both instruct thy people clearly, and ravish and move them
mightily, to the fervent reverence, fear, and love of thee their God,
detestation of them selves for their sin, and feilling of the sweitnes of thy
grace in Jesus Christ, that sa they may rightly serve and worship thee their
God and Father, and earnestly seik thy face, and not depart there^^a, with out
a spiritual comfort and blessing. Lord resist Satan and stay all his
impediments, and purge us in special from this vennome of hypocrisy, whilk is
may detestable in thy sight, when outwardly coming before thee in our
bodies, and yet the heart is far from thee; and keip us Lord from that curse
pronunced upon sik as dois thy work negligently. Lord draw us away from this
earth and thought of things earthly, that we may be haillie set upon thee,
and things heavenly and incorruptible. Lighten our understanding whilk is
dark and blind in the self, stablish our wandering minds, confirm our
slipperie memory, bow our rebellious wills, purge al our corrupt affections,
and grant sufficient ability of the inward man, both to will and do according
to that measure of grace, that thou think meit for us, and for that effect we
beseik thy majesty, yet again to work in our hearts be the force of that inward
teacher, disposer and mover, and let always our intentions, meditations of our
hearts, and words of mouths, and al our actions and doings be acceptable in the
name, and for the merits of our high lawgiver, King and Priest, the Lord
Jesus Christ. In whose name we ask their and all other things thou kennis to be
meit this day and always for thy glory, the weill of thy Kirk, of us, and all
the members thereof, praying as he has teached, Our father, etc.

For the Sabbath at Night.
NOw Lord of thy great mercy, we have enjoyed this Sabbath, and the may
comfortable exercises thereof; for the whilk we offer to thee in the name of
thy son Jesus, what thanks our hearts ar able to contain and present unto thee.
But alas, O Lord, if thou should enter in judgment with us, thou might lay maa
and greater sins to our charge this day, nor any day of the oulk: forsa-meikle
the halier a thing it is, to sanctify thy holy name aright on the Sabbath; sa
meikle the greater guiltines do they contract wha takes the same in vain,
setting themselves to the exercise thereof without right preparation,
disposition, and seiking of fruit and comfort, and luik how meikle the higher
and greater ar thy warks nor our awin, so meikle the mair heavy is the curse
upon sik as dois the same negligently. And alas, o lord, if thou try us, what
sal we be found to have done this day, but taken thy haly name in vain. In
hearing of thy word, meditating on thy warks, using of prayer and tha^ksgiuing
without right preparation, disposition or fruit, and so done thy wark
negligently. O Lord therefore be merciful unto us, and give us grace to wey
this great sin that we commit against thee, even when we are about to be best
and may hailely occupied, to be sorry for it, and humbly beg thy mercy, for
Jesus Christ's sake, and freith us for thy mean grace from that curse of
neglegence, for of a truth when we have done all that we can, we are but
unprofitable, and unworthy servants. And yet Lord, whatsoever hes flowed from
thy good spirit working in us, accept it as fra us, for thy Christ's saik, as the
marks and duties of thy servands and children, assuring and comforting our
saules and consciences thereby. And make the instructions, admonitions,
comfort, and consolation that we have heard of thy word, and found in mutual
example and conference, amang our selves to hide in our memories, and show
forth the fruit in our lives and conversation this oulk following, and all the
time of our life; yea Lord, if it be thy pleasure, make us sa earnest and
deep in meditation thereof this Night, that even in our sleep, we may find
our saules filled and occupied with the thought and consideration thereof, and
taken with the delight, comfort and joy of the samin, that when we awaike, we
may find our selves with thee, and that thy word be the working of thy spirit,
has transformed and changed us in the very nature thereof, in wisdom,
verity, cleannes, halines, and sanctification, to stand and abide in happiness
and permanent felicity for ever. Now for Jesus Christ sake, wha is Lord of the
Sabbath, grant us this, and what ever thou knawis to be good for thy self, for
us, and for all thine, adding his perfect prayer, Our father, etc.

A prayer before the halie Communion.
Most merciful God, and gracious father, wha knawis the weakness and
inability of man, to conceive the mysteries of thy grace, hes not only
appointed thy word to instruct him be hearing: but also the use of thy haly
Sacraments, wherein his haill senses being outwardly occupied, the mind within
might clearly conceive, and the heart firmly believe and embrace the samin.
That be the right use of these signs and seilles of thy covenant of grace; to
wit, the outward and inward matters and actions coupled togidder be the
Sacramental union, that is, be virtue of the institution, command and promise
of Christ declared and believed, and be the prayer and obedience of the Kirk in
doing as is required, Christ Jesus with his hail blessings may not only
clearly be represented, bot given and received for life and salvation, yea,
even verelie, really, and with may mighty force and effect applied, convoyed
into,and sealed up in the saules of the believer, as be a may commodious and
effectual instrumente of the halie Ghaist. Grant we beseik thee, that as thou
in halie and secreit unity and substance of nature and trinity of persons in
on Godhead, presents thy Christ a sanctified and perfect mediator, consecrate
and perfyted be his awin prayers and suffering, even in their actions of thy
Sacraments, ordaned be thee for that effect, and sa offers and exhibits him
with all his merits and blessings on that ane part. Sa it wald please thee on
that other part, to give us a true and lively faith, be the use of their actions
and power of thy halie spirit, mair and mair quickened, steired up, confirmed,
and augmented, whereby we may receive and apply, grippe injoye, and possess
Jesus Christ mair and mair, for righteousness and sanctification, and sa for
life and Salvation everlasting. O Lord prepare us aright thereunto, be an
earnest and diligent trial of the knawledge of the poincts of thy heavenly
verity, and practice thereof, in faith and repentance: that finding out and
feiling our wants in the ane and other, we may be reconciled with thee, and our
neighbors, and seek confirmation, and increase of that small measure we have,
in the use of their actions according to thy ordinance: that in the mean time
thereof, we may be wounded and humbled with a sense and conscience of our
sins, and yet raised up again and healed with an assurance, and feiling of
thy mercy grace and love in Jesus Christ, sa that moved with exceeding joy and
gladness of spirit, we may burst out in thy praises. And namely now Lord in
this Sacrament of the holy Supper and present action thereof, grant that we
may seal up our continual growth, and increase in that blessed communion and
fellowshippe of Jesus Christ, that we may be nurished and fed mair and mair in
our saul and inward man, be declaring the death of thy son Jesus Christ,
constantly believing his body to have bin broken, and his precious blood shed,
yea, him to have suffered whatsoever might satisfy the justice of thee our
God, for our sins and safety. And sa to magnify and extol thy gudnes,
love, mercy, and grace, thy justice, power, and wisdom, quhilk are infinite,
passing the reatch of all consideration. And finally, that we may set our
selves thus ways, fed and strenghned in the inward man, to do the duties of
thy redeemed servants and children, in love, fear, obedience, and holiness all the days of our life. Amen.

A meditation of the faithful saul with God, after the receiving of the holy
Communion.
WE might utterly despair in consideration of our manifold sins and infinite
offenses, had not thy word, O Lord our God, bin made flesh, and dwelt amang
us: But now all praise be unto thy merciful grace, we neither need, nor dare
despair: for gif when I was thy enemy, I was reconciled to thee by the death
of thy Son, how meikle mair being reconciled, sall I be saved by his life:
For all mine hope and my confidence is reposed, in that precious blood whilk
was shed for me and for my salvation. In that blood I reviue wha before was
dead, I take my heart again wha before was heartles, and resting thereupon*.
I covet to come to thee, wha before hated thee, and followed after Satan, I
cum to thee putting no doubt, but now I sall be acceptable, not having my awin
righteousness, but whilk is through faith of my Lord Jesus Christ. Wherefore,
O most gracious and merciful God, lover of all mankind, and lover of thy
faithful Saints: but lover of me in special, wha through Jesus Christ thy
son my Lord, even when I was in the estate of damnation be reason of sin,
have delivered and faued me after sik a way, as neither man nor Angel could
dream off: what craves thou again for this thy love that thou hes kythed upon
me pure wretch but thankfulness? I therefore, unworthy to think upon thee,
unworthy that thy holiness should be conceived in my profane and filthy heart,
yet fra my heart, whilk in sum part is renewed by thy halie Spirit, I thank
thy gracious gudnes; yea, I highly thank thee for that thou have sent thy only
begotten son, from thy awin bosom to save sinners, and to save me, of all
sinners the greatest, the very child of wrath; I thank thee for his holy
incarnation, and birth of his blessed mother, of whom he vouchsafed to take my
flesh for my salvation; that as he was very God of God, sa he might be very
man, of man: I thank thee for his bitter passion, cross, and death; I thank
thee for his glorious resurrection, and ascension to heaven, and sitting at thy
right hand, pouring down the haly Spirit according to his promise, upon me his
child of adoption. I thank thee, both for the shedding of that his precious
blood, wherewith we are redeemed, and also for his instituting of his holy and
lively Sacrament of his body and blood that was given for me, where withal
thus in thy Kirk I am nurished, refreshed, sanctified, strengthened and quickened
in my inward man, and made pertaker of ane heavenly and divine nature: again,
I thank thee for thy unmeasurable love, wherewith thou hes so loved me,
miserable and catiue wretch in thy only weil beloved son Jesus Christ, in
whom I have this reconcilation, with thee my God and Father, this redemption,
forgiveness of all my sins, righteousness, adoption, sanctification, and
finally assured life, and heritable infeftment of the kingdom of glory. O
pity unspeakable! O wonderful love, to save thy unworthy seruand, thou hes
given thy dear son* God was made man, that I of the wretched seed of man,
might be plucked out of the snare of the devil, how dearly hes thou Lord
Jesus my sweet Savior loved me, wha thought it not enough to humble thy self
from the most heigh and glorious majesty of the Godhead, to take on my slavish
nature, unless that for me also, and for my salvation, thou had shed thy
precious blood, and suffered the most shameful death of the cross. O rare
love! O tender kindness! Wha had hard the like at any time, wha rightly
considering, will not be amazed at sik bowels of mercy. O strange judgment! O
unspeakable disposition of the mystery of God. The sinner offended, the just
is punished: the guilty transgressed, the innocent is struken. The wicked
sinned; the Godly is damned: that whilk the evil deserves, the good suffers,
the seruand dois amiss, the master makes the mends, man commits the sin, and
God bears the punishment. Ah, O son of God, how hes thou abased thy self,
how hes thou burned in affection? how far is thy mercies stretched out? how
great is thy kindness? how large is thy love? for I did wickedly, and thou was
punished: I sinned and thou was afflicted: I offended and thou was tormented: I
lifted up my self proudly, and of a vile worm made a God of my self, but thou
was humbled, and of the everlasting God made thy self a worm: I was
disobedient, but thou obediently bare the punishment of my disobedience: I
served the belly, but thou endured hunger: the forbide^ tree, allured me to
unlawful concupiscence; but perfect charity led thee to the cross: I tasted of
pleasure, but thou suffered torments: I felt the sweetness of sin, bot thou
tasted the bitter gall. Lo, O King of glory, this is my ungodliness and thy
mercy manifest, this mine unrighteousness and thy innocence is evident. And
now O my King and my God, what sall I rander unto thee for all thy benefits
toward me? for man's heart cannot conceive that whilk may worthily recompense
these thy sa ample graces. Can the wit of man find out any thing answerable
to Gods love and mercy? Na: It is not for a creature to enterprise to
recompense and meet God his creator. Notwithstanding sweet Savior in this sa
wonderful dispensation, sumthing any frailty by the force of thy spirit is
able to do: namely, gif by thy visitation the mind being pricked, it crucify
the flesh with the affections and lusts thereof: whilk thou having wrought, I
begin then as it were to suffer with thee, because thou died with meikle pain
for me: and sa throw the conquest of the inner man, I sal be armed, thou being
captain, and thy spirit furnishing strength unto the attaining of the outward
victory: In asmeikle as I fear not having ouer-cum the spiritual battle, to
be subject for thy sake, even to bodily torments, to the sword, to the fire,
to the cross, to prison, banishment, or whatsumeuer else: in whilk respect the
weakness of my condition, gif it like thy gudnes, sall be able according to
the power it hes to answer to the greatness of thee the Creator. And this is
heavenly Physic, O sweet Jesus, this is the preservation of thy love. Now I
beseik thee, by thy wonted mercies, to make that this oil and wine poured in
the wounds of my saul in this haly Sacrament, it may purge all corrupt
contagion of venoumous humors, and may restore me again to my first health
and holy jmage of God, whereto I was created: and having tasted of the sap of
thy sweetness, may make me fra the very heart, to despise the intisments of the
world: abhor the wickedness, lusts and vanities theirof, yea, nor to fear na
adversity theirof for thy names sake, but being always mindful of thy
everlasting life and glory, thus ways by thee my Christ purchased to me, may
boldly contemn the death, and be ready to gif my life again for thy love and
glory. Dear Christ, seeing I have here sealed up this conjunction and union
with thee: make me by thy spirit to abide in the same to the end, and
eternally, and make me daily maire and mair to find thee my Christ by faith
dwelling in my heart; the whilk I may perceive be the undoubted fruits and
marks thereof, in the exercise of all good warkes in sobernes, piety, and
righteousness fra time to time increasing. And seeing I am thus, not only
received within thy household, O my God and father, but also refreshed nurished
and sustained theirin; I may humbly beseik thee for a mair and mair
effectual working of thy Spirit, whereby I may carefully, reuerendly, and
faithfully, do the dewtie of thy child and seruand within the same. And
being thus redeemed from the devil and the servitude of sin, be my great and
strong Savior, to be the free Citiziner, and heir of his kingdom of justice
and life. Grant O Lord, by this renewed force of the quickening spirit of thy
Christ, that niether the pairts, faculties nor powers of my saul, nor the
instruments and members of my body, be any mair employed to serve Satan and
sin, conformed to the facions of this world, but that both saul and body,
withal the powers and members thereof, may be presented and consecrated unto
thee, as a living sacrifice, pure and holy, and being transformed by the
renewing of the inward man, may be always bent, and intend to discern and
obey the will of thee my God, whilk is good, acceptable and perfect: I beseik
thee, Lord my God, let nothing seem sweet to me without thee, and let nothing
that can fall out, seem sour and hard to me, gif I have thee, let nothing
please me, nor warldly thing like me, besid thee: let me not love that whilk
thou dois abhor, and let thy good pleasure be all my desire continually, let it
be a grief to me to rejoice without thee, and make me glad to be afflicted for
thy names sake, let thy name be my joy, and thy rememberance my consolation:
let the law of thy mouth be better to me, then thousands of gold and silver;
and finally, Lord my God, be thou all in all unto me, thy word and holy
worshipping my comfort and pleasure, and thy sweet Christ my only vantage and
gain, both in life and death. To whom with thee, the father, and that holy
spirit my comforter, be glory infinite and eternal. Amen.

Ane short exhortation anent trial.
FOr want of trial and consideration of their awin estaite, the greater
multitude perishes in ignorance, they of knawledge carry with them the greater
condemnation, for not doing the will of him whom they know; and sik as hes
begun to do, relents, leaves off, and falls on sleep, til God waken them by
some cross, least they should fall with the former in utter condemnation. Men in
public charge in Kirk and policy, sleuthis, perverts and misfaris al, and
men in private occupations, runs loose without fear of God, or aequitable
and charitable dealing with their neighbor, and sa the heap of this common
confusion of sin, grows huge out of measure; that it is the wounderfull mercy
and long suffering of God, that stays the consuming fire of his wrath, from
finding out sik matter, and burning there upon, to the bottom of hell. My
counsel and warning is therefore to all in the love of Christ, that they cast
aside the business and cares of this world, wherewith they are haillelie
occupied, to the wrak and loss of their saules, and esteeming the chief earand
and turn, whilk they have to do in this world to be, how, that after a
miserable, short, and vain life, they may live happily hereafter for ever:
That in this consideration, I say* they take large time, and great pains in
this exercise of trial and examination of the estaite wherein they stand
before God: sa that they neither sleep nor eat ane day or night, before they
have spente some piece of time, fectfullie and fruitfully, in the wark of
trial; that finding out their wants, danger and misery, they may be moved
earnestly to seik and embrace the furniture and remedy, whilk God of his
superaboundant grace, vouchsafes daily to offer by the preaching of his word,
and profitable writings of his godly and learned servants. And that this be
done by speedy redeeming time without farther delay: for it is now high time,
and fuire days, our day of the Gospel is past noone, and the Sun thereof
tendes toward going down: Yet then to day if ye will hear his voice, hardin
not your hearts, neither sleipe in ignorance, infidelity, and sin, least
being debarred, ye perish with the multitude of the foolish, ignorant,
faithless and rebellious. For this purpose then, I exhort and earnestly beseik
all and every ane, (specially of you dear flock) after your very names, to
wey and considder the Scriptures following, whilk now and then ye hear opened
up and entreated for this effect; and that with grace and sanctification of
your saules, the quhilk only God is able to give, by the working of his
spirit, and hes promised to sik as will seik for the samin: Ask therefore the
samin earnestly, and seik him carefully, that ye may receive and find, and
by all means, quicken and steir up the measure of that gift whilk ye sall get
of your bountiful God. Now seeing many things appeir that is not, and Christ
himself as man was deceived with the Fig Tree, weill busked with leaves, and
fruitful-like a far-off, but found barren and fruitles when it was ryped
nearely, and therefore accursed. We are blind in our awin faults, we pass
over lightly, we easelie forgive them, and flatter our selves therein, as
though we were good enough, yea, and better nor our neighbors. Therefore see
that this trial be taken not cauldlie, negligently, flouthfullie, but gravely,
carefully, and diligently, not as before men, but before God, wha sees the
secreet of thy heart: not in matters knawin to men only, but to thy awin heart
and conscience, yea to God wha is greater nor thy heart and conscience; neither
mon this be done generally, but particularly, ryping out all the hirnes and
plyes of thy heart, and calling narrowly thy memory to a count of all
thoughts, words and deeds; and finally, not suddenly as a thing fectles, and
of small importance, that may be easelie past over, or used for a fashion of
religion or halinesse; but gravely, with lang time and weighty attention, as
the greatest matter thou hes to do in the world, for the honor of thy God, and
thine awin salvation eternal.

Now thought but doubt, if thou try thy self aright, thou sall see ane ouglie
sight, whilk may terrify thy conscience exceedingly, yet despair not, but
assure thee there is infinite store of mercy and grace in God, offered in the
Lord Jesus Christ, to all that humbly acknowledge their misery, hungers and
thirstes for his grace, and embraces the faithful promises thereof, be a
lively faith.

That Christians ought to try themselves always, and namely, before they come
to the Table of the Lord: For their reasons easy to be gathered of the Texts
following.
1 Sa God commandes, therefore if they be his children and servants they mon
obey. 2 They sall have great and everlasting profit and honor in sa doing. 3
They sall incur great and everlasting skaith and shame in omitting and not
doing:
Textes of Scripture.
TRy your selves, 2 Cor. 13. 5
if ye be in the faith, prove your selves: do ye not acknowledge your selves
that Christ Jesus is in you, and if not, that year reprobates.

If any man think himself to be some thing, Gal. 6.
when he is nathing, his awin heart deceaues him, let ilk man therefore try
himself.

Be commoo^ed and sin not, Psalm. 4.
examine your hearts in your bed and leave of to do evil.

Wash your selves, Esaias* (...)
purge your selves, cast away the wickedness of your actions from before my
face, leave off to do evil, learn to do good, seek right, come and let us
reason togidder. If your sins were as Scarlet, they sall be white as snaw: If
ye apply and hear, ye sall enjoy the good things of the land: but if ye refuse
and rebel, ye salbe consumed by the sword, for the mouth of the Lord hes
spoken it.

Thou hes heard me reckon my ways, Psalm. 119.
teach me thy statutes.

I take count of my ways, that I may bring again my feet to thy testimonies.

Blessed is that man, Psalm. 1.
that walks not in the counsel of the wicked, and insists not in the way of
sinners* and sittes not in the seat of scorners, if sa be his delight be in
the law of the Lord, and in that law meditates day and night.

For he sal be as the tree planted by the rivers of water, whilk brings forth
fruct in the awin time, whase leaf fades not and whatsoever he dois sall
prosper.

Bot the wicked sal not be sa, bot as the chafe whilk the wind drives,
therefore the wicked sall not stand in that Judgment, nor the sinners in the
company of the just, for the Lord acknawledges the way of the just, bot the way
of the wicked sall perish.

The lute, Esaias. 5
the harp, the timbrell, and shalme, and good wine abounds in your bankets:
bot the warks of God, you respect not, nor yet have ye consideration of his
doings. Therefore hes hell enlarged her self, and opened her mouth without al
measure, and the stout, high, and glorious of the people sal descend thereinto.

The heart is a deceatful and deadly thing above all, Ier. 17.
wha can know it, I JEHOVAH the searcher of the heart and reins, that I may
give to every ane according to their ways, according to the fruit of their
actiones.

My little children, 1. Ioh. 3.
let us not love in word, neither in tongue only, but indeed and in truth,
for thereby we know, that we are of the truth, and sall assure our hearts
before him, for if our hearts condemn us, God is greater then our hearts,
and knawes all things.

Beloved, if our hearts condemn us not, then have we baldnes toward God, and
whatsoever we ask we receive of him, because we keep his commandment, and
do the things quhilk are pleasand in his sight.

This is then his commandment, that ye believe in the name of his son Jesus
Christ, and love ane another, as he gave commandment, for he that keeps his
commandments dwellis in him, and he in him, hereby knavv we that he abides
in us, even be that spirit whilk he hes given us.

Dearly beloved, believe not every spirit, bot try the spirits if they be of
God.

Above all things that thou takes heed to keep thy heart, for thereout
springs the actiones of life, Prove. 4.
remove from thee the peruersitie of the mouth, and set far from thee
thrawardnes of the lips.

Let thy eyes luke right before thee, and thy eye-liddes behauld things that
are right before thee, wey the paths of thy feet that all thy ways may be
straight.

Decline not to the right hand, nor to the left, set away thy feet from evil.

Let us try and ripe out our ways, Lament. 3.
and turn unto the Lord, let us lift up our hearts with our hands, unto the
strong God of heaven, and say, we have made a defection and rebelled, therefore
thou spares not.

When the Pharisees saw the Disciples eat with unwashed hands. Mark. 7.
etc.

Christ calling togidder the haill multitude: Said, hear me all and
understand, there is nathing without a man, that entering within him can pollute
him, bot the things that comes out of him, thy are the things that pollute him.
If any hes ears to hear, let him hear.

Then the disciples asked him the parable; and he said, understand ye not? The
things that outwardly comes into man, cannot pollute him, for it enters not in
his heart, but in his womb, and goes to the closet, purging all meats: bot he
said, that whilk comes out of man defiles him, for from within, out of the
heart of man, comes out evil thoughts, adulteries, harlatries, slaughter,
thifts, covetousness, wickedness, deceitfulnes, uncleanness, a wicked eye, pride,
backbiting, foolishnes, all these evil things comes from within, and defiles
the man.

Verily, verily, I say unto you (says Christ) of every idle word that comes
out of man's mouth, Math. 12.
they sall rander a count thereof, at the day of judgment.

We mon all appear before the tribunal of Christ, that every ane may receive
in his body, 2. Cor. 5.
according to that he hes done whidder evil or good.

Behauld, Reul. 3.
I stand at the door, if any hear my voice and open, I will come into him, and
sup with him, and he with me.

Behauld, I come shortly, hauld that whilk thou hes, that nane take thy crown
fra thee.

We mon fight, we mon big, Luck. 14, we mon give a count of our talent, we mon
have our lamps light to meet the bridgroome. Mat. 25. and therefore prepare,
try, and take heed to your selves, with watching sobriety, and cairfull
consideration: finally for special trial and searching out of thy sins, use
their texts quoted. Romans 12. and 3. Ephe. 4. and 5. Col, 5. 3. 2. Pet. 2

Before the Communion.
I Wald not ye should be ignorant brethren, 1. Cor. 10.
that all our fathers were under that cloud, and all past throw the sea, and
all were Baptized in Moses, with the cloud and sea, and al eat the same
spiritual fude, and al drank the same spiritual drink, for they drank of the
spiritual rock that followed, and the rock was Christ, but God approved not
many of them: for they were casten down in the desert. Now their were exampls
unto us, that we should not covet evil things as they coueted, be not therefore
Idolaters as some of them, nether let us commit fornication as some of them
did, and fell in a day three and twenty thousand, neither tempt Christ as some
tempted and perished be serpents. Neither murmr ye, as some of them murmured
and perished be the destroyer, al these things came on them for example, and
are written for our admonition, on whom the ends of the world are fallen;
therefore let him that thinks he stands, bewar he fall not.

Let every ane prove himself, and sa eat of that bread, and drink of that
cup. For who so eats and drinks unworthily, eats and drinks damnation to
themselves, for not discerning the Lords body.

Therefore is there many weak amang you and diseased, 1. Cor. 11.
and many sleep, for if we should judge our selves, we should not be punished,
but when we are punished, we are chastised be the Lord that we be not condemned
with the world.

Follow the form of trial in particular, of misery and mercy, be their
several points and columns.
Unless that thou try out, and find thy misery,
Thou can never seek for nor esteem of Gods mercy.
1 COnsider the happy and halie estate, wherein Adam was first made and his
filthy defection and fall, and understand, that God may justly lay to thy
charge his sin, and all the sins of thy forefathers, betwixt thee and him:
because thou art a pairt of their substance, and be them all begotten in sin,
sa that their sin is thy natural heritage.

2 Examine thy original corruption in thy mind, conscience, memory, will,
and in all thy affectiones, as in gladness, sadness, pity, confidence, hope,
despair, fear, cair, shame, desire, leathing, love, hatred, disestiming,
esteeming, anger, contentment, miscontentment, zeal, cauldnesse. etc.

3 Try out thy actual sins, in thought, word, and deed, and to that effect,
go through the commands with right understanding, and diligent examination of
thy life thereby, in the particular circumstances of time place, persons, and
manner of doing in all thy actions and proceedings: namely, gif flowing from
faith, they have been directed be lawful means unto the right end.

4 Examine all thy senses, whereby sin is sa drunken in, as the beast drinks
water be the mouth; thy sight, hearing, smelling, taisting, tuitching, how thou
hes used them, and in like manner, all the members of thy body inward and
outward, whilk are the weapons and instruments of committing of sin.

5 Examine thy life throughout all the ages thou hes past, bairn-head,
youth-head, man-head, and aulde age, how thy God hes dealt with thee therein, and
how thou hes recompensed him again.

6 Try thy estate, occupation, calling, and trade of life, if thou hes walked
in the fear of God, faithfully and rightly therein. And here is the trial of
Magistrates, Pastors, Elders, Fathers, Mothers, Masters, husbands, wives,
people, flock, children, servantes, occupations, trades and crafts: be land,
be Sea, in City and country.

7 And last, wey the foulnes of the guiltiness of sin, how odious and
detestable it is before God, and what punishments in his justice he hes laid
thereon, from the beginning of the world, and weight of wrath he hes to lay
thereon, eternally in the hell; and questionles, thou will see sik an ouglie
and terrible sight of thy misery, that will sa affray and move thee, that thou
will never be blythe, til thou have gotten a grippe of the remedy thereof in
the mercy of God.

Miserable man that I am, wha sall deliver me from the body of this death.

1 COnsider the infinite gudnesse, love, grace, and mercy of God, wha pitying
our misery, provided a remeid theirfoir in the precious blood of his awin
son, the Lord Jesus Christ, in whom he elected his awin, before the
foundation of the world.

2 Try and considder, if thou have the right knawledge and possession of Christ
in thy heart, be faith in his natures, and their personal union, in his offices,
prophecy, Priest-head, and Kingdom.

3 Try if thou hes found those benefits of Christ, whilk be the perfect
fulfilling of the office of mediator, he hes purchased to his awin, to wit,
redemption, reconciliation, justification, adoption, sanctification,
mortification, newness of life, intercession; and in sum, deliverance from al
evil, and perfyte felicity.

4 Considder and examine thy self if thou hes the knawledge, faith, feeling,
and enjoying of the haly ghaist, wha calls the chosen effectually, applies
Christ unto them, and makes them to apprehend and receive him, and all his
blessings be a true faith.

5 Then try thy faith, if thou be assured that God sent his Christ in the world
to save thee, and unlade thee of the haill burden of thy misery, and ladin
thee with the rich store of his blessings and perfect happiness.

6 Try thy repentance the chief effect of faith, if thou have a true sorrow
for thy sins committed, that hes made the halie Lamb of God to suffer sa
shamefullie and cruelly for them, and ane earnest purpose of amendment and
newnes of life in time to come.

7 And finally, because there is great hypocrisy in flesh, and counterfetting
of calling, faith, and repentance, be the craft of Satan, as also terrible
assailzeing of the conscience, by his fyrie tentationes. Therefore, there is
great need here, of a diligent and accurat trial, to find out the true
marks of thy election: and sa of salvation. First, be the testimony of the
spirit: Secondly, by the motiones and working thereof. Then try weill, if at any
time thou hes found the halie spirit, to speak, as it were within thee, and
testify to thy spirit, that thou art the child of God. If thou hes found in
thy heart the love of God and Christ, and of the things that he loves, and the
hatred of the Devil and his warkes. If thou hes found a heart to pray and
thank God, to meditate and delight in him and his word, to love his servands
and children, and delight in their company. And finally, if thou finds hope
with patience, and a continual battle against sin, and the intysements of
the world: then may thou be certain, that God hes given thee to Christ, na
power salbe able to take thee from him, or separate thee from his love, or stay
him from giving thee life everlasting. And here is the joy and peace of
conscience, that continual feast.

I thank God through Jesus Christ our Lord. Romans 7.

The form of trial and examination, taken of all sik as ar admitted to the
Table of the Lord.
1 PART.
What should thou do before thou come to the

Table of the Lord?

Examine and try my self.

What is the danger if thou do not?

Condemnation.

Whereanent should thou try thy self?

Anent my natural misery, and remeid thereo by God his grace.

Where in stands thy misery?

In my sins, and the reward thereof.

How came sin in the world, seeing God made all very good?

God maid the Devils angels of light, and ADAM and

FVAH our first parents good and halie: but the Devils fell fra God and
deceived our parents, and made them and all that are come of them wicked sinners.

How know thou sin?

By the law and commandments of God, whilk I break daily.

How sa? I neither do my duty to God not my neighbor as I aught.

What is the reward of sin?

All the plagues and punishments of God* and the first and second death, whilk
is everlasting condemnation with the Devils in the fire of hell.

2 PART
Good Lord save us! that is a horrible thing, and wha can remeid this misery?

Only God, wha made me and all, was able to remeid and mend my misery.

What is God?

A Spirit, eternal, infinite in wisdom, power, gudnesse, mercy, and
justice: In nature ane, and persons three; the Father, Son, and halie Ghaist.

What hes God the Father done for remeid of thy misery?

He hes send his awin only begotten Son in the world to die for my
deliverance.

What hes the Son Jesus Christ done for thee?

He hes taken my nature and sin, with the reward thereof upon him, and shed
his precious blood unto the dead, to save me therefra.

What does the halie Ghaist for that effect?

He sanctifies me, and joins me with Christ, and makes me able to receive him
and his merits, offered to me be my gracious heavenly father.

And how?

By working true faith and earnest repentance in my heart.

What is thy faith?

My sure belief, that God both may and will save me in the blood of Jesus
Christ, because he is almighty, and hes promised sa to do.

Tell me the promise whereon thou leanes assuredly?

Whasoeuer (says God) will believe in the death of my Son Jesus, sall not
perish, but get eternal life.

What is thy repentance?

The effect of this faith* John. 3. 6.
working a sorrow for my sins bypast, and purpose to amend in time to come.

How hes God then remeided thy misery?

He hes forgiven all my sins, and freed me fra the reward thereof, and made
me righteous, halie, and happy, to live for ever, and that of his free grace
allanerly, be the merits of Jesus Christ, and working of the haly ghaist.

And what craves God of thee again for sa great a benefit?

Only thankfulness, to give him his awin praise, in pressing to love and
obey him above all, whilk is also his free gift and wark of his spirit in me,
that all praise may be to him only.

3 PART.
BY what instruments and means, warkes the spirit of God, Faith, Repentance,
and Thankfulness in thy heart?

By the word and sacraments.

Where is the word of God to be found?

In the Bible, containing the auld and new testament, the law and Gospel.

But it may be thou cannot read, nor hes learned at school?

I have it of Gods mercy preached to me, and the whole substance thereof,
shortly comprehended in the Commandes, Belief, and Lords prayer.

How many Commands is there?

Ten, The commands.
containing the sum of the haill law of God, written by his ^win finger, in two
Tables of stone.

What hes the first Table?

Our duty to God in four Commands.

What is commanded in the first?

To know God, and cleave to him, with faith, fear, and love.

What in the second?

To worship and serve him, by the means he hes appointed; namely, his styles,
word, sacraments, warkes, prayer, and aith.

What in the third?

To use these means rightly, and halelie be preparation going before, right
disposition in the time, and expressing of fruit, after always in spirit and
verity.

What in the fourth?

To employ the seventh day heallelie, in the halie, right, and earnest use of
the foresaid means, and doing of the warkes of mercy and charity for Gods
cause.

What hes the second Table?

Our duty to all men in sex commands.

What is then commanded in the first?

The duties of them that are above and under, for good ordour; that brings forth
a halie and happy estate in all societies.

Wha ar above?

Fathers, Mothers, Magistrate, Pastor, Elder, Master, Husband and aged.

What is their duty?

To have a fatherly care of the inferiors, to rule, teach, sustain,
command, and counsel them in God. Wha ar under?

Children, subjectes, people, servants, wives, and younger in age.

What is their duty?

To love, reverence, obey, maintain their superiors, as fathers of bodies,
saul, and gudes.

What in the sext?

To keip my life and my neighbors, and not hurt the same.

What is the seventh?

To keip my person, and my neighbor clean and chaste, in, and out of marriage.

What is the eight?

To win and spend lawfully, the things pertaining to this life.

What is the ninth?

To keip my neighbors fame, and mine, by thinking, speaking, and hearing truth.

What is the tenth.

To keip the heart from concupiscence, the mother of all sin.

What is the use of the law of God?

It hes two chief and necessary uses. First, to show me my sin and misery,
and sa to lead me to Christ. Secondly, To show me how to be thankful, by
preassing to keip his commandments, and make my faith fruitful in love and
obedience.

Yet thou sins in all thy warke?

Over true, but striving to mende, and preassing to the best, God will accept
thereof, for Christ's sake.

What contaynes thy Belief? The Beleete.


The sum of the Gospel.

In how many parts?

Two chief. First concerning God the Father, Son, and halie Ghaist. Next
concerning the Kirk, and benefits thereof.

What believes thou concerning God the Father?

That he is the almighty, maker, vphalder, and rewler of all, for his glory
and my weill in special: Father of Jesus Christ, and in him of me, and all the
faithful.

What concerning God the Son?

That he is very God and man, Prophet, Priest, and King, conceived, borne,
suffered, to perfect the office of the true and only Mediator and Savior,
for all the elect and faithful, and for me in special.

What further?

As he came lawlie, first to work the warke of redemption, sa sal he come at
last in glory, to judge both all that dyed before, and them that sall then be
found alive.

What a day sall that be?

The best for the godly, and worst for the wicked that ever they saw.

What believe ye concerning the halie Ghaist?

That he is God eternal, alike with the Father, and Son in substance, and in
ordour the third person proceeding from the Father and the Son, for
government of all, and namely, for sanctifying of the saules of the faithful
and mine in special.

What conteines the second part of the Belief?

My faith anent the Kirk, and the benefits whilk God bestows thereupon.

What believes thou concerning the Kirk?

That God hes chosen a number out of the haill multitude of men to be his in
Christ, of the whilk I am ane.

What is the communion of Saints?

The unity and fellowship, that the children of God hes in him, and every ane
with another in Jesus Christ.

What are the rest of the benefits?

Sin, with the reward thereof, and all miseries removed and taken away; and
the bodies whilk be death, mon be anes destroyed, sall be raised up again at
the latter day, and joined with the saul, to live in perfect happiness for
ever*

Now tell me how thou art made righteous, and reconciled to God?

By faith only, whereby Christ dwelles in my heart.

And how may it be kend that thou possesses Christ by faith?

By the necessary effects thereof, love, and obedience of Gods commandes, as I
have said, and namely, the right exercise of Prayer.

Whom to pray ye? The prayer.


To God the Father, Son, and halie Ghaist, as they are all ane God.

What warrant have ye, that your prayer sall be accepted and hard?

Because God hes commanded me to pray, and promised to hear me for Christ's
sake.

How many parts is in the prayer?

Three, the preface, petitions, and conclusion.

What teaches the preface?

That we ought not to go rashly to prayer, but prepared with faith and charity.

How with faith?

Believing God our almighty Father, wha both may, and will grant our
requests.

How with charity?

How with charity?

Praying for our neighbors as our selves.

How many petitions is there?

Sex, three craving all things perteining to the glory of God, conform to the
first Table of the Law, and three, craving all things good and neidfull for
man, conform to the second.

Our petitiones then mon be according to his commandes?

Yes verily, for his will mon rule us and be done, and not our awin.

What teaches the conclusion?

To join thanksgiving ever with prayer.

What is true thanksgiving?

Ane acknawledging that God sends all, and ane earnest desire and care, that
all may be weill used to his honor and glory.

What means the word Amen.

It is ane note of assurance, that God will grant our petitiones, sa far as he
thinks good, for his honor, and our weill.

Wha mooues the heart to pray and praise God?

The halie Ghaist, wha of his grace, mote move me rightly mair and mair.

4 PART.
Now to the Sacraments: What are the Sacraments?

Outward signs and seals, of the inward grace of God, and the covenant
thereof, by the whilk being rightly used, Christ and all his benefits, are
given and received for life and salvation.

Wherein stands the right use of them?

In this, namely, that as we bring the natural instruments of the body to
receive the singes; sa we bring the spiritual instrument, to wit, true faith
in our hearts, to receive the things signified.

How many Sacraments is there?

Two: Baptism and the Lords Supper.

What is Baptism?

It is the Sacrament of our first entry within the Kirk of God, wherein by the
outward washing of water, is sealed up the washing away of our sins, be the
precious blood of Jesus.

What is the supper?

It is the Sacrament of our perpetual nurishment with in the Kirk, wherein by
bread and wine sa used as is prescribed, is sealed up our spiritual nurishment
and life in Jesus Christ.

And how is this done in the ane and the other?

Be true faith and effectual working of the haly Spirit.

How then tryes thou and prepares thy self anent their things?

I try if I understand them aright, and if I have practice, and done them in
any measure, be faith and repentance; and finding my ignorance, weakness of
faith, and wrang done to God and my neighbor, I am heartily sorry therefore,
and seeks to be reconciled to God and my neighbor, and sa prepares my self
with a true heart, and clean conscience, to come to that table.

How art thou reconciled to God?

Be repenting my sins, and believing in Jesus Christ as said is, and taking
ernest purpose of amendment of life, and grouth in faith and halines.

How art thou reconciled to thy neighbor?

Be making a mends for the wrang done, if it lie in my power, at least, be
confessing my fault, and craving him forgiveness: as als forgiving with my
heart, all wrang done to me, as I wald God should forgive me.

And finally, when thou perceaues in the action of the supper, how God hes sa
loved thee, that he hes given his awin only begotten son, to suffer the may
shameful death for thy sake, how should thou be moved?

Even to love him again with all my heart, and my nighbour for his sake, and
to bend all the powers of my saul and body, to his honor, service and
obedience.

FINIS
The saules delight.
OF God I am, in God is my delight,
On God I stay, naught else can me content,
In God I get relief and rest perfect,
But God my days in grief and gall are spent,
For God I sore abone the firmament.
With God I feed on sweet and secret grace,
Fra God I get, great gain, great glo^r, great rent,
O God great Iah, my joy is in thy face.
Fra God, fra hame, enclosed for a space,
At Gods command, in clay I clogged go.
But God hes height fra hand and heavenly place,
God will perform, he heastes, he hears my woe.
O clay! away, my God thy bands will bruise,
My God, abode with thee but change I choose.
M. W. S.


