THE SIN UNTO DEATH.

OR AN AMPLE DISCOVERY OF THAT FEAREFVLL SIN, The Sin against the holy
Ghost, Together with the signs, degrees and preservatiues thereof.

IN A SERMON PREACHED at Paul's Cross. August 26. 1621.

BY THO: BEDFORD, Mr of Arts in Queens College in CAMBRIDGE.

LONDON, Printed by John Dawson for WILLIAM SHEFFARD, and are to be sold at the
sign of the Star under St Peters-Church in Corne-hill, and in Pope's Head
Alley. 1621.

COLLEGII REGINALIS (IN ALMA CANTABRIGIENSI ACCAdemia) Praesidi dignissimo,
IOANNI DAVENANTIO, Sarisburiensi Episcopo electo. Singulisque illius Caenobij
Socijs and Magistris, Salutem in Domino sempiternam.
VEreor prosecto (viri vere literaii mihique semper honora^di) necui vestrum
factum hoc and ausum meum insolentius paulo quam par est videatur. Nec immerito
mihi vereri videor, utpole qui, tum dignitatis vestrae, tunc tenuitatis meae
satis conscius, vos omnes, vestrumque sodalitium, tam novo, tamque inconsueto
more, ausim salutare. Verum fortasse cum rations meas notas fecero, hoc saltem
impetraturum me vehementer confido, vt, si non omnes approbare, non tamen omnes
condemnare velitis. Tuque prae caeteris, Reverende Praeses, cujus ex schola,
Theologi, tanquam ex equ^ Trajano Principes, innumeri prodierunt: Tu inquam,
audaciam hanc meam, errorem, and (vt durissime dicam) temeritatem, (scelus enim
nemo vocabit, nemo piaculum) non invitus condonabis: Quin etiam (vti spero si
vacat exiguis adesse) partum hunc meum, sieve ab^rtivum magis vocari placeat,
non omnino* indignum luce judicabis. Vos itidem Magistri dignissimi, hanc,
credo, de me m^oque libello senteniiam feretis, me, neque labori, nec studio,
nec industriae, duns Spartam hanc quam suscepi exornare possem, defuisse. Atque
huic libello meo, si, non quod sit omnibus suis numeris perfectus and absolutus
(qui enim ego hoc essicere possem) saltem quod vester est quicquid est,
vobisque dicatus, atque ex ^lumno vestro procreatus, patr^cinari dignabimini*
Vos enim omnes, partus hic meus sibi patronos jimdiu postulavit. Patronos,
inquam, quidni? Siquidem and Virgilij Poemata, and Ciceronis Rhetorica, and
Aristotelis Moralia, and Livij Historia, and Erasmi opera, and vniuscujusque
lucubrationes suos habeant Patronos, suosque Maec^n^tes. Atque in horum numero,
fortasse aliquis reperiri poterit, qui ad Minervam, non ad Iunonem, ad
Mercurium, non ad Martem, ad literatos, non ad pecuniatos provocarit: qui
potius viros doctrina, artibus, scientia praeditos and insignes sibi patronos
^legerit, quam alios, longo patrum, avorum, atavorum stemmate and prosapia
oriundos. Stemmata quid faciunt? Vos mihi vere nobiles, vere spectabiles, vere
honorabibiles, semper est is judicandi: Vobis si forte placeat and arrideat,
tenellitulus iste meus apparatus, quem Ecclesiae consecratum volo, (vt verbis
Poetae vtar,) sublimi feriam sydera vertice; Proculdubio nequicquam morabor
arrisum plausumve caeterorum.

Nec modo Patronos ad sobolem hanc meam suscipiendam vt solent alij, sed and
Patres ad instituendam, vos mihi decrevi deligendos. Quam iniquum enim, quam
superbum, quam impium foret, si, mihi licere vt sub vestro nomine, and tutela
vestra crudas and ra^cidas quasque meditationes meas in lucem protrudere,
postularem? Siquid forsitan erravi, siquid obscurum praetermist, siquid aride
tractavi, siquid (...) intertexui, siquid in argumento, siquid in methodo
haesitavi, Censores agite, legite, perlegite, calamo notate: Hoc tamen, vos bis
terque oratos and exoratos velim, vt illud quodcunque est, tenuitati potius
meae tribuatis quam voluntati. Volui omnia, quae dicenda fuerunt, volui eodem
ordine, quo dicenda, dixisse; and pro virili mea contendisse sat scio, and
testatur conscientia; sed homo cum sim, and humanum sit errare, non possum non
suspicari, aliquem hic itidem errorem irrepsisse. Neque enim Bernardus (quod
aiunt) videt omnia, quin and Homerus ipse bonus quandoque dormitavit.
Quapropter, inquam, censores, agite, and penna vestra mihi loco poenae
grauissimae censebitur. Censores tamen benevolos, vos mihi futuros, saepe
precatos velim. In hoc enim vos, prae caeteris elegi, vtpote sub quorum
praesidio, olim in Collegio illo, mihi nunquam inter preces, obliviscendo,
fueram enutritus. Censores agite, ne scateat erroribus libellus iste; Benevolos
agite, ne voluntati potius servijsse videamini, quam veritati. Nova hic
aliquot, nec tamen nova, sed fortasse non satis ante hac notata inuenietis; and
fieri potest, vt, novit as magis offendat, quam possit placere veritas
opinionis. Sed es^o! Rations potius and argumenta mea, vti perpendatis pet^,
quam vt in tenuitate nostra reprehensionem statuatis. Est enim hominum genus (a
vobis procul absint istiusmodi sordes) quibus nihil est cordi, nisi quod
totidem verbis in Patribus antiquis queat inveniri: Est and aliud contrarium
hisce genus (a quorum consortio long abscedat anima mea) qui nihil, quod
antiquitatem and antiquorum authoritatem sapiat, admittere, nedum admirari
volunt. Inter vtrumque vola, medio tutissimus ibis, vt recte Poeta. Ego nec
Antiquitati sic me astrictum velim, vt nefas crederem novum aliquod (si det
Deus) argumentum excogitare: nec sic aspernor veteres aut vilipende, vt non
multo magis placeat veritas illa, quae patrum authoritate sit comprobata. Atque
hoc mihi in votis fuisse, a capite ad calcem vsque hujus tractatiunculae ^uil:
bet (benevolo saltem animo legenti) satis apparebit.

Quapropter vt tandem Al^^noi sabulam hanc concludam, vobis (viri vere insignes
and reverendi) vestra fretus clementia, hoc opusculum nuncupavi: Partim vt
illos mihi quaeram amicos ad sobolem meam suscipiendam, quos olim habui
tutores, praeceptores, patres ad ingemum excolendum: Partim, vt animi mei erga
vos gratitudinem pro singulari vestra in me bencuolentia (quam silentio
praeterire nefas esset) significarem. Hoc ergo (precor) antiquae vestrae
benevolentiae super addite, vt and libellum hunc tutela vestra dignemini, and
libelli authorem eodem, quo prius, amore and favore complect amini.

Deus opt: max: vestro Caenobio, Praesidi, socijsque singulis ita benedicat,
and studijs vestris sit propitius, vt and amplissimum apud homines vobis
praestet honorem; and apud Christum suum singulis vestrum aeternam post hac
faelicitatem largiatur.

Sic precatur Reverentijs vestris deditissimus, Musarum apud vos quondam
alumnus. T^O: B^DFORD.

The Author to the wellaffected Reader, wishes Grace, mercy, and peace from
God the father, and from the Lord Jesus Christ.
COurteous Reader, before thou enter upon this Discourse, either to read or to
censure, I have to admonish thee of two things. First, for the manner of
writing, thou may easily see it, to be fitted for the Pulpit. And indeed, so
it was, that having diverse years since delivered some few out of this text,
to mine Auditory: I did lately (upon warning given) take it once again in
hand, and alter, change, correct, and enlarge it, till I brought it to this
quantity in which it is* so preparing it for a more noble Audience. Then
finding it be ouerlong to be rehearsed at once, I was constrained again to
Epitomize it. Here therefore have thou (and that is the second thing whereof I
advertise thee) at large the whole body of that Discourse, whose Epitome was
rehearsed in public. So that if any thing, seemed to them that heard me
either obscure, or too slightly passed over in the delivery, here may they
help themselves to understand my meaning. For the matter I shall not need to
tell thee, that it is needful in respect of the times, wherein the words of
our Savior are seen fulfilled, For because iniquity does abound, the love of
many waxes cold. And how many are there daily, who either fall back to
Popery, and Aegyptianpalpable superstition, or else turn open rebels by
Atheism? And well may we think that when the Son of man comes, he will
scarce find faith upon earth. Who is there, therefore, except that
unprofitable servant that hid his Talent in a Napkin, but will be willing to
set to his helping hand, if not to stay all, yet to preserve some from
Apostasy? Hence comes it, that now lately there have been more Sermons and
Tractates published concerning this sin of Apostasy, within these few years,
than were in many ages heretofore. So that now it might seem as superfluous
for an after-commer, to deal in this subject, as to take in hand new Arguments
for Popery: All which have bin so often urged by Schoolmen, alleged by
Catholics, reassumed by Popish Priests, painted over by Jesuits, that a man
might sooner hope for wholesome meat to be made of Cole-worts, twice or thrice
sodden, than to find a new, and not here-to fore answered Argument. So here:
Yet since the gifts of men are diverse (albeit they proceed from the same
spirit) what hinders but that still men may be doing, and do well, since the
end of their Action, is the glory of God?

Concerning this present Tractate, what it has, not to be found in the former,
thou thy self (good Reader) upon trial wilt easily perceive. In reading of
which, if thou be such a one who know me not, It is well, go on and try the
spirits: If such who do know me, yet do me the courtesy, to withdraw thy
self from considering my meane-nesse, and look only upon the cause. Consider
the weight of Reason, which I have alleged. For if thou should either like
the worse of this, in respect of me, or esteem better of another, in respect
of his person, not regarding what force of Argument we do either of us
allege: thou may easily err, as who indeed do pin the truth of God
upon the sleeue of man.

To conclude then, if thou be judicious, read, censure, and correct, I give
thee free liberty For I will not my self, be tied to this that I have
delivered, if I see better reason to evince it, than is brought to confirm it.
But if thou be one, who either do, or justly may suspect thy judgment,
read, but leave censuring to others. Howsoever it be, whosoever thou art,
conceive thus of me, that my desire was to have delivered the Truth, and
nothing but the Truth. So will thou, I hope, commend me and my labors to the
blessing of God in thy prayers: And cause me to rest

Thine in the Lord: the Lords unworthy servant in the Ministry. T. B.

To the devout Readers, which desire to keep Faith and a good Conscience to
the end, Grace, and Peace, and strength, against Temptations by JESUS CHRIST.
MARVEL not (dear Christians and courteous Readers) that so many learned
divines and holy minded men, bestow so much pains, and spend so long time, in
so sad and unpleasant a subject as this is; searching and desirous to define
what the impardonable sin against the holy Ghost should be: For even as the
best and most approved Physicians do more busy themselves in studying those
maladies, which are most incurable, rather then those, for which every emperick
has a medecin in readiness, and cach one amongst them proves himself in
his skill, if he have sound out either some especial Antidote to prevent, or
some singular remedy (if not perfectly to cure, yet) to ease and aswage the
tormenting pains of such desperate disseases as aflict men most, as well with
the fear of imminent death, as with the sense of present dolours: Even so, for
as much as all heed is to be given, and all diligence carefully used, that no
man (if it be possible) dash upon this Rock, nor fall into so devouring a
deep; many students in divinity, enflamed with zeal, care, and love unto
men's salvation, refuse no pains, nor think any labor grievous, by night or
day, if they may be so happy, as to give warning betimes, and so prevent any
man's relapse, or falling away: And for as much as many true hearted Christians,
upon a tenderness of Conscience, through Satan's illusions, are often troubled
with a fear of having offended in this kind: And others again, in a
continual security, forsaking their first love, revolt and fall off, by
little and little, from the practice of sincere Piety, taking the high way to
Epicurisme, and denial of their profession, and so come near and into great
danger of final relapse at lest, if not of an hatred also, and despite of
that holy truth which they once professed: therefore good men willing to
comfort the one, with solid evidence of Gods word, and to reclaim and save the
other from the peril of so irrecouerable a fall, do labor in this sad
subject, that by an exact deciphering of that mortal sin, both might find
fit instruction, whilst the one may see how far they are from it, and the
other perceive how daungerously they hasten toward it.

Now as men are diversely affected, some with fear, and some with presumption
(as I have showed) so likewise we may find very great, (yea too much) variety
of opinion amongst writers concerning this sin, some supposing it to be so
rarely and seldom admitted, as scarce three examples or four can be produced
since the beginning of the World, others make it so frequent and usual, as
almost all that finally fall from their Faith and holy profession, are
supposed, by them, to sin in this kind.

Again, some are of opinion, that only God can discern, who they be, that
sink and are drowned in this gulf; as if he had not revealed any certainty
concerning this matter, and thereupon shun and reject all meditation upon
this point, and Argument, as vain and uncertain. I am not worthy neither will
I take upon me to censure great and learned men, but let it be seriously
considered, how much and how often mention is made in Gods word, of this
fearful fall and direful plight, that men are brought into thereby, and we
may easily guess that the Lord would not have us utterly ignorant of it: And
let us weigh and observe the fruit, and great benefit which Gods people, by a
sober and wise meditation hereof may reap, and it may be judged, that their
labor is commendable, who warily and with judgment, write and preach to that
purpose For, as Mariners cannot easily shun the gulf nor rock, except they
know (or at lest can guess) whereabouts the danger is; No more is it likely
that a Christian professor should live absolutely without the peril or fear
of this, so fearful a sin, in some probable sort, unless he be warned
thereof by such as do study the point of purpose.

It is more then manifest, that the danger of such a relapse is very great, and
that our vigilance and care of avoiding it ought to be no less, and lastly
considering the drowsy security of this age, the present decay of zeal, the
utter neglect of the means to quicken it, that no argument is of more
necessary and profitable use to be preached or published, then this at this
time, wherein many hanging, as it were, in suspense and expectation, are ready,
whatsoever shall ensue, with Demas to embrace the present world, and so
politickly, in the mean while, do carry themselves, that which way soever
they shall hereafter think good to incline, yet they shall not be deemed
Apostataes: But let them for all that (as it were upon this public warning)
examine themselves, whether their hearts and Consciences be not plainly and
evidently euinced of the truth of the Gospel, against Atheism, Papisme,
Turcisme, Iudaisme, or whatsoever Gentilisme, or other sect, and if so, then
consider, whether the revolt from the known truth, will not prove as heinous
a fault in Gods sight, for all their covert carriage, as heavy a clogge to
their Consciences, as deep a downfall from Grace, and as wilful a loss of
the taste of the power of the world to come, as if they had professed it in the
forwardest manner, or rather let them fear lest, whilst they (in worldly
wisdom) using cautelous circumspection to provide for a change, do not
palpably bewray, that they receive not the love of the truth, together with the
knowledge thereof, and so declare plainly, that they are of the number of
those, upon whom God, in his just judgment, will send strong delusion to
believe lies. The Scribes and Pharisees never undertook the profession of
Christ, as of the promised Messiah; yet because they were evidently convinced
by his word and works, that he it was, that was to come, Christ spares not to
call their wilful reluctation and opposition against him, blasphemy against
the Spirit; And I could wish, that such wary walkers in neutralitie, would
vouchsafe to peruse this short treatise, which tends to admonish them at
least, that they outstand not the time of Grace, but rather fear, least being
forsaken, and lest in a Reprobate sense (when they would) they shall not be
able to embrace and apply to themselves, what they once knew and had learned
and so fall to despite both God and good men. This let all men know and take
notice of that no time nor age since the days of the Apostles, has been more
likely to bring forth plenty of peccants in this kind, then this we live in.
First, knowledge did never so abound, not only amongst the learned, but even
amongst the lay-vulgar, by the clear light and plentiful preaching of the
Gospel* Secondly, this knowledge has begotten an universal profession and
form of outward Godliness, whereby men give consent to the Truth, preached and
manifested unto them. Thirdly, this general consent has bred a forwardness
in many, showing in probability their hearts affected with that which they
profess, and to have attained a taste of the heavenly gift, as the Apostle
speaks: From such a degree and measure of knowledge and Grace, if any should
fall as (if greater heed be not taken) it may be feared some will, especially,
if that should come to pass, which those Politicians before spoken of do
prepare for, and want of zeal in others does deserve. How deep should they
sink into this Dungeon, and how near might we judge them unto this sin?
Cast your eyes back a little, and look unto the Histories of former times, and
for want of other books concerning more ancient ages of the primitive Church,
take notice only of the defection after King Edwards days: How many seeming
forward professors, during the liberty of the Gospel (in a moment almost) not
only forsook their sincerity, but also became violent persecutors of that
themselves professed, whose desperate ends in that their wilful Apostasy,
without any remorse at all pronouncing damnation upon themselves, with horrible
blasphemies, and he^lish despite against God, declare manifestly, that their
fall was scarefull, and their sin vnpa^donable. Now, although we have none
other cause (blessed be God) given to us, to fear or suspect any such
defection or change, but only our own sins, deserving such a plague, yet are
not their labors vain and to no purpose, which give warning before, that men
look to their standing, and take heed that they fall not. Satan is subtle,
and men's hearts are deceiptfull out of measure, and some without any such cause
given, may be taken with a sudden spiritual Apoplexy, and fall headlong at
once, not only into the love and practice of sensuality, but also into the
hatred of that grace of God, which teaches them to deny all ungodliness, and
worldly lusts, and to live Godly, righteously and soberly in this present world.

And some others, though they fall not at once, like a man that flingeth
himself down headlong from the top of a Rock or steeple, may be so careless
of their estate, as by insensible back sliding, through the deceiptfulnesse of
sin, they may depart away from the living God, and being once gone, fall into
Saul his case the son of Cis, who quite berest of the spirit of Grace, had an
evil spirit sent to terment him. Or become like the Apothecaries Gl^sse or
Gally*pet, which being emptied by now and then a little, of some precious or
special Cordial is sitted to receive venom or poison: And if any do stand
and be preserved out of such temptations; these and such like ende^uours that
exhort, admonish, and rebuke before hand, may truly be said to be the
Antidotes, and blessed means of prevention, and they that desire to stand and
not to fall, ought to use them reverently, and with thanks to God, who, of his
infinite mercies, uses men's ministeries unto the preservation of men's souls.

And to the end that all true holy-minded Christians may better keep watch and
ward against Satan's sleights and subtleties, this one secret is worthy
observing: To take great heed continually by all means, to nourish and
increase the peace of Conscience, and joy in the holy Ghost. For as these are
the last and principal graces men attain unto by the preaching of the
Gospel, so are they the first, which such as fall away do commonly loose,
whereupon the blessed Apostle, with very great reason encouraging the
Philippians against imminent troubles assures them, that the peace of God
which passes all understanding (...) shall be a guard or Garrison to their
hearts, and to their minds, implying, that peace with God, and joy in the holy
Ghost, are present rewards of holiness, effects of true Faith and Repentance,
earnest pennies of the reward to come, and therefore principal encouragements
unto Constancy and Perseverance in all well d^eing, wherefore in a word, this
is it I would say, that our adversary the Devil will especially labor, and
use his whole cunning, to bereave men either, of these, very Graces themselves,
or of the sense of them, which is easily done by drawing them into wilful
sins, which defile the Conscience, and disturb the peace thereof. Upon the
loss of the reward (as laborers and soldiers do more negligently apply
themselves when they are doubtful of their pay* so) men grow less careful of
holy duties, and do not so much delight in them; why? But even because, by the
defiling of their Consciences, they do not find their wonted comfort in such
exercises: So the means of renewing their Repentance dis-vsed, or less
frequented, by neglect of the means the heart grows into hardness, sin
into custom, and disquietnesse of Conscience into a ^umbdnesse or nonsense,
then must needs both Faith and Hope fail, the loss whereof, that it might be
less felt* Satan offers carnal delights in sensuality and pleasures, then
God and the world to come begin to be forgotten; sincerity and strictness
of Life begin to be intolerable; Looseness and liberty plausible,
admonitions odious, all manner of lewdenesse justifiable, Gods word hated, and
messengers persecuted, and how little differs this fearful revolt, from the
sin against the holy Ghost? The effect whereof, and just punishment can be
none other but final despair in the man, and horrible blasphemies against God
and his Christ, with a despighting of his spirit of Grace, and so at last
everlasting torments in hell fire. Behold then both the ladder (as I may say)
whereby menascend, and the rope, whereby they fall or descend into this
Dungeon; men climb, and attain to some taste and smack of the powers of the
world to come, which I call peace of Conscience, and joy in the holy Ghost, by
these steps. First, their mind and understanding, by the preaching of the
word, is enlightened with the knowledge of the Mystery of Christ. Secondly,
the will and reason consents. Thirdly, the heart imbraceth and applies unto
a measure of Faith, and of Repentance. Fourthly, the affections begin to
frame into obedience. Fifthly, the life and conversation is fashioned to the
outward form of Godliness. Sixthly, the Conscience is at peace and the inward
man ioyeth: Now the manner of relapse, or descent, is down the same way. Joy
and peace of Conscience are lost through some wilful sin. Secondly, the life
and conversation grows worse and worse. Thirdly, the affections are altered
from delight in holiness, and loosed from obedience. Fourthly, Faith fails,
and Repentance given ever. Fifthly, the benefit by Christ, despised. Sixthly, a
great decay of knowledge follows, through the contempt of the means, and so
the man is given up unto a Reprobate sense, whereby God and goodness and all
their worshippers despighted and persecuted: As every one therefore loves his
soul, and longs for salvation in Christ, and delights in the assurance
thereof; so let him beware and take heed of defiling and disquieting his
cosc^ence with wilful sins, or if he be fallen by Satan circu^uented, let him
give way and diligent heed to the word, for his recovery by repentance; let him
in no case suffer himself to be transported from the company and fellowship of
faithful admonishers; let him use the help of their prayers unto God for him;
let him abandon carnal companions, and worldly vanities and delights, to the
end that he may more humble his soul before God; let him even force himself
unto spiritual and heavenly meditation, and other godly exercises of Religion,
and if not withstanding all this, his heart should still incline to despair,
let him not be ashamed to bewray and confess unto some one or two (whom he
dares trust, and thinks able, by his or their counsel and godliness, to
help) into what temptation he is fallen, that he may not bear the brunt of
the assault alone: And whatsoever befaileth, let him not fly to carnal
delights, or worldly mirth and vanity for remedy, which brings a
forgetfulness of this guiltiness, and so a secure benummednesse of
Conscience, to his utter vndoeing, rather then a true cure and help for his
dangerous disease, use only those means which may recover true peace of
Conscience with God, and the battle is sought, and the field won: For very
often times, as by evil Chyrurgerie, acurable wound grows to a gangren, even
so the wound of Conscience, which might have been to the increase of Grace,
and better certainty of salvation, by forsaking the true and right cure,
becomes desperate carnae^itie, incurable security: But now for as much as many
are in fear of having committed this sin, which indeed have not, but
through Satan's policies to disquiet their Consciences, are illuded and
afrighted; It shall be good to consider for their comforts these short
positions and Maxim^s, found certain and most true by the Scripture, by the
judgment of learned writers, by ^^^ly experience of those that have to deal
with afflicted Consciences. First, that such as fear least they have thus
sinned, are undoubtedly as yet, free from this sin, or from falling ^^^o it, so
long as that fear remains in them. Secondly, that such as are sorry for
their offenses toward God, are far off from this sou^e offense. Thirdly,
that who so has a desire to be reconciled to God, and could wish himself
pardoned, shall surely obtain pardon, if he seek it at Gods hand, according
to his word. Fourthly, that whosoever would not that another should fall into
his wretched plight and condition, has ^ome portion of love, both to God and
man left in him, and therefore is not utterly fallen from Grace; nay more.
Fifthly, whosoever hates not all other, whom he thinks not to be in his own
damnable case, is not come to the height and perfection of this sin, and
therefore. Sixthly, whosoever takes pleasure and delight in the company of any
of Gods men and servants, may through their endeavor, by Gods grace be reduced
and recovered. Seventhly, If any place of Scripture or position of Gods word,
does minister more consolation or comfort, or on the other side, more affright
or terrify then another, there is still place for the working upon the
Conscience, by the word, which is quite taken away in the case of the sin
against the holy Ghost. Lastly, if all, or most of the speeches of the party
affected, concerning God, and Christ, and his Church, be not blasphemous, or if
the offender could not wish them blasphemies (it may be a fearful and a
damnable case) but it is not fully this desperate and impardonable sin: But
let no man trust in himself, or in his own strength of recovering, to give
way willingly, no not unto the least sin, for Satan (as is said) is subtle,
and we are weak and foolish, and God is not bound to attend us, but we him.
Therefore let our care be to please him, our Faith and hope fixed in him
through Christ, our hearts dep^^ ^^^ on his ^r^ce and holy ordinances, our
profession be sincere and from he heart without guile, our conversation and
li^^ honest an^^ pright, our desire to be constant to the end, and to grow
daily in Grace. And the peace of God which passes all understanding, shall
preserve our hearts and minds in Jesus Christ.

Your own in the Lord Jesus, I. C.

A brief Synopsis of the whole.
The handling of the Text is performed in the
Preparation, by observing The Term used. The Number insinuated.
Matter, which may be reduced to two heads, viz. Doctrine, twofold, viz What
this sin is Negatiuely Generally Not each sin against Knowledge, though
presumptuously committed. Conscience, though presumptuously committed.
Not each sin committed after Baptism. Not Final Impaenitencie. Not each
sin of Set Malice. Particularly, Not any one of those six commonly mentioned
sins Impaenitencie. Obstinacy. Impugnatio^ of the truth Envying the
fraternall grace. Praesumption. Desperation.


Affirmatively, in setting down the Definition of it, And thence Generally,
Nothing it to be a Sin Not against the person of the Spirit. But against the
work of the Spirit.
Particularly, handling Terminus ^quo, Truth Not of Law. But of Gospel.
Known: where is showed that Some both know and profes. Some know, but
profess not.

Terminus ad que^, and that in the effect Persecuting Generally showing the
object, viz. Professors. Truth. Majesty of God.
Particularly, noting the 2 kids, in Men of authority. Men of learning.

blaspheming, whose act is in attributing whose act is in robbing, and both of
them performed in the simple understanding, and the understanding joined with
affection.

cause viz. malice which Excludes all perturbed passions. produces seperatio^
from the communion of Saints, and siding with the Adversaries.
Motion, showing Genus viz. Apostasy. Disse(...) General ^ Simply. ^





Why to death, confirmed By Scripture. By Reason, in Examining the Reasons
alleged by some of the Schoolmen. Propounding Orthodoxall From the Object
opposed Gospel. Spirit.
From the Nature Wittingly resisting. Wilfully resisting. Ma^^^ously resisting.
Totally resisting.
From the punishment Deprivation of the Churches prayers. Imprecation.
Obduration. Impaenitencie.




^se Examination, herein showing Difficulty of resolute Determination. Grounds
of vehement suspicion, viz. when man becomes Profane, extremely. (...).
Envious. Blasphemous. (...).
Who are not in this sin For ^onsol^tion.

A^^^^^ition, and herein are D^^^o^e^ed two kinds ^o stop censuring. (...).
(...) declination, performed by 5. acts Of man sinning. Of God punishing.

Prescribed some Preservatiues to keep men from Apostasy.



I^^ici^^s Reader, thou have here represented to thy view, a brief Synopsis of
the matter handled in this Discourse: By perusing of which thou may guess,
whether it will be worth thy labor to readit over. For Time is precious, and
loath I am that through me thou should loose any of it. Take in good part,
my well-intended labors* Farewell.

THE SIN UNTO DEATH.
1 JOHN 5. 16. There is a sin unto death, I say not that he should pray for
it: or, (as others read)* that *(...). thou should pray for it.
NEBRIDIVS, one of St Augustins friends, (as himself does style him,) a very
learned man, and an acute and accurate searcher-out of difficult questions,
could not endure any that having propounded an hard question required a short
answer: Judging such a person unworthy, who did not understand that of a
weighty cause, much and many things ought and must be spoken: This judgment
of Nebridius is much commended by August. epist. 23.
S. Augustine, who albeit he excused Pope Boniface, propounding to him
difficult questions, and requiring short answers, in regard both the
questionist and the respondent were Bishops, and therefore troubled with
weighty affairs; yet he confesses that Nebridius did justly reprehend the
preposterous doing of the other. Why? Because both of them had time enough, the
one to discuss at large, the other to hear at leisure.

And as it is much commended by S. Augustine, So least there should be any that
upon the hearing of the Text, judging whereto the discourse will tend, would
require an affected brevity and concisenes; I do here profess to follow the
practice of Nebridius. Especially, since both time and leisure sufficient is
alloted for you to hear, for me to speak. Leisure in respect of the day,
^^^gil. ^d^g. 1.
Deus nobis haec otia f^cit, God having sanctified it to the duties of
holiness: Leisure in respect of the place, Charitas nobis haec otia f^cit, The
charity and zeal of our Ancestors having alloted the double stint of time to
this place, for the better discussing of harder questions.

Yet mis-take me not, I will not forget the golden saying of Tertullian;
Compendium sermonis est gratissimum; A short and compendious speech is
wonderful acceptable: Nay, I will and I know I may with more boldness proceed
without the Nauseons repetition of the Cr^mbe, in regard the most part of this
Auditory (if not all) are well instructed, a wise and understanding people,
Heb. 5.
who through long custom have their wits exercised to discern both good and
evil. Now therefore in the name of the most High let us proceed.

The Author of this Epistle, questionless is S. John. This if all other
reasons failed the phrase and the sense would euince, Digna est ^^^^ ejus
discipuli sp^ritu, qu^ prae a^^^s a (...) d^^^^^us fuit. Calv.
as befitting the Spirit of that Disciple which was above the rest beloved of
Christ. I find him dignified with four Titles. Evangelist, Apostle, Elder,
Divine. ^^a ^^^. Presbyt. in 1 Ioh. (...).
Evangelist in respect of his history of the Gospel, Apostle for his office,
He lived about 68. years after Christ, dyed Anno 102.
Elder for his age, Divine The Complu^ense Edition, puts this down in the
^^tle of the Revolution.
for the excellency of matter which he above the rest does handle, viz. the
secret mysteries of the Gospel.

For the time, he wrote this very late, for Corinthus, Ebion, and other
Heretics against whom he wrote his Gospel, and this Epistle V^^. Beda. in
^p^^^t.
both upon the same occasion were much about the year 94. This is that, that
made him say, Cap. 2. ^. ^8.
There are many Antichrists already in the world, who were busy to extirpate,
and overthrow the divinity of Christ, against whom as a Champion of the Lord
he fights.

For the matter of this Epistle it is various. But the thing that he chiefly
aymeth at is Purity in life, Charity in affection.

In this fifth Chapter, he sets down the force and efficacy of Faith, the
several fruits and effects which it produces: a special one whereof is
Assurance to be heard in our prayers, verse 14. The which Assurance teaches
us, that whatsoever we ask, the same shall be, nay, is already granted; We
know that we have the petitions, that we have desired of him, provided always
that it be according to his will. Whereupon the Apostle Ver. 16.
builds an exhortation, that, if any one do see his brother going astray,
sinning a sin which is not unto death, he should pray for him, and the Lord
would give li^e for them that sin not unto death. By which words having
intimated a difference of sins, and thereby given just occasion of a doubt,
of a question, he annexeth the solution, the answer of it in this Text,
showing plainly, that there is a sin unto death, for which he will not have
prayers to be made, There is a sin unto death, I say not that thou should
pray for it.

For the clearing of which words (which I must needs do before I can come to
the matter) I note, first, the Term that is used, secondly, The number that is
insinuated. A word or two of either.

The Term is not Mortal, but sin unto death. The School men and their
followers the Jesuits have a distinction of sin into V^^ia^e quod est
praeter, Mortale quod est contralegem.
Venial and Mortal. Some sins say they are sua natura in their own nature,
venial, others are mortal. But one that has but half an eye may see the
reason of this distinction: For, you must know that when Purgatory was found
out, lest that it should have been lost again, and so the Popes Kitchen have
wanted fire, fuel, and other vtensilles, it was convenient, nay, in a manner
necessary, that some sins should be accounted venial, that so, though a man
should die in them without repentance, yet there might be some hope to help
him: But not daring to make all sins venial, lest they might seem to have
reversed the judgment of God, they left some to be mortal. Little considered
they that Death is the wages of all sin, Romans 6. 23.
Paul speaks indefinitely; and Moses more distinctly, Deuteronomy. 27. 26.
Cursed is he that confirms not all the words of this Law to do them. And
how can it be otherwise, since that, All sin is a rebellion against God and
transgression of the Law of God? Excellent to this purpose is the saying of an
Ancient, n We must not use deceitful ^ In aestimandis peccatis non afferamus
s^ateras dolos^^ etc.
balances in censuring sin, but the just and true weight of Gods holy word.

Neither is the distinction so absurd, but the application of it is far more
gross; For while they reckon up these mortal and deadly sins, hence have
they excluded the breach of the first Table, hence also the ^ Nullum fere
Sorbomci, peccatum mortale agnoscunt, nisi quibus tam crassa extat turpitudo vt
manibus palpari queat. Comment. in 1. Ioh. 5.
breach of their two last, our tenth commandment, So that Idolatry,
Superstition, Swearing, Profanation of the Sabbath, together with the
inordinate lusts, and concupiscence of our corrupted nature are not mortal
with them; The aspersion of holy water will wash them away, especially if
committed after Baptism. The Sorbonists o (says Calvin) acknowledge no sin
to be mortal, except it be Egyptian darkness, filthiness that may be felt,
and palpably perceived.

Objection. But no learned Papist does build that distinction upon this Text?

True indeed, yea. I grant that Rhemist^s Testament. in 1 Ioh. 5.
some do here manifestly distinguish betwixt mortal sins, and sins to
death. But who knows whether hereafter it may not be true, that as this
generation is worse then the former, Aetas parentu pejor avis, tulit nos
nequiores, moxdaturos progentem vitiosiorem. Hora^. Odur. lib. 3. ^de 6.
so the next may be more absurd then this? And as they decay in learning, so
fail in understanding: and in the end come to that, which their forefathers
would have blushed at. None before Ca: vnam sanctam. Extrav. de Majoritate et
obedientia.
Boniface the eighth could pick the Supremacy out of Genesis ^. 1. Nor any out
of Deuteronomy. 17. 6. before Ca: Per venerabile^. Extrav. Qui sunt filij legitimi.
Innocentius the third. Whereas all things duly considered, this Text is a
far fitter place to prove the distinction of venial and mortal, then the
other to build up the Supremacy.

And yet if we mark it Haymo in epist. Dominica octav^ post Pentocosteni.
Haymo is not far from it, when speaking of the words of Paul, Stipendium
peccati mors est, The wages of sin is death, he adds, this is not to be
understood of all sins, but only of Criminal, of which (says he) S. John
speaks, saying, There is a sin unto death. But if any hereafter should so
far forget himself as to urge this place for it, Let him withal consider
what S. John adds, viz. That for this sin we must not pray: So that if
this Text shall patronize the distinction of Mortal sin, it shall also exclude
all Mortal sin from the Churches prayers, for Saint John says, I say not
that thou should pray for it.

Nay, says Bellarmine that follows not, He forbids us not, but only he does
not encourage us to pray for such. Why then it seems S. John did approve of
the ^ Prove. 22. 13.
sluggards saying, ^ There is a Lion in the street, I shall be slain; Because
it was somewhat difficult, therefore the safest course were to give it over?
Would a Captain so speak to his soldiers? A Physician to his patient? A
Master to his scholars? A Minister to his people? How much better is that
noble consequence of our blessed Savior. The way is narrow and the gate
straight, Ergo (not give it over) but (...). Luke 13. 24.
strive to enter. But if neither the Sea Dr Denisons Sermon upon the sin
against the holy Ghost.
consent of Authors thus understanding this Text, nor the coherence of the Text
it self, could guide the Cardinal to the truth: yet the rule of Logic might
have taught him. For Contradicenti^ contraria est consequentia.
contradictories have contrary consequences. Now St John before had said, If
any see his brother sin a sin not unto death, let him pray for him, does it
not hereupon follow, If he see him sin a sin unto death, let him not pray
for him? But I loose time.

Observe also the number here used, ^ A sin. For ^ The French reads it
somewhat more particular. Il y a un peche a ^^rt.
howsoever the singular number does not always imply an individual unity, as
may appear out of ver. 17. yet here it does: For there is found only one
sin so deadly, so mortal, that it may not be prayed for, and to which the
Lord will show no mercy. One such there is, called, A sin unto death: First,
because it hangs upon a man even to death. Secondly, It gives death
possession of him, surrenders up his damnable life to a ^ Quandiu venia(...)us
relinquitur, mors prorsus imperi(...) eccupat. Calvm.
cursed death. a Now so long as any place is left for pardon, death has not
taken possession; but when all hope of pardon is excluded then death (which is
the wages of sin) claims his right, calls for his due. Only one such there
is, and (that we hang no longer in suspense) it is that heavy, that heinous,
that deadly, that mortal, that irremissible, and unpardonable sin, viz. The
sin against the holy Ghost, which is a sin with a witness, a lump of
sin, Ilias malorum.
a mass of mischief. It is the perfection of sin, (if the word perfection
may be so ill placed.) It is the Nil vltra, the up shot of all sins, So that
there is none here, I suppose, who is not very sensible of the difficulties, I
now sustain, Non est res levis, no small matter, whereof I am to speak; you
to hear. Let me borrow the full emploiment of your best attention, that I may
fly upon the wings of your holy desires, and with the full gale of your
prosperous wishes, arrive at the haven of my hopes, Gods glory, man's
edification.

They which put forth into the Ocean do guide their sailing by the wind,
discern the wind by the Compass, direct their Compass by the Pole-starre;
and not in vain, for without these their labor might be much, their
progress little, their profit none at all. This wisdom of the Mariner is
worth imitation. Loc here therefore (before I enter into the Ocean of matter
which may be expected, in which I may easily loose my self, and abuse mine
Auditory) my Cynosura, my Pole-starre (which must guide my sailing, confine my
speech, direct my discourse) is briefly reducible to these two maine points.

First, enquire what this sin is which is against the 1
Holy Ghost.

Secondly, why it is so mortal. 2


Of both these with as much briefness and plains as such a matter will give
leave.

For the first, I take it for granted that all men do easily understand that
this Sin (which now we seek) is no sin of Infirmity; nor of Ignorance:
but it must needs be a sin of a Presumptuous mind, a sin with an high
hand: so that only among them will we look. There is a sin against
knowledge, When the servant knows his masters will, and does it not. Well may
our sin comprehend this under it, but all sin against knowledge is not this
sin. There is a sin against conscience, when notwithstanding the conscience
like Gods solliciter Surdo verbert coedit.
secretly checketh them yet on they go still, this is worse then the former,
but yet neither can it be that which we seek, unless we would enwrap David
in it. There is a sin of Presumption Perk. Case cons. lib. 1. cap. 2.. 3.
proceeding from pride, and arrogancy, wilfulness and haughtines of heart:
which both wilfully and contemptuously causes a man to sin against God.
wilfully, as presuming upon Gods mercy and his own future repentance,
Contemptuously, as despising and con temning the Law of God. These are great,
gross, and grievous, especially if the particular sin be either Idolatry
which is the forsaking of God, or witchcraft, which is a joining Covenant with
Satan. In these, to sin against knowledge, against the check of conscience,
presumptuously, wilfully, and contemptuously, is a sin that may make the
earth to tremble, and the heavens to sweat with amazednes, that earth should
thus transgress against heaven, man against God. Yea it may on a sudden set
a man into a stound, and drive his thoughts to a perplexity to consider what
further degree of sin there can be found or thought of, into which the
Son of Adam may slip or plunge himself.

But let us wade a little deeper, Origin (as Bellar. lib. 2. De Poenit. cap. 16.
Bellarmine alleges) thought that every sin committed against the Law of
God after Baptism, was the sin against the Holy Ghost, not far from this
were the Novatians, But Athanasius does well refute this opinion: first because
our Savior does accuse the Pharisees of this sin, who yet never were
Christians nor baptized, whereas the opinion of Origin does suppose a
prcedencie of baptism in those who may fall into this Apostasy. Secondly,
Because then it would follow that all sins committed by Christians should
be sins of this nature, as being committed after the Sacrament of Baptism:
which to hold, what were it else, but to bar up the gates of heaven against
all Christians what soever, for who is there that sins not, and sins not
grievously at one time or other? Truth it is that Christians falling into
sin, do sin against the grace of God received, But we seek out one
special sin which in a principal manner and for some special consideration
is called the Sin against the Holy Ghost. such is not each sin committed
after Baptism.

Augustine, stands for final Impoenitencie ( viz.) when men die without
repentance. Certainly I cannot but much commend the censure that Bellarmine
passes upon this opinion, Haec vera est sententia, quatenus docet finalem
Impoenitentiam esse aliquod peccatum in spiritum sanctum: sed non lefendi
potest si velit hoc esse proprium peccatum. Lib. 2 de Poeni. cap. 16
This is true (says he) so far forth as it teaches that final
impoenitencie is some special sin against the holy Ghost, but it cannot be
defended, if he would have this impoenitencie to be that peculiar and proper
sin which we feeke for. But I more commend his Reasons, First, Because
final Impoenitencie, is not blasphemy, but only a certain circumstance in
every sin, whereas our sin is a blaspheming sin as hereafter shall
appear, in which respect it is called blasphemy against the Spirit. Secondly,
This final Impoenitency is not committed till death, for which cause it is
called final, ( viz.) which continues to and in the end (I suppose) to
distinguish it from the other Impoenitencie (a species of sin of malice)
which according to their doctrine may be forgiven in this life; but the sin
against the Holy Ghost is committed in this life, the which he confirms,
first by the practice of our Savior who taxed the Pharisees at that time living
and like enough to live longer, Secondly by the text of Paul to the Hebrews 6.
Necessarily to be understood of men living, unless we would make Paul
speak thus, It is impossible that the dead should be renewed by repentance:
which how unbeseeming so great an Apostle it were, judge ye. Lastly by this
text of John, the which indeed speaks of a man seeing his brother sinning,
and not of one knowing or hearing that he has sinned: whereupon he concludes
that our sin is not final Impoenitencie, which not before death, and hardly
then, can be seen and discerned.

A third opinion holds the sin against the Holy Ghost, to be any sin of
malice: This is the common opinion received from the Schoolmen, and by the
Papists much magnified, Let us (if you please) fetch it from the original.

Aquinas, the Perer Jesuit in Comment. on Dan.
Angelical Doctor, the Flos Theologi^e scholastica Vega lib. 16. de Just.
chief of the Schoolmen whose Elogie is See his picture in the Parision
Edition of Peter Cevallier Anno 1615
Toll Thomam, and disipabo Ecclesiam, were it not for Thomas Aquinas, the old
Serpent would easily destroy the Church, whose writings were confirmed by
miracle (or else Fame is a liar) the Crucisixe speaking to him; He I say (as in
other questions so in this) has bestowed much labor in the searching out of
this sin. Let us trace him.

Three sorts of men Aquin. 20. ^. 14. Art. ^*
(says he) are said to sin against the spirit. First, he who blasphemeth the
person of the holy Ghost. Secondly, He which dies in final impaenitencie.
Thirdly, He that sins of set malice, whether it be in choosing evil, or
refusing good.

This third kind he Ibid. Art. 2.
subdivideth into six several sins, which he calls the several species
and kinds of this kind. And distinguishes them according to the contempt of
those things which should keep men from sinning. First, then in respect of
sin it self, God keeps men from sinning, one while by consideration of the
filthiness; another while by consideration of the unprofitableness of sin,
These two are rejected, The one by Impaenitencie which respects not
Impoenitentia.
the filthiness, the other by Obstinacy, which will not consider the
unprofitableness. Secondly, in respect Obstinatio.
of Gods gifts he withdraws men from sin, sometimes by the knowledge of the
Truth, and sometimes by the love of the brotherhood, and Communi^n of Saints.
These two also are opposed, and hence comes Impugnatio agnitae veritatis.
the Impugnation of the known Truth, and envying the grace of God bestowed
upon a brother. Thirdly, Invidentia ^raserna gratiae.
in respect of his Judgment, God does preserve men from sinning, by working in
them either a fear of his Justice, or an hope of his Mercy. And these two
also are withstood, yea, and contemned, the one by Presumption, which repelleth
all fear, the other by Desperation, Praesumptio.
which rejects all hope of Mercy. These then Desperatio.
(says he) for still I am reading a Lecture of Schoole-Diuinitie) are the
six kinds of this sin against the holy Ghost, viz. Impaenitencie,
Obstinacy, Impugnation of the Truth, Envying, Praesumption, and Desperation.

Didaeus Stella (whose commendation is that he was counted, Eximius verbi
Divini concionator cum Privilegio. In Praefat.
An excellent, and privileged Preacher of Gods Word) may help us also
somewhat in this our disquisition. Something more contract he is then Aquinas.
Take him thus, Stella in Lucam. cap. 12.
Some (says he) call this sin (the sin against the holy Ghost:) The deni
ill of Christ, some Final Iaepenitencie: some Any sin after Baptism: some a
voluntary Obduration: some a Desperation of Gods mercy, proceeding not from
ignorance or passion, but from Malice, Others call it any deadly sin
committed wilfully and maliciously: the which they devide again into six
particulars, Praesumption, etc.

We will walk no further in these paths, least we fall into a Maze or
Labyrinth, Carmine ab vno disce omnes, The rest are like these, and these far
wide, Nihil istorum satis veritatem assequitur. ibid.
None of these (says Stella) come near enough to the Truth, which may appear
by these Arguments.

1. Argument. Christ manifestly (says Stella, for first we will fight with his
weapons) distinguishes betwixt the sin against the son, and the sin
against the Spirit, saying. Luke 12. 10.
He that shall speak a word against the son of man it shall be forgiven him,
but to him that shall blaspheme the holy Ghost, it shall not be forgiven him.
Et tamen peccatum in filium potest ex malitia contingere. ibid.
And yet the sin against the Son may proceed of malice, a man may be
obstinate in it, yea, and impaenitent also to the end, perseuering in his
sin, witness Arrius the troubler of the world, whence it follows that all
sin of Malice is not this sin. And here must I needs entreat you to take
notice how Bellarmine does pass over this opinion, Haec sententia vera est,
sed non satisfacit quaestiom. lib. 2. de Pamt. cap. 16.
This sentence (says he) is true, but it satisfies not the question, And why?
Because albeit this sin be sin of Malice, yet all sin of Malice is not this
sin: The which he further confirms, because the sin against the holy
Ghost is Blasphemy, and so a special sin, But sin of Malice is not any
one special sin, neither is it always blasphemy, but only a general
kind of sin, the particulars whereof are six in number. Thus far
Bellarmine.

2. Argument. Multi, ab hu^usmodi peccat^s solent ^^^piscere Stell* ibid.
Many who have sinned and offended in these several kinds, have
notwithstanding returned again, and have repented. For if we should let loose
the raines of our censorious judgment to condemn all presumptuous, all
envious, all obstinate, all impenitent persons, may we not justly fear that
caveat of Christ, Mat. 7. 1.
(...), Judge not that ye be not judged? Far more modest, more charitable is
the judgment of Musculus; Fieri potest vt qui hodie non recte presumat aut
desperet, etc. crasista corrigat: Quodsi talis ad sinem vsque perseveret,
peccat ad mortem, sed non est blasphemus in spiritum sanctu^ Musc loc. com.
It may be that he who to day does too much either presume, or despair of Gods
mercy, that is obstinate, that is impaenitent, or envious, may correct these
affections to morrow, and so be renewed by repentance, Quod si talis ad finem
perseveret, But if he continue so to the end, well may he sin to death, but
yet he commits not the sin against the holy Ghost.

3. Argument. The sin against the holy Ghost cannot be augmented by
Circumstances: For, (as I said) it is the greatest, the Nil vltra of all sins.
But all these may be exaggerated by the several circumstances of Time, Place,
Person, etc.

4. Argument. That which Bellarmine says of Impenitencie, is true also of the
most of these, viz. Circumstantia quaedam, quae in omni peccato reperiri
potest. Bell. loco citato.
They are certain Circumstances in all sins. They are certain Symptoms of
this sin, but not the sin it self. Or to speak more favorably, they are
some of them parts of it, some adjuncts, some necessary companions: but the
sin it self is some further matter.

This in general, now let us single them out one by one, and bring them into
the field, and so pass the Pikes of our Examination: Or, (if you will) let
them come forth by couples, that so we may the sooner have them dispatched:

The first couple is, Impenitencie and Obstinacy. Impenitencie is Imp^nitentia
importar propositum non p^^^endi. Aqum. 22. Q^. 14. Art. 2.
The settled purpose of a man wilfully determining never to repent. Wherein
first I marvel what great much more, what specificall difference can be made
betwixt Impenitencie in this sense, and Obstinacy? For what is Obstinacy, but
Obstinatio est, ^um hemo firmat propositum in ho^, quod peccato inhareat.
Aquinabid.
a resolute purpose and intention to continue in sin? And what difference
betwixt a Resolution to continue in sin, and a Resolution not to repent?
Especially, since there is no other way to leave sin, but by repentance? Nor
to repent but by leaving sin? When Jacob sent his sons into Egypt to buy
Corn, his Motive is,z That we may live and not ^ Genesis 42. 2.
dye: Esaias speaking of the Jews says, Esa. 3. 9.
They declare their sin and hide it not: Compare these; what difference,
Live, and not dye; Declare, and not hide, Continue in sin, and not repent of
it?

Secondly, Further, if we well consider of it, we shall easily see that this
Propositum non revertendi, Purpose to continue still in sin without
repentance, is such a disposition as cannot sink into the heart of a man, and
therbe settled, unless the Judicial act of God do proceed against a man for
former sin. It sauoureth too much of Arminius poison, to hold that a man may
thus settle and dispose his own heart, that he would resist the work of Gods
spirit, and fully resolve with himself never to repent.

Thirdly, Once more hear what Stella says concerning Impenitencie (which
among all the six is that which most pleases the Rhemists, and which they do
most easily grant to be the sin against the holy Ghost) Non est verisimile,
tot p^ccare in spiritum sanctum, quot impoenitentes abeunt. Stell. ibid.
It is not likely that all who dye in final Impenitencie do sin against the
holy Ghost.

The next couple are, Impugnation of the known truth, and Envying of Gods
graces bestowed upon the brotherhood. These two come somewhat near,
especially, if we remember their Genus, which is Peccatum ex malitia, Sin
grounded upon malice. These are parts of that sin we seek for, and ( Ergo)
I pass them over.

Now for the last couple, viz. Desperation and Presumption. These cannot be
that sin which we seek for. As for Desperation, how many poor souls have
there been heretofore, who through the sense of GODS wrath and anger against
sin, whereof their guilty conscience did accuse them, have for a time, cast
off all hope of pardon, fallen into despair, as if Psalm. 77. 9. 10
God had forgotten to be gracious, and had shut up his loving kindness in
displeasure; concluding plainly with David, This is my death: and yet
afterward, remembering the years of the right hand of the most high, have
recollected themselves, Reasons proouing Desperation not to be this sin, see in
D Benefields 2. Sermon upon Heb. 10. 27. As namely, 1. It is not blasphemy. 2.
It brings not with it final Impaenitencie. 3. It is not a wilful dema^^ of
Christ, arising from an obstinate malice. 4. It may befall the children of God,
whereas the sin against the holy Ghost ^s only in the Reprobate.
gathered strength, and regained comfort?

But what need I Scripture, or experience, or the consent of Orthodoxall
Writers, to prove this point, if our Adversaries will stand to their words,
Thus then I set mine Argument.

The sin against the holy Ghost, is a sin unto death and irremissible, this
is in confesso amongst all, and shall God willing be further confirmed when I
come to the second maine point. In the mean space, I assume, Praesumption is
not to death, but remissible, wherefore I conclude, that Presumption is not the
sin against the holy Ghost, and consequently neitheir can Desperation be,
because Contraria sunt sub eodem genere posita.
contraries are always to be referred to the same head. The assumption I
prove out of the words of their own Authors, He that shall upon hope of a
Iubilee to come, willingly and purposely fall into a sin reserved may
notwithstanding be absolved. Neither will their common Evasion serve the turn,
to say, It is but one Doctors opinion, and therefore they are not bound to
receive it. For these are chief men; Pillars of their Church, In Tractat. di
Iubil.
Navarre the great Cas^ist Cordub. qu. 37 de In ^u^g.
Cord^bensis and Bellar. libr. 1. d^ Indulg. cap. 18. All thus alleged by Dr
Hall in his book called the Peace of Rome Page ^56.
Bellarmine. If they refuse the judgment of these men who hereafter will step
forth to maintain the Roman Church, and Papal dignity?

Thus is it plain (I hope) and evident, that hitherto we have not found out
that sin which we seek for. The schoolmen, and their followers, though
learned, wise, grave, judicious; yet have in this point failed, come short, and
are not to be maintained.

Marcus Cae^^us having a better vein in obiecting then in answering, in urging
then in defending, is by Cicero said to have, Bonam dextram malam vero
sinistram* A good right hand, but not so good a left one all^ding to this, that
the right hand holds the sword to strike, the lef^ the backler to defend. The
saying of Cicero may perhaps by some, and that deservedly be to me applied,
who hitherto have spent the time rather in confutation then confirmation: which
least it be, I now come to the use of my left hand, and will tie my self close
to it in the Explanation, and confirmation of that definition which (as I take
it) does most happily, most properly, most perfectly set forth, what this sin
is, which we seek for, what the sin against the holy Ghost is, the which
What the sin against the holy Ghost is.
I describe to be, A general Apostasy, and revolt of a man wilfully fallen
from the truth known, even to a malicious, persecuting, and blaspheming of the
same.

In the which before I come to particulars, I note in general; that it is a
sin not so much against the person of the spirit, as against the work of the
spirit. For which we have a cloud of witnesses. A whole day would not suffice
to take their Examination: Let Beza speak for the rest. Hoc peccatum dicitur
in spiritum sanctum committi, non quatenu^ est sacra Triadis persona, sed
respectu propria ipsius in nobis energi^ Annot. in 1 Ioh 5.
It is called the sin against the holy Ghost, not as the spirit is a person
in the sacred and ever blessed Trinity (for neither is the dignity of the
spirit greater then of the father, or the son, they being Athanasius in
Symbolo.
in glory coequall, in majesty coeternall, which would follow, were the sin
against the person: Nor is it possible to offend any one person of this
Tri-vnitie, but the injury does redound to them all) but in respect of his
proper and peculiar work in us. The which here is not so much the act of Faith
and Repentance, cast off by Obstinacy and Impenitencie, nor of Hope and Fear,
rejected by Desperation and Presumption, as of the illumination of the mind
and understanding, and the convincing of the Conscience and affections. This is
that work of the spirit, which this sin opposes, and opposing is sealed up
to be (...), the sin against the holy Ghost, a sin unto death and
irremissible.

Now for perticulars. Where (that we may let nothing of any moment pass from
us vn-examined,) I will rank the words of the former definition unto three
heads. This Apostasy is a Motion though a bad one, in which as in all other
Motions we may observe; first, The Terminus a quo, from whence: Secondly, The
Terminus ad quem, whethor: Thirdly, The motion it self.

1. Terminus a quo, from whence, id est Truth. Known.
2. Terminus ad quem, whether, Persecuting. Blaspheming. Malicious.
3. The Motion, Apostasy. General. Truth.
Wilful.

THe first word in the Term from whence they fall is the Truth, For this
mark. Bez. Annot. ^n 1 Ioh. 5.
Beza speaking of this our subject, says, that Non secundam sed primam tabulam
direct respicere hoc peccatum, etc.
This Sin does directly and immediately respect the first Table, not the
second. Bucan. lec. com. 17.
Bucanus seems to contradict this. Hinc colligo. Hence (says he) I gather,
that the sin against the spirit, is not any transgression of the moral Law,
Nec vniuersalem nec partu^larem, sine ex ignorantia sieve ex infirmata^e, sieve
ex malitia c^ntra legem sit commissa.
neither universal nor particular, whether proceeding from ignorance, or
infirmity, or malice against the Law of God. This difference is not so great,
but an easy reconciliation will suffice. For either Beza means no more then
this, that it is directly and immediately against God, as the breaches of the
first Table, not mediately as the breaches of the second. Or else he enlarges
the bounds of the Law, including under it the knowledge of the Mediator, which
Bucan In his common place of the Law, he speaks not one word of the
knowledge of a Mediator, but handles it merely as an exposition of the law of
nature, given to Adam before ^he fall.
perhaps excludes. And this I am the rather induced to believe, in that Beza a
little afterward reckoning up particular lapses and sins against the first
Table, (which, says he, cannot be this sin) mentions, Dubitationam de
Christo, doubting of Christ.

And certainly, I fully believe that this sin against the holy Ghost does
necessarily suppose the knowledge of the Mediator, for it seems impossible,
See this hand led afterward.
that the creature should vnrecoverably fall from the Creator, until he have
rejected also the help of the Mediator offered to him. So that by Truth in my
definition, I understand not with the Novatians any natural, moral, or
civil, truth whereof certain knowledge is obtained, no, nor any supernatural
truth in Scripture revealed: but the supernatural Truth of the Gospel, that
everlasting Word of Truth, to witness which John 18. 37.
Christ came into the world. In which respect Christ calls himself the John
14. 16.
Truth, viz. Quia ipse est materia and argumentum totius Evangelij. Zanch. de
operi. Dei. lib. 4. ^.
because he is the matter and argument of the Gospel.

This point (besides that which Aquinas does help us with, who makes
Apostasy to be Aquin 22. q. 12. Art. 2. 0. and afterward he distinguisueth
of the means by which a man may Apostatize from God viz. either by casting often
his order, as Monks: Or by disobedience to the commandments, as wilful often
ders.
Species, a kind of Infidelity, which is contrary to faith; faith (I say)
required in the Gospel) may further be confirmed by our own observation,
viz. That wheresoever there is any mention of this sin in the new Testament,
there comes with it some intimation of the works of the Mediator. In Mat. 12.
They opposed Christ himself in his miracles. In Heb. 6. Paul instanceth in
their crucifying again of Christ, etc. And in Heb. 10. Of their trampling
underfoot the Son of God, etc. So that this Truth is the doctrine of the
Bucan puts into his definition veritatis (...) angelicae renuntiatio. Loc. com.
17.
Gospel, the faith of our salvation through the blood of Christ, The which
Piscator confirms by Quibus duobus existentibus etc Both which kinds being
yet (says he) may a man be joined to God by faith.

Sedsi a side retrocedat. etc. But if he cast off that, then he is altogether
an Apostata from God. And Art. 2. 3. Apostasia a side, totaliter siparat
homine^ a Deo, quod non centing it in quibuscunque alijs peccatis.


the Antithesis betwixt the contempt of the Law, and the contempt of the
Gospel, handled in Heb. 10. 28.

This Truth must be known to the party, he must be enlightened, he must have
a competent measure of knowledge, before he falls into this sin. For
confirmation of this (to omit that of Paul Heb. 10. 26.
(...), after we have received the knowledge of the truth) let us consider how
he enlarges this point, Heb. 6. 4 what phrases the Apostle uses to set forth
the measure of grace to which they had attained. Mark his words, (...) etc.
It is impossible that they which were once enlightened etc. We shall not
lightly find a more plain, more full, more pithie place, Ergo let us here
stay and demurre a little, and labor to understand the same.

There are two diverse applications of this place if they may be called
Diverse, which all tend to the same end. For some do apply each phrase to
signify some particular thing. Thus Hemingius and Iunius.

First hear Hemingi^ Heming. in Heb. 6. 4.
Praecedunt peccatum in spiritum sanctum, (says he) there goes before this
our sin five things, first An illumination. Secondly, A taste of the heavenly
gift. Thirdly, A participation of the holy Ghost. Fourthly, A taste of the good
ward of God. Fifthly, A taste of the powers of the world to come. These he thus
explaineth. This Illumination is the knowledge of Christ and his benefits. The
taste of the heavenly gift, is the participation of these benefits by faith.
The communion of the Spirit is the Testimony of the Spirit in the hearts of the
faithful concerning the truth of God. The good word of which they tasted, is
the isntrumental cause of the former, for by the word comes knowledge, by
knowledge faith, the holy Ghost being powered into our hearts. The powers of
the world to come, is that blessed Immortality which the faithful and
believers do taste of through the holy Ghost, who does renew their hearts. Thus
far Hemingius, very well and to good purpose; if withal you note the
Emphasis, and and force of the word, Gustaverunt, have tasted, he says not
Bucan. le^. citato.
Deglutiverunt, have swallowed down, much less Concoxerunt, have digested it
Beza. Annot. in Heb. 6. Notanda est Emphasis. etc.
For it is one thing to believe truly, and plenarily as did Lidia, whose heart
the Lord opened, another thing to have only a taste. Piscator, handles these
five phrases thus: They contain (says he) first, The benefits of God
bestowed, which are two, viz illumination, and a taste of Gods favor: Secondly,
The causes of them, viz. The word and the Spirit.

Iunius Iunius in Paralellis hunc locum enarrans.
( not an Author to be contemned) goes an other way to work, for he makes
these five phrases to answer to the Ea sunt numero vtego puto in vniuersum
qui^que. ibid. So also Beza, Quinque capita chatech^s mi numerat.
five heads of the Apostles Catechism spoken of in the beginning of the
chapter, that as by the knowledge and profession of those, he was aedified and
builded up in Christianity: so now in his relapse and Apostasy he did undo
all, and quite destroy the former building. The first head of Catechism was
Repentance from dead works, to which answers the Annot: Thus they do agree
in the number albeit they disagree in the application of the number. Piscator
makes but four.
first phrase, were once enlightened, ( idest) were called from darkness (yea
death) to light (yea life) by the renouncing of themselves and their dead
works. The second, was faith toward God, to which answers the second
phrase, Have tasted of the heavenly gift, which gift is faith, received from
God. The third ground was the Doctrine of Baptismes, not Baptism only, but
Baptismes as well the inward of the Spirit (whereby we are made the members of
Christ, the sons of God, and inheritors of the kingdom of heaven) as the
outward of the Minister by which we are received into the Church, and
acknowledged members thereof. To this answers the third phrase, were made
partakers of the holy Ghost ( id est) received the Spirit, a most constant
witness of their adoption and redemption. The fourth head was the Doctrine of
the Imposition of hands, a ceremony used at that time to admit and consecrate
by a public consent, those who upon trial were found sufficient, either to
the common profession of Christianity in the comunion of the Sacrament; or to
some special office or function in the ministry. To which answers the fourth
phrase, Have tasted of the good word of God, which is the nourishment of those
who do live by the Spirit, and who by the Imposition of hands were called to
the offices of a Christian life.

The last ground of the catechism was the Doctrine of the resurrection Iunius
joyneth these two in one, whereas Beza joyneth Baptismes and impositio^
together, and disjoineth these two last. Piscator, dissereth from both: for he
joyneth Baptismes and Imposition together as did Beza: and Resurrection and
aeternall judge meant, as did Inmus. Vter horum melius Iudicet Lector.
and aeternall judgment; to which answers the last phrase, Have tasted of
the powers of the world to come, ( id est) That hope of life, and immortality,
which is laid up for them in the heaven. Hitherto Iunius laudably indeed, if
there be, tantum certitudinis, quantum subtilitatis, so much certainety as
subtilty in this his application.

And this is the former.

The second kind of Application is of them who do apply all these five phrases
to signify one self same thing. Thus Calvin the Coriphaeus of our Divines
Calv. Coment. in heb.. 6.
Notandum est, saayth he, we must here mark with what Elogies the Apostle
does set forth, the Cognitionem Euangeli^.
knowledge of the Gospel: For he calls it, first, Illumination, intimating
that men do grope in darkness till Christ the day star do arise in their
hearts. Secondly, The taste of the heavenly gift, teaching that the benefits of
Christ do transcend the heavens, and yet by faith are tasted. Thirdly, The
Participation of the Spirit, because he it is that distributeth to each one as
he lists. Fourthly, The taste of the good word of God, signifying that in the
Gospel the will of God is so manifested to us, as that it does most sweetly
delight us. Fifthly, The taste of the powers of the world to come, insinuating,
that by faith we are admitted into the heavenly kingdom, beholding through
faith that blessed immortality which is laid up for us in the heaven. Thus
Calvin.

To the same effect, Zanchius, who thus explaineth himself, (...),
enlightened, viz. by the holy Ghost to know the truth. (...), id est, have
tasted in some measure of the divine bounty manifested in the Gospel. (...)
etc. id est have in some measure perceived themselves renewed by the holy
Ghost, through the doctrine of the Gospel. (...), tasted of the good word of
God, ( id est) the Gospel it self and the faelicitie of those who do embrace
the Gospel. who have peace with God, and peace in their own consciences,
(...) the powers of the world to come, ( id est) by the Gospel they have
perceived, how great the foelicitie of the godly is like to be in the world to
come. Thus Zanchy refers it to the Gospel, Calvin to the knowledge of the
Gospel.

Something more roundly goes Bullinger to work, Bulling* Comment. in Heb.
Vtitur Apostolus Endiadi, etc. The Apostle, says he, uses an Endiadis, a
figure in the Copy of words diversely uttering the same thing. For what else
is it to be enlightened, but to taste of the heavenly gift? And what Two sorts
of men do fall into this sin. See D^wnam Christian Wa^sare, part prima lib.
3 See the burning Bush.
is that heavenly gift, but the dowry of graces proceeding from the Spirit? and
what is that dowry but only by which we receive the saving word of God, and
are made partakers of eternal glory?

To stay no longer in this discourse (for I fear you think me tedious
already) whether we understand this place of several graces with Hermingius
and Piscator, or apply it to the points of the Catechism with Iunius, or make
it an Endiadis with Bullinger, or refer it to the Gospel with Zanchius, or
to the knowledge of the Gospel with Calvin, Here I observe two things for our
purpose, first, That the Terminus a quo, from whence is the Truth of the
Gospel not of the Law, Saul in Beza. Bucan and vrsins chateth. Arrius in Beza
Annot. on Heb. 10. Spira in Polan. Partit. lib. 2 Judas in Fulke Bucan, and
Vrsin. yea he is so censured by S. Ambrose* Comment. on Luke 22. Cassa erat
proditoris paenitentia, qui peccavit in spiritum sanctum.
secondly, That this truth must be known. I might also add Professed, but
that would too much streighten, and restrain the search of it. For Divines do
observe two sorts of men, subject to this our sin. Some have both known the
truth, and also made profession of the fame, as These examples of this sin, I
find in writers. Julian, and the Pharis^es confessed of all.
Saul, Judas, Alexander the Copper-smith, Arrius, Francis Spira, and Julian the
Apostata; All these made profession of the Gospel before they fell away. And
by name Iulianus was well grounded in the Christian Religion, knew the truth of
the Gospel, was baptized, yea, and publicly did make profession of it, and
yet through the persuasions, inticements, and allurements of those wicked
Philosophers, Libanius, Iamblicus, and others, he fell away and became a most
cruel persecutor. This is one sort: Another there is, which have certain
knowledge of the truth, but yet have not given their names to profess it, but
do hate, persecute, and blaspheme it, calling it erroneous, haereticall, and
diabolical; Such were the Pharisees, against whom our Savior Christ
disputes, Mat. 12. Who albeit they did know this to be truth which Christ
taught, knew that he was the Messiah, that his miracles were wrought by the
finger of God, yet of an obstinate, envious, and malicious mind resisted,
contradicted, and blasphemed. Such were some of Stephens accusers, they knew
the truth of that he taught, yea, and were convicted in their consciences, so
that they could not resist the spirit by which he spoke. But the most manifest
example is in Satan and his Angels. For though he know the truth, that is, That
Christ is God, the Savior of the world, that all felicity is to be hoped from
him alone: yet still he does resist slander, and blaspheme the truth* and
having maliciously rejected it himself, does labor by all means, to bring
men into the same state of condemnation. Hence come all heresies which do
oppose the Truth: Hence come Atheism and Epicurisme, whereby all care of
Religion is cast off. Yea, which is most of all to be wondered at, albeit he
knows that his wickedness falls still upon his own pate, yet he does
still resist because he will resist. To wind up this point, All they who fall
into this sin first of all do attain to a certain and assured knowledge of
the truth, though all do not profess it. Yea, and which is more, it is no
swimming motion, but a full persuasion, Therefore Beza translateth that (...).
Heb. 10. 26. Receiving and acknowledging.
so that the Conscience thereby is convicted and constrained secretly to
confess it so to be as the Pharisees, whiles they are in the Synedrion can
say, What Ioh. 11. 47.
shall we do? for this man does many miracles. And afterward, Act. 4. 16.
A manifest miracle is wrought by these men, and we cannot deny it. Hence it is
that Paul was excusable, in that he did it through ignorance, as many now also
do, persecute the Truth, which if they were persuaded that it was the Truth
would embrace it with all readiness.

I would feign now pass from the Whence to the Whether, were it not that I
fear least some of Arminius brood should hereupon buzze into your ears, that
this Illumination, this knowledge is saving knowledge. And the Grace, saving
Grace; and that there is at all no difference betwixt them, but only
Perseverance, and thereby would hope to confirm their poisonous, and
uncomfortable Doctrine of Recidivation, and falling from saving Grace once
received. And yet I will, for why should I fear this? Certes I need not, if
you will be pleased to remember and often to meditate on those three
disparisons betwixt Temporizers, and true believers, which the late Reverend
Synod of Dort has observed out of our Saviors parable, viz. Synod: Dort. cap.
5. In the rejection of erorrs, sect. 7.
first, That Temporisers receive the seed in a stony, but true believers in a
good ground, id est, in an honest and good heart. Secondly, They want root,
These are rooted, and grounded, have a fast root. Thirdly, Those are
fruitless, these bring forth fruit with patience, constancy, and
Perseverance. So that though the mind be enlightened, yet the conscience is not
purified; though the brain swim with motions, yet the heart wants upright
affections: though the understanding be informed, yet the will is not
reformed; much less the whole man trans-formed into the image of Jesus Christ.
This if you will remember, you shall not need to fear the enticing words of
man's wisdom, which cunning seducers use to beguile unstable souls. And thus
I pass from the Terminus a quo, to the Terminus adquem, from the Whenoe to the
Whether: that as we have seen where they stood before their fall, so now we
may see their practice since their praecipitation.

The Terminus ad quem, the Whether has in it two special Terminus ad quem.
words (for as for bluspheming it is a species of Persecuting) and it is no
moment whether of them we set first, whether Malicious or Persecution, for it
is a Malicious persecuting, and a Persecuting malice. Yet since the effect
declares the cause, and this persecuting is the effect of that cause, let us if
you will first speak of this and afterward come to the other.

Persecution generally is a peevish and froward disposition Persecution.
of the wicked, whereby they are whetted on Crudeliter studiose, et
pertinaciter. Flac. Illyr.
cruelly, purposely, and peevishly to infest and trouble the Truth, and those
who do profess it, studying by all means to satisfy and satiate their
wicked, yea, their diabolical fury. The notation of the word teaches thus
much, for Flac. Illyr. Cla^is script: indictione Persequi.
Persequi est pertinaciter sequi, says Illiricus, To persecute is perversely
to prosecute.

This Persecuting is an action, this action works upon an object, this object
is threefold. 1. The professors The object of this persecution, threefold 1.
Professors.
of the Truth, they can rest in no ground, their persecutors are swifter then
Eagles, stronger then Lions, spare no pains, no labor to dissipate and root
out (were it possible) the memorial of them from off the face of the earth.
Yet if this were the worst, it were well, but they also persecute, 2. the Truth
it self, as 2. Truth it self.
Paul says of Alexander, 2. Tim. 4. 15.
(...), He greatly resisted our words, the doctrine that Paul preached. Neither
do they stay here, but they oppose 3. Majesty of God.
3. The Majesty of God himself. Indeed their hand is too short, but they
supply it with abundance of malice and hatred, yea, and their tongues shall
walk at liberty, against the God of heaven. And like as the Rev. 12. 17.
Great redd Dragon when he could no longer remain in heaven, nor devour the
woman, then he went and made war with the remnant of her seed; So these men
when the person of Christ himself is exalted above the heavens, is so high
that they cannot reach him, then do they turn the sea of their Malice against
his members, and in them they persecute him.

Particularly there are two sorts of men which being relapsed into this sin,
do bring forth two special kinds of persecution. Men of authority do draw
forth the sword of Injustice, and cruelty. Like the 4. Gellius. lib. 11. cap.
18.
Athenian Draco, they write laws with the blood of Christians, and make
Statutes that no man may buy or sell, save such who renounce their Religion.
Thus Saul hunts David like a Partridge in the Mountains, sucketh the blood of
the Priests like a Lion in the wilderness Julian chased those out of the
military affairs, who would not sacrifice to the Heathenish gods. So also he
forbad ^hristians the schools of good learning.
Julian oppresses and vexes the Christians, Yea, though they have not the
sword in their hands, yet they will usurp, witness d^^crle of Stephens judges
a^ da^^^^ers, who, albeit by their own confession to ^^late, they might not
put my man to death, yet when their ^age is kindled against Stephen by his
reproof, they can fide (if not a sword, or a Cross, yet) a stone ^o p^sh out
his brains. 2. M^n of learning whett their tongues, R^ff* hist. lib. 1: cap.
32. Socrat. Hist. lib. 2* 14. Theodor. hist* lib. 3. cap* 8. Sozom. lib. 5.
cap. 17.
sharpen their pens* against the Truth, and Truths sauouri^s. They ^^ite with
the tongue, not only like Doeg in accusing, or like Saules Courtiers in
backbiting, but like Shimei in accusing, railing, slaundering, like Ishmael in
most poisonous and virulent mocking. The tongue is an Iam. 3. 8.
unruly evil (says S. James) full of deadly poison* mark that it insecteth
as poison, it kills, it mort^fieth as deadly poison. Neither if we do
compare the severalls, is this the least, Ensis sauciat corpus, mentem sermo.
nay, questionless, the tongue leaves a deeper wound then does the sword.
Ismael is said to persecute Isaac, Gal. 4. 19. How? Calvin in Genesis 21.
Gl^dione an m^^^? says Calvin; with sword or hand? Imo virulentis linguae
ludibrijs, quae non corpus laedunt, sed vibrantur in ipsam animam. Calv. ibid.
No, with the poisonous mocks of his tongue, which hurts not the body, but
directly wounds the soul. Sarah saw Ishmaell mocking. What follows? Cast out
the bondwoman and her son. For this his mock, he and his mother are
ablegated and banished. What could Sarah have done more, had Ishmaell struck
him, spurned him, or beaten him? Whence comes this heat? Certainly this
mocking was more bitter, more grievous then any blows. It was a froward,
Proterv^ subsannatio. Calvin.
a peevish mocking, carrying with it (besides the contempt of his brother) a
contempt and scorn of Gods promise of grace which at that time made the house
joyful. Abraham is merry, Sarah rejoices, the whole family semblably
affected, only he in his brothers person, mocketh God, slighteth his promise,
derideth Father Abraham's faith. Thus he that was borne after the flesh
persecuted him that was borne after the spirit; and heavyer was his tongue,
then could have been his hand.

The same may be said of the sufferings of Christ, questionless, Nes ^olaphi,
neque flagella, neque clavi, neque spinae, tantum cruciatum attulerunt Christo,
quantum blasphemi^. Calv.
neither the blows, nor whippings, nor thorns, nor nails did so much afflict
his body, as their poisonous and envenomed tongues did pierce his soul. Oh
that struck deep, wounded sore when they in their spiteful mockes
opprobriously taunted him, saying, He trusted in God, let him save him etc.

Neither is this peculiar to men of learning, though in them most perspicuous:
others also can rail and revile the Truth. The Jews full of envy spoke
against those things, that were spoken of Paul, contrarying them, Blasphemy.
and railing on them, contradicting and blaspheming. Blaspheming, that is
another word in the definition, and a certain especial manner, of this
verbal Persecution.

Blasphemy* Blasphemiae nomen importare videtur, quan^a derogationem alicujus
excellentis bonitatis, and pr^cipue divinae Aquin. 22 q. 13 Art. 1.
does import a certain derogation and diminishing of an excellent goodness,
especially Divine. The Notation gives it to be Ex (...). So Flac. Illyr. in
clav. script.
An hurting of the fame. In Scripture it is appropriated to signify not any
kind of Malediction or slanderous speeches: but that which is peculiarly bent
against God, and his truth And by a Metaphor sometimes applied to backbiting
and raylings uttered against men. The act of it, is either to attribute that to
God, which belongs not to him, as Ignorance, Sin, Tyranny, Injustice, etc.
or to rob him of his honor, taking that from him which is his due. And it is
committed Vno modo secu^dum solam opinionem intellectus: Alio modo, conjuncta
quadam affectus detestatione. Aquin. ibid.
two ways. First, Either only in the understanding, which may be found in
those who have not sinned our Sin (as Paul 1 Timothy 1. 23.
calls himself a Blasphemer, but it was through Ignorance.) Secondly, Or else
in the Affection joined to the understanding, and this is it that comes
nearer to us. for our Blasphemy proceeds from the detestation of Affection,
which is set against God.

This is another part of the Terminus ad quem, ( viz.) A mouth that speaks
blasphemies, hither do they come. Musculus Peceatum in spiritum sanct^
conviti^s per^^^itur. Musc.
makes it the plenitude and fullness of this sin. Hence comes the reviling
of Gods Justice making God an accepter of persons, taxing the right ous Judge
with Injustice. Hence comes the truth to be accounted Impious, wicked, and
Diabolical. Hence it is, that they count the blood of the new Testament an
unholy thing* hence is it that they attribute that to the Devil, which is
proper to God, as did those Mat. 12. 24.
Blasphemous Pharisees: In a word hence comes the whole troop, the whole
heap of those blasphemous speeches which they cast forth against the God of
heaven, even from that mouth speaking blasphemies.

We have perused the effect in our Whether, now Malicious.
turn your eyes, and see the cause. The cause is Malice. Yea this Malice is
the Essential form of it Forma dat esse and distinguere.
which gives life to it, and distinguishes it from other persecution. For all
Persecution of the truth is not so severely to be censured. Many are carried
with a blind zeal to defend Superstition which they conceit to be the truth.
Heretofore in those Queen Mary's days.
bloody times of Antichrists domineering reign over us, though many especially
of the learned sort, cannot be excused from violating, yea, and resisting the
check of their own consciences in persecuting the Gospel: yet the common
people, and many other were ledd with a blind zeal to defend Popish received
Errors, and thereupon to oppose whatsoever was contrary to it. The same is to
be said of diverse among Stephens auditors, they did not all (questionless)
resist the spirit, though diverse of them did, but were carried with a blind
zeal for the defense of the Temple, and the Law of Moses.

This their Malice is set forth in Scripture by diverse phrases, Heb. 6. 4.
first, (...), Crucifying again to themselves the son of God: secondly,
(...), make a mock of him, as men that hate Christ, and as though they
crucified him again, make him a mocking stock to all the world, as did that
Julian Centur. Magdeburg. centu: qua^ta: cap. de Iulian^.
who still in mocking termed him the Galilaean, and the Carpenter, or Mary's
son, and Christians he called the Galilaeans; thus most impiously traducing
the sacred name of our ever blessed Savior. Thirdly, Heb. 10. ^9.
(...), Trampling under foot the Son of God. Furio^sly raging like
madd-dogs, tearing renting, like a Bear, or a she lion robbed of their
whelps, implacably furious. Julian is called H^^on C^tal. Scriptor: Ecclesiast.
Can^s r^bidus, a mad dog, for his f^ry and malice. Fourthly, (...), does
despite to the spirit of grace. Maliciously breaking forth into speeches and
actions, to grieve, to vex, yea, to despite the spirit of grace. Fifthly,
(...), The adversaries, which do profess open rebellion, proclaim open war
against God.

This their Malice ^^^th excl^d^ all pert^^bed and inordinate passions and
^^^ections. Peter denies his Master indeed, yea, and for swears his
knowledge, nay, he curses himself, if he know the man; but whence proceede^^
this exorbitancie? this his horrid, and horrible sin? Oh consider the place
where he was, and the time when he did it: In the high Priests Hall, while
Christ his Master is in danger of his life, where if he confess him, there is
no way with him but present death. It was (therefore) the fear of death that
makes him forget his Master, his fellows, his profession, yea himself, and
his own knowledge. Such is not our sin: We find Malice, and Malice in the
highest degree, which upon a bent Resolution and settled purpose, does affect
that kind of behavior. It is a witting, a willing, a wilful Malice, much
like to that of Satan, who, albeit there be no further motive why he should
resist, yet still he does because he will resist.

Malice (says Bernard su^er Canti^.
Bernard) is carried in a Charyot with four wheels, viz. Cruelty,
Impatiencie, Boldness, and Impudency. And therefore must needs be
wonderful swift to shedd blood. It is neither b^idled by fea^e, nor ^^rbed by
shame, neither stayed by innocence, nor stopped by patience Like the inexorable
sea that is violently whirryed and toised with a tempestuous wind Neither is
the Charyot so swift, as the Horses that draw it, fiery: these are two, viz.
Earthly power, and worldly pomp, which least they might not be violent enough
of their own accord, are spurred and pricked on by two most passionate
Waggoners, Fear and Envy. For partly through fear to loose that that they
have, and partly through envy of another glory, are men ledd forth violently
into the untilled and accursed field of spiteful Malice. This is the
disposition of our Apostata'es. In whom, if time and place do serve their
turn, you may observe yet further two other fruits of their Malice, viz first,
a forsaking of the Communion of Saints. Secondly, A siding and joining
fellowship with the Adversaries.

The first is perpetual; for how should they join society with those whom
they hate mortally, and wish extinguished? The other not so perpetual, but
where it is to be found does most easily and apparently detect this sin. Saul
could not side with the adversaries but Julian could: Judas did attempt, but
Alexander did effect it, and therefore the sin of these is more easy to be
discerned then of the other. Hitherto of the terms, Where they were, Where
they are, Whence they fell, Whether they are fallen. A word or two of their
Motion and so an end of the first general part at the first propounded.

The Motion does comprehend three words, which Motion.
do show the Genus of this sin, viz. Apostasy, and the differences of this
Apostasy from others, in that it is General and Voluntary.

The word Apostasy signifies Recidivation, Relapsing, Apostasy.
and (...) qui discedit ab eo, quod suscepit tuendum. Lex.
falling away from that which a man has heretofore taken upon him to profess.
In Scripture phrase it intimates a rebellious, revolting, and departing from
the Faith, and the profession of the Gospel. And so the word, and the phrase
is used. 2 These. 2. 3.
2 These. 2. 3. (...), except there come an Apostasy, a departing. And in
another place, (...), 1 Timothy 4. 1.
Some shall depart from the says: And Heb. 3. 12.
Heb. 3. 12. (...), In departing from the living God, in Apostatizing. The
which in the same Epistle is expounded by two other phrases, viz. Heb. 6. 6.
(...), If they fall away and Heb. 12. 15. Praepositio and q^i sequuntur
osten^unt, positum esse (...): So ^^za Annotat. General.
(...), That no man fall away from the grace of God, etc.

As it stands in the definition, it has rather respect to the Whether, then
the Whence, for the man being now relapsed, and already fallen away is said to
be an Apostata, and his sin Apostasy.

This Apostasy is not any particular Relapse from some particular points in
Religion. Herein were the Novatians blameworthy, who applied that Text of Heb.
6. against such who sinned after Baptism. Whereupon many took occasion to
refuse that Epistle as patronizing that over-strict, and uncomfortable
doctrine. As did others also reject the Beza in Prol^^o ante Apo^alypsin.
Apocalipse, because of the Ch^l^^sts and Millenaries. The which doing of
theirs was much like the cure of Alexanders thigh, being wounded with a Dart,
which could not be got forth unless a greater and deeper incision were made;
so that Curatio ipso vul^ere gravior fuit, The cure was more gr^enous then the
wound it self. And this their refuge was more grievous then the wound.

A great Argument of the great Ignorance that did encroach upon the western
Churches, Non tantum valebant doctrina vt refell^ndo ^^g^mento pare^essent.
Calv. in Heb. 6.
who were not able to vindicate these places from the Schismatic, and
Heretical glosses of deceivers: Particular lapses are bad beginnings, and men
are to take heed of them: but this is a General relapse and Apostasy, which
may be manifested. 1. By the use of the word in Scripture phrase. For it is
appropriated to signify a general and universal falling away. So Paul uses
the same word to signify the manner of departing from sin, which ought to be
in Christians, viz. a general and universal; (...), 2 Timothy 2. 19. Secondly,
By that place of Paul, Heb. 6. 6. Where he uses the phrase (...). Prolapsi,
id est, Si^ Anselmus.
prorsus lapsi, if they fall a way, id est, altogether, totally. For reason
wills that the fall be as general as the grace received. Excellent to this
purpose is the saying of Calvin, commenting upon the place, Nodus totius
disputationis, etc. The knott of the whole question, and disputation betwixt us
and the Nouatians depends on the right understanding of that word
Prolabantur, If they fall away, whereupon he distinguishes betwixt a
particular and an universal fall. Particular into some particular sin, as
Murder, Adultery, and the like. But the Apostle speaks not of these, Sed
not^t ^niversalem ab Evangelio desectoonem; vbi non aliqua ex part offendit
Deum, sed ejus gratia se totum abdica^ peccator. Calv. ibid.
but of an universal defection and falling away from the Gospel. Where the
sinner does not in some one thing offend God, but does altogether cast away
grace received. Thus Calvin. The which he further confirms by the Calv.
Instit. lib. 3. c. 7. 22.
Antithesis, and opposition betwixt the grace of God bestowed upon him, and
this his fall. So that if the grace be general as we heard before, so also
must be the falling away.

The sum of all this is, It is not a particular lapsing, sliding, falling,
but a general and universal falling away. Not the Eclipsing, or clouding of
the sun, but the full setting, yea, such a setting as admits no rising,
aeternall night. Like Noah's inundation overflowing all the face of the earth:
overwhelming the party delinquent within an Ocean of filthiness and polution.
The children of God do fall, but these fall away: David may grieve the spirit
of God, but Saul did quite quench it. In a word, it is not Deliquium animi, a
failing, or swooning, but seperatio animae, a separation, a plain death, a
total, general, and universal Apostasy.

Two ways is this Apostasy said to be universal, first, Simply, when men
do cast off all Religion, renounce the truth wholly, altogether contemning
both it, and all that belongs to it, to their might, opposing, hating,
blaspheming, and persecuting all that profess, and favor it. Of this kind
were those in the Primitive Church, who revolted to Paganism, and Gentilisme,
as did Iuliaa the Emperor: and as many do questionless, who live among the
barbarous Turks, and leaving their former profession, do turn Turks, and
embrace their abominations: and some that abide in the bosom of the Church,
who fall away to plain Atheism.

Secondly, Consequently when men do fall away and renounce some maine
fundamental point of the Gospel; the which being violently opposed, does
indeed by consequence strike at all the rest. Such was the Apostacy of
Mentioned in Soc^at. H^st. ^^b. 1. cap. ^. 6. Theol. Hist. lib. 1. cap. 4.
Sazom. lib. 1. cap. 14.
Arrius, who in opposing the foundation did indeed viol^^e all Religion. Such
were the Scribes and Pharisces, who albert they fasted and prayed, were st^ict
obseruers of the Ceremonial Law, and so had not cast off all Religion, yet
because they embraced not the Gospel preached to them by Christ, but
persecuted him who is the Truth it self, they fell into this sin. Why so?
Because this did even nullisie all the rest. So that as the body without the
soul is dead; so this their observation of the Law was dead Superstition, and
not true Devotion. Such was the Apostasy of Hym^^aeus and P^iletus, with
Verisimile est Alexan^^u^ h^c ipsum sens^se quod Hymenau^. Bulling* in 1. Tim.
1. 20.
whom join also Alex^nder, who as concerning the Truth (...). qu(...)n quoduis
(...), sed quod est e^usmo^i, vt suada ^entum non ret(...) Bez (...) in 2 Timothy
^^. 2. 18.
erred from the Mark, and so did overthrow the says of some. The Resurrection
a maine point in Religion, which being denied, does overthrow the faith of the
Scriptures, the providence of God, the fear of punishment, the hope of reward,
Labefactata mortu^^um resurrectione ^ollitur sides scripturarum; p^ovidentia
de^; metus poenarum, and spes praenuorum. Bull. in 2. Tim. 2. 18.
says Bullinger. Nay, if there be no Resurrection, Then as Paul at large
disputes, 1. Cor. 15.
Christ is not risen, and consequently, he is perished, we not redeemed,
justified, and much less glorified. Thus a little leaven leaueneth a whole
lump, and one absurdity begets a thousand. Such a matter it is to oppose
any fundamental point, and therefore S. Paul speaking of these persons, says,
That 2 Timothy 2. 17.
their word will frett, (...), as does a canker, or ga^graene, which if it take
hold of any member in the body, unless speedy remedy be found, it fre^^eth
the flesh, blood, bones, never ceasing till the whole man be destroyed. Such is
the negation, the denial of the fundamental and substantial points in
Religion, it will eat, it will frett and wear them all away, and so come to
be at last simply universal.

And certainly I see not why the same may not also be applied to many* who do
revolt to Antichristianisme, if all things else do concur^e. For howsoever
they do not reject all manner of Religion, yet if they first, wilfully set up
the Popes supremacy, which does over turn the sole Head ^^ip of Christ:
secondly, if maintain the blasphemous Mass to be a propitiatory sacrifice
for sin, which disanulleth the virtue of Christ's sacrifice: thirdly, if
defend Justification by works, which does overthrow the merit of Christ's
obedience and death. (For As for vnctio^, Purgatory, penance, confession,
praying for the dead, etc. albei^ they who hold them are not sound, yet unless a
man hold the other, he^ is not to be counted a Papist: No more then each
Haeretique is to be counted an Arri^n. For we know that he only is an Arrian,
who denies the consubstance of the Son. So he is to be counted a Papist who
holds these three points of Popery.
these are the three most substantial points of Popery, and whence a man is to
be denominated a Papist.) If (I say) they do wilfully dese^d these impieties,
and maliciously oppress the contrary truths (as for ought we can discern
some in Q. Mary's days did) having been heretofore well instructed in the
truth, and persuaded in their consciences that it was the truth. I see not how
such can be excused from the sin of which we speak. For as Sampson by
leaning against the maine pillars, did in effect lean against all the rest. As
David by killing Goliath, did indeed wound the whole Army. And as he that
uses violence against the corner stone in the building, may fitly be said to
^^i^^^e the whole, yea, though he should under prop some other part of it: So,
when a man does wilfully, and maliciously oppose the fundamental points, and
grounds of the Gospel, not caring, nor respecting what absurdities do follow
upon ^^s assertion, though he may seem to hold some points, yet indeed he
does oppose all, and so his Apostasy may justly be said to be universal. Even
as the generation is said to be of the whole man, though the act be only
terminated in the body. But in this as in all the rest, ^ desire that my Gerah
may be tried by the Sh^k^l of the Sanctuary. I dare not enter into the seat
of judgment ^o censure, but only desire to put this Quaere to the Judgment
of the learned, that upon due examination it may pass, as current, or be
convinced of Imperfection.

Only one word of the definition remains, and so ^
I shall end it. Not the least though the last, viz. Voluntari. This is (...)
necessarium, necessary with the first, ^^ is ^^ch ^n Apo^^^^ie which proceeds
not from any c^n^^r^i^t, or (...)on, but from the proper motion of the mind, a
w^^^^ll Apost^^^e. This word we gather (...) ^ul. H^b. ^0. 2^. (...), etc.
(...), and (...) the word answers to that (...), with an high hand. It
implies (...)ore then a simple and single will, it is rather (...)ing of that
facult^^ to the performance of wicked designs. Saint Peter does (...)ine it,
opposin^ it to necessity, (...) but willingly, willingly we (...) of good
things, but wilfully speaking of ^^^^^.

To (...) more f^lly. let me step into the pe^^ of the (...) men, and there
read the distinction betwixt Voluntary and Involuntary actions.

Voluntary actions are those which are performed with the full consent of the
will, both in respect of the use and exercise of the act, as also the
specifying and determination of the act. Thus the will of man rightly info^med,
is carried to will and not to nill the glory of God, and then specially to
glorify God in the obedience of this or that commandment. On the contrary
nilleth evil, and specifieth this act of ^illing or refusing in the specialtie
of Murder, Adulter^e, etc.

Involuntary actions are such which proceed from simple and faul^le^^e
Igno^antia tripliciter se habet ad actum voli^tatis, Conc^m^tanter,
C^ns^quenter, Ante^dinter. (...)ra non causant in v^suntar^um: Sed istud
(...)er. Aq. 12. q 6. Art. ^.
ignorance. Faultlesse ignorance is that which goes before the will of the
doer, and so is not voluntary. Such is that when a ^act is done which could not
be either foreseen or avoided; an example whereof God himself puts in his
law, Exodus 21. Deuteronomy. 1^. 4. The man that lopped the tree and in the lopping his
Axe head fell o^^ and sl^e another, These two kind of actions are simply such:
that simple voluntary, this simple involuntary. There is another kind of
actions, which are in some respect voluntary, and in some respect inv^luntary,
viz where the will is h^ndr^d in the performance, executing, and effecting of
the act* which is the second act of the will. For as for the Voluntas est
libera semper quoad exerciti^ a^^us, quamvi^ ^^sen ser quoad determinatione^.
Aq^m. 12. q. 1^ A^t. 2. ^t^mq. 6. Ar^. 4. I^ possibile est voluntati quoad
a^^umin (...)tum and eli^^tion vi(...) sed quam ^e ad a^lus an^^^at^^ ab (...)
^potes^.
first act, that is the use and exercise of the act either in willing or
nilling, there can be no constraint or hind rance of the will: but still
whatsoever it does, it does it willingly Tie a man in an hundred chains yet
cannot you hinder him from his will to go, thorgh he cannot put this will in
practice.

Hence it follows* that neither violence, nor fear, nor affected ignorance,
does al^er the will in respect of the first act thereof, (...)ce may force the ^
effect of the will, but not the act. As the man ^ound in chains may be
hindered from going, and det^yn^d^* this place but not hindered from willing to
go, not constrained willingly to abide. ^
Fear likewise may draw s^^th a consent while the man apprehends that to be
evil which is not, and so desires to shun it, and when consent is yielded,
the will does willingly will that which it wills. Some call these actions
mixed, partly willing, partly unwilling; but indeed they are more Simpliciter
voluatarium est, sed inuolunta^^^ secundum quid, ^. e. sit voluntari(...), ad
ev^^andum malum quod timetur. Aquin. ibid.
voluntary then involuntary, because the power of willing is free still to will
o^ to nill, though the performance of the act in this particular is badly
placed, Because the passion of fear does apprehend the present Object to be
good, which indeed is evil. Ignorantia consequens actu^ voluntatis Aq. 12. q.
6. 8.
Affected ignorance least of all ca^ cause an Involuntary action, seeing that
his ignorance is Uoluntary. Man wilfully continuing in ignorance, and either
neglecting or despising the means of knowledge, that so he may continue in the
course of life which he likes.

From all this I gather, first, That affected ignorance is so far from
excusing a fault, that it does rather aggravate the offense. Secondly, That
neither fear, nor violence can altogether excuse men from blame in willing
evil, because the willingness of the will cannot be compelled, though indeed
it may be much persuaded.

To apply this to our purpose. This Apostasy is called wilful. 1. Because it
proceeds Ab intrins^^o v^l^ndi prin^^p^^.
from the inward beginning of willingness, from the immediate act of the will
( ab ipso velle) the willing of the will it self. 2. It is free from violence,
from fear, from ignorance, which are the causes that do in any respect cause
involuntary actions. Yet this does not hinder, but that there may be some
incitation, some inclination, and stirring of the will by some external Object.

As the Scribes and Phaerisees were ambitious and loved the praise of men; this
inclined their will. Judas was covetous, a thief, and the hope of gain
stirred his will. Yea this their concupiscence and desire did make their ^
Aquin. 12. q. 6 Art. 7.
action the more wilful, Aquinas gives the reason, because, A thing is said
to be voluntary in that the will is carried to it, but by the concupiscence is
the will inclined to will that which it desires. And further he says it is De
ratione voluntarij est, quod principium ejus sit intra, sed non opo^^e^, quod
hoc int^insecum principium sit primum ^ovens non motion ab alio. Aquin. 12. q.
9. Art. 1. 1.
necessary to denominate an actio^ willing that the beginning of it be inward.
But it is not necessary tha^ this inward beginning should be the first moover,
not moved by another. For Non tantum ex appetitu boni and finis, ipsa voluntas
move^^^ sed necessarium est, vt ab exteriori objecto, moveatur in suum primum
all^m. ibid.
not only is the will moved by the desire of good, and the chief end; but
also it is often necessary that the first act of the will be stirred up by some
external Object. Neither can any man say that the Apostasy of Judas, the
falling away of Demas, and the like, was not properly to be termed wilful,
because there was some outward respect to move them: unless also he will deny
that Adam ^ell voluntarily, in whom there was an external Object, and a
forcible perswader to stir up the act of his will.

Last of all, in Saul, Judas, Julian, and the like, their action must needs be
simply voluntary, in that they had time of Deliberation. For the Apprehension
of good does not work so effectually upon the will as does the Apprehension of
evil. And therefore those passions which do apprehend good, do not take away
Election and Deliberation, but do allow men sufficient time to think of all
inconveniences, and give them liberty to resolve whether they will do so or
no. Whereas those passions which do apprehend evil, do not so easily suffer
a man to consult, and therefore if these cause not involuntary actions, much
less do the former.

Whereby you see the difference betwixt the fact of Judas, and the fall of
Peter. Judas has time to call his wits together, to consult with Reason, to
deliberate with himself what he will do, to sum up all inconveniences that
may ensue, and thereupon proceeds upon full purpose and resolute intention.
Whereas Peter has no such respite, on the sudden he must answer, and had no
time to forethinke himself; For the fear of danger had so possessed him, that
no place was left for Deliberation. Hitherto concerning the first maine part of
my Discourse, showing what this sin against the holy Ghost is. Now let me
lead you a-long to the second, viz. Why it is so mortal. Let not your patience
fail me to the end.

The second Part. Why the sin against the holy Ghost is so mortal?

FOr confirmation of this second point, though much might be said, yet it shall
now be my care rather to select that which is most for the purpose, then to
collect and heap together a multitude of matter, of which perhaps some might
say, and say truly, Totum hoc est (...). This is besides the purpose. In
brief, I will reduce it to this Sillogisme.

Prop. That sin which is without all hope of pardon and irrem^ssible, is
deadly and mortal. Even as that wound is said to be mortal, which is
incurable, and past all help of Surgery.

Assumption. Such is this our sin, irremissible, and without all hope of
pardon, and therefore mortal.

Plinius Plin. Epist. lib. 6. Epist. 3.
Secundus in one of his Epistles affirms it to be the office of an Author us
titulum legate, to read the ^^le of his Book, and often to ask himself, what
he has begun to handle knowing this, that if he keep him to his matter, he
cannot be taedious, though he may be long. Certainly his observation is good
and worthy to be remembered, not only of a Writer, but also of an Orator, of
an Auditor. Of an Orator, least he abuse his Auditory. Of an Auditor least his
censure seem rather to proceed from the rashness of a Caviller, then from the
judgment of an understanding hearer.

Wherefore as in the handling of the former Part, raised all my matter from the
definition praefixed, and reduced the words of the definition to certain
heads, that so still I might read my Title, and you might see what I was in
doing: So, here in this second Part, that both you and I may still find our
selves, this shall be the Title, that we must often read, viz. The
assumption of the former Sillogisme. For I hope that in prooving this our sin
to be irremissible, I shall draw each one to conclude with me, That it is
mortal. The irremissibilitie stands then to be confirmed by the rule of
Faith, which is Scripture, by the guide of action which is reason.

For Scripture, let us first scanne that which the Evangelists Scripture.
have set down. Mat. 12. 32.
Matthew says. It shall not be forgiven, neither in this world, nor in the
world to come. Neither in this world in soro conscientiae in the Court of
conscience, God speaking peace to our consciences: Nor in the world to come in
soro iudicij, in the last judgment. Neither in this world per solutionem
ministerij by the ministry of the word, loosing upon earth. Nor in the world
to come per approbationem Christi, by the approbation of Christ, loosing that
in heaven which was loosed upon earth by the ministry. The which phrase of
Matthew is expounded by Mark Mar. 3. 29.
Non in aeternum, it shall never be forgiven, in the same sense that Peter
says, Ioh. 13. 8.
Non in aeternum lavabis: id est, nunquam. Thou shall never wash my feet. Or
else to mend the example because Marcus non accep^t vocem (...) c^dem sensu quo
Petrus siquidem in^pte dixisset Petrus, Non lavabis mihi neque in hocs^^uso
neque in futuro: quia pedes non lauantur in futuro. Sed non in^pte hoc in loco
dominus. Non r^mittetur, etc. Bell: ^ li. 1. de Purgat. cap. 4.
Bell^rmine does carpe at that of Peter in the same sense in which Christ uses
the phrase to the woman of Sam^ria, John 4. speaking of the water that he
would have given her, (...), He shall never thirst, id est, neither in this
world nor in the world to come, that so the similitude may to satisfy
Bellarmine run on four feet, and agree in terminis.

And mark I pray you the concordance of the three Evangelistes Luke Luke 12.
10.
says plainly Non remittetur: It shall not be forgiven, Mark says Non in
aeternum, never forgiven. Matthew. Neque in hoc seculo etc. Neither in this
world, nor in the world to come. So that whether we begin with Matthew and
expound him by Mark, and Mark by Luke, or ( vice versa) begin with Luke and
increase his negative by Mark, and amplify that of Mark by Matthew, all is one
in substance. Indeed here is the difference, that Matthew to cut off all hope
of pardon, and to shut this sin perpetually from remission, uses this
distribution of time. And certainly not without just cause; For as God, when
he charged Laban Neque b^anditij^ neque asperita^^ eum (...) nititor: Ideo
Laban hujus rei nullam menti^nem sacit, ab on^m ta^en colloquio non abstinet.
Annotat. T^emell.
to use no means to bring Jacob back again, least Laban might think it
lawful to use fair means though not foul, did use a distribution of the
things neither good nor evil: As Moses after the explication of the Law
adds Thou Deuteronomy. 5. 32.
shall not turn aside (id est) no whether, but least they might suppose it not
amiss to turn to the right hand, though not to the left, to embrace
superstition though not wickedness: he uses the partition of places, Neque ad
dex^ram, neque ad sinistram. Neither to the right hand: As Paul having set
forth the effect of the Gospel, that it is Romans 1. 16.
Potentia Dei ad salutem cuivis credenti. The power of God to salvation to
every one that believes: least the Jews might dream of some prerogative does
distribute the persons, and Iudaeo and Graeco both to the Jew and the Greek:
So in this place least some might think (as did Sic Beda in Mar. 3. and
Rabanus, et ex Rabani c^mmentario Aquinas in Aurea catena.
Origin afterward) that this sin (as all other sins) might be remitted, though
not in this life, yet post novissimum judicium multis voluminibus seculorum
after many revolutions of future ages: there fore does Matthew use this
distribution of times. Neither in this world, nor in the world to come.

Pass we from the Gospel to the Epistles Heb. 6. 4. 5 (...), etc. It is
impossible etc. He says not (as do the Jesuits) it is difficult and very
hard, but plainly impossible. Neither says he to renew them to baptism, or
to make them pertakers of a second Baptism, but to renew them again to
Repentance. Or that they should ^e renewed again by Repentance* Repentance (I
say) not Baptism. For what absurdity is it for our Rhemists to confound
Repentance with-Baptisme. Or if some of the Ancients did so understand it, did
they not by denying Baptism, the Sacrament of Remission, deny* also Remission?
Or if the Apostle mean that this sin of Apostasy does exclude from a second
Baptism: wherein shall it differ from other sins, unless other sins may
allow a man a second Baptism upon his Repentance which were ridiculous?

Again, mark what the same Apostle adds* Heb. 10. 26. There remain^th no
more sacrifice for sin: The Sacrifices of the old Law were effectual in
their time to the expiation of sin, if joined with faith. Since they were
abolished, the Sacrifice of Christ's death is effectual: But if this also be
despised, this being the last, there is no more Sacrifice for sin, and yet
without Sacrifice, no remission of sin.

This is the tenor of the sacred Scripture, thus does the spirit speak to the
Churches, and they who are of God, do acknowledge the voice of the Spirit.
Wherefore if the Papists will expound cannot be forgiven, by can be forgiven:
Never by one day, Neither, in this world, nor in the world to come, by both in
this world and in the world to come, Impossible by possible, though difficult,
Repentance by Baptism, and the like: Certainly it is reason that they show
some authority that they* have, thus to expound the Scripture, and to warrant
their licentious interpretations, else when we read such glosses, we shall
imagine that we hear not men, but Bellies speak, which have sworn to defend
their ^rroniu^ positions, whatsoever become of the truth of the Scriptures. Yea
if this may be allowed, what ^uidence of words can there be found, whereby the
truth shall be able to defend her self against untruth and heresy?

We have heard the ^uidence of Scripture* let v^ also hear the witness of
Reason. And first, if you please, the reason^ alleged by the Schoolmen.

The sin against the Holy Ghost is irremissible, says Reason.
Aquinas* Aquin. 22. q. 14. Art. 3. and 22. q. 118 Art. 5. 3.
First, either because it is final impenitency, and after this life is no
repentance, and no Remission: and that sin which is not remitted here, is
never dimitted hereafter, according to the saying of Da^as^ene, which yet is
somewhat too slack. Omnia peccata mortalia sieve magna sieve parua, antemortem
sn^t remissibili^ post mortem vero irremissibili^ and perpetuomanentia. Aquin.
ex Damasc.
All mortal sins whether great or small (he should have excepted this our
sin) are remissible before death, but after death are irremissible and
remain for ever. Secondly, or Irremissible, Ex part contemptus, because it
contemns the mercy of God, and rejects that by which man might obtain
pardon. Thirdly, Or else because it deserves to have no pardon, as being a
sin of certain and wilful malice, for which cause it can have none: Whereas
sins of infirmity and ignorance may seem to deserve some hope of pardon.
Thus Aquinas very well, if we be favorable in his censure, he has another
reason* why it is called Irremissible, but indeed that h^l^eth, viz. ^ Because
^ Aquin. part. 3 q. 86. Art. 1.
it is not easily remitted. But here I pray you take notice of the mystery of
Iniquity: Whereas the other expositions of Irremissible might have been
allowed, the Jesuits either refuse them, or stick not to them; but to this,
the worst, the weakest they adhaere, they cleave, this they allow of* and
approve it: Why I know not, but I hele^^ for some such reason as moved them,
among all the six abo^e mentioned species of this our sin, especially to
choose out Impenitency: viz. the same that the fawning Parasite* in the Pla^t.
in ^il. glor. A^^. 1.
Poet gave for his good memory, Offame monet, his belly was his Register. So
certainly their belly, their gains was the chief cause: For what think you
is meant by Impaenitency? Perhaps, you would think, the re^ecting of Gods
grace, that might bring him to Repentance: No no, It is a w^lfull contempt of
the Sacrament of Paenance, obstinately re^using absolution by the Churches
Ministry, as the Rhem. Test. in Mat. 12.
Rhemists do define it. Now who sees not, that if this be Impaenitency, and
Impaenitency the sin against the holy Ghost, and the sin against the holy
Ghost, a sin unto death; what a strong and inexpugnable ground here is for
Popish Paenance? The same is there here for Commutation of Paenance, for if
this sin be remissible, but not de sacile, easily, then must there come a
good round portion to the Priest for a gentle Commutation. Some such reason as
this, I guess moved the holy Fathers of shrift, to magnify this exposition
that Aquinas gives of Irremissible, or else this: As one well observes in
their handling of Mat. 12. they follow S. Augustine walking alone, rather then
Hillary, Jerome, Chrysostom and other, for what reason he knows not, unless
it be for that, here, Augustine went farthest from the words and sense of the
Scripture: So I may say here, I see not why this should please them better than
the other, unless it be for that it goes farthest from the words and sense of
the holy Scripture.

But to let these pass, come we to those Reasons which more Orthodoxall
writers will afford us, the which for my memories sake I will reduce to three
heads. Some are drawn from the Object. Some from the Nature. Some from the
Punishment of this sin. The Object against which this sin does bend it
self, is externally, the Gospel: Internally, the spirit of Grace, that
works by the Gospel.

First then it being a sin against the Gospel it must Gospel.
needs be Irremissible: For, what is the Gospel but the word of Grace, the
ministration of Life, declaring unto man (in himself lost) a way by which he
may return to his former estate of Grace and Glory. Now so long as there is
not the knowledge of the Mediator, and of this means of recovery, the words of
the Lord have place. q Shall they fall, and not arise? Shall they (...) 4
turn away, and not turn again? But when once the means of recovery by the
Gospel is neglected, contemned, and despised, then is there no place for
remission: So long as there is not the knowledge of the Mediator, it seems
impossible that the creature should Irrecouerably fall from the Creator.

And herein certainly is there one maine difference, betwixt the fall of Adam,
and the fall of the Angels. Adam fell by misperswasion, being deceived by the
lying suggestion of the spirit of error: D^. Field of the Church li. 1. cap. 3.
But the Angels being intellectual spirits, dwelling in heavenly places, in
the presence of God, and light of his countenance, could not sin by error or
misperswasion, but of purposed malice, which is the sin against the holy
Ghost, and is Irremissible. Adam falling from the knowledge of the Law, fell
recouerably: They falling from the knowledge of the Gospel, fell
Irrecouerably: For understanding of this. I praesuppose, that God did signify
to the Angels these points at once. First, that their Righteousness consisted
in their Obedience. Secondly, that the acceptance of their obedience should be
through Christ. Christ, I say, who in fullness of time was to be incarnate, and
to take, not the nature of Angels, but of man, and by the personal union of
the two natures in his one person, lift up the humanity above the nature of
Angels, and so remaining one individual person, to be the head of the Church.
Thirdly, that from this person should be expected, all good whatsoever, so that
what good soever the creature was to receive, they were to receive it from God
only, in the name of this mediator, this being the sum of the Gospel, no
doubt, was delivered to them* and so in a manner the whole will and council of
God, both of Law and Gospel, and that by a shorter and nearer way than man is
capable of; they having Field ibidem.
the fullness of intellectual light* so that when they take view of any thing,
they see all that pertains to it, whereas man finds but one thing after
another. This Peccatum Angelorum illud tum primis esse videtur, qu^d in
veritate I u^ngelij de Christo ^am inde ab initio illis proposita acqui^s^^re*
noluerunt: atque ita n^lue^u^t, ^^maluerint potius suamp^^mam originem suu^que
caeleste domicilium des^^^^e, quam ^lli ve^ttatis* (...). Zanch lib. 4. de
Operil, d^^^a. 2*
doctrine of the Gospel being manifested to them, the devils rejected it,
partly puffed up with pride, in respect of the excellency of their own nature,
scorning to be accepted in any but themselves; partly envying so great glory to
the nature of man, disdayning to be subject to Christ, as man, and to stand
obliged to him for all benefits; altogether refused to be obedient to this
ordinance of God, and so refused as that they chose rather to leave their first
estate, and their heavenly habitation, than to agree and subscribe, and submit
themselves, to this aeternall and immutable decree of God. And which is yet
more plain to manifest their sin, to be the sin against the holy Ghost:
They fell, having received the knowledge of the whole work of the three
persons, for, and unto the Angels. First, of God the Father, creating and
giving a Law, and taking exception against their disobedience. Secondly, of God
the Son, in whom only stood reconciliation and acceptance, through his
obedience, more worth and honorable to God the Father, than that of all the
creatures, both Angels and men. Thirdly, of God the holy Ghost, by whose power
and grace only, is possibility for any creature, man or Angel, to stand or
recover. This in modesty may we believe to have been the fall of Angels, whose
sin is Irremissible as is this our sin in man, because it is an Apostasy
from the Gospel.

Secondly, as against the Gospel, so against the Spirit, Spirit.
which works grace by the Gospel. The Schoolmen said not nothing,
inascribing Power to the Father, Knowledge to the Son, and Grace to the holy
Ghost. Against the Father men sin of infirmity, against the Son of
Ignorance, and these two are remissible. But against the holy Ghost men sin
of malice, and this is irremissible. But I would rather have said thus: That in
regard these men sin against the spirit ( id est, the proper effect and work
of the spirit in them) their sin must needs be irremissible, because there is
not another person in the Trinity, whereby they might receive grace, and arise
to Repentance: For God the Father bestowed Innocence and righteousness upon
the creature at the first, by which he might live. This being lost, God the
son came to repair it, and to restore us to our former estate, and he indeed
paid the price of our redemption. But man being in the state of nature could
have no benefit by it. Then came the holy Ghost and regenerated and quickened
man, and taught him what Christ had done for him, what is the virtue of his
death and passion, yea, the spirit also applies the blood of Christ, and by it
washes and purifieth the heart of man, and so sanctifies both body and soul.
Hitherto you see how still as man profits not by the former grace, there is
yet another person in the Trinity who by a second work can make the first
effectual. But now, when it is come to this, that the work of the spirit is
resistell, and impugned, so that these three persons have given him over* there
is none other means for him to recover. For to whom should he go when these
forsake him? Where may he find a Physician, if these conclude his wound is
incurable?

Where are you all you grand Imposters of the world? You strict defenders of
the Intercession of Saints and Angels? Now come forth and help. Here, here is
place for the Indulgences of your Popes, the merits of your Saints, the
intercession of your Angels. Here is a man forsaken of God, out of all hope of
heaven, can you now cure him? If there be any Deity in your Saints, any
Divinity in your Angels, any hope, any help, any merit, any mercy, any
virtue, any power, now let them show it; Let them recover this forlorn man out
of the gulf of hell, restore him to his former estate of grace: reform his
will, cure his affections, renew his mind, create a right spirit within him,
in a word vendicate him from everlasting perdition, and destruction. Oh!
miserable comforters are you all: here, where there is need of help you do
forsake, there, where there is no need you promise it largely: No, no, this
man's estate is wretched, though not lamentable, Li^sius distinguishes betwixt
M^s^^atio and M^s^ricordia.
miserable though not pitiful. He has forsaken God, refused heaven, to hell
he must, there to be tormented so long as God shall live for ever, for ever.

Thus much for the Reasons drawn from the Object: The nature also of this
sin is such, that it refuses, repugneth all pardon, as which does indeed 1.
wittingly, 2. wilfully, 3. malitlously, 4. totally fall from the profession of
godliness.

God having created man, ordained in his soul two Wittingly.
principal faculties to be the guides of his life, the conducters of his
actions: viz. the Understanding and the Will. The understanding he furnished
with knowledge of the will of his creator in heavenly things. This knowledge
being lost in Adam, was repaired again by Christ, who is the light that
lights every one that comes into the world by the Meminerimus hic tantum
ag^ de communi naturae lu^e etc. Calv. in Ioh. 1. 9 So also Musculus ibid.
Omnes homines illuminantur luce qua^ vocant nature, quae ratio est and
intelligendi vis. etc.
light of nature: and the Son of Righteousness shining in our hearts by the
light of grace: by whose spirit we are led into all truth, and thereby are
enlightened in the understanding to discern both good and evil. This is the
grace which of God we have received: and received to this end (questionless)
that the abundance of knowledge should work effectually in us, in turning us
from all iniquity, and should teach us to deny all ungodliness, and worldly
lusts. Wherefore if we do wittingly put out this light, extinguish this
knowledge, quench the spirit, and having the key of knowledge, do yet shut up
heaven gate against our selves* if we know our Masters will and do it not: if
we know the l^ght and therefore hate it, see the plague and run into it. What
remedy can there be? What hope of pardon, or of remission? Had we not seen,
we had had no sin, but now that we see, our sin remains: It had bin
better not to have known the way of righteousness, then after knowledge to
turn from the holy Commandment. Better says Peter, id est, less punishable
by far. Affected ignorance is very liable to the curse of God, but witting
reiection of knowledge once received is abominable. If we sin (...) after
the knowledge and acknowledging of the truth, there remains no more sacrifice
for sin.

As they are destitute of pardon, because wittingly Wilfully.
they sin, so also because wilfully. The will of man (the other principal
faculty in man's soul) was endued with freedom, that so it might freely
work: and following the direction and guidance of the understanding might
apply it self to embrace and choose the good, and to eschew and refuse the
evil. The strength of this indeed was overthrown by Adams fall, but it being
much renewed by Christ, serves to the same end still. Wherefore when men do
wilfully and of set purpose, turn aside and sin, not of infirmity, but of
peevishness, who can help them? If the Patient be willing to be cured, the
Physician may by his skill do much: But if he be froward, perverse, wilful,
obstinate, and will not be healed, there may be balm in Gilead, and Physicians
there, but yet the wound will not be recovered. Invitum q^i servat idem facit
occidenti. Hor.
Who can cure him that refuses to be cured? Certainly the Physicians that
enterprise this must return the complaint of the Prophet, I^r. 51. 9.
We would have cured Babell, and she would not be cured, forsake her, etc. for
her judgment is come up to heaven, and is lifted up to the clouds.

It is worth the noting, that in the Law there was no Sanctuary for wilful
murderers. Neither in the Gosspell is there any pardon for wilful Apostataes.
It is the word of the Lord, and it will be found true, Le. 26. 23. 24.
If ye walk stubbornely against me, I will walk stubbornely against you. And
that of the Psalmist* Psalm. 18. 27.
With the froward thou will deal frowardly. You have seen a stubborn son,
and a severe father, (as it were) striving for the victory. The father
scourges him for his fault, the son he striveth, strugleth, roareth,
sobbeth, snubbeth, and ready he is to burst for anger. The father then grows
angry, and to him again, and lays on sorer and fiercer yet will not the
varlet yield; stubborn still, stomackfull, fretting, vexing, no father, no
mother, no blessing, no submission: What should the father now do? Must he now
let him carry it away? Certainly it is not the best: No, he is resolved either
to break this his stomach, or tear away this rebellious flesh, discover the
sinnewes, let him blood; now he is grown resolute, and there is no mercy with
him, no compassion, his mother may not entreat, nor his friends beg his
pardon: No, since he has begun to walk stubbornely against his father, his
father will walk stubbornely against him. And deservedly. So is it here: This
perverse, peevish, stubborn, obstinate wilfulness makes the sin to be
Irremissible.

Neither is there a fault only in the will but also in the Maliciously.
actions, which adds more fuel to the fire prepared for the punishment of
this sin. The propensitie and pronenesse in man's nature to move forward
toward his end, God placed in the will, and this his will he furnished with
diverse affections, as the Aqui^^es co^pareth them to the natural inclination
in liue-les things, called Sympathy and Antipathie. 1. 2. q. 29. 1.
Instruments of the soul either to cleave to the good or to refuse the evil.
Among the rest there is the affection of delight, the continuance of which
engenders love of Good by which the soul indissolubly cleaves to the same*
On the contrary is the affection of anger, the continuance of which brings
forth Odium est inverata^ra. Szeged. loc. com.
hatred, by which the soul is irreconciliably separated from the evil. This
hatred therefore is an affection in it self like to the planet Mercury,
neither good nor bad, but according to the Object: There is an hatred good and
just, viz. which is bent against evil, and this is the right use of the
affection. There is an hatred wicked, and unjust, viz. when men hate that which
is good: and this continues not long but it brings forth malice. The which
is bad enough where (least of all) evil; so the more excellent that the good
is which it opposes, the more exorbitant is it and abominable. When as
therefore the affection that should keep us from evil, is perverted to keep
us from good: When this perverted affection is directed, nay, vomited forth
against God, his Church, his truth, his servants, those that profess the name
of Jesus: how wicked, how pestilent is this alienation? What hope of pardon can
there be to such a one? Or which way might one devise to care him? Though the
disease be dangerous, yet if the Patient be willing to be healed, have an
affectionate love to his Physician, there may be some hope: But when he
grows to be peevish, loatheth his food, quarrels with his friends, hates
his Physician, resists his Physic, who can help it if he go to his grave,
and that speedily? So here, when man grows to this pass that he crucifieth
again the son of God, trampleth underfoot the blood of the new Testament,
does despite to the spirit of grace, and thus professes himself an open
enemy, and adversary: What can remain, but a fearful looking for of
judgment, and violent fire, which shall devour the adversaries?

Lastly, this sin comes to be irremissible, in that Totally.
it is a total and universal Apostasy. Dan. 4. 15*
Nebuchadnezzars tree might yet flourish again: for the root was left in the
earth. Act. 20. 10.
Eutichus fell from the third loft, yet there was hope: for his life was in
him. Luke 10. 30.
The Travailer was sore wounded, yet recovered, how so? They left him but half
dead. So though David fall by adultery, Solomon by Idolatry, Peter by denial,
yet there is hope of recovery: the root remains, the life is not quite gone,
his seed remains in them. But Iud. ver. 12.
Iudes trees are past recovery: why so? They were twice dead and plucked up by
the roots. Daniels Dan. 6. 24.
accusers were incurable. For why? the Lions brake all their bones or ever they
came at the ground of the den. 2. Sam. 2. 23.
Asahells wound was past all Surgery, for Abner smote him under the fifth
ribbe, namely, whereas the lively parts lie. So when the fall is total, that
utterly decays the life and brings in death, what hope can there be of
Remedy?

Some there are, which make a nice distinction betwixt Total and Final
recidivation: and I deny not, but the terms are different: but experience
teaches, and the Scripture confirms, that in substance they are not much
different. For where there is a Total, there is also a final loss of grace.
Witness the evil Angels who having once totally lost their grace, have lost
it for ever. Witness Adam, who having once lost Original righteousness
totally, lost it also finally: God indeed does sanctify particular persons,
but not the Humane nature in general any more. And the reasons drawn from the
nature of this sin, prove it to be Irremissible and consequently mortal.

You have heard the nature of the sin which proves it to be irrecouerable.
Now turn your eyes and behold the punishment of it, likewise confirming the
irremissibilitie of it. Not the plenary penalty of it, but the praeparatiue;
not that which hereafter is to be expected, but some of that which in this life
is executed and inflicted: So much of it I mean as conducteth to this end, to
prove it to be Irremissible.

Wherein first comes to be considered, that God depriueth Deprived of the
Churches prayers.
them of the Churches prayers. He will not have such prayed for, and therefore
their sin must needs be Irremissible. Frame the Argument thus. They who sinning
may not be partakers of the Churches prayers, are without all hope of pardon.
Such are our Apostataes ( ergo). The proposition is manifest. For to what cause
should they be denied the Churches prayers, which are many times a means to
work repentance in men, and to procure pardon for them, but only because God
does not entend to have any mercy on them? Why is Ier. 7. 16. and 11. 14. and
cap. 14. 11.
Jeremy forbidden to pray for the people, but because the Lord had an entention
not to hear him, but to consume them utterly? The Prayer of a Iam. 5. 16.
faithful man avails much if it be fervent; witness Moses praying for the
people, and Eliah against them: And therefore the Lord in this point deals as
a King uses to do, that knows his own merciful nature, having determined
to cut of such a rebel, does withal forbid the prayers of all such* who might
intercede for him, least perhaps their importunacy might move him to mercy.

The Assumption also is as clear, for notwithstanding the false Interpretation
of the Jesuits, yet it has been proved before that these words of S. John, I
say not that thou should pray for it, are a direct prohibition, interdicting
and forbidding any prayers to be made for him that sins unto death. So also
we read that the Lord did 1 Samuel 16. 1.
reprove Samuel for mourning for Saul, whom the Lord had rejected, intimating
that we ought not to show our selves more pitiful than God, nor to mourn for
them whom the Lord has rejected. Neither do I read any prayer, either by
Samuel or David, after that time, conceived for Saul. Lastly, our Savior in
his prayer does except Judas the son of perdition.

Neither is this all: But as they may not pray for such, Imprecation.
so also do they pray agaiust them: Thus have holy men of God heretofore, being
stirred with zeal, for Gods glory, deuowed and accursed the wicked and
malicious enemies of the Church. Thus David many times: Let us observe his
vehemence, Psalm. 69. 22* 29.
Let their Table be a snare, etc. id est. Omnes eorum delitia, so Chrysostom.
All their delights, whatsoever was ordained to make their lives comfortable.
Let their eyes be blinded and bow down their backs, Priva eos ratione and
intelligentia: deinde e^erva eorum vires, vt prorsus inutiles si^t ad omnem
actionem. Calv. in Psalm. 69.
id est. Take away both judgment: blind their understandings: take away their
power and strength. Pour out thine anger upon them, etc. Not a small
sprinkling, but the full viols of thy wrath, make them to drink the dregs
thereof; neither let it end in them, but redound to their posterity, to blot
out the memorial of them. Let their habitation be void, etc. Yea, he
proceeds, Add iniquity to their iniquity, id est: cast them into a
Reprobate sense, that they never may come to Repentance, as p Calvin expounds
it. Let q Vt Deus spiritu suo eos destituens conijci^t in sensum reprobu^: ne
vnqua^ ad resipiscendu^ aspirent.
their iniquity be increased more and more, that so it may plainly be
perceived that they are of the reprobate. Geneuenses. Or else as Tremellius,
reads, Affice eos aterna p^na, quasi alteram super addens alteri. Trem. Annot.
in Psalm. 69.
Add punishment to their punishment, id est: Having pursued them with
temporal punishments in this life, prosecute them also with eternal in the
life to come. Blot them out of the book of Life, and let them not be numbered
with the Righteous, id est. Howsoever by their profession hitherto they have
seemed to be written in the book of Life, and have been counted among the
Righteous, as members of the Church: Yet since their wickedness is grown to
that height, that they persecute him whom thou have smitten, let them now be
known as Reprobates, and exterminated and banished out of thy Church: That it
may plainly be perceived, that they have neither part, nor portion, nor
inheritance among the Saints. Thus you see how he does Anathematize and curse
the obstinate impaenitent and malicious persecutors of the Church: Anathematize
(I say) not pray for them, as Thus quoted by Dr. Willet in his Hexapla upon the
Romans. viz. in cap.
Origin would have it, nor merely prophecy of what should befall: as Aug de
Sermon. Dom. in mente lib. 1.
Augustine, but smite them with a curse; and well he might, it being Gods
cause, himself being directed to it, by an extraordinary and prophetical
Spirit, and they being the professed enemies of God.

Thus Paul 1 Cor. 16. 22.
If any man love not the Lord Jesus, id est. hates, execrateth, blasphemeth,
which is the sin against the holy Ghost, Let him be Anathema, Maranatha,
accursed for ever, even till the Lord Jesus come from heaven with flaming fire
to render vengeanec, to devour the adversaries.

These are general, for particular impraecations, besides ^ 2 King. 2. 24.
the example of Elisha u cursing the children, and Paul doing the like to Acts.
13. 10. ^1.
Elymas the sorcerer, there is Psalm. 109. where David does most bitterly devowe
and curse his enemy, whether it were Doeg or Saul, or some other once-familiar
friend. And Paul speaking of Alexander the copper-smith, who was one of our
Apostata's, adds 2 Timothy 4. 14.
The Lord reward him according to his works: Yea, and for the safety of the
Church, he proceeds to excommunication of him: 1 Timothy 1. 10.
Whom I have delivered to Satan. Theod. hist. lib. 3. cap. 19.
The Ecclesiastical Histories do record, that diverse in the primitive Church,
did pray against Julian the Apostata, applying the Psalms of David against him
and his Idolatry, and after his fall, the Church of Antioch made feasts of joy,
rejoicing greatly over him, and mocking and deluding his followers and
adhaerents: (...). Theod. hist. lib. 3. cap. 27.
Where are thine auguries o foolish Maximus, God and his Christ at length has
overcome.

Neither are we to suppose that these are left to us only, as matterr of
History, monuments of Antiquity: But certainly for matter of imitation,
always provided that we warily and carefully, have respect unto those things
which are to be observed in Imprecation. Now that we may be true imitators of
David, and so lawfully apply the Psalms of Imprecation, we must says Calvin
comment in Psalm.
Calvin induere personam Christi, Put on the person of Christ, id est. deal in
his cause: For, so shall we find, that, still when David comes to
Imprecation, he was, First, not carried away with an immoderate carnal
affection. Secondly, nor handled his own cause. Thirdly, nor was inflamed with
inconsiderate and rash zeal. So just we do.

In the practice of Anathematizing, and Imprecation, What is to be observed in
Imprecation.
there must be observed: First, The person accursing, that he be a man of
knowledge, wisdom, and discretion; that so he may wisely understand the
condition of the person to be accursed, the spirit that moves him, the end
which he propounds to himself, and the time when he is to do or not to do
it. Secondly, The person accursed, that he be such an one of whom (besides that
he is a public, and no private enemy) there is no hope of amendment,
intractable, incorrigible, yea a professed enemy to God, and all goodness.
Thirdly, The spirit by which he is led. Not of a private passion; not led away
with carnal affection, but with a single eye, not hating the person, but
judging and misliking the wicked practices of such, by whom God is dishonored:
In a word it must be the spirit of Prudence, to distinguish betwixt the curable
and the incurable: Of Uprightness, to sequester and separate his affections
from his own private cause: Of Moderation, to compose the mind to patience
meekness and toleration. Fourthly, The end which one propounds to himself,
which must not be the desire of revenge; but the zeal for Gods glory, which
he sees to be trodden down under foot. Fifthly, the time, viz. After For I
mean the curse which is used to cut off, not to cure. Sometime the Church does
smite with the curse, but yet that the Spirit may be saved in the day of the
Lord. Sometime it ^ccu^seth with a final curse utterly cutting off the parties
delinquent.
that all means of recovery and amendment being used, yet none amendment
follows, but rather evil men wax worse and worse, so that there is good
cause to believe that the party is incorrigible; yea, and given up to a
Reprobate sense. Add to this that the hour of death, is no fit nor seasonable
hour to use Impraecation, though the cause be just. Christ upon the Cross,
prayed for his enemies, and Stephen for his persecutors, neither of them at
that time used Imprecation.

To shut up this point, since now the gift of discerning spirits, which was in
the Apostolical Church, is gone, and men have their zeal mingled with much
choler, stomach, anger and hatred, therefore it is good: First, to use only a
general form of Imprecation contained in the Scripture, against all incurable
enemies, and so leave the application of it to God, whose hand will find out
all those who hate him; and not as the custom of the Mentioned by Calum in his
Commone in Psalm. 109* 6.
e Franciscan Friars, who for a piece of money, do in the behalf of the
Doner, apply the 109. Psalm, against any one whatsoever, yea, for the Mother
against the Son. Secondly, In our mental application still to pray with a
condition, if they be incurable, and these are the Laws of Imprecation.

As God depriueth them of the Churches prayers, and Obduration.
stirs up the zeal of his servants to pray against them: So does he also
give them up to hardness of heart, in judgment, hardening their hearts
against all means of recovery; so that they had rather be in that estate in
which they are, then to come out of it by such means: confirming in them that
opinion which once was in Naaman. Are not Abanah and Phaphar rivers of
Damascus, etc. So these, is there none other River to wash my soul, but the
blood of Christ: Pereat Anima, rather perish for ever then subscribe to that:
Or if not thus in words, yet their heart will not suffer them to pant after the
Rivers of Comfort; no hope they have, none can they have, none do they desire:
And who sees not, that this is none of the lest parts of the punishment due f
Sentio causam praecipuam impaenitentiae Angeloru^ maso^u^, esse iudiciu^ Dei in
illes qui sic constituit, vt qui peccant in spiritum Sanctum, i. e. qui
scientes, volentes and ex animo, cognita^ Euangely veritatem ave^sautur and
oppugna^t hos sequatur Impanitentia. Zanch. de Operib. Dei lib. 4. cap. 6.
to this sin of Apostasies. This is alleged as one main cause of that
incurable wound, which Satan and his Angels received in their fall, viz. The
wrath and judgment of God, who has thus appointed that they, who do sin
against the holy Ghost, id est, willingly, do fall from, and do oppose the
doctrine of the Gospel, should be given up to a Reprobate mind, and barred
from all Repentance: So that the perverseness of the Devils will, proceeds
not simply from the Immobility of their Nature; but from the wrath of God, and
his just judgment, who for that their sin* has so forsaken them, that,
whereas of themselves, they are never able to repent, now they never shall
return to God, nor ever change their will.

The same is the case of these men, they hardened their hearts before, and would
not hear; now God does How God does harden their hearts.
harden their hearts, as he did Pharaohs, that they may not be moved from their
opinion: partly by Satan whom he commands to tempt, yea to rule in them, yea,
to possess them with the spirit of madness: God neither strengthening against
him, nor any whit weakening the power of Satan; and hence at the length
proceeds that settled purpose in man, never to Repent, but obstinately to
continue in his malicious persecuting and blaspheming, into which, certainly I
believe, man could not slip, before this judicial act of God has proceeded
thus against him.

The last, and main reason, for the Irremissiblenesse Impanitency.
of this sin, is their wilful impaenitency which speedily follows upon
their hardness of heart: They cannot, they will not Repent, and this is the
chief reason. For the Scripture says not that it is Impossible that they
should be forgiven, for there is mercy store in God, and merit sufficient in
Christ to purchase pardon for it, upon Repentance, but It is impossible that
they should be renewed by Repentance, and why impossible? First, they are
punished with final blindness, and hardness of heart. Secondly, they will
not, they refuse it. Thirdly, Repentance is wrought by the Spirit. Fourthly,
grounded on the death of Christ, which they cast off: So that it is impossible
that ever they should Repent, and, consequently, impossible that they should be
forgiven, but remain guilty of an Reus aterni delict^, so reads the vulgar
Latin, in Mar. 3. 29.
aeternall sin, and therefore also must look for an aeternall punishment.

If any should object the example of Esau, who seemed exceeding paenitent, and
shed many tears: Or of Judas, who as the Text says, When he saw what was done
repented himself. The answer is ready, first, In general, For that was no
true conversion or repentance, but it was an argument of that anxiety and
trouble of mind, which now in their extremity did press upon them, causing
them indeed to look at that which in their security they had neglected.
Neither indeed did they implore and desire it, but howl and cry for the loss
of it, or for the fear of the future punishment. Secondly, In particular: Esau
sought not repentance with tears, he found no place for that: but he sought So
reads the Geneuab Translation, thereby helping the understanding of the place:
for should the Relative (...) it, be referred to Repentance, it would seem
harsh, that a man should seek for Repentance, and that with tears, and yet not
obtain it. Unless by Repentance in this place, we understand with Beza, not
the act of Esau sorrowing for his sin, but the act of Isaac, who would not
repent him of what he had done, nor alter the blessing given to Lu^^. Whether
of both these we take, it skilleth not much: it is certain that by Repentance
is not meant any sorrow of mind in Esau.
it, id est, the blessing, a matter of no moment with yelling and howling, to
seek for the blessing without true repentance: Sorry for the loss, not for
the cause of the loss: But had he bestowed those tears, those cryings in
seeking a place for repentance and sorrow for his sin, then might he perhaps
have found that that he sought for and desired.

Judas also indeed repented, as says the Text, id est, did something that a
Repenting man would do, he brought again his ill gotten goods: but his
behavior, and the event showed that this was no true repentance. For why did
he not join himself to the Apostles? Why did he not labor to be reconciled
to the Church? Why did he Aug. de Sermon. Dom. in Monte.
sooner run of desperation to the rope, and hang himself, then of humility
to ask pardon? These are no tokens of Repentance, but of an Impaenitent and
desperate mind.

Truth it is indeed, that he confessed his fault, and cleared the Innocence of
Christ, and thereby indeed did aggravate his own sin: and herein I persuade
my self he showed greater signs of Repentance than ever since did any such
Apostata: But give me leave to put this Quaere, Whether, there were not some
special occasion which wrung these words from Judas? This we know, that as the
Lord Jesus was innocent in very deed, so it was fitting that his innocence
should be sufficiently testified. Whence it came that nothing could be proved
against him, the witnesses were detected, the accusers agreed not: Pilate
perceived that for envy the high Priests had delivered him up to him, and
therefore proclaimed him innocent: Pilates wife also being admonished in a
Dream, did give the like testimony of him. So that now Judas only remained of
all them who had an hand in betraying Christ, and on whom a suspicion might
rest, that he knew more by Christ than any of the other, in that he was his
Disciple, and daily conversant with him, and so might be thought to have
sufficient cause to do that which he did: Wherefore to the end that nothing
might be wanting: I take it, as Judas like Balaam to bless the people, so he
to witness this point of innocence, rather enforced by the overruling
providence of God, than voluntarily moved.

And this seems to me to have been the occasion of that fact of Judas:
which seems to persuade us of his Popish repentance, in contrition,
confession, and satisfaction. Thus have you heard the reasons for the second
maine point delivered, which prove it (and I hope sufficiently) both, that it
is and ever shall be irremissible; as being a sin against the Gospel, and
against the spirit; being a witting, wilful, malicious, total Apostasy:
punished, and that justly, with deprivation of the Churches prayers, with
Imprecations, Hardness of heart and final Impaenitencie.

Lucius Cicer. de Great. lib. 3. ^^ed de his rebus sol me ad(...)uit qu^ ipse
^a^ praecipitas me quoque pracipitem haec pene evoluere ^^eg^t.
Crassus hastening to the end of his dispute used this for an excuse of his
praecipitation,1 The speedy have of the Sun now declining admonishes me to
roll over these things with greater speed. If in each particular here spoken,
I have not satisfied mine Auditory, mine answer is the same, Hora praecipitans
me quoque praecipitem cogit haec evolvere, The time now drawing to an end,
urges me to speediness, constrains me to hasten. And here could I very
willingly take up my rest, and make an end: having now finished the two parts
propounded in the beginning. And certainly I will with much celeritie
dispatch: there remains only use to be made of what has been said, and so
an end.

Here then first let us observe, the miserable estate of Use 1.
those men which are in this sin! Oh, whose heart does not ache? whose loins
do not tremble, to think, Satan should thus far seduce any man as to make
him cast off God the fathers mercy, God the sons merit, to trample
underfoot the Son of God, to count the blood of the new Testament an unholy
thing to set himself in hatred against God and all goodness? Oh that man
should ever in this life come to that estate, that the Church may not pray for
him but against him, that he should be so cauterized, and given up to
hardness of heart, as to have no sense nor feeling of his estate, no desire to
come out of it. Oh in the name of God, let every man try and examine himself,
that so he may find the estate of his own soul, how near he is to this
sin, or how far off from it. Learn wisdom also to discern of others,
both to admonish those who walk this broad way to destruction, and to take
heed of those who have now already plunged themselves into the same, and to
quiet our consciences in the fear of this sin.

Quaest. How may it be discerned who are in this sin, and who not? What
marks of it may yet further be assigned?

Respon. Some answer thus, See Marlorat. in 1. Ioh. 5.
Licebit interdum statuere, etc. It shall be lawful sometime to determine,
whether he that falls, fall desperately, or whether there be any place for
recovery: Sed quia rarissime accidit, etc. But in as much as it happens very
seldom, and God commending the incomprehensible riches of his grace, by his
own example, Luke 6. 36.
bids us to be merciful* we ought not rashly to pronounce sentence of
condemnation against any one, rather charity wishes us to hope well. To this
effect also Beza, Beza in Annotat. in Ioh. 5.
Quum hoc peccatum magis intus lateat, etc. Since that this sin does lie hid
within the hearts, rather then appear outwardly, nothing is so much and so
warily to be looked into as to take heed that we rashly fall not to judgment
in this case. Heretofore when the gift of discerning spirits was in the Church,
this was more easy to be discerned by some special Revelation, and yet even
then very seldom, very sparingly. Wherefore now (says he) we ought to be much
more considerate, condemning the vices, but wisely handling the persons.
Marlorate Sunt igitur tales divino judicio relinqnendi. ibid.
will have such to be altogether left to the judgment of God.

But here then another Objection is moved: viz. How may we then fulfill the
Apostles iniunction, in denying them our prayers? If such may not in this life
plainly be discerned, then may we still pray for them, and so strive against
God, and break his direct commandment. To this Thomas Naog. Citatus a
Morlorato, loco praedicto.
some answer, that if we include such a one in our prayers, and so make our
prayers, Non debito ordine, not in a due manner, though our charity may excuse
our prayer, that it shall not be sinful, yet we shall suffer this loss, that
we shall never be heard for them. As Christ on the cross prayed for his
murderers, but he was heard only for such, who did repent, the rest sinned
unto death.

But this answer (me thinks) does not so fully satisfy the doubt, nor
answer this text of S. John, which bids us not to pray for such at all.
Neither can I simply allow of that exception, which Si non ores gemas tamen;
for^asse gemitus tu^^s penetret quo oration non praesumat tendere. Thus quoted
by Cajetan in 1. Ioh. 5.
Bernard adds to this Text, If thou may not pray for him, yet may thou
sigh for him: Happily thy sighs may have access, whether thou dare not send
thy prayers. For to what end should any mourn for such a one, unless our
sighs, and mourning might either procure him release from his punishment, and
so nullify the justice of God; or obtain remission for his sin, and so
falsify Gods word. For which cause Samuel is greatly reprehended. And I pray
what is the sighing and groaning of the heart, but the prayers of the spirit;
so that in this it is no great difference whether thou pray with the spirit
inwardly, or with an audible voice outwardly, for both ways prayer is
performed. Wherefore far better is that which Calvin answers. Si tamen
quorundam desperata malitia and ^^p^etas, non secus nobis apparet, ac si
Dominus eam tanqua^ digito monstraret; non est certemus cum justo Dei judicio,
vt elementiores eo esse appare amus Call. in 1. Ioh. 5.
If (says he) the desperate malice, and wickedness of any does so plainly
appear, as if God did with his finger point forth such a one, we must not
strive with the justice of God, as if we would be more merciful then he.
Which is also confirmed by Beza, using almost the same words: Si quem tamen
dominus tanqua^ digito demo^stret ad mortem peccare, quid nobis faciendum sit
aperte docet. Apostolus. Annot. Bez in 1. Ioh. 5.
But if the Lord shall ( as it were) with his finger point forth such an
offender, then this place of John teaches us what to do in such a case, viz.
we must not pray for him.

So then the whole answer. I suppose may be thus declared. 1. For matter of
Imprecation, we are to observe all the cautions that were before mentioned, and
not suffer our selves to be drawn to that in particular. Neither do I hold it
fitting, even in the urging of these common Anathema's, mentioned in Scripture,
to have any private intention. 2. For praetermitting such in our prayers, this
precept might most happily be observed, when the gift of discerning spirits
was in the Church. 3. Though we cannot obsolutely determine and conclude, that
such a one has sinned thus desperately, yet may we have sufficient ground for
a strong conjecture, which may suffice to cause us to pass over such in our
particular prayers, and to leave them to God. Neither are we to be blamed
(though we should err in this point) since that our end is good, and his
sin deserves such a punishment, and we can have no Faith to pray for him.

Still the first question, How these may be discerned does rest unsatisfied.
To which I answer, that absolutely to determine of such a one is very
difficult, neither is there any sufficient mark, but the event, viz. Final
impaenitency: But the grounds of suspicion are such as these.

First, Profaneness, which kicketh and spurneth against The ground^ of strong
conjecture.
all the works of the Spirit, all duties of holiness, no grace, no
thanksgiving, no humiliation, not a good word, but this man's dislike is seen,
yea, such a dislike as manifests an heart full fraught with malice, choking
and damming up all passages of Grace, thus plainly does he profess his
cankered heart, and spiteful malice against the spirit of Grace.

Secondly, when a man rejoices not in any one truth revealed in the Scripture,
concerning the salvation of man, but rather does question it, doubt of it; yea,
to his power, does impugn and resist it.

Thirdly, envying the grace and happiness in which another stands: It was a
bad sign in Kaen, who envied his brother, because the Lord accepted the
Sacrifice of Abel rather than his: But it was a worse sign in Saul, who
knowing that David was the man in whom the kingdom should be established, did
fret and grudge, murmur and repine against it, laboring by all means, to
overthrow the decree of God. So when men come to that pass, that, having
received in themselves, the seal of Gods curse everlasting upon their souls,
they cannot endure to hear that any should fare better then they do, but
rather wish that all might with them be damned, it is a shrewde sign of an
Apostata.

Fourthly, Blasphemy against God, whom he hates and accuses as an unjust
Judge, in that the Lord has given him up to the power and dominion of Satan.

Fifthly, want of good affections, when he neither loves good, nor desires
it, but rather continues in a violent hatred and malice against God, the which
also breaks forth against those who labor his good, his conversion, his
salvation; whom he cannot abide, but hates and detesteth.

These are vehement causes of suspicion, when a man bewrays his malice
against the Spirit of Grace, when he impugneth each point of the Gospel, when
he professes an envying of Grace, and Gods favor toward any, when he
spares not to blaspheme the God of heaven, when he is altogether destitute of
all good affections, it is ten to one this man's case is desperate, and I may
justly leave such an one to the judgment of God; and as to imprecatio^ I dare
not proceed, because I may fail in the understanding of his cause: Yet since
I cannot have faith, nor warrant to be heard, I dare not by name recommend his
cause, absolutely, in my prayers and supplications.

On the contrary side, we may more easily observe Persons in whom this sin is
not.
in whom this our sin is not. First, being a general Apostasy, it is not in
those who hold fast the foundation, and rejoice in the knowledge of the truth:
Much less in those, who labor against corruption; least of all, in those who
hold on a constant course in holy exercises. These may be in great offenses,
but of this they are not guilty.

Secondly, being a oalicious opposition and persecution of the truth: It is not
in those who hunger and thirst after Righteousness, not in those who love any
of the good means of Salvation: Much less in those who do love the brethren
for the truths sake.

Thirdly, being voluntary, it is not in them who are afraid of it; not in
those, who albeit, their hearts perhaps are hardened, yet this disposition of
their heart does not please them: Wherefore let this be the comfort of all
poor souls, who are vehemently troubled with this fear, lest they have thus
fallen; They may be overcome by many weaknesses, but yet into this sin they
are not fallen. Yea, hearken to this, all you that are weary and heavy laden,
so long as you stand in fear of falling into it, be assured for your comfort,
you are far from it: Wherefore let not the Devil (busy though he be) persuade
you, that so you have offended, for it is but an See Downam his Christian
Warfare, part. 1 lib. 3. c.
illusion, yea, a stratagem of Satan whereby he labors to make shipwreck of
your souls.

Now to stop our Censure: This is not the sin of such, who never attained to
the knowledge of the Truth; neither Turks nor Infidels, neither Atheists nor
Epicures, neither Pharaoh nor Rabshekah, neither Herod nor Pylate did or could
ever fall into it: A curse indeed and an heavy one, has gone out against
them, and all like to them; bondslaues are they of Satan, and strangers from
the Common wealth of Israel; Aliens from the covenant of Grace, but yet an
heavier curse is for those who have sinned this sin, and far more miserable
is their estate.

Secondly, Not of all that fall being constrained through fear in the time of
persecution. Thirdly, No not of all that do persecute the Truth, unless they
be found to carry a malicious mind, against, not only man, but God.

The next use is for exhortation, to take heed of Use. 2.
falling into this; there is no recovery, it is like the laws of hell, if once
man be slipped down thither, there is (...) a great gulf to hinder all passages
of return. Wherefore it is the wisdom of a Christian to to take heed how he
traceth in these steps, for the paths thereof are the paths of death.

Quest. What are the steps and degrees of this descension, by which a man does
decline till he come to this final Apostasy?

Resp. In the answering of this we are to distinguish, for there are two kinds
of this Apostasy, or falling away; not much unlike to the two kinds of
Epilepsy, or falling sickness, which the Physicians have observed: The one, is
seated either in the brain, or the heart, and this takes suddenly, and so
suddenly, that wheresoever it takes them it casts them into the fire, or
into the water, bereauing them of all means to help themselves: The other
begins in the external parts, as in the Arms or Legs, and here by
frication it may be stayed, at least wise, some time gained, that the parties
may provide for their own security. Even such is our Apostasy, there is a
praecipitation, when a man does suddenly fall headlong into this sin, and of
this there can be given, no signs nor degrees. Of this kind was the sin of
the Angels, who suddenly fell into this Apostasy, in which they are. There is
also a certain Pedetentim, and leasurely declining, so that from one step to
another does a man descend till he come to the gates of death.

Neither is this distinction so newly devised, but that it has been disputed
in the Schools. Aquinas Aquin. 22. 4. 14. Art. 4.
among other questions of this subject, moves this. Whether a man may ( primo)
at the first, fall into this, and sin against the holy Ghost? He is a
Schooleman and his answer is not to seek; his answer is this. That two ways
may a man sin against the holy Ghost. First, Ex inclinatione habitus.
by inclination of habit, and this, he says, is not incident at the first, for
an habit must be acquired and gotten by many, and frequent actions. Secondly,
Ex abiectione per contemptum little per quae homo retra^it^^^ a peccat^.
by a wilful rejecting of that, by which he might be kept from sin; and of
this he says that, howsoever it does most an end praesuppose former sins
(viz. that men walk in the counce^ll of the ungodly, and stand in the way of
sinners, before they sit down in the seat of the Scornful) yet he
affirms, that it is possible, that at the first a man may thus sin; and
that (says he) for one or all of these causes. First, for the freedom of his
will. Secondly, for many praeceding dispositions. Thirdly, for some great
motive. Fourthly, for the weakness of affection to that that is good:
Whereupon he infers that this hardly or never befalls those who have
attained to any good perfection, according to the saying of Non arbitr^t quod
aliquis en his qui in summoperfectionis gradu, constiterunt, ad subi^u^
euacu^^ur, and decidat, sed paulat^m eum decidere est necesse. Orig. (...).
lib. 3.
Origin, in brief his answer is this, that against the holy Ghost by final
Impaenitency, man cannot sin at the first, but to this he comes, by a long
series, and order of precedent sins; but by contempt and rejecting of those
What these means are, is declared page 6
means of Grace which should keep men from falling, as also by blaspheming
the Spirit of Grace, he may. Wherefore, since we have rejected his final
Impenitency (wherein notwithstanding to the purpose of the mind, though not to
the extent of the act, he allows a praesentany lapse) not alowing it to be a
species of this sin, and only do allow the other two branches, viz. a
malicious and contemptuous abnegation of the truth, and reiection of the
Sacrifice of Christ (the only effectual means to withdraw us from sin)
together with the blaspheming of the Spirit of Grace. The conclusion is
manifest, that speedily, swiftly, with headlong have, a man may sin against
the holy Ghost, and fall into a final Apostasy.

But herein, I take it, was Aquinas short: A good wit unsanctified, is a good
pray for the Devil, says Green-ha^.
For men of skill and knowledge. are most incident to it, as who for the most
part, are more puffed up (according to that of the Apostle,c Knowledge puffs
up) which is an affection easily throwing man into this sin; the which c 1
Cor. 8. 1.
may further seem to be confirmed by Aquinas himself, who otherwhere, asking
the question, whether the first Angel among the lapsed were the first among
all, answers, that it well might be so; for In omni peceato duo sunt,
Pronitas and Motivum. Primu^ est plus in Creatura ignobiliori; sed secundu^ est
plus in nobiliori. Aquin. part. 1. q: 63. Art. 7.
says he, In every sin, there are two things to be considered, viz. The
procliuity, or pronenesse, and the Motive. The first is more effectual in a
baser creature, the second in a nobler: So then since the motive, does more
effectually work upon any, whose state is nobler, it follows, that rather
are the skillful, learned, and men of perfection, subject to this
praecipitation, then meaner men. Add to this, that by how much their
understanding is the better informed, so much more free is their will, of a
sudden to deliberate what is to be done.

And if it be safe to instance in particulars, this praecipitation is specially
performed by abnegation, and abiuration of the known and professed Truth: For,
though all abnegation of the truth be not this sin, nor does bring it forth;
yet, when a man does deny and forswear the Truth, that Truth, which heretofore
he has prosessed, then many times the Lord does in justice, give such an one
over to hardness of heart, and a Reprobate sense: So that having fallen from
the professing of the Truth, he does also loose all love and liking of it, and
never aspireth to any love of the same again, and who knows not, that,
howsoever the Lord had mercy upon Peter, yet he was in the ready way upon that
his abiuration?

Now for the other kind of Apostasy, which by steps declineth and from one
degree falls to another give me leave to put here a Quare, whether it may not
be thus described?

First, he loses his holiness, and sanctity of life, Degrees of falling.
to which he had attained, viz. External: which 2 Pet. 2. 20.
Peter calls the escaping of the filthiness of the World, This is the last
step to which he comes; and that he comes to this, the zeal 2 Kin. 10.
16.
of Iehu, the Mar. 6. 20.
reverence of Herod, the Repentance of Ion. 3. 5. 6.
Nineueh, the 1 Samuel 28. 3.
reformation of Saul, the goodness 2 Chro. 24. 2.
of king Ioash, do plainly show; here he begins to fall, loosing this, the
which is done by deceitefulnesse of sin, which ouertaketh and beguileth him
with profit or pleasure, or by some other means.

Then does God in Justice give him over to Satan to be hardened in heart, that
so the means of salvation cannot work upon him, Satan having this power
given him, works effectually, prompting and insinuating into his heart (as
he did into the heart of Pharaoh) diverse Reasons, why he should not hear the
word, nor fear the threatenings: nor regard the judgments, tush (says he)
what, have not the best had their falls? Did not Peter deny his Master? Abraham
lie? David commit adultery? And Lot incest? The Righteous, does he not fall
seven times a day, and yet rises again? Was not the repentance of the thief
effectual to his salvation? Know thou not that at what time soever a sinner
does repent him of his sin, he shall surely live? Thus does he lull the man
asleep, yea, he sends him like Jonah to the bottom of the ship to sleep,
ouerwhelmeth him with security.

Secondly, Hereupon he becomes perverse, and froward, and backward to
goodness, growing into a dislike, an hatred against it. Nay, takes occasion
(like Pharaoh upon the speech of Moses to afflict the Israelites, so he) by the
Ministers admonition and reproof to be more perverse and froward: And Sicut
ignis quanto amplius ligna susceperit in majorem fla^mam erigitur: sic anima
mala quanto magis veritatem audierit, eo amplius in malitiam excitatur.
Chrysostom. in Math. 22.
as the fire by the heaping of wood increases the flame: So this mind
increases in wickedness, by how much the more it hears the word of truth.
Thus Judas covetous by nature, being reproved by Christ, proceeds further to
betray his Master. If he cannot finger the box of ointment to make money of
that, he will sell his Master, and make money of him. Thus he proceeds in
mischief.

Upon this God takes away the joy that he had before: For before this he ioyed
in his knowledge, Mat. 13. 20.
received the word with joy. Knowing and believing that happiness in heaven is
the reward of holiness on earth. This God takes away from him, he being
unworthy of it in respect of his unholy and wicked life: For his conscience
tells him, that he has neither part nor portion in it.

Thirdly, Then does he willingly cast away the faith which he had, viz. a
Temporary one, as appears Mat. 13. 21. which includes an historical
knowledge, with a confused application. This he does willingly cast away,
neither does he hold and profess any fundamental point of the Gospel,
because the Scripture has revealed it: For when he cannot find the truth of it
himself, viz. That the precious promises do bring such joy and comfort as he
hears delivered, presently he calls into question whether there be such or
not, yea, and concludes with the profane ^eo the tenth. See Balc.
Pope, that the Gospel is but Fabula Christ's, the tale of Christ. And
thereupon counts the blood of the new Testament an unholy thing, merely
deriding and mocking those, who ascribe so much unto it: and for himself is an
utter enemy to the same.

Hereupon does God justly confound his knowledge, darkning his cogitation,
blinding his mind, and his understanding, that seeing he would not use that
knowledge that he had, he shall loose much of it, or at least be confounded in
it: And indeed how can it be but that even his knowledge should much decay,
since neither God blesses it, nor he uses means to keep it?

Fourthly, He does now voluntarily fall away even from that civil honesty
which the light of nature does teach men: willingly wallowing in all manner of
wickedness and pollution with greediness: not without spite and malice,
seeking hereby (if it were possible) to be revenged of God, who has rejected
him, still by his vicious and abominable life, provoking him to anger, thus
despiting the spirit of grace.

Whereupon the Lord does press his conscience with fear and terror, affecting
it with the sensible feeling of Gods heavy wrath upon his soul: yea, even
setting him forth as a vessel prepared for destruction: causing his soul and
conscience to witness so much against him, and at certain times making him to
feel most horrible terrors and convulsions.

Fifthly, Then grows he to impenitency, to fretting, to murmuring and
reluctation against God, maliciously opposing himself against his Majesty:
yea, hating him whom he can conceive none otherwise then a righteous judge to
condemn him. Hence it comes, says o Calv. comment. in Heb. 10. 27.
o Calvin, that so boldly, yea, so Contumaciter fr^mant.
malapertly they frett against God: They try indeed all means to remove the
sense of Gods anger, but in vain. For Nam simulas breves illis inducias Deus
concessit, mox ad tribunal suum retractos, tormentis, qua maxim fugiunt, eos
exagitat, Calv. ibid.
so soon as they have a little truce, a little ease, presently he troubles
them again with torments, haling their guilty consciences before the
tribunal seat of his angry justice. Now at the last does this man perceive
how fearful a thing it is to fall into the hands of the living God: yet
having rejected the means of grace, cast off Christ, and contemned the
sacrifice of his blood, he has no power to return, but only breaks forth
into blasphemous, and reuiling speeches against the Almighty.

Then at the last does God set the brand of destruction upon him, taking from
him all hope of pardon, and so leaving him to Satan to be brought home by
final Impaenitencie, and desperation, to final destruction.

Thus we see from the beginning to the ending, there Correllar.
is (as it were) a certain Reluctation and striving of the creature against
the Creator, seeking still to go beyond God, and from one point to another, to
despite and malice him and his just proceedings.

Here I note; That as the praecipitation is performed Note.
by the abjuration of the fundamental points of the Truth, So this other may
begin with other smaller matters, See afterward page 57.
especially, fornication and profaneness, mentioned by Heb* 12. 16.
Paul, and so by little and little creep upon a man, till it have possessed
him with a total repugnancie and resisting. And that this description of the
declination of an Apostata (which yet I willingly submit to the censure of the
judicious learned) may not seem altogether to be rather a figment, and a thing
devised, as probable and possible, than indeed any where to be found, or any
where exemplified; give me leave I pray to examine the fall of King Saul, in
the which me thinks, I do clearly see, both those five acts of man falling,
and resisting the work of grace; and also those five acts of God, punishing
man for his fall.

1. Saul loses his holiness of life. In the beginning of his reign he had
reformed abuses; But now he begins to fall away, when by his foolish pity
he spares Agag, and the best of the Cattle, contrary to the flat
commandment of God.

Then God gives him up to the evil spirit, who works upon him, indeed
strangely, but effectually, driving him into many strange and vncot^^^tts,
certainly hardening his heart, against all goodness.

2. Now grows he to be perverse and froward, yea, falls into a dislike of all
those that were good: persecuteth David causeless, even David the man whom he
perceived God had chosen to be the heir of the kingdom: yea, the more that
Jonathan does excuse David, and plead for his innocence, the more is he
enraged.

God takes away his joy, for beside the vexation of the evil spirit, how is
he fretted at the safety of David, he is in continual fear of him; For, an
evil mind, (says Men's prava semper in laboribus est quia aut molitur mala,
quae inferat, aut metuit ne sibi ab alijs inferantur; et quicquid contra
proximos cogitat, hoc contr^ se cogitari a proximis formidat* Greg. lib. 11.
Moral.
Gregory) is ever in trouble, either devising mischiefs against other, or
fearing mischiefs from others: always imagining that his wicked plots against
his neighbor are returned upon his own pate. What joy therefore can Saul
have, when as David still prevails, all Saul's plots will do no good; Michol
saves him, the Lord defends him, Jonathan convayeth him away, excuses him,
the Priests commend him. Thus is he in continual trouble and travel; how does
he lay traps for him? yea, in the end neglecting all other businesses of the
kingdom, he is wholly bent upon this, to persecute David, and to kill him.

3. After his fall we can find not any one act of faith in him, and therefore
may well allow him to have rejected it.

We see also his knowledge confounded: proof hereof we have in his behavior
at those two times that David had him at the advantage, what man (were he not
distracted and quite bereft of common reason) would have proceeded? but he is
so blinded by the Devil, that he cannot see a kindness done to him. Thus also
according to his gross ignorance stoth he bid the Witch of Endor, bring him up
Samuel, not considering the state of the Saints after this life, how that
Satan has no power over them at all.

4. Manifest proof is there of his pollution, though not in the He contented
himself with one only wife.
flesh (in which he was not much blame worthy) yet in other(...)tters, he is an
usual swearer and curser, nourishes Some do gather that Michols Image,
mentioned 1. Sam. 19. was an Idol, which she worshipped: for else whence
should she have it so readily?
Idolatry in his house, an horrible and filthy murderer, causing 85. Priests
to be slain, yea, he destroyed the city, and all in it, man, woman, child,
suckling, ox, and ass, sheep, and all, spared none: What could he have done
more to Jericho? What to Amalek? What to the cursed Philistims? Yea, further
he would have killed x Jonathan for excusing David, and ^ 1 Samuel ^0. 33
missing of that all to reviled him: were not these arguments of his malice
against God himself, to persecute David the Lords anointed, to slay the Lords
Priests? as who should say, if he could not prevent David, yet he would put him
to his shifts, and perhaps make him come short of his hopes, and as for these
Priests they should smart for it.

The punishment of this has evident confirmation, For how bitterly and sorely
did the Lord press his conscience, especially, when 1 Samuel 28. 5.
he saw the host of the Philistims, and at such time as the Lord denied to
answer him either by Urim, or by Prophets: as also when Satan in the person of
Samuel did reckon up his faults, and prophecy his destruction. But especially
when he was ready to die, cap. 31.

5. His Impaenitency and fretting, and murmuring against God is evident upon
Gods denying to answer him, when he commands to seek out As who should say
Flectere si nequeo superos, Ach^^o^ta ^oveb^.
a Familiar, albeit, he knew them to be the means and instruments of the
Devil, for which cause he had banished them heretofore.

Lastly, the brand of destruction, final Impenitencie and desperation was set
upon him, a long time before signified to Samuel, but plainly practiced by
Saul at such time as God denies him any to be his executioner, and so he that
wallowed in the blood of others, is now constrained by his own hand, to wallow
in his own blood, that so he may once have z his fill of blood ^ As Tomyris to
Cyrus Satia te sanguine que fi^^st^.
and murder.

Quaest. Yea, but how may it appear that Saul did renounce Christ, and his
Mediation: which was set down as the proper Object of this sin?

Resp: Indeed this is a material point, for except we find him failing in
this, we shall do him wrong. We must therefore observe that the knowledge of
the Messiah was then contained in types and shadows: and he then that did
renounce and oppugn the certain and undoubted type of Christ, did also oppose
Christ himself. Even as he that receives the Sacrament unworthily, is guilty
of the body and blood of the Lord Jesus. ^ When David was exalted to the
kingdom, no doubt but the Lord did intend to represent to the Church a lively
Image of Christ, that was to come: And not only for them to expect the
promised seed in that lineage, but also to repose all their hope of external
deliverances in the kingdom of David. For which cause the Psalmist, Psalm. 2.
Exhorting the Church to the fear of God, and submission to the Lords
ordinances, adds, Kiss the Son, etc. As if he had said thus: As you look
for salvation spiritual in Christ, so expect temporal from this family,
which God has adopted to the kingdom. For the Psalm is literally to be
applied to David, and mistically to Christ. Moreover, God did make the promise
of an everlasting kingdom to David, that so the faithful might with greater
confidence rest upon Gods promise. Answerable was the practice of the Church.
For it is obseruable that through the whole book of Psalms, the Church did
pray for and expect deliverance from God in the name of Christ, who was
represented to them, in the person of the King, descended from the house of
David. Hence it is also that in the Captivity, the kingdom being in
appearance overthrown, and all things subverted, Jeremy lamenting the estate
of the Church, particularly complains, that the kingdom which was the hope
of the faithful was overthrown, Lam. 4 20. The breath of our nostrills, the
Anointed of the Lord, was taken in their pits: of whom we said, under his
shadow we shall live among the Heathen: i. e. The King of the posterity of
David was taken away, under whose protection and defense, they did hope for
safety. Not in respect of the external sign, (though many did look no
further) but in the same as a type of the everlasting kingdom of the Messiah.
Last of all, note this, that when the ten Tribes, did rouolt from the house of
David, and chose Jeroboam King, they are dealt withal, ( Hos. 1.) as with an
adulterous woman: The matter is this: God had set up his King, upon the holy
hill of Zion, that is, established the kingdom in the house of David. And had
by this means, tied the house of Israel to that family, from the which they
might not depart, without manifest rejecting the Ordinance of God. By all which
it is manifest that Daud was a type of Christ, and his kingdom a type of
Christ's kingdom, and the Rejectors and persecutors of him, the persecutors of
Christ.
Now it is evident, that a David was a type of Christ, and his kingdom a type
of the kingdom of Christ. And the outward saluatio which the people did
receive from David was a type of the spiritual salvation performed by the
Messiah. Yea, all the hope of deliverance, was to be expected, according to the
Lords ordinance, from that family. Yea (which is more) the faithful also did
know so much, Lam. 4. 20. Moreover, it is worth the noting, that after the
anointing of David, Saul of himself did obtain no notable victory: but either
David was the principal, as in the battle with Goliath: or the sole Agent, as
when he was Saul's Captain: Yea, once in the time of his troubles he saved
Keilah, and chased the Philistims. For else Saul fought no battle till the
last, which he lost: Indeed it is mentioned that 1. Sam. 23. 28
Saul went against the Philistims, at what time he was upon the point to take
David, but there is no mention made of Saul's prevailing against them. Further
it may seem that by a common fame and speech of the people, David was
accounted the King, from whom the Philistims had heard it, and thereupon
reported to Achish, 1. Sam. 21. 11.
is not this David the King of the Land? And certainly it is not unlikely but
that the best men did depend upon him as their King, and therefore when Keilah
is in danger, they come to him, not to Saul. Neither was this unknown to Saul,
who, by his 1. Sam. 24. 21
own confession knew that David should be King, and that the kingdom of
Israel should be established in his hand, yea, he prophecieth of his
prevailing, and prosperous affairs, and therefore exacteth an oath of David,
that he would not destroy his seed after him, nor abolish his name out of his
fathers house.

So that all this being laid together, it is manifest, I hope, that Saul cannot
wash his hands of this crime, nor prove himself innocent in this fact: but
must suffer himself to be ranked with Judas, Julian, and other wretched
Apostata's.

The blessed Apostle St. James speaking of them, who Transition.
to the naked and destitute of daily food, do say Iam. 2. 16.
Depart in peace, and worm your selves, and fill your bellies, and yet give
them not those things that are needful to the body, censureth the coldness
of their charity, thus, (...), What heleth it, what does it profit? And not
undeservedly; for what end is there of Gods counsel, if there be no ability of
performance? This censure of the Apostle might perhaps be applied to this mine
admonition, to take heed of Apostasy; as if I did exhort men to warm
themselves, and fill their bellies; and yet give them not those things that are
needful to the body, id est, to practice those things which may preserve men
from this Recidiuation, and yet prescribe no means, set down no
preservatives. Wherefore to satisfy the hungry and thirsty soul, in some
measure, even in this point; I now come to the preservatives, which, being
practiced, are effectual, to prevent this consumption, this disease incurable,
For, how soever this sin be of that deadly nature, that like to some violent
poison, it being once received, there is no remedy, no help against death: Yet
there is a Mithridatum, an Antidote, a Preservative; which, if it carefully be
observed and practiced, will preserve (as that the body, so this the soul)
from being infected with this deadly venom. The ingredients, that serve for
this Mithridatum, are many, and to be gathered out of diverse gardens: But I
will content my self, only, with the Garden of the sacred Scripture, which is
sufficient and contains in it many several grave exhortations, like
salutiferous herbs, purposely intended by the holy Ghost, for this confection.

First, Remember Lots wife, Luke 17. 32.
the words of our Savior to his Apostles, exhorting to perseverance, the only
virtue contrary this our vice, using thereto the example of a woman, who
having, as it were, put her hand to the Plough looked back, and so became unfit
for the kingdom of God, having escaped from the filthiness of Sodom, and now
traveling toward Zoar, a place of safety, looked back, and became a pillar of
Salt; and her example hung upon records, for a perpetual warning to all
shrinkers throughout all generations ( Lots wife) is memorable. First, in her
sin, she looked back, no doubt (says Ex verbis Christi colligiinus prauo
aliqu^ desiderio fuisse ^tillatam. Calu. Comment. in Genesis 19. 26.
Calvin) being tickled with some evil desire and affection, she did not leave
Sodom willingly. Secondly, In her strange and wonderful transformation,
presently, suddenly was she turned into a pillar of Salt. In respect of both
these, remember Lots wife. A great sin, Recidiuation, Apostasy; A great
punishment, present vengeance. Remember the sin to shun it, Remember the
punishment to fear it: Our Savior sets forth the punishment of such as
look back, viz. Luke 9. 62.
They are unfit for the kingdom of God. St. Paul something more roundly, Heb.
10. 31.
It is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God. For that
ground, which having drunk in the rain that falls upon it, bears nothing
but Briars and Thorns, is rejected, and is nigh unto cursing, whose end is to
be burned. Heb. 6. 8.

Secondly, Grieve not the holy spirit of God, etc. Ephesians. 4. 30.
as did the Psay 63. 10. Psalm. 95. 10.
Israelites in the Wilderness, forty years, least the Lord swear against
you also in his wrath, that you shall not enter into his rest. First, The
spirit of God is the seal of our Redemption, therefore grieve him not, neither
by neglecting assurance when thou may have it: ( To day if ye will hear,
harden not your hearts, to day, while it is called to day, hear his voice) nor
in wilful doubting of that assurance recorded in the word. This spirit, which
is the seal of our Redemption, is the spirit of God, therefore grieve him not;
Of God our Creator, whose glory we are to set forth; Of God our Redeemer, who
has enlarged our feet out of the snares of Satan; Of God the Judge and
auenger of all those who shall vex his spirit. Thirdly, The spirit of God, is
an holy spirit; Holy in his essence; Holy in his operation, therefore grieve
him not, neither by neglecting the duties of holiness, in hearing the word:
For what know thou O man, whether ever thou shall hear it more? And perhaps
thou might at that time have hard that, that might have done thee good for
ever. Not by resisting, or at lest, not listening to the good motions which the
spirit does put into thine heart, much less by wilful falling into any sin! O
take great heed of this, for what know thou (wretched man) whether ever
thou shall come out of the same again? Thou have not Repentance in thine own
hand; yea, what know thou whether this be not the first step that thou
steppest on to final Apostalie.

Thirdly, Holding faith and a good Conscience, In which 1 Timothy 1. 19.
words the Apostle does exhort Timothy to stand manfully against all lets and
impediments, and being called to the ministry, to fight a good fight, id est,
to be vigilant and diligent in his office; vigilant, to watch against all
enemies; diligent, to expel them: And not without cause does he thus stir up
Timothy, for the office of the ministry is a kind of warfare, in which
Satan, Heretics, Schismatics, lewde-liuers, and false brethren do in
hostile manner oppose the Church of God; Against all which, the Ministers, who
are the Ancient Antesignani and duces, Calu.
bearers and Captains, must oppose themselves. Now that he may the better make
resistance, and perform the office of his Ministry with joy, the Apostle
shows with what armor it is fit that he should be furnished, viz. Faith,
and a good Conscience. Faith, that is to say, wholesome doctrine, which, cap. 3.
9. he calls the mystery of Faith, the mystery of godliness, that is, the
doctrine of the Gospel, which must be kept in a pure Conscience. And
certainly those two are wonderful requisite in a Minister; Faith, and a good
Conscience, nor are they of less consequence for every Christian. I can
compare them to nothing so well, as to a precious pearl, and a rich carquenet,
both must be regarded. Faith, the doctrine of the Gospel, the form of
wholesome words; a rich pearl, an incomparable treasure, better than thousands
of gold and silver, wherefore how much ought we to fear lest it should be
taken from us? For what is this wholesome doctrine, but like the star that led
the wisemen to Christ, which when they lost, into what by paths were they
driven, and how much trouble ere they found it again? So here keep the
pattern of wholesome words, and it will guide you in the right way, suffering
you to decline neither to the right hand nor to the left, neither to suspicion
nor to profaneness, neither to Schisms and Heresies, nor to Atheism and
Epicurisme. This is the precious pearl. The rich Carquenet is a good
Conscience, a pure Conscience; in this must we keep Faith, else it will be
lost. For whence comes it that so many continually do reject the truth, and
fall into wicked sects and damnable heresies, but because they were not
careful to keep the sound doctrine in a pure Conscience? and therefore God
justly punished their hypocritical dealing with this judgment, sending them
strong delusions, that they should believe lies, who delighted not in the
Truth* Two fearful examples does Paul here allege, of two men who casting
away the Carquenet, lost also the Pearl; putting away a good Conscience, as
concerning Faith, made shipwreck, id est, were quite deprived of it: For (says
Beza) they who keep not a good Conscience do also by little and little, loose
the gift of understanding. Wherefore lo here another excellent means to
prevent Apostasy, Hold Faith, depart not from it, for whatsoever is not of
Faith is sin; keep a good Conscience unspotted undefiled, transgress not
against that, keep the form of godliness and deny not the power thereof: As
we profess to know God, so in works deny him not; for what is the end of the
Commandment, but love out of a pure heart, and of a good Conscience, and of
Faith unfeigned?

But amongst all the parts of holy Scripture, there is not any one book, so
well furnished with variety of exhortation, tending to stir men up to
perseverance, and to take off reuolting, as the Epistle to the Hebrews, wherein
the Author does hoc agere, in a manner aim at nothing else, wherefore
whatsoever prescripts of Physic I have else to give, shall thence be deducted.
^ Heb. 12. 16.


Fourthly, Let there be no fornicatour, nor Profane person, etc. The words of
Paul, prescribing a caveat to take heed of this our sin, id est, Neque in
secu^dam legis tabulam, neque in primam offendens. Iun. Paral. 3. in Heb. 12.
neither in the second table nor in the first, give way to any gross sin,
and namely not to these, whereby the Spirit might be grieved, and by which,
that Communion of Saints, that ought to be in the Church, might be violated.
Three reasons, I suppose, may be given, why Paul instanceth rather in
Fornication, for the second Table, than any other sin. First, Our bodies are
the Temples of the holy Ghost, and fornication is a sin against a man's own
body, by this then, should the habitation of the holy Ghost be defiled, his
Temple profaned, yea, and himself driven forth by our uncleanness, and
pollution. Secondly, Fornication is a sin of a pleasing nature, to voluptuous
persons, and they who place happiness in pleasure, do most easily yield to
this sin, and having once yielded, it is so clammy, that, like pitch or
birdlime, it sticks and cleaves to them; and so cleaves, that it rather
brings them to renounce the Gospel, and the doctrine of it, then to give over
this filthiness and uncleanness. Thirdly, Fornication found in any member of
the Church, is such a sin, as may not be tolerated in the congregation
without manifest danger of infection, so that in necessity the Congregation
must proceed to excommunication 1 Cor. 5. in tot^.
as Paul prescribes, by which the party delinquent, is delivered up to Satan,
who is ready presently to possess him with (...). Heb. 12, 15.
a root of bitterness, against God, his truth, and the professors of it, for
these causes I take it, does he instance in Fornication, and the like might
be said for profaneness: The sum is this; Harbor no sin wilfully, and
by name not this, for it is a poison to the Soul, and infection to a Christian
profession.

Fifthly, Keep the profession of our hope without wavering. Heb. 10. 23.
Another excellent Antidote prescribed by our Apostle, as we have hope in
heaven, and have been called to the hope of the Gospel, and thereupon have
professed the same before men, so must we hold it fast without wavering, not
doubting of it, or calling it into question, after that we have been persuaded
of it: For he that having once believed the truth of the Gospel, and professed
his belief, does afterward begin to question it, and dispute against it, does
justly deserve to be given up to a Reprobate sense, that as he would not hold
fast when he had time and opportunity, so now he should for ever loose the hope
of happiness manifested in the Gospel.

Siztly, Provoke one another to love and good works, Heb. 10. 24. and Heb. 3.
13.
exhorting one another, id est, in season, out of season, publicly in the
Church, privately from house to house, in all places, at all times be ready to
stir up one another to constancy and perseverance, aedifying one another in
that most holy Faith. And Ne quis in incredulitate^ aut deiectionem incidat,
hoc remediu^ ostendit, vt scilicet fideles exhortentur se mutuo. Marlorat.
certainly not without cause does St. Paul praescribe this as a means to
prevent Apostasy, for good it must needs be, both for thee that exhortest,
and for him that is exhorted. For him, whilst thou stirrest him up to walk in
the path of godliness, for thee whilst thou art careful to mend thine own
ways, for him, since thou pullest the more out of his eye; for thee, since
thou must also pull out the beam out of thine own eye: And since this
exhortation must be mutual, therefore also men must Heb. 13. 22.
suffer the word of exhortation patiently, not kicking against the prick, nor
spurning with the heel against him that seeks to reform them.

Seventhly, Forsake not the (...).
assembling of our selves together, or as the Geneuah reads, the fellowship
that we have among our selves. A third preservative set down by Paul in the
Heb. 10. 25.
same place concerning this our sin, exhorting to observe the holy assemblies,
and neither of our own accord forsake them, nor suffer our selves profanely
to be led away from them: The which he exemplifieth, as the manner of some is,
to deter Ad deterrendum pios ne forte quod in alijs damnu^ est, id sibi
patiantur. accidere. Iun, Parall
and scare the godly, lest they should suffer that to happen to themselves,
which is a damage and detriment to others. Many in the Church do (and indeed
justly) condemn those, who for their offenses, are to be separated from the
Congregation; whereas in the mean space, they themselves do more loosely, and
at their lust and pleasure, neglect, forsake, yea, and contemn the Church
assemblies: They which are frequent in the Communion of Saints, have a good
means to keep them from Apostasy; but if they forsake the same, then are they
subject to errors, Schisines and damnable Heresies. It is observed, that Euah
was seduced by the Serpent, when she was out of the company of her husband; and
certainly it is manifest, that hence arose the whole generation of Vipers, the
brood of Haereticks, which have been in all ages, viz. when men, puffed up
with pride of their own gifts, have scorned and contemned the fellowshippe of
the Church, and so have run into singularity, and thence to Haeresie, and
damnable Apostasies. One preservative more, and so I conclude.

Eighthly, Take heed least there be in any of you an evil heart, and
unfaithful, Heb. 3. 1^.
or an evil heart of infidelity, wherein to the end that men might take heed
of Apostatizing from God, he exhorts them to see to their heart. Many do
make a fair and glorious profession of the Truth, whereas in the mean space
in heart they affect it not, nay, dislike it; Therefore, says he, Take heed,
and be very circumspect, least any of you carry an heart incredulous, and
rebellious against the doctrine of the Gospel, for it must needs be that such
a one shall in the end return to his former vices, and taking port with
Satan, fall from the living God. A good Caveat for hypocrites, who desire not
sincerity, but only make a fair outward show, to please the world, They love
the praise of men more then the praise of God; Certainly these men are all of
them subject to this sin, and may as well come to it as Judas, Julian, or any
of the rest, Julian to save himself from the anger of Constantius, shaued
himself prosessing a monastic life. Socrat. Hist. li. 3. cap. 1.
who indeed to satisfy their own turn, to get applause of the world, to
shun perils and dangers are content with, yea, forward in the profession of
Christianity, when (God knows) their hearts are not upright with God, and
therefore what marvel if they go out from us and become Apostata's, since
they never were of us, id est, of the number of those who having sacrificed
their hearts to the Lord, dedicate both body and soul to the profession of
godliness. Moses to the people gives this same charge, Deuteronomy. 4. 9.
Take heed to thy self and keep thy soul diligently, mark that, keep it,
and keep it diligently. The which Solomon secondeth, a keep thine heart ^
Prou. 4. 23.
with all diligence. Tremellius reads, supra omnem observantiam, above all
manner of keeping, i. e. more diligently then thou would keep any treasure.
And why? Salomons reason is good. For out of it, are the issues of life. All
the actions, good or evil proceed from Mat. 12. 35. and 15. 19.
the heart. It was provided by the Law of the twelve c Tables, that all springs
and fountains should be kept ^ Frontin. lib. 2.
free from filthiness and pollution, least these being corrupted, should fill
the land with insection, so is it here. Paul's reason is more effectual, viz.
in departing from the living God, id est, least you depart from the living God,
intimating, that as by faith we do come near to God, and cleave unto him, so
by our infidelity we fall from him. So then to conclude, The heart is all in
all, therefore hear we so often, My son give me thy heart. Wherefore if any
be desirous (as all ought) to shun this sin of Apostasy, let him here
begin, it is not the least good help, Keep a good heart; Take heed there be
not in any of you an evil heart of infidelity and unbelief, for if there
be, it cannot be, but you will in the end depart from the living God. I have
now done, And I suppose, that that censure which Lib. de Art. Poet.
Horace passes upon the tedious Poet, will also pass upon me, Tenet
occiditque legendo. But if the Lacedaemontans thought themselves well excused
when they said, The Thebani suis injurijs secerunt. vt breviloq^entia vti
desiermius.
Thebans have been so tedious in their injuries, that we cannot use our
wonted brevity of speech: I hope the multiplicitie of matter whereof I have
had to speak, will also in part hold me excused? The comfort therefore that
Diogenes Synopensis, having almost tired his Auditors in reading a long
Oration, (spying at last the blancke paper) gave them, do I present to you.
Bono animo estote, terram videmus.
The haven is in kenning, the land within sight. For I am now come to that
which I have still poynted after, viz. the end. Now therefore give me leave,
like the newly arrived Merchant, to sit down and count with my self what is
the sum of all which in this ship I have ventred. Now I find that the summa
totalis comes to this.

First, You heard the explanation of the Text, by observing the term used, and
the number insinuated. Then did I propound the two maine parts of my Discourse,
wherein, first, I sought out the sin what it was, secondly, Searched it, to
see why incurable? In the disquisition, having found it to be the sin
against the holy Ghost, we passed by those six kinds reckned by the
Schoolmen, and prooved by Argument, both in general against them all, and in
particular against each, that no one of them is that sin which we sought for.
The which at the length was defined to be a general Apostasy of a man fallen
from the known Truth, even to a malicious persecution, and blaspheming of the
same; the which words I reduced to three heads, first, The whence, viz. from
the known truth, The truth of the Gospel, not of the Law. Secondly, The
whether, to a malicious persecuting and blaspheming. Thirdly, The motion, a
voluntary and universal Apostasy. In searching the deadliness of the wound,
I found it to be therefore called a sin unto death, because it is
irremissible. The which was confirmed by Scripture, and reason. Reason drawn,
first, From the Object, it being a sin against the Gospel, and against the
spirit. Secondly, From the nature of it, In that it does wittingly, willingly,
maliciously, totally oppugn and resist the means of pardon. Thirdly, From the
punishment of it, it being deprived of the Churches prayers, and rewarded with
Imprecation by men, Hardness of heart by God, and Impaenitency by it self.
The Use of all was, First, For examination and trial, where were discovered
certain grounds of suspicion, causing a man justly to be suspected for an
Apostata. Secondly, For admonition and exhortation, to take heed of it, where
also were described the degrees by which man relapseth into this sin, and
also now lastly some Preservatives were prescribed to keep men from Apostasy
and Recidiuation. In all which discourse, might I be so happy, as to have
neither troubled your patience with things impertinent, nor to have
praetermitted ought that was necessary; Solomon in all his royalty could not
find more contentment then I in mine endeavors. But if I have been too
prolixe, impute it to the matter, if too concise, impute it to the time:
Howsoever, let God be glorified, that man may be comforted. Now unto him that
is able to keep us that we fall not, and to present us blameless before the
presence of his glory with joy: that is, to God only wise our Savior, be
glory, and majesty, and dominion, and power, both now, and for ever.

Amen.
to theo mono doxa.
(...)
