The mirror of friendship: both how to know a Perfect friend, and how to
choose him.

With a brief treatise, or caveat, not to trust in worldly prosperity.

Translated out of Italian into English by Thomas Breme Gentleman.

Imprinted at London by Abel Iesses, dwelling in Sermon lane, near Paul's
chain. 1584.

blazon or coat of arms of Thomas Kirton of Thorpe Mandeville

To the worshipful Master Thomas Kyrton esquier, chief common Sergeant of
the cittye of London, A I. wishes increase of worldly prosperity, and after
this life, that he may enjoy the heavenly felicity.
GReat is the force of Virtue, (worshipful) which causes those that therewith
are beautified, often times to be praised, loved, and wondered at: even of such
as never saw them. Among which golden number (for there be not many such now
living in this our iron age) I cannot but deservedly account your worship:
having heard you so notably commended and well spoken of, not so much for your
very good natural inclination, as for your other extraordinary dispositions of
virtue: and namely for your liberaltie, courtesy, and affablenesse toward all
sorts and degrees of people. These with other your honest and rare qualities:
as your upright dealinge and just demeanure in civil affairs, are means
that never fail to purchase favor among the well inclinans: and therefore
being in you both so manifest and manifold, they cannot but give grace among
the well disposed. In consideration whereof, I among the rest (as one of the
most that may do least) have reverenced your name, and often have wished some
just occasion to befall me whereby I might find the means to testify that
good will in open action toward your worship, which along time in secret
cogitation and thought I have borne to so good a Gentleman. And now (in a
happy time be it spoken) I have taken opportunity, as conveniently it fell
out, in signification of my foresaid goodwyl which is far inferior unto my
slender and weak abillity, to undertake the presenting of your worship with
this small discourse, being a mirror, or looking glass, wherein all are
advertised and taught, not only what duties of humanity the most excellent
name of friendship does mutually require; and would continually to be
practiced among men: but also what course a man is to keep and take in the
election and choice of a friend: Wherein such as be wise will (no doubt) be
circumspect: knowing that a faithful and inward friend is to be reckoned one
of the most precious ornaments and necessary instruments belonging to this our
variable life, and that without it (no more then the body of man without
sinews and joints the society of men cannot consist. Thus much in brevity,
touching the argument of this book, by way of induction to the treatise it
self: which because it will sufficiently commend it self to those that be of
judgment able to discern, I will conceal whatsoever I might most justly
record in praise thereof. Beseeching your worship, whom (among all other) the
reasons before said have moved me to choose for the countenancing of the same,
being (I must needs confess) in respect of the valor unworthy, but in
consideration of the use most worthy to be dedicated unto your worship:
persuading my self, that you are none of those that esteem the price of
things by their outward bark, but by the inward pith: for the eye may fail
in judging, but the mind (if it be not distempered) does sildome miss.
Receive this litile treatise therefore (I beseech you) with favor answerable to
my good will, and as your leisure shall serve, bestow now and then an hour
or twain in the reading thereof: which if it please you to do, I doubt not but
you will like well of the labor: and besides the honest recreation which it
affoordeth, apply what your judgment makes choice of, unto your private use,
And thus wishing prosperity to your worship, acceptance to this my gift,
and a good opinion of the giver. I conclude: hoping that mine honest wish shall
not be void of an happy issue and success.

Your worships, most humble to command, Abel leffes.

A Preface to the gentle Reader.
GOod Reader, considering that in these days there is such unsteady friendship
amongst many, that it is hard to find a perfect and true friend: for now
friendly words are common, but when friendship comes to the touch or proof,
the alteration is maruailous: yea and sometimes so dangerous that of friends
in words they will become enemies in deeds: for many that will be accounted
as friends, if a storm of aduerfitie or a tempest of troubles fall out to
those they have professed friendship unto, they utterly withdraw their good
wills, and become so cold, that no regard is had at all of their former
professed good wills. I have therefore in breife: discourse showed thee the true
duty of one friend to a another: and partly how to know, and chose a good
and perfect friend, and also not to trust in the prosperities of this world:
which I desire may be unfeignedly practiced, and followed by those that seek to
prefer virtuous, honest, and lawful amity. Thus I commit you to the
discourse, entreating thereof as follows.

printer's device of Abel Jeffe, incorporating the arms of the City of London
and of the Worshipful Company of Stationers A I
PRAISE THE LORD WITH HARP AND SONG

A most excellent description what one true and perfect friend ought to do
for another. Also how to choose such a friend, with most perfect counsels how
to govern thy self in security: both pleasant to read, and profitable to
follow.
THe famous philosopher Plato, being asked by his scholars, why he went so
often from Athens into Sicilia, the way being long, and the sea very
tempestuous, and perilous to trauerse and pass: he answered them: the
occasion that moves me to go and come so often from Athens into Sicilia is for
no other cause, but only to see my friend Phocion, a man very excellent in
his works and learning: wise in his sayings, and just and true in his words:
and also for that he is my great friend, and enemy to vice, and a lover and
follower of virtue, I go willingly to aid him to my power, and to consult
with him of all things that I know. And further he said: you ought to know, my
good scholars, that a good Philosopher, or wise man, to visit and succor his
friends, to practice and confer with him, ought to esteem the voyage little,
and the (...): yea though he should sail over the sea, or should journey over
all the land. Apollonius Tianeus a notable philosopher.
Appollonius Tianeus parted from (...), passed through all Asia, did sail over
the great flood Nylus, Nilus a famous River in Egypt.
endured the coldes of the mount Caucasus, The mountain Caucasus, a famous
mountain extreme cold.
and suffered the great hoards of the Ryphean mountains, The Riphean mountain
extreme hoate.
passed the lands of the Massagets, entered into the great India, making this
long peregrination and travel for no other respect, but to visit and confer
with Hyarchos the Philosophor, this great friend Agesilaus, sometime a famous
Captain among the Greeks, having knowledge that the king Hytarius did hold
prisoner another Captain his very friend, leaving and setting apart al his
affairs and travels thorough infinite countries, till he came to the king, and
after most humble and reverent salutation said these words: I beseech thee
most renowned king, that it may please thee to pardon Mynotus, my singular
friend, and thy humble subject: and all that it shall please thee in favor to
do for him, I shall and will account it done to myself. And I assure thee, O
king, thou can not chastise, or punish his person, but that thou shall give
unto me feeling of the like torment, that thou give or causest to be done to
him. The king Herod, after that Marcus Antonius was vanquished by the Emperor
Augustus, Marcus Antonius a noble Roman and of great authority.
he came to Rome, and set his crown at the feet of Augustus;, and with a
bold heart spoke unto him these words: thou shall now know, O Augustus, if
thou do not already know it, that if Marcus Antonius had rather believed me
then his friend Cleopatra, Cleopatra Queen of Egypt after the death of Marcus
Antonius, enclosed her self in a tomb full of live serpents, and so ended her
life, for the great love she bare unto Marcus Antonius her lover.
thou should have proved how great an enemy he had been to thee. And thou
should likewise have known, how great a friend I had been to him, as yet I
am: but he as a man yt would rather govern himself by the will of a woman,
then be led by reason and wisdom, he took of me money, and of Cleopatra
council: and see here my Realm, my person and my Crown here at thy feet,
which I offer willingly to thee to dispose at thy will and pleasure: but with
this consideration, O invincible Augustus, that no punishment or hurt be done,
upon my Lord and friend Marcus Antonius. For a true friend will not forsake his
friend, not for the peril of death, nor after his death, be forgetful or
unmindful of him, although his person be absent. By these examples and many
other, that I could bring, it maybe considered, what faith and fidelytie one
true friend owes to an other, and what perils one of them ought to adventure
for an other: for it is not sufficient, that one friend be sorry for an other,
for their mishaps or evil fortunes, but to put them selves even to the danger
of death, rather then to fail his friend in his extreme need.

He then of good right ought to be called a friend, and esteemed as true and
perfect, that does willingly offer, Note how to know a perfect friend.
depart, and give to his friend those things that he lacks, before he asks
his aid: and yt speedely comes to succor and help his friend, being in
peril, without calling, or sending for. And therefore there is not, nor can not
be in this world, better friendship, the^ this that I have spoken of, which
is that comes with a free heart of himself to aid his friend in necessity,
and to succor him when he is in grief or sorrow: further we ought to know,
that to continue and make perfect friendship, thou ought not to enter into
friendship with many: following the counsel that Seneca the Philosopher gave
to his friend Lucillus, willing him to be the only friend to one, and enemy
to none: for the number of friends causes great importunity, the which
causes perfect amity to diminish for considering well the liberty of our
heart, it is impossible, that one man should, or can conform or dispose his
nature and condition to the will and liking of many: nor that many should
conform themselves to the desire and liking of one. Tully and Salust were two
Orators in Room, very renomed amongst the Romans: which two Orators were
mortal enemies: and during their enimities, Tully had for his friends all the
Senators in Room, and Salust had no other friend in Room but Marcus Antonius:
and one day these two Orators, being in contention in words together, Tully
with great disdain did reproach Salust, saying unto him: what can thou do,
or enterprise in Room against me? for well thou know, that in all Room thou
have to thy friend but only Marcus Antonius, and that I have in Room no
enemy but him. Salust, made him a ready answer: thou make great bragges, O
Tully, for that thou have but one enemy, mocking me, that I have but one
friend: but I hope in the immortal gods, that all thy friends shall not be
able to defend thee from destruction, and that this one friend of mine if all
be of power sufficient to keep me from danger against thee and all thy
adherents: and so it came to pass within few days after, that Marcus
Antonius caused Tully to be slain, and did advance Salust to great auctority
and honor. A friend may part to another body with all that he has, as bread,
wine, gold, silver, and all other his temporal goods, but not ye heart: for
that can not be parted nor given to more then one: for this is true and
certain: many hold it for great glory to have many friends, but if they
consider to what purpose: such a number of friends serve for no other cause,
but to eat, drink, walk, and talk together: not to succor them in their
necessities, with their goods, favor and credits, nor brotherly to reprove
them of their vices and faults, where in truth, where is a perfect amite,
neither my friend to me, nor I to my friend ought never to dissemble but one to
tell another their vices and faults: A perfect friend a great measure.
for in this world is not founds so great a treasure that may be compared to a
true and perfect friend, considering that to a true and assured friend, a man
may discover the secrets of his heart, and recounte to him all his griefs,
trust him with things touching his honor, and deliver him to keep his goods
and treasures, which will sucour us, in our pains and travels, council us in
all perrilles and dangers, rejoice with us in our prosperityes, and will be
sorrowful with us in our adversities, and disgraces of fortune. Finally, I
conclude, that a faithful friend does never fail to aid us during his life,
nor to complain and mourn for us after our death. I agree that gold and
silver is good, and parents and kindred, but far better is true friends,
without comparison: for that all other things cannot help us in our necessity,
if by fortune it happen that we be plonged in troubles, but riches many times
does danger us, yea and does further increase our peril, and deceives us,
making us to enterprise unprofitable attempts, leading us to the tops of
craggy mountains, from which, we fall in great perrill, and perpetual ruin:
but a true friend seeing or hearing his friend in danger or heaviness does
minister to him of his goods, travel and danger his person, takes long and
paynfull voiages, enters into debates and speches, and does hazard his person,
only to help and release his friend out of peril, with such a pure
affection and amity, that he would yet do more for him if it were in his
power: having then presupposed that it is necessary to choose a friend, and
only to use him alone, great consideration is to be had in the choice and
election of such a one, least thou find thy self deceived in thy trust, in
uttering thy secrets to him: How to chose a perfect friend.
have regard that he be not covetous, impatient, or angry: a great talker,
seditious, or a mouer of strife, neither presumptuous: for if he be infected
with these vices, thou were better to have him thine enemy, then to choose him
for thy friend: but thy perfect friend ought to be of good conditions, and
honest customs: that is to be gentle of nature, wise in his purposes, and
paynefull in travels, patient in injuries, sober in eating and drinking good in
council giving: and above all faithful and constant in amity, and keeping thy
secrets: and such a one thou may surely choose for thy friend. And where
want and defaylance shall be of these conditions, to fly his friendship as a
dangerous pestilence. Hold this for a certain thing, that much worse is the
amity of a feigned friend and fantastical, then the malice of an open enemy.
We se none will buie a horse, till first he has seen him go, and well vewed
him: silk nor cloth without seeing and feeling it: wine without tasting it:
flesh without cheapening it: nor house without vewing it within: nor
instruments without hearing them sou^ded, and played upon: by a more great
reason thou ought in choosing thy friend, to know his behavior and wisdom
and virtues, long before thou admittest him as thy secret friend. Note the
Emperor Augustus order in friendship.
The Emperor Augustus was wary and difficil in admitting a special friend, but
after he had received him into his friendship, he would never leave him, nor
reiecte him for any cause or displeasure. Friendship ought to be exercised
with good men, and in virtuous actions: for although a man make his friend Lord
of his secrets, and liberty, yet always reason ought to reserve virtue free.
Plutarke says in his Politics, that we were much better, to sell dearly to
our friends our good turns, Note Plutarks opinion.
and friendshippes, either in prosperity or adversity, then to feeds them with
fair and dissembling words, and vain promises, not meaning to perform any of
our friendships offered. I wish these my trauells might be agreeable to them,
that shall peruse that I have written of Amity, and choice of a friend, having
writ freely, without flattery. Saluite in his book of the Iugurthine wars,
shows that it is no less commendation for a writer to write truly the valiant
acts of the worthy, then to the conqueror to have executed his charge with
valor and worthiness of arms: for often it happens, the captain to be
slain in gaining the battle and victory, yet fails he not to be revived by
good reputation, Good fame remains after death,
that he gained before his death, being set down in true history by the
writer. Good counsel is of great efficacy in a friend: Marcus Aurelius a
famous empeour of Rome.
as said Marcus Aurelius to his secretary Panucius, saying that a man with
money may satisfy and recompense many pleasures and good turns done him, but
to reward good counsel all the goods had need to satisfy and recompense. If
we will believe ancient historyes, we shall find it true, that the virtuous
Emperors, fortunate Kings, and hardy Captains, going to the wars, to
conquer their enemies, have always been desirous to have in their company
some discreet and learned philosopher, as well to counsel with, as also to
record in writing their adventures and noble faets. Great Alexander had
Aristotle: King Gyrus, Chilon: King Ptholome, Pithimon: King Pirrhus Zatvru:
The notable emperors and kings have esteemed learned men greatly.
the emperor August Simonides Scipio, Sophocles: the emperor Traian,
Plutarke: the emperor Antonius p^^^ Georgias. The company of al these
philosophers and excellent men of the world served only for good counsel,
wherein their services deserved praise: as did the valiant Captains, by their
hardiness and manhood. The emperor Nero asked Seneca the philosopher, what he
thought of Scipio the Affrican and ^a to the Censor: he answered the emperor
that it was: As Arms is necessary so is learning also.
as necessary that Cato should be borne into the world, for the common wealth,
as Scipio to, for the wars: for as much, as the good Cato, by his counsel
did: chase the vices out of the common wealth: and Scipio by his actiuity and
valiantness in arms, did chastise the enemy of the common wealth. And surely
who shall follow the counsel here written, shall find them necessary and
profitable: and shall help him to assure his estate. For all the troop of
philosophers do affirm, that the felicity does not consist in great
puissance, nor in having worldly riches, To deserve well is the property of
good men.
but in deserving well. For the honor, favor, and greatness of this mortal
life is of more practice in them that deserve it then to them that possess it
without deserte, by hap or fortune: for if the earthquakes do most hurt
where be the most costly buildinges, and the tempest and lightning is most
extreme upon the high mountains, more then in the valleys, and low planes:
and that in the greatest and most proud and most peopled cities, the pestilence
does most rage, more then in other places of small inhabitation: and the birds
be entrapped in the nets unknown to them: and the calmnesse of the Sea is
token of some great tempest to come: and that after long health sickness is
most dangerous: so do I infer hereby, that it is necessary for all men to
beware of fained friends and beware of falling into ruin and danger of evil
fortune, and entrapping of dissembled friends. The emperor Augustus asked
Virgil how he might long maintain himself in his empire, and be liked of the
common weal: he answered, often to examine thy self, O Emperor, and to know
that as thou excellest all in estate and degree, and authority, so ought
thou to surpass all other in vertus and nobleness: which was a most excellent
and wise answer. The ancient and wise Historiographers did praise greatly the
greatness of Alexander, the learning of Ptholome, the instice of Numa
Pompilius, the clemency of Julius Caesar, the patience of Augustus, the veritis
of Traian, the pity of Antonius, the temperance of Constantius, the
continency of Scipio, and the humanity of Theodosius: so that these great
princes got their great reputation more by their virtues, then valiancy and
great deeds of arms, victories, and tryumphes. One thing is most certain,
that how vicious, dissolute or dissembling a man be, when he considers, and
remembers his wicked doings, and thinks what he has been, what he he is, It
is a wicked thing to dissemble.
and what may happen to him, for dissembling with his friends, and other his
evil doings, that if any spark of grace, or any goodness remain in him, he
will repent him of his former evil, and it brings heaviness to him, when he
has done wickedly: for so say truly, we never receive so much pleasure and
contentment in doing evil, as we shall find displeasure, grief, vengeance
and punishment, after evil doing. Certain counsels and good aduertisments I
will give all men, Note these councels.
never discover nor declare to any person all that thou think, nether make
any privy how much treasure, or valor in goods thou haste: for if thou can
not have all thou desire, do not say all thou knoweste, nether do hurt, to
any that thou may, and is in thy power to do: for commonly great hurt
does a man procure to himself in following his own will, without resting
upon the rock of good consideration and reason. The second is to be wary, and
careful, never to put to the hazard of variant fortune those things that
concern thy person, thy estate and goods: for the wise will never repose or
put themselves in perrill upon hope, where danger and perrill is likely to
ensue: neither think, that all services and proffers that shall be made them in
words and friendly protestations shall be performed for commonly those: that
most liberally offer their friendships, are slack in performing, ye a sometime
redyest, if they see a man has need of him, or that fortune frown upon him
to whom he professes great good will, none shall be found a greater enemy
then he: never be thou a medler in other men's business, or matters that touth
thee not, neither be slack in following thine own: for a time lost in doing
thy business, the like oportunitye thou shall never find, or recover again:
if thou stand in danger, and that there be hope of help, the duties of a
perfect friend.
speedily prevent thy mishappe, least by detracting the time all hope of help
may fail thee: choose them for thy friends assured and faithful, that will
have care of thee, and hold thee up from falling, and not them, do not opresse
or hurt the poor.
that after thou art fallen will proffer thee their hand to help thee up
again: hurt not those that thou have power to hurt: for the cries and cursses
of the poor, and sometimes of other, being wronged comes before the presence
of God, demanding justice and vengeance: in that thou art of ability to do
good, help thy friends: parents and kindred, and also the poor. In counsel
that that thou shall give, be not affectionate: be not presumptuous, or severe
against them you may command: nether do any thing without good
consideration: keep company with them that will speak the truth, and flee
from them that be liars, flatterers, and dissemblers: for more account is to be
made of them, that will forewarne thee of evil that may follow to thee, then
to those that will give counsel after thou have received the hurt: For a wise
man is to think that although evils commonly happen not to the provident man,
yet to think possible they may come, is wisdom: for it happens, the ship
soddainely by tempest to wrack, when the Sea is a little before very calm and
quiet, A wise consideration.
and the more favorable thou find fortune, so much the more have thou fear
that she will be cruel, and despitefull against the: make no small accounte of
this little work, and brief aduertisment, for experience teaches us, that a
little diamond is of more estimation then a great ballays. Consider also, how
the time flies away, and all things come to an end: A notable counsel.
and that thou must depart from thy riches, be forsaken of friends, and thy
person to dye, and those that should succeed and follow thee shall utterly
forget thee: and thou shall not know, to whom thy goods and succession, shall
come, and less how thy children and heirs shall govern themselves, nor
whether they should prove good and virtuous, or not. Chilon the philosopher,
being asked what thing he did find in this world upon which fortune had no
power, he answered: there be two things only in this world, which time
cannot consume, Fame and verity will never be covered.
nor fortune destroy, that is fame and good reputation of a man, that is
written in books, and verity hid, for that veritye and truth may be hid
and clowded for a time, but in the end it will manifest it self: if thou will sometime, for the recreation and contentment of thy spirits. To peruse
these councels, here set down, thou shall have cause to think it a good
travail, and work and time bestowed well. As Suetonius Tranquillus does
write of Julius Caesar, Time spente virtuously.
that among all the wars and continual following them, he did not cease to
read and write some thing, yea being in the camp, and in his tente, commonly
in one hand he held his spear, and in the other his pen, to write his
commentaries. Man is to make great accounte of the time lost, more then to
have care to keep his treasures and riches: for the time being well employed
shall bring him to salvation, and treasures evil gotten shall be the cause of
eternal damnation, over and besides a great travail and weariness to the
body of man, and greater perrill to his soul, when he occupies all his days
and all his life in the affairs, of this world, and cannot separate his mind
from these worldly affairs, till he be called to the place, where he must make
accounte of all his wretched doings, and leave his body in the earth, a food
for woormes. And finally, I assure you all that shall read this short
aduertisemente and council; that of all the treasures, riches, prosperities,
services, authorities and powers that you have, and possess in this your
mortal life, you shall carry nothing with you, but only the time that you have
well employed and spente virtuously, during the course, and time of this your
mortal life.

FINIS.
An excellent advertisement and council to be by the readers well remembered:
not to trust prosperous fortune, neither the felicities of this worldly life.
With diverse histories, and antiquities approouing the same by examples.

Collected out of sundry tongues by. I. B.

AT LONDON Printed for Abell Ieffes, dwelling in Sermon lane near Paul's
chain.

A godly advertisement to the Reader.
Among all the Romans, the great Cato the Censor was had in singular
reputation, which in all the progress of his life was so honest, and in
government of the common wealth was so rightwise a Iusticiar, that by good
right there was written upon the Gate of of his house these Epitaphes: O most
fortunate Cato, the reputation of whom is such toward the common wealth, that
there cannot be found a man that is able to Justify that ever he saw thee do
evil, or that any ever durst pray thee of any favor or grace in any cause
that was not just and honest. Cato would have no statue or Image of him self
set up as the notable Romans used.
And by good reason such honor was done him: for among all the noble and
famous Romans, it was he alone that would not suffer that any Image of
himself should be erected or set up in the capytoll of Rome, as the other
famous Romans did use for their honor and remembrance to continue. Many
having great marvel why this worthy Cato refused the honor, where upon were
great discourses and speeches in Rome: Cato upon a day being in the Senate
house, said openly unto them: the cause yt I will not co^snent to erect my
Image in the capitol, is for that I desire that after death my good works
should rather be followed, A man's good works rather to be followed then his
image to be looked upon.
then to go after, and behold my Image, and enquire what house or parents I
came of, and what evil I have done in my life time: and so my evil deserts
might cause my statue or Image to be thrown down, to my infamy and dishonor
after my death: for it happens often that those which by variant fortune,
from bace estate be mounted to great honor, come afterward by the same
occasion to be plonged and over throwe^ into utter ruin and defamy: for many
be reverenced and honored for their great riches, while they possess them,
which after are mocked when fortune has abaced them, and deprived them of
their riches. Lucian does recite that Pompey the great was wont to say: Note
Pompeius words of the variety of Fortune.
my friends we have little cause to trust the flatterings of fortune: as for my
part, I have proved by experience, that obtained the rule of the Roman empire
before I did once pretend it, or had any hope to do it, and you know how
suddenly again it was taken from me, when I nothing suspected any such hap to
come. Lucius Seneca being banished from Rome, wrote a letter to his mother
Albine, in which, in comforting her he said these words: know this for
certain, good mother Albine, yt in my life I never gave credit to, or trusted
fortune, The wise will not presume upon good hap.
although there were between me and her many shows of friendlinesse: but what
so ever she as a traitres conse^ted to, whereby I found my self in rest and
tranquillity: it was not done by fortune, by will to cease to hurt me, but only
to give me the more great fall, and dissimuled assurance of her furious revenge
toward me: yea even with ye furies, that one camp of them come after another
armd against me to give battle: for all that she gives me, either in riches
or honor by her liberality, I accept it but lent, and not to continue, but
small time: the promises yt fortune offers me, the honors she does me, and
the riches she gives me, I lay it by account in my house by it self, that
always I look to lose it every hour of the day and night: even when it
pleases her to take all again, without any thing troubling my mind or
spirits, or making dolorous or heavy my heart any thing at all, and further
know, that although I have been beholding to fortune, yet I have always
determined never to put trust in any thing she gives me, nor hope in my heart
safely to keep it, otherwise then for ye time to take pleasure in it, but no
assurance. I love to have fortune my friend, rather then mine enemy, but
notwithstanding, if I lose all that she gives me, it shall grieve me nothing:
therefore I conclude finally that when fortune causes or suffers my house to
be robbed and assailed by the greatest extremity she can: yet shall it not
cause me to give one sigh from my heart. We read that King Phillip the father
of great King Alexander, A wise king that doubted prosperous fortune.
when he had received news of three victories that his Captains and men of
war had gotten in diverse places, he immediately kneeled down, joining his
hands together, lifting up his eyes to the heavens, and spoke these words: O
cruel fortune: Oh most pitiful gods: after my prosperous success, I most
humbly pray you that after such great glory as you have given me at this
present, you will moderate the chastisement, I fear will follow: How fearful
the king Phillip was.
and that it may be with such pity, that it be not the cause of my extreme
ruin and destruction: for I am certain that after great felicity and
prosperity of this life there follows great misfortunes and disgraces. All
these examples before recited be worthy to be noted and often called to our
remembrance, that by thinking on them we may know how little we have to trust
in fortune, and how much we have to fear the flattering fawning and felicityes
of this life. True it is that we be very frail by nature, and therefore fall
into many fragilities daily. This world as a traitor does use always to give
us troubles and sorrows, as a recharge after our good happes. So that we may
by good right call our felicities cawteries or burning diseases in the flesh
almost incurable to heal: for that the world is subtle to find every fraud
and mischief, without giving us warning to foresee the sequel that follows.
As is manifestly seen: for we fall into a number of mishappes before we can
beware. After pleasure pain follows.
Yea if it fortune that sometimes we happen upon pleasures, or contentme^ts of
mind, by good fortune, as we term it, there follows a dangerous gulf of
troubles, and a sea of dolorous thoughts: so yt we hoping, as right worldlings,
to hold in certenty our good happes, riches and treasures of this world, are
suddaynly entrapped and toyled in ye nets of misfortune, hidden under a vain
hope of our good fortunes continuing with us. As though we had good fortune
taken in our netts, and so forced to abide with us: as had one notable Captain
Timotheus (as poets feign) for that he was happy in all his enterprises,
wherefore, Timotheus a fortunate Captain.
how high, great, rich, or how wise so ever we account our selves: of this we
may be sure and certain, that all men that be in the world, shall find the^
selves deceived in following the world, and the practices used in the same. And
such is our folly that after a little good fortune our wits be captiuated and
drowned in our own conceit, that we offer our selves as a prayr to evil haps
and froward fortune most commonly irrecuperable. O traiterous world, which for
a short time do flatter us, and suddenly with the twinkling of an eye
do hunt us from thee: suddenly thou give us occasion to be merry,
traiterous ^orlde.
and by and by make us heavy and sad: now thou do advance us, and shortly
after abace us, and inchant us: under the guise of troubles does so travel and
weary us, and make us so fast in thy toils and troublous laborinthes, that
we can not escape thy engines, for ye world, the more knowing a man hawty and
glorius, the more does provide for him honors and riches, deinty fare,
bewtifull women and other worldly pleasures and restes, which is to no other
end, but after all these wished pleasures and deintines ministered unto us,
even as a bait is to ye fishes we are suddenly and more easily taken in the
nets and snares of our own wickedness: but as for our first temptations that
by the world be presented unto us, we think it impossible that we should be
so often assailed with adverse fortune, and our power yt is small to resist, is
cause to us of great hardynesse: but I would have one that is most affectionate
to the world, or loves it most, should tell me, what hope or recompense he or
they can recover after they be deceived of ye world and their trust they have
of the continuance of their brittle pleasures: by trusting whereof they after
endure so many incu^brances of fortune. If we should ever hope they would
continue with us, that were a great folly and mockery, Death mo near when lif
is most desire
considering that the time when our life is most sweet and agreeable to us,
then is death most near us, even most suddenly to entrap us: for when we
think to have peace and truce with fortune, at the same instant she rayses a
camp, and stirs up a new war against us. And I certainly believe that which I
have written and said shall be red of many, and remembered and believed of few:
that is, that I have known great dolors and lamentations to have been in the
houses of many, where before has been great joy, laughing and rejoicing in
this world, which is a giver of evil, ^he world des^^ibed.
a ruin of good things, a heap of wickedness, a tirant of virtue, an enemy of
peace, a friend of wars, a mayntayner of errors, a river of vices, a persecutor
of virtues, an inue^ter of novelties, a grave of ignorance, a forest of
mischefe, a burning desire of the fleshly delights and insatiable delicacy, in
feeding and gourmandise, and finally, a Charibdis or most dangerous gulf, in
which does perish many noble hearts, and a very Scilla, where also does perish
al our desires and good thoughts for the people do not account them happy that
deserve well, ^he Peoples ^ccompt.
but those that posses the riches and treasures, which upon the sudden some
times they see fortune utterly despoyle them of that the^ possess: but of that
mind were not the Philosophers and Sages, neither at this day those that be
wise and virtuous, we see some lose their riches and some their lives and
treasures together that have been long in gathering and getting: for where is
great riches envy follows, as the shadow the body. Ewsenides was in great
favor with King Ptholome of Egypt, and thereby very rich: Note this.
rejoicing in this prosperity of fortune, said to another his great familiar:
the king can give me no more then the rule of all that he has: his friend
answered him: yet adverse fortune may take it all from thee, and then it will
be a grievous day to thee, to descend the degrees of good hap, The cruelty of a
king in respect of this liver.
shortly after it followed that king Ptholome found Ewsenides talking secretly
with a woman that king Ptholome loved greatly, wherefore the king taking high
displeasure against them both, commanded the woman to drink poison, and
caused the man to be hanged before his gate. Plaucian was so greatly esteemed
of the Emperor Seuerus, that all that Plaucian preferred, the Emperor thought
well of, Plaucian slain by the Emperors son.
and willingly accomplished his requests: yet was he suddenly slain in the
kings chamber by the hands of Basian the Emperors eldest son. the Emperor
Commodus, son of the good Emperor Marcus Aurelius, loved one servant that he
had, called Cleander, The end of extreme covetousness.
a man very wise and old, but yet covetous: which man being asked pay by the
soldiers of Rome, showing the emperors warrant under his hand, Princes
commandments are dangerous to be broken.
yet would not Cleander make pay wherefore the Emperor seeing his
disobedience, and the small respect he had to do the emperors commaundment,
commanded imediatly that Cleander should be put to a shameful death, and all
his goods confiscate, Alcimenides, a famous king in Greece, had one yt served
him, named Pannonian, one that the king held in singular favor and account, in
so much that the king played at tennis with this his servant: in playing, a
contention grew between them, where the chase was marked, It is danger to
contend with princes.
the king said in one place, Pannonion in another, the king being in a great
fury, commanded his guard to take him, and in the same place that Pannonian
affirmed the chase to be ye king caused Panonians head to be cut of, the
Emperor Constance favored greatly one Hortensius, in so much that all matters
in the common wealth, the wars, and household affairs were done by Hortensius
his direction: the emperor having cause to sign letters very hastily, and
Hortenslus brought the Emperor a pen that was evil made, or else some fault
in the ynke, that the Emperor could not readily write with it, the Emperor
being very angry caused Hortensius head to be cut of with out any stay. A cruel
punishment for a light fault.
Many other examples might here be brought in. How great Alexander slew in his
anger Craterus. King Pirrhus caused his scretary Alphabot to be slain. The
emperor Bittalio, Cincinatus his dear friend. Domician, his chamberlen Rufus,
by which examples may be seen ye sodainnesse of the alteration of prospetity
and riches, and for light occasions also death. King Demetrius asked the
Philosopher Euripides, what he thought of the weakness of man and of the
uncertainty of this life, he answered: O king, there is nothing certain in
this life, but that sudden eclipses and incumberances chances. King
Demetrius answered: you might well say they change daily, and almost from hour
to hour. So that there may be inferred by the words of this good king, that
changes of perrill and danger come in the twinkling of an eye, but to say the
truth, the man that would live content, Many mishaps might be prevented by
wisdom.
and foresee these evil happes, might well avoid most mischances: but
abundance and prosperity of fortime does so blind us, that coveting still to
enrich our selves, and to command, brings us in the end to infelicity and
torments of the mind. Finally I conclude, that all men ought to live sagely
and wisely, to foresee the directions of their lives and daily affairs. For
most true it is that none live in any prosperous estate that has no enemies,
noting their doings: wherefore let all men direct a virtuous course in their
living in this world, by means whereof their own quietness may follow in
their life time, and be a good example for their posterity to follow, after
their deaths.

FINIS.
Imprinted at London by Abel Ieffes and William Dickenson.


