MESOLABIVM ARCHITECTONICVM

THAT IS,

A most rare, and singular Instrument, for the easy, speedy, and most certain
measuring of Plains and Solids by the foot:

Necessary to be known of all men whatsoever, who would not in this case be
notably defrauded:

Invented long since by Mr. Thomas Bedwell Esquire:

And now published, and the Use thereof declared by Wilhelm Bedwell, his
nephew, Vicar of Tottenham.

LONDON,

Printed by J. N. for William Garet 1631

TO THE ILLUSTRIOUS, Right-honourable, Right-worshipfull, and dearly beloved,
the Nobility, Gentry, and Commons of Great Britain, and Ireland.
GOd, says the wise man, has ordered all things by measure, number, and
weight. And man, the image of God, ought, as the Philosophers teach, to order
all his life according to the same directions. And yet who knowth not, (...)
little they are of all men regarded! To pass by the general, and to come to
that which concerns our commerce, What smatterer in the Mathematics is he,
who knows not, what neglect or ignorance there is, even in those artists,
whom all men, the Rich as well as the Poor, do, and must daily trust, in
matters of measuring! I accuse no man of wilful fraud or malice. But this I
say There is no man whatsoever, that is not some piece of a scholar, that can
measure (...) truly: And those who are most (...) in both, cannot do it either
speedily, or readily. All which, Illustrious, Righthonourable,
Rightworshipfull, and Dearly beloved, I promise in this short treatise, by the
ordinary Instrument, in this (...) used, to teach the meanest of understanding,
though wholly unlearned, to do, with that speed, facillity, and certainety,
that may not be bettered. This as a prodromus, begun and ended, in the midst
of many and great troubles, I thought good to premise and send out, before a
larger discourse of the Fabric, and more ample Use thereof, which, God
willing, shall follow, so soon as Figures and Diagrammes may conveniently be
cut, for that purpose, with all possible speed: In the mean time the Author,
wholly devoted to his Countries service, rests

Your H. H. H. in all obseruancy, Wilhelm Bedwell.

MESOLABIVM ARCHITECTONICVM.
CHAP. 1. Of the Mesolabe: And of the use of it in general.
1 To measure by this Rule, is by two known lines, to find out the third
unknown.

THe Instrument whose use at this time we intend to (...), is no other, in
respect of matter and form, in general, but the Carpentars rule, by them used
in the measuring of Timber, and Bourd by the Foot square: For it is a flat
Ruler, or oblong parallelogram, of two foot, or a foot and half long: Two
inches and an half, or there abouts, broad: And of such convenient thickness
as shall at cuery man's discresion be thought most fit.

Again, as theirs, so this on the one side, contains a Scale of equal
divisions, First of (...), Halfe-ynches, Quarters, Half quarters, and so
forth: Then again, on the (...) side, you hauean Ynche divided into Seven,
Eleven, Thirteen, (...), (...), and Three and twenty, and such other (...)
parts, as (...) man for his (...) (...) shall think (...) (...), and the (...)
hand shall be able to perform. More over, on the other side, as on theirs
also, you have a Scale of unequal divisions, serving for the measuring of
Board and Timber: But after a far different manner For their divisions are
only marks or small strokes, in one of the limbs of that side, determinyng
from the Fore-end of the Rular in inches, and parts of inches, the Square
measure of solids or Timber. Whereas this of ours consists of two for^es of
straight lines, the one Beuelling o^ sla^ting, drawn as ^^e from side to side:
The other parallel that is equidistant one from another running along the
Ru^ar, from the one end toward the other: And therefore cutting those former,
and dividing them into unequal portions, whereby not only their said Quadrate
or square measure is performed: But also all other whatsoever, and that with
great facillity, speed, and certainety.

Lastly here, as also there, you must make a distinction between end, and end;
For that end we call the For-end of the Rular, from whence the divisions of it
into inches, on both sides are begun to be reckoned: And that the Backer-end
where they do end and determine: Or, contrariwise, the For-end is that from
whence the numbers asscribed to the Beuelling linnes are less and less. But
the distances between them are greater and greater.

Thus much of the Ruler, and the Parts thereof. Mensura, innuit Aristoteles, in
quolibet mensurabili genere, est quippiam minimum: A measure, as Aristotle
seems to intimate, is some small portion in every thing that is to be
measured: And it is commonly termed of the Geometricians Famosa mensura:
Aknowne, or set measure generally agreed upon amongst all men: As in measuring
by hand-breadths, feet, and passes, one hand breadth, on foot, one pass. And
in deed it is an old saying of Protagoras, as Aristotle records, That man is
the measure of all things. And true it is, That Vi^^^^us, and Hero the
mechanicke or inginer, do show, That generally all measures are taken from the
parts of Man's body, as a Finger, an Ynch (Pollex) an Hand, or Hands breadth, a
Spanne, a Foot, a Cubite, a Pass, an Elne, a (...).

But who knows not, What great difference there is between man and man? And
not only between men of diverse Countries and climats: But even between those
of one and the same province; Nay of one and the same family, children of the
same parents? And, the limbs of men being proportional to their bodies, what
(...) must there needs be, between the measures taken from them? And in deed
heerupon it came to pass, That the Measures, not only of diverse Nations: But
even of one and the same, are, and always have been much different, as does
manifestly appear by the diligent comparisons made of them by diverse and
sundry learned men, and especially by that hopeful Willebrordus Snellius, as
we (...), Godwilling, shortly teach in Ramus's Geometry, which we purpose to
set out in English, for the benesite of such of our Country men, as delight in
these study's, yet are ignorant of those languages where in they are written.

This difference was in this our kingdom complained of in all ages: For from
hence arose many grievous (...) and suites in the Law, which our worthy Kings,
and state in their Parlaments, in all ages have labored to appease, by
reducing all to an uniformity: For thus we find in our Statutes: It is
ordained, That 3 grains of Barley, dry and round, do make an Ynche: Twelve
ynohes do make a Foot: Three foot do make a Yard: Five yards and half do make
a (...). And 40 (...) in length, and 4 in Breadth do make an Aker. 33 of Edward
the first, De (...) mensurandis Item, De Compositione (...) et Perticarum.
Again in a (...) held in the 25 (...) of Queen Elizabeth, you have an Act,
thus entitled: An Act for the restrainte of Newbuildings, etc. in and nere the
citys of London and Westminster Be it enacted by the authority afor'said, That
a Mile shall be taken and reckoned in this manner, and no otherwise: That is to
say, a Mile to contain 8 Furlongs. And every Furlong to contain 40 lugges or
poales: And every Lugge or Poale, to contain (...) foot and an half.

Although this same our Rule may be fitted for sundry other sorts of
measures: Yet we have here nothing to do, But with the Foot, and his parts,
which are Inches, Halfe-ynches, Quarters, Half-quarters, and such other
sensible parts of the same.

2 Things to be measured by this Rule, are magnitudes.

3 A magnitude is a continual quantity. Amagnitude, or a bigness is that
which has one, or more dimensions: Now dimensions are in number three, to weet
Length, Breadth, and Thickness.

4 A magnitude is of one (...), or many.

5 The measure is of the same nature with the thing to be measured.

6 A magnitude of one dimension is called a Line.

Aline, is a magnitude of length only. Or, Aline is a magnitude only long.
Such are ways, or distances (...) place and place. Such a magnitude, says
Proclus out of Apollonius, is conceived in the measuring of iourneys. And by
the difference of a lightsome place, from a darksome. Such are Lenghts,
Heighths, Depths, and Breadths. Therefore here

7 The measure used is a line.

Here therefore there is no further skill required in the measurer then a due
application of the measure given: And therefore here in this case there is not
any use of this our Instrument.

CHAP. II. Of the measuring of Plains by the foot square.
1 A magnitude of many dimensions, is of two or three: That is called a
Surface: This a Solid.

2 If a dimension given, be either greater, or lesser, then any of the numbers
upon the Rular, you must take some lesser, or greater, which is proportional
unto it.

3 A surface is a magnitude long and broad. That is, a surface is a magnitude
which has two dimensions, to weet Length and Breadth. Such magnitudes, says
Apollonius, are the shadows upon the ground, which ouerspread the fields far
and wide, but do not enter into, or pierce the earth: Neither have they any
thicknes at all. The Greek word Epiphania, is here more significant. For this
word intimates no more but, The outward appearance of any thing. For of a
magnitude nothing is to be seen but the surface. Such are bourds esteemed to
be by the Carpentars: Wainscotte, by the Ioyners: Glass, by the Glasiers:
Cloth, both linen and Woollen, by the Drapers: Land, Medowe, and Wood, by the
Surueighers: For in the measuring of these, there is only Breadth and Length
considered, with out any respect at all had to the Thickness. Therefore

2 Here the measure is a Surface. Surfaces, according to their diverse natures,
are measured with diverse and sundry kinds of measures: Wood, Land, and
Medowe, are measured by the Rod or Perch: Cloth, Painting, Pauing, and
Wainscotte, by the Yard: Bourd and Stone, by the Foot. Although this our
Instrument may be fitted to all these, or any other like measure, Yet we at
this time intend to meddle with no other but the last, to weet With the
Footesquare.

4 A surface is either Plain or Vneu'n.

5 A Plain surface is a surface, which lies equally between his bounds. A
surface, the learned know is geometrically made of Lines: Therefore as lines
are either straight or Crooked: So from hence are all surfaces Straight or
Crooked: Or, to speak more properly, Even or vneu'n, Plain or Rugged: Yea and
by a straight line are surfaces tried, whether they be Even, or vneu'n. For if
a rightline applied to a surface every way, do touch it in all places, it is
Even: Otherwise, it is vneu'n.

9 Plains, as we said, are measured by the Foot square, That is the quadrate
of 12 inches.

A (...) of plain or flat measure is the quadrate of 12 inches, or that
which is equal unto it. That is, it (...): 44 (...) Inches: For 12 times 12,
are 144. Having therefore a plain given of 12 inches broad, there is no
question but 12 inches of that breadth shall make a Foot. But if the breadth
given be greater or less then 12, there is a question, What length, with the
breadth given, shall make a plain (...) to the square 144. Here

7 Of the two lines' given, the one is the breadth assigned, the other is
always the beuelling line 12.

Here again it must be remembered, That only those plains are to be measured
which are Rightangled parallelogramms, Or to speak in their own Language,
which are comprehended of a, Base, and Heigh which are rational between
(...): Ramus 9 e IIII. Those plains therefore which are not such, must be
reduced unto these kind of figures.

1 An example or two shall make all plain. A bourd of 16 inches broad and 18
inches long, (And so a stock of 13 bourds) is to be measured. Here I find 16,
the line answering to the Breadth, to (...) the beueller 12, at 9 inches from
the fore-end of the Rular. Therefore I say every 9 inches of that length shall
make a Foot of bourd: Or which is all one, shall be (...) to 144, the square of
12 inches. Now 9 inches I find to be contained in 18 foot, the Length, 24
times: Therefore I say, The bourd assigned does contain 14 foot of bourd.
Lastly, there being in the stock 13 such bourds, I say the whole stock does
contain 312 foot of bourd.

II A Table of 36 inches broad, and 28 foot long, is to be measured. Here 36
is greater then any of the parallels found upon the Rular: Therefore by the 2 e
of this, I take ^8 the half of it, which I find to meet with 22, the
beuelling line, (...) 8 inches from the for'end of the Rular: Therefore every 8
inches of length, of the breadth 18, shall contain a root of bourd: But the
breadth given is 36 inches: That is twice 18: Therefore every 8 inches in
length, of that Table shall be 2 foot of bourd. Now again I find 8 inches,
in 28 foot 42 times: Therefore the Table contains twice so many foot: That
is 84 foot of bourd.

III A pane of Glass, 7 inches broad, is to be measured. Here 7 is lesser
then any of the parallels: Therefore by the 2 e of this, I take 14, the double
thereof: Which I observe to meet with 12, at 10 inches and 2 seventh parts of
an ynch from the fore-end: Therefore every 10 inches and 2 seventh parts of
an ynch, of 14 inches breadth, shall be a foot of Glass: But the breadth
given is but 7 inches: Therefore every 10 inches, and 2 seventh parts of an
ynch shall be but half a foot of glass.

Of the measuring of Triangles, and all other Rightlined plains.
8 A triangle is nothing else but the half of a quadrangle, or
parallelogramme: And if it have one right angle, it is the half of a
rightangled parallelgramme. Therefore

9 It is to be measured as the Rightangled-parallelogramme, only conceive
that the number found, shall be the double of that which is sought.

Here therefore it must be conceived, That of the two sides encluding the
Rightangle, the one is to be understood to, be the Breadth, the other the
Length.

I Suppose a Rightangled-triangle, whose sides including the Right-angle, are
18, and 24, are to be measured. Here I take 18 for the Height, or Breadth of
the parallelogramme which also I find to meet with the beuelling line 12,
precisly at 6 inches from the fore end of the Ruler: Again 6, the said line
found, I find just 4 times in 24 the Lenghth given: Therefore I auerre the
Triangle given to contain the half of 4 foot, that is 2 foot of bourd.

20 If the triangle given be not right-angled, then is it by a perpendicular,
let fall within the triangle, from one of the corners unto the base, to be
reduced unto two rightangled triangles.

How this is to be done, Euclide teaches at the 11 and 12 propositions of his
I, book; And P. Ramus, at the 9 and 10 elements of his V. book of Geometry.
It is also to be done by the squire. Or by a triangled level, and otherwise.

II An Obtuseangled triangle, whose three sides are 25, 40, and 42, is to be
measured. Here by one of those above named ways, I find the perpendicular or
plumbline, falling from the greater corner, unto the opposite line, to be ^8.
And 24 I find upon the Ruler to meet with the line of 12, at 6 inches from
the fore-end of the same: Again 6 I find in 42 seven times: Therefore the
Triangle given does contain half so many foot, That is 3 foot and an half
of bourd.

11 From hence it is manifest how any Rhombus, Rhomboides, Trapezium, or
irregular rightlined multangles are to be measured.

To weet, that they are to be measured by parts, or by the particular
triangles, which every such figure does contain. Examples you may have in the
XIIII book of Ramus's Geometry, or in any others, which have written of
Geometry.

Of the measuring of any ordinate multangle figured.
12 Ordinate multangled plains are measured by their half Perimeter, and the
plumbline from the center, unto the midst of any one side.

These sorts of plains may be measured, as the former were, by dividing them
into their several Triangles. But this last is far shorter: And therefore to
be embraced and rather to be used in practice. Here the half of the
perimeter, or bout-line, (...) to the Length in a (...) (...): And the
plumbline here, is in stead of the Height or Breadth there.

1 An (...) Pentangle, whose sides are 24 inches a piece; And the (...) from
the center, to the midst of any one of the sides 16, is to be measured. Here
10 the Plumbline or Height, does, upon the Rular, meet with the (...) line 12,
at 9 inches from the often named end: And 9 is contained in 60, the half of the
perimeter, 6 times and two thirds: Therefore the Pentangle given contains 6
foot, and two third parts of a foot of Bourd.

II A Sexangled ordinate figure, whose sides are 12 inches broad a piece, is to
be measured. Here the Plumbline from the center to the midst of any one
side, is 10 inches, and 8 one and twentyths of an ynch: The double of 10 (that
is 20.) and (...) one and twenty parts of one ynche, I observe to meet with
the beueller 12, about 7 inches, and one quarter of an ynch, from the fore end
of the Rular. Which 7 and a quarter, is contained in 44 six time, and two
twenty nineth parts. Therefore I say the Sexangled figure given does contain 6
foot of bourd, and some small quantity more. The Circle, or Circular form is
in like manner measured: For

13 The Circle is measured by the Ray, and the half of the perimeter.

For, savth the Geometrician; Planus e radio and peripheriae (...) est area
(...). The plain of the ray, and half of the circumference is the content of
the circle. A Round table, whose diameter is 4 foot, and 8 inches, (or 56
inches) is to be measured. The half of 59 is 28: And the half of the
circumference is 88. Now ^8 being geater then any of the (...), I take 14 the
half thereof Wh ch I find to meet with the beuelling line 12, at 10 inches, and
a quarter, from the for'end of the Rular: Therefore I say every 10 inches, and a
quarter of an ynche of that Table shall be 2 foot of bourd. And because 88 does
contain 10 and 1 quarter, 8 times, and 20 forty ones; Therefore I say, the
whole does contain 16 foot of of bourd, and 144 inches.

CHAP. III. Of the measuring of Bodies or Solids by the Foot.
1 A Body is a magnitude of three dimensions. A Body or Solid is a magnitude
which has Length, Breadth, and Thicknes.

2 Here the measure is also a body, to weet the Cube of 12 that is 1728.

This is our opinion: Yet if any shall think it a paradox, or shall gain say
it, or mainetaine the contrary, we will not contend.

And

3 Of the three dimensions, two are given, the third is sought.

4 Bodies are of diverse sorts: But we will at this time meddle only with such
as are comprehended of parallelogrammes, or with Cylinders.

True it is, that this our instrument may be fitted, and applied to the
measuring of many other sorts of Solid bodies: But because we see no great use
of it in the measuring of any other then of these two sorts: Therefore we will
declare the use of it, in the measuring of these two only. Of these the first
is the Parallelepipedum, which is a plain Solid, whose opposite sides are
parallelogramme.

I A rightangled parallelepipedum (or a squared (...) logge) of 12 Inches
(...), 18 broad, and 16 foot long, is to be measured. Here the (...) and
Breadth are given: The Length is sought. These I find upon the Rular to meet
at 8 inches from the (...) named fore-end: Therefore I Say, Every 8 inches of
that Logge in (...) shall make a (...) (...) of timber. And because I find 8
Inches, in 16 foot, 24 times: Therefore I say in the Tymbersticke given, there
is 24 foot of solid measure.

II A squared stone of 14 Inches thick, five (...) (or 60 inches) broad, and
10 foot long, is to be measured. Here 60 is greater then any of the parallels
upon the Rular: Therefore I take 12 the 5th part of it: And I observe 12 and 14,
to meet at 10 inches, and 2 seaunth parts of an ynche, from the Fore-end of
the Rular. Therefore I say, That every 10 inches, and 2 seaunth parts of an
ynch in length of that stone shall be 5 foot of solid measure. And because
that 10 foot contains 10 inches, and 2 seaunth parts of an (...), 11 times
and 5 seau'nty twoos: Therefore I say the whole stone contains 58 foot, and
one third part of a Foot of solid measure.

III A rightangled Prisma, both whose sids, (...) I mean, containing the
rightangle, are 18 inches (...) the whole being in length 16 foot, is to be
(...) (...) understand that, as before was showed, as a Triangle was but the
half of a quadrangle: So a Prisma is naught but the half of a
Parallelepipedum, sawne longways from (...) to corner though the amidst: And
hence in (...) it has the name: This known I enter with the numbers given,
and I find 18 to meet with 18, at 5 inches and one third part of an ynche
from the often named end of the Rular: Therefore I say, That (...) 5 inches, and
(...) third part of an ynche in length of that stick shall be but half a
foot of solid measure. Now because 5 inches, and 1 third of an ynche is
contained in 16 foot, 67 times and 14 sixteen parts, that is almost 68 times:
The fore I say, The (...) given does contain (...) 68 half foot's, or 34
foot of (...) measure.

IIII A sispaned solid, all whole sides are 6 inches broad a (...) and 16 foot
long, is to be measured. Here the two lines given are, as above was taught,
the Plumblin: from the center, unto the midst of any one of the sides: And
the half of the compass; That, as before was taught, is 5 inches, and 2 (...)
parts of an ynche: This is, as you see 18. Now 5 and 2 eleu'nths does meet
with 18, at 19 inches and (...) fifth part of an inche from the fore-end:
Therefore I say, That every 19 (...), and one (...) part of an ynch, shall be a
(...) of solid measure. Lastly, because 16 inches, and 1 fifth part is (...)
in 16 foot, 10 times, and 2 fifteen pates, I say that the timber stick given
does contain 10 foot of solid measure, and some small quantity more.

Lastly a Round column, or Cylinder, of 44 inches about, and 12 foot long, is
to be measured. Here according to that above taught, the two lines given are,
The half diameter, and the half circumference: This is 22: That 7. Now these
two do meet upon the Rular at 11 inches, and 17 seauenty two parts, of an
ynch, from the fore-end there of; Therefore the stick contains about 13 foot
of timber or solid measure.

FINIS.




AN APPENDIX TO THE MESOLABIVM.
TWo things, for the further illustration of the Instrument, we have thought
good here to annex unto the former. The one is a collation of this manner of
measuring, with (...) commonly taught and practiced. (...) is of the Measuring
of Land by the (...)

A foot of solid measure, as all do generally (...) Cube of 12 inches; that
is, a square, or (...) (...), all whose dimensions, to wit, Thickness,
Breadth, and Length are equal: And the content, in numbers, is found by a
continual (...) of 12, 12 and 12, thus: 12 (...) 12, are (...): and 12 times
(...), are (...). Therefore a foot of solid measure does contain 1728 several
cubes of an (...), thickness, breadth, and height. This is (...) it were the
standard, whereby this kind of measuring is to be examined.

All artificers generally do measure by a Table of square numbers. And
therefore if the body given to be measured, be square, that is, if the
thickness and breadth be (...), they (...) give the just content. But where
these two dimensions do differ, there by their rules they do it not without
some error. For to bring it to the use of their Table, they must first make the
thickness and breadth equal; which they do, by taking the excess from the
greater, and adding of it to the lesser, or, which is all one, by girding of
the body about, and by taking of the quarter of the compass. An example or two
will make all plain.

Suppose a body, given to be measured, were 10 inches, thick, and 14 broad.
Here they take 2 from 14, and add it unto 10, and so do make all the sides
equal: Or by girding of it they find the compass to be 48. And the quarter
of 48 to be 12. And their table for the square of 12 inches, does give 12
inches for the length required to make a foot of solid measure. If this be
(...), then 10, 14, and 12, continually multiplied between themselves, shall be
equal to 12, 12, and 12, continually multiplied between themselves. But 10, 14,
and 12, do give for the product 1680. And 12, 12, and 12, as in former we
saw, gave 1728. (...) the difference between (...), and 1680, is 48. Therefore
the loss in every foot of (...) body, by their measure, is 48 inches.

(...) upon our Rular, you see 14 the parallel, to meet (...) (...) beuelling
line at 12 inches, and 12/35 of an inch (...) end of the Rular: And by
multiplication you (...) 10, 14, and 12 12/35 do make 1728: Therefore our
(...) is true.

If the body given be 8 inches thick, and 16 broad, they likewise take 4 from
16, and do add it unto 8, and so, as before, do (...) it to be equal to 12
inches square. Which, if it be true, then the product of 8, 16, and 12, shall
be equal to the product of 12, 12, and 12. But the product by the continual
multiplication of 8, 16, and 12, is but 1536: And the product of 12, 12, and
12, is 1728: and the difference between 1728, and 1536, is 192: Therefore by
that their measure there is lost in every foot 192 inches. Now upon the (...)
we find 8 and 16 to cross one another at 13: And 8, 16, and 13 continually
multiplied one by another, do give the product 1728: Therefore this kind of
measuring by the Rular is exact.

If it were 6 inches thick, and 18 inches broad, by the same reason, every 12
inches in length should make a foot of solid measure. For the sum of all the
sides added together, is 48: And the quarter of 48 is 12: And their Table for
the square of 12, does assign 12 inches for the length. (...) 6, 18, and 12,
multiplied continually do make but 1296, which differs from 1728 by 432.
Therefore by this their measure, in every foot of solid measure, there is lost
432 solid inches. That is just one quarter of a foot.

Upon this our instrument 6, and 18, are observed to meet at 16 inches from the
said fore end: and therefore it allows for a foot 16 in length. And 6, 18,
and 16 continually multiplied do make (...): therefore our rule is true.

Of the measuring of Plains, or Land, Meddows, and Woods by the Aker.
ALthough this instrument, as the title specifieth, be fitted only for the
measuring of Plains and (...) by the foot: Yet, as before is mentioned, it may
easily be applied to other like sort of measuring. Now, among others, there
being none of more frequent (...) amongst us, then the Rod or Perch for the
measuring of Land, Meddow, and Wood by the Aker: And this being either not
easy to be done by the unlearned; or not speedily to be performed by any, I
have thought it not amiss, for the further declaration of the use and
excellency of this invention, and for the benefit of others, to add unto the
former, something of this also.

An Aker of Land is, as before we heard, an oblong parallelogramme, whose
breadth is 4 Poles, and length 40. Therefore an Aker contains 160 square
Rods, of what figure or form soever it be. For 4 times 40, are 160. This here
in this case is, as 144 was in Board, and 1728 was in solid measure, as it were
the Standard, whereby this kind of measure is to be examined.

Land, Meddow, or Wood, is to be measured by this instrument, in all respects,
as Board or Glass was measured. Only two things are here first to be known:
The first is, That as there the beuelling line of 12, was always given for the
breadth, as appropriate to that kind of measure: So here another, peculiar to
this manner of measure, is in like sort to be drawn ouerth wart the parallel
lines from 6 (...) of an inch from the fore-end of the Rular, in the parallel
24, unto 13 and in the parallel 12. The second is, That (...) there lines and
spaces did answer, and were denominated of inches and parts of inches; so here
the same lines and spaces must be supposed to signify Rods and Perches, and
parts of the same. An example or two will make all plain and manifest.

1 Suppose a right angled square field of 16 Pole broad, and 30 in length were
to be measured: Here I find 16, to meet with the line of Land measure at 10
inches from the fore end of the Rular: Therefore I say, that every 10 rod in
length, of the breadth of 16 rods shall make an (...) of Land. And again,
because the said 10 is found in 30 the length given 3 times. Therefore I say,
the field assigned does contain 3 Akers.

2 A square Meddow right-angled of 40 Poses in breadth, and 60 in length, (...)
to be measured. Here 40, the lesser number of the two given, is greater then
any upon the Rular: Theresore I take 20, the half of 40: And I find 20 to
meet with the line of land measure, at 8 inches from the said foreend of the
Rular. Therefore (...) I say. That every 7 Pole in length of the breadth of 40
Pole, shall (...) 2 Akers of Meddow. Again because 8 is contained in 60 seven
times and: therefore I auerre, that the Meddow assigned to be measured, does
contain 15 akers.

3 Admit that a Wood to be measured were 160 rods square: that is, that every
side of the same were 160 Poles in length. Here 160 is far greater then any
number upon the Rular: Therefore I take 16, the tenth part of 160: which I
(...) to cross the line of land measure at 10 inches from the fore end of the
Rular: wherefore first I affirm, that every 10 pole of the breadth of 160
pole, shall contain 10 Akers of Wood: Again, because 160 does 10 sixteen
times, I say, that the Wood does contain 160 Akers. Or, which is all one, that
every Pole in breadth of that length, does contain an Aker.

But some man may object and say, this is not a matter worth the learning, or
of so many words, seeing that it is well known, that there are many men wholly
unlearned, yea, and some of no extraordinary parts of capacity or
understanding, which can measure Land, Meddow, or Woods, so that they be
square, or of any ordinary form. I confess I have known diverse such. And yet
is not this our labor in (...) or altogether unprofitable: For first, what
they do with much study or contention of mind, and are long in doing of it,
we teach to do with great facility and speed. For they, although the field be
a rightangled parallelogramme, must first measure at the least two sides
comprehending one or other of the rightangles. And then multiply these two
sides the one by the other: And lastly, the product found, they must divide by
160: And so by the quotient now found, answer the question propounded. We save
a great deal of this labor. For we only measure the breadth of the field;
then we seek upon the Rular, how much in length of this breadth does make an
Aker. Lastly, we apply this last number found unto the whole length, and so
witho ut either multiplication or division, do speedily answer the demand.

Another thing there is wherein this invention does go far beyond the reach
of the unlearned, which is thus. These (...) can sooner measure and cast up the
whole content of the field, then they can set you (...) one, two, or three
Akers of the same. Here it is all one to give the content of the whole, or any
part, or parts of the same. And that which to those is most hard, here to us is
most easy: I mean to set out any one or more Akers of the (...); and that on
which side or end of the field you shall think good.


