WISDOM Crying out to Sinners to return from their evil ways. CONTAINED IN
THREE pious and learned Treatises, Viz. I. Of CHRIST'S fervent love to bloody
Jerusalem. II. Of GODS just bardening of Pharaoh, when he had filled up the
measure of his iniquity. III. Of MAN'S timely remembering of his Creator.
Heretofore communicated to some friends in written Copy: but now published to.
the general good.

EZEKIEL 33. 11. Say unto them, As I live (...) the Lord God, I have no pleasure
in the death of the wicked but that the wicked turn from his way and live:
turn ye, turn ye from your evil ways, for why will ye dy^, Oh house of
Israel? LONDON, Printed by M. P. for John Stafford, dwelling in Black horse
Alley near ^^^^^street 1639.

CHRIST'S FERVENT LOVE TO BLOVDIE HIERVSALEM; OR An Exposition, delivered in a
Sermon on MATT. 23. verse. 37.
MATT. 23. verse. 37. Oh Jerusalem, Jerusalem, thou that killest the Prophets,
and stonest them which are sent unto thee: how often would I have gathered thy
children together, even as an ben gathers her chickens under her wings, and
yes would not?
THe sum of my last meditations upon the former verses was, That
notwithstanding our Saviors predictions or threatenings of all those plagues
shortly to befall Jerusalem, there was even at this time a possibility left
for this people to have continued a flourishing nation, a possibility left for
their rep^ntance: that their repentance and prosperity was the end whereat the
Lord himself did aim, in sending Prophets, and Wisemen, and lastly his only
Son unto them.

The former of the two parts; the possibility of their prosperity, and
repentance, was proved from the perpetual tenor of Gods covenant with his
people; first made with Moses, afterward renewed with David and Solomon, and
ratified by Jeremy and Ezechiel. The tenor of the covenant (as you then
heard) was a covenant not of death only, but of life and death: of life, if
they continued faithful in his covenant; of death, if they continued in
disobedience.

The later part of the same, viz. That this peoples repentance and prosperity
wa^ the end intended by God, was proved from that declaration of his desire of
their everla^ting prosperity; Deuteronomy. 5.29
Oh that there were such an heart in this people to fear me, and to keep my
commandments always, that it might go well with them and their posterity for
ever. And the like place, Psalm. 81. verse. 13. to the end: Esaias 48. verse 18.
Both places manifest Gods love, and desire of this peoples safety. But the
abundance, the strength, with the unrelenting constancy and tenderness of his
love, is in no place more fully manifested than in these words of my text. The
abundant fervencie we may note in the very first words, in that his mouth
which never spoke idle or superfluous words, does here ingeminate the
appellation, Oh Jerusalem, Jerusalem. This he spoke out of the abundance of
his love: But love is often time^ fervent or abundant for the present, or whiles
the object of ou^ love remains amiable, yet no^ so constant or perpetual, if
the quality of what we love be changed. But herein appears the constancy
and strength of Gods love, that it was thus fervently set upon Jerusalem, not
only in her pure and virgin days, or whiles she continued as chaste and
loyal, as when she was affianced unto the Lord by David, a man after his own
heart: but upon Jerusalem, often drunken with the Cup of fornications; upon
her long stained and polluted with the blood of his Saints; upon her children,
who with the dog returned unto their vomit, or with the sow unto their
wallowing in the mire, or puddle of their Mothers dust, whose sacrifices were
mingled with righteous blood; upon Jerusalem and her Children, after he had
cleansed her infected habitations with fire, and carried her Inhabitants beyond
Babylon into the North-land, as it had been into a more fresh and purer air;
not only before the Babylonish Captivity, but after their return thence, and
replantation in their own land, God would have gathered them even as the Hen
does her chickens under her wings, etc.

In which words, besides the Tenderness of Gods love toward th^se
Cast-awayes, is set out unto us the safety of his protection, so they would
have been gathered. For as there is no creature more kind and tender than the
hen unto her young ones: so is there none that does more carefully shroud and
shelter them from the storm, none that does more closely hide them from the
eye of the Destroyer. Yet so would God have hidden Jerusalem under the shadow
of his wings, from all those storms which afterward overwhelmed her, and
from the Roman Eagle, to whom this whole generation became a prey; if so
Jerusalem with her children after so many hundred years experience of his
fatherly love and tender care, had not remained more foolish than the new
hatched brood of reasonlesse creatures; if so they had not been ignorant of
his call, that had often redeemed them from their enemies. How often would I
have gathered you, and you would not?

Here were large matter for Rhetorical digressions or mellifluous Encomions of
divine love; points wherein many learned Divines have in later times been very
copious: yet still leaving the truth of that Love (which they so magnify) very
questionable. It shall suffice me at this time, Two poin^s.
first, to prove the undoubted truth and unfainednesse of Gods tender love,
even toward such Cast-awayes, as these proved, to whom he made this
protestation: Secondly, to unfold (as far as is fitting for us to enquire) how
it is possible they should not be gathered unto God, nor saved by Christ, whose
gathering and whose safety, He to whom nothing can be impossible, had so
earnestly, so tenderly, and so constantly longed after.

These are points of such use and consequence, that if God shall enable me,
soundly, though plainly, to unfold their truth; you will (I hope) dispense with
me for want of artificial exornations or words more choice, than such as
naturally spring out of the matters handled; as willingly as the poor amongst
you pardon good housekeepers for wearing nothing but home-spunne cloth. For as
it is hard for a man of ordinary means to bestow much on his own back, and
feed many bellies: so neither is it easy for me and my present opportunities,
both to feed your souls with the truth, and to cloth my discourse with choice
words and flourishing phrases. And I am persuaded many Preachers might, in this
argument, often prove more Theological, so they could be content to be less
Rhetorical. Yet let not these premises prejudice the truth of the conclusion.
My purpose is not to dissent from any of the Reformed Churches, but only in
those particulars, wherein they evidently dissent from themselves, and from
general principles of truth acknowledged by all that believe God or his word.
Point. That God earnestly desires the conversion of such as perish.

1 Timothy 2.1. 2.




Were I to speak in some Audience of this point, it would be needful to dip
my pen in Nectar, or sweeten my voice with Ambrosia, to allay the harshnesse of
this position, That God should so earnestly desire the conversion of such as
perish. Howbeit, the surest ground of that charity which God requires should
be in every one of us toward all (our greatest enemies not excepted) is firm
belief of this his unspeakable love toward all, even toward such as kill his
Prophets, and stone the Messengers of his Peace. 1 Timothy 1. 1, 2.
I exhort (says the Apostle) that first of all, Supplications, prayers,
intercessions and giving of thanks be made for all men: For Kings and all that
are in Authority. Iam. 2.6.
Yet did such in those days most oppress all Christians, and draw them before
the Judgment Seats, even because they did pray to the true God for them. For
they did blaspheme that worthy name, Verse. 7.
by which we were called. This duty notwithstanding, which was so odious unto
those great and rich men, for whose good it was performed, 1 Timothy 2.3.
Saint Paul tells us was good and acceptable in the sight of God our Savior:
Verse. 4.
why acceptable in his sight? Because he would have all men (and therefore even
the sworn enemies of his Gospel) to be saved, and come to the knowledge of
the truth which they oppugned. Or if the express authority of the Apostle
suffice not, his reasons drawn from the principles of Nature will persuade
such as have not quenched the light of Nature, by setting not the corruptions
only, but the very Essence of Nature and Grace at ods and faction. Verse. 5.
For there is one God: Had there been more, every one might have been conceived
as partial for his own Creature. But in as much as all of us have but one
Father, his love to every one must needs be greater than any earthly parents
love unto their Children, in as much as we are more truly his, than children
are their parents. But here (as the Apostle foreseeth) might be replied; That
albeit God be one, and the only Creator of all, yet in as much as we are
seeds of Rebels with whom he is displeased; our Mediator might be more
partial, and commend some to Gods love, neglecting others. To prevent this
scruple, the Apostle ads; As there is but one God, Verse. 5.
so there is but one Mediator between God and Man; and He of the same Nature
with us, A man: but Men are partial; yet so is not the Man Christ Jesus, that
is, the Man anointed by the holy Ghost, to be the Savior of the world. As he
truly took our flesh upon him, that he might be a faithful and affectionate
High Priest; so that we might conceive of him, as of an unpartiall Sollicitour
or Mediator betwixt God and us, he took not our Nature instampt with any
individual properties, characters, or references to any one tribe or kindred.
Father according to the flesh, he had none; but was framed by the sole
immediate hand of God: to the end that as the eye, because it has no set
color, is apt to receive the impression of every color: so Christ, because
he has not these carnal references, which others have, but was without
father, without brother, without sister on earth, might be unpartiall toward
all, and account every one that does the will of his father which is in Heaven,
as Sister, Mother and Brother. Esaias. ^6.4. ^.
Thus says the Lord to the Eunuchs that keep my Sabbaths, and choose the
things that please me, and take hold of my Covenant: even unto them will I
give in min^ house, and within my walls, a place and a Name, better than of
Sons and Daughters: I will give them an everlasting name that shall not be
cut off. Briefly, He is a Brother to all mankind, more loving and more
affectionate, than Brothers of entire blood are one toward another.

The very ground of the Apostles reason thus bared will of it own accord
reverberate that Distinction which has been laid against his meaning, by
some, otherwise most worthy Defendants of the Truth.

The distinction is, that, when the Apostle says, God will have all men to be
saved, he means Genera singulorum, not Singula generum, some few of all sorts,
not al of every sort: some rich, some poor, some learned, some unlearned, some
Jews, some Gentiles, some Italians, some English, etc.

The illustrations which they bring to justify this manner of speech, did the
time permit, I could retort upon themselves, and make them speak more plainly
for my opinion, than for theirs. It shall be sufficient by the way to note the
impertinencie of the application, supposing the instances brought, were in
themselves justifiable by the illustrations they bring: or how little it could
weaken our assertion, although it might intercept all the strength or aid this
place affords for the fortification of it. What can it help them to turn
these words, because they make toward us, from their ordinary or usual
meaning, or to restrain Gods love only unto such as are saved; when as the
current of it in other passages of Scripture is evidently extended unto such as
perish? In stead of many words uttered by him that cannot lie, unto this
purpose, those few, Ezekiel. 33. 11. shall content me: As I live, says the Lord
God, I have no pleasure in the death of the wicked; but that the wicked turn
from his way and live: turn ye, turn ye from your evil ways; for why will
ye die, Oh house of Israel? If God mind the safety of such as perish, yea
even of most desperate and stubborn sinners: no question but he wills all
should be saved and come to the knowledge of his truth.

The former distinction then will not stop this passage. Howbeit some learned
among the Schoolmen, and other most religious Writers of later times, have
sought out another for intercepting all succor this or the like places might
afford to the maintenance of that truth which they oppugn and we defend. That
God does not will the death of a sinner Voluntate signi they grant: but that
he wills it Voluntate ^eneplaciti, they take as granted. That is in other
terms: God does not will the death of him that dies, by his revealed will; but
by his secret will. Not to urge them to a better declaration than hitherto they
have made, in what sense God being but one, may be said to have two Wills: That
he wills many things which we know not, that he has diverse secret purposes,
we grant and believe as most true indefinitely taken. But because these Wills
or Purposes are secret; man may not without presumption dete^mine the
particular matters which he so wills o^ purposes. Otherwise they should not be
secret but revealed to us: where^as things secret as secret, belong only to God.

In that they oppose thi^ Secret will to Gods revealed will; they do as it
were put in a Caveat that we should not belee^^ it in those par^iculars whereto
they apply it. For we man not believe any thing concer^ning the salvation or
damnation of mankind, or the mean which lead to either; but wha^ is revealed.
But this Secret will ^^ not revealed. Ergo, not to b^ believed.

Nor are we by the principle of Reformed religion bound one^ly not to believe
it, but utte^l^ to disclaim it: For admittin^ what was before granted, an i^^
definite belief, that God wi^ many things which he keeps s^^cret from us:
yet we most abso^lutely believe, that he never wills any thing secretly, which
shall be contrary or contradictory to that whereon his revealed will is set;
or, to that which by the express warrants of his written word we know he
wills. Now every Christian must infallibly and determinately beleeve^ that God
wills not the death of the wicked, or of him that dies, (seeing his written word
does plainly register his peremptory will unto this purpose). Therefore no man
may believe the contradiction to this, to wit, That he wills the death of him
that dies. Otherwise this distinction admitted, untwines the very bonds of man's
salvation. For what ground of hope have the very Elect besides Gods will
revealed, or at the best confirmed by an oath? Now if we might admit i^ but as
probable, That God voluntate beneplaciti, or by his secret will may purpose
some thing contrary to what he promises by his revealed will: who is he that
could have (I say not any certainty, but) any moral probability of his
salvation? seeing God assures us of salvation only by his word revealed, not
by his secret will or purpose; which for ought we do or can possibly know, may
utterly disanull what his revealed will seems to ratify.

Lastly, it is an infallible Rule o^ Maxim in divinity, That we may not
attribute any thing to the most pure and perfect Essence of the Deity which
includes an imperfection in it: much less may we ascribe any impurity or
untruths to that Holy One, the Author of all Truth. But to swear one thing,
and to reserve a secret meaning contrary to the plain and literal meaning
professed, is the very Idea of untruth, the essence of impious perjury, which
we so much condemn in some of our adversaries, who (if this distinction might
generally pass for current amongs^ us) might ^^stly say, that we are as
mali^i^usly partial against the I^suites, as the Iew^^ were against Christ
Jesus; tha^ we are ready to blasphem^ God, rather than spare to revil^ them:
seeing we attribute tha^ to the divine Majesty which we condemn in them as
mos^ impious and contrary to his sacred will, who will not dispense with
AEquivocation or Mental reservation, be the cause wherein they be used never
so good. Because to swear one thing openly, and secretly to reserve a
contradictory meaning, is contrary to the very nature and essence of the very
first truth; the most transcendent sin that can be imagined: Wherefore, as this
distinction was lately hatched, so it might be wished, that it might be quickly
extinguished and buried with their bones that have revived it. Let God be true
in all his words, in all his sayings; but especially in all his oaths: and let
the Jesuit be reputed, as he is, a double dissembling perjured liar.

The former place of Ezechiel, as it is no way impeached by this distinction
last mentioned: so does it plainly refute anoth^r gloss put upon my text by
some worthy and famous writers; How often would I have gathered you etc. These
words, say they, were uttered by our Savior manifesting his desire as man. But
unless they be more than men which frame this gloss, Christ as man was
greater than they, and spoke nothing but what he had in express commission
from his Father. We may then (I trust) without offense, take his words as here
they sound, for better interpretation of his Fathers will, than any man can
give of his meaning in this passage, uttered by himself in words as plain as
they can devise. These words indeed were spoken by the mouth of man; yet as
truly manifesting the desire and good will of God, for the saving of the
people, as if they had been immediately spoken by the voice of God.

But why should we think they were conceived by Christ as man, not rather by
him as the Mediator between God and Man^ as the second person in the Trinity
manifested in our flesh? He says not, Behold my Father has sent: but in his
own person; Behold I have sent unto you Prophets and Wise. Nor is it said, How
often would my Father; but, How often would I have gathered you? this gathering
we cannot refer only to the three years of his ministry; but to the whole
time of Hierusalems running away from the Prophets call, from the first time
that David first took possession of it, until the last destruction of it: For
all this while, HE, that was now sent by his Father in the similitude of Man,
did send Prophets, Wisemen and Apostles, to reclaim them, if they would have
hearkened to his, or his me^sengers admonitions. Saint Luke puts this out of
controversy. For repeating part of this story, he says expressly, Luke 11. 49.
Therefore also said the Wisdom of God, I will send them Prophets etc. And
Christ is said the Wisdom of God, not as Man, but as God: and consequently
he spoke those words not as man only, but as God.

The same compassion and burning love, the same thirst and longing after
Hierusalems safety, which we see here manifested by a manner incomprehensible
to flesh and blood, in these words of our Savior in my text, or the like
uttered by him Luke 19. verse 41. and sequentibus, with tears and sobs, we
must believe to be as truly, as really and unfainedly in the divine nature,
though by a manner incomprehensible to flesh and blood. How any such flagrant
desire of their welfare, which finally perish, should be in God, we cannot
conceive, because our minds are more dazeled with the inaccessible light, than
the eyes of Bats and Owls are by gazing on the Sun. To qualify the
incomprehensible glory of the Deity, the Wisdom of God was made flesh, that
we might safely behold the true module or proportion of divine goodness in
our Nature: as the eye which cannot look upon the Sun in his strength, or as
it shines in the ^irmament, may without offense behold i^ in the water, being
an Elemen^ homogeneall to its own substance. Thus should all Christ^ prayers,
desires or pathetical^ wishes of man's safety, be to u^ so many visible pledges
or sensible evidences of Gods invisible, incomprehensible love. And so he
concludes his last invitation of the Jews; John 12. 49.50.
I have not spoken of my self, but my Father which sent me, he gave me a
commandment, what I should say, and what I should sp^ake. And I know that his
commandment is everlasting life. Whatsoeve^ I speak therefore, even as the
Father said unto me, so I speak.

And what says our Savior more in his own, than the Prophet had done in the
name and person of his God? Sion complained the Lord has forsaken me, and my
Lord has forgotten me: Esaias 49. 14, 15. etc.
but he answ^red, Can a woman forget her sucking child, that she should not
have compassion on the son of her womb? yea they may forget, yet will not I
forget thee. Behold I have engraven thee upon the palms of my hands, etc.
These and the like places of the Prophet compared with our Saviors speeches
here in my text, give us plainly to understand, That whatsoever love any mother
can bear to the fruit of her womb, unto whom her bowels of compassion are
more tender than the Fathers can be; or whatsoever affection any dumb creature
can afford to their tender brood; the like, but greater does God bear unto his
children. Unto the Elect, most will grant. But is his love so tender toward
such as perish? Yes, the Lord carried the whole host of Israel (even the
stubborn and most disobedient) as an Eagle does her young ones upon her wings,
Exodus 19. 4. Earthly parents will no^ vouchsafe to wait perpetually upon their
child^^n, the Hen continues not her call from morning until night, nor can
she endure to hold out her wings all day for a shelter to her young ones: as
they grow great and refuse to come, she gives over to invite them. But says
the Lord by his Prophet, Esaias 65. 2, 3, 4, 5.
I have spread out my hands all the day long unto a rebellious people, which
walked in a way that was not good, after their own thoughts: A people that
provokes me to anger continually to my face, that sacrifices in Gardens, and
burns incense upon Altars of brick; which remain among the graves, and lodge
in the monuments, which eat swines flesh, and broth of abominable things is in
their vessels: which say (adding Hypocrisy unto filthiness and Idolatry)
Stand by thy self, come not near unto me^ for I am holier than thou. Such they
were, and so conceited of our Savior, with whom he^ had in his life time often
to deal, and for whose safety he prayed with tears before his passion.

These and many like equivalent passages of Scripture are path^tically set
forth by the Spirit, to assure us, that there is no desire like to the
Almighties desire of sinful man's repentance, no longing to his longing after
our salvation. If Gods love to Judah comne to the height of rebellion, had
been less than man's or other creatures love to what they affect most dearly:
if the means he used to reclaim her, had been f^wer or less probable than
any others had attempted for obtaining their most wished end: his demand (to
which the Prophet thought no possible answer could be given) might easily be
put off by these incredulous Jews, unto whom he had not referred the judgment
in their own cause, if they could have instanced in man or other creature more
willingness to do what possibly they could do, either for themselves or
others, than he was to do whatsoever was possible to be done for them. And
now, Oh inhabitants of Jerusalem, and men of Judah, judge, I pray you, between
me and my vineyard, what could more be done to my vineyard, that I have not
done to it? Wherefore, when I looked i^ should b^ing forth grapes, brought it
forth wild grapes^ Esaias 5. 3, 4.

Point. How it is possible then that all men are not saved.
But the greater we make the truth and extent of Gods love^ the more we
increase the difficulty of the second point proposed. For amongst women many
there be that would, amongst dumb creatures scare^ any that would not redeem^
their sucklings from death by dying themselves: Yet what is it they can do,
which they would not do to save their own lives? And did not God so love the
World that he gave his only begotten Son for it? Yes, for the World of the
Elect. If there be Worlds of the Elect, I see not why any should be excluded
from the number. ^ut to let that pass: Gods desire of their repentance which
perish, is undoubtedly such as has been said. Yet should we say that he has
done all that could be done for them; how chances all are not saved? and was
the vineyard more barren than Sarah, the fruit of whose womb he made like the
stars of the sky, or like as the sands b^ the Sea shore, innumerable? was it
a matter more hard to make an impenitent Jew bring forth fruits worthy of
repentance, than to make a virgin conceive and bear a Son? If it were not;
how chances it, the word of the Lord (and that but a short one) should bring
the one to joyful issue; whiles the other (the repentance of these Jews and
other ungodly men) after so many exhortations and threatenings, after so many
promises of comfort, and denuntiations of woes (which the Prophets, the
Apostles, and their Successors have used) is not to this day, nor ever shall be
accomplished? If repentance of men borne and brought up in sin be a work
altogether impossible: all of us should utterly perish; none repent. If
possible to any; shall it not be possible to the Almighty, who alone can do
all things? If possible in him: why is not repentance wrought in all, whose
salvation he more earnestly desires, than the most tender hearted mother does
the life and welfare of her darling infant?

Hence in probability, some may conclude, either Gods love unto such as perish
is not so great as some mothers bear unto their children: or else his power in
respect of them is not infinite. And against our doctrine perhaps, it will be
objected, that by thus magnifying Gods love toward all, we minish his power
toward some. From which to derogate ought, is in some men's judgments the
wo^st kind of blasphemy: a point as dangerous in divinity to speak but
doubtfully or suspiciou^ly of it, as in matt^r of Sta^^ to determine or limit
the Pre^ogative Royal. Howbeit, if no other choice were left, but a necessity
were laid upon us of ^eaving either the infinite power, or infinite goodness
of our God questionable or unexpressed; the offense were less, not to speak
of his power so much (as most do,) than to speak ought prejudicial all to
that conceit, which even the Heathens by the light of nature had of his
goodness. This attribute is the chief object of our love, and for which he
himself desires to be loved most. And in this respect to derogate ought from
it, it must needs be most offensive. But his curse be upon him that will not
unfainedly acknowledge the absolute infiniteness as well of his power as of
his goodness. Whoso^ver he be that loves his goodness, will unfainedly
acknowledge he is to be feared and reverenced, as the Almighty Creator and
Judge of men. Unless he were in power infinite, he could not be infinitely
good. Howbeit he that restraines his love and tender mercy only to such as are
saved, does make his goodness less (at least extensively) than his power. For
there is no creature unto which his power reaches not. But so does not his
loving kindness extend to all; unless he desire the good and safety of those
that perish.

For winding, our selves out of the former snare; we are to consider a maine
difference between the love of man or other creatures, and the love of God to
mankind. Dumb creatures always effect what they most desire, if it be in the
precincts of their power, because they have neither reason, nor other internal
law of right or wrong to control or countersway their brutish appetites. Man,
although endued with reason and natural notions of right and wrong, is
notwithstanding oftentimes drawn by the strength or inordination of his tender
affection, to use such means as are contrary to the rules of reason, equity
and religion, for procuring their safety or impunity, on whom he dotes.
Howbeit among men, we may find some, which cannot be wrought by any promise
or persuasion to use ^^ose unlawful courses for the impunity of their children
or dearest friends, which the world commonly most approves. Not that their
love toward their children, friends or acquaintance is less; but because
their love to public justice, to truth and equity, and respect to their own
integrity, is greater than other men's are. A fit instance we have in Zaleucus
King of Louis, who having made a severe law, that whosoever committed such an
offense (suppose adultery) should lose his eyes: It shortly after came to
pass that the Prince, his son and heir apparent to the crown, trespassed
against this sanction. Could not the good King have granted pardon to his
son? He had power, no doubt, in his hands, to have dispensed with this
particular, without any danger to his person. And most Princes would have done
as much as they could for the safety of their successor. Nor could privileges
or indulgences upon such special circumstances be held as breaches or
violations of public laws; because the prerogative of the person offending
cannot be drawn into example. But Zaleucus could not be brought to dispense
with his law, because he loved justice no less dearly than his Son, whom he
loved as dearly as himself. And to manifest the equality of his love to all
three, he caused one of his own eyes, and another of his sons to be put
out: that so the law might have her due, though not wholly from his Son that
had offended; but in part from himself, as it were by way of punishment for
this partiality toward his Son.

It were possible no doubt for a King to reclaim many inferiors from theft,
from robbery, or other ungracious courses; so he would vouchsafe to abate his
own expenses to maintain theirs, or afford them the solaces of his Court,
make them his Peers, or otherwise allow them means to compass their wonted
pleasures. But thus far to descend to unthrifty subjects humors, were ill
beseeming that Majesty and gravity which should be in Princes. If one should
give notice to a Prince how easy and possible it were to him by these means,
to save a number from the gallows: his reply would be, Princeps id potest
quod salva Majestate potest: That only is possible to a Prince, which can
stand with the safety of his Majesty: but thus to feed the unsatiable
appetites of greedy unthrifts (though otherwise such as he loves most dearly,
and whose welfare he wishes as heartily as they do that speak for them) is
neither Princely nor majesticall. For a King in this case to do as much as by
his authority or other means he is able to do, were an act of weakness and
impotencie, not an act of Sovereign power; a great blot to his wisdom, honor
and dignity; no true argument of royal love or Princely Clemency.

In like manner we are to consider that God, albeit in power infinite, yet his
infinite power is matched with goodness as truly infinite; his infinite love,
as it were, counterpoised with infinite Majesty. And though his infinite mercy
be as Sovereign to his orher Attributes: yet is it in a sort restrained by the
tribunitiall power of his justice. This equality of infiniteness betwixt his
attributes being considered, the former difficulty is easily resolved. If it be
demanded whether God could not make a thousand worlds, as good or better than
this: it were infidelity to deny it, why? Because this is an effect of mere
power; and might be done without any contradiction to his goodness, to his
Majesty to his mercy or justice: all which it might serve to set forth. And
this is a Rule of faith, that all effects of mere power, though greater than
we can conceive as possible, may be done of him with greater ease, than we can
breath. His only Word would suffice to make ten thousand worlds. But if it be
questioned, whether God could not have don more than he has done for his
Vineyard, whether he cannot save such as daily perish: the case is altered, and
breeds a fallacy Ad plures interrogationes. For man's salvation is no work of
mere power: it necessarily requires a harmony of goodness, of majesty, of
mercy and justice, whereunto the infinite power is in a manner subservient. Nor
are we to consider his infinite power alone, but as matched with infinite
majesty; nor his infinite mercy and goodness alone, but as matched with
infinite justice. And in this case it is as true of God as man; Deus id potest,
quod salva Majestate potest; quod salva bonitate and justitia potest: God can
do that which is not prejudicial to his Majesty, to his goodness and
justice. And he had done (if we may believe his oath) as much for his
vineyard, as the concurrence of his infinite power and wisdom could effect
without disparagement to the infinity of his Majesty, or that internal law
or rule of infinite goodness, whereby he created man after his own image and
similitude.

God as he has his being, so has he his goodness of himself, and his
goodness is his being: as impossible therefore, that he should not be good, as
not be. Man, as he had his life and being, so had he his goodness wholly from
his Creator. And as actual existence is no part nor necessary consequence of
his essence: so neither is his goodness necessary or essential to his
existence. As his existence, so his goodness is mutable: the one necessarily
including a possibility of declination or decay; the other an inclination of
relapse, or falling into evil. As he was made after the similitude of God, he
was actually and inherently good. Yet was not his goodness essential,
necessary or immutable. Nor did he resemble his Creator in these essential
attributes: but rather in the exercise of them ad extra. Now the exercise of
them was not necessary, but free in the Creator. For God might have continued
for ever Most holy, righteous and good in himself, albeit he had never
created man, nor other creature. Wherefore he made them good, as he was
freely good. And such is the goodness communicated to them in their creation,
not necessary, but free: And if free, as well including a possibility of
falling into evil, as an actual state in goodness. If then you ask, Could
not God by his almighty power have prevented Adams eating the forbidden fruit?
None, I think, will be so incredulous to doubt, whether he that commanded the
Sun to stand still in his sphere, and did dead Ieroboams arm, when he
str^tched it out against the Prophet, could not as easily have stayed Adams
hand from taking, turned his eye from looking upon, or his heart from lusting
after the forbidden fruit. All these were acts of mere power. But had he by
his omnipotent power laid this necessity upon Adams will or understanding, or
had he kept him from transgression by restraint: he had made him incapable of
that happiness, whereto by his infinite goodness he had ordained him; for by
this supposition he had not been good in himself, nor could he be capable of
true felicity, but he must be capable likewise of punishment and misery. The
ground of his interest in the one, was his actual and inherent goodness
communicated in his creation: nor was he liable to the other, but by the
mutability of his goodness, or possibility of falling into evil. In like
manner, he that gave that known power and virtue to the lodestone, could as
easily draw the most stony hearted son of Adam unto Christ, as it does steel
and iron. But if he should draw them by such a necessary and natural motion,
he should defeat them of all that hope or interest in that excessive glory,
which he has prepared for those that love him. If again it be demanded, why
God does not save he impenitent and stubborn sinner; it is all one, as if we
should ask, why he does not crown bruit beasts with honor and immortality.
That this he could do by his infinite power, I will not deny. And if this he
would do, no creature justly might control him, none possibly could resist or
hinder him: yet I may without presumption affirm, that thus to do, cannot
stand with the internal rule of his justice, goodness and majesty. Nor can
it stand better with the same rule to save all men, if we take them as they
are, not as they might be; albeit he has endued all with reason to
distinguish between good and evil. Jude 10.
For many of them speak evil of those things which they know not: but what
they know naturally, as bruit beasts, in those things they corrupt themselves.
It stands less with Gods infinite goodness or power, if we consider them as
linckt with infinite justice or majesty, to bring such into true happiness,
than to advance bruit beasts unto immortality. Isa. 27. 11.
It is a people (says the Prophet) of no understanding, therefore he that
made them, will not have mercy on them; and he that formed them, will show
them no favor. God out of the abundance of his goodness, mercy, and
long-suffering, tolerates such as the Prophet and Apostle speaks of; and out
of his infinite love seeks by the preaching of the Word and other means, not
prejudicial to his justice and majesty, to gather them as he would have done
Jerusalem here in my text. But finally there is a certain measure of iniquity,
which where it is full, an height of stubbornness and prophannesse, whereunto
if once they come, the stroke of his infinite justice falls heavy upon them,
for wilful contempt of his infinite mercy; that as he himself somewhere
says, He cannot any longer endure them.

The suspicions to which these resolutions seem liable, are specially three:

First, 1. Object.
that they derogate from Gods extraordinary favor toward his elect.

Our answer is brief; Answer.
the offense (if any there be) is taken, not given: seeing we only affirm,
that none so perish, but that they had a possibility to be saved: we deny not
that many are so saved, as it were not possible for them finally to perish; yet
so saved they are, not by Gods infinite power, laying a necessity upon their
wills; but by his insinite wisdom preparing their hearts to be fit objects of
his infinite mercy, and fore-casting their final salvation, as necessary by
assenting not altogether necessarily to the particular means whereby it is
wrought. That is, in fewer terms, unto their salvation, an infinite power or
infinite mercy matched with justice infinite, without an infinite wisdom would
not suffice. To call some (how many none may determine) extraordinarily, as he
did Saint Paul, may well stand with the eternal rule of his goodness; because
he used their miraculous and unusual conversion as a means to win others by
his usual and ordinary calling. Special privileges upon peculiar and
extraordinary occasions do not prejudice ordinary laws. Albeit to draw such
privileges into common practice, would overthrow the course of justice. It is
not contrary then to the rule of Gods justice, to make some feel his mercy and
kindness before they seek, that others may not despair of ^inding it: having
assured all by an eternal promise, that seeking they shall find, and that
they which hunger and thirst after righteousness shall be satisfied.

on.
The second suspicion and imputation is, that this doctrine may too much favor
free will.

Answer.
In brief we answer; there have been two extremities in opinions continually
followed by the two maine factions of the Christian world. The one, That God
has so decreed all things, that it is impossible ought should have been, that
has not been: or not to have been, which has been. This is the opinion of
the ancient Stoics, which attribute all events to fate; and is no way
mitigated, but rather improved, by referring this absolute necessity not to
second causes or nature, but to the omnipotent power of the God of nature. This
was re^uted in our last meditations; because it makes God the sole author of
every sin.

The second extremity is, That in man before his conversion by grace, there is
a freedom or abiliment to do that which is pleasing and acceptable to God, or
an activity to work his own conversion. This was the error of the Pelagians,
and communicated to the modern Papists; who hold a mean indeed, but a false
one, between the Pelagians and the Stoics. The true mean from which all
these extremities swerve may be comprised in these two propositions: the one
negative; In man after Adams fall there is no freedom of will, or ability to
do any thing not deserving Gods wrath or just indignation: the other
affirmative; There is in man after his fall, a possibility left of doing or not
doing of some things, which being done or not done, he becomes passively
capable of Gods mercies; doing or not doing the contrary, he is excluded from
mercy, and remains a vessel of wrath for his justice to work upon. For
whether a man will call this contingence in humane actions, not a possibility
of doing or not doing, but rather a possibility of acknowledging our
infirmities or absolute impotencie of doing any thing b^longing or tending to
our salvation; I will not contend with him: Only of this I rest persuaded,
that all the exhortations of the Prophets and Apostles, to work humility and
true repentance in their Auditors, suppose a possibility of humiliation and
repentance; a possibility likewise of acknowledging and considering our own
impotency and misery; a possibility likewise of conceiving some desire, not
merely brutish, of our redemption or deliverance.

Our Savior (ye know) required not only a desire of health, of sight, of
speech, in all those whom he healed, restored to sight, or made to speak: but
withal a kind of natural belief, or conceit, that he was able to effect what
they desired. Hence says the Evangelist, Mark 6. 5. Mat. 13. verse last; He
could not do many miracles among them, because of their unbeleefe. Yet CHRIST
alone wrought the miracles, the parties cured were mere patients, no way
agents. And such as solicited their cause in case of absence, at the best,
were but bystanders. Now no man (I think) will deny, that Christ by the power
of his God head could have given sight, speech, and health to the most
obstinate and perverse: yet by the rule of his divine goodness, he could not
cast his pearls before swine. Most true it is, that we are altogether dead to
life spiritual, unable to speak or think, much less to desire it, as we
should. Yet belief and reason moral and natural survive, and may with Martha
and Marie beseech Christ to raise up their dead brother, who cannot speak for
himself.

The third Objection will rather be preferred in Table-talke discourse, Object.
3.
than seriously urged in solemn dispute. If God so dearly desire and will the
life and safety of such as perish; his will should not always be done.

Answer.
Why? Dare any man living say or think that he always does whatsoever God
would have him do? So, doubtless, he should never sin or offend his God. For
never was there woman so wilful, or man so mad as to be offended with ought,
that went not against their present will. Nor was there ever or possibly can be
any breach, unles^e the will of the Lawgiver be broken, thwarted or
contradicted. For he that leaves the letter and follows the true meaning of
the Lawgivers will, does not transgress his law, but observe it. And unless
Gods will had been set upon the salvation of such as perish, they had not
offended, but rather pleased him in running headlong the ways of death. Yet in
a good sense, it is always most true, that Gods will is always fulfilled.

We are therefore to consid^r, that God may will some things absolutely, others
disjunctively: or that some things should fall out necessarily, others not at
all, or contingently. The particulars which God absolutely wills should fall out
necessarily, must of necessity come to pass; otherwise, his will could in no
case be truly said to be fulfill^d. As, unless the Leper, to whom it was said
by our Savior, I will, be thou clean, had been cleansed, Gods will
manifested in these words, had been utterly broken. But if every particular
which he wills disjunctively, or which he wills should be contingent, did of
n^c^ssity come to pass; his whole will should utterly be defeated. For his
will (as we suppose in this case) is that neither this no^ that particular
should be necessarily: but that either they should not be, or be continge^tly.
And if any particular comprised within the latitude of this contingency with
its consequent, come to pass; his will is truly and perfectly ful^illed. As
for example, God tells the Israelites, that by observing his Commandments they
should live; and dye by transgressing them. Whether therefore they live by the
one means, or dye by the other; his will is necessarily fulfilled: Because it
was not that they should necessarily observe his Commandments or transgress
them: but to their transgression, though contingent, death was the necessary
doom; so was life the necessary reward of their contingent observing them.

But the Lord has sworn that he delights not in the death of him that
dies; Object.
but in his repentance: if then he never repent, Gods delight or good pleasure
is not always fulfilled; because he delights in the one of th^se; not in the
other. How then shall it be true which is written, God does whatsoever pleases
him in the Heaven and in the Earth, if he make not sinners repent, in whose
repentance he is better pleased, than in their death?

Answer.
But unto this difficulty, the form^r answer may be rightly ^itted. Gods
delight or good pleasure may be done two ways, either in us, or upon us. In
the former place, it is set upon our repentance or obsequiousness to his will.
For this is that service, whe^eto by his goodness, he ordained us. But if we
cross his good will and pleasure, as it respects this point; that is, if we
will not suffer our selves to be saved; the same delight or pleasure is set
upon our punishment and fulfilled upon us. And if we would enter into our own
hearts, we might see the Image of Gods will hitherto manifested by his word,
distinctly written in them: and that the Rule which his justice observes in
punishing the wicked and reprobate, is to measure out their plagues and
punishments according to the measure of their neglecting his will or
contradicting his delight in their subjection. That as the riches of his
goodness leading them to repentance has been more plentiful: so they, by
their impenitencie still treasure up greater store of wrath against the day of
wrath. To this purpose does the Lord threaten the obstinate people before
mentioned in Esaias; Es^. 65.5.
These are as a smoke in my nose, and a sire that burns all the day; as he
has spread out his hands to them all the day. Behold it is written before me,
I will not keep silence, but will recompense into their bosoms, your
iniquities, and the iniquities of your Fathers together, says the Lord: which
have burnt incense upon the mountains, and blasphemed me upon the Hills:
therefore will I reward their former works into their bosom.

Both these parts of Gods delight are fully expressed by Solomon: Prove. 1. 20,
21, etc.
Wisdom cries without, she has uttered her will in the streets, she cries
in the chief places of the concourse, in the opening of the Gates, in the
City, she utters her words, saying; How long ye simple ones will ye love
simplicity, and the scorners delight in their scorning, and fools hate
knowledge? Turn you at my reproof; behold, I will power out my spirit upon
you, I will make known my words unto you. These passages infallibly argue an
unfeigned delight in their repentance, and such a desire of their salvation as
the wisdom of God has expressed in my text. But what follows? Because I have
called and ye refused, I have stretched out my hand, and no man regarded: but
ye have set at naught all my counsel, and would none of my reproof; I also
will laugh at your calamity, I will mock when your fear comes. This his
delight remains the same, but is set upon another object: To the same purpose,
Esaias 65.12. Therefore I will number you to the sword, and you shall all bow
down to the slaughter: because when I called, ye did not answer; when I
spoke, ye did not hear: but did evil before mine eyes, and did choose that
wherein I delighted not. So then, whither by the destruction of the wicked, or
salvation of the chosen; Gods name is still glorified. His justice ^xp^cts what
should have been done, but was not paid unto merc^. He can be no loser by
man's unthankfulness or ungratefulness. The case is all one, as if one should
take that from a thief with the left hand, which he has picked out of our
right hand. Thus much of the two points proposed.

I do desire no more than that the tree may be judged by the fruit: and
questionless the use of these ^esolutions, for convincing our selves of sin,
or quelling despair, or for encouraging the careless and impenitent unto
repentance, by giving them the right hold of the means of life, is much
great^r than can be conceived without the admittance of their truth.

First, seeing the end of our preaching is not so much to instruct the elect,
as to call sinners to repentance; not so much to confirm their faith that are
already certain of salvation, as to give hope to the unregenerate, that they
may be saved: how shall we accomplish either intendment by magnifying Gods
love toward the elect? who these are, God and themselves know. How shall he
that lives yet in sin p^rswade himself, there is probability that he may be
saved, because God has infallibly decreed to save some few? Rather seeing by
the contrary doctrine, the most part of mankind must necessarily perish, he
has more reason to fear, le^t he be one of those many, than one of the few.
The bare possibility of his salvation cannot be inferred, but from indefinite
premises, from which no certain conclusion can possibly follow: and without
certain apprehension or conceit of possibility, there can be no certain
ground of hope. But if we admit the former extent of Gods unspeakable love to
all, and his desire of their eternal safety, which desperately perish; every
man may, nay, must undoubtedly thus conclude; Therefore, Gods love extends to
me: It is his good will and pleasure, to have me saved amongst the rest, as
well as any other: and whatsoever he unfainedly wills, his power is able
effectually to bring to pass.

The danger of sin, and terror of that dreadful day, being first made
known to our Auditory; the pressing of these points, as effectually as they
might be, (were this doctrine held for current) would kindle the love of God
in our hearts, and inflame them with desires answerable to Gods ardent will of
our salvation: and these once kindled, would breed sure hope, and in a manner
enforce us to embrace the infallible means thereunto ordained.

Without admission of the former doctrine, it is impossible for any man rightly
to measure the heinousness of his own or others sins. Such as gather the
infinity of ^innes demerit, from the infinite Majesty against which it is
committed, give us the surface of sin, infinite in length and breadth; but
not in solidity. The will or pleasure of a Prince in matters meanly affected by
him, or in respect of which he is little more than indif^erent, may be
neglected without greater offense, than meaner persons may justly take for
foul indignities or grievous wrongs. But if a Princes sovereign command in a
matter which he desired so much as his own life, should be contemned; a loyal
subject conscious of such contempt, though happening through riot, or persuasions
of ill company, would in his sober fits be ready to take revenge of himself;
specially if he knew his Sovereigns love or liking of him to be more than
ordinary. Consider then, that as the Majesty and goodness of our God, so his
love and mercy toward us is truly infinite: that he desires our repentance as
earnestly, as we can desire meat and drink in the extremity of thirst or
hunger; as we can do life it self, whiles we are beset with death: This our
God manifested in our flesh, did not desire his own life so much as our
redemption. We mu^t therefore measure the heinousness of our sin, by the
abundance of Gods love, by the height and depth of our Saviors humiliation.

Thus they will appear infinite, not only because committed against an
infinite Majesty, but because with this dimension, they further include a
wilful neglect of infinite mercies, and incomprehensible desires of our
salvation. We are by nature the seed of rebels, which had lift up their hands
against the infinite goodness of their Creator, in taking of the forbidden
fruit; whereby they sought to be like him in Majesty. Conscious of the
transgression, the first actors immediately hid themselves from his presence:
and, as if this their terror had imprinted a perpetual antipathy in their
posterity, the least glimpse of his glory for many generations after, made
them cry out, Alas we shall die, because we have seen the Lord. We still
continue like the offspring of tame creatures grown wild, always eschewing
his pres^nee, that seeks to recover us; as the bird does the fowlers, or the
beasts of the forest the sight of fire. And yet, unl^sse he shelter us under
the shadow of his wings, we are as a prey exposed to the destroyer, already
condemned for fuel to the flames of hell, or nutriment to the breed of
serpents. To redeem us from this everlasting thraldom, our God cam^ down
into the world in the similitude of our flesh, made as a stale to allure us
with wiles into his net, that he might draw us with the cords of love. The
depth of Christ's humiliation was as great as the difference between God and
the meanest man; therefore truly in^inite. H^c, that was equ^ll with God, was
conversant here on earth with us in the form and condition of a servant. But
of servants by birth or civil constitution, many live in health and ease, with
sufficient supplies of all things necessary for this life. So did not the Son
of God: His humanity was charged with all the miseries whereof mortality is
capable; subject to hunger, thirst, temptations, revilings and scornings even
of his servants; an indignity which cannot befall slaves or vassals, either
borne or made such by men: or, to use the Prophets words, He bare man's
infirmities, not spiritually only, but bodily. For wh^ was weak and he not
weak? who was sick and he whole? No malady of any disease cured by him, but
was made his, by his exact and perfect sympathy: Lastly, He bare our sins
upon the ^rosse, and submitted himself to greater torments than any man in
this life can suffer. And though these were as displeasant to his humane
nature, as to ours: yet were our sins to him more displeasant. As he was
loving to us in his death: so was he wise toward himself, and in submitting
himself unto his cruel and ignominious death did of two evils choose the
less; rather to suffer the punishment due to our ^innes, than to suffer sin
still to reign in us, whom he loved more dearly than his own life. If then,
we shall continue in sin after the manifestation of his love: the
heinousness of our offense is truly infinite: in so much as we do that
continually, which is more distasteful to our gracious God, than any torments
can be to us. So doing we build up the works of Satan which he came purposely
to destroy. For of this I would no^ have you ignorant; that albeit the end of
his death was to redeem sinners: yet the only means pr^destinated by him for
our redemption, is destruction of the works of Satan, and renovation of his
Fathers Image in our Souls. For us then to reedifie the works of Satan, or
abett his faction, is still more offensive to this our God, then was his Agony
or bloody sweat.

For taking a fuller measure of our sins: let us hereunto add his patient
expectation of his enemies conversion after the resurrection. If the son of
Zaleucus before mentioned should have pardoned any as deeply guilty as himself
had been of that offense for which he lost one of his eyes, and his father
another; the world would have taxed him, either of unjust folly, or too much
facility, rather than commended him for true justice or clemency. But that we
may know how far Gods mercy does over-beare his Majesty, he proceeds not
straightway to execute vengeance upon those Jews which wrecked their malice
upon his dear and only Son, which had committed nothing worthy of blame,
much less of death. Here was matter of wrath and indignation so just as would
have moved the most merciful man on Earth to have taken speedy revenge upon
these spillers of innocent blood; especially the law of God permitting thus
much. But Gods mercy is above his law, above his justice. These did exact the
very abolition of these sinners in the very first act of sin committed
against God made man for their redemption: yet he patiently expects their
repentance which with unrelenting fury had plotted his destruction. Forty
years long had he been grieved with this generation after the first
Passover celebrated in sign of their deliverance from Egyptian bondage, and
for their stubbornness He swore they should not enter into his rest. And now
their posterity, after a more glorious deliverance from the powers of
darkness, have forty years allotted them for repentance, before they be
rooted out of the land of Rest or Promise. Yet has not the Lord given them
hearts to perceive, eyes to see, or ears to hear unto this day: because
seeing they would not see, nor hearing would not hear; but hardened their
hearts against the Spirit of grace. Lord give us what thou did not give them;
hearts of flesh that may melt at thy threats; ears to hear the admonirions of
our peace; and eyes to foresee the day of our visitation: that so when thy
wrath shall be revealed against sin and sinners; we may be sheltered from
flames of fire and brimstone, under the shadow of thy wings so long stretched
out in mercy for us. Often, Oh Lord, would thou have gathered us, and we
would not: but let there be, we beseech thee, an end of our stubbornness and
ingratitude toward thee; no end of thy mercies and loving kindnesses toward
us. Amen.

GODS JUST HARDENING OF. PHARAOH, When he had filled up the measure of his
iniquity. OR AN EXPOSITION OF ROMANS 9. 18, 19.

Therefore he has mercy on whom he will have mercy, and whom he will he
hardneth.
Thou will say then unto me, Why does be yet find fault? For who has resisted
his will.
LONDON, Printed by JOHN HAVILAND, for ROBERT MILBOURNE. 1638.

Gods just hardening of Pharaoh, when he had filled up the measure of his
iniquity: Or An Exposition of ROMANS 9. 18, 19.
Therefore has he mercy on whom he will have mercy, and whom he will he
hardneth.
Thou will say then unto me, Why does he yet find fault? For who has resisted
his will?

THe former part of this proposition here inferred by way of conclusion was
avouched before by our Apostle, as an undoubted Maxim ratified by Gods own
voice to Moses. For he said to Moses, I will have mercy on whom I will have
mercy: and I will have compasion, on whom I will have compassion. Exodus 33. 19.
The true sense and meaning of which place I have before declared in unfolding
the 16. verse of this chapter: so that the later part of this eighteenth verse,
( Whom he will, he hardneth) must be the principal subject of my present
discourse.

The Antecedent inferring this part of this conclusion, is Gods speech to
Pharaoh, Exodus 9. 18. Even for this purpose have I raised thee up, that I may
show my power in thee, and that my name may be declared throughout all the
Earth. The inference is plain; seeing Gods power was to be manifested in
hardening Pharaoh.

The points of inquiry (whose full discussion will open an easy passage to the
difficulties concerning Rebrobation and Election, and bring all the contentious
controversies concerning the meaning of this chapter to a brief prospicuous
issue) are especially four.

1. The Manner how God does harden. 2. The pertinencie of the Objection [ why
does he yet find fault? for who has resisted his will?] and the validity of
the Apostles answer. 3. The Logical determination of this proposition, [ Whom
he will, he hardens:] what is the proper object of Gods will in hardening.
4. What manner of division this is, [ He will have compassion on whom he will
have compassion; and whom he will, he hardens.]
For the right opening of all these four difficulties; the explication of the
single term^s, with their diverse acceptions, s^rves as a key.

The terms briefly to be explicated are three: 1. Gods will. 2. Induration, or
Hardening. 3. Irresistible.


The principal difficulty or transcendent question, is, in what sense Gods
will or Induration may be said to be irresistible, [ whom he will he
hardens.]

Not to trouble you with any curious distinctions concerning Gods will: (this
is a string which in m^st meditations we were enforced to touch.) Albeit Gods
will be most truly and indivisibly one, and in indivisible unity, most truly
infinite and immutable: yet is it immutably free, omnipotent, able to produce
plurality as well as unity, mutabilitie as well as immutabilitie, weakness
as well as strength, in his creatures. In what sense, or in respect of what
object^ Gods wi^^ is said to be irresistible.
By this one, infinite, immutable will, he ordaines that some things shall be
necessary, or that this shall be at this time and no other. And such
particulars he is said by an extrinsecall denomination from the object, to
will by his irresistible will. The meaning is, the production of the object so
willed, cannot be resisted, because it is Gods will, that it shall come to
pass, notwithstanding any resistance that is or can be made against it. If
any particular so willed, should not come to pass, his will might be resisted,
being set only on this.

By the same immutable and indivisible will, he ordained that other events
should be mutable or continguent, viz. that, of more particulars proposed, this
may be as well as that; the affirmative as well as the negative. And of
particulars so willed, no one can be said to be willed by his irresistible
will. If the existence of any one so willed should be necessary, his will
might be resisted; seeing his will is, they should not be necessary. ^ach
particular of this kind by the like denomination of the thing willed, he may
be said to will by his resistible will. The whole (...) or list of several
possibilities, or the indifference betwixt the particulars, he wills by his
irresistible will.

The Psalmists oracle is universally true of all persons in every age of Adam,
specially before his fall; Non Deus volens iniquitatem tues: God does not, he
cannot will iniquity. And yet we see the world is full of it. The Apostles
speech again is as universally true; This is the will of God, even your
sanctification, that every one of you should know to possess his vessel in
honor, 1 Thessalonians. 4.3. God wills, and he seriously wills sanctity of life
in our selves, uprightness and integrity of conversation amongst men: and yet
behold a Vacuum in this little world, in the sons of Adam, whom he created
after his own image and similitude. So then, he neither wills men's goodness,
nor wills their iniquity by his irresistible will. He truly willed Adams
integrity, but not by his irresistible will: For so Adam could not have
fallen. What, shall we say then, God did will Adams fall, by his irresistible
will? God forbid: For so Adam could not but have sinned. Where is the mean or
middle station, on which we may build our faith? The immediate object of Gods
irresistible will, in this case, was Adams free will, that is, Potestas
labendi, and potestas standi: Power to stand and power to fall. By the same
will he decreed Death, as the inevitable consequent of his fall; and life, as
the necessary unpreventable reward of his perseverance. Thus much briefly of
Gods will, in what sense it is resistible or irresistible.

What it is to harden.
The nature and property of an hardened heart cannot i^ fewer words better be
expressed, than by the Poets character of an unruly stubborn youth.

Cereus in vitium flecti, monitoribus asper. It is a constitution or temper of
mind, as pliant as wax, to receive the impressions of the flesh or stamp of
the old man; but as untoward as flint or other ragged stone, to admit the image
of the new man.

The first general part, how God does harden.
THe difficulty is, The first general part.
in what sense God can be truly said to be the Author of such a temper. The
proposition is of undoubted truth, whether we consider it as an indefinite, God
does harden; or as a singular God hardened Pharaoh; or in the universality here
mentioned, God hardemeth whom he will, after the same manner he hardened
Pha^raoh.

Concerning the manner how God does harden, the questions are two.

1. Whether he harden positively, or privatively only. 2. Whether he harden
by his irresistible will, or by his resistible will only.
To give one and the same answer to either demand without distinction of time
or persons, were to entangle our selves (as most Writers in this argument have
done) in the fallacy, A^^ plures interrogationes.

That God does not harden all men at all times, after this same manner.
Touching the first question, some good Writers maintain the universal
negative, God never hardens positively, but privatively only; only by
substracting, or not granting grace or other means of repentance: or by
leaving nature to the bent of its inbred corruption. Vide Lo^inum in verse. 51.
cap. 7. Act. Apost. page 322. colum. 1a. Others of as good note, and greater
desert in Reformed Churches, better refute the defective extreme, than they
express the mean between it, and the contrary extreme in excess: with the
maintenance whereof they are deeply charged, not by Papists only, but by their
brethren. How often have Calvin and Beza been accused by Lutherans, as if they
taught, That God did directly harden men's hearts, by ^nfusion of bad qualities:
or, That the production of a reprobate or impenitent temper were such an
immediate or formal term of his positive action, as heat is of calefaction,
or drought of heat. But if we take Privative and Positive induration in this
sense, and set them so far asunder; the division is altogether imperfect: the
former member comes as far short of the truth, as the latter overreacheth it.
God sometimes hardens some men neither the one way nor the other; that is (as
we say in schools) datur medium abnegationis between them. And perhaps it
may be as questionable, whether God at any time hardens any man mere privative;
as it is, whether there can be Peccatum purae omissionis, any sin of mere
omission, without all mixture of commission. But with this question here or
elsewhere we a^e not disposed to meddle; being rather willing to grant what is
confessed by all or most, God sometimes harden^ privatively only.
That he sometimes hardens privative, if not by mere substraction of grace,
or utter denial of other means of repentance; yet so especiall^ by these
means as man suffice to verify the truth of the proposition usually received;
or to give the denomination of Privative Hardening.

But many times he hardens Positive; God usually hardens positively; but not
by his irresistible will.
^ot by infusion of bad qualities; but by disposing or inclining the Heart to
goodness, that is, by communication of his favors, and exhibition of motives
more than ordinary to repentance, not that he exhibites the same with purpose
to harden: but rather to mollify and organize men's hearts to the receiving of
Grace. The natural effect or purposed issue of the Riches of Gods bounty, is
to draw men to repentance. But the very attempt or sway of means offered,
provokes hearts fastened to their sins, to greater stubbornness in the
rebound. Hearts thus affected treasure up wrath against the day of wrath in a
p^oportioned measure to the riches o^ bounty of^ered, but not entertained by
them. And such a cause as God is of their treasuring up of wrath, he is
likewise of their hardening; no direct, no necessary cause of either: yet a
cause of both, more than privative, a positive cause by consequence or
resultance; not necessary, or necessary only ex hypothesi. Means of
repentance sincerely offered by God, but wilfully rejected by man, concur as
positively to induration of heart, as the heating of water does to the quick
freezing of it, when it is taken off the fire and se^ in the cold air. If a
Physician should minister some physical drink unto his patient, and heap
clothes upon him with purpose to prevent some disease by a kindly sweat; and
the patient thoroughly heated, wilfully throw them off: both may be said
positive causes of the cold, which would necessary ensue from both actions;
albeit the patient only were the true moral cause, or the only blameworthy
cause of his own death or danger following. Just according to the importance
of this supposition or similitude, is the cause of hardening in many cases to
be divided betwixt God and man. The Israelites did harden their own hearts in
the wilderness; and yet their hearts had not been so hardened, unless the
Lord had done so many wonders in their sight. In every wonder his purpose was
to get belief: but through their wilful unbeleefe, the best effect of his
greatest wonders was induration and impenitencie. Now as it suits not with the
rule of good manners for Physicians to tie a man's hands of discretion or place,
lest he use them to his own harm: so neither was it consonant to the rules
of eternal equity, that God should necessitate the Israelites wills to a true
belief of his wonders, or mollisie their hearts against their wills; that is,
He neither hardens nor mollifies their hearts by his irresistible will; nor
did he at all will their hardening, but rather their mollification.

Pharaoh was hardened by Gods irresistible will.
All this is true of Gods ordinary manner of hardening men, or of the first
degrees of hardening any man. But Pharaohs case is extraordinary. Beza rightly
inferres against Origin and his followers; that this hardening whereof the
Apostle here speaks, was irresistible; that the party thus hardened was
uncaple of repentance; that God did show signs and wonders in Egypt, not with
purpose to reclaim but harden Pharaoh, and to drive him headlong into the
snare prepared for him from everlasting. All these inferences are plain, first
that interrogation, Who has resisted his will? is equivalent to the universal
negative, No man, no creature can at any time resist his will. That is,
according to the interpretation premised, Whatsoever particular Gods will is to
have necessary, or so to be, as the contrary or contradictorie to it shall not
be: the existence of it cannot be prevented or avoided. Now that God did in
this peremptory manner will Pharaohs hardening, is evident from the Emphasis of
that message delivered unto him by Moses, (...), Even for this very purpose,
and for no other end in the world possible, have I raised thee up, that I might
show in thee my power: and his power was to be showed in his hardening. For
from the tenor of this message, the Apostle inferres the latter part of this
conclusion in my text, Whom he will, he hardneth; yea so hardneth, that it is
impossible they should escape it, or his judgments due unto it.

Whether Pharaoh were an absolute reprobate, o^ created to be hardened.
In all these collections Beza does not err. Yet was Beza (with reverence be
it spoken) more to blame than this filthy Writer, (for so it pleases him to
entitle Origin) in that he referres these threatenings, [ For this very purpose
bare I raised thee up, that I may show my power in thee] not only unto Pharaohs
exaltation unto the Crown of Egypt, (as I think Origin did, we need not, we
may not grant) but to his extraction out of the womb; yea to his first
creation out of the dust: as if the Almighty had molded him by his
irresistible will, in the eternal Idea of reprobation, before man or Angel
had actual being: as if the only end of his being had been to be a reprobate
or vessel of wrath. Beza's collections to this purpose (unless they be better
limited, than he has left them) make God, not only a direct and positive
cause, but the immediate and only cause of all Pharaohs tyranny; a more
direct and more necessary cause of his butchering the Israelites infants, than
he was of Adams good actions, during the space of his innocence. For of these,
or of his short continuance in the state of integrity, he was no necessary,
nor immutable cause; that is, he did not decree that Adams integrity should be
immutable. But whether Gods hardening Pharaoh by his irresistible will, can any
way infer that Pharaoh was an absolute reprobate, or borne to the end he
might be hardened, we^ are hereafter to dispute in th^^ third point. All we
have to sa^ in this place is this: If as much as Beza earnestly contends for
were once granted; the objection following, to which our Apostle vouchsafes a
double answer, had been altogether as unanswerable, as impertinently moved in
this place. Let us then examine the pertinencie of the objection, and unfold
the validity of the answers.

The second general point, concerning the pertinencie of the objection.
WHy does he yet find fault? (...)? The second general part.
or Why does he yet chide? with whom does he find fault? or whom does he
chide? All that are reprobates? does he only chide them? is this all that they
are to fear? the very worst that can befall them? were this speech to be as
far extended as it is by most Interpreters, no question, but our Apostle
would have intended the forcs and acrimonie of it a great deal more than he
does; thus far at least: Why does he punish^ why does he plague the
reprobate^ in this life, and deliver them up t^ everlasting torments in the
life ^^ come; seeing they do but th^^ which he by his irresistible wi^^ has
appointed? Or suppose the Greek (...), might b^ some unusual synecdoche (which
passes our reading, observation or understanding) include as much or more than
we now express (all the plagues of the life to come:) yet it is questioned
what (...) has here to do. That the objection proposed has reference only to
Pharaoh, or to some few in his case; not to all that perish or are reprobated.
It must be examined whence it came, and whither it tends. It naturally
designs some definite point or section of time, and imports particulars before
begun and still continued: it can have no place in the immutable sphere of
eternity, no reference to the exercise of God^ everlasting wrath against the
reprobates in general.

The quaere's which here naturally of^er themselves, (though, for ought that I
know, not discussed by any Interpreters) have occasioned me in this place, to
make use of a Rule more useful than usual, for explicating the difficult
places of the New Testament. The Rule is this; To search out the passages of
the old Testament with their historical circumstances, unto which the speeches
of our Savior and his Apostles have special reference (...) allusion. Now
this Interrogation [(...)] was conceived from our Apostles meditations upon
those expostulations with Pharaoh, Exodus 9. 16. And indeed for this cause have
I raised thee up, for to show in the^ my power, and that my name may be
declared throughout all the Earth. (...); A^^ yet exaltest thou thy self
against my people, or oppressest thou my people, that thou will not let them
go? Chap. 10. verse. 3. (...); he yet chides and threatens him again, How
long will thou refuse to humble thy self before me? Let my people go, that
they may serve me. Else if thou refuse to let my people go, behold to morrow^
I will bring the locusts into thy coasts. That which makes most for this
interpretation, is the historical circumstance of the time and manner of Gods
proceeding with Pharaoh. For this expostulation, whereunto our Apostle in this
place has reference, was uttered after the seventh wonder wrought by Moses and
Aaron in the sight of Pharaoh; upon which it is expressly said, tha^ The Lord
hardened the heart of Pharaoh, that he hearkened not unto them. Whereas of the
five going before, it is only said, That Pharaoh hardened his heart, or his
heart was hardened, or he set not his heart to the wonders. The spirits censure
likewise of Pharaohs stupiditie, upon the first wonder may be read
impersonally, or to be referred to the wonder it self, which might positively
harden his heart in such a sens^ as is before expressed. Nor is it to be
omitted, that upon the neglect of the seventh wonder, the Lord enlarges his
commission to Moses and his threats to Pharaoh. ^hus says the Lord God of the
Hebrews, Let my people go, that they may serve me. For I will at this time
send all my plagues upon thine heart, and upon thy servants, and upon thy
people; that thou may know that there is none like me in all the earth. For
now I will stretch out my hand that I may ^^ite thee and thy people with
pestilence, and thou shall ^ee cut off (...) the earth: or as Iunius
excellently ^^^dreth it; I had smit^^^ thee and thy people with p^stil^^ce,
when I destroyed your cattle with murraine, and thou had kee^e cut off from
the earth, when the boiles were so rife upon the Magitians: but when they fell,
I made thee to stand (for so the Hebrew is verbatim:) to what purpose? that
thou might still stand out against me? nay but for this very purpose [ That
I might show my power and declare my name more manifestly throughout all the
earth, by a more remarkable destruction, than all that time should have
befallen thee.]

The true occasion of the former objection.
This brief survey of these historical circumstances present unto us, as in a
map, the just occasion, the due force and full extent of the objection here
intimated in transitu, Thou will say then unto me, why does he yet find
fault? As if some one on Pharaohs behalf had replied more expressly thus: God
indeed had just cause to upbraid Pharaoh heretofore, for neglect of his signs
and wonders: it was a foul fault in him not to relent, so long as there was a
possibility left for him to relent. But since God has thus openly declared
his irresistible will to harden him to destruction, (...), Why does be chide
him any longer? Why does he hold on to expostulate more sharply with him than
heretofore, for that which it is impossible for him to avoid? For is it
possible for him to open the door of repentance, when God has shut it? or to
mollify his heart, whose hardening was now by Gods decree irrevocable?

I have heard of a malepart Courtier, who being rated of his Sovereign Lord
for committing the third murder, after he had been graciously pardoned for
two, made this saucy reply: One man indeed I killed; and if the law might have
had its course, that had been all. For the death of the second and of the
third, your Highness is to answer God and the Law. Our Apostle being better
acquainted than we are with the circumstances of time, and with the manner of
Pharaohs hardening, foresaw the malepart Jew or Hypocrite (especially when
Pharaohs case came in a manner to be their own) would make this or the like
saucie answer to God; If Pharaoh, after the time, wherein by the ordinary
course of justice he was to die, were by Gods special appointment not only
reprived but suffered to be more out-ragious than before, yea imboldened to
contemn Gods messengers; the ensuing evils which befell the Egyptians may
seem to be more justly imputed unto God, than unto him; at least, the former
expostulation might seem now altogether unseasonable.

To this objection our Apostle opposes a twofold answer: The Apostle^ first
answer to the former objection explicated.
First, he checks the sauciness of the Replicant; Nay but oh man who art thou
(...), qui respondeas Deo, says the Vulgar: Beza, (as he thinks) more fully
qui responsas Deo; our English better than both, that reply against God. The
just and natural value of the original doubly compounded word will best
appear from the circumstances specified. First, God by Moses admonishes
Pharaoh to let his people go. But he refuses. Then God expostulateth with
him, As yet exaltest thou thy self against my people, that thou will not let
them go? The objection made by the Hypocrite is as a rejoinder upon Gods Reply
to Pharaoh for his wonted stubbornness; or as an answer made on his behalf,
or others in his case, unto the former expostulations. For (...) is Respondenti
respondere, to rejoyne upon a reply or answer. Now this Rejoinder (to speak
according to the rules of modesty and good manners) was too saucie, out of
what man's mouth soever it had proceeded. For what is man in respect of God? any
better than an artificial body in respect of the arti^icer that makes it? or
than an earthen vessel in respect of the potter? Nay if we might imagine a
base vessel could speak (as fables suppose beasts in old time did) and thus
expostulate with the potter; [ When I was spoiled in the making, why did thou
rather reserve me to such base and ignominious uses, than throw me away;
especially when others of the same lump are fitted for commendable uses?] it
would dese^ve to be appointed yet to more base or hom^ly uses. For a by-stander
that had no skill in this facul^ie; for the potters boy or appr^ntise thus to
expostulate on the vessels behalf to his father or master, would argue
ignorance and indiscretion. The potter at least would take so much authority on
him, as to reply; I will appoint every vessel to what use I think fit; not to
such use as every idle fellow, or malepart boy would have it appointed.

Now all that our Apostle in this similitude intends is, that we must
attribute more unto the Creators skill and wisdom in dispensing mercy and
judgment, or in preparing vessels of wrath, and vessels of honor, than we
do unto the potters judgment in discerning clay, or sitting every part of his
matter to his right and most commodious use. Yet in all these, the potter is
judge, says the author of the book of Wisdom. That very vessel which
ministered the matter of this similitude to our Apostle, Ier. 18. 4. was so
marred in the potters ^and, as he was enforced to fa^hion it again to another
use than it was first intended for. That it was marred in the first making, was
the fault of the clay. So to fashion it anew, as neither stuff, nor former
labor should be altogether lost, was the potters skill. And shall we think
our Apostle did intend any other inference from this similitude, than the
Prophet, from whence he borrowes it, had made to his hand O house of Israel,
cannot I do with you, as this potter, says the Lord? Behold, as the clay is
in the potters hand, so are ye in mi^^ hand, Oh house of Israel, Ierem 18.6.

The true and full explication is thus much and no more; albeit God sought to
prepare them to glory, yet had they a possibility or liberty utterly to
spoil themselves in the making. Howbeit, if so they did, he was able to form
them again, to an end quite contrary unto that whereto he first intended
them. So the Prophet explicates himself, verse. 9. 10.

And here we must request our Reader always to remember, that the Apostle
compares God, not to a frantic, or fantastic potter, delighted to play tricks
to his loss; as to make a vessel scarce worth a groat, of that piece, which
with the same ease and cost, might be made worth a shilling; only to show his
imperial authority over a piece of clay. He imagines such a potter as the
Wise man did, that knows a reason why he makes one vessel of this fashion,
another of that; why he appoints this to a base use, that to a better: albeit
an unskilful bystander could perhaps discern no difference in the stuff or
matter whereof they are made.

The sum then of our Apostles intended inference is this; As it is an
unmannerly point for any man to contest, or wrangle with a skillful artificer
in his own faculty, of whom he should rather desire to learn with
submission: so it is damnable presumption for any creature to dispute with his
Creator in matters of providence, or of the worlds regiment; or to debate his
own cause with him thus; Seeing all of us were made of the fame mass, I might
have been graced as others have been with wealth, with honor, with strength,
with wisdom, unless thou had been more ^avourable to them than to me. Yet
that which must quell all inclination to such s^cret murmurings, or
presumptuous debates, is it our steadfast belief of his omnipotent power or
absolute will? No: but of his infinite wisdom, equity and mercy, by which he
dispo^eth all things, even men's infirmities or greater crosses to a better end
in respect of them, (so they will patiently submit their wills to his) than they
could hope by any other means to atchieve.

In what sense Gods will is said to be the absolute and infallible rule of
equity, or justice.
Gods will to have mercy o^ some, and to harden others, or howsoever otherwise
to deal with men, is in this sense most absolute. Whatsoever we certainly
know to be willed by him, we must acknowledg^ without examination, to be
truly good. Whomsoever we assuredly believe it has been^ his will to harden,
we mus^ without dispute, believe their hardening to have been mos^ just. Yet
thus to believe we ar^ not bound, unless it were a fundamental point of our
belief, that this his most absolute will has just reasons (though unknown to
us) why he hardneth some, and not others; yea such ideall reasons, as when it
shall be his pleasure to make them known to us, we shall acknowledge them to
be infinitely better, and more agreeable to the immutable rules of eternal
equity (which indeed they are) than any earthly Prince can give, why he
punishes this man, and rewards that.

The contrary in consequence, which some would in^erre out of our Apostle in
this place, is the true, natural, and necessary consequence which they have
made of another orthodoxall principle, [ Gods will is the only infallible rule
of goodness,] that is, in their exposition, Things are good only, because God
does will them; When as in truth his will could not be so infallible, so
inflexible, and so sovereign a rule of goodness, (as all must beleeeve it to
be, that think themselves bound to conform their wills to his) unless
absolute and immutable goodness were the essential object of this his most
holy w^^^. Wherefore though this argument be more than demonstrative; It was
Gods will to deal thus and thus with mankind, therefore they are most justly
dealt withal: Yet on the other side, this inference is as strong and sound;
Some kind of dealings are in their own natures so evidently unjust, that we
must believe, it was not Gods will to deal so with any man living. Abraham did
not transgress the bounds of modesty in saying to God, That the righteous
should perish with the wicked, that be far from thee. Shall not the Judge of
all the earth do right? Yet were Gods will the rule of all goodness in such a
sense as some conceive it; or our Apostles meaning such, as many in this place
have made it; Abraham had been either very ignorant or immodest in questioning
whether Gods will concerning the destruction of Sodom (lovingly imparted to
him, Genes. 18.) had been right or wrong: whether to have slain the righteous
with the wicked had been just, or ill beseeming the great Judge and Maker of
the world. Howbeit to have slain the righteous with the wicked would have
been less rigorous and less unjust, than to harden man by an inevitable
necessitating decree, before they had voluntarily hardened themselves, or
unnecessarily brought an impenitent temper or necessity of sinning upon
themselves. And for this cause, we may safely ^ay with our father Abraham; Thus
to harden any whom thou have created, that be far from thee, Oh Lord. Far
be it ever from every good Christians heart to entertain any such conceit of
his Creator.

Albeit this first answer might suffice to check all such captious replies, The
Apostle^ second answer to the former objection.
as hypocrites here make: yet, as our Apostle in his second answer imports; we
need not use the benefit of this general apology in Pharaohs case. The reason
or manner of Gods justice and wisdom in hardening and punishing him, is
conspicuous and justifiable by the principles of equity acknowledged by all.
For Pharaoh and his confederates were vessels of wrath sealed up for
destruction. Hell (as we say) did yawne for them, before God uttered the
former expostulations: perhaps from that very instant, wherein he first sent
Moses unto him. It being then granted, that God (as we indeed suppose) did
from the plague of murraine, or that other of boiles positively and inevitably
harden Pharaohs heart, and after he had promised to let the Israelites go,
infatuated his brains to wrangle with Moses; First, whether their little ones,
afterward whether their flocks should go along with them: yet to reserve him
alive, upon what condition or terms soever, (though to be hardened, though to
be threatened, though to be astonished and affrighted with frosts, plagues, and
lastly to be destroyed with a more fearful destruction, than if he had dyed
of the pestilence, when the cattle perished of the murraine) was a true
document of Gods lenity and patience, no impeachment to his justice; a gentle
commutation of due punishment, no rigorous infliction of punishment not justly
deserved. For what if God had thrust him quick into hell in that very moment
wherein he told him, Ad hoc ipsum excitavite, For this very purpose have I
reserved thee alive, So the Septuag^nt express the sense of the Hebrew phrase
(...).
that I might show my power in thee? No question but as the to^ments of that
lake are more grievous, than all the plagues which Pharaoh suffered on earth^
so the degrees of his hardening (had he been then cast into it) had been in
number more, his struggling with God more violent and stubborn, his possibility
of repentance altogether as little as it was after the seventh plague, if not
less. But should GOD therefore have been thought unjust, because he continued
to punish him in hell after possibility of repentance was past? No; Pharaoh had
been the only cause of his own woe, by bringing this necessity upon
himself, of opposing God and repining at his judgments. All is one then in
respect of Gods justice, whether Pharaoh having made up the measure of his
iniquity be irrevocably hardened here on earth, or in hell. To reserve him
alive in the state of mortality, after the s^ntence of death is past upon him,
is no rigor, but lenity and long-suffering: although Gods plagues be still
multiplied in Egypt for his sake, although the end of his life become more
dreadful, than by the ordinary course of Gods justice it should have been,
if he had dyed in the seventh plague.

Another reason why God without impeachment to his justice does still augment
Pharaohs punishment, as if it were now as possible for him to repent, as once
it was, is intimated by our Apostle to be this; That by this lenity toward
Pharaoh, He might show his wrath and declare his power against all such
sinners as he was, that the world might hear and fear, and learn by his
overthrow not to strive against their Maker, nor to dally with his fearful
warnings. Had Pharaoh and his people died of the pestilence or other disease,
when the cattle perished of the murraine, the terror of Gods powerful wrath
had not been so manifest and visible to the world, as it was in overthrowing
the whole strength of Egypt, which had taken arms and set themselves in
battle against him. Now the more strange the infatuation, the more fearful
and ignominious the destruction of these vessels of wrath did appear unto the
world; the more bright did the riches of Gods glory shine to the Israelites,
whom he was now preparing for vessels of mercy; the hearts of whose posterity
he did not so effectually fit or season for the infusion of his sanctifying
grace, by any secondarie means whatsoever, a^ by the perpetual memory o^ his
glorious victory over Pharaoh and his mighty host. But this faithless
generation (who^e reformation our Apostle so anxiously seeks) did take all
these glorious tokens of God^ extraordinary free love an^ mercy toward their
Fathers^ for irrevocable earnests or obligements to effect their absolute
predestination unto honor and glory, and to prepar^ the Gentiles to be vessels
of info^^mie and destruction. Now o^ Apostles earnest desire and u^quenchable
zeal to prevent the dangerous presumption in h^^ countrie-men, enforces him
in stead of applying this second answer to the point in question, to advertise
them for conclusion, that the Egyptians case was now to become theirs; and
that the Gentiles should be made vessels of mercy in their stead. All which the
event has proved most true. For have not the sons of Jacob been hardened as
strangely as Pharaoh? Have they not been reserved as spectacles of terror to
most nations after they had deserved to have been utterly cut off from the
earth, yea to have gone quick into hell? Nor have the riches of Gods mercy
toward us Gentiles been more manifested by any other apparent or visible
document, than by scattering of these Jews through those Countries, wherein
the seed of the Gospel has been sown.

The third general point proposed, concerning the Logical determination of
this propositio [whom he will, he hardneth]: or concerning the immediate or
proper object of the induration here spoken of.
The third general Part.
PHaraoh, we grant, was hardened by Gods absolute, irresistible will. Could
Beza, can Piscator, or any other Expositor living enforce any more, out of the
literal meaning of those texts? whether granting thus much, we must grant
withal (what their followers, to my apprehension, demand) that Pharaoh was an
absolute Reprobate from the womb; or, that he was by Gods irresistible will
ordained to this hardening, which by Gods irresistible will did take possession
of his heart, is the question to be disputed. They (unless I mistake their
meaning) affirm: I must even to death, deny. I desire then that in this case I
may enjoy the ancient pivilege of Priests, to be tried by my Peers, which (God
wot) need not be great ones. I will except against no man, of what profession,
place or condition soever, either for being my Judge, or of my Jury, so his
brains be qualified with the speculative rules of syllogizing, and his heart
^easoned with the doctrine of the ninth Commandment, which is, Not to hear
false witness against his Neighbor, against his knowledge.

To avoid the Sophistical chinkes of scattered propositions, wherein Truth
often lies hid in rhetorical or popular discourse, we will join issue in
this syllogism.

Whatsoever God from eternity decrees by his irresistible will, is absolutely
necessary, and inevitable, or impossible to be avoided.

God from eternity decreed to harden Pharaoh by his irresistible will.

Ergo, The hardening of Pharaoh was absolutely necessary, and impos^ible to be
avoided.

And if his hardening were inevitable, or impossible to be avoided, it will be
taken as granted that he was a reprobate from the womb; Damnatus ^ntequam
natus, the absolute ^hilde of eternal death, before he was made partaker of
mor^all life. A discovery of the fallacy wherewith Beza and others have in
this argument been deceived.


The Major proposition is a Maxim not questioned by any Christian, Jew, or
Mahometane. And out of it we may draw another Major as unquestionable, but
more immediate in respect of the conclusion proposed; [ Whomsoever God decrees
to harden by his irresistible will, his hardening is absolutely inevitable,
altogether impossible to be avoided. The Minor, [ Pharaoh was hardened by Gods
irresistible will] is granted by us, and (as we are persuaded) avouched in
terms equivalent by our Apostle. The difference is about the conclusion or
connexio^ of the terms; which without better limitation than is expressed in
the proposition or corollarie annexed, is loose and Sophistical.

Would some brain which God has blessed wi^h natural perspicacitie, ar^ and
opport^nitie, vouchsafe to take but a little pains in moulding such fit^ cases
for this Praedicates, as Aristotle, has done for the Subjects of Propositions,
(though those we often use not, or use amiss) those seeming Syllogismes whose
secret flawes clear sighted judgments can hardly discern, by light of arts
would crack so foully in framing, that ^^^are eyes would epsy their ruptures
without spectacles. It shall suffice me at this time to show how grossly the
Syllogism proposed fails in the fundamental rule of all affirmative
Syllogismes. The Rule is, Quae cunque convenient cum aliquo tertio, inter se
convenient. All other rules concerning the quantity of propositions, or their
disposition in certain Mood and Figure, serve only to this end, that the
convenience or identitie of the Major and Minor with the Medium may be made
apparent. This being made apparent by Rules of art, the light of Nature assures
us that the connection between the Extremes is true and indissoluble.

Now this Identitie or Unity (for that is the highest and surest degree of
convenience) is of three sorts, of Essence, of Quality, of Quantity or
proportion, under which is comprehended the Identitie of Time. Whatsoever is
truly called one and the same, is so called in one of these respects. And all
those Identities may be either Specificall (or Common;) or Numericall, Mixed or
Single. Most Fallacies arise from substitution of one Identitie for another. As
he that would admit that proposition for true of Specificall Identitie, which
is most true of Numericall, might be cheated by this Syllogism;

I cannot owe you the same ^umme which I have paid you.

But I have paid you ten pounds in Gold.

Ergo, I do not owe you ten pounds in Gold.

The Negative included in the Major is true of the same Individual or
Numericall sum^ but not of the same Specificall^ For suppose twenty pounds in
gold were due; the one moytie might be paid, and the other yet owing. But men
of common understanding are not so apt to be deceived in matters of money or
commodity with captious collections of this kind, as unable to give them a
punctual solution. Every Creditor in his own case would be ready to give this
or the like sufficient practical answer: I do not demand my (...) pounds
which are already paid; but the other ten pounds which are yet behind: that is
(as a Logician would say) The same sum specie, which has been paid, may yet
be owing; not the same numero: Or, the same sum by equivalence; not the same
individual coins.

But the Intrusion or admission of one Numericall Identitie for another of
different kind, is not so easily discerned in matters not dist^nguishable by
common sense; especially i^ the Relative or Ante^^dent be in ordinary discourse
promiscuously matched with both, and that conjunctim or divisim. The Numericall
Identitie inclused betwixt the Relatives^ [ Whatsoever ever and whomsoever,
quis, quicquid, quaecunque] and their Antecedents whether expressed or
understood, is sometimes an Identitie of Ess^nce or Nature only, sometimes of
Quality only, sometim^s of Quantity or proportion only: sometimes of
Essence and Quality, but not of Quantity; sometimes of Essence and Quantity,
but not of Quality; sometimes of Quality and Quantity, but not of Essence.
These Rules are universally true, [Wheresoever the Minor proposition is charged
with an Identitie of Quality, Quantity, Time or Essence, wherewith the Major
is not charged: or e contra wheresoever the Major is charged with any one or
more of th^se Identities, from which the Minor is free: the Syllogism, if it be
affirmative, must needs be false, and tainted with the fallacy of
Composition. Of the former rule, that vulgar example, because best known, is
most fit.

Quas heri emisti carnes, easdem hodie comedisti. At heri emisti carnes cruda^.
Ergo; Hodie carnes crudas comedisti.

The Identitie included between the Relative and the Antecedent in the Major
proposition, is an Identitie of Essence or Substance only. The Minor includ^s
another Identitie, of Quality, which cannot be admitted in the Conclusion;
because not charged in the Major. Had the Assumption been thus; At heri ^misti
carnes ovillas^ the conclusion would rightly have followed; Ergo, Carnes
ovillas body comedisti; For this is a part of Essential unity. The fallacy
is the same backwards and forwards;

Quas hodi^ com^disti carnes, easd^m heri ^misti. At hodie tostas comedisti.
Ergo, Hori tostas emisti.

Examples of fallacies against the latter rule are more frequent in most men's
writings, than ^ulgarly known. This for one;

The same sound which once pleases a judicious Musicians constant ear, will
please it still.

But this present voice or sound, which is now taken up (suppose a young
Quirister were singing) ^^th please his Masters ear.

Ergo, It will please it still to ^he very fall.

The Major supposes an exact Id^ntitie not of Essence or Quality only, but
of Proportion: otherwise it is false. For the articulate sound may be
Numerically the same, as being uttered with one and the same continued breath.
The voice likewise may be for its quality, sweet and pleasant: but so weak
and unartificiall, that it may relish of flatnesse in the fall; and so lose the
proportion and consonancie which in the beginning or middle it had with a
judicious Musicians ear, or internal Harmony.

That the object of divine approbation or reprobation is not the individual
abstract nature.
The form of this following fallacy is the same;

Whatsoever the eternal and immutable rule of goodness once approves as just
and good, it always so approves. For in that it is immutable, it is still the
same; and if the object remain the same, the approbation must needs be the
same.

But the eternal and immutable rule of justice once approved the humane
nature, or the corporal reasonable creature, as just and good.

Ergo, It always approves at least the humane nature, or reaso^^^le creature,
as just and good.

The conclusion is evidently false, albeit we restrain it to the same
individual humane nature, or reasonable creature which immutable goodness did
actually approve. What is the reason? or where is the fault? in the connection.
The Major includes an exact Identitie not of Essence or Substance only: but of
Quality, or rather of Consonancie to the immutable rule of goodness. And
whiles this Identitie of Quality or Conso^ancie lasts, the rule of goodness
cannot but approve the nature thus consonant: otherwise it should be mutable
in its judgment, or approbation. The minor proposition supposes the same
identitie of quality or consonancie; but not the continuance of it. And
therefore the conclusion is only true of that time, The old man and new suppose
not two distinct persons: and yet the rewards of joy and pains everlasting are
allotted to them.
wh^rein the identitie of consonancy remained entire. That is, in f^w words;
Though the humane nature continue still the same; or though Adam were still the
same man, yet he was not still one and the same in r^spect of divine
approbation^ (...) that supposes an identi^^^ of quality, of justice and
goo^^nesse. As these alter; so it alters.

The Syllogism last mentioned would be unanswerable, were their doctrine not
fallacious or rather altogether false, which would persuade that every entitie,
nature, or creature, qua talis, as such, is good and approveable by the
Creator. Was it then the humane nature? No, but the humane nature so qualified
as he created it, which ^e approved. And whatsoever other nature is so
qualified as Adams was, when he approved it, has still the same approbation
from the immutable rule of goodness, which he had: Because the consonancie to
the divine will may be the s^lf^ same in natures numerically distinct.

The Syllogism in which we stated the seeming endless controversy last,
has all the faults which these two last fallacies had, and a great many more.
The Syllogism was this;

Whatsoever God from eternity has decreed by his irre^istible will, is
inevitable. Or thus;

Whomsoever God from eternity reproves or decrees to harden by his irresistible
will, that man's reprobation or induration is inevitable.

But God from eternity reproved Pharaoh, and decreed to harden him by his
irresistible will.

Ergo, Pharaohs reprobation or induration was inevitable.

The Major supposes an Identitie not of person only, but of quality: yea of
degrees of quality. For as the immediate object of divine approbation is
justice, consonancie or conformity to the immutable rule of goodness: so the
immediate object of reprobation or induration, is not the abstract entitie or
nature of man; but the nature mi^-qualified, that is, unjust or dissonant from
the rule of goodness. And according to the degrees of injustice or
dissonancie, are the degrees of divine di^^ike, of divine reprobation or
induration. The minor proposition includes not only an identitie of Pharaohs
person, but such a measure of in justice or dissonancie, as makes him liable to
the eternal decree of reprobation or induration by Gods irresistible will. But
it supposes not this identitie of such bad qualities, or this full measure of
iniquity to have been always in him. Without alteration of his person or
nature, he was subject to great variety of quali^ication: and each
qualification capable of diverse, degrees and different disproportion with the
eternal and unchangeable rule of goodness. And therefore the minor
proposition, albeit eternally true, yet is eternally true only with reference
to those points of time, wherein Pharaoh was so qualified. No universalitie can
infer any more particulars than are contained under it: and all those it
necessarily infers. And universalitie of time cannot infer an universalitie
of the subject: nor an universalitie of the subject infer an universalitie of
time. This collection is false, God from eternity foresaw that all men would
be ^inners. Ergo, He foresaw from eternity, that Adam in his integrity
should be a sinner. The inference in the former Syll^gisme is as bad; God
decreed to harden Pharaoh from eternity. Ergo, He decreed to harden him in
every moment of his life. Or, Ergo, He was a reprobate from his cradle. This
conclusion rightly scanned, includes an universalitie of the subject, that is,
all the several objects of divine justice, which are contained in Pharaohs
life; not one particular only. Whereas Pharaoh in the minor proposition, is
but one particular or individual object of induration, or of the divine decree
concerning it.

That albeit Pharaoh was always one and the same man: yet he was not always
one and the same object of the divine deci^e.
And thus at length we are arrived at that point, whence we may descrie the
occasions by which so many Writers of good note have missed the right stream
or current of our Apostles discourse, and gravelled themselves and their
Auditors upon by-shelves. All this has been for want of consideration^ That
albeit Pharaoh from his birth unto his death, were but one and the same
individual man; yet was he not all this while one and the same individual
object of Gods decree concerning mercy and induration. That Pharaoh in the
Syllogism pro^osed is no singular but indefinite term.
The difference betwixt these we may illustrate by many parallel
resemblances. Suppose that Scepter (whose pedigree Homer so accurately
describes) had in that long succession, lost any of his length; this had broken
no square nor bred any quarrel, whether it had been the same Scepter or not.
Yet if the first and last owners should have sold or bought scarlet by this one
and the same Scepter; they should have found a great alteration in the measure.
So then it is one thing to be one and the self-same standard; and another
thing, to be one and the self-same staff or scepter. The least alteration in
length or quantity that can be, does alter the identitie of any measure: but
not the identitie of the material substance of that which is the measure. The
same grains of barley which grow this year, may be kept till seven years
hence. But he that should lend gold according to their weight this year, and
receive it according to their weight at the seven years end, should find
great difference in the sums: though the grains be for number and substance
the same, yet their weight are diverse. Or, suppose it to be true which is
related of the Great Magore, that he weighs himself every year in gold, and
distributes the sum thereof to the poor; and that he had continued this
custom from the seventh year of his age: yet cannot there be half the
difference betwixt the weight of one and the same Prince in his childhood and
in his full age, after many hearty prayers to make him fat, as is between the
different measures of Pharaohs induration within the compass of one year.

Therefore, this argument, [ Pharaoh was hardened after the seventh plague by
Gods irresistible will: Ergo, Hoe was an irrecoverable reprobate from his
childhood] is to a man of understanding more gross, than if we should argue
thus; [ The Great Magore distributed to the poor five thousand pounds in gold
in this fortieth year: Ergo, He distributed so much every year, since he
began this custom of weighing himself in gold.] For as he distributes unto
the poor, not according to the identitie of his person, but according to the
identitie or diversity of his weight: so does the immutable rule of justice
render unto every man, not according to the unity of his person, but according
to the diversity of his work. Unto the several measures of one and the same
man's iniquities, several measures of induration, whether positive or
privative, are allotted from eternity. But small induration by Gods
irresistible will, or irrecoverable reprobation, is the just recom^ence of the
full measure of iniquity; or (as the Prophet speaks) To harden thus, is to
seal up iniquity to destruction, without hope or possibility of pardon.

These two propositions are of like eternal truth; [ God from eternity
decreed by his irresistible will to harden Pharaoh having made up the full
measure of his iniquity:] and, [ God from eternity did not decree by his
irresistible will, that Pharaoh should make up such a measure of iniquity.]
For he does not decree iniquity at all, much less full measures of iniquity.
And yet, unless he so decree, not iniquity only, but the full measure of it;
Pharaohs induration or reprobation was not absolutely necessary, in respect of
Gods eternal decree. For it was no more necessary, than was the full measure
of iniquity unto which it was due. And that (as has been said) was not
necessary, because not decreed by Gods irresistible will; without which,
necessity it self has no title of being.

From these deductions I may clear a debt for which lingaged my self, That the
contention concerning Pharaohs induration has no contradiction for his ground.
in my last public meditations. My promise was then, to make it evident that
these two propositions [ God from eternity decreed to harden Pharaoh by his
irresistible will;] [ God from eternity did not decree to harden Pharaoh by
his irresistible will,] might easily be made good friends, if their Abbettors
would cease to urge them beyond their natural dispositions. From their
natures, they are indefinites not singulars. Both, in a good sense, may be
made to tell the truth. But a wrangler may work them both to bear evidence for
error. [ God from eternity did not decree to harden Pharaoh by his
irresistible will,] is true of Pharaoh in his infancy or youth: but false of
Pharaoh after his wilful contempt of Gods summons by signs and wonders.

The conclusion of the Syllogism proposed indefinitely taken is most true: but
universally taken is altogether false.
Beza's collection upon this place, is grounded upon the indefinite truth of
this affirmative, [ God from eternity decreed to harden Pharaoh.] But he
extends this indefinite truth beyond its compass. For he makes it an
universal, in that he terminates the irresistible decree to every moment of
Pharaohs life, without distinction of qualification. And it may be, he was of
opinion, that as well each several qualification, as each different measure of
Pharaohs hardening or impenitency, did come to pass by Gods irresistible will.
His error, into which the greatest Clerk living (especially if he be not an
accurate Philosopher) might easily slide, was in confounding eternity with
successive duration; and not distinguishing succession it self, from things
durable or successive. He and many others in this argument speak^ as if they
conceived that the necessary coexistence of eternity with time did
necessarily draw every man's whole cour^^ of life, mo^u quodam raptus, after
such a manner as Astronomer^ suppose that the highest Sphear^ does move the
lower, whereas if we speak of the course, no^ of Pharaoh's natural, but
mo^rall life; it was rather an inco^^dite heap or confused multitude of
durables, than one e^tire uniforme duration. An^ each durable has its distinc^
reference to the eternal decree^ That which was eternally tr^^ of one, was not
of all; m^^^ less eternally true of anothe^^ Eternity it self, though
immutable, though necessarily, though indivisibly co-existent ^o all, was not
so indissolubly ^inked with any, but that Pha^^oh might have altered or stayed
his course of life before that moment, wherein the measure of iniquity was
accomplished. ^ut in that moment he became ^o exorbitant, that the
irresistible decree of induration did ^^sten upon him. His irregular ^otions
have ever since be^ome irrevocable; not his acti^ns only, but his person, are
^^rried headlong by the everl^sting revolution of the un^^angeable decree,
everlasting ^^avoydable destruction.

The proposition or conclusion proposed, [ Pharaoh was hardened by Gods
irresistible will,] is true from all et^rnitie, throughout all eternity; and
therefore true from Pharaohs birth unto his death: but not therefore true of
Pharaoh howsoever qualified, or of all Pharaoh's qualifications throughout the
whole course of his lif^. For so the proposition becomes an universal, not
only in respect of the time, but of the subject; that is, of all Pharaohs
several qualifications. The sense is, as if he had said, [ God from eternity
decreed to harden Pharaoh, howsoever qualified, as well i^ his infancy as in
his full age, by his irresistible will: and thus taken it is false. The
inference is the same with the forementioned, [ Adam in Gods foreknowledge was
a sinner from eternity; Ergo, Adam was always a sinner; a sinner before he
sinned, during the time of his innocence:] or with this, God from all
eternity did decree by his irresistible will, that Adam should die the death;
Ergo, He did decree by his irresistible will, that Adam should die as soon as
he was created, or be a sinner all his life long.

To reconcile these two propositions aright, [ God from eternity decreed by
his irresistible will that Adam should die,] [ God from eternity did not
decree by his irresistible will, that Adam should die,] otherwise than we have
reconciled the two former, [God from eternity decreed to harden Pharaoh by his
irresistible will;] [ God from eternit^^ did not decree to harden Pharaoh by
his irresistible will,] no Writer, I presume, will undertake. The only
reconciliation possible, is this, [ God did decree by his irresistible will,
that Adam sinning should die:] [ God did not decree by his irresistible will,
that Adam not sinning, should die] nor did he decree by his irresistible will,
that Adam should sin, that he might die. For (as we said before) God did
neither decree his fall, nor his perseverance by his irresistible will. And his
death was no more inevitable than his fall. Nor was Pharaohs final induration
more inevitable, than the measure of iniquity to which such induration was
from eternity awarded by Gods irresistible will. Of Pharaoh thus considered,
the conclusion was true from eternity; true in respect of every moment of
Pharaohs life, wherein the measure of his iniquity was, or might have been
accomplished; though it had been accomplished within three years after his
birth. And this accomplishment presupposed, the induration was most inevitable,
his final reprobation as irrecoverable, as Gods absolute will (taking absolute
as it is opposed to disjunct) is irresistible:

In what sense, the conclusion proposed may be said to be universal,
universalitate subjecti.
The same proposition in respect of reprobation is universally true
Vniversalitate subjecti, that is, of every other person so ill qualified as
Pharaoh was, when God did harden him. Whosoever shall, at any time, become such
a man as Pharaoh was then, is a reprobate from eternity by Gods irresistible
will. And seeing no man is exempted from his jurisdiction, he may harden whom
he will, after the same manner that he hardened Pharaoh: although de facto
he does not so harden all the reprobates; that is, he reserves them not alive
for examples to others, after the ordinary time appointed for their
dissolution. Nor does he tender ordinary means of repentance to them, after
the door of repentance is shut upon them. God in his in^inite wisdom has
many secret purposes incomprehensible to man; as, Why, of such as are equal
offenders, one is more rigorously dealt withal than another: Why, of such as
are equally disposed to goodness moral, one is called before another. That
thus to dispense of mercy and justice in this life, does argue no parti^litie
or respect of persons with God, is an argument elsewhere to be insisted upon.

The point whereupon we are now to pitch, is this indefinite, [ Men are not
reprobated or hardened by Gods irresistible will, before they come to such a
pitch or hight of iniquity. Whether granting that Pharaoh was a reprobate from
eternity, we must grant wi^hall that Pharaoh was a reprobate in his middle
age, youth, or infancy.
No man living shall ever be able to make this inference good: Pharaoh was
absolutely reprobated from eternity, that is, His reprobation was immutable
from eternity; Ergo, Pharaoh in his youth or infancy was a reprobate. To
infer the consequence proposed, no Medium more probable than this can possibly
be brought; Pharaoh from his infancy to his full age, was always one and the
self same man; Et de e^dem impossible est idem affirmari and negari. The
consequence notwithstanding is no better than this following: The Eclipse of
the Moon was necessary from the beginning; Ergo, The Moon was necessarily
eclipsed in the first quarter, or in the prime; Because the Moon being of an
incorruptible substance, has continued one and the same since the creation.
But unto this consequence every Artist could make reply, that the proper and
immediate subject of the Eclipse is not the Nature or Substance of the Moon
howsoever considered; but in certain opposition to the Sun. So that albeit
this proposition, [ The Moon shall be eclipsed] be true necessarily and from
everlasting: yet it is necessary, yet it is true only of the Moon in such
Diame^r^ll opposition to the Sun, that the Earth may cover it with her shadow
as with a mantle. Whenever it is in such opposition, it is necessarily
Eclipsed. Whenever it is not in such opposition to the Sun, it cannot
possibly by course of nature be Eclipsed. It is in like manner true which we
have often said, that the proper and immediate object of the eternal decree,
concerning induration or reprobation, was not Pharaohs individual Entitie or
essence: but Pharaoh charged with a certain measure of iniquity, or
separation from his God. Granting then that Pharaohs substance was one and the
same, as incorruptible as the Moon: yet the degrees of his declination from
the unchangeable rule of justice, or of his opposition to the fountain of
mercy and goodness, might be more than are the degrees of the Moons
ab^rration or elongation from the Sun. Now the All-seeing providence did more
accurately calculate each word, each work, each thought of Pharaoh, and their
opposition to his goodness, than Astronomers can do the motions of the Moon
or Planets. And will he not make his payment according to his calculation? So
that in one and the self same Pharaoh there might be more several objects of
the eternal decree, than are minutes or scruples in forty years motion of the
Moon. Not the least variety or alteration in his course of life, but had a
proportionate consequent of reward or punishment allotted to it from all
eternity, by the irresistible decree. Unto Pharaoh then having made up the
full measure of his iniquity, the irresistible induration and unrecoverable
reprobation was, by the virtue of this eternal decree, altogether necessary
and inevitable. But unto Pharaoh, before this measure of iniquity was made up,
neither induration nor irrecoverable reprobation was so necessary or
inevitable. To think the unchangeable rule of justice should award the same
measure of induration or reprobation unto far different measures of
iniquity, is deeper than the dregs of Heathenisme: it is a doctrine which
may not be vented where any Christian ear is present.

The former resemblance is fully parallel to our resolution in all other
points, save only in this, that the eternal decree did not so necessary
direct or impell Pharaoh to make up the full measure of his iniquity, as it
does direct and guide the course of the Moon, till it come in full and
Diametrall opposition to the Sun. Therefore this Similitude will not follow,
The Moon, though not at this time Eclipsed; yet holds that course by the
unchangeable decree, which in time will bring it to be in Diam^trall opposition
to the Sun, and by consequence to be Eclipsed: So though Pharaoh in his
infancy was not reprobated or hardened by Gods irresistible will; yet was he
by the eternal decree ordained to such reprobation or induration, without
possibility of altering his course, or avoiding that opposition which his full
age had unto divine goodness.

As every true convert or regenerate person may say with Saint Augustine, Ego
non sum ego; I am become another man: so might it be truly said, in a contrary
sense, Pharaoh sometimes was not Pharaoh. When he was a child, he spoke as a
child, he thought as a child. His mouth was not opened against God: his
mind was not set on murder. To have seen the Israeli^sh infants strangled
and exposed to the merciless floods, would more have affected his heart, being
young and tender, than afterward it did his daughters. Nor was that cruelty,
which in his full age he practiced, so contained in his infancy, as poison in
the serpents egg. It did not grow up by kind or necessity of his natural
temper; much less was it infused by Gods irresistible will: but acquired by
custom. The seeds of it were sown by his own self will: ambitious pride was
the root: politic jelousie was the bud: tyranny and oppression, the fruit.
Neither was it necessary by the eternal decree, that this corrupt seed should
be sown: or being sown, that it should prosper and bud; or that after the
budding, it should ripen in malignity. During all this progress from bad to
worse, the immediate object of Gods immutable and unresistible will was
mutabilitie in Pharaoh. But this progress which was not necessary by any
eternal decree or law, being de facto once accomplished; his destruction was
inevitable, his induration unresistible, his reprobation irrecoverable, by the
eternal and uncontrollable decree.

That Pharaoh in his youth or infancy was not such an object of Gods
irresistible will for induration, That Pharaoh in his youth or infancy was not
excluded by Gods irresistible decree from possibility of repentance.
as in his full age he became, may be thus demonstra^ed:

No man whose salvation as yet i^ truly possible, is utterly excluded by Gods
irresistible will from salvation.

But the salvation of Pharaoh in his youth or infancy was truly possible.

Ergo, Pharaoh in his youth or infancy, was not excluded by Gods irresistible
will from salvation.

Therefore, He was not then the object of Gods irresistible will for induration.

The Major is evident from the exposition of the terms. For God is said to
will that only by his irresistible will, which has no possibility of the
contrary. The necessity of it likewise may be made evident by the rules of
conversion^ No man^ salvation that stands excluded by Gods irresistible will
from salvation, is truly possible: Ergo, No man, whiles his salvation is
possible, is utterly excluded by Gods irresistible will from salvation; or,
which is all one; No man whiles his salvation is possible is either hardened or
reprobated by Gods irresistible will: or in Latin more perspicuously thus,
Nullus per ^resistibilem Dei voluntatem salute exclusus, est servabilis: Ergo,
Nullus servabilis (id est, quamdiu servari potest) est a sal^te exclusus per
irresistibilem Dei voluntatem. No argument can be of such force or perspi^^tie
as is this primary rule of argumentation: Negativa universalis simpliciter
convertitur.

The Mi^^r, [ Pharaohs salvation in his youth or infancy was truly possible,]
is as evident from another Maxim in Divinity; Quicquid non implicat
contradictionem, est possibile; sive objectum Divinae potentiae. Now what
contradiction could it imply, to save this child, supposing Pharaoh, more than
it did to save another; for example, Moses? Unless we will say, that Pharaoh
was made of another mould, or a creature of another Creator, than Moses or
other children are. To save Pharaoh, as a son of Adam, could imply no
contradiction: otherwise, no flesh could possibly be saved. If to save Pharaoh
after he had committed many actual sins and follies of youth, did imply any
contradiction, what man of years, in this age especially, can hope for pardon?

It will be replied, that albeit to save Pharaoh in his youth or infancy did
imply no contradiction in the object; and therefore his salvation was not
absolutely it self impossible: yet it being supposed, that God from eternity
decreed to harden him and destroy him by his irresistible will; it must needs
imply a contradiction in Gods decree or will to save him; and by consequent,
his salvation was impossible ex Hypothesi.

This answer is like a medicine which drives the malady from the outward parts
whereto it is applied, unto the heart. It removes the difficulty into a more
dangerous point. For we may with safety infer, That God did not d^cree by
his irresistible will to exclude Pharaoh in his youth or infancy from
possibility of salvation: because, to have saved Pharaoh in his youth or
infancy was in it self not impossible, as implying no contradiction.

In bodies natural, so long as the passive disposition or capacity
continues, the same effect will necessarily follow; unless the efficacy or
the application of the agent alter. Idem secundum idem, semper natum est
producere idem: He which is always the same without possibility of alteration
in himself, is at all times equally able to do all things that in themselves
are not impossible. And no man, I think, will say that Pharaohs election in
his infancy was in it self more impossible, than his own reprobation was.
And he that thinks his own reprobation was in it self impossible, cannot
think himself so much bound to God, as he makes show of, for his infallible
election.

If from the former proposition, Whatsoever is absolutely possible to God, is
always possible to him, a man should thus assume; To have showed mercy to
Pharaoh was absolutely possible to God, and hence conclude; Ergo, It is
possible to God, to show mercy on him at this instant: the illation,
whatsoever the assertion be, includes the same fallacy of composition, which
was before discovered in the Syllogism, Quas emisti carnes, easdem comedisti;
Sed crudas emisti, etc. For Pharaoh, though unto this day, one and the same
reasonable soul; yet is he not one and the same object of Gods eternal decree
for hardening or showing mercy. To save any man of Gods making, implies no
contradiction unto that infinite power by which he was made. To save any man
that has not made up the full measure of his iniquity, implies no
contradiction to his infinite goodness, no impeachment to his Majesty: it is
agreeable to his goodness. To save such as have made up the full measure of
their iniquity, always implies a contradiction to his immutable justice. And
all such, and (for ought we know) only such, are the immediate objects of his
eternal, absolute and irresistible will or purpose of reprobation. But when
the measure of any man's iniquity is made up, or how far it is made up, is
only known to the all-seeing Judge. This is the secret wherewith flesh and
blood may not meddle; as being essentially annexed to the prerogative of
eternal Majesty, belonging only to the cognizance of infinite wisdom.

The fourth gen^rall point concerning the extent or nature of this division, He
will have mercy on whom he will have mercy; and whom he will he hardneth.
The ^our^h general part.
AS some do lose the use of their native tongue by long traveling in far
countries: so minds too much accustomed to the Logician Dialect, without which
there can be no commerce with arts and sciences, oft-times forget the
character of ordinary speech, in matters of civil and common use.

In arts or sciences, divisions should be either formal, by direct
predicam^ntall line, as that, [ Of creatures endued with sense, some have
reason, some are reasonlesse:] or at least so exact, that the several members
of the division should exhaust the whole, or integrum divided. As if a
Geographer should say, [ Of the inhabitants of the earth, some are seat^d on
this side the Li^e, others beyond it, or just under it;] this division were
good: but very imperfect if he should say, [ Some are seated between the
Tropic of Cancer and the Artick circle; others betwixt the Tropic of
Capricorn and the circle Antartick: for a great many are commodiously seated
betwixt the Tropicks, (as experience has taught later ages to reform the
error of the Ancient:) and some likewise betwixt the Polar circles and the
Poles.

This division i^ not formal, nor so exact as is required in arts and sciences.
But in matters arbitrarie and contingent (as matters of common use for the most
part are) to exact alike formal or accurate divisions, is ridiculous;
especially when as well the members of the division as the divident it self,
are terms indefinite. As if a man should say of men, [ Some are
extraordinarily good, some extraordinarily bad;] or of Academicks, [ Some are
extraordinarily acute, some are extraordinarily dull;] though every one will
grant the division to be indefinitely true, yet no man almost would
acknowledge himself to be contained under either member; as the most part of
men are not indeed. Or if one should say, Every Prince shows extraordinary
f^vour to some of his subjects, and some he makes examples of severitie; who
could hence gather, that no part or not the greatest part were left to the
ordinary course of justice, or to the privileges common to all free denizons?
Now we are here to remember what was pr^mised in the entry into this
treatise; That albeit Gods will be most immutable, yet is it immutably free,
more free by much than the changeable will of man. So are the objects of this
his free will more arbitrarie, than the designs of Princes. The objects of his
will in this our present argument, are mercy and induration: and these he
awards to diverse persons; or to the same persons, at diverse times, according to
a different measure. Whence, That many men are not comprehended under either
member of this division.
if we take these terms, in that extraordinary measure which is included in
this division, the most part of men, with whom we shall usually have to deal,
do not fall within either member. The proper, perhaps the only subject of this
division in Moses time, were the Israelites and Egyptians: in our Apostles
time, the castaway Jews, and such of the Gentiles as were forthwith to be
ingraffed in their stead. If we take mercy and induration in a lesser measure,
according to their lower degrees or first dispositions, scarce any man living
of riper years but has devolved from the one part of this division unto the
other, oftener than he has eaten, drank, or slept. Christ's Disciples (says
Saint Mark, chap. 6. v. 52.) Con^idered not the miracle of the loaves, because
their hearts were hardened; yet shortly after to be mollified, that Gods mercy
and Christ's miracles might find more easy entrance into them. Our habitual
temper is for the most part mutable: how much more our actual desires or
operations? And whatsoever is mutably good or mutably evil in respect of its
acts and operations, (which are sometimes de bono, sometimes de malo objecto)
has its alternate motions from Gods decree of hardening, toward his decree of
showing mercy, and e contra.

That one and the same man according to the diversity of time or qualification
may be the true and proper subject of both parts of this division.
The doctrine contained in this passage of Scripture will never sound well for
the settling of the affections and consciences of such as be Novices in faith,
until they be taught to run this division upon the same string: Have thou
been enlightened and tasted of the heavenly gift, been made partaker of the
Holy Spirit? Thy sin is great, and thou art sound a despiser of the riches of
his bounty, unless thou embrace these illuminations (notwithstanding thy
inbred corruptions daily increase upon thee) as undoubted pledges of his
favor, and assured testimonies of his good purpose to make thee heir of
eternal life. Worthy thou art to be numbered among those perverse and wayward
Jews whom our Savior compares to children playing in the market, if while
those good motions and exultations of spirit last, thou give not more
attentive care, than he that danceth does to him that pipeth or harpeth, unto
that sweet voice of our heavenly Father encouraging thee in particular as he
did sometimes the host of Israel, Oh that there were such an heart in thee
always, that it might go well with thee for ever.

But eschew these or the like inferences as cunning Sophismes of the great
Tempter, that old and subtle Serpent, I thank God I have felt the good
motions of the spirit, I perceive the pledges of his good purpose toward me:
but his purpose is unchangeable. Therefore is my election sure enough, I am a
sealed vessel of mercy, I cannot become a vessel of wrath. If such thoughts
have at any time insinuated into thy heart, or be darted upon thee against thy
will; remember thy self in time, and thus repel them: If God harden whom he
will; if this will be immutably and eternally free; it is as free for him to
harden me as any other. And consider withal that albeit thou can not make
or prepare thy self to be a vessel of mercy: yet thy untimely presumption, of
it continue long, in the end will make thee, as in the beginning it does
prepare thee, to be a vessel of wrath. This was the disease whereof the whole
Nation of the Jews did perish.

Do thou see thy brother, one baptized in the name of Christ, go on
stubbornly in his wicked courses? thou do well to threaten him with the
sentence of Death. Yet limit thy speeches by the Prophets rule, Ierem. 18.
pronounce him not for all this an absolute reprobate or irrecoverable vessel
of wrath: give him not forthwith for dead; but rather use double diligence to
prevent his death, and tell him, If God show mercy upon whom he will show
mercy, if this his will be eternally free: it is as free for him yet to show
mercy upon supposed Cast-awayes, and to harden uncharitable and presumptuous
Pharisees (for the present manifestation of his glory) as it was for him to
reject the Jews and choose the Gentiles.

Perhaps the ingenuous and hitherto indifferent reader will here begin to
distrust th^se last admonitions, That this doctrine delivered is no way
prejudicial to the certainty of salvation; but rather di^ects us how to make
our election sure.
and for their sakes, most of our former resolutions, as prejudicial to the
doctrine concerning the certainty of salvation. But if it please him either to
look back unto some passages of the former discourse, or to go along with me
a little further; I shall acquaint him (though not with a surer foundation,
yet) with a stronger frame or structure of his hopes, than he shall ever
attain unto by following their rules, who I verily think were fully assured
of their own salvation, but from other grounds than they have discovered to us.

Surer foundation can no man lay, than that whereon both parties do build, to
wit, the absolute immutability of Gods decree or purpose. Now admitting our
apprehension of his will or purpose to call, elect or save us, were infallible:
yet he that from these foundations would rear up the edifice of his faith,
after this hasty manner, [ Gods purpose to call, elect and save me, is
immutable; Ergo, my present calling is effectual, my election already ^ure,
and my salvation most immuta^le,] becomes as vain in his imaginations, as if
he expected that walls of loome, and rafters of reed covered with fern, should
be able to keep out Gunshot, because seated upon an impregnable Rock.

For first, who can be longer ignorant of this truth, than it ^^^ll please him
to consider it? That Gods purpose and will is most immutable in respect of
every object possible: that mutabilitie it self, all the changes and chances
of this mortal life, and the immutable state of immortality in the life to
come, are alike immutably decreed by the eternal counsel of his immutable
will. Now if mortality or mutabilitie have precedence of immortality in
respect of the same persons by the immutable tenor of his irresistible decree:
can it seem^ any paradox to say, [ That ordinarily there should be in every one
of us as true a possibility of living after the flesh, as of living after the
spirit; before we become so actually and completely spiritual, as utterly to
mortify all lusts and co^cupiscences of the flesh?] Until then our
mortification be complete and full, we may not presume all possibility of
living after the flesh to be finally expired and utterly extinct in our souls.
And whether this possibility can be in this life, altogether so little, or
truly none, as shall be in the life to come, after our mortal hopes are
ratified by the sentence of the almighty Judge, I cannot affirm, if any man
peremptorily will deny it; nor will I contend by way of peremptory denial, if
it shall please any man upon probable reasons to affirm.

But if to such as finally perish, no true or real possibility of repentance
during the whole course of this mortal life, be allotted by the everlasting
irresistible decree; in what true sense can God be said to allow them a time of
repentance? How does our Apostle say, that the bountifulness of God does lead
or draw them to repentance, if the door of repentance be perpetually mured up
against them by his irresistible will?

If in such as are saved, there never were from their birth or baptism any
true or real possibility of running the ways of death, not what sins soever
they commit, the fear of Hell, or the declaration of Gods just judgments (if
at any time they truly feared them) is but a vain imagination, or groundless
fancy, without any true cause or real occasion presented to them by the
immutable decree. Or if by his providence, they be at any time brought to fear
hell, or the sentence of everlasting death: ^et has God used these but as
bug-beares in res^ect of them, though truly terrible to others. And Bug-beares,
when children grow once so wise as to discern them from true terrors, do
serve their parents to very small purpose.

For mine own part, albeit I fear not the state of absolute reprobation, yet
so conscious am I to mine own infirmities, that I would not for all the hopes,
or any joy, or any pleasure which this life can afford, abandon all use of the
fear of hell, or torments of the life to come.

Upon this real possibility of becoming vessels of wrath, does our Apostle
ground those admonitions, Hebr. 3. 12. 13. Take heed, brethren, lest there be
in any of you an evil heart of unbeleefe, in departing from the living God:
But exhort one another daily, while it is called to day, lest any of you be
hardened through the deceitfulness of sin. And again, chapt. 4. verse 1. Let
us therefore fear lest a promise being left us of entering into his rest, any
of you should seem to come short of it. These and the like admonitions
frequent in the Prophets and the Gospel, suppose the men whom they admonish to
be as yet not absolutely reprobated, but in a mutable state; in a state subject
to a mutable possibility of becoming vessels of wrath, or vessels of mercy;
and by consequence, not altogether incapable of that height of impiety unto
which only the eternal and immutable decree has allotted absolute
impossibility of repentance, or of salvation.

Upon the true and real possibility of becoming vessels of mercy supposed to
be awarded to all partakers of the word and Sacraments, does Saint Peter ground
that exhortation, Brethren, give diligence to make your calling and election
sure: for if ye do these things, ye shall never fall. For so an entrance
shall be ministered unto you abundantly into the everlasting kingdom of our
Lord and Savior Jesus Christ: 2 Peter, 1. 10, 11. The end of this exhortation
was to bring his Auditors unto that full growth in grace and good works in
this life, unto which absolute impossibility of Apostasy is as irresistibly
assigned, by the eternal immutable decree, as final induration or
impossibility of repentance is unto the full measure of iniquity.

In what proportion these two contrary possibilities may be mixed in all or
most men before they arrive at the point of absolute impossibility either of
Apostasy or of repentance; we leave it to every man's private conscience to
guess or examine gr^sso modo, and to infinite and eternal wisdom exactly and
absolutely to determine. Unto whose examination we likewise refer it,
whether the impossibility of repentance be absolute or equal in all that
perish; or the impossibility of Apostasy be absolute and equal in all that
are saved, at one time or other before they depar^ hence: or whether the
mutual possibilities of becoming ^essels of mercy or vessels of wrath^ may
not, in some degree or other, continue their combination in some men until the
very last act or exercise of mortal^ life.

God always speaks, (whether by his word preached or otherwise by his
peculiar providence) as unto two: because every such man has somewhat of the
flesh, and somewhat of the spirit. For men as they ar^ the sons of Adam are
carnal; and Gods words are all spiritual, and always leave some print or
touch behind them, ^hereby the soul, in some de^ree or other, is presently
hard^ed, or presently mollified; or ^^ least disposed to mollifica^ion or
induration. Continual (...) frequent calcitration against ^^e edge of this
fiery sword ^^eeds a Callum or complete ^ardnesse; or (as the Apostle ^peakes)
it seares the conscience. But where it enters, it causes the heart to m^lt,
and mak^s way for abundant mercy to ^ollow after.

Men as yet not com^e to ful^^sse either of iniquity, or of ^^owth of faith,
are but chi^ren in Christ: and God speaks (...) his children, while they are
children, as wise and loving parents do to theirs. Now if a kind loving
father should say to one of his sons, whom he had often taken playing the
wag, Thou shall never have penny of what is mine; and to another whom he
observed to follow his book or other good exercises well pleasing to him, Thou
shall be mine heir: a man of discretion would not construe his words (though
affectionately uttered) in such a strict sense, as Lawyers would do the like
clauses of his last Will and Testament; but rather interpret his meaning thus;
that both continuing in their contrary courses, the one should be
disinherited, and the other made heir. Though God by an Angel or voice from
heaven should speak to one man ^^ his devotions, Thou shall be ^^^ed; and to
another at the ^^me time, Thou shall be damned: his speeches to the one were to
be taken as a good encouragement to go forward in his service; his speeches
to the other, as a fair warning to desist from evil: and not as ratifications
of immutabilitie in either course, not as irrevocable sentences of salvation or
d^mnation in respect of their individual persons, but in respect of their
present qualifi^^tions in whomsoever constantly continued. Saul the Persecutor
was a reprobate, or vessel of wrath: but Paul the Apostle, a Saint of God, a
chosen vessel. It is universally true; The seed of Abraham or Israel was Gods
people: yet it is true, that the Jews (though the seed of Abraham and sons
of Israel) were not partakers of the promise made to Abraham. For they became
those Idumaeans, thos^ Philistines, those Egyptians, against whom Gods Prophets
had so often threatened his judgments, whom they themselves had excluded from
Gods temple. One principal cause of their miscarriage^ was their ignorance of
the Propheticall^ language, whose threats or promises are always immediately
terminated not to men's persons, but to their qualifications. In their Dial^ct,
only true Confessors are true Jews; every hypocrite or back^slider is a
Gentile, an Idumaean, a Philistine. None to whom God has spoken by his
Prophets, were by birth such obdurate Philistines, as had no possibility of
becoming Israelites or true Confessors. The children of Is^ael were not by
nature so undegenerate sons of Abraham as to be without all possibility of
becoming Amo^ites.

The true scantling of our Apostles up-shot, [ He will have mercy upon whom
he will have mercy, and whom he will he hardneth,] rightly taken, reaches
exactly to these points following, and no farther.

First, to admonish these Jews by Gods judgments on Pharaoh, not to strive
with their Maker, not to neglect the warnings of their peace, upon presumption
that they were vessels of mercy by inheritance: seeing they could not pretend
any privilege abl^ to ex^mpt them from Gods g^nerall jurisdiction of hardni^^
whom he would, (as well of the Sons of Abraham, as of the Egyptians,) of
diverting tho^^ beams of glory which ha^ shined on them, upon some other
nation.

It secondly reaches to us Gentiles, and forewarns all and every one of us, by
Gods fearful judgments upon these Jews, not to tie the immutabilitie of
Gods decree for Election unto any hereditarie, amiable, national disposition;
but to fasten one eye as steadfastly upon Gods severitie toward the Jew, as we
do the other upon the riches of his glory and mercy toward our selves. For
if he spared not the natural branches, let ^^ take heed lest he also spare not
^^, who have been hitherto the flower and bud of the Gentiles. Behold
therefore the goodness and severitie of God: on them which fell, severitie;
but toward thee, goodness, if thou continue in ^u goodness: otherwise thou
also shall be cut off. And they also, if they bide not still in unbeleef^,
shall be graffed in: for God is able to graffe them in again. The one aspect
breed^th fear, the other brings forth hope: and in the right counterpoise of
hope and fear consists that uprightness of mind and equabilitie of
affections, without which no man can direct his course ar^ght unto the Land of
promise. This manifestation of Gods mercy to one people or other, after ^
kind of equivalent vicissitud^ perpetuated from the like revolution of his
severitie toward others, was the object of tha^ profoundly divine
contempla^^on, out of which our Apostle awaking, as out of a pleasant sleep,
c^yes out, O the depth of the riches both of the wisdom and knowledge of God!
how unsearchable are his judgments, and his ways past finding out! Romans 11.
33.

He that desires to have his heart filled with such a measure of joyful
admiration as will seek a vent in these or the like unaffected serious
exclamations, must feed his thoughts with contemplation of divine attributes;
specially with those of infinite duration or eternity, of infinite wisdom, of
infinite goodness and love to man. In all which I have adventured to tread a
path for others to correct o^ follow upon trial; being assured of this, that
without the knowledge of these generalities, nothing can be said to any purpose
in the particulars thu^ far prosecuted, or in the like to be prosecuted more
at large, when God shall grant leisure and opportunity.

These present disquisition^ (though seeming curious, as the resolution^ is
truly difficult) have a vulgar and immediate use; yet not so vulgarly plain^ or
common to all, as profitabl^ to every particular Christian not fully persuaded
in the certainty of his salvation.

The special aim of my intentions in this argument is, first, to deter my
self and others from all evil ways whatsoever; but specially from those
peculiar and more dangerous sins, which make up the full measure of iniquity
with greater speed: Secondly, to encourage mine own soul and others with it,
to accomplish those courses unto which the immutabilitie or absolute certainty
of election it self (which must in order of nature and ^^me go before our
infallible apprehensions of it) is inevitably predestined by the eternal and
irresistible decree.

These exhortations are more fit for popular sermons, than such points as
hitherto have been discussed: whose discussion nevertheless has seemed unto
me very expedient, as well for warranting the particular uses which I purpose
(if God permit) to make out of the chapter following, as for giving such
satisfaction to my best friends as God has enabled me to give my self,
concerning the Apostles intent and meaning in this ninth chapter.

If what I have said shall happen to fall into any man^ hands, which has a
logical head, and bears a friendly heart to truth (though otherwise no friend
to me:) yet I presume he will not be so uncharitable toward me, as to
suspect I have intended these premises to infer any such distasteful
conclusions as these; That election should be ex fide aut operibus praevisis,
for our faith or works sakes; That any man should be more than merely passive
in his first conversion; That the working of saving grace might be resisted; or
lastly, That in man before his conversion, ther^ should be any spark of free
will remaining, save only to do evil. Whosoever will grant me these two
proposi^ions, [ That the unregenerate man has a true freedom in doing evil,]
and [ ^he eternal Creator a freedom in doing good:] I will engage myself to
give him full satisfaction, that no difference betwixt Reformed Churches
concerning Predestination or Reprobation, is more than verbal, or has any
other foundation besides the ambiguitie of unexplicated terms. The errors on
all sides grow only from pardonable mistakings, not so much of truth it selfe^
as of her proper seat or place of residence.

FINIS.
MAN'S TIMELY REMEMBERING OF HIS CREATOR; OR An exposition delivered in a Sermon
upon ECCLESIASTES 12. 1. Remember now thy Creator in the days of thy youth.

LONDON, Printed by JOHN HAVILAND, for ROBERT MILBOURNE. 1638.

MAN'S TIMELY Remembering of his CREATOR; OR An Exposition delivered in a Sermon
upon ECCLES. 12. 1.
Remember now thy Creator in the days of thy Youth.
We may consider two virtues, one for the society of this life,
Thankfulness; and the other for the attaining of the next life, Repentance,
as precious metals, Silver and Gold. Of this Silver, of the virtue of
Thankfulness, there are whole Mines in the Earth, books written by Moral
men: but of this Gold, the virtue of Repentance, there is no Mine in the Earth;
in the books of Philosophers, no doctrines. This Gold is for the most pa^ in
the Washes: Repentance for the most part is in the Waters of Tri^ulation: But
God directs thee to it in this text, before tho^ come to those Waters:
Remember now thy Creator, (...) those evil days come^ and (...) thou will
Repent that thou did^^ not remember him till Now.

Here the Holy Ghost takes the nearest way to bring man to God, by awaking his
Memory. For the understanding requires long instruction, and clear
demonstration: and the Will requires an instructed Understanding; and it is of
it self, the blindest and the boldest faculty: but if the Memory do fasten
upon any of those things, which God has done for us; that is the nearest way to
him.

Remember therefore, and Remember now. Though the Memory be placed in the
hinder part of the head: defer^e not thou thy Remembering to the hindermost part
of thy life. But do it Now, Nunc in die, Now, whilst thou have Light; and Nunc
in diebus (as it is in the text) Now, whilst God gives thee many Lights, many
means to come to him; and Nunc in diebus juventutis, in the days of thy youth,
of thy strength, whilst thou art able to do that which thou proposest to thy
self; and as the Original word (...) imports, in diebus Electionum tuarum,
whilst thou art able to make thy choice; whilst the grace of God shines so
brightly upon thee, as that thou may see thy way; so pow^rfully upon thee, as
that thou may walk in that way: Now in thy day, and, Now in these days,
Remember. But whom? First, The Creator; That all these things which thou
delightest in and labourest for were created; they were nothing; and therefore
the Memory looks not far enough back, if it stick only upon Creature, and
reach not to the Creator. Remember the Creator: and Remember thy Creator and in
that, Remember, that He made thee; that He made thee of nothing; but of that
nothing, He has made thee such a thing as cannot return to nothing again,
but must remain for ever; whether ever in glory, or ever in torments: that
depends upon the Remembering thy Creator now in the days of thy youth.

First, Remember; which word is used oftentimes in the Scripture for
Considering and taking care for; Genesis 8. 1.
God remembered Noah and every beast with him in the arc: as the word contrary
to this, [ Forgetting is also used for the affection contrary to it,
Neglecting;] Isay 49 15
Can a woman forget her child, and not have compassion on the son of her
womb? But here we take not Remembering so largely, but restrain it to the
affection of that one faculty, the Memory, For it is Stomachus animae,
Bernard.
The Stomach of the soul, that receives and digests and turns to good blood,
all the benefits formerly exhibited to us in particular, and the whole Church
of God in general.

Present that which belongs ^o the understanding, to that fa^ultie: and the
understanding is ^ot presently settled in it. Pre^ent any of the Prophecies made
in the Captivity; and a ^ewes understanding will take them for a diliverance
from that bondage; and a Christians ^^derstanding will take them for ^^
spiritual deliverance from ^^nne and death, by the Messi^^, Jesus Christ.
Present but the ^ame of a Bishop or an Elder out ^f the Acts of the Apostles,
or out ^f the Epistles: and other men will take it for a name of paritie of
equality; and we for a name of office and distinction in the Hierarchy of
Gods Church. Thus it is in the understanding that is often perplexed.

Consider the other faculty, the will of man; and thereby those bitternesses
between the Jesuits and the Dominicans in the Roman Church, even to the
imputation of the crime of he^ res^e upon one another, in que^stions concerning
the Will o^ man, and how that concurre^^ with the Grace of God; particu^larly,
Whether the same proporti^on of Grace being offered by God^^ two men equally
disposed towar^^ him before, must not necessaril^ work equally in those two?
An^ by those bitternesses among^^ persons nearest us, even to the drawing of
swords, in questions of the same kind; particularly, Whether that proportion
of Grace, which does effectually convert a particular man, might not have been
resisted by the perverseness of that man's will? Whether that grace were
irr^sistible or no? By all th^se and in^inite such difficulties we may see how
untractable and untameable a faculty the will of man is.

But leave the Understanding and the Will, and come to the Memory, not with
matter of ^aw, but with matter of Fact; Let God make his wond^rful works to be
had in remembrance (as Davi^ speak^^h; Psalm 111 4
) present the hi(...) Gods protection o^ his children in the Arc, in the
wilderness, in the Captivities, in infinite other dangers; present this to the
Memory: and howsoever the Understanding be clouded or the Will perverted; yet
both Jew and Christian, Papist and Protestant, Refractarie and Conformitant,
are affected with a thankful acknowledgement of his former mercies and
benefits: this issue of the faculty of the Memory is alike in them all. And
therefore God in giving the Law works upon no other faculty but this; I am the
Lord thy God which brought thee out of the Land of Egypt etc. He only
presents to their Memory what he had done for them. And so in delivering the
Gospel, one principal Seal thereof, the participation of his Body and Blood
in the Sacrament, he proceeds so too, he recommends it to their Memory; Do
this in remembrance of me. This is the faculty that God desires to work
upon. And therefore, if thine understanding be too narrow to comprehend or
reconcile all differences in all Churches, as what understanding is large
enough to do so? If thy will be too scrupulous to submit it self to the
Ordinances of thine own Church, which sometimes a Zeal, though not perverse,
yet indigested, may work: yet have recou^se to thine own memory. For as
Saint Bernard calls that, The stomach of the soul; so we may be ^old ^o call
it, The gallerie of the soul, hung with so many and so lively pictures of the
goodness and mercies of thy God to thee, as that every one of them may be a
sufficient Catechism to instruct thee in all thy particular duties to God for
those mercies. And then as a well made and a w^ll placed picture looks always
upon him that looks upon it: so shall thy God look upon thee, whose memory
is thus contemplating him; and he shall shine upon thine understanding, and
recti^ie thy will too. If thy memory cannot comprehend his mercy at large, as
it has been showed to his whole Church (as it is an incomprehensible thing to
consider, that in a few years God has made us even in number and temporal
strength to our adversaries of the Roman Church:) If thy memory have not
received and held that great picture of our general deliverance from that
invincible navy; if that mercy be written in the Waters and in the Sands,
where it was acted, and not in thy memory: if thou remember not our later, but
greater deliverance from that artificial hell, that vault of powder (in which
the Devils instruments lost their plot; they did not blow it up:) yet every man
has a pocket-picture about him, a manual, a bosom book; and if he will but
turn over one leaf of that book, but remember what God has done for him
even since yesterday; he shall find by a little branch, a navigable river to
sail into that great and endless sea of the mercies of God toward him from
the beginning of his being. Do but remember then.

Iam. 1.18.
Remember now, says the text. Of his own will he begat us with the word of
truth, that we should be Primitiae, the first fruits of his creatures; that as
we consecrate all his creatures to him in a sober and religious use of them: so
as the first fruits of all, we should principally consecrate our selves to his
service betimes.

Now there were three payments of first fruits appointed by God to the Jews.
The first were Primitiae spicarum, The first fruits of their ears of corn:
and this was only about Easter. The second were Primitiae panum, the first
fruits of loaves, after the corn was converted to that use: and this, though
it were not so soon, yet it was early too, about Whitsuntide. The third were
Primitiae frugum, of all their latter fruits in general; and this was very
late in Autumn, in the Fall, about September. In the two first of these three,
in those that were offered early, God had his part; he had his part in the
corn, and in the loaves: but in the latter fruits he had no portion. Offer thy
self to God then, as Primiti^^ spicarum, whether thou gleanest in the world,
or bindest up by whole sheaves; whether thine increas^ b^ by little and little,
or thou be rich at once, by the devolution of a rich inheritance and patrimony
unto thee. Offer this in an acknowledgement, that this proceeds from the
treasure of his goodness, and not from thine industry. And offer thy self
again as Primitia^ panum, when thou have kneaded up riches, and honor, and
favor, in a settled and established fortune: offer that to God in an
acknowledgement, that he can scatter and moulder away that estate again, how
safe soever it seems to be settled. Offer at thy Easter, whenever thou have
any resurrection, any sense of raising thy ^oule from the shadow of death:
offer thy confession to God, that it is the sunshine of his grace, and not of
thy morality. Offer at thy Pentecost, whenever the hol^ Ghost descends upon
thee in a fiery ^ongue, that thou feel thy self melted by the powerful
preaching of the word: of^er thy confession then, that this is the proceeding
of his grace, and not the disposition, or concurrence, or tenderness of thy
nature. For if thou defer thine offering till September, till thy Fall, till
thy winter, till thy death; howsoever those may be thy first fruits, because
they be the first that ever thou gave: yet they are not such as are
acceptable to God; God has no portion in them if they come so late.

Offer thy self now; nay do but offer to thy self now; that is but an easy
request; and yet there is no more asked. Viximus mundo; vivamus reliquum nobis
ipsis: Thus long we have served the world; let us serve our selves the rest of
our time: but this is the best part of our selves, our souls. Expectes ut
febris te vocet ad poenitentiam? Had thou rather a sickness should bring
thee to God, than a Sermon? Had thou rather be beholding to a Physician for
thy salvation, than to a Preacher? Thy business is to Remember: stay not for
thy last sickness, which may be a Lethargy, in which thou may forget thine
own name, and his that gave thee thy best name, the name of a Christian,
Christ Jesus himself. Thy business is to Remember, and thy time is Now: stay
not till that Angel come, that shall say and swear, that Time shall be no
more.

Remember then, and Remember Now; Nunc in die, Now whilst it is day. The Lord
will hear thee in die qua invocaveru (says David) in the day that thou
call upon him; and in quacunque die velociter exaudiet, in any day he will
hear thee quickly: but still it is Opu^ diei, a work of the day, to call upon
God. For in the Night our last Night, these thoughts that fall upon us, are
rather Dreams than Remembrings: upon our deathbed we rather dream that we
repent, than repent indeed. To him that travels by Night, a bush seems a
horse, and a horse seems a man, and a man seems a spirit; nothing has its
proper shape: to him that repents by Night, on his deathbed, neither his own
time nor the mercies of God have their true proportion. This night they shall
fetch ^way thy soul, says Christ to the secure man: but he neither tells him
who they be that shall fetch it away, nor whither they shall carry it. He has
no light but lightning, a sudden flesh of horror: and so is translated i^^o
the fire which has no light. Nunquid Deus paravit nobis ignem i^^um? Non
nobis, sed Diabolo and Angelis e^us. And yet we who ar^ vessels so broken, that
there is not asheard left to fetch water at the pit, (as the Prophet expresses
an irreparable ruin,) no means in our selves to derive one drop of the blood
of Christ Jesus upon us, no means to wring out one tear of true contrition
from us, have plunged our selves into this dark, this everlasting fire which
was not prepared for us. A wretched covetousness to be intruders upon the
devil! a woeful ambition to be usurpers upon damnation! God did not make that
fire for us, much less did he make us for that fire: (make us to damn us?
God forbid:) but yet though it were not made for us at first, now it belongs to
us; the judgment takes hold of us. Whosoever believes not, is already
condemned: there the fire belongs to our infid^l^tie, and the judgment takes
hold of us. Ite maledicti; you have not fed me, nor clothed me, nor
harbored me, therefore go ye cursed: then that fire takes hold of our
omission of necessary duties and good works. What Is our remedy now? why still
this is the way of Gods justice, and his proceeding, ut sent^ntia lata ^it
invalida, That if he publish his judgment, his judgment is not executed. The
judgments of the Medes and Persians were irrevocable: but the judgments of
God, if they be given and published, are not executed. The Ninivites had
perished, if the sentence of their destruction had not been given: and the
sentence preserved them by bringing them to repentance. So in this cloud of
^te maledicti, we may see Day-breake, and discern beams of Sunning light in
this judgment of Eternal darkness. If the contemplation of Gods judgments
bring us to Remember him, it is but a dark and stormy Day: but yet spiritual
affliction and the apprehension of Gods anger, is one Day wherein we may
Remember God. And this is Copiosa redemptio, the overflowing mercy of God, that
he affords us many days to remember him in: for it is not in die, but in
diebus.

This Remembering which we intend, is an inchoation, yea it is a great step into
our Conversion and Regen^ration, whereby we are New Creatures: and therefore
we may well consider as many days in this New creation, as were in the first
Creation of the world.

In the first day was the making of Light: and our first day is the knowledge
of him who says of himself, Ego sum Lux mundi, I am the light of the world;
and of whom Saint John testifies, Erat Lux vera, He was the true Light which
lights every man that comes into the world. This is then our first day, The
Light, the knowledge the profes^ion of the Gospel of Christ Jesus. Now God
made Light first, ut operaretur in Luce, says Saint Augustine, that he might
work in the light, in producing other creatures: not that God needed Light to
work by, but for our example. God has shed the beams of the light of his
Gospel, first upon us in our Baptism, that we might have that Light to work
by, and to produce our other Creatures; and tha^ in every enterprise we might
examine our selves, our consciences, whether we could not be better content,
that that Light went out, or were Eclipsed, than the light of our own glory:
whether we had not rather that the Gospel of Christ Jesus suffered a little,
than our own ends and preferments.

God made Light first, that he might make his other creatures by the light,
(says Saint Augustine:) and he made that first too, ut cernerentur quae
fecerat (says Saint Ambrose) that these creatures might see one another: for
frustra essent si non viderentur, says that Father, It had been to no purpose
for God to have made creatures, if he had not made Light, that they might see
one another, and so glorify him. God has given us this Light of the Gospel
too, that the wo^ld might see our actions by this Light. For the noblest
Creatures of Princes, and the noblest actions of Princes, War, and Peace, and
Treaties, and all other Creatures and actions, which move in the lower
Spheres, Frustra ^unt, they are good for nothing, they will come to nothing,
they are nothing, if they abide not this Light, if there appear not to the
world a true Zeal of the preservation of the Gospel, and that we do not in
any thing erubesce^e Evangelium, be ashamed of making and declaring the love
of the Gospel to be our principal end in all our actions.

Now when God had made Light, and had made it to these purposes, He saw that
the light was good, says Moses. This Seeing implies a consideration, a
deliberation, a debatement: That a religion, a form of professing the Gospel,
be not taken, or accepted blindly, nor implicitly. We must see this light; and
then the Seeing that it is good implies the accepting of such a religion as is
simply good in it self; not good for ease or convenience, not good for honor
or profit, not good for the present, or the state of other businesses, not good
for any collateral or by-respects; but simply, absolutely, and in it self
good.

And when God saw this light to be good, then he severed Light from darkness:
so as no darkness must be mingled with the Light, no dregs or rags of
Idolatry and superstition mingled with the true Religion. But God severed them
otherwise than so too: he severed them (as we say in the Schools) Non
tanquam duo positiva, that Light should have a being here, and Darkness a
being there; but tanquam Positivum and privativum, that Light should have an
essential being, and Darkness utterly abolished. And this severing must hold
in the Profession of the Gospel too; not so severed as here shall be a Sermon,
and there a Mass: but that the true religion be really professed, and corrupt
Religion be utterly abolished. And then and not till then it was a Day, (says
Moses.) And since God has given us This day, The light of the Gospel, to
these uses, to try our own purposes by, in our selves, and to show and
justify our actions by, to the world; since we see this Religion to be good,
and that it is professed advisedly, and not implicitly; but so that it is able
to abide any trial that the adversary will put us to, of antiquities, Fathers
and Councels; since it is so severed, as that there are sufficient laws and
means for the abolition of superstition utterly: since God has given us this
day; Qui non humiliabit animam in die hac, etc. (as Moses speaks of other
days of Gods institution) he that will not throw down himself before God on
this day, in humble thanks that we have it, and in humble prayer that we may
still have it: he does not remember God in his first day; he does not consider
how great a blessing the light, the profession of the Gospel is.

To make shorter days of the rest (for we must pass through all the days in
a few minutes^) God in the second day made the firmament to divide between the
waters above, and the waters below. And this firmament in man is Terminus
cognosci^ilium, The limit of those things which God has given a man means and
f^^ulties to conceive and under^^and of him. He has limited our eyes with a
starrie firmament ^oo, with the knowledge of those things quae ubique, qu^^
semper, which those stars whom he has kindled in his Church, The Fathers
and the Doctors have ever from the beginning proposed as things necessary for
the salvation of our souls. As for the eternal decrees of God, and his
unrevealed will and mysteries, and the knottie and inexplicable perplexities of
the Schools, they are waters above the firmament. Here Paul plants, here
Apollo waters, here God raises up men to convey to us the dew of his Grace, by
waters under the firmament, by visible means, by Sacraments, and by the Word
so preached and so explicated, as it has been unanimly and constantly from
the beginning of the Church.

And therefore this second day is consummated and perfected in the third: for
in the third day, God came to that, Congregentur Aquae, Let the waters be
gathered together into one place. God has gathered all the waters of life into
one place; all the doctrines necessary for the life to come into the holy
Catholic Church. And in this third day, God came to his Producat terra, there
here upon Earth all herbs and fruits necessary for man's food should be
produced: that here in the visible Church should be all things necessary for
the spiritual food of our Souls. And therefore in this third day God repeats
twice that testimony, Vidit quod esset bonum, He saw that it was good, that
all herbs and trees should be produced that be seed; all doctrines that are
to be seminall to be proseminated, and propagated, and continued to the end,
should be taught in the Church: But for such doctrines as were but to vent the
passions of v^hement men, or to serve the turn of great men for a time, for
collateral doctrines, temporary, interlinearie, marginall doctrines, which
belong not to the body of the text, to fundamental things necessary to
salvation: for these, there is no Vidit quod bonum, no testimony that they are
good. Now, si in diebus istis, if in these days, when God gives thee a
Firmament, a knowledge what thou art, to learn conce^ning him; and when God
gives this collection of Waters, and this fruitfulness of Earth, the knowledge
how to receive these necessary doctrines: if in these days thou will not
Remember God, it is an inexcusable and irrecoverable Lethargy.

In the fourth days work, which was the making of the Sun and Moon. Let
the Sun to rule the day be a testimony of Gods love to thee in the sunshine
of temporal prosperity: and the Moon to shine by night, be the refreshing of
his comfortable promis^s of the Gospel, in the darkness of adversity.
Remember in this thy day, that he can make thy Sun to set at noone, blow out
thy taper of prosperity when it burns brightest: and he can make thy Moon to
turn to blood, make all the promises of the Gospel which should comfort thee
in adversity, turn to despair and obduration.

Let the fifth days work, which was the creation Omnium reptilium and
volatilium omnium, signify either thy humble devotion, wherein thou say,
Vermis ego and non homo, I am a worm, Oh God, and no man, etc. or let it
signify the raising of thy soul in that security, Pennas columbae, that God
has given thee the wings of a dove to fly to the wilderness from the
temptations of this world, in a retired life and contemplation. Remember in
this day too, that God can suffer even thy humi^litie to strive and degenerate
into an uncomely dejection, stupiditie, and s^nselesnesse of the tru^ dignity,
and the true liberty of a Christian: and he can suffer thy retiring of thy
self from the world, to degenerate into a contempt and despising of others,
and an over-valuing of thine own perfections, thine own purity and
imaginary righteousness.

Let the sixth day, on which both man and beast were made of earth, (but yet a
living soul breathed into man) remember thee, that this earth which treads
upon thee must return to the earth which thou treadest upon; this body which
loads th^e, must return to the grave, and thy spirit return to him that gave
it.

And let the Sabbath remember thee too, that, since God has given thee a
temporal Sabbath, placed thee in a Church of peace; thou must perfect all in a
Sabbath, in a consci^nce of peace, by remembering now thy Creator in all, in
some, in one of these days of the New week: either as God has created a
first day in thee by giving thee the light of the Gospel; or a second day, by
giging thee a Firmament of knowledge of the things that concern thy salvation;
or a third day, access to that place where those doctrines and waters of life
are gathered together, the Church; or a fourth day, wherein thou have a Sun and
a Moon, Thankfulness in prosperity, and Comfort in adversity; or a fifth
day, in which thou have Reptilem humilitatem, and volatilem fiduciam, an humble
dejecting of thy self before God, and yet a sure confidence in God; or as in
thy sixth day, thou considerest thy composition, that thou have a body that must
dye, though thou would have it live, and thou have a soul that must live,
though thou would have it die.

Now all these days are contracted into a less room, in this text, into two:
for here the original word, (...) is, either In diebus juventu^is, in the
days of thy youth; or In diebus electionum tuarum, in the days of thy
choices, or whilst thou art able to make thy choice.

First therefore if thou would be heard in David's prayer, Delicta juventutis,
etc. Oh Lord remember not the sins of my youth: remember to come to this
prayer In diebus juventutis, in the days of thy youth.

Job. 29 4.
Job remembers with sorrow how he was in the days of his youth, when Gods
providence was upon his Tabernacle: and it is a sad, but a late consideration,
with what tenderness of conscience, what scruple, what remorses we entered
into the beginning of sins in our youth; and how indifferent those sins are
grown to us now, and how obdurate we are grown in them.

It was Jobs sorrow to consider his youth, Tobit. 1.4.
and it was Tobits comfort, When I was young (says he) all my tribe fell
away; but I alone went often to Jerusalem.

For, Lam. 3. 27.
It is good for a man to bear his yoke in his youth, says Jeremy: and even
then when God had delivered over his people to be afflicted purposely; ^et he
complains on their b^halfe, Isay 47. 6.
that the persecutor laid the heaviest yoke upon the ancientest men.

Age is unfit for burdens: and to r^s^rve the weight, and burden of our
conscience, conversion and repentance till our age, is an irregular,
incongiuous and a disproportioned thing. Labor fracta instrumenta ad Deum
ducis, quorum nullus est usus? Basil.
Will thou pretend to work in Gods building, and bring no tool^s, but such as
are blunted and broken in the s^rvice of the world? No man would present a lame
horse, a disordered clock, a torn book to the King. Caro est jumentum, August.
thy body is thy beast, thy flesh is thy horse; will thou present that to God,
when it is lame and tired with exces^e of wantonness? when thy cl^ck, the
whole course of thy life is disorde^ed with passions and perturbations; when
thy book, the history of thy life, is torn, and a thousand sins of thine
own torn out of thy memory; will thou then present this Clock, this Book so
defaced and mangled, to thy God? Thou pretend^st to present that indeed which
thou do not present; Temperantia non est temperantia in senectute, sed
impotentia intemperantiae; Thou pretendest to present temperance and continence
to God, and in age temperance is not temperance, but only a disabilitie of
being intemperate. It is often and well said, Senex bis puer, An old man
returns to the ignorance and frowardness of a child again: but it is not
Senex bis juvenis, an old man returns to the days of youth again, to present
fruits acceptable to God, so late in his years. Do this then, In diebus
juventutis, in thy best strength, and when thy natural faculties are best able
to concur with the grace of God.

Do it too in diebus electionum tuarum, Whilst thou may choose. For if thou
have worn out this word in one sense, that it be too late to Remember him in
the days of thy youth that's sinfully and negligently spent already: yet as
long as thou art able to make a new choice, to choose a new sin; that when the
heats of youth are not overcome but burnt-out, then thy middle ag^ chooses
ambition, thine old age covetousness: as long as thou art able to make this
choice, art thou not able to make a better than this? God testifies the power
that he has given thee; Deuteronomy. 30. 19.
I call heaven and earth to record this day, that I have set before you Life
and Death, etc. therefore choose life: if this choice like you not (says Iosuah
to the people) If it seem evil in your eyes to serve the Lord, Josuah 24. ^5.
choose you this day whom you will serve. Here Is the Election day, bring that
which you would have into the balance, with that which God presents you, and
tell me what you would choose to prefer before God. As for honor, and
favor, and health, and riches; perchance you cannot have them, though you
choose them: but if you have, can you have more of them than they have had, to
whom these very things have been occasions of ruin? It is true, the market is
open till the last bell ring and ring out, the Church is open and grace offered
in the Sacraments of the Church: but trust not then to that Rule, That men buy
cheapest at the end of the Market; that heaven may be had for a breath at the
last, when they that stand by the bed and hear that breath, cannot tell
whether it be a sigh, or a gasp; whether a religious breathing and anhelation
after the next life, or a natural breathing and exhalation of this. But find
thou a spiritual good husbandry in that other rule, That the best of the
market is to be had at first, at the beginning. For howsoever in thine age,
there may be by Gods working Dies juventutis, God may make thee a new creature,
and so give thee a new youth (for as God himself is Antiquissimus dierum, so
with God no man is superannuated:) yet when age has made a man impotent for
sin, these are not properly Dies electionis, when he forbeares sin out of an
impotencie toward that sin. And therefore whilst thou have a choice, means
to advance thine own purposes, means to defeat other men's purposes by evil
means, Remember. But whom? Creatorem: for we have done with the faculty to
be excited, the Memory, and with the time Now, etc. And we come to the
Object, the Creator.

And there Remember first The Creator; secondly, Thy Creator.

And Remember The Creator, first, because the Memory can go no farther than
the Creator. The Memory reaches far: but it must find something done. And
what was done before the Creation? we have therefore no means to conceive or
to apprehend any of Gods actions before that. For when men will speak of
Decrees of Reprobation, decrees of Condemnation, before a Decree of Creation,
this is not the Holy Ghosts place, they go before him: for they Remember God a
Judge and a Condemning Judge before the Creator. This is to put a preface
before Moses his Genesis. God will have his Bible begin with the Creation; and
we will not be content with that In principio, but we will seek out Ante
Principium to know what God did before he did any thing ad extra.

The In principio of Moses we can Remember, that God created the Heaven and the
Earth in the beginning: but the In principio of Saint John, the Beginning that
he begins his Gospel withal, the Eternal beginning, we cannot Remember. We
can Remember Gods Fiat in Moses; but not Gods Erat in Saint John. What God has
done for us, is the Object of our Memory; not what God did before we or any
things else was. For when it is said in our Translation, John 7.39.
The Holy Ghost was not yet given; because that Jesus was not yet glorified;
though the supplement^ seem necessary for the clearing of the sense, yet the
word Given is not in the text: but it is simply Spiritus sanctus non erat, the
holy Ghost was not. Non erat antequam operaretur, says Saint Augustine: H^e
was not to this intendment and purpose; he was not manifested nor declared to
us, till he wrought in us. And so we say of God in general, not considered
in any one person, we cannot remember him but in producing of his works, in
the Creation. Thy Bible begins there, thy Creed begins there; and thou have a
good and a perfect memory, if thou remember all that is presentd unto thee by
those ways: and those ways go no higher than the Creator. Remember the
Creator then; because thou can Remember nothing beyond him.

And Remember the Creator so too, that thou may stay upon nothing on this
side him: that so neither height, nor depth, nor any other Creature may
separate thee from God; not only separate thee finally, but not retard thee
any other ways; but as the love of the Creature may lead thee to the Creator.
We see fair shipping in the River: but all their use were gone, ^f the River
led not into the Sea. We see men fraughted with honor and riches: but all
their use is gone, if they lead them not to the honor and glory of the
Creator. And therefore says the Apostle, 1 Pet. 4. 19.
Let them that suffer commit their souls to God as to a faithful Creator. He
had gracious purposes upon us in our Creation; and if he bring us back again
to as good a state as we had in our Creation, we enjoy the very Redemption
too.

This is then the true contracting: and this is the true extending of this
faculty of the Memory, to Remember the Creator, and sta^ there, because there
is no prospect farther: and to Remember the Creator, and get so far, because
there is no safe footing, nor relying upon any creature. Remember then the
Creator:

And Remember thy Creator. If thou desire wisdom; Quis prudentior Sapientia?
where will thou seek it, but of him who is Wisdom it self? If thou desire
profit, Quis utilior bono? Who can pro^it thee more than Goodness it self?
And if thou would Remember that which is nearest unto thee; Quis conjunctior
Creatore? Who is so near thee, as he that made thee, and gave thee thy being?
What purpose soever thy Parents or thy Prince have to make thee great: how had
all these purposes been frustrated, if God had not made thee before? Thy very
Being is the greatest degree. As in Arithmetic, how great a number soever a
man express in many figures; yet when all is done, and that we begin to
reckon and name this number, the first figure of all is the greatest of all: So
what d^grees or titles soever a man has in this world, the greatest of all is
the first of all; that he had a being by Creation: for the distance of Nothing
to a little is the best degree of this life. And therefore Remember thy
Creator, as by being that, he has done more for thee than all the world
beside.

And Remember so too, with this consideration, that since thou have a Creator,
thou wast once Nothing: He made thee, he gave thee a Being: there is matter of
Exaltation. He made thee ex nihilo, thou wast less before than a worm; there is
matter of Humiliation.

But he did not make thee Ad nihilum, to return to Nothing again: there is
matter of Study and Consideration, how to make thine immortality profitable
unto thee. For it is a deadly immortality, if thou be immortal only for
immortal torments.

That Being which we have from God shall not return to Nothing: nor that
Being which we have from men neither. As Saint Bernard says of the Image of
God imprinted indelibly in man's soul, Vri potest in Gehenna, non exuri; That
soul which descends to Hell, carries the Image of God thither too, and that
can never be burnt out in Hell: So those Images, those impressions which we
have received from Men, from Nature, from the World, the Image of the Lawyer,
the Image of the Lord, the Image of the Bishop, may all burn in Hell; but they
cannot be burnt out: not only, not those souls, but not those offices shall
return to Nothing; but our condemnation shall be everlastingly aggravated, for
the ill use of these offices.

Remember therefore thy Creator, who, as he made thee of nothing, shall hold
thee still to his glory, though to thy confusion in a state capable of his
heaviest judgments. For the court of God is not like other courts, that after
a surfeit of pleasure, of greatness, a man may retire: after a surfeit of sin,
there is no such retiring, as a dissolution of the soul to nothing. And
therefore remember, that he made thee; thou wast nothing: and what he made
thee; thou can not be nothing again.

To shut up this circle, and to return to the beginning; to excite the
particular faculty of the memory. As we remember God: so for his sake, and
for him, let us remember one another. In my long absence and far distance
remember me, as I shall do you, in the ears of God: to whom the farthest
East and the farther West are but as the right and left ear in one of us. We
hear with both ears at once; and he hears in both places at once. Remember
me; not my abilities. For when I consider my Apostleship to you, that I was
sent to you, I am ^n Saint Paul's Quorum; Quorum ego minimus; I am the least of
them that have been sent unto you: and when I consider mine infirmities, (I
know I may justly lay a heavier name upon them) I know, I am in his other
Quorum, Quorum ego maximus; sent to save sinners, of whom I am the chiefest.
But yet remember my labors, my endeavors, at least my desires to do that
great service of making sure your salvation: and I shall remember your
religious cheerfulness in hearing the Word, and you^ Christian-like respect
to those who bring this Word unto you; and of me in particular, so far above
my merit. And so as your eyes that stay here, and mine that must be far off,
for all that distance, shall meet every morning in looking upon the same Sun,
and meet every night in looking upon the same Moon: so our hearts may meet
morning and evening, in that God, who sees and hears alike at all distances.
That you may come up to him in your prayers on my behalf, that I (if I may be
of any use for his glory and your edification in this place) may be restored
to you again in this place: and I may come up to him in my prayers on your
behalf, that what Paul soever shall plant here, and what Apollo soever shall
water here, be himself will be pleased to give the increase. And that if I
never meet you, till by several ways we have met in the gates of death; that
within the gates of heaven I may meet you all, and there say to my Savior and
your Savior, that which he said to his Father and our Father; Of those whom
thou gave me I have not lost one.

Remember me thus, you that stay in this kingdom of peace, where no sword is
drawn but the sword of justice: as I shall remember you in those kingdoms,
where Ambition on the one side, and a necessary defense of religion against
imminent persecution on the other side, has drawn many swords. And Christ
Jesus remember us all in his kingdom, to which though we must sail through a
sea, yet it is the sea of his blood, in which never soul suffered shipwreck.
Though we must be blown with strong winds, with vehement sighs and groans
for our sins: yet it is the Spirit of God that blows all that wind in us,
and shall blow away all contrary winds of diffidence in his mercy. It is that
kingdom, where we shall all be soldiers, but of one army, the Lord of hosts;
and all children of one Quire, the God of harmony and consent; where all
clients shall retain but one Advocate, the Advocate of us all, Christ Jesus;
and yet every client receive a sentence on his side; not only a verdict of
not-guiltie, a non-imputation of sin; but a Venite Benedicti, a real
participation of an immortal crown of glory: where there shall be no
d^fference in affection nor in voice, but we shall all agree as fully and
perfectly in our Hallelu-jah and our Gloria in excelsis, as God the Father, God
the Son, and God the holy Ghost agreed in their F^ciamus Hominem; we shall
praise the whole Trinity as unanimly, as the Trinity concurred in making us.
To end, it is the kingdom where we shall end, and yet begin but then; where we
shall have continual rest, and yet never grow lazy; where we shall have more
strength, and no enemy; where we^ shall live, and never die; where we shall
meet, and never part; but here we must.

FINIS.

