JACOBS GREAT DAY OF TROVBLE, AND DELIVERANCE.

A SERMON PREACHED AT Paul's Cross, the fifth of August 1607. upon his
MAJESTY'S deliverance from the Earl GOVVRIES Treason and CONSPIRACY.

By JOHN MILVVARDE Doctor of Divinity.

LONDON Printed for ELEAZAR EDGAR, and are to be sold at his Shop in Paul's
Churchyard, at the Sign of the Windmill. 1610.

To the Right Noble, and Right Honorable, GEORGE, Earl of Dunbar, Lord Hume
of Barwicke, Baron of Norham, Lord High Treasurer of Scotland, one of the Lords
Commissioners, equally conjoined for the middle Shires of Great Britain,
sometime called the Borders or Marches, Lord Governor and Captain of his
Majesty's Town of Barwicke; and the Garrison of the same, Knight of the most
Noble order of the Garter, and one of his Majesty's most Honorable Privy
Council in both Kingdoms.
RIGHT HONORABLE,
THe nature of true goodness, is to communicate it self to others; it is a
powerful Agent, and would work all like it self. It pleases God to call
great ones after his own name, dixi dij ostis; and good ones after Christ's
name, Nolite tangere Christos meos; to to this end says Saint Bernard, vt
sicut sunt haeredes nominis, sint etiam imitatores sanctitatis, to show how
noble they are by deputation, and how worthy they should be by imitation; that
being the Delegats of so high a sovereign, they might be dij tutelares, not
titulares only. The mighty are said to be Gods hills, and mons Domini, mons
pinguis; though they first receive rain from heaven, yet they keep it not to
themselves, but suffer it with speed to slide down to the valleys: they are
the first to whom the Sun shows his rising, and the last that behold his
setting; yet being once mounted up to his Meridian, the poorest Ant-hils then
feel the virtue of his influence. Those glorious lights of honor that shine
in the fair Orb of justice, the Star Chamber, they borrow their beams of
brightness from one Sun; and those beams they keep not to themselves, but
as Homer calls Apollo, are (...) long iaculantes, imparting their splendour to
inferior bodies. For greatness armed with goodness is the sanctuary of
innocence, and whither should misery fly, if not to the merciful? Virtue
indeed has (...), and is to her self a sufficient recompense, sat habet
fautorum semper qui recte facit, nor needs she like palliated hypocrisy
prostitute her beauty to popularity; for she is the kings daughter, and her
glory is within, (...) says Clemens Alexandrinus, amiable she is, but not
amorous, and with no other philtres then her own worthiness winnes the hearts
of the Noble; yet like Truth that goes now and then with a scratcht face, she
has need of a Patron, and looks for protection from her true professors;
not to be magnified above her merit, for she cannot but to vindicate her
honor from vile contempt. He that loves others virtues has many of his own;
and it is impossible for goodness to find favor, but with the good. Amongst
whom (most honorable Lord) I find your noble self a Principal: and whose
memorable love to my dearest brother if I should forget, I were worthy, as
Alexander once served one, to be branded in the forehead with Ingratus hospes.

He that painted Ingratitude like a Fiend, meant her for hell, not man's heart;
which like the Sea, for all the fresh rivers that fall into her vast bosom, is
never the sweeter; like a whirling gulf, ever swallowing down benefits,
never returning the least remembrance of thanks. The nine leapers that our
Savior healed, had a worse disease then leprosy sticking on them, un
thankefulnes. Sapientis est (said Seneca) been debere beneficium, been soluere,
interdum autem solutio est ipsa confessio: so falls it out with me (right
Honorable) having obtained more then I durst desire, and wanting power to
requite (nam tibi quod soluat non habet arca Iouis.) My heartiest prayers must
be your best payment, and no other requital then a thankful
acknowledgement. Accept therefore, I beseech you, haac diuinae particulam
aurae, this heavenly parcel, and blessed remnant of that faithful and
painful Doctor, whose powerful preaching, like Bonarges one of the sons of
Thunder (for he was a John) many a Christian ear has with comfort heard; and
whose worthy praise will sound better from any man's mouth then mine: He was my
brother, therefore I forbear; yet me thinks to praise the dead and he
deserving, were no flattery.

That his life was fraught with crosses, I impute not to any inauspicious
planet (though he found in his horoscope some too malignant) but to Divine
providence, that with the frequent strokes, malorum seu malleorum, he might be
fitted for that heavenly Jerusalem, where of he was living, a lively, and dead
is now an everliving stone. Yet this comfort God sent him and his friends, to
sweeten the bitterness of sorrows, he served a most gracious Master, who
loved him alive, and honored him dead, Cuius erat vinus, mortuus huius erat.
For first his most excellent Majesty, to whom he owed the duty of a subject,
being his King, of a servant, being his Master; did out of his Heroic and
Princely clemency, a compassionate pitier of wronged simplicity, rescue him
from the jaws of conspiring perjury. And after his death has granted (by
your Honorable means) an Annuity of an hundred pounds sterling, for the
better maintenance of his wife and children. And since it pleased his Highness
to hold him worthy of employment into Scotland, I can testify with what
abundant joy he mentioned in his Letters, your Honorable name; how more like
a father then a friend you respected him: and to use the words of his own pen,
which if he had lived, the world should not have known, and which he wrote
more for our comfort, then any vain ostentation: unless he should lie in
your bosom, you could not use him more lovingly. Also that honorable Lord,
the Lord Chancellor of Scotland, in whose house my brother departed this life;
whose exceeding kindness I ought never to forget: and if cost or skill, pains
or prayers could have redeemed him from the grave, he had not died. Besides the
sumptuous Funeral, the large remuneration of his servants, all at your honors
charge, do witness to the world your Honorable disposition, and how much you
esteemed him. Amongst his other children (right Honorable) left behind him,
this which I here dedicate to your Honor, is one; not bredde of the mother,
but borne of the fathers own brain, like Pallas, for which he endured some
throws, and was by the help of a happy memory delivered of it at Paul's
cross. It is a poor Orphan, but rich enough if you give it countenance, and
safe enough, if protection. And the God of peace, whose Minister he was, whose
Agent you are, and whose work this is, vouchsafe the light of his countenance
to shine upon you, and so increase your earthly honor as you desire the
advancement of his.

Your Honors humbly devoted, MATTHIAS MYLWARD.

TO THE READER.
REligious Reader; I am bold to call thee by a binding word, because I suppose
thee to be no loose companion. This Sermon is bound for thee, and may be much
bound to thee. Peruse it, but misuse it not. Art thou a good Subject? Thou will
Read it for the Kings sake. Art thou a good Christian? Thou will love it for
thy souls sake. Art thou both? Thou will reverence it for Gods sake. Art thou
neither? Why then for Gods sake let it alone: The dead bite not, they must not
be bitten. The Author is at rest and gone, yet he lives thou secst. He has
vnboweld himself like the Silke-worme, and died in a good cause, yet left such
taskes behind him as may record his memory, and propagate his fame to
perpetuity. The kind acceptance of this, may occasion the coming forth of
more. If I have done well in publishing it, thank God for my sake, if not,
forgive me for Gods sake.

Thine in him, by whom, and in whom, and through whom are all things.
Matthias Mylward.

MEMORIAE VIRI DOCTRINA CLARISSIMID. MYLVARDI, ANGLI, S. SANCTAE THEOLOGIAE
DOCTORIS, REGIAE MAIESTATI A SACELLIS, etc. IN SCOTIA DEFVNCTI CALL. AVG. I. D.
C. IX.
SIccine te summam nobis, Miluarde, salutem
Dicere; nec patrios fas adijsse Lares?
Credo, tuam hanc duxti Patriam: viget Vnio: Doctor
Quam viuens docuit, nunc quoque morte probat.
ALIVD.
Quam been, Miluarde, est? tua vox haec vltima nobis,
Ecce citus venio: maxim Christ veni,
Venit, adest; frueris. Te o terque quaterque beatum
Laeta ferens alijs, qui rapis ante tibi.
Patricius ab Arenis Edinburgenus P.

JACOBS GREAT DAY OF TROVBLE, AND DELIVERANCE.
IEREM. 30.7. Alas, for this day is great, none has been like it, it is the
time of JACOBS trouble: yet shall he be delivered from it.


THere is no Story more noble, nor of note for Fame better known, nor for
Grace more honorable, then the Story of the Jews and State of Israel, if ye
consider the vocation special of Abraham and his family, or the redemption of
his posterity, from the iron and Aegiptian bondage, elutulentis manuum
operibus, says Saint Augustine. Though the service was base, Aug. in Psalm.
Esa. 48.17. Psalm. 130.7.
yet was the redeemer Noble, and the redemption copiosa nimis, as the good King
said; or if ye consider the great benefits wherewith they were enriched,
beneficia priuatiua and positiua, as the schoolmen call them. First, benefits
conferred, or evils removed; in one word to say as much as may be said to
ties liber, tot malis tot bonis toties auctus, Psalm. 116.12.
might make them cast in their mind with that holy king and Prophet Quid
retribuam? What shall J render to the Lord for all his benefits? So that when
God gives, he does not as many do, which give to Ruffians liberally, that
which they spend loosely; Deuteronomy. 4.40.
but as in Deuteronomie, vt been sit tibi, that it may go well with thee, ten
times repeated in that book; for to that end God gives, that his gifts may be
blessings: and, that you may see gods bounty too, he calls them omnia beneficia
all, because he withholds nothing: Nothing that is good from them that leadea
godly life: and then King David calls them, Psalm. 84.
beneficiadej, from the person to show their excellency, and to the persons to
show their dignity, that is, excellent gifts from an excellent giver, given to
men to make them excellent, that as the Hebrew word, (...) spoken of troubles,
signifies, number and quantity, many and great: so of benefits theirs were,
multa and magna, and all to make the threefold cord of duty strong, whereby
they might be bound to God.

But with ill natures thus it happens, that fullness is the mother of
forgetfulness, and we alth and prosperity Nurses of wantonness, in
Deuteronomie God therefore complains thus, Dilectus meus impinguatus,
dilatatus, incrassatus, recalcitrauit, Deuteronomy. 32.15.
the people fed, fatled, enlarged, spurnedwith their heel, that is, were
unthankful and unkind; and the Prophet Hoje. says, Oz. 13.6.
They were filled, their heart was exalted and they have forgotten me; They
forsook their God, and justly he cast them off, and cast them into the hands
of Philistines, Iud. 4. Ion. 1.15.
Cananites, Moabites, Ammonites. etc. So that their sin became to them like
Jonas to the Mariners, against whom winds and waves and all conspired to cast
the fugitive ouer-boord; yet was he near and dear unto God; whom heavenly
providence would not suffer to perish, but hedged his way with thorns, that he
should not run away to his utter ruin. And God thus tempered this peoples
posterity with invasion of enemies, assault of neighbor evils, scorn of
wicked men, with troubled state, with bad governors, with continual wars;
and wars injustice and misgouernment, are like a three stringed whip for
punishment, afterward their kingdom was divided, and at last they came to
their worst state; captivity under the Chaldees for 70. years together, who
ouerturned the Temple, the glory of that kingdom, rooted out that Nation
almost utterly, rased down their walls, burnt their City, and miserably and
unmercifully slew their people, bringing in the lamentable times of famine,
fire, and sword, times says Lactant. In quibus non erat iucundum viuere, every
where being overtaken with trembling and horror; their days now likened by
this Prophet in this Chapter to the days of Childbearing, wherein their men
like women in travel, put their hands upon their loins and all their faces
were turned into palenes, which made the Prophet cry out, Vae, quia, etc. Alas,
for this day is great, none has been like it, it is the time of Jacobs
trouble, yet shall he be delivered from it.

In which words are two general points contained, viz. First the Sorrowful
distress of Jacob. Secondly the Consolation which followed.

In the first I observe four things.

First, A vehement exclamation, a very Vae, Alas, more then a sad and heavy
groan; sorrow of a deep impression, from the very hearts root, sighing,
crying,

Secondly, A confirmation of it with a reason, to show he cries not without
cause, Alas, for this day is great, in which, are two words, dies, and magnus,
there is breuitas and grauitas, not short and sweet, but like to anger, si
breuis grauis. viz. If it be short, it is sharp.

Thirdly, A reason upon reason, it is a great day, why so? for none has been
like it, and this is an (...) very forcible, such a day as never was the like;
a strong and a strange amplification of sorrow.

The fourth part speaks out; for in the other three, sorrow spoke in her own
language, that is, scarce could speak at all, but chatter like a Crane or like
a Swallow, as Hezechias did; this fourth declares all: Where the first is an
exclamation, thesecond a confirmation, the third an admiration none like it;
the fourth is an explanation, and tells what all this sorrow means, It is the
time of Jacobs trouble.

The second part is sacobs consolation, and in it are three things.

First, the promise he shall be delivered, a word of a future time, not he has
been, not now, no nor yet; but he shall be, and this notes three other matters.

1 Jacob must have patience and tarry Gods leisure. 2 That he must hope then
most, where reason is least; 3 He must not be weake-handed, nor faint-harted,
least he droupe ere the promise be fulfilled.
Secondly, here is an union of the people with their head Jacob, and all
Jacob; rex and populus, Jacob and every Jacob, that is, every holy man shall
suffer tribulation, but he shall overcome it, and rise like Israel out of the
Sea.

The third is in the words Sed tamen, which implies a mighty defense of God on
Jacobs side, as if he should say although they should conspire by fraud or
force to put Jacob down, and as the proverb is pes pede densusqueviro vir,
band themselves, and hand in hand with weapons in their hand, endeavor to take
Jacobs life away; yet let him bear his trouble, it is but for a time, Sed
tamen, that is, I the God of Jacob, in spite of them all, I will deliver him:
and this is the sum of this verse, and as I take it the fittest text that
could be chosen for the time.

This verse begins like the life of man, with a mournful ditty, Alas, a note
of sorrow, and, Aug.
Puer qui nascitur a ploratu incipit begins with crying; nesciens prophetizat
quid malorum passurus sit, and is at first a prophet of his own aduersityes;
and all experience tells us it is true, and never any heard of but Zoroastes,
the great Magician, who is said to have laughed when he was borne. These words
are Speculum humanae vitae the very glass of life, representing to all men
alike their common lot in their several forheades and beginnings. So that if
we consider nature only, it is true that one observed, man's life for his
entrance is blindness, his birth a crying, his progress labor, and his end
dolor, every where error: and now a sorrowful Alas salutes me at the
threshold, like a churlish porter to shut the door where joy would enter; so
that me thinks, I do not speak but groan, and rather weep then persuade.

The Poets feign that Jupiter has two great tons or vessels, of which every
man at his birth must take his draught; the one is prosperity; the other is
adversity; of the first he may but sip, of the last he shall have store If you
mark the ouerthwarting; of life and the crosses of all men's states, Job. 23.4.
Seneca said true Lacrimae potius deerunt quam causae dolendi, yea Saints and
holy men when they do plead with God as Job calls it, cannot, nor dare not fill
their mouths with arguments, but lay their hand upon their mouths and so make
supplication to their judge, plus gemitibus quam ser monibus, with sighs,
rather then sayings, says Saint Jerome; and treat with him, affectu potius
quam affatu, says Saint Ambrose. First with remorce rather then discourse. The
holiest King in his 88. Psalm says, Psalm. 88.15. Thren. 3.
from my youth up thy terrors have I suffered and he said not dolores, but
terrores, well, that was in youth; and it is good (says Jeremie) for a man to
bear the yoke in his youth; but should not his age be better comforted? no.
But as Martyr says, though God forgave his sin and gave him favor, yet he
so lived, as if God had reserved him ad vitam plenam crucibus. viz. To live and
die an afflicted man. The wisest King in his preaching book against vanity,
has this grave sentence; Eccle. 7.
it is better to go to the house of mourning then of feasting: wise men are
mourners for the most part, and it is better to go from tears to joy 'then
from your joy to weeping; labor and sorrow are the twins of sin, borne at
a birth, and our life is an Hermaphrodite consisting of both sexes, pertaking
of both. For to Adam God said, in sudore uultus tui; and adds, manducabis in
labor; Genesis 3.19. and 3.16.
there is sweat and toil and labor for the man: and to the woman he said,
paries in labor, and there is sorrow for the woman; sorrow is her portion;
one of these for them both, if not both these for either one. But if you come
to Prophets and there happen to find Daniell to be vir desideriorum, as the old
translator reads, you shall find that Jeremy is vir dolorum, Dan. 10.11. Ior.
10.19.
a man of sorrow, and crying out vae mihi propter rupturam; Alas and woe is me
for my breach, plag mea dolorifica, my plague is sorrowful; the old translator
says, it is plaga pessima, a superlatiue plague; but yet Jeremy is
courageous, and struggles not impatiently, but resoluedly layer hit to his
shoulder saying, this is dolor meus, my sorrow and I will bear it. And
without doubt this Alas is great, for the day is great, and none has been like
it, and a day and a sorrow that made a sorrowful day, and a day of such a
sorrow as made him say non fuit similis illi, and, non estdolor sicut dolor
meus; that first is in my text, Thren. 1.12.
and this other fitly placed in the Lamentations, spoken also properly of
Ierusalems misery, and by the ancient fathers referred unto Christ. Let this
Alas stand for a great sorrow; yet whether sorrow will or no, sorrow has
this comfort in it, nemo potest valde dolere at que diu, no man can sorrow
much and sorrow long; for nature (says the Philosopher) we say (God) has
made every sorrow, si non breuem, at certe tolerabilem, that is, either a man
shall quickly wear it out, or bear it out.

Let therefore no man wonder, for heavy things are mixed with joyful, in
medicinam says Saint Augustine for physic to the soul; and Saint Gregory
says that exleni^ate and seueritate God does temper salutare poculum the
health-bringing cup. For as before is said, the wisest men are mourners, so
every good man is vir lachrimabilis (...), good men are weeping men and compose
mentem ad lamentum, they order their minds to mourning upon the worlds ruthful
accidents. And it is true that Seneca said, ni ratio finem fecerit fortuna non
faciet. Well, if sound eyes cannot look on sore eyes, but will shed tears,
and be like affected; what heart can joy in such a day, such a time, in such a
word of sorrow? Barbarians have judged it shameful and a fault not then to
sorrow, when if not all, yet best men sorrow, Alas, to sing songs to a heavy
heart, is Nero-like, that plaide on his harp while the City was burning: the
Greek Orator said well (...) wha is out of season is out of reason: if an Ah,
of a sigh or a groan, bends and rends the heart with such a tangit and angit,
what think you of this Oh? this Alas, this Vae, the note for the most part
(says Chrisostom) of damnation eternal; it is at least a vehement sorrow that
turns lumina in flumina, in fontem frontem, eyes into tears, and face into a
fountain: Ier. 9.1.
yea that turns all faces in auruginem palenesse, Ier. 30.6.
as in the verse before, Yea into blacknes blacker then blacknes, Lamentations,
4.8. and Pagnine and Vatablus so translate it. Sad and mournful looks
declare a heavy heart, such is the face of my text, where in the forehead this
Alas is fixed as the sign of sorrow.

So would the Creator that his creature should make his progress like the
noble Patriarchs; I am no better then my fathers, 1. Reg. 19.4.
says good, yet sorrowful Eliah: Oh that we were so good! but look upon
their sorrows, Genesis 4.
and you shall see Adams heart melting for the parricides curse, and mourning
for Abel, whose name signifies mourning; me thinks I see Noah grieuing to
pronounce a curse upon his own son and to see Chams Chanaan accursed from
the father to the son in their posterities. Genesis 9.25.
Look upon Abraham and Isaac Gods friends, wandering up and down like
pilgrims, and settled no where save in God only: and Jacob that is, fons
omnium disciplinarum, as Saint Ambrose calls him, what sorrows did he suffer,
which made him confess his days few and evil? Look upon the Israelites
pursued with Pharaohs host, Genes. 47.9. Exodus 14.28
to pass the sea of blood, by the desert and fiery Serpents to win the
promised land. Go a little further, and see the Prophets, and Christ and his
Apostles, and see how Saint Jerome speaks of them together, An putatis fratres,
quod Prophetae iocando praedicent, ridendo loquantur apostoli, aut Christus
infantiliter comminetur; sed ioci non sunt vbi tormenta intercedunt: Esaias
serra secatur, Daniel leonibus deuorandus exponitur; Petrus in cruce, Dei
exemplo suspenditur. Si iocando sunt passi, credo and iocando suut loquuti. But
we may fear the worlds faith, to be rather a sporting faith then theirs was:
they went the way to the Kingdom, as beautiful Naomi did by Marah, that is
bitterness. The beginning of the Prince of salvation was with a Vae, Alas,
heavy and sad entrance; borne poor, and yet persecuted; driven to fly, and
into Egypt; yet says Chrysostom, persecutor primogeniti fit custos
vnigeniti, let his life go, for it went for us: what did he? Tertullian tells
us the order, that Christus fauos post fella gustauit, after the gall of the
Cross, he was to taste honny combs of glory, and was not saluted of the
heavenly company, ante quam rex Iudeorum proscriptus in cruce; and there
begins his Trophee. Zach. 13. Psalm. 24.7.9.
What means these wounds in thy hands, says the Prophet? And the answer is,
sic percussus sum ab amicis: and David like an Herald went before, proclayming,
Lift up your heads ye gates, and be ye lift up ye everlasting doors, and let
the King of Glory come in. The Cherubims and Seraphims, the heavenly host,
and howsoever else called, to see and hear such a call were amazed, and ask,
Quis est iste rex gloriae? Who is this king of glory? at last they knew him,
it is the Lord of Hoasts, etc. He that first passed from Edom with his garments
so red as in blood; that went by Acheldama, Esaias 63.1. Mat. 26.
and by the cross: so says Saint Bernard, Et tu perge; non est n^iter ad
cellaria regis nisi per torcular crucis: therefore if you will Christum se qui
and consequi, follow Christ and come to Christ, shrug not, nor shrink not, nor
shift not the Cross, nor think to make it last: this Alas will stand no where
so well as in the beginning, assure your selves this Alas will salute you
first: and that for three reasons,

First, to weane us from the world, as Nurses do their children, anointing
their breasts with some bitter thing: so does almighty God, to make us loath
and forbear the worlds sweetness, seasons thy life with sorrows more bitter
then gall, and yet all must be borne, so the end may be sweet: is not short
pain well borne, that brings long ease? peace is most welcome after wa^re, and
haven after stormy seas: aftera sad life glad death, and after combat conquest,
aut cito mors venit aut victoria laeta, said the Poet.

Secondly, that every man's mind might by daily exercises in bearing adversities
be made more manly. Saint Ambrose says Animus stabiliendus est constantia, vt
nullis frangatur molestiis, etc. a good man will not be daunted with any
storms, although like Samson he encounter Giants, or like David wrestles and
fights with Lions and Bears, because he knows how God first makes fit, and
after brings him to the fight.

Thirdly that we might consider Gods judgments and their causes, what they
are, and on whom they fasten, learning thereby to wait for the Lord in vijs
iudiciorum, as Esaias says, who will then turn your Vae into an Aue, Es. 26.8.
your meat of sorrows, as Job calls it, Job 6.7.
into the feast of comforts, your lamentings into reioicings, Apoc. 21.4.
washing the face of sorrows, and wyping away all tears from your eyes?
Therefore the Prophet here to infer the greatness of the grief, in the very
entrance placed the name and note of sorrow, showing hearty and inbred
sorrow; not in labris, but in fibris: a Vae, that is, Alas, not sounded but
with a deep and a heavy groan, a strong and sharp exclamation, confirmed
with a reason; that you should not think he did as wantons do, cry and have
no cause, but he cries out, and brings good reason for it: Alas, For this day
is great, etc.

There have many great days been in former times, Genesis 1.
and amongst them all that dies vnus, which was dies primus, the first day,
when God called the light day, and that was dies dierum; the day before which
there was no day, which verily was dies magnus. Yet that same addition given to
the seventh day, that it should be sanctified dies sanctus, Genesis 2.4.
a holy day, the rest of good and holy souls, the blessed and sanctified day;
that day is dies magnus. And of these Moses speaks with admiration, in die,
qua Deus creauit caelum! and again, in die, qua creauit Deus hominem! in that
day too wherein God created man. Genesis 5.1.
What would Moses have said of the day of the worlds redemption, if he had
lived to it? certainly a greater, and a far better day, nam plus mihi
contulit Deus redimendo, quam creando, says Saint Ambrose; quia creando me
mihi dedit; redimendo, seipsum pro me, and me mihi reddidit: si totum de beo
pro me facto, quid iam reddam pro me refecto? Both the days were glorious
days, the creation and redemption: but yet here the Prophet Jeremy speaks of
another day, that is, of the distress and affliction of this people in the
name of Jacob, and so it was dies magnus. Two words implying two things:

First, Breuity, for that it is but a day, used to express small continuance.

Secondly, Gravity, and weight of sorrow in that word magnus, which implies
sharpenes and the extent of affliction.

Short it is, but for a day, and dies vnus: so when Moses sums up Methushelah
his life, he then numbers (as in Job, vita vnius diei) his life by a day, and
sets one day for his life; but when he gathers particulars to make the total,
then he says, All the days of Methushelah, etc. Genesis 5.
And Jacob to Pharaoh makes mention in one verse once of years, and thrice of
da^es: if this life be short by years, Genesis 47.
it is shorter by days; though Abraham, as the Text says, lived full of
days, yet he and others gave place to nature, Mat. 6.34.
and were not more full dierum then dolorum. The truth has spoken it, sufficit
diei malitia: i. the sorrow or vexation of it: Moses couples labor and dolor
together, Psalm. 90.10.
and such a day was Jacobs day. Why, had not Esau a day too? Yes, the day of my
fathers mourning will be shortly: what then? Genes. 27.41
Why, then have at my brother Jacob. I will kill, says one Text, I will slay
my brother Jacob; kill and slay are terms for Esau. Rebecca hears of it, and
cries, shall I loose both in one day? that is, the younger oppressed, and the
elder accursed; and Jeremy bringes in Rachell crying for her Children: Ier.
13.15.
Rebecca cried because she feared, Rachell wept because they were not. And the
Church our mother Rachel-like sigheth and lamenteth in her Children non carnis
necessitudinm, sed fidei destructionem. Many amongst us are luke warm, and
hasten to death as men stung with Aspes, not feeling their dying and are (...)
without any remorse; and others are striving in their mothers womb unkindly
like Benoni, Children of sorrow, that bring her death for breeding them. If ye
will yet so unnaturally strive, do that which children do, who when they have
bitte and scratcht a while, turn clamores in amores, and are friends again.
The great measurer of times, made Jacobs afliction but a day; and will you
nourish lites immortales immortal hatred? Lactantius says, mortalium vtique
mortalia sunt opera; if you must die, let your contention first be killed. See
the longest and shortest days of the year, the winter and summer, and you
shall find the stormy winter days the shortest, because they are the sharpest.
Apoc. 2.10. Es. 54.7.
All the Churches sorrows are reckoned but ten days, and in Esaias for a moment
in mine anger I have smitten thee; Anger says God, is not in me, if any
appear, you see it is but momentanie.

Days of sorrow have many names in Scripture; Eze. 1.18.
Ezechiel calls them dies pluuiae raynie days. Job 14.6.
Job calls them the days of an hierling: Matthew. 24.
Christ calls them dies tribulationum; and Solomon calls them days of
extremity, Prou. 24.
or days of anguish: and in the book of the Preacher, Eccles. 12.1.7.16.
dies malos, evil days and days of vanity: and the prophets they speak
roughly; Esaias calls them dies interfectionum, Es. 30.25. Esaias 34.8.
days of slaughter, days of revenge and vengeance, days wherein God
exercises his judgments: and Amos calls them days of a Tempest or
Whirlewind: and Obadiah calls them days of desolation, Obad. 1.
days of ruin and destruction; and all meet together to make them days of
lamentation: and yet but a day, that is, a short time, and passing quickly, and
for the affliction of the days, in the end of the world they shall be
shortened, ob nimiam afflictionem, says our Savior. And the last judgment is
called a day, either for the cleerenes, in that all evils now hidden shall then
be manifested: or because the Lord, as Saint Paul says, Romans 9.28.
will make a short sum and abbreuiate quickly: and here this Prophet gathers up
into a sum, all Jacobs trouble into a day, one day, but it is dies magnus, A
great day.

Great! why so? Jer. 30.
for we have heard a horrible noise, the voice of trembling, and not of peace,
of mourning and lamenting, Alas, for this day is great. In comparison, Great,
in this verse dies iste, but in the eight verse n die illo conteram iugum and
vincula, all will fit for us anon: for this distress of Jacob was great, when
a Traitor offered to bind Jacob; but Israel here did bear the yoke, and now
was to be bound in iron bands; so Zedekiah was chained, 2. Reg. 25 7.
and this great shame and misery the prophet aforehand describes, that men
mourned, yea cried out like women in travel, who keep in their cries as long
as they can; at last do what they can, they will break forth: and as in Cities
set on fire by the enemy, some men run up and down, others are amazed and
stand still, some look pale, others whisper, some shrike and cry out; so
stood this people then afflicted, and afflicted in the day of Jacobs trouble;
every where Alas; and the sorrow was great, for this was a Great day: and now
follows the admiration; it was Great, for there was none like it.

No? there was none like it! certainly there was, Exodus 2.
if Jeremy speak of captivity: for what was harder then that of the Egyptian
bondage, infants taken from their mothers breasts, and drowned in Rivers? all
degrees of either sex, oppressed with servile works and scourgings, things
hard and heavy to be borne: yet in Egypt they were bred, and grew miserable
by degrees; But for Majesty and State, suddenly to fall into distress, shows
this (the higher up the sooner down) and honors and pleasures to be very baits
of evil; but under a proud enemy to bear reproach! and to seem reserved for
an evil day; thus dies magnus is become dies malus, in which says God to
Babel, Amos 6.3.
these two things shall happen to thee; Esaias 47.9.
loss of thy children, and widowhood, and both these will make a great
lamenting, as when Josiah was slain, then it was called Hadadimmon, Zach. 11.12.
in the valley of Megiddon: then grew upon Israel the evil day, when their
good Josias was slain, who taking part with a wicked king, lost his life and
honor too; then was Isreal's glory shaken in that day, which Jeremy bewailes in
his Lamentations, there was no sorrow like that sorrow, nor any day like this,
non fuit similis ei.

Yea, but the prophet does not say, Non erit, there shall not be any day like
this, but there has not been; for there shall be a day, in which they
shall-crie and houle; For as of the first day, it was said, there has been
none like it; such is the last day, none shall be like it, Ames 8.9.
as Amos the prophet says, when the sun shall go down at noone, and it did
so in our Saviors passion; and that day of sorrow, of which the Fathers said,
Non erat dolor sicut; is turned into a day of Redemption, of which it is truly
said, non erat similis illi; for of this day Dionysius the Areopagite said, Aut
Deus naturae patitur aut mundi machina dissoluitur: But yet the last day,
Thren. 1.12.
that day which is dies Domini, the day of our Lords coming, the day of
judgment, that is without all comparison, for Daniel says, non fuit similis
ei, Dan. 12.1. Zoph. 1.14.15.
nec erit: and Zophanias the prophet setts it down for a strange day, no
Ephemerides can have the like: Yea our blessed Saniour in the Gospel, Matthew.
24 21.
sets this stamp upon it, Qulis non fuit, neque fiet, First referred to the
Jews euersion and dispersion, and then to that wosull subversion of wicked men
in the day of Christ's coming; which day he forewarnes to come like a thief:
first speedily and suddenly, and afterward, as Saint Paul says, terriblie
with flaming fire, 2. These. 1.7.
rendering vengeance. This day is such a day, that it may truly be said, non
fuit similis ei, nec erit, never was seen such a day, nor besides that ever
shall be.

And now before I come to the Explanation, what Ieremies day is, mark what use
arises out of these three; the exclamation, Alas; the Confirmation, for this
day is great: and the speech of wonder, none has been like it.

First in the text is placed Alas, a Vae, the mark of sorrow in the beginning,
but yet the end is sweet, for there is a liber abitur, or else the soul would
faint, and to the soul it shows, that God has placed in vestibulo
poenitentia^, as Tertullian says, yea bitter repentance, as Anselme calls it,
sit a mara poenitentia indiniduus con es etatis meae, and he that performs it
shall find it, though yet bitter repentance follow sin, after repentance
comes salvation, sorrow first, and joy will follow.

Secondly, many evils and many adversities must be borne, therefore we must
have patience, this repelles the darts of pain, and is a perpetual document
in matters of perplexity, and only patience triumphs over misery.

Thirdly, God sends sorrows for a check, for in an easy life it is easy
to do amiss; therefore sorrows are like strong Porters to shut the gates,
where sins would enter. Sorrow is a medicine and the smart of sin, and
biting, cures whom it corrects, it preuents new dangers with derestation of the
old disease. Avoid therefore thy lives bitter sweets, for all thy worldly
pleasures are but fortunes flatteries, and easy premises to bring thy soul to
hard conclusions.

Fourthly, where Christ and all his Saints have had their Alas and day of
sorrow, and made their way to highest honors through thorny passages; why
then, nudus nudum sequere, nay rather armed with his life and death follow hard
after the price, willing to change this earth for heaven, this life is the very
frosty hardness of al thy happiness and felicity, and death will one day thaw
and dissolve and melt thy vanity.

Fifthly, these sorrows are but short, as Saint Paul says momentany, and leaves
and breues says Athanasius and ideo leaves quia breues; short it is indeed
that is ended in a day; and it is much comfort, when heaviness is but for a
night and joy comes in the morning.

Sixthly, although misery has her increase, and the end of one adversity be
the beginning of another, yet none can be greater then a state and kingdom,
then majesty it self to be cast into misery, as Jacob was in his day: which
may show Potentates thus much, that Kings and kingdoms and famous Cities have
their dying days; and the more happy in liberty is the more wretched in
danger; mariner's call fortune a tempest, and a great fortune is a great
tempest, and there we have need of strength and council too; if therefore
thou have wasted the day in foul weather, provide that at night thou may be
in the haven.

Seventhly, the day is great, and none like it, for though there shall be none
like that day of judgment, yet some will date to desire not diem magnum, but
diem malum, as in Amos, and the very day of Christ with such a face, as if
they would outface the Judge: Thus does sin put on a harlots forehead, and
in her evils is become impudent, that if there were not a day wherein Jacob
should be honored, and every proud Tyrant ouerturned; if death were not
moderator to pull them hence, obtorto collo, as the proucrbe is, there are some
that would live alone, (...), sine rege, sine lege, yea, and sine grege too,
that is, without all humane society. Well, these may have their day, diem
suum; viz. a day of their own making, but when the day shall come, that
sheep and Goats shall be divided, that day shall reform all and turn good
men's fasting into feasting, and right all wrongs; but for the while it is heavy
to bear, it is a day, a day and none like it; tell plainly then, what day
is it?

It is the time of Jacobs trouble:

Time of Jacobs trouble! what is this? Indeed this is the day, this fifth of
August, wherein our Jacob was troubled, and I did but hold you in suspense a
while, it was our own cause, and came very near us, while I spoke of Israel
and that state, according to the verse, iam tua res agitur, etc.

But now I will draw away the veyle, and speak plainly: Great was the Alas,
the signs, and cause of sorrow, a heavy day, and none like it: A king that is
alti sanguinis decus, as Saint Jerome said of Marcella, a King that holds it
nobility, clarum esse virtutibus, as the same father says, qui benig nitate
potius quam seueritate exigit reuerentiam, a king, the glory of these times,
the most noble of all his progenitors; Henricus rosas, regna Iacobus: such a
king to wrestle for life in the gripes of a Traitor; this time was the time of
Jacobs trouble, and in so great a matter, that we may running read, as Abacuc
said, or hearing discern, as Esaias speaks: and to proceed orderly; in these
words I find three things principally to treat of, and they are:

First the person distressed.

Secondly, the name of it, Tribulation.

Thirdly, the continuance, it lasts but for a time.

The person, whose distress Jeremy describes; and the text says, it was
Jacobs: but how can this be Jacobs trouble? Jacobs head now did not ache, for
true it is, Jacob was dead before this time about one thousand five hundred
year; how may it then be Jacobs trouble? The Scripture shows that Jacob is
populus dei, and Saint Jerome says, duodecim tribus intellige; by these
understand the posterity too, for all is but Jacob, because all this people
descended from him.

First therefore it is set for the honor of his name, memoria iusti in
aeternum, Psalm. 112. for Jacob was a sincere hearted man, plain, and of true
dealing, a man very dear to God, as appeared by his story; and God brings
their fathers name to remembrance for his great honor.

Secondly, Jacobs life was an afflicted life, and therefore fitter to have this
word tribulation joined to it; and this prophet is, says Jerome, in verbis
simplex and facilis, in maiestate sensuum prosundissimus, and fits his words
to the person, Jacobs trouble.

Thirdly, Jacob had a special trouble, which never any had in such a kind; and
there must be something in him to answer to his name, Jacob a wrestler, a
supplanter, like one that in wrestling trippes up another heels, a striuer
and a great preuailer, a man that wrestled with God, and held an Angel so
fast, that he would not let him go without a blessing; and in his mothers
womb he was forced to wrestle for his life with rough Esau: and in vtero
there he was too weak, his brother prevailed, and got before him, and was
borne first, but yet Jacob held him by the heel, and thereupon had his name,
for Jacob is calcaneum as Pagnine notes; but ab vtero, then Jacob was the
stronger, and the elder served the younger, non obediendo sed persequendo,
says Saint Aug. he served him many a cruel touch, as the proverb is.

And yet did Jacob wrestle; with excellent wrastlings have I wrastled with my
sister, says Rachell, when she obtained a son, and called him Nephthali,
and, says she, I have prevailed. And so might Jacob say, with excellent
wrastlings have I wrastled, with my brother Esau, and I have prevailed: indeed
excellent wrastlings and for excellent things, for a birthright, and a
blessing too, and he may say, I have prevailed, for he gat them both, and
supplanted his brother Esau. And may not our renowned Iacobus, our sovereign
King, our Patriarch, from whose face shines nothing but grace and mercy; may
not he say with excellent wrestlings, and vehement wrestlings have I wrestled,
with a Traitor hand to hand, foot to foot, with gripe for gripe, and I have
prevailed? Alas, for this day is great, none like it, for it was the time of
our Jacobs trouble. And now I come to that which in order is next, the time
requires it, and I know you expect it: the trouble wherein our sovereign was
in that unnatural Conspiracy of Gowries against his Majesty's life and honor,
against the succesfull happiness of these kingdoms, united in his Majesty's
most royal person, against the now enjoyed joys of every true-hearted
subject, a treason odious to God and men, infamous to the persons, and the
deliverance therefrom, the greatest glory to God that any poor sinners may
ascribe. In which matter these things cannot be omitted, but necessarily be
observed.

First, the Authors and Actors of it.

Secondly, the action it self, namely to kill the king.

Thirdly, the manner of doing it.

Fourthly, the contention or wrestling, with the time it endured.

Lastly, miraculum salutis, the wonder of deliverance. All which show it was a
sad and heavy time. Alas this is a great day, none was like it, it was the
very time of Jacobs trouble: and so can Jacob tell best, how he was affected
when he was worst afflicted.

And now first of the Authors and actors of this saddest (thanks be to God
for it) not Tragedy, that ends with killing of kings: but through Gods mercy a
tragicomedia, for though the beginning be sad, yet it had a joyful end.

I would spare the name for the haynousnesse of the fault, Psalm. 16.4.
with king David's ne memorentur nomina eorum inter labia mea and had rather
hide then blaze a shameful Fact. And yet in the names, this comfort the
innocent of that name may have, that as of others virtues a man may conceive
much joy, but win no glory to himself; so of another fault they may
conceive a grief, but take no shame; for where the fault is, there the
punishment and shame must light.

But truth enforces to express the name of Gowries, and I should prove a
false and faithles servant, to tender more the Offenders names, then they would
tender my Masters life. Gowry, and an Earl, Comes principis, mark how justly
King David's and king James his cause agrees; he says, If it had been thou
mine enemy, that had done me this dishonor, I could well have borne it; and
this saying is referred unto Judas that betrayed Christ, from whom all Traitors
are called Iudasses: from an enemy? I could then have borne it: But it was
thou my Comes, my companion and a familiar friend, Psalm. 55.12.
which did eat at my Table; yea to whom our King had given again his
forfeited estate, and made him and them a Table: that is, enriched, nourished,
benefited, honored them; and a companion, a friend, a Comes to do thus? It is
much, yet it is no new thing. Therefore our Savior would rather be betrayed of
a Disciple, then any other, as S. Ambrose says, voluit deseri, voluit prodi,
voluit ab apostolo tradi, vt tu a socio tuo proditus mode rate feras tuum
errasse iudicium, tuum periisse beneficium: Indeed gifts may be given for
necessity, but love is to be bestowed with judgment. No great hurt is it, yet
grief it is, to confer upon unthankful persons; but benefits turned into
weapons, to rebel against the giver is grief and danger too, as Ignatius
Epistola ad Romanos said he was bound by beasts, qui ex beneficiis peiores
fiunt, that is, the better you use them, the worse they are. But let his
greatness go, and see his confidence: For this Earl having been addicted to
charms and Necromancie, and being slain, had in his pocket a patchment of
magical characters found, which he ever carried with him, as his preservative
from danger: belike thinking himself safer under the devils witchcraft, then
to be guarded with the grace of God. And this was apparent for one effect of
his charms, that though he were thrust through at the very heart, yet he
never bled, but when the Characters were taken away, his blood gusht out
abundantly; a wretched man, a miserable confidence. Yea but to make his Table
the snare, and his own house the slaughter-place, is barbarous and ignoble;
and for any man to turn hospitality into hostility, is monstrous; so Lycaon
would have killed Jupiter, and for false turning, was turned into a Wolf: for
by the laws of humanity all hate should there have ceased; yea that house
should rather have bin a harbor against violence, and a sanctuary especially
for a sacred person, then to make it the prison of so free a king, and the
shambles for Sovereignty: How true is that saying? Jerome. de vita Nalchi.
ouis, quae de ouilibus egreditur, lupi statim morsib. patet, the innocent
mind that thinks no harm, is soonest brought to danger. See if it would not
trouble Jacob to be thus dealt with by a Companion, a Comes principis, by a
person honored with his Majesty's presence, and that any nature should against
the laws of nature there intend his hurt, whom he ought to help, Alas, it was
a great day to fall into such hands, none was like it, it was the time of
JACOBS trouble.

But the desperate Actor was the Earls brother, frater quasi fere alter,
almost another, says Isidorus; nay this Alexander was a brother, that is as
badde and somewhat worse; yea they were brothers indeed, Genes 49.
but fratres in malo, as the Patriarch Jacob said of Simeon and Levy, cursed
be their wrath, for it was fierce, and their rage, for it was cruel: go on
good Patriarch still, and say, into their secret let not my soul come, nor
Jacobs life into their closets. Hilarion the Eremite said of the Devil, Ierom.
in vita eius.
in camelo atque in vulpecula vnus and idem es diabolus. Whether in an Earl,
or whether in a Brother, thou art but one Traitor, yet see how this Fox
carries his tail, I mean the end of his Treason.

First, he speaks so fair with lowly words, and looks, with courtesy
never lower ducking; I should say, with duty down to the ground: A very
Mark of TREASON; so says the Italian proverb, He that uses me better then
he was wont, will me betray: but let the Hebrew prophet speak in his
discovery of a Traitor: He lies in wait secretly, Psalm. 10.7.8.
as a Lion in his Den; this set teth out the elder Brother, for he kept home,
and would not be seen in it; he falls down and humbles himself, to make
the simple fall by his might; and this was the Alexander of this treason, by
guiles and wiles to entrappe a harmless breast, and draw it into danger.

Secondly, in him I observe the proud and scornful heart of a Traitor, that
when he had closed and locked in his Soueraign in a straight room, so
unmindful was he of Majesty, he changed his former fair words into foul
deeds, clapped on his hatte, swearing and staring in the face of his king;
menacing and threatening him, now with hands, and words and bands, whom not long
since he solicited with all duty and mediation, to have been one of his
Majesty's Chamber. It may be a warning to Princes, whom they entertain, and
how they admit of any unhallowed hands to come near where Majesty dwells. Thus
was our most noble Patriarch shut up, and brought into trouble for the time;
the Text says, it was the time of Jacobs trouble.

And well might this be called so, for the action was to kill the king; this
was the end, like the devils quaerens quem deuoret, for destroying is his end.
A subject to kill his king! Si omnia membra corporis in linguas verterentur, to
use Saint Ieromes words, 1. Ioh. 3 15.
how should I speak out this evil? Saint John says, he that hates his
brother, is a Manslayer, and no Manslayer has part in the kingdom of God:
where then shall he be thrown, but like a dog upon a dunghill, that killes
his king; without shall be dogs as in the Revelation, and inchanters, Apoc.
22.15.
and murderers, and who so loves or speaks lies; and this was compassed all
by lying. In Matthew. our Savior says, Matthew. 5.
He that calls his brother (fool) in wrath says Chrysostom. shall be in danger
of hell fire. To kill a man wilfully and desperately, is homicide, 2. Reg. 9.31.
to kill a brother parricide: had Zimri peace which slew Master? shall he have
peace that murders the Lords anointed? Our law does well to make it treason
for a servant to kill his Master, a wife the husband, a Clerk his Prelate or
Superior, or any other such as haueciuil rule and sovereignty over them; and
shall this king-killing trade set up, and now warranted by that Romish
bloodsucker, become no sin but merit? I reremember a witty tale of a fool,
walking far from home (as many fools do) a shrewd fellow of the house met
him, and would have set him home, and scared him much, and iestingly threatened
to kill him: the fool in earnest told his Master; O Master, such a one will
kill me: kill thee says his Master! if he kill thee I Will hang him next day
after. Nay rather (says the fool) hang him a day before, and then I shall be
safe. I wish, I heartily pray, that al such as bear that mind, to drink
innocent blood, sacred blood, the blood of Princes, and of States (if they
convert not) that they might all be hanged a day before they spill it. And that
yet at last his Majesty so well experienced of the malice of that blood-thirsty
generation, would as he has well begun, either utterly banish these Romish
Priests and Jesuits; and if they will not away, but still abuse his mercy, as
they be taken to hang the^ up. We may preach here and else where, till our
hearts ache; but if they may mass it, and reconcile in secret as they do, late
repentance I fear, will overtake the kingdom, and the States great suffrance
may perhaps at last, against their wills, prove good subjects annoyance:
Therefore you Magistrates, I exhort you in the Lord, as you tender the life of
the king, the peace of the state, and the common good, fetch these snakes out
of their holes.

But me thinks I hear some say, we apprehend, we commit them, we do what we
can, and what comes of it? there is nothing done; it is a sore speech this, yet
fulfill you the law, go on in the right way; if they escape still, yet take
those Foxes still, for fear of an evil day: for this I know by much
experience, if there be any fortune in the world, it is the fortune of the
worst men ever to escape punishment; but this kind of Romish spider first weaues
his web in corners, but after will hang up (if first they hang not him) his
work in Kings houses, if they take not heed. Miseri sunt principes, si
intelligant sua mala (said learned Erasmus) miseriores vero si non intelligant.
To warn them of dangers is our office, if we forbear it, who shall do it?
and in these distasteful times, when at many men's hands the truth may hardly
be endured, and wretches presume though not to strike and kill, yet with their
tongues to throw stones at Majesty. Lycophron called Juno (...) that is
invulnerable, Ambros. de. Valentiniano.
not that majesty cannot, but that it ought not to be wounded. To take away an
Emperors life is Soleme mundo tollere to put out the Sun; and to kill our
King is Lucernam Britanniae extinguere, to quench the life and light of
Britanny.

Consider next the manner of this Action. First by devise, by fraud and lies to
draw his credulous soul to danger credulas animas maliioqua lingua dissociat
a false and lying tongue, Ierom. ad Celantian.
disseuers and beguiles the Credulous. Well; he leads the King and misleads
him, locks every door and Aenigmatically says, I warrant you he is safe and
fast enough: well; nay it is very ill, for he shuttes up an armed man there,
then with oaths and bloody threats tells him he must now die, charge his
innocent majesty, with the death of his father, who was judged by their Law
long before, and that in his majesty's minority. Yet is there no remedy, for all
that, it is he must die; then pulles he out that others dagger, and sets it to
his sacred breast, begins to triumph over his Lord, offers to bind his King in
bands; Alas, this day was great, none was like it, this was the time of Jacobs
Trouble.

Now if ever Jacob was a wrastler, he must now wrestle for his life, and so
he did, and by force held him, who by fraud deceived him, and in that strife
was heard to call, and (like that most noble Patriarch that held Esau by the
heel) he supplanted this rough-handed and tough-hearted Traitor.

The Hebrew word (...) signifies anguish: that is, when the soul is in a
strait, it is here expressed tribulation: and this tribulus or tribulum, the
first is a thorn, the other a flaile, that breaks out the corn, both
painful to endure; of the first the prophet David says, conuersus sum in
aerumna, dum configitur spina, where a thorn is fastened in the flesh, it is
an inward and a rankling sorrow: so may our king have said, conuersus sum, and
unless it had been Deus in adiutorium, he might have said Euersus sum. S.
Bernard says Spina malus magistratus, malus Minister, Apostata discipulus,
falsus frater, spina vicinus malus, such badde neighbors had he, but blessed
be the God of Jacob, that suffered not this thorn, vt infigatur, that it
should pierce him; let the fire of the Lord fall among such thorns and consume
them all.

Tribulum is a flaile; and here was Jacob like good corn on the floor, in
area contusus and ab omni humana confidentia ventilatus, threshed in the
floor, and winnowed from all worldly hopes or confidence; granum tritici in
area; nay rather agnus in crucis ara: a Lamb for sacrifice, saving in the
hands of a Butcher, not a Sacrificer. O Jacobs God, and Isreal's guide; the
fiery pillar and the days cloud, if God had not helped now (may Israel now
say) if God had not been (...) the Master of the Combat, and a mighty defense
in that great and evil day, Jacob might say, I should have perished in my
trouble; a great trouble for the time, and it was but a time, as my text
infers.

The time. Solomon says to every work under heaven there is an appointed
time, but amongst all those works he reckons not this time; there should be no
time to assault Majesty, never such a time: Well, then was a time of this
trouble, and it had his time, and here it is called a Day; yet it was a day
almost to night here, ere it could be quieted: But mark this one thing how
God restraines wicked men in their worst evils, constraines fury to yield; and
keeps the Devil in chains, whose malice and mischief may endure but for a
little time; yet the shorter the time is, the sharper is his fury, as Saint
Gregory notes, Quanto minus de tempore angustatur, tanto magis ad crudelitatem
extenditur, and certainly as the devil has a name, Exterminans, that is a
destroyer: so are they to be called that partake of the Devils nature: the
Sybill said of Christ, that when he should come (...), he shall dissolve the
wicked Oracles, and break the violent bands: and this very work of Christ
appeared herein, to dant the heart, and daube up the mouth of cursed oaths, and
parted those hands of bands, rescued his Majesty's life from that sad and
heavy hour, which we had found if he had felt it; so that now it is
certainly a great day; great then in the greatness of the evils (the time of
Jacobs trouble) and now greater in the joy of his Majesty's most happy
deliverance; great trouble, Sed tamen liberabitur, but yet he shall be delivered
from it. And so I come to that which I called Miraculum salutis.

In which I observe these three things:

First, the Author of this deliverance; God only, and how he showed himself
in it:

Secondly, Jacobs virtue, consisting in these two: 1. The innocence of his
heart, which ever carries comfort and defense. 2. Greatness of mind, valor
and magnanimity.


Thirdly, the instruments of Gods mercy, by whom though God do many things
miraculously, yet such is his goodness, and so evident for our sakes, that he
saues by means, and not by miracles.

First, God was the Author of this deliverance; and in it the head of all
mercy is, Ero tecum; and the promise, cum ipso sum in tribulatione, I am with
him in trouble: this being of God with faithful men, is the life of al their
deliverance, their sum of comfort, fons benedictionu^, so S. Ambrose calls
it. It was said of Joseph the Lord was with him, and made all things to prosper
in his hands, four times in one chapter, erat Dominus cum Joseph, and being
shut up in the prison, the Lord was with him: he is every where, per essentiam,
says Saint Aug. but with his servants he is specially, with them per
habitationis gratiam. In Exodus the Lord comforts Moses: Exodus 3.12.
certainly I will be with thee, and to Iosuah. the Lord speaks; fear not
Joshua, be strong and of good courage, Jos. 1.
there shall not a man be able to withstand thee all the days of thy life; as
I was with Moses, so will I be with thee. And when Judah should go up to war,
Iud. 1.
Dominus erat cum Judah; if a man can get the Lord his God with him, he is safe
enough, though he be enclosed with walls and locks, and bars, because God is
extra omnia, August.
sed non exclusus: intra omnia, sed non inclusus, without, yet not excluded,
within, and not shut up; and so it appeared by his mercy in this day. Solomon
therefore prays, 1. Reg. 8.57.
that God would he with him as he was with their fathers; that he leave them
not, nor forsake them. And it is an excellent prayer for the young Prince, if
ever he should be in any strait, as his father was (which God forbid) he might
pray that God would be with him, as he was with his father in the day of his
trouble, and in the very hour of tentation to deliver him:

But how was God with their fathers? invisibiliter, ineffabiliter,
admirabiliter, How thus? for he works and is not seen: he stirred up the
spirit of Jacob, and strengthened him, as David said, Psalm. 8.
mine arms shall break a Bow of steel: inuisibly he wrought in that others
heart, that was placed there to kill him, that at the sight of the king his
heart failed, his tongue faultred, his hands shook, all his body tremble, and
had neither heart or any power to hurt, to help perhaps, but not able to hurt:
Is not this to stop the Lions mouths? he wrought inuisibly in the heart of
that desperate Alexander Ruthwen, the Earls brother, that was at first as
fierce as a Tiger or a Bear, that the words of his Majesty made him relent,
and consider and respite till he might talk with the Earl his brother; but
after that, came again, bloodily resolved to be imbrewde; yet then God was
with him, as with the Patriarch Jacob in Egypt, that iron sorrow; and as he
was with Jonas in the Whales belly, and kept him from consuming. But if you
ask me, how was he with him? I can but say ineffabiliter, I cannot tell how to
utter it: Nay more, he was with him admirabiliter; How Is that? a present help
in trouble, at every stabbe, at every gripe, at every assault a rock of stone,
a refuge, a defense, and therefore blessed be the God of Jacob for ever, and
blessed be he that has the God of Jacob for his help, and whose hope is in
the Lord his God, which only does great things, and he is wonderful among
the kings of the earth, and so he was with our king in this day.

Secondly, I noted the kings virtue in this conflict; the first is innocence,
which every where carries with it comfort and defense. It was a noble speech of
Alphonsus king of Arragon, being advised to take some care of his person,
where, and how he walked privately, answered, Satis munitus est, qui bonam
habet conscientiam; yea this is a good armor for the soul, yet sometime the
body wants it; a good conscience is a continual feast indeed, and nothing can
keep in true peace your conscience, but your innocence.

Another virtue was the magnanimity of Jacob, which is certainly a virtue
royal, and suffers not the mind to be daunted with any adversities; no fears,
no rumors nor evil tidings, shall make him quake, Psalm, 112.
who stands in the Lord; and this is such a virtue as has been annexed to
the Crown, that kings should be magnanimous; Solomon fetches an argument of
mercy from Gods omnipotency, misereris omnium qui omnia potes, thou have mercy
on all, because thou art Almighty, and noble Kings are called (...), not so
much for bounty as for mercy Saint Ambrose says procul abest a magnanimis
cupiditas vltionis, valiant natures never revenge: it is for wolves and Bears,
for cowards to be cruel, and quaecunque minor nobilitate fera est, says the
Poet. As God therefore prepared David with Lions and Bears, and then brought
him forth against the Philistim; and armed Job, giving him as one says (...) a
Patriarchicall soul, Origin.
constant and valiant to endure al sorrow that might come; so did the almighty
bless our holy King, with a speech, Spirit, wisdom, strength and courage, to
resist his enemy, and Jacob like, to wrestle for the blessing which now his
eyes do see and we enjoy.

The third thing is the means which God used for his Majesty's Deliverance,
for though God does many things miraculously, yet makes he not a man, to fly
out of a casement like a bird, but orders by high providence, things below,
and men and means, in the very extremity he directs, where the danger is.
That close by the windows, his ownse uants should pass where his Majesty was
striving; they heard his call, went up and found their Lord in the graspe of a
Traitor, but the Traitor ouer-grasped that he could not hurt. By a noble
servant of his were first the very wreathes of this Serpent untwined; this
Alexander of mischief turned out to his cursed but deserved end; that as he
showed no mercy; so perishing he called for none from God, in whose hand only
mercy was. Euripides says (...) al men may know the calamities of Kings and
Princes. For yet all Jacobs Trouble was not over past. But now the old
serpent, with seven other spirits as ill as himself, came up to the place
armed, assaulting his Majesty's. four defendants where with much strife and
doubtful victory, at last it pleased God, to send the Earl his hire, and the
rest vanquished to be thrown down headlong. W^ll said Ignatius ad
Magnesianos Nemo multus nemansit: qui se contra potiores extulit, his Majesty
now, had a little breathing given him, and like a religious and holy King upon
his knees in the flore, where his enemy lay dead before him, gave hearty
thanks to God for so great a mercy. And this; and thus, was the time of Jacobs
Trouble. Trouble? yea, But he shall be delivered from it, says God, and here
he performed it; and hitherto as the day requires, I have showed the trouble
which concerned Jacob.

The consolation of Jacob is in these words, Sed tamen liberabitur,
Unspeakable is the joy of deliverance, Exodus 15.1.
it so opens the heart, and makes them sing that find it. And so did the
Israelites sing, Moses and the men, and Miriam and the women with Timbrels,
quia fecit Dominus magnifice, the Lord has triumphed gloriously, he saved
them, and destroyed their enemies, fecit magnifice, Jud 5.
he did valiantly: and Deborah made a song, when God delivered Israel from the
hand of Sisera Captain of the Host of Iabin, king of Canaan; and it is for a
glorious victory, a most noble song: thus the Psalms of David were most of
them composed, and are thankesgiuings unto God: How did the three children sing
in the flaming Furnace? and Jonas pray and praise God delivered from the whale?
Ion. 2.
what heart can express the joy of the Jews delivered from Haman? not one but
all to be destroyed, and how mercifully God did turn the destruction upon the
destroiers, as he did in this day: by these you may see, what joy comes with
this Liberabitur.

It is like Gods Angel that comforted Saint Paul, and bad him not to fear,
but be bold, the Lord shall stand by thee: or like the Angels touch, that made
all S. Peter's chains fall off at once: And I say that any that has known the
worlds malice, the depth of Satan, the rage of his Helhounds, may say with the
holy prophet David, I was in wosull misery, and he delivered me: what is he
in his life, to whom deliverance, at one time or other, has not been sweet?

But this word (...) is a future time, a promise, He shall be delivered, verbum
dulce super mel and fauum, says Saint Bernard, yea but when? quando
duplicantur lateres tunc venit Moses, not now, nor yet, but in the time of his
trouble: So in the Psalm, Jnuoca me in die tribulationis and ego liberabo te,
in the time of thy trouble, in thy greatest anguish and extremity, for then God
shows himself like Christ, who slept til his Disciples were almost drowned,
and then rebukes, etc. and suspends his mercy to take thee out like Peter, when
he was sinking, he cried then, and Christ then presently rescued him. When
there is but a step between thee and death, then God delivers, then is his
time.

And this does comfort much to think that we have God a looker on, and
beholder; yea a Master and a Moderator in the matter, that things are governed,
not by Fate and Constellations, but by heavenly Providence, which slumbers not.

Yet Jacob must have patience, to tarry Gods leisure; there is no appointing
his wisdom the time, Judith. 8.16.
as Judith notably said to the Elders of Bethulia, who were content to tarry
five days; says she, What? will ye bind his Council, Abac. 2.
or set the Lord a time? nay rather as Abacuc advises; if the vision come not,
tarry thou, if it speak not, yet wait; for it shall speak in his appointed
time, and the Lord will humble flesh and blood, and defer his comforts to
make them sweeter, Si differt Deus sua dona, commendat non negat, says Angush.
and S. Bernard says, delicata est diuina consobatio, and non datur
admittentibus alienam, it is a sweet mercy to be delivered, and he that will
have it, must only look to God, and in this patience and hopeful expecting
must every good man possess his soul.

Secondly, Jacob must then hope most, where his reason is least and this is a
faithful man's part; for what reason had Abraham to hope for Isaac at those
years? If as Saint Paul says, Romans 4.
he had not believed and hoped, without fixing his heart upon reason: or David
ever to have worn the Crown, if he had bent to reason: And what reason had
Jacob in this day to hope, but that faith like Deborabs soul, marches
valiantly and endures like Moses, Hebr. 11.
as seeing him which is invisible.

The third thing which I noted in this (liberabitur) is, That Jacob must not
be weake-handed nor faint-hearted, to droup and cast away his confidence, but
valiant and courageous, and so expect the promise: for this cause did the
Angel say to Gedeon, go in this thy might thou valiant man. Kings and Princes
be called Saviors, but yet such as need salvation, and they that save others,
the Lord will save them: But if there be any king, or noble, or Judge, or
Prelate, or potentate, that abuses his power, and will not save such as are
oppressed, the Lord will leave such in their enemies hands; and as they have no
care to comfort others: so GOD in their times of trouble shall leave them
comfortless, and this shall be their just portion. These kind of men are
endued with a more noble spirit, not for their own sakes so much as for
others: David had a heart like a lion, Sampson rends a lion in pieces, and
after saues his people; and that people of Israel, not only in their Rulers
had a blessing of mighty and valiant men, but in inferiors also, to show that
from GOD comes also the outward Ornaments of Nobility, and they are
certainly most Noble, that are most Faithful, and they most valiant that are
most virtuous.

The first Jacob that ever was, faieth, Genesis 31.40.
I endured, etc. and then reckons his sorrows; and the last, and all must
endure till they receive the promise: Job 36.5.
for Job that suffered heavy things was told by Elihu, that the mighty God
casts away none that is mighty and valiant of courage.

The second thing is to show, what is employed in this word JACOB; and this
will make up the application, and shows:

First, That Jacob the Patriarchs life was a very troublesome life, full of
difficulty, danger, distress; hearts grief amongst his children, and yet
GOD made a sweet and blessed end with him, and delivered him from all, sent
him down into Egypt, yea went with him, Genesis 46.4.
Descendam tecum in Aegyptum, there he saw Joseph his fruit full bough, there
he blessed his sons, there he died and gave commandment of his bones, that
is, prophesying their liberahitur, israel shall be delivered.

But here Jacob stands for a whole people, to whom Jeremy for their sin
threatens Captivity and makes a description of a said and ruth full day,
wherein they shall look with gaslly and amazed looks one upon another, pale
faced and heavy hearted, when this day shall come, a great day, a day of
sorrow, the day of wretchedness and misery, never day like it; a people
settled in a glorious state, thought never to be removed, but they shall have
their day, and so had Jerusalem in Christ's time her day. O sicognouisses, etc.
and that day was her day, and time of trouble.

Let us look upon our selves; we stand now, we may fall, we are at peace,
but there can be no security, iron and clay legs will not, nor can not bear up
the biazen thighs, the golden lead, and silver body; the bribery and prowling,
the oppression and cries of the oppressed, the parking in of beasts, and
depopulating Towns, to shut out Christians, the neglect of justice, the death
of godly zeal, the contempt of laws, and all good order, will bring a day of
trouble upon Jacob, that is upon this kingdom, which God yet withholdes in
great mercy, to make Jacob and every Jacob to bethink themselves, and not to
melt away in worldly pleasures: for this is true, they that bath themselves in
pleasure and in worldly joy, it makes the manliest heart to melt away; and I
have heard it, and read it often, and in my life have seen it, that there are
many have been worthy men, that have put on virtue with their Armor, and
vices with their gown, that is in exercise and sorrow and acuersity, in
distress, in action and arms have been very vigilant and valiant; but
coming to peace and ease and lulled in pleasures lap, have fallen a sleep if
not swounded, yea they have grievously fallen, if not fallen quite away.

Jacob yet is more particular, and here may stand for any faithful soul,
which shall have her time of trouble, that is of adversity and tentation:
therefore he must look first he be a Jacob, that is an innocent and
harmless man, and then to look for his oppression and trouble; Syrac. 2.1.
for as Syracides said, My son have thou entered into the feate of the Lord,
prepare thy soul to tentation? and the instance is notable in the person of
Christ, that though he were persecuted by Herod while he was an infant, yet
was he not tempted till after Baptism: to show that so soon as we give our
names to God and take up our holy life, then comes the sorrow and persecution
for righteousness; and if he have care to serve God and sever himself from
the profane fashion of this world, he is derided and scorned, as Noah was
when the Arc was a making; traduced by odious and disgraceful names, and
laden with infinite injuries, as if he were a mark for all the Devils
arrows. Yet Jacob must have patience, and in all this, address himself to
God, not shrinking in these adversities and wrestlings, no more then that holy
Patriarch did, Genesis 32.31.
who overcame and prevailed with the Angel, though he went away halting; we
shall have from the world a touch of sorrow to carry to our graves, but there
it should be buried, and that which shall follow is comfort everlasting.

And now as this day and time admonishes in this Jacobs trouble, I find a more
excellent person, to which it is applied, that is to our very Nathanaell i.
the gift of God, his sacred Majesty, who may take up Isreal's complaint in a
song of degrees, for the degrees of his sorrow, that oftentimes from his youth
up, he was afflicted may Israel now say, Psalm. 129.1.
and the plowers plowed on his back, and made long furrows, that in a great and
noble kingdom, from a year old to this day, is by God vpholde^, and was
preserved from dangers, though not freed from troubles; for cares infinite are
wrapped up in the crowns of princes, and they are more noble then happy, and
many troubles atte^d upon their persons, because as in Esaias the key of
government hangs upon their shoulder: and like the Master-pilot guids the
ship of the Commonwealth, sitting at the stern in every storm; so that the
troubles of a careful Prince are more then the labors of any common subject;
and the dangers of the head, more then of all the body. Let us then that are
but legs and hands or other parts, labor to support this Jacob, not trouble
Jacob, but as much as we may free him from troubles; I mean from grief and
sorrows; for it cannot be but the head will ache if the body be distempered: and
the good and careful head will watch, and hear, and see, and search, and find
out, and remedy all that may offend, and hurt the body, or else the head is
not a head of care, but a drowzie and a sleepie part; which if it do but
slumber, troubles are then sent both to awake the Pilot and the Mariners; for
in the head you see the members are united, Jacob for Israel, that is the
whole people; Jacob for every faithful man, Jacob for the Prince of Jacob; in
every of these is seen a day of trouble. Sed tamen, But yet; that is, I the
God of Jacob in despite of them al, I will deliver him. And this shows Gods
own opposing himself against all the troubles and troublers of Jacob. Wherein
I will instance in two most famous particulars, and set before your eyes the
mercies of God to this kingdom, in the days of our late most noble Queen
Elizabeth, worthy of al our memories, under whom you have been bred, nursed
and brought up: and the happy and most joyful succession of our so Noble a
king, under whom we are still so godly, so lovingly and so peaceably governed:
That this day we may remember with all possible thanks to God, both their
miraculous preseruations with a Sed tamen, that is, in despite of all their
enemies.

Elizabeth the glory of her Sex while she lived, and the honor of it being
dead; a name signifying the oath of God, as if God had sworn to be merciful
to England in the days of Elizabeth. Many and great were her troubles, and yet
delivered out of all. Let go the famous acts she did; her succor of
afflicted strangers, relief of distressed states, power to settle with peace,
and to suppress by force, honor at home and fame abroad; I say, let these
pass. But her deliverance from Conspitacies and bloody Treasons, so many and
so wonderful, are to us certain Demonstrations of Gods mercy; that the
gospel of Christ which we profess, was at the first miraculously planted and
established, and ever since has been most miraculously preserved and
continued. Notwithstanding all Romish oppositions, which so frequent and
desperate plainly show, that our Church has by them been persecuted, the
Gospel intended to be suppressed, the glory of our State purposed to be
supplanted, the life and honor of so noble a Queen so cruelly pursued: and
yet I say, notwithstanding all that ever they could do, in despite of all
Traitors (not worthy to be named) she was with her peoples peace, her State
and honor, to the end of her life miraculously preserved, and the Gospel
lives; and being dead, she lives in their hearts that love the gospel.

But now to see GODS goodness still, in preparing to this kingdom a king of
whom I would say much, but that as Saint Jerome said, vereor ne damnum illius
laudibus me a faceret verecundia, and preparing such a king for such a
kingdom, A king of Justice, a king of peace, whose receiving was with such joy
and general applause, as I think, never happened in any nation: whose care of
the afflicted and oppressed Israel, which by many testimonies has so clearly
appeared, shall plead with God, and he shall remember it in the evil day, and
when his soul is troubled, the Lord shall stand by him, and save him alive;
and the backs and sides of the poor relieved shall bless him, the prayers,
cries, and tears of his people shall pray for him, and they shall say;
Deliver Jacob Lord out of all his troubles.

And has not GOD delivered him in this fifth day of August, as you have heard
before, and since his Majesty's coming to this kingdom from other foul and
traiterous attempts.

But above all, from that same Salt- Peter Treason, or Peter's salt Treason of
Rome. I know Saint Peter the Apostle never seasoned his meat nor manners with
this kind of salt: I say a Treason without all reason, a treason sine nomine
without a name, as Saint Jerome notes of the face of the fourth Monarch, the
first a Lion, the second a Bear, the third a Leopard, the fourth terribilis
valde, but sine nomine, quia crudelitas eius erat sine modo; such was this, a
Treason which never any age may forget: and I think so horrible as scarce
posterity can believe, that ever any vipers bred in any Country, would so
bloudily betray their sovereign Lord, him and his, All the Orders and States
of a kingdom, and kingdom and all: such a treason, so conceived, conspired,
contrived, and so concealed to a point of time, and then so mercifully
discovered, tell me what God is there to the God of Jacob, and who so great,
yea add this, and who so good a God as Englands God? let Rome if she please,
boast of her miracles, and her rash, and Garnets straw, all not worth a straw,
we will rejoice in the name of our God, and make our boast of him, that has
delivered us from so great a death and will deliver; has planted the gospel,
and no power can supplant it; has peseru'd our state, and still preserues it;
has confirmed his mercy to us, by his word continued it, in the hopeful
succession of Princes has saved our king out of the hands of all his enemies,
and will save him from the evil day, from the sorrowful Alas, from the great
days of trouble, from open and privy enemies, from all that bear evil will at
Jacob: and the Lord is faithful, and has promised (Sed tamen) that is, let
them do what they can, in despite of them all, he is yet, and yet he shall be
delivered. Which since our eyes have seen, and our ears have now heard the
mercies of the Lord unto our king, and us in this his day of mercy: Let us
ever pray that God would continue them still; and let our hearts joyfully give
thanks, and for these blessings ever ascribe to God our heavenly father, to
Jesus Christ his son, our blessed Lord and only Savior, and to the holy
spirit our true and eternal Comforter, three persons and one God, All glory,
honor, praise and power, this day and for evermore. Amen.

FINIS.

