A Fair Quarrel.

With new Additions of Mr. Chaughs and Trimtrams Roaring, and the Bauds Song.
Never before Printed.

As it was Acted before the King, by the Prince his Highness Servants.

Written by Thomas Midleton, and William Rowley. Gent.




Printed at London for I. T. and are to be sold at Christ Church Gate. 1617.

TO THE NOBLY DISposed, virtuous, and faithfull-brested Robert Gray Esquire,
one of the Grooms of his Highness Bedchamber, his poor Well-willer, wishes
his best wishes. Hic es Supra.
Worthy Sir,
It Is but a Play, and a Play is but a Butt, against which many shoot many
Arrows of Envy, it is the weaker Part, and how much more noble shall it be in
you to defend it, yet if it be (as some Philosophers have left behind'um) that
this Megac^sme, this great world, is no more then a Stage, where every one must
act his part, you shall of necessity have many parttakers, some long, some
short, some indifferent, all some, whilst indeed the Players themselves have
the least part of it, for I know few that have lands, (which are a part of the
World) and therefore no grounded men, but how soever they serve for mutes,
happily they must wear good clothes for attendance, yet all have exits and
must all be stripped in the Tyring-house ( viz, the grave) for none must carry
anything out of the stock, you see Sir, I write as I speak, and I speak as I
am, and that's excuse enough for me. I did not mean to write an Epistle of
praise to you, it looks so like a thing, (I know) you love not Flattery, which
you exceedingly hate actiuely, and vnpleasingly accept passiuely: indeed I
meant to tell you your own, that is, that this child of the Muses is yours,
who ever begat it, it is laid to your charge and (for ought I know) you must
father and keep it too, if it please you, I hope you shall not be ashamed of
it neither for it has been seen (though I say it) in good companies, and many
have said it is a handsome pretty spoken infant, now be your own judge, at
your leisure look on it, at your pleasure laugh at it, and if you be sorry it
is no better you may be glad it is no bigger.

Yours ever. William Rowley.


A Fair Quarrel.
Actus primus, Scaena prima.
Enter Master Russell Solus. Russell: IT must be all my ear; there is all my
love,
And that pulls on the the other, had I been left
In a son behind me, while I had been here
He should have shifted as I did before him;
Lived on the freeborne portion of his wit:
But a daughter, and that an only one, oh*
We cannot be to careful ore, to tender,
It Is such a brittle nicenes: a mere cubbord of glasses,
The least shake breaks, or crakes em; all my aim is
To cast her upon riches: that's the thing
We richmen call perfection, for the world
Can perfect naught without it, it is not neatness
Either in handsome wit; or handsome outside
With which one gentleman (far indebt) has courted her
Which boldness he shall rue. He thinks me blind,
And ignorant, I have let him play along time,
Seemed to believe his worth; which I know nothing.
He may perhaps laugh at my easy confidence
Which closely I requite upon his fondness.
For this hour, snaps him; and before his Mistress
His Saint forsooth, which he inscribes my girl,
He shall be rudely taken and disgract,
The trick will prove an everlasting Scarcrow,
To fright poor gallants from our rich-mens daughters,
Enter the Lady Ager, with two servants. Sister? Iue such a joy to make you a
well-come of,
Better you never tasted.

Lady, Good sir spare it not,

Russ. Colonells come, and your son Captain Ager;

Lady. My son! -- she weeps:

Russ. I know your eye would be first served,
That's the souls taster still for grief, or joy,

Lady. Oh if a mothers dear suit may prevail with him,
From England; he shall never partagen,

Russ. No question he will be ruld, and grant you that,

Lady. I Will bring all my desires to that request.

Exeunt Lady and her Servants. Russ. Affectionate sister, she has no daughter
now
It follows all the love must come to him,
And he has a worth deserves it, were it dearer.

Enter a friend of the Colonells, and another of Captain Agers. Colo. Frien. I
must not give way to it,

Russ. What Is here to question,

Col. Fry. Compare young Captain Ager, with the Colonel,

Cap. Fri. Young? why, do you make youth stand for an imputation: that which
you now produce for his disgrace,
Infers his noblenes, that being young
Should have an anger more enclind to courage
And moderation then the Colonel:
A virtue as rare as chastety in youth.
And let the cause be good; (conscience in him
Which ever crowns his acts, and is indeed,
Valors prosperity) he dares then as much,
As ever mad him famous that you plead for;

Col: Frien. Then I forbear to long.

Cap: Frien. His worth for me.

Russ. Here Is noble youths, belike some wench has croft'em, and now they know
not what to do with their blood.


Enter the Colonel and Captain Agar. Colo. How now!

Cap. Hold, hold, what is the incitement,

Colo. So serious at your game, come, come, the quarrel,

Colo. fry. Nothing good faith sir.

Colo. Nothing, and you bleed,

Col. fri. Bleed, where, pish, a little scratch by chance sir,

Col: What need this nicenes, when you know so well
That I must know these things, and truly know 'em,
Your daintines makes me but more impatient,
This strange concealment frets me.

Col. fri. Words did pass
Which I was bound to answer, as my opinion
And love instructed me, and should I take in general fame,
Into 'em, I think I should commit no error in it,

Colo. What words sir, and of whom,

Col. fri. This gentleman.
Paralelld Captain Agers worth with yours,

Colo. With mine.

Col. fai. It was a thing I could nor listen to
With any patience.

Capt. What should aile you sir,
There was little wrong done to your friend i'that,

Colo. How^ little wrong, to me,

Capt. I said so, friend.
And I suppose that you will esteem it so;

Colo. Compatisons?

Capt. Why sis? twixt friend, and friend,
There is so even and level a degree
It will admit of no superlatiue.

Col: Not in terms of manhood?

Russ. Nay gentlemen,

Col. Good sir give me leave, in terms of manhood?
What can you dispute more questionable*
You are a captain sir, I give you all your due,

Cap. And you are a Colonel, a title
Which may include within it many captains,
Yet sir, but throwing by those titular shaddows,
Which ad ne substance to the men themselves;
And take them uncompounded, man and man;
They may be so with fair equallity,

Colo. You Are a boy sir,

Cap. And you have a Beard sir.
Virginity and marriage are both worthy,
And the positive purity there are some
Have made the nobler.

Colo. How now?

Russ. Nay good sir,

Cap. I shrink not, he that goes the foremost,
May be oretaken.

Colo: Death, how am I weighd?

Cap. In an even balance sir, a beard put in
Gives but a small advantage: man and man
And lift the scales,

Colo. Patience shall be my curse
If it tide me further;

Russ. How now Gallants?
Believe me then, I must give aim no longer,
Can words beget swords and bring um forth, ha?
Come they are abortiue propagations;
Hide 'um for shame, I had thought Soldiers
Had bin musical; would not strike out of time,
But to the consort of Drum, Trumps and Fife.
It Is madman-like to dance without music.
And most unpleasing shows to the beholders,
A Lydian ditty to a Dorick note
Friends embrace with steel hands? fie, it meets to hard,
I must have those encounters here debarred,

Colo. Shall I loose here what I have safe broughthome
Through many dangers?

Capt. What Is that sir?

Colo. My fame,
Life of the life, my reputation,
Death? I am squared and measured out, my heights
Depths, breadth, all my dimensions taken,
Sure I have yet beyond your Astralobe
A spirit unbounded;

Cap. Sir, you might weigh,

Russ. Tush, all this is weighing fire, vain and fruitles,
The further it runs into argument
The further plunged, beseech you no more on it,
I have a little claim, sir, in your blood
As near as the brother to your mother,
If that may serve for power to move your quiet
The rest I shall make up with courtesy
And an Uncles love.

Cap. I have done sir, but

Russ. But! I Will have no more shooting at these buts,

Colo: We Will to pricks, when he please,

Russ. You roue all still
Sir, I have no motive proof to digest
Your raisd choler ba^k into temperate blood,
But if you will make mine age a counselor
(As all ages have hitherto allowed it)
Wisdom in men grows up as years increase,
You shall make me blessed in making peace,
And do your judgment right,

Colo. In peace at home
Gray hayres are Senators: but to determine
Soldiers and their actions;

Enter Fitzallen and Jane. Russ. It Is peace here sir,
And see, here comes a happy Interim,
Here enters now a Scene of loving arms;
This couple will not quarrel so;

Colo. Fri. Be aduisd Sir,
This gentleman Fitzallen is your kinsman,
You may'orethrow his long labord fortunes
With one angry minut, it is a rich churl
And this his sole inheritrix, blast not
His hopes with this tempest,

Colo. It shall calm me,
All the towns coniurers and their Demons
Could not have laid my spirit so,

Fitz. Worthy Cuz
I gratulate your fair return to peace
Your swift fame was at home long before you;

Colo It meets (I hope) your hapy fortunes here
And I am glad int, I must salute your joys, cuz,
With a soulders encounter Kisses her.

Fitz. Worthy Captain Ager,
I hope my kinsman shortly, --

Russ. You must come short indeed,
Or the length of my devise will be ill shrunk,
Why now it shows finely, I Will tell you, sir,
Sir, nay son, I know in the end, twill be so,

Fitz. I hope so, sir,

Russ. Hope? nay it is past all hope, son,
Here has been such a stormy encounter,
Betwixt my cozen Captain and this brave Colonel
About I know not what, nothing indeed,
Competitions, degrees and comparatiues
Of Soldiership: but this smooth passage
Of love has calmed it all, come I Will hau't found,
Let me see your hearts combined in your hands,
And then I will believe the league is good,
It shall be the grapes if we drink any blood.

Colo. I have no anger sir,

Capt. I have had none,
My blood has not yet rose to a quarrel,
Nor have you had cause,

Colo. No cause of quarrel?
death? if my father should tell me so:

Russ. again?

Fitz. Good sir, for my sake,

Colo. Faith, I have done, Cuz,
You do too hastily believe mine anger,
And yet to say, deminiting valor
In a soldier is no cause of quarrel.

Russ. Nay then I Will remove the cause to kill the effect,
Kinsman, I Will press you to it, if either love
Or consanguinity may move you to it,
I must disarme you, though year a soldier,
Pray grant me your weapon, it shall be safe
At your regresse from my house, now I know
No words can move this noble soldiers sword
To a man vndefenc't so, we shall parle,
And safely make all perfect friends again,

Colo. To show my will sir, accept mine to you,
As good not wear it as not dare to use it.

Colo friend. Nay then sir, we will be all exampled.
We Will have no Arms here now but lovers arms.

Capt. friend. No seconds must begin a quarrel,
Take mine sir.

Russ. Why Law, what a fine Sun shines here? these
clouds my breath has blown into another Climate,
I Will be your armourers, they are not paun'd,
These were the fish that I did angle for,
I have caught 'vm finely, now for my trick,
My proiect's lusty, and will hit the nick. Exit with weapons.

Colo. What is it a match beauty? I would now have,
Aliance with my worthy Captain Ager,
To knit our loves the faster; heeres witness
Enough if you confirm it now.

Jane. Sir my voice,
Was long since given, since that I gave my hand,

Colo. Would you had sealed too,

Jane. That wish comes too late,
For I too soon fear my delivery: ( aside.)
My fathers hand sticks yet sir, you may now
Challenge a lawful interest in his,
He took your hand from your enraged blood,
And gave it freely to your opposite
My Cozen Ager, me thinks you should claim from him,
In the less quality of calmer blood,
To join the hands of two divided friends,
Even these two that would offer willingly
Their own embrace.

Capt. friend. Troth, she instructs you well
Colonel: and you shall do a lovers part
worth one brave act of valor.

Colo. Why, I did
misdoubt no scruple, is there doubt in it?

Fitz. Faith sir, delays, which at the least are doubts,
But heeres a constant resolution fixed,
Which we wish willingly he would accord to,

Colo. Tush he shall do it, I will not be denied,
He owes me so much in the recompense
of my reconcilement, Captain Ager
You will take our parts aganst your uncle
In this quarrel?

Ager. I shall do my best, sir,
Two denialls shall not repulse me, I love
Your worthy kinsman and wish him mine, I know
He doubts it not.

Colo. See, he is returned.

Enter Russell and a Servant. Russ. Your qu.
Be sure you keep it, 'twill be spoken quickly.
Therefore watch it.

Colo. Lets set on him all at once.

Omnes, Sir, we have a suit to you.

Russ. What! all at once.

Omnes. All, all, i faith, sir.

Russ. On speaker may yet deliver, say, say,
I shall not dare to stand out against so many,

Colo. Faith sir heeres a brabling matter hangs on demurre,
I make the motion for all, without a fee
Pray you let it be ended this term,

Russ. Ha, ha, ha.
That's the rascals qu, and he has mist it. a side.
What is it? what is it sir?

Colo. Why sir, here is a man;
And here is a woman; you are scholar good enough,
Put 'am together; and tell me what it spells,

Russ. Ha, ha, ha, there is his qu once again,
Enter Servant. Oh he is come, humh:

Seru. My master laughes, that is his qu to mischief,

Col. What say you, sir

Seru. Sir.

Russ. Ha? what say you sir?

Seru. Sir, there is a couple desire speedily to speak with you.

Russ. A couple sir, of what, hounds, or horses?

Seru. Men sir, gentlemen or yeomen, I know not which;
But the one sure they are

Russ. Have thou no other description of them.

Seru. They come with commission, they say, sir to
taste of your earth: if they like it, they will turn it into gunpouder.

Russ. Oh, they are Salt-peetermen, before me
And they bring commission: the kings power indeed,
They must have entrance, but the knaves will be bribed,
There Is all the hope we have in Officers,
They were too dangerous in a common wealth,
But that they will be very, well corrupted, necessary varlets,

Seru: Shall I enter in sir?

Russ. By all fair means sir.
And with all speed sir give vm very good words,
To save my ground vnrauisht, unbroke up,
Mines yet a virgin earth: the worm has not been seen,
To wriggle in her chaste bowels: and I Would be loath
A Gunpowder fellow should defloure her now.

Colo. Our suit is yet delayed by this means sir,

Russ. Alas I cannot help it, these fellows gone
(As I hope I shall dispatch vm quickly)
A few Articles shall conclude your suite,
Who? Mr. Fitzallen: the only man
That my adoption aims at.

Colo. There Is good hope then.

Enter two Sergeants in disguise. 1. Ser. Save you, sir,

Russ. You are welcome sir for ought I know yet,

2. Ser. We come to take a view and taste of your ground, sir,

Russ. I had rather feed you with better meat, Gentlemen,
But do your pleasures, pray:

1. This is our pleasures, we arrest you, sir, in the Kings name

Fitz. Ha! at whose suite?

Russ. Howe's that?

Colo. Our weapons, good sir furnish us.

Jane. Aye me,

Russ. Stay stay, Gentlemen, lets enquire the cause,
It may be but a trift; a small debt,
Shall need no rescew here.

2. Sir betwixt three Creditors: Mr. Leach, Mr. Swallow, and Mr. Bonesuck, the
debts are a thousand pvunds.


Russ. A thousand pounds?
Beshrow me a good man's substance.

Colo. Good sir our weapons we will teach these varlets to walk in their own
parti-coulour'd Coats, that they may be distinguished from honest men.


1. Ser. Sir, attempt no rescue, he is our prisoner,
you will make the danger worse by violence.

Colo. A plague upon your Gunpowder treason;
Ye quick damb'd Varlets, is this your salt peter proouing,
Your tasting earth, would you might never feed better,
Nor none of your Catchpole tribe:
Our weapons good sir, we will yet deliver him.

Russ. Pardon me sir,
I dare not suffer rescue here,
At least not by so great an accessarie
As to furnish you; had you had your weapons,
But to see the Ill fate on it, my fine trick In Faith,
Let Beggars beware to love Richmens Daughters,
I Will teach 'um the new morris, I learned it
My self of another careful Father.

Fitz. May I not be bayld?

2. Ser. Yes, but not with swords,

Colo. Slaves, here are sufficent men;

1. Ser. I ith field,
But not in the City, sir, if this Gentleman
Will be one, we will easily admit the second.

Russ. Who I? sir, pray pardon me, I am wronged,
Very much wronged in this, I must needs speak it,
Sir, you have not dealt like an honest Lover,
With me nor my child, here you boaste to me
Of a great reuenew, a large substance
Wherein you would endow and state my daughter,
Had I mist this, my opinion yet
Thought you a frugall man, to understand,
The sure wards against all necessities,
Boldly to defend your wife and Family,
To walk vnmuffled, dreadlesse of these fleshhookes,
Even in the daring'st streets through all the City,
But now I find you a loose Prodigal,
A large unthrift, a whole thousand pound?
Come from him girl, his inside is not found?

Fitz. Sir I am wronged,
These are malicious plots,
Of some obscure enemies that I have,
These debts are none of mine.

Russ. I all say so,
Perhaps you stand engaged for other men,
If so you do, you must then cal't your own,
The like arrerage do I run into
Should I batle you; But I have vowed against it,
And I will keep my vows: that is religious.

Fitz. All this is nothing so sir.

Russ. Nothing so?
By my faith it is sir, my vows are firm,

Fitz. I neither owe these debts,
Nor engaged for others.

Russ. The easier is your liberty regained,
These appear proofs to me,

Colo. Liberty sir?
I hope you will not see him go to Prison,

Russ. I do not mean to bear him company
So far: but I Will see him out of my doors,
Oh sir, let him go to Prison, it is a School
To tame wild bioods, heel be much better fort,

Colo. Better for lying in Prison,

Russ. In prison,
Believe it many an honest man lies in prison,
Else all the keepers are knaves,
They told me so themselves.

Col. Sir, I do now suspect you have betrayed him,
And us to cause us to be weaponlesse,
If it be so you are a blood suckng Churl,
One that was born in a great frost, when charity
Could not stir a finger, and you shall dye
In heat of a burning fever in the Dog* days,
To begin your hell to you, I have said your grace for you,
Now get you to supper as soon as you can,
Pluto the Master of the house is set already,

Cap. Sir you do wrong mine Uncle.

Colo Pox on your Uncle,
And all his kin, if my Kinsman mingle
No blood with him.

Capt. You Are a foul mouthd fellow,

Colo. Foul mouthed I will be, thou art the son of a whore,

Capt. Ha! Whore! plagues and furies I Will thrust that back,
Or pluck thy heart out after, son of a whore?

Colo. On thy life I Will prove it,

Capt. Death I am naked,
Uncle, I Will give you my left hand, for my sword,
To arm my right with; Oh this fire will flame me
Into prsent ashes,

Colo. Sir, give us Weapons,
We ask our own, you will not rob us of them?

Russ. No sir, but still restrain your furies here,
At my door I Will give you them, nor, at this time
My Nephews, a time will better suit you,
And I must tell you sir, you have spoke swords,
And'gainst the law of arms poisoned the blades
And with them wounded the reputation
Of an unblemished woman: would you 'were out of my doors.

Colo. Pox on your doors, and let it run all your house ore,
Give me my sword.

Capt. We shall meet Colonel?

Colo. Yes better provided, to spur thee more,
I do repeat my words Son of a Whore. Exit with his friend.

Capt. fr. Come sir, it is no worse then 'twas:
You can do nothing now. Exit Capt. and his friend.

Russ. No, I Will bar him now, away with that beggar, Exit.

Jane. Good sir, let this persuade you for two minutes stay,
At this prise (I know) you can wait all day.

1. Ser. You know the Remora that stays our ship always.

Jane. Your ship sinkes many when this hold lets go,
Oh my Fitzallen what is to be done,

Fitz. To be still thine is all my part to be,
Whether in freedom or captivity,

Jane. But art thou so engaged as this pretends?

Fitz By heaven, sweet Jane it is all a hellish plot
Your cruel smiling father all this while,
Has candied over a bitter pill for me,
Thinking by my remove to plant some other,
And then let go his fangs.

Jane. Plant some other?
Thou have too firmly stamped me for thine own,
Ever to be rast out, I am not current
In any others hand; I fear too soon
I shall discover it.

Fitz. Let come the worst,
Bind but this knot with an unloosed line,
I will be still thine own..

Jane. And I Will be thine.

1. Ser. My watch has gone two minutes M.

Fitz It shall not be renewed, I go sir, farewell.

Ia. Farewell, we both are imprisoned, though not togeither:
But heers the difference in our luckelesse chance.
I fear mine own, wish thy deliverance.

Fitz. Our hearts shall hourly visit, i will send to thee, Exit Fitz, with
Officers
Then it is no prison where the mind is free.

Enter Russell. Russ. So, let him go, now wench I bring thee joys,
A fair sunshine after this angry storm:
It was my policy to remove this beggar:
What shall rich men wed their only daughters
To two fair suites of clothes? and perhaps yet
The poor Tailor is unpaid; no, no my gitle,
I have a lad of thousands coming in;
Suppose he have more wealth then wit to guide it*
Why, there is thy gains, thou kep'st the keys of all
Disposest all: and for generation,
Man does most sildome stamp 'um from the brain,
Wisemen begets fools, and fools are the fathers
To many wise Children. Histeron, Proteron,
A great scholar may be get an Idiot,
And from the plow tail may come a great scholar:
Nay, they are frequent propogations.

Jane. I am not well, sir.

Russ. Ha? not well my girl?
Thou shall have a Physician then,
The best that gold can fetch upon his footecloath,
Thou know my tender pity to thee ever,
Want nothing that thy wishes can instruct thee
To call for, before me, and thou look half ill indeed,
But I Will bring one within a day to thee
Shall rouse thee up: for he is come up already,
One M. Chaugh a Cornish Gentleman:
Has as much land of his own fee-simple,
As a Crow can fly over in half a day:
And now I think on it, at the Crow at Algate
His lodging is, He shall so stir thee up,
Come, come, be cheard, think of thy preserment,
Honor and attendance, these will bring thee health
And the way to 'um is to clime by wealth. Exeunt.

Actus Secundus, Scaena primae.
Enter Captain Ager. Capt. The Son of a Whore?
There is not such another murdring piece
In all the stock of Calumny: it kills
At one report two reputations,
A mothers and a Sons: if it were possible
That souls could fight after the bodies fell,
This were a quarrel for 'em; he should be one indeed
That never heard of heavens joys or hels torments
To fight this out: I am too full of conscience,
Knowledge and patience, to give Justice to it,
So careful of my Eternity, which consists
Of upright actions: that unless I knew
It were a truth I stood for, any Coward
Might make my breast his footepace, and who lives
That can assure the truth of his conception,
More then a mothers carriage makes it hopeful.
And is it not miserable valor then,
That man should hazard all upon things doubtful
Oh there is the cruelty of my foes advantage,
Could but my soul resolve my cause were just,
Earth's mountain, nor seas surge should hide him from me,
Ee'ne to hells threshold would I follow him,
And see the slanderer in before I left him,
But as it is it fears me, and I never
Appeard too conscionably just till now:
My good oppinion of her life and Virtues,
Bids me go on: and feign would I be ruld by it,
But when my judgment tells me she is but woman,
Whose frail to let in death to all mankind,
My valor shrinkes at that, certain she is good,
There only wants but my assurance in it,
And al things the^ were perfect how I thirst for it,
Here comes the only she that could resolve,
But it is too vild a question to demand indeed.

Enter the Lady Ager. La. Son l'ue a suite to you.

Capt. That may do well.
To me good Madame, you're most sure to speed in it.
Beet i'my power to grant it,

La. It Is my love
Makes the request, that you would never part
From England more,

Capt: With all my heart it is granted,
I Am sure I Am in the way never to part from't,

La. Where left you your dear friend the Colonel?

Capt Oh the dear Colonel, I should meet him soon,

La. Oh fail him not then, he is a Gentleman
The same and reputation of your time
Is much engadg'de to.

Capt. Yes, and you knew all mother.

La. I thought I Would known so much of his fair goodness,
More could not have bin looked for.

Capt. O yes, yes Madam.
And this his last exceeded all the rest.

La. For gratitudes sake let me know this, I pre thee.

Capt. Then thus, and I desire your censure freely,
Whether it appeard not a strange noble kindness in him.

Lady. Trust me I long to hear't,

Capt. You know he is hasty,
That by the way.

Lady. So are the best conditions
Your Father was the like.

Capt. I begin now
To doubt me more, why am not I so too then,
Blood follows blood through forty generations,
And I Have a flow pac't wrath, a shrewd Dilemma,

Lady. Well, as you were saying sir,

Capt. Marry thus good Madame,
There was in company a foul mouthed villain, stay, stay,
Who should I liken him to, that you have seen,
He comes so near one that I would not match him with,
Faith just a'th Colonels pitch, he is nere the worse man,
Vserers have bin compard to Magistrates,
Extortiners to Lawyers, and the like,
But they all prove nere the worse men for that,

Lady. ^ hats bad enough, they need not,

Capt. This rude fellow,
A shame to all humanity or manners,
Breaths from the rottenes of his gall and malice,
The foulest stain that ever man's same blemished,
Part of which fell upon your honor Madame,
Which heighthend my affliction.

Lad. Mine? my honor sir?

Capt. The Colonel soon enraged,
(As he is all touch-wood)
Takes fire before me, makes the quarrel his,
Appoynts the Field, my wrath could not be heard
His was so high pitched, so gloriously mounted,
Now what is the friendly fear, that fights within me,
Should his brave noble Fury undertake,
A cause that were unjust in our defense,
And so to loose him everlastingly,
In that dark depth where all bad quarrels sink,
Never to rise again, what pity twere,
First to dye here and never to dye there.

Lady, Why what is the quarrel, speak sir: that should raise
Such fearful doubt, my honor bearing part ou't:
The words what ere they were:

Capt. Son of a whore.

La.. Thou lie, and were my love ten thousand times more to thee,
Which is as much now, as ere mothers was,
So thou should feel my anger. Do thou call
That quarrel doubtful; where are all my merits, Strikes him.
Not one stand up to tell this man his error.
Thou might as well bring the Sun's truth in question,
As thy birth or my honor.

Capt. Now blessings crown you for it,
It is the ioyful'st blow that ere flesh felt.

Lady. Nay stay, stay sir, thou art not left so soon,
This is no question to be slighted of,
And at your pleasure closde up fair again,
As though you'de never touched it, no honor doubted,
Is honor deeply wounded, and it rages
More then a common smart, being of thy making.
For thee to fear my truth, it kills my comfort,
Where should fame seek for her reward, when he
That is her own by the great tie of blood,
Is fardest of in bounty, O poor goodness!
That only pay'st thy self with thy own works,
For nothing else looks toward thee. Tell me pray,
Which of my loving cares do thou requite
With this vilde thought? which of my prayers or wishes?
Many thou owe me for, this seven year have thou known me
A widow, only married to my vow:
That's no small witness of my faith and love
To him that in life was thy honored Father,
And live I now to know that good mistrusted.

Capt. No, t'shall appear that my belief is cherefull,
For never was a mothers reputation
Noblyer defended, it is my joy and pride,
I have a firm to bestow upon it.

Lady. What Is that you said sir?

Capt. 'Twere too bold, and soon yet
To crave for giuenesse of you. I will earne it first,
Dead or alive, I know I shall enjoy it.

Lady. What Is all this sir?

Capt. My joys beyond expression:
I do but think how wretched I had been,
Were this another quarrel, and not mine.

Lady. Why, is it yours?

Capt. Mine! Think me not so miserable,
Not to be mine: then were I worse then abject,
More to be loathde then villnes; or sins dunghill:
Nor did I fear your goodness (faithful Madame)
But came with greedy joy to be confirmde in it,
To give the nobler onset, then shines valor,
And admiration from her fixed Sphere draws,
When it comes burnisht with a righteous cause,
Without which I Am ten sadomes under coward,
That now am ten degrees above a man,
Which is but one of virtues easiest wonders.

Lady. But pray stay; all this while I understood you,
The Colonel was the man

Capt. Yes, he is the man,
The man of injury, reproach and slander,
Which I must turn into his soul again.

Lady. The Colonel do it, that's strange

Capt. The villain did it:
That's not so strange; -- your blessing and your leave

Lady. Come, come, you shall not go.

Capt. Not go; were death
Sent now to summon me to my Eternity,
I Would put him off an hour: why the whole world
Has not chains strong enough to bind me from't:
The strongest is my Reverence to you,
Which if you force upon me in this case;
I must be forc'st to break it.

Lady. Stay I say.

Capt. In any thing command me but in this Madame.

La. Less, I shall loose him, you will hear me first.

Capt. At my return I will.

Lady. Youl'e never hear me more then.

Capt. How?

Lady. Come back I say:
You may well think there is cause I call so often.

Capt. Hah, cause! what cause?

Lady. So much, you must not go.

Capt. How?

Lady. You must not go.

Capt. Must not, why?

Lady. I know a reason for it,
Which I could wish you would yield to, and not know
If not, it must come forth. Faith, do not know,
And yet obey my will.

Capt. Why I desire
To know no other then the cause I have,
Nor should you wish it, if you take your injury
For one more great, I know the world includes not.

Lady. Yes, one that makes this nothing, -- yet be ruled,
And if you understand not, seek no further.

Capt. I must, for this is nothing.

Lady. Then take all,
And if amongst it you receive that secret
That will offend you, though you condemn me,
Yet blame your self a little, for perhaps
I would have made my reputation sound
Upon an others hazards with less pity;
But upon yours I dare not.

Capt. How?

Lady. I dare not,
'T was your own seeking; this,

Capt. If you mean euilly
I cannot understand you, nor for all the riches
This life has, would I.

La. would you never might.

Capt. Why, your goodness, that I joy to fight for.

Lady. In that you neither right your joy nor me.

Capt. What an ill Orator has virtue got here?
Why, shall I dare to think it a thing possible
That you were ever false?

Lady. Oh fearfully!
As much as you come to.

Capt. Oh silence, cover me.
Iue felt a deadlier wound then man can give me, false?

Lady. I was betraide to a most sinful hour.
By a corrupted soul I put in trust once.
A Kinswoman.

Capt. Where is she? let me pay her.

Lady. Oh, dead long since.

Capt. Nay then she has all her wages:
False, do not say it, for honors goodness do not,
You never could be so, he I calde Father,
Deserud you at your best, when youth and merit
Could boast at highest in you, y'ade no grace,
Or virtue that he matched not, no delight
That you invented but he sent it crownde
To your full wishing soul.

Lady. That heaps my guiltiness.

Cap. Oh, were you so unhappy to be false,
Both to your self and me, but to me chiefly,
What a days hope is here lost, and with it
The joys of a just cause. Had you but thought
On such a noble quarrel, you would ha dyed
Ere you would ha yielded, for the sins hate first,
Next for the shame of this hours cowardice:
Cursed be the heat that lost me such a cause,
A work that I was made for. Quench my spirit,
And out with honors flaming lights within thee:
Be dark and dead to all respects of manhood,
I never shall have use of valor more:
Put off your vow for shame, why should you hoarde up
Such Justice for a barren widdowhood,
That was so injurious to the faith of wedlock. Exit Lady.
I sheuld be dead, for all my life's works ended,
I dare not sight a stroke now, nor engadge
The noble resolution of my friends,
Enter two friends of Captain Agers. That were more vilde. Their here, kill me
my shame,
I am not for the fellowship of honor.

1. Friend. Captain, fie come sir, we have been seeking for you
very late to day, this was not wout to be,
Your enemies ith field,

Capt. Truth enters cheerfully.

2 Friend. Good faith sir you have a royal quarrel on it,

Capt. Yes, in some other Country, Spain or Italy.
It would be held so.

1 Friend. How, and is it not hereso?

Capt. It Is not so contumeliously receiude
In these parts, and you mark it.

1 Friend. Not in these?
Why prithee what is more, or can be?

Capt, Yes,
That ordinary Commotioner the lie
Is Father of most quarrels in this Clymate,
And held here capital, and you go to that.

2. Fr. But sir, I hope you will not go to that,
Or change your own for it, Son of a Whore,
Why there is the Lie down to posterity.
The lie to brithe, the lie to honesty,
Why would you cussen you self so, and beguile
So brave a cause, Manhoods best Master piece,
Do you ever hope for one so brave again.

Capt. Consider then the man Colonel,
Exactly worthy, absolutely noble,
How ever spleen and rage abuses him:
And it is not well, nor manly to pursue
A man's infirmity.

1 Friend. O miracle!
So hopeful, valiant and complete a Captain,
Possessed with a tame devil, come out, thou spoilest
The most improude young soldier of seven kingdoms,
Made Captain at nineteen, which was deserude
The year before, but honor comes behind still,
Come out I say, this was not wont to be,
That spirit never stood in need of provocation,
Nor shall it now. Away sir.

Capt. Urge me not.

1. F. By Manhoods reverend honor but we must.

Capt. I will not fight a stroke.

1. Friend. O blasphemy
To sacred valor!

Capt. Lead me where you lift.

1. Friend. Pardon this traiterous slumber, clogd with evils.

Give Captains rather wives then such tame devils. Exeunt. Enter Physician and
Jane. Ph. Nay Master, you must not be covered to me,
The Patient must open to the Physician
All her dearest sorrows: Art is blinded else,
And cannot show her mystical effects.

Jane. Can Art be so dimsighted, learned sir?
I did not think her so in capacious:
You train me (as I guess) like a Coniurer,
One of our five Oraculous wizards,
who from the help of his Examinant,
By the near guess of his suspicion
Appoints out the thief by the marks he tells him:
Have you no skill in Phisiognomie?
what color (says your coat) is my disease?
I am unmarried, and it cannot be yellow,
If it be Maiden green, you cannot miss it.

Phis. I cannot see that vacuum in your blood:
But Gentlewoman, if you love yourselfe,
Love my advise, be free and plain with me,
where lies your grief?

Jane. Where lies my grief indeed?
I cannot tell the truth where my grief lies,
But my Ioy's imprisoned.

Phis. This is mystical.

Ian. Lord, what plain questions you make problemes of,
Your Artis such a regular high way
That put you out of it, and you are lost:
My heart is imprisoned in my body, sir:
There Is all my joy, and my sorrow too
Lies very near it.

Phys. They are bad adjuncts,
Your joy and grief lying so near together,
Can propagate no happy issue, remove
The one (and let it be the worst) your grief,
If youl'e propose the best unto your joy.

Jane. why, now comes your skill: what physic for it?

Phis. Now I have found you out, you are in love.

Jane. I think I am, what your appliance now?
Can all your Paracelsian mixtures cure it,
'T must be a Surgeon of the Civil Law,
I fear that must cure me.

Phi. Gentlewoman,
If you knew well my heart, you would not be
So circuler, the very common name
Of Physician might reprove your niceness,
we are as secret as your Confessors,
And as firm obliged, it is a fine like death
For us to blab.

Jane. I will trust you, yet sir,
I had rather do it by Attorney to you,
I else have blushes that will stop my tongue
Have you no friend so friendly as your self
Of mine own Sex, to whom I might impart
My sorrows to you at the second hand.

Phi. why law, there I hit you, and be confirmde,
I Will give you such a bosom counsellonr,
That your own tongue shall be sooner false to you,
Make your self unready, and be naked to her:
I Will fetch her presently. Exit Physician.

Jane. I must reveal
My shame will else take tongue, and speak before
It Is a necessity impulsive drives me: me,
Oh my hard fate, but my more hard father,
That Father of my fate, a father said I?
What a strange Paradoxe I run into,
I must accuse two fathers of my fate
And fault, a reciprocal generation,
The father of my fault would have repairde,
His faulty issue, but my Fates Father hinders it:
Then Fate and fault, where ever I begin,
I must blame both, and yet 'twas love did sin.

Enter Physician, and Anne his sister. Phy. Look you Mistres, heres's your
closer put in,
What you please, you ever keep the key of it,

Jane. Let me speak private, sir.

Phy. With all my heart,
I will be more then mine ears length from you.

Jane. You hold some indeared place with this Gent.

An. He Is my brother forsooth, I his creature,
He does command me any lawful office
Either in act or counsel.

Jane. I must not doubt you,
Your brother has protested secresic,
And strengthened me in you: I must lay open
A guilty sorrow to you: I am with child,
It Is no black Swan I show you, these spots stick
Upon the face of many go for maids,
I that had face enough to do the deed,
Cannot want tongue to speak it: but it is to you,
Whom I accept my helper.

Anne. Mistress, it is locked
Within a Castle that is invincible,
It is too late to wish it were undone.

Ia. I have scarce wish within my self so strong
For understand me, it is not all so ill,
As you may yet conceit it: this deed was done
When heaven had witness to the Iugall knot,
Only the barren ceremony wants.
Which by an adverse Father is abridged.

Anne. Would my pity could help you.

Jane. Your counsel may.
My Father yet shootes widest from my sorrow,
And with a care indulgent seeing me changed
From what I was, sends for your good brother
To find my grief, and practice remedy:
You know it, give it him, but if a fourth
Be added to this counsel: I will say
Ye' are worse then you can call me at the worst.
At this advantage of my reputation.

Anne. I will revive a reputation,
That women long has lost, i will keep counsel.
I Will only now oblige my teeth to you,
And they shall bite the blabber if it offer
To breath on an offending syllable.

Jane. I trust you, go, whisper, here comes my Father.

Enter Russell, Chawgh, and Trimtram. Russ. Sir. you are welcome, more and most
welcome,
All the degrees of welcome: thrice welcome sir.

Chaw. Is this your daughter, sir?

Russ. Mine only joy, sir.

Chaw. I Will show her the Cornish hug, sir, -- I have kissed you now sweet heart,
and I never do any kindness to my friends, but I use to hitte'am in the
teeth with it presently.


Trim. My name is Trimtram forsooth, look what my master does, I use to do
the like.


Anne. You are deceived, sir, I am not this Gentlewomans servant, to make your
courtesy equal.


Chaw. You do not know me Mistress.


Jane. No indeed, I doubt I shall learn too soon.


Chaw. My name is Chawgh, a Cornish Gentleman, my man's mine own countriman too
in faith: I warrant, you took us for some of the small Islanders.


Jane. I did indeed, between the Scotch and Irish.


Chaw. Red-shankes: I thought so by my truth, no truly, we are right Cornish
Diamonds.


Trim. Yes, we cut out quarrels, and break glasses, where we go,

Phis. If it be hidden from her Father, yet
His ignorance understands well his knowledge,
For this (I guess) to be some rich coxcombe
Hee'de put upon his daughter,

An. That's plainly so.

Phys. Then only she is beholding to out help
For the close delivery of her burden,
Else all is overthrown.

An. And pray be faithful in that. sir.

Phys. Tush, we Physicians are the truest
Alchymists, that from the ore and dross of sin,
Can new distill a Maydenhead again.

Russ. How do you like her sir?

Chaw. Troth I do like her sir in the way of comparison to any thing that a
man would desire. I am as high as the Mount in love with her already, and that's
as far as I can go by land, but I hope to go further by water with her one day.


Russ. I tell you sir, she has lost some color,
By wrestling with a peevish sickness now of late.

Chaw. Wrestle? nay and she love wrestling, I Will teach her a trick to overthrow
any peevish sickness in London, what ere it be.


Russ. Well, she had a rich beauty though I say it,
Nor is it lost: a little thing repayres it.

Chaw. She shall command the best thing that I have in Middlesex, in faith.


Kuss. Well sir, talk with her, give her a relish
Of your good liking to her, you shall have time
And free access to finish what you now begin,

Jane. What means my father? my loves unjust restraint,
My shame were it published, both together
Could not afflict me like this odious fool:
Now I see why he hated my Fitz-Allen.

Chaw. Sweet Lady, your father says you are a wrastler, if you love that
sport, I love you the better. I faith I love it as well as I love my meat
after supper, it is indeed meat, drink and cloth to me.


Jane. Me thinks it should tear your clothes, sir.

Chaw. Not a rag in faith: Trimtram hold my cloak, -- I Will wrestle a fall with
you now, I Will show you a trick that you never saw in your life.


Jane. Oh good sir for bear, I am no wrastler.

Phy. Good sir take heed, you will hurt the Gentlewoman.

Chaw. I will not catch beneath the waste believe it, I know fair play,


Jane. It Is no woman's exercise in London, sir.

Chaw. I Will nere believe that, the hug and the lock between man and woman,
with a fair fall, ^is as sweet an exercise for the body, as you will desire in a
summers evening.


Phy. Sir, the Gentlewoman is not well,

Chaw, It may be you are a Physician, sir.

Phys. It Is so, sir.

Chaw. I say then, and i will stand to it, three ounces of wrestling with two
hippes, a yard of a green gown put together in the Intourne, is as good a
medicine for the green sickness as ever breathd.


Trim. Come sir, take your cloak again, I see here will be nere a match.


Jane. A match? I Would rather be matched from a Muskets mouth, and shot unto my
death.


Chaw, I Will wrestle with any man for a good supper.

Trim. I marry sir, i will take your part there, catch that catch may.

Phy. Sir, she is willing to it. There at my house,
She shall be private, and near to my attendance,
I know you not mistrust my faithful care,
I shall return her soon and perfectly.

Russ, Take your charge sir, go with this gentleman ( Jane)
But prithee look well this way, ere thou go,
It Is a rich Simplicity of great Estate:
A thing that will be ruled, and thou shall rule,
Consider of your sexes general aim,
That domination is a woman's heaven.

Jane. I Will think on it sir.

Russ. My daughter is retiring, sir.

Chaw. I will part at Dartmouth with her, sir, Oh that thou did but love
wrestling, I would give any man three foiles on that condition.


Trim. There Is three sorts of men that would thank you for 'um, either
Cutlers, Fencers, or Players.


Russ. Sir as I began, I end, wondrous welcome.


Exit Russ, Jane, Phys. An. Trim. What, will you go to school to day? you are
enterd you know, and your quarterige runs on.


Chaw. What? to the roaring school? pox on it, it is such a damnable noise, I
shall never attain it neither: I do wonder they have never a Wrestling
School, that were worth twenty of your fencing or dancing schools.


Trim. Well, you must learn to roar here in London, you will never proceed in
the reputation of Gallantrie else.


Chaw. How long has Roaring been an exercise, think thou Trimtram.


Trim. Ever since Guns came up, the first was your roaring Meg


Chapter Meg* Then 'twas a woman was the first roarer:


Trim. I, a fire of her tuch-hole, 'that cost many a proper man's life since
that time: and then the Lions they learned it from the Guns, living so near
'um, then it was heard to the Banckeside, and the Bears they began to roar:
then the boys got it, and so ever since there have been a company of roaring
boys.


Chaw. And how long will it last, think thou?


Trim. As long as the Water runs under London Bridge, or Watermen at
Westminster stayres.


Chaw. Well, I will begin to roar too, since it is in fashion, Oh Corineus,
this was not in thy time, I should have heard on it by the tradition of mine
Ancestors (for IN me sure there were Chawghes in thy days) if it had been so,
when Hercules and thou were on the Olimpicke mount together, then was wrestling
in request.


Trim. I, and that Mount is now the Mount in Cornwall. Corineus brought it
thither under one of his arms, they say.


Chaw. Oh Corineus my predecessor: that I had but lived in those days to see
thee wrestle, on that condition I had dyed seven year ago.


Trim. Nay, it should have been a dozen at least, in faith, on that condition.
Exeunt.


Actus Tertius. Scaena Prima.
Enter Captain Ager with his two friends. Capt. Well, your wills now.

1. Our Wills? our Loves, our Duties
To honored Fortitude: What wills have we
But our desires to Noblenes and Merit?
Valors advancement, and the sacred Rectitude
Due to a valourous cause.

Capt. Oh, that's not mine.

2. War has his court of Justice, that is the field,
Where all cases of Manhood are determinde,
And your case is no mean one.

Capt. True, then 'twere virtuous:
But mine is in extremes, foul and unjust:
Well, now you have got me hither, you are as far
To seek in your desire, as at first minute:
For by the strength and honor of a vow,
I will not lift a finger in this quarrel.

1. How? not in this? be not so rash a sinnen:
Why sir, do you ever hope to fight again then
Take heed on it, you must never look for that,
Why the universal stock of the Worlds injury,
Will be too poor to find a quarrel for you:
Give up your right and title to desert, sir,
If you fail virtue here, she needs you not:
All your time after, let her take this wrong,
And never presume then to serve her more:
Bid farewell to the integrity of arms,
And let that honorable name of Soldier
Fall from you like a shiuered wreath of Laurel
By Thunder struck from a desertlesse forehead,
That wears another right by usurpation.
Good Captain, do not wilfully cast away
At one hour all the same your life has won:
This is your native seat, here you should seek
Most to preserve it, or if you will doat
So much on life (poorelife) which in respect
Of life in honor is but death and darkness
That you will prove neglectfull of your self,
Which is to me too fearful to imagine,
Yet for that virtuous Ladies cause (your mother)
Her Reputation, dear to Nobleness
As grace to penitence, whose fair memory,
Even crowns fame in your issue, for that blessedness,
Give not this ill place, but in spite of hell,
And all her base feats, be exactly valiant,

Capt. Oh -- o -- o

2 Why, well said, thetes fair hope in that,
Another such a one.

Capt. Came they in thousands?
It Is all against you.

1 Then poor friendlesse merit,
Heaven be good to thee, thy professor leaves thee:
Enter Colonel and his two friends. He Is comd, do but you draw, we will fight
it for you.

Capt. I know too much to grant that.

1. O dead manhood!
Had ever such a cause so faint a servant?
Shame brand me if I do not suffer for him.

Colo. Iu'e heard sir, ya'ue bin guilty of much boasting,
For your brave earlines at such a meeting,
You Have lost the glory of that way this morning:
I was the first to day.

Capt, So were you ever.
In my respect sir.

1. O most base Praeludium!

Capt. I never thought on Victory our Mistres
With greater reverence then I have your worth,
Nor ever loved her better.

1. Slight, I could knock his brains about his heels, me thinks.


2. Peace, prithee peace.

Capt. Success in you has been my absolute joy,
And when I have wished content, I have wished your friendship.

1. Stay, let me but run him through the tongue a little,
There Is Lawyers blood in it, you shall see foul geere straight

2. Come you are as mad now, as he is cowardous.

Col. I came not hither sir for an Encomium.

1. No, the more Coxcombe he, that claws the head
Of your vain glory with it!

Col. I came provided
For Storms and Tempests, and the fowlest Season
That ever Rage let forth, or blew in wildness
From the incensed prison of man's blood.

Capt. It Is otherwise with me, I come with Mildness,
Peace, constant Amity, and calm Forgiveness,
The weather of a Cristian and a friend.

1, Give me a valiant Turk, though not worth ten pence, rather.

Cap. Yet sir, the world will judge the injury mine.
Insufferable mine, mine beyond injury,
Thousands have made a less wrong reach to hell,
I, and reioyc'st in his most endless vengeance,
(A miserable triumph, though a just one)
But when I call to memory our long friendship
Me thinks it cannot be too great a wrong.
That then I should not pardon, why should man,
Eor a poor hasty syllable or two,
(And vented only in forgetful fury)
Cheine all the hopes and riches of his soul
To the revenge of that, dye, lost for ever:
For he that makes his last peace with his Maker
In anger, anger is his peace eternally:
He must expect the same return again,
Whose venture is deceitful. Must he not sir?

Col. I see what I must do, fairly put up again:
For here'le be nothing done, I perceive that,

Capt. What shall be done in such a worthless businesset
But to be sorry, and to be forgiven.
You sir to bring repentance, and I pardon.

Col. I bring repentance sir?

Capt. If it be too much
To say Repentance: Call it what you please sir:
Choose your own world, I know you are sorry for it, and that's as good.

Col. I sorry? by fames honor, I am wronged:
Do you seek for peace, and draw the quarrel larger?

Capt. Then it is: I Am sorry that I thought you so.

1. A Captain, I could gnaw his title of.

Capt. Nor is it any misbecomming virtue, sir,
In the best manlines to repent a wrong,
Which made me bold with you.

1. I could cuff his head off,

2. Nay: pish.

1. Pox on him, I could eat his buttocke baked me thinks.

Col. So, once again take thou thy peaceful rest then,
But as I put thee up: I must proclaim
This Captain here, both to his friends and mine,
That only came to see sayre valor righted, Offers to go away.
A base submisiue coward; so I leave him.

Capt. Oh, heaven has pitied my excessive patience,
And sent me a cause: now I have a cause:
A coward I was never: -- Come you back sir?

Col. How?

Cap. You left a coward here?

Col. Yes sir, with you.

Cap. It Is such base mettell sir: 'twill not be taken,
It must home again with you.

2. Should this be true now.

1. Impossible, coward do more then bastard?

Col. I prithee mock me not, take heed you do not,
For if I draw once more, I shall grow terrible,
And rage will force me do what will grieve honor.

Capt. Ha, ha, ha.

Col. He smiles, dare it be he? what think you Gentlemen?
Your judgments, shall I not be cussend in him?
This cannot be the man? why he was bookish,
Made an inuectiue lately against fighting,
A thing in troth that mou'de a little with me,
Put up a fowler contumely far
Then thousand cowards came to, and grew thankful

Capt. Blessed remembrance in time of need?
I Would lost my honor else.

2. Do you note his joy?

Capt I never felt a more severe necessity.
Then came thy excellent pity.-.Not yet ready?
Have you such confidence in my just manhood:
That you dare so long trust me, and yet tempt me
Beyond the tolleration of man's virtue,
Why? would you be more cruel then your injury?
Do you first take pride to wrong me, and then think me
Not worth your fury, do not use me so:
I shall deceive you then: sir, either draw,
And that not sleightingly, but with the care
Of your best preservation; with that watchfulnes,
As you would defend your self from circuler fire,
Your sins rage, or her Lord, this will require it,
Or you will be too soon lost for I Have an anger
Has gathered mighty strength against you: mighty;
Yet you shall find it honest to the last,
Noble and Fair.

Col. I Will ventur'te once again.
And if it be but as true, as it is wondrous,
I shall have that I come for; Your leave Gent.

1. If he should do it indeed, and deceiues al now:
Stay, by this hand he offers; fights in faith.
Fights: by this light he fights sir.

2. So me thinks sir.

1. An absolute Punto: hey.

2.!It Was a Passado sir.

1. Why let it pass, and 'twas, I Am sure, it was somewhat,
What Is that now.

2. That's a Punto.

1. O go to then,
I knew 'twas not far off: What a worlds this?
Is coward a more stirring meat then bastard, my Masters?
Put in more eggs for shame when you get children,
And make it true Court custard. -- Ho? I honor thee:
It Is right and fair, and he that breathes against it,
He breathes against the justice of a man,
And man to cut him off: it is no injustice.
Thanks, thanks, for this most unexpected noblenes.

Cap. Truth never fayles her servant, sir, nor leaves him With the days shame
upon him.


1. Thou Have redeemde
Thy worth to the same height 'twas first esteemde.

Exeunt Captain and his friends. Col. 1. Friend. Alas, how is it sir: give
us some hope
Of your stay with us: Let your spirit be seen
Above your fortune, the best fortitude
Has been of Fate ill friended: Now force your Empire,
And reign above your blood, spite of deiection,
Reduce the Monarchy of your abler mind,
Let not flesh streighten it.

Col Oh, just Heaven has found me,1
And turnde the strings of my too hasty Injuries
Into my own blood, I pursude my ruin,
And vrgde him past the patience of an Angel.
Could man's revenge extend beyond man's life:
This would have wak't it, If this flame will light me
But till I see my sister: it is a kind one.
More I expect not from't, Noble deseruer:
Farewell most valiant, and most wronged of men, Exeunt, led by them.
Do but forgive me, and I am Victor then.

Enter Physician, Jane, Anne, Dutch Nurse with the child. Phys. Sweet Fro, to
your most indulgent care,
Take this my hearts joy, I must not tell you,
The value of this jewel in my bosom.

Nur. Dat you may vell. sir, der can niet forstoore you.

Ph. Indeed I cannot tell you, you know Nurse,
These are above the quantity of prise,
Where is the glory of the goodliest trees
But in the fruit and branches? The old stock
Must decay, and sprigs, syens such as these
Must become new stocks from us to glory,
In their fruitful issue, so we are made
Immortal on by other.

Nur. You spreke a most lieben fader, and Ick fall do de best of tender Nurses
to dis Infant, my pretty Frokin.


Phys. I know you will be loving, here sweet friend, Give. money.
Here Is earnest of a large sum of love and coin.
To quit your tender care.

Jane. I have some reason too, Gives her money.
To purchase your dear care unto this Infant.

Nurs. You be de witness of de Baptime, dat is, as you spreken: de godimother,
ick vell forstoor it so.


Jane. Yes, I am the bad mother: If it be offense. Aside.

Ann. I must be a little kind too. Gives her money.

Nurs. Much tankes to you all: dis child is much belouen: and Ick sall see much
care over it.


Phys. Farewell good sister: Show her the way forth,
I shall often visit you, kind Nurse.

Nurs. You sall be velcome. Exeunt Ann and Nurse.

Jane. Oh sir, what a friend have I found in you?
Where my poor power shall stay in the requital,
Your self must from your fair condition
Make up in mere acceptance of my will.

Phys. Oh, pray you urge it not, we are not borne
For our selves only, self love is a sin,
But in our loving donatiues to others,
Man's virtue best consists, love all begets,
Without, all are adulterate and counterfeit.

Jane. Your boundless love I cannot satisfy,
But with a mental memory of your virtues,
Yet let me not engage your cost withal,
Beseech you then take restitution
Of pains and bounty which you have disburst
For your poor debtor.

Phys. You will not offer it:
Do not esteem my love so mercenary,
To be the hyre of coin? Sure, I shall think
You do not hold so worthily of me
As I wish to deserve.

Jane. Not recompense!
Then you will beggar me with too much credit,
If not sufficient, you preserve my name,
Which I had forfeyted to shame and scorn:
Cover my vices with a veil of love,
Defend and keep me from a fathers rage,
Whose love yet infinite (not knowing this)
Might (knowing) turn a hate as infinite:
Sure he would throw me ever from his blessings,
And cast his curses on me: yes, further,
Your secrecy keeps me in the state of woman:
For else what husband would choose me his wife:
Knowing the honor of a Bride were lost.
I cannot number half the good you do me,
In the concealde retention of my sin,
Then make me not worse then I was before.
In my ingratitude, good sir.

Phys. Again.
I shall repent my love (if you will so called)
To be made such a Hackney, give me coin?
I had as leave you gave me poison (Lady)
For I have Art and Antidotes gain'st that,
I might take that, but this I will refuse.

Ian. Well you then teach me how I may requite you,
In some small quantity.

Phys. 'T was that I looked for. Aside.
Yes, I will tell you Lady a full quittance,
And how you may become my Creditresse.

Jane. I beseech you do sir.

Phys. Indeed I will Lady,
Not in coin, Mistress, for silver though white,
Yet it draws black lines: It shall not rule my palm
There to mark forth his base corruption:
Pay me again in the same quality
That I to you tendered, that's love for love:
Can you love me Lady? you have confessed
My love to you.

Jane. Most amply.

Phy. Why faith then,
Pay me back that way.

Jane. How do you mean, sir?

Phys. Tush, our meanings are better understood
Then shifted to the tongue, it brings along
A little blabbing blood into our cheeks,
That shames us when we speak.

Jane. I understand you not.

Phy. Fie, you do, make not your self ignorant
In what you know, you have taken forth the lesson
That I would read to you.

Jane. Sure then I need not,
Read it again, sir.

Phy. Yes, it makes perfect,
You know the way unto Achillis spear,
If that hurt you, I have the cure you see.

Ian. Come, you are a good man, I do perceive you:
You put a trial to me, I thank you,
You Are my just Confessor, and believe me,
I Will have no further penance for this sin,
Convert a year unto a lasting ever,
And called Apollo's smile, 'twas onces then never.

Phy. Pray you mistake me not, indeed I love you.

Jane. Indeed, what deed?

Phy. The deed that you have done.

Jane. I cannot believe you.

Phy. Believe the deed then.

Jane. Away, you are a Blackamore, you love me?
I hate you for your love: Are you the man
That in your painted outside seemed so white?
Oh, you are a soul dissembling Hypocrite,
You saved me from a thief that your self might rob me,
Skin'd'ore a green wound to breed an ulcer.
Is this the practice of your Physic College?

Phys. Have you yet vtter'd all your niceness forth?
If you have more, vent it, certes I think
Your first grant was not yielded with less pain,
If'twere, you have your prise, yield it again.

Jane. Pray you, tell me sir, (I ask't it before)
Is it a practice amongst you Physicians.

Phy. Tush, that's a secret, We cast al waters.
Should I reveal, you would mistrust my counsel:
The Lawyer and Physician here agrees
To women Clients they give back their fees,
And is not that kindness?

Jane. This for thy love, Spits,
Out, outside of a man: thou Cynamon tree,
That but thy bark have nothing good about thee
The Unicorn is hunted for his horn,
The rest is left for carrion: Thou false man.
Tha'st fisht with silver hooks and golden baits:
But I Will avoid all thy deceiving sleights.

Phys. Do what you lift, I will do something too:
Remember yet what I have done for you,
You Have a good face now, but 'twill grow rugged.
Ere you grow old: old men will despise you:
Think on your Grandam Helen the fairest Queen
When in a new glass she spyed her old face:
She (smiling) wept to think upon the change,
Take your time, you are crazed, you are an apple fallen
From the tree, if you be kept long, you will rot.
Study your answer well, yet I love you.
If you refuse I have a hand above. Exit Phys.

Jane. Poison thy self, thou soul Empoysoner:
Of thine own practique drink the Theorie.
What, a White Diuill have I met withal?
What shall I do? What do? is it a question?
Nor shame, nor hate, nor fear, nor lust, nor force
(Now being too bad) shall ever make me worse,
Enter Anne. What have we here? a second spirit.

Anne. Mistress,
I am sent to you.

Jane. Is your message good?

Anne. As you receive it, my brother sent me,
And you know he loves you.

Jane, I heard say so;
But 'twas a false report.

Anne. Pray, pardon me, I must do my message,
Who lives (commanded) must obey his Keeper.
I must persuade you to this act of woman.

Jane. Woman! of Strumpet

Anne. Indeed of Strumpet,
He takes you at advantage of your fall,
Seeing you down before.

Jane. Curse on his fained smiles.

An. He Is my brother Mistress, and a curse on you
If ere you bless him with that cursed deed,
Hang him, poison him, he held out a Rose,
To draw the yielding sense, which come to hand
He shifts, and gives a canker.

Jane. You speak well yet.

Ann. I, but Mistress, now I consider it,
Your reputation lies at his mercy,
Your fault dwells in his breast, say, he throw it out,
It will be known, how are you then undone?
Think on it, your good name, and they are not to be sold*
In every market, a good name's dear,
And indeed more esteemed then our actions,
By which we should deserve it.

Jane. Aye me most wretched.

Anne. What? do you shrink at that?
Would you not wear one spot upon your face,
To keep your whole body from a leprosy,
Though it were vndiscouerd ever, hang him,
Fear him not. Horseleeches suck out his corrupt blood,
Draw you none from him, less it be pure and good.

Jane. Do you speak your soul?

Anne. By my soul do I.

Jane. Then yet I have a friend; but thus exhort me,
And I have still a collumbe to support me.

Anne. One fault Heaven soon forgiues, and it is on earth forgot,
The Moon her self is not without one spot. Exeunt.

Enter the Lady Ager, meeting one of her servants. Lady. Now sir, where is he?
speak, why comes he not?
I sent you for him; bless this fellows senses:
What has he seen? a soul nine hours entrancst,
Houering twixt hell and heaven, could not wake gastlier,
Enter Servant. Not yet return an answer? What say you sir?
Where is he?

2. Ser. Gone?

Lady. What say thou?

2. Ser. He is gone Madame.
But as we heard, unwillingly he went
As ever blood enforced.

La. Went, whether went he?

2 Ser. Madam, I fear, I ha said too much already.

La. These men are both agreed, speak, whether went he?

2. Se. Why to -- I would you would think the rest your self Madame.

Lady. Meek Patience bless me.

2. Ser. To the field.

1. Ser. To fight, Madame.

Lady. To fight!

1. Ser. There came two urging Gentlemen,
That called themselves his seconds, both so powerful,
As it is reported they preuailde with him,
With little labor.

La. O he is lost, he is gone,
For all my pains, he is gone; two meeting torrents
Are not so merciless as their two rages,
He never comes again, -- wretched affection.
Have I belied my faith? injured my goodness?
Slaunderd my honor for his praeseruation?
Having but only him: and yet no happier.
It Is then a judgment plain, truths angry with me,
In that I would abuse her sacred whiteness,
For any wordly temporal respect:
Forgive me then thou glorious woman's virtue,
Admired where ere thy habitation is,
Especially in us weak ones: Oh forgive me.
For it is thy vengeance this, to belie truth,
Which is so hardly ours, with such pain purchased
Fastings, and prayers, continence and care,
Misery must needs ensue: Let him not dye
In that unchaste belief of his false birth,
And my disgrace: What ever Angel guides him,
May this request be with my tears obtaind,
Let his soul know, my honor is unstained,
Run, seek, away, if there be any hope, Exeunt Seru.
Let me not loose him yet; when I think on him,
His deerenes, and his worth, it earnes me more,
They that know riches tremble to be poor.
My passion is not every woman's sorrow,
She must be truly honest feels my greese,
And only known to One, if such there be,
They know the sorrow that oppresses me. Exit.

Actus quartus, Scaena prima.
Enter the Colonels Second.. Usher etc. with Chaugh and Trim. Second. Truth
sir, I must needs blame you for a Trewant, having but one lesson read to you
and neglect so soon: fie, I must see you once a day at least.


Chaugh. Would I were whipped Tutor if it were not long of my man Trimtram here.


Trim. Who, of me?


Cha. Take It upon the Trim. I Will give the five shillings, 'as I am a Gentleman.


Trim. I Will see you whipped first: well, I will too; faith sir, I saw he was not
perfect, and I was loath he should come before to shame himself.


Sec. How? shame sir? is it a shame for Scholars to learn? Sir, there are
great Scholars that are but slenderly read in our profession: sir, first it
must be Oeconomicall, the Oecumenicall: shame not to practice in the house how
to perform in the field: the nail that is driven takes a little hold at the
first stroke, but more at the second, and more at the third, but when it is home
to the head, then it is firm.


Chau. Faith I have been driving it home to the head this two days.


Trim. I helped to hammer it in as well as I could too sir.


Sec. Well sir, I will hear you rehearse anon, mean time peruse the
exemplary of my bills, and tell me in what language I shall rore a Lectue to
you; or i will read to you the Mathematical science of Roaring.


Cha. Is it Mathematical?


Sec. Oh sir, does not the winds roar? the Sea roar? the Welkin roar?
indeed, most things do roar by nature, and is not the knowledge of these
things Mathematical?


Cha. Pray prooceed sir. reads his bill


Sec. The names of the languages, the Sclanonian, Parthamenian, Barmeothian,
Tiburnian, Wappinganian, or the modern Londonian. Any man or woman that is
desirous to roar in any of these languages, in a week they shall be perfect,
if they will take pains; so let'um repair into Holborne to the sign of the
Cheat loaf.


Chau. Now your bill speaks of that, I was wondering a good while at your
sign, the loaf looks very like bread in faith, but why is it called the cheat
loaf?


Second. This house was sometimes a Bakers sir, that served the Court where the
bread is called cheat.


Trim. I, I, it was a Baker that cheated the Court with bread.


Sec. Well sir, choose your languages: and your Lectures shall be read, between
my Usher and my self, for your better instruction, provided your conditions be
performed in the premises beforesaid.


Chau. Look you sir, there is twenty pound in hand, and twenty more, I am to pay
when I am allowed a sufficient Roarer.


Sec. You speak in good earnest sir.


Chau. Yes faith do I Trimtram shall be my witness.


Trim. Yes indeed sir, twenty pound is very good earnest.


Usher. Sir one thing I must tell you belongs to my place, you are the youngest
Scholar, and till another comes under you, there is a certain garnish belongs
to the School, for in our practice we grow to a quarrel: then there must be
wine ready to make all friends, for that's the end of Roaring, it is valiant but
harmless, and this charge is yours.


Chau. With all my heart in faith and I like it the better: because no blood
comes on it, who shall fetch?


2. Roar. I Will be your Spanniell sir.


Sec. Bid Vapor, bring some Tobacco too,


Chau. Do and here is money for it. Exit 2. Roarer.


Usher. No, you shall not, let me see the money: so, I Will keep it, and discharge
him after the Combat, for your practice sake you and your man shall roar him
out on it, (for indeed you must pay your debts so: for that's one of the maine
ends of Roaring) and when you have left him in a chafe, then I Will qualify the
Rascal.


Chau. Content in faith Trim. we will Roar the rusty Rascal out of his Tobacco.


Trim. I and he had the best Craccus in London.


Sec. Observe Sir, we could now roar in the Slauonian Language, but this
practice has been a little sublime: some hayres breadth or so above your
Caput; I take it for your use and understanding both it were fitter for you to
taste the modern assault, only the Londonian Roar.


Chau. In Faith sir, that is for my purpose, for I shall use all my roaring here
in London: in Cornwall we are all for wrestling, and I do not mean to
travel over sea to roar there.


Sec. Observe then sir, but it were necessary you took forth your tables, to
note the most difficult points for the better assistance of your memory.


Chau. Nay sir, my man and I keep two Tables.


Trim. I sir, and as many trenchers, cattes meat and dogs meat enough.


Sec. Note sir, -- Do thou confront my Cyclops?


Vsh. With a Briarean Brousted:


Chau. Cyclops.


Trim. Briarean.


Sec. I know thee and thy lineall pedigree,


Usher. It is Collateral: as Brutus and Posthumus.


Trim. Brutus.


Chau. Posthumus.


Sec. False as the face of Heccate; thy sister is a --


Vsh. What is my Sister Centaure?


Seco. I say thy Sister is a Bronstrops.


Vsh: A Bronstrops!


Chau. Tutor, Tutor, ere you go any further, tell me the English of that,
what is a Bronsterops pray.


Se. A Bronsterops is in English a Hippocrene.


Chau. A Hippocrene, note it Trim. I love to understand the English as I go.


Trim. What Is the English of Hippierene.


Chau. Why Bronsterops?


Vsh: Thou do obtrect my flesh and blood,


Sec. Again, I denounce, thy sister is a fructifer,


Chau. What Is that Tutor?


Sec. That is in English a Fucus or a Minotaure.


Chau. A Minotaure:


Chau. A Fucus.


Vsh. I say thy mother is a Callieut, a Panagron, a Duplar and a Sindicus.


Sec. Dislocate thy Bladud.


Vsh. Bladud shall conjure, if his Demons once appear,


Enter 2. Roarer with Wine, and Vapor with Tobacco. Sec. Advance thy
respondency.


Chau. Nay good gentleman, do not fallout, a cup of wine quickly Trimtram.


Vsh: See my steel has a glister,


Chau. Pray wipe him, and put him up again good Usher.


Vsh. Sir at your request I pull down the Flag of defiance.


Sec. Give me a boule of Wine my fury shall be quenched, here Usher.


Vsh. I pledge thee in good friendship.


Chau. I like the conclusion of Roaring very well in faith.


Trim. It has an excellent conclusion indeed, if the Wine be good, always
provided.


Seco. O the wine must be always provided be sure of that.


Vsh. Else you spoil the conclusion, and that you know crowns all.


Chau. It Is much like wrestling in faith: for we shake hands ere we begin: now
that's to avoid the Law, for then if he throw him a furlong into the grownd,
he cannot recover himself upon him, because it was done in cold friendship.


Seco. I believe you sir.


Chau. And then we drink afterward, just in this fashion, wrestling and
Roaring are as like as can be in faith, even like long sword and half pike.


Sec. Nay they are reciprocal if you mark it, for as there is a great Roaring
at Wrestling: so there is a kind of wrestling and contention at Roaring.


Chau. True in faith, for I have heard 'um roar from the six windmilles to
Islington: those have been great falls then.


Ser. Come, now a brief rehersall of your other days lesson, betwixt your man
and you, and then for to day we break up school.


Chau. Come, Trimtram; if I be out Tutor, I Will be bold to look in my tables,
because I doubt I am scarce perfect.


Ser. Well, well, I will not see small faults


Chau. The wall,


Trim. The wall of me, to thy kennell spannell,


Chau. Will thou not yield precedencie?


Trim. To thee, I know thee and thy brood


Chau. Know thou my brood, I know thy brood to, thou art a Rooke;


Trim. The nearer a kin to the Chaughes?


Chau. The Rookes a kin to the Chaughis?


Ser. Very well maintained,


Chau. Dungcoer, thou lie,


Trim. Lie, enucleate the kernel of thy scabberd,


Chau. Now if I durst draw my sword, twere valiant in faith:


Seco. Draw, draw, howsoever,


Chau. Have some wine ready to make us friends I pray you,


Trim. Chaugh, I will make thee fly and roar,


Chau. I will roar if thou strik'st me,


Seco. So it is enough now conclude in wine, I see you will prove an excelent
practitioner: wondrous well performed on both sides:


Chau. Here Trimtram I drink to thee,


Trim. I Will pldge in good friendship,
Enter a Servant. Is there not one Master Chauogh here,

Vsh. This is the Gentleman sir;


Seru. My master, sir, your elected father in law, desires speedyly to speak
with you:


Chau. Friend I will follow thee, I would thou had come a little sooner, thou
should have seen Roaring sportysaith,


Seru. Sir I Will return that you are following, Exit servant


Chau. Do so: I Will tell thee Tutor, I am to marry shortly, but I will defer
it a while till I can roar perfectly, that I may get the upper hand of my wife
on the wedding day, 'tmust be done at first or never.


Sec. 'T will serve you to good use in that sir.


Cha. How like thou this Whister?


Vap. very valiantly in faith sir,


Cha. Tush, thou shall see more by and by.


Va. I can stay no longer indeed sir, who paies me for my Tobocco?


Cha. How, pay for Tobacco, away ye sootie mouthed piper: you rustie piece of
Martlemas bacon, away.


Trim. Let me give him a Mark for it.


Chau. No Trimtram, do not strike him, we will only roar out a curse upon him.


Trim. Well, do you begin then,


Chau. May thy Roll rot, and thy pudding drop in pieces, being sophisticated
with filthy urine.


Trim. May Serieants dwell on either side of thee, to fright away thy two penny
customers.


Cha. And for thy penny ones, let them suck thee dry.


Trim. When thou art dead, may thou have no other sheets to be buried in but
mouldie Tobacco leaves.


Cha. And no strawings to stick thy Carkas, but the bitter stalks.


Trim. Thy mourners, all greazie Tapsters,


Cha. With foul Tobacco pipes in their hats in stead of rotten Rose mary: and
last of all may my man and I live to see all this performed and, to piss
reeking even upon thy grave


Trim. And last of all for me, let this Epitaph be remembered over thee.


Here coldly now within is laid to rot,
Aman that yesterbay was piping hot:
Some sap he died by p^dding, some by prick,
Others by role and ball some lease, all stick
Fast in censure, yet think it strange and rare,
(He lived by smoke, yet died for want of air)
But then the Surgeon said when he beheld him,
It was the burning of his Pipe that killed him.
Chau. So, are you paid now whisler?


Vap. All this is but smoke out of a stinking Pipe,


Chau. So, so, pay him now Usher.


Sec: Do not henceforth neglect your schooling M. Chaugh.


Cha. Call me Rooke if I do Tutor.


Trim. And me Raven, though my name be Trimtram.


Cha. Farewell Tutor.


Trim. Farewell Usher.


Sec. Thus when the Drum's vnbrast, and Trumpet cease, Soldiers must get pay
for to live in peace. Exeunt


Enter the Colonels Sister, meeting the Surgeon. Sist. Oh my most worthy
brother, thy hard fate 'twas: Come hither honest Surgeon, and deal faithfully
With a distressed Virgin: what hope is there?


Surg. Hope, Chillis was escaped miraculously Lady.


Sist. What Is that sir.


Surg Cava vena: I care but little for his wound'ith Orsophag, not thus much
trust me, but when they come to Diaphragma once, the small Intestines, or the
Spynall Medull, or in the Roots of the Emunctories of the noble parts, then
straight I fear a Syncops; the flanks retyring toward the back, the Urine
bloody, the Excrements purulent, and the Dolor pricking or pungent.


Sist. Alas I Am nere the better for this answer.


Surg. Now I must tell you his principal Dolor lies in the region of the Liver,
and there is both inflammation and Turmafaction feared, marry I made him a
Quadragular plumation, where I used Sanguis Draconis; by my faith, with powders
incarnatiue, which I temperd with oil of Hypericon, and other liquors
mundificatiue.


Sist. Pox a your Mundies figatiues, I would they were all fired,


Surg. But I purpose Lady to make an other experiment at next dressing with a
Sarcotricke medicament, made of Iris of Florence. Thus Masticke, Calaphena,
Apopanax, Sacrocolla:


Sist. Sacro-halter, what comfort is i'this to a poor Gentlewoman; pray tell
me in plain terms what you think of him?


Sur. Marry in plain terms I know not what to say to him, the wound I can
assure you enclines to Paralisme; and I find his body Cacochimicke: being then
in fear of Fever and inflammation, I nourish him altogeither with Viands
refrigeratine and give for potion the juice of Sauicola, dissolved with water
Cerefolium: I could do noe more Lady, if his best Guiguimos were disseuered.
Exit.


Sist. What thankelesse pains does the tongue often take,
To make the whole man most ridiculous:
I come to him for comfort, and he tyres me
Worse then my sorrow, what a precious good
May be delivered sweetly in few words:
And what a mount of nothing has he cast forth.
Alas his strength decaies: how cheer you sir,
My honored Brother?

Colo. In soul never better.
I feel an excellent health there, such a stoutnes,
My invisible enemy flies me, seeing me armde
With penitence and forgiveness, they fall backward,
Whether through admiration, not imagining
There were such armory in a Soldiers soul,
As pardon and repentance: or through power
Of ghostly valor? but I have been Lord
Of a more happy conquest in nine hours now,
Then in nine years before: Oh kind Lieftenants
This is the only war we should provide for,
Where he that forgiues largest and sighs strongest,
Is a tried Soldier, a true man in deed,
And wins the best field, makes his own heart bleed.
Read the last part of that Will sir.
1 Liefetenant reads. I also require at the hands of my most beloved Sister,
whom I make full Executrix, the disposure of my body in burial at S. Martins
in the field: and to cause to be distributed to the poor of the same parish,
forty Mark, and to the Hospital of maimed Soldiers a hundred: lastly I give
and bequeath to my kind, dear, and virtuous sister, the full possession of my
present estate in riches, whether it be in Lands, Leases, Money, Goods, Plate,
Jewels, or what kind soever, upon this condition following, that she
forthwith, tender both her self and all these Infeoffments, to that noble
Captain my late Enemy Captain Ager.


Sist. How sir?

Colo. Read it again sir, let her hear it plain.

Sist. Pray spare your pains sir, it is too plain already.
Good sir, how do you, is your memory perfect?
This Will makes question of you: I bestowde
So much grief and compassion a your wound,
I never looked into your senses Epilepsie:
The sickness and infirmity of your judgment
Is to be doubted now, more then your bodies,
Why is your love no dearer to me sir,
Then to dispose me so upon the man,
Whose fury is your bodies present torment?
The Author of your danger: one I hate
Beyond the bounds of malice, do you not feel
His wrath upon you? I beseech you sir,
Alter that cruel article.

Colo. Cruel sister? (forgive me natural love)
I must offend thee, speaking to this woman, am I content,
Having much kindred, yet to give thee all,
(Because in thee I Would raise my means to goodness)
And can thou prove so thanklesse to my bounty,
To grudge my soul her peace? is my intent
To leave her rich, whose only desire is
To send me poorer into the next world,
Then ever Usurer went, or politic Statist?
Is it so burdensome for thee to love
Where I forgive? Oh wretched is the man
That buildes the last hopes of his saving comforts
Upon a woman's charity? he is most miserable,
If it were possible, her obstinate will
Will pull him down in his midway to heaven,
I Have wronged that worthy man past recompense,
And in my anger robbed him of fair fame:
And thou the fairest restitution art
My life could yield him: if I knew a fairer,
I Would set thee by and thy unwilling goodness,
And never make my sacred peace of thee:
But there is the cruelty of a fate debard,
Thou art the last, and all, and thou art hard.

Sist. Let your grieved heart hold better thoughts of me,
I will not prove so sir, but since you enforce it,
With such a strength of passion I Will perform,
What by your will you have inioynd me to,
Though the world never show me joy again.

Colo. Oh this may be fair cunning for the time,
To put me off, knowing I hold not long,
And when I look to have my joys accomplished,
I shall find no such things: that were vilde cosenage,
And not to be repented.

Sist. By all the blessedness,
Truth and a good life looks for, I will doo'te sir,

Colo. Comforts reward you for it, when ere you grieve,
I know if you dare swear I may believe. Exeunt

Euter Captain Ager. Cap. No sooner have I entrance i'this house now,
But all my joy falls from me, which was wont
To be the sanctuary of my comforts:
Me thought I loved it with a reverent gladness,
As holy men do consecrated Temples
For the Saints sake, which I belieu'd my mother,
But proved a false faith since, a fearful heresy,
O who'de erect the assurance of his joys
Upon a woman's goodness? whose best virtue,
Is to commit unseen, and highest secrecy,
To hide but her own sin, there is their perfection,
And if she be so good, which many fail of to,
When these are bad, how wondrous Ill are they,
What comfort Is It to fight, win this days fame,
When all my after days, are lamps of shame,
Enter the Lady Ager. Blessings be firm to me, he is come it is he,
A surgeon speedily;

Cap. A surgion? why maddam,

Lady. Perhaps you will say it is but a little wound
Good to prevent a Danger: quick, a surgeon,

Cap. Why maddam,

Lady. I, I, that's all the faust of valiant men,
They Will not be known a their hurts till rhei'r past help,
And then to late they wish for it:

Cap. Will you hear me.

La. It Is no disparagement to 'confesse a wound,
I Am glad sir it is no worse, a surgeon quickly,

Capt. Maddam,

Lady. Come, come sir, a woun'ds Honorable,
And never shames the wearer,

Cap. By the Justice
I owe to honor, I came of untouched,

Lady. I Would rather believe that;

Cap. You believe truth so,

Lady. My tears prevail then, welcome, welcome sir,
As peace and mercy to one new departed,
Why would you go though, and deceive me so,
When my abundant love took all the course
That might be to prevent it, I did that,
For my affections sake, goodness forgive me for it,
That were my own life's safety put vppon't,
I Would rather dye then do it, think how you vsd me then,
'And yet would you go, and hazard your self too,
It Was but unkindly done.

Capt. What Is all this Madame?

Lady. See then how rash you were and short in wisdom,
Why wrong my faith I did, slanderd my constancy,
Belyed my truth, that which few Mothers will,
Or fewer can, I did, out of true fear
And loving care, only to keep thee here.

Capt. I doubt I am too quick of apprehension, now
And that is a general fault, when we here joyfully,
With the desire of longing fort, I ask it:
Why? were you never false,

Lady. May death come to me,
Before Repentance then?

Capt. I heard it plain sure,
Not false at all?

Lady. By the reward of truth,
I never knew that deed
That claims the name on it.

Capt. May then that glorious reward you swore by,
Be never failing to you, all the blessings
That you have given me since obedient custom
Taught me to kneel and ask 'um, are not valuable
With this immaculate blessing of your truth:
This is the Palm to victory.
The Crown for all deserts past, and to come,
Let 'em be numberless, they are rewarded,
Already they are rewarded: bless this frame
I feel it much too weak to bear the joy on it.

Lady. Rise Sir,

Capt. O pardon me --
I cannot honor you too much, too long,
I kneel not only to a Mother now,
But to a woman that was never false,
Year dear, and year good too: I think a that,
What reverence does she merit it is fit such
Should be distinguished from the prostrate sex,
And what distinction properer can be shown,
Then honor done to her that keeps her own,

Lady. Come sir, I Will have you rise,

Capt. To do a deed then, rises.
That shall for ever raise me: O my glory,
Why this, this is the quarrel that I looked for,
The the other but a shift to hold time play,
You sacred ministers of preservation,
For Heavens sake send him life,
And with it mighty health, and such a strength,
May equal but the cause, I wish no foul things,
If life but glow in him he shall know instantly
That I Am resolud to call him to account for it.

Lady. Why hark you sir,

Cap. I bind you by your honor, Madame,
You speak no hindernce too'^,
Take heed, you ought not

Lady. What an unhappiness have I in goodness,
It Is ever my desire to intend well
But have no fortunate way in it, for all this
deserve I yet no better of you: but to be greeud again?
Are you not well with honest gain of fame,
With safety purchasd, will you needs tempt a ruin,
That auoyds you? Exit Lady.

Capt. No you have preuaild: things of this nature sprung,
When they use action must use little tongue.
Now sir, the news?

Enter a Servant. Ser. Sir there is a gentlewoman,
Desires some conference with you.

Capt. How, with me?
A Gentlewoman? what is she?

Seru. Her attendant
Delivered her to be the Colonels Sister.

Capt. Oh for a storm then,
'Lasse poor virtuous Gentlewoman,
I will endure her violence with much pity,
She comes to ease her heart good noble soul,
It Is ee'ne a charity to release the burden,
Were, not that remedy ordaind for weomen,
Their hearts would never hold three years together,
And here she comes, I never marked so much of her,
Enter the Colonels Sister. That face can be the mistress of no anger
But I might very well endure a month me thinks,
I am the man speak Lady, I Will stand fair.

Sist. And I Am enioynd by vow to fall thus low, She kneeles.
And from the dying hand of a repentant
Offer for expiation of wrongs done you,
My self, and with my self all that was his,
Which upon that condition was made mine,
Being his souls wish to depart absolute man,
In life a soldier death a Christian.

Capt. Oh Heaven has touched him nobly, how it shames
My virtues slow perfection: rise dear brightness,
I forget manners too, up matchless sweetness,

Sist. I must not sir, there is not in my vow
That liberty, I must be received first,
Or all denied, if either, I am free,

Cap. He must be without soul should deny thee,
And with that reverence I receive the gift,
As it was sent me, worthy Colonel,
Has such a conquering way in the blessed things,
Who ever ouercomes, he only wins. Exit.

Hem, within. Enter Captain Albo, a Baud and a Whore. Bau. Hark of these
hard-hearted Bloodhounds: these Butchers are ee'ne as merciless as their
Dogs, they knock down a Woman's fame, ee'ne as it walks the Streets by 'um.


Whor. And the Captain here that should defend us, walks by like John of the
Apple loft.


Capt. What for interiections Prisse? Hem, Euax, Vah: let the Carnisexes scour
their throats: thou know there is a curse hangs over their bloody heads,
this year there shall be more Butchers Pricks burnt then of all trades besides.


Bau. I do wonder how thou came to be a Captain.


Cap. As thou came to be a Baud Meg, and Prisse to be a whore, every one by
their deserts.


Bau. Baud, and Whore? out you unprofitable rascal, have not thou been at the
new Play yet, to teach thee better manners: truly they say they are the finest
Players, and good speakers of Gentle-women of our quality; Baud and Whore is
not mentioned amongst 'um, but the handsomest narrow-mouthed names they have
for us, that some of them may serve as well for a Lady, as for one of our
occupation.


Who. Prithee Patroness, lets go see a piece of that Play: if we shall have
good words for our money, it is as much as we can deserve in faith.


Bau. I doubt it is too late now, but another time Servant.


Cap. Let Us go now sweet face I am acquainted with one of the Pantomimick^,
the Bulchins will use the Irish Captain with respect, and you two shall be
boxt amongst the better sort.


Who. Sir Captain Albo, I doubt you are but whiteliuer'd, look that you
defend us valiantly, you know your penance else: Patroness, you remember how
you used him once?


Bau. I servant, and I shall never forget it, till I use him so again: do you
remember Captain?


Cap. Mum Meg, I will not hear on it now.


Bau. How I and my Amazons stripped you as naked as an Indian.


Cap. Why Meg?


Bau. And then how I bound you to the good behavior, in the open fields.


Who. And then you strow'd oats upon his hoppers.


Cap. Prithee sweet face.


Who. And then brought your Ducks to nibble upon, him you remember?


Cap. Oh, the remembrance tortures me again, no more good sweet face.


Bau. Well, lead on Sir: but hark a little.


Enter Chaugh and Trim. Chau. Did thou bargain for the bladders with the
Butcher Trim?


Trim. I sir, I have 'um here, I Will practice to swim too sir, and then I may
roar with the water at London bridge, he that roares by land and by water
both, is the the perfect Roarer.


Chau. Well I Will venture to swim too: if my father in Law gives me a good dowry
with his daughter, I shall hold up my head well enough.


Trim. Peace, sir, here is practice for our roaring, here is a Centaure, and two
Hippocrenes.


Chau. Offer the iustle Trim. Iustle:


Cap. Ha? What meanest thou by that?


Trim. I mean to confront thee, Cyclops.


Chau. I Will tell thee what a means, is this thy Sister?


Cap. How then sir?


Chau. Why then I say she is a Bronsterops: and this is a Fucus.


Who. No indeed sir, we are both Fucusses.


Cap. Art thou military? art thou a Soldier?


Chau. A Soldier, no I scorn to be so poor, I am a Roarer.


Cap. A Roarer?


Trim. I sir, two Roarers.


Ca. Know then my fresh water friends, that I am a Capten.


Chau. What, and have but two to serve under you?


Cap. I am now retiring the field.


Trim. You may see that by his Bag and Baggage.


Chau. Deliver up thy Panagron to me.


Trim. And give me thy Sindicus.


Cap. Deliver?


Bau. I pray you Captain be contented, the Gentlemen seem to give us very
good words.


Chau. Good words? I if you could understand 'um, the words cost twenty pound.


Bau. What is your pleasure Gentlemen?


Chau. I would enucleate my Fructifer.


Who. What says he Patroness?


Bau. He would enoculate: I understand the Gentleman very pithily.


Cap. Speak, are you Gentile or Plebeyan, can you give Arms?


Chau. Arms? I sir, you shall feel our arms presently.


Trim. Sault you the Women, I Will pepper him til he stinks again: I perceive what
Countryman he is, let me alone with him.


Cap. Dare thou charge a Captain?


Trim. Yes, and discharge upon him too.


Cap. Foh, it is poison to my Country, the slave has eaten pippins: Oh shoot no
more, turn both thy Broad-sides rather then thy Poope: it is foul play: my
Country breeds no poison: I yield, the great O Tool shall yield on these
conditions.


Chau. I have given one of 'um a fair fall Trim.


Trim. Then thus far we bring home Conquest: follow me Captain, the Cyclops
does command.


Chau. Follow me Tweaks, the Centaure does command.


Bau. Any thing sweet Gentlemen, wilt please you to lead to the Tavern, where
we will make all friends.


Trim. Why now you come to the conclusion.


Chau. Stay, Trim; I have heard your Tweakes are like your Mer maids, they
have sweet voices to entice the passengers: lets have a Song, and then we will
set 'um at liberty.


Trim. In the commendation of Roaring, not else Sir,

Chau. I, in the commendation of Roaring,

Bau. The best we can Gentlemen.
Sing Baud.
THen here thou shall resign
Both Captain and Commander,
That name was never thine,
But Apple-Squire and Pander.
And henceforth will we grant,
In pillage or in moneys,
In clothing or prouant,
What ere we get by Conies:
With a hone, a hone, a hone,
No Cheaters nor Decoyes,
Shall have a share, but alone
The brauest Roaring Boys.
What are we get by Gulls,
Of Country or of City:
Old Flatcaps or young Heirs,
Or Lawyers Clerks so witty:
By Sailors newly landed,
To put in for fresh waters:
By wandering Gander-mooners:
Or mufled late night-walkers. With a, etc.

What are we get by Strangers,
The Scotch, the Dutch, or Irish:
Or to come nearer home,
By Masters of the Parish.
It is concluded thus,
By all and every wench,
To take of all their coins,
And pay 'um back in French. With a, etc.


Chapter Melodious Minotaure.

Tr. Harmonious Hippocrene.

Chapter Sweet-brested Bronsterops.

Tr. Most runable Tweake.

Chau. Delicious Duplar.

Trim. Putrefactious Panagron.

Chapter Calumnious Calieut.

Tr. And most singular Sindicus.

Bau. We shall never be able to deserve these good words at your hands
Gentlemen.


Cap. Shake golls with the Captain, he shall be thy valiant friend.


Chau. Not yet Captain, we must make an end of our Roaring first.


Trim. We Will serve 'um as we did the Tobacco-man: lay a curse upon 'um, marry
we will lay it on gently, because they have used us so kindly, and then we will
shake gols together.


Who. As gently as you can, sweet Gentlemen.


Chapter For thee, Oh Pander: may thou trudge till the damned soles of thy boots
fleet into dirt, but never rise into Air.


Trim. Next, may thou fleet so long from place to place, till thou be
kicked out of Fleetstreet.


Chau. As thou have lived by bad flesh, so rotten mutton be thy bane.


Trim. When thou art dead, may twenty whores follow thee, that thou may go a
Squire to thy grave.


Cap. Enough for me sweet faces, let me sleep in my grave.


Chapter For thee old Sindicus, may I see thee ride in a Caroch with two wheels,
and drawn with one horse.


Trim. Ten Beadles running by, in stead of footmen.


Cha. With every one a whip, steed of an Irish dart.


Trim. Forty Barbers Basins sounding before in steed of Trumpets.


Bau. This will be comely indeed sweet Gentlemen Roarers.


Trim. Thy Russe starch't yellow with rotten Eggs.


Chau. And may thou then be drawn from Holborne, to Hounslow-Heath.


Trim. And then be burnt to Colebrooke for destroying of Maydenhead.


Bau. I will study to deserve this kindness at your hands Gentlemen.


Chau. Now for thee little Fucus, May thou first serve out thy time as a
Tweake, and then become a Bronstrops as she is.


Trim. May thou have a reasonable good Spring, for thou art like to have many
dangerous soul falls.


Chau. May thou have two Ruffes torn in one week.


Trim. May Spiders only weaue thy Cobweb-lawne:


Chau. May thou set up in Rogue Lane.


Trim. Live till thou stink'st in Garden-Allyes.


Chau. And die sweetly in Tower-Ditch.


Who. I thank you for that good sir Roarer.


Chapter Come, shall we go now Trim, my father in law stays for me all this while.


Trim. Nay, I Will serve 'um as we did the Tobacco-man: I Will bury 'um
altogether, and give 'um an Epitaph.


Chaugh. All together Trim, why then the Epitaph will be accessory to the
sin: alas, he has kept the door all his life time, for pity let 'um lie
together in their graves.


Ca. Eene as thou will Trim, and I thank you too sir.


Trim. He that the reason would know, let him hark,
Why these two were buried near Maribone Park:
These three were a Pander, a Band, and a Whore,
That sucked many dry to the bones before.
Well you know how they lived? heer't may be red,
The low Countries did ever find 'um bred,
They lived by Flushing, by Sluice, and the Greyne,
Sickened in France, and dyed under the Line.
Three letters at last commended 'um hither,
But the hangman broke one in putting together.
P. was the first, who cries out for a Pardon,
O. craves his book, yet could not read such a hard one,
An X. was the last, which in conjunction
Was broke by Brandon, and here is the conclusion.
By three trees, three letters; these three, Pander, Band, Whore:
Now stink below ground, stunke long above before.

Chau. So, now we have done with you, remember Roaring Boys.


Trim. Farewell Centaure.


Chau. Farewell Bronsterops.


Trim. Farewell Fucus.


Exeunt Chaugh and Trim. Cap. Well Meg: I will learn to Roar, and still
maintain the name of Captain over these Launcepresadoes.


Bau. If thou do not, may thou be buried under the Roaring curse. Exeunt.


Actus Quintus, Scaena prima.
Enter Physician: Jane as a Bride. Phis. Will you be obstinate?


Jane. Torment me not,
Thou lingering Executioner to death,
Greatest disease to Nature, that striu'st by Art
To make men long a dying, your practice is
Upon men's bodies, as men pull Roses,
For their own relish, but to kill the flower
So you maintain your lives by others deaths,
What eat you then by carrion?

Phis. Fie bitterness,
Ye'ad need to candy ore your tongue a little,
Your words will hardly be digested else,

Jane. You can give your self a vomit to return 'um,
If they offend your stomach,

Phis. Here my vow
You are to be married to day.

Jane. A second torment,
Worse then the first, cause unavoidable,
I would I could as soon annihilate
My Fathers will in that as forbid thy lust.

Phis. If you then tender an unwilling hand,
Meet it with revenge, marry a Cuckolde.

Jane If thou will marry me, I Will make that vow,
And give my body for satisfaction
To him that should enjoy me for his wife.

Phis. Go to, I Will mar your marriage.

Jane Do, plague me so.
I Will rather bear the brand of all that's past,
In Capital Characters upon my Brow,
Then think to be thy whore or marry him,

Phis. I will defame thee ever.

Jane Spare me not.

Phis. I will produce thy Bastard,
Bring thee to public penance,

Jane No matter, I care not,
I shall (...) have a clean sheet, I Will wear twenty
Rather then one desil'd with thee.

Phis. Look for Revenge.

Jane. Pursue it fully then, out of his hate,
I shall pursue (I hope) a loathed fate. Exit Jane

Phis. Am I rejected, all my baits nibled off,
And not the fish caught? I Will trouble the whole stream,
And choke it in the mudde, since hooks not take,
I Will throw in nets that shall or kill or break.
This is the Bridegroomes man, hark sir, a word.

Enter Trimtram with Rosemarie. Trim. It Is a busy day sir, nor I need no
physic,
You see I scour about my business.

Phis. Pray you a word sir, your Master is to be married to day.


Trim. Else all this Rosemaries lost.

Phis. I would speak with your master sir.

Trim. My Master sir, is to be married this morning and cannot be within
while soon at night.


Phy. If you will do your master the best service,
That ere you did him, if he shall not curse
Your negligence hereafter slacking it:
If he shall bless me for the dearest friend
That ever his acquaintance met withal,
Let me speak with him ere he go to Church.

Trim. A right Physician, you would have none go to the Church, nor Churchyard
till you send them thither; well, if death do not spare you your selves, he
deals hardly with you, for you are better benefactors and send more to him
then all diseases besides.


Chau. within. What Trimtram, Trimtram?


Trim. I come sir. Hark you, you may hear him, he is upon the spur and would
feign mount the saddle of Matrimony, but (if I can) I Will persuade him to come to
you. Exit Trim


Phy. Pray you do sir: I Will teach all peevish nicenes
To beware the strong advantage of revenge.

Enter Chaugh. Chau. Who Is that would speak with me?

Phy. None but a friend sir.
I would speak with you.

Chau. Why sir, and I dare speak with any man under the universe, can you
roar sir?


Phy. No infaith sir.
I come to tell you mildly for your good,
If you please to hear me: you are upon Marriages

Chau No sir, I an toward it, but not upon it yet.


Phy. Do you know what you do?


Chau. Yes sir, I have practiced what to do before now, I would be ashamed to
be married else: I have seen a Bronstrops in my time, and a Hippocreene, and a
Tweke too.


Phy. Take fair heed sir, the wife that you would marry is not fit for you.


Cha. Why sir, have you tried her?


Phy. Not I believe it sir, but believe with all, She has been tried.


Chau. Why sir, is she a Fructifer? or a Fucus?


Phi. All that I speak sir, is in love to you, Your Bride, that may be, 'has
not that portion that a Bride should have.


Chau. Why sir? she has a thousand and a better penny.


Phy. I do not speak of rubish, dross, and ore, But the refined Mettle,
Honor sir.


Chau. What she wants in honor shall be made up in worship sir, money will
purchase both.


Phy, To be plain with you, she is naught. draws his sword


Chau. If thou can not roar thou art a dead man, my Bride naught?


Phy. Sir, I do not fear you that way, what I speak, My life shall
mainetaine, I say she is naught.


Chau. Do thou not fear me*


Phy. Indeed I do not sir.


Chau. I Will never draw upon the while I live for that trick, put up and speak
freely.


Phy. Your intended Bride is a whore, that's freely sir,

Chau. Yes says, a whor's free enough, and she has a conscience: is snee a
whore? Foot I warrant she has the Pox then?


Phy. Worse, the Plague, it is more incurable,

Chau. A plaguie whore? a pox on her I Will none of her,

Phy. Mine accusation shall have firm evidence.
I will produce an vnaubided witness,
A bastard of her bearing.

Chau, A Bastard? 'snailes, there is great suspicion she is a whore then, I Will
wrestle a fall with her father for putting this trick upon me as I am a
Gentleman.


Phy. Good sir mistake me not, I do not speak
To break the contract of united hearts,
I will not pull that curse upon my head,
To separate the husband and the wife,
But this (in love) I thought fit to reveal,
(As the due office betwixt man and man)
That you might not be ignorant of your ills,
Consider now of my premonishment,
As your self shall please.

Chau. I Will burn all the Rose mary to sweeten the house, for in my conscience
it is infected: has she drunk Bastard? if she would piss me wine Viniger now
nine times a day I Would never have her, and I thank you too.


Enter Trimtram Trim. Come, will you come away sir, they have all Rosemary and
stay for you to lead the way.


Chau. I Will not de married to day Trimtram, has't ere an Almanacke about thee?
this is the nintenth of August, look what day of the month it is. Looks in an
Almanacke.


Trim. It Is tenty nine indeed sir.

Chau. What Is the word? what says Bretnor?

Trim. The word is sir, there is a hole in her coat.

Chau. I thought so, the Physician agrees with him, I Will not marry to day.


Trim. I pray you sir, there will be charges for new Rosemary else, this will
be withered by to morrow.


Chau. Make a Bon fire ont to sweeten Rosemary Lane prithee Trim. entreat my
father in law that might have be^^^, to come and speak with me.


Trim. The Bride cries already and looks to there way, and you be so backward
too, we shall have a fine arseward wedding on it. Exit Trim.


Chau. You Will stand to your words, sir?

Phis. I Will not fly the house sir, when you have need call me to evidence. Exit
Physician.


Chau. If you will prove she has borne a Bastard, I Will stand to it she is a whore.


Enter Russell and Trimtram. Russ. Why how now son what causes these
delays? All stay for your leading.


Chau. Came I from the mount to be confronted?

Russ. How Is that sir?

Chau. Can thou roar old man;

Russ. Roar? how mean you sir?

Chau. Why then I Will tell thee plainly thy daughter in a Bronstrops.


Russ. A Bronsterop? What Is that sir?

Trim. Sir if she be so she is a Hippocrene.

Chau. Nay worse she is a fructifer.

Trim. Nay then she is a Fucus, a Minotaure, and a Tweke.

Russ. Pray you speak to my understanding sir,

Chau. If thou will have it in plain terms: She is a Callicut, and a Panagron.


Trim. Nay then she is a Duplar and a Sindicus.

Russ. Good sir, speak English to me.

Chau. All this is Cornish to thee, I say thy Daughter has drunk Bastard in
her time.


Russ. Bastard you do not mean to make her a whore?

Chau. Yes but I do, if she make a fool of me, I Will nere make her my wife,
till she have her maidenhead again?


Russ. A whore? I do defy this Callumnie.

Chau. Do thou? I defy thee then.

Trim. Do you sir, then I defy thee too, fight with us both at once in this
quarrel if thou dare.


Chau. I could have had a whore at Plymouth.

Trim. I or at Perin.

Chau. I or under the Mount.

Trim. Or as you came, at Evil.

Chau. Or at Hoc-kye hole in Somersetshire.

Trim. Or at the hanging stones in Wiltshire.

Chau. Or at Maidenhead in Barkshire: and did I come in by Maidenhead to go
out by Stains? Oh that man woman or child, would wrestle with me for a pound
of patience.


Russ. Some thief has put in poison at your ears.
To steal the good name of my child from me:
Or if it be a malice of your own,
Be sure I will enforce a proof from you.

Chau. He Is a goose and a woodcocke that says I will not prove any word that I
speak.


Trim. I either goose or Woodcocke he shall sir with any man.


Chau. Phi-si-ti-an, Mauz auez Physician.

Russ. Is he the author?

Phis. Sir, with much sorrow for your sorrows sake,
I must deliver this most certain truth,
Your daughter is an honor stained Bride,
Indeed she is the mother to a child,
Before the lawful wife unto a husband.

Chau. Law, that's worse then I told thee, I said she had borne a Bastard, and
he says she was the mother ont too.


Russ. I Am yet an infidel against all this,
And will believe the Sun is made of Brass,
The Stars of amber.

Chau. And the moon of a holland cheese.

Russ. Rather then this impossibility, oh, here she comes,
Enter Jane and Anne. Nay come daughter, stand at the bar of shame,
Either now quit thy self, or kill me ever:
Your marriage day is spoyld if all be true.

Jane. A happy misery, whose my accuser?

Phis. I am that knows it true I speak,

Chau. Yes and I Am his witness.

Trim. And I.

Chau. And I again.

Trim. And I again too,
there is four that's enough I hope.

Russ. How can you witness sir that nothing know,
But what you have received from his report.

Chau. Must we not believe our Physicians? pray you think
I know as much as every fool does.

Trim. Let me be Trimtram: I pray you too sir.

Jane. Sir if this bad man have laid a blemish
On my white name: he is a most false one,
Defaming me for the just denial
Of his soul lust, nay now you shall be known sir.

An Sir I Am his sister and do better know him,
Then all of you give not too much belief
To his wild words, he is oftentimes mad sir.

Phis. I thank you good sister.

An. Are you not mad to do this Office,
Fie upon your malice.

Phis. I Will presently produce both nurse and Child,
Whose very eyes shall call her mother, before it speaks.

Chau. Ha, ha, ha, ha, by my troth I Would spend a shilling on that condition to
hear that, I think in my conscience I shall take the Physician in a lie if the
Child call her mother before it can speak, I Will never wrestle while I live
again.


Trim. It must be a she child if it do sir, and those speak the soonest of
any living Creatures they say.


Chau. Baw waw, a dog will bark a Month sooner, he is a very puppy else.


Russ. Come tell truth twixt our selves, heers none but friends
One spot a fathers love will soon wipe off?
The truth and they try my love abundant,
I Will cover it with all the care I have*
And yet (perhaps) make up a marriage day.

Jane. Then its true sir, I have Child.

Russ. Have thou?
Well wipe thine eyes, I Am a Grandfather then,
If all bastards were banished, the City would be thin,
In the thickest term time, well now let me alone
I Will try my wits for thee, Richard, Francis, Andrew,
None of my knaves within?

Enter his Servant. Ser. Heeres one of'um, sir, the Guests come in apace.

Russ. Do they dick? let 'um have wine and sugar, we will before 'um presently,
but hark Dick.


Cha. I long to hear this child speak in faith, Trim, I would this foolish
Physician would come once.


Trim. If it calls her mother, I hope it shall never call you father.


Chau. No, and it do I Will whip it in faith, and give thee leave to whip me.


Russ. Run on thy best legs Dicke.

Seru. I Will be here in a twinkling sir. Exit Ser.

Enter Physician, Nurse, with the child. Phy. Now Gentlemen, believe your
eyes, if not my tongue Do not you call this your child?


C. Phew, that's not the point you promised us the child should call her Mother,
if it does this month, I Will nere go to the roaring school again.


Russ. Whose child is this Nurse?

Nurse. Dis Gentleman's, so he to me readen. Points to the Physician.

Chapter Snailes she is the Physicians Bronstrops, Trim.

Trim. His Fucus, his very Tweke, in faith.

Chau. A glister in his teeth, let him take her with a purgation to him.


Russ. It Is as your sister said: you are stark mad, sir,
This much confirms it, you have defamed
Mine honest daughter: I Will have you punished fort,
Besides the civil penance of your sin,
And keeping of your bastard.

Phis. This is fine,
All your wit and wealth must not thus carry it.

Russ. Sir Chaugh a word with you.

Chau. I Will not have her in faith, sir, if Trimtram will have her and he will let
him.


Trim. Who I, sir? I scorn it, if you will have her, I Will have her too, I Will do as
you do, and no otherwise.


Russ. I do not meant to either, this only, sir,
That whatsoere you have seen, you would be silent,
Hinder not my child of another husband,
Though you forsake her.

Chau. I Will not speak a word, in faith,

Russ. As you are a gentleman.

Chau. By these basket hilts, as I am a youth,
A gentleman a Roarer.

Russ. Charm your man I beseech you too.

Chau. I warrant you sir he shall do nothing but what I do before him.


Enter Servant with Fitzallen. Russ. I shall most dearly thank you, Oh are you
come,
Welcome son in law: this was beyond your hope,
We old men have pretty conceits sometimes,
Your Wedding daye's prepared, and this is it,
How think you of it?

Fitz. As of the ioyfulst
That ever welcomd me, you show your self now
A pattern to all kind fathers: my sweetest Jane,

Russ. Your captivity I meant but as sauce,
Unto your Wedding dinner, now, I Am sure
It Is far more welcome in this short restraint
Then had it freely come:

Fitz. A thousand fold.

Jane. I like this well.

Chau. I have not the heart to see this Gentleman guld so, I will reveal, I
make it mine own case it is a foul case.


Trim. Remember you have sworn by your hilts.

Chau. I Will break my hilts rather then conceal, I have a trick Do thou follow
me, I will reveal it, and yet not speak it neither.


Trim. It Is my duty to follow you sir.

Chaugh sings. Take heed in time oh man unto thy head,

Trim. Sings. All is not gold that glistereth in bed.

Russ. Why sir? why sir?

Chau. Look to it I say, thy Bride's a Bronsterops,

Trim. And knows the thing that men wear in their slops,

Fitz. How Is this sir?

Chau. A Hipocrene, a Tweke, for and a Fueus,

Trim. Let not fond love with foretops so rebuke us.

Russ. Good sir.

Chau. Behold a baby of this maids begetting,

Trim. A deed of darkness after the sunsetting.

Russ. Your Oath sir.

Chau: I swear and sing thy Bride has taken Phisike,

Trim. This was the Doctor curd her of that Ptisicke.

Chau. If you will believe me I will say no more,

Trim. Thy Brides a Tweke as we do say that roar.

Chau. Bear witness Gentlemen I have not spoke a word,
My hilts are hole still.

Fitz. This is a sweet Epithalamium,
Unto the Marriage bed, a musical
Harmonius Io: sir, yaue wronged me,
And basely wronged me, was this your cunning fetch,
To Fetch me out of prison, for ever
To marry me unto a Strumpet?

Russ. None of those words good sir,
It Is but a fault, and it is a sweet one too,
Come sir, your means is short, lengthen your fortunes,
With a fair proffer: I Will put a thousand pieces
Into the scale to help her to weigh it up,
Above the first dowry.

Fitz. Ha? you say, well
Shame may be bought out at a dear rate,
A thousand pieces added to her dowry.

Russ. There Is five hundred of 'um to make the Bargain,
I have worthy guests coming and would not delude 'um,
Say: speak like a Son to me.

Fitz. Your blessing sir, we are both yours, witness Gentlemen these must be
made up a thousand pieces, added to a first thousand for her dowry, to father
that child,


Phis. Oh is it out now?

Chau. For the other thousand I Will do it my self yet.

Trim. Or I, if my Master will.

Fitz. The Bargaine's made, sir, I have the tender
And possession both; and will keep my purchase,

Chaw. Take her eene to you with all her moueables, i will wear my batchellors
buttons still.


Trim. So will I in faith; they are the best flowers in any man's garden, next to
hartsease.


Fitz. This is as welcome as the other sir,
And both as the best bliss that ere on earth,
I shall enjoy, sir, this is mine own child,
You could not have found out a sitter Father
Nor is it basely bred as you imagine
For we were wedded by the hand of heaven
Ere this work was begun.

Chaw. At Pancridge, i will lay my life on it,

Trim. I Will lay my life on it too, it was there,

Fitz. Some where it was, sir,

Russ. Wa'st so in faith son?

Jane. And that I must have reuea'ld to you, sir,
Ete I had gone to Church with this fair groom,
But thank this gentleman, he prevented me,
I am much bound unto your malice sir.

Phi. I am a shamed

Jane. Shame to amendment then.

Russ. Now get you together for a couple of cunning ones,
But son, a word, the latter thousand pieces
Is now more then bargain.

Fitz No by my faith sir
Here Is witness enough ont, must serve to pay my fees
Imprisonment is costly

Chaw. By my troth the old man has gul'd himself, finely, well sir, I Will bid
my self a guest, though not a groom, I Will dine and dance, and roar at the
wedding for all this.


Trim. So will I sir, if my Master does,

Russ. Well sir, you are welcome, but now, no more words on it,
Till we be set at dinner for there will mirth
Be the most useful for digestion,
See, my best guests are coming.

Enter Captain Ager, Surgeon, Lady Ager Colonells Sister, two friends. Cap.
Recouerd say thou.


Surg. May I be excluded quite out of Surgeons hall else, marry I must tell
you the wound was feign to be twice Coroded, 'twas a plain Gastrolophe, and a
deep one, but I closed the lips on it with Bandages and Sutteures, which is a
kind conjunction of the parts separated against the course of nature.


Capt. Well sir, he is well


Sur. I feared him I assure you Captain before the Surture in the belly, it
grew almost to a convulsion, and there was like to be a bloody issue from the
hollow vessels of the kidnyes.


gives him money. Capt. There Is that, to thank thy new^s and thy Art together.


Sur. And if your worship at any time stand in need of incission, if it be your
fortune to light into my hands, i will give you the best.


Cap. Uncle, the noble Colonells recouerd,


Russ. Recovered.
Then honor is not dead in all parts Cusse.

Enter Colonel with his too friends. 1. Behold him yonder sir.


Capt: My much unworthiness is now found out,
Tha'st not a face to fi^ it.

Colo. fry. Sir yonder is Captain Ager.

Colo. O Lieftenant the wrong I have done his same,
Puts me to silence, shame so confounds me,
That I dare not see him.

Capt: I never knew how poor my deserts were,
Till he appeard'; no way to give requital,
Here shame me lastingly; do it with his own,
Return this to him, tell him I have Riches
In that abundance in his sisters love,
These come but to oppress me, and confound
All my deseruings everlastingly:
I never shall requite my wealth in her say,
How soon from virtue and an honored spirit,
May man receive what he may never merit.

Colo. This comes most happily, to express me better,
For since this will was made there fell to me
The manner of Fitz-dale, give h'um that too,
He Is like to have chardge there is fair hope
Of my sisters fruitfullnesse, for me
I never mean to change my mistress,
And war is able to maintain her servant,

1. Read there, a fair increase sir, by my faith,
He has sent it back sir, with new additions.

Capt. How miserable he makes me, this inforces me
To break through all the passadges of shame
And headlong fall,

Colo. Into my arms dear worthy.

Capt. You have a goodness
Has put me past my answers, you may speak,
what you please now; I must be silent ever,

Colo. This day has showen me joys vnualeu'd treasure,
I would not change this brotherhood with a monarch,
Into which blessed aliance sacred heaven
H^'s placed my kinsman, and given him his ends
Fair be that Quarrel makes such happy friends.

Exeunt Omnes. FINIS.

