THE WISDOM of Solomon Paraphrased. Written by Thomas Middleton.

A Joue surgit opus.

Printed at London by Valentine Sems, dwelling on Adling hill at the sign of
the white Swanne. 1597.

To the right Honorable and my very good Lord, Robert Deuoreux, Earl of Essex
and Ewe, Vicount of Hereford, Lord Ferrers of Chartley, Boutcher, and Louayne,
Master of her Majesty's Horse and Ordonance, Knight of the honorable order of
the Gartor, and one of her Majesty's most hon^rable privy Counsel.
THe Summers Harvest, (right Honorable) is long since reapt, and now it is
sowing time again: behold, I have scattred a few seeds upon the young ground
of unskillfulness, if it bear fruit, my labor is well bestowed, but if it be
barren, I shall have less joy to set more. The husbandman observes the courses
of the Moon, I, the forces of your favor: he desires sunshine, I, cheerful
countenance: which once obtained, my harvest of joy will soon be ripened. My
seeds, as yet, lodge in the bosom of the earth, like Infantes upon the lap
of a Favorite, wanting the budding springtime of their growth, not knowing
the Est of their glory, the west of their quietness, the South of their
summer, the North of their winter: but if the beams of your aspectes lighten
the small moytie of a smaller implanting, I shall have an euery-day-haruest, a
fruition of content, a branch of felicity.

Your Honors addicted in all observance, Thomas Midleton.

To the Gentlemen Readers.
GEntlemen, I give you the surueyaunce of my new-bought ground, and will only
stand unto your verdicts, I fear me, that the acres of my field pass the
anchers of my seed, if wanting seed, then I hope it will not be to much seeded:
this is my bare excuse: but trust me, had my wit been sufficient to maintain
the freedom of my will, then both should have been answerable to your wishes,
yet nevertheless think of it as a willing, though not a fulfilling moity. But
what mean I? while I thus argue, Momus and Zoylus, those two Ravens devour my
seed, because J lack a Scarrecrowe: indeed so J may have less than I have,
when such fowle-gutted Ravens swallowe up my portion: if you gape for stuffing,
hie you to dead carrion carcasses, and make them your Ordinaries; J beseech
you Gentlemen, let me have your aid, and as you have seen the first practice
of my husbandry in sowing, so let me have your helping hands unto my reaping.

Yours devoted in friendship. Thomas Middleton

The Wisdom of Solomon paraphrased.
CHAP. 1.

Has taught her lesson to judicial views,
To those that judge a cause and end a strife,
Which sits in Judgments seat and Justice use:
A lesson worthy of diuinest ear,
Quintessence of a true diuinest scare.
Unwilling that exordium should retain,
Her life-infusing speech, does thus begin,
You (quoth she) that give remedy or pain:
Love Justice, for injustice is a sin.
Give unto God his due, his reverent style;
And rather use simplicity then guile.
For him, that guides the radiant eye of day,

The Horizons and hemespheres obey,
And winds the fillers of vacultie:
Much less should man tempt God, when all obey,
But rather be a guide, and lead the way.
For temting argues but a sins attempt,
Temptation is to sin associate;
So doing, thou from God art clean exempt,
Whose love is never placde, in his loves hate,
He will be found, not of a tempting mind,
But found of those which he does faithful find.

Converting goodness from the thing it was,
Heaping the indignation of his rod,
To bruise our bodies like a brittle glass:
For wicked thoughts have still a wicked end,
In making God our foe, which was our friend.
They muster vpreuenge, encamp our hate,
Undoing what before they meant to do,
Stirring up anger, and unlucky fate,
Making the earth their friend, the heaven their foe:
But when heavens guide makes manifest his power,
The earth, their frinds, does them like foes devour.

O hateful hearts where wisdom never raignd,
O wicked thoughts which ever thought amiss,
What have you reapt? what pleasure have you gaind?
A fruit in show, a pleasure to decay,
This have you got by keeping follies way.
For wisdoms harvest is with folly nipt,
And with the winter of your vices frost,
Her fruit all scattered her implanting ripped,
Her name decayed, her fruition lost:
Nor can she prosper in a plot of vice,
Gaining no summers warmth, but winters ice.

Thou fruitles womb, where never fruits abide,
And thou drie-withered sap which bears no good,
But the dishonor of thy proud hearts pride:
A seat of al deceit, deceit, deceaude,
Thy bliss, a woe, thy woe of bliss bereaude.
This place of night has left no place for day,
Here never shines the sun of discipline,
But mischief clad in sable nights array,
Thoughts apparition, evil Angel^s sign,
These reign enhoused with their mother Night,
To cloud the day of clearest wisdoms light.
Oh you that practice to be chief in sin,

What do you gain? what merit do you win,
To be blaspheming vices practiser?
Your gain is wisdoms everlasting hate,
Your merit, grief, your grief, your lives debate.
Thou can not hide thy thought, god made thy thought,
Let this thy caucat be for thinking ill,
Thou know that Christ thy living freedom boght,
To live on earth according to his will:
God being thy creator, Christ thy bliss,
Why do thou err? why do thou do amiss?

He knows the volume which thy heart contains,
Christ skips thy faults, only thy virtue reads,
Redeeming thee from all thy vices pains:
O happy crown of mortal man's content,
Sent for our joy, our joy in being sent.
Then sham'st thou not to err, to sin, to stray,
To come to composition with thy vice,
With new-purg'd feet to tread the ouldest way,
Lending new sense unto thy old device?
Thy shame might flow in thy sin-flowing face,
Rather then ebb to make an ebb of grace.

And the ineqall course of every star,
Did know man's thoughts and secreats at his birth,
Whither enclinde to peace or discords jar:
He knows what man will be ere he be man,
And all his deeds in his life's living span.
Then it is impossible that earth can hide,
Unrighteous actions from a righteous God,
For he can see their feet in sin that slide,
And those that lodge in righteousness abode:
He will extend his mercy on the good,
His wrath on those in whom no virtues bud.

Will seek a covert for to hide their shame,
And range about the earth, thinking to shun,
Gods heavy wrath, and meritorious blame:
They thinking to fly sin, run into sin,
And think to end, when they do new begin.
God made the earth, the earth denies their suit,
Nor can they harbor in the centres womb,
God knows their thoughts, although their tongs be mute,
And hears the sounds from forth their bodies tomb:
Sounds? ah no sounds, but man himself he hears,
Too true a voice of man's most falsest fears.

Mantling her self in wickedness array,
Hoping to make thy body as her bed,
Thy vice her nutriment, thy soul her pray:
Thou have forsaken him that was thy guide,
And see what follows to assuage thy pride.
Thy roaring vices noise, has cloyd his ears,
Like foaming waves they have orewhelmde thy joy,
Thy murmurings which thy whole body bears
Has bred thy wail, thy wail, thy life's annoy,
Unhappy thoughts to make a souls decay,
Unhappy soul in suffering thoughts to sway.

Is plunged within the pudle of misdeedes:
And wades amongst discredits infamy,
Blasting the merit of his virtues seeds,
Beware of murmuring, the chiefest ill,
From whence all sin, all vice, all pains distill.
O heavy doom proceeding from a tongue,
Heavy light tongue; tongue to thy own decay,
In virtue weak, in wickedness too strong,
To mischief prone, from goodness gone astray;
Hammer to forge misdeedes, to temper lies,
Selling thy life to death, thy soul to cries.

With the dead carcass of descending spirit?
Will thou of force be snared in his gin,
And place thy error in destructions merit:
Life seek not for thy death, death comes unsought,
Buying the life which not long since was bought.
Death and destruction never needs a call,
They are attendants on lives pilgrimage,
And life to them is as their playing ball.
Grounded upon destructions anchorage,
Seek not for that which unsought will betide,
Nere wants destruction a provoking guide.

Will you needs harbor your own overthrow?
Or will you cause your own euersion?
Beginning with despair, ending with woe:
Then die your hearts in tyrannies arraie,
To make acquittance of destructions pay.
What do you meditate but on your death?
What do you practice but your living fall?
Who of you all have any virtues breath,
But ready armed at a mischiefs call?
God is not pleased at your vices savor,
But you best pleased when you lose his favor.

But you to conquer over death and hell.
Nor you to be destructions seruitor,
Enhoused there where Majesty should dwell:
God made man to obey at his beheast,
And man to be obayde of every beast,
He made not death to be our labors hire,
But we our selves made death through our desert,
Here never was the kingdom of hell fire,
Before the brand was kindled in man's heart:
Now man defieth God, all creatures, man,
Vice flourishes, and virtue lies wan.

Whose blossoms ever bud, whose fruits increase,
Whose top celestial virtues seat has been,
Defended by the soueraintie of peace:
This tree is righteousness, o happy tree,
Immortalized by thine own decree.
O hateful plant whose root is always dry,
Whose blossoms never bud, whose fruits decrease:
On whom sits the infernal deity,
To take possession of so foul a lease;
This plant is vice, O too unhappy plant,
Ever to die, and never fill deaths want.

Cancred with sin, shaken with every wind,
Whose top does nothing differ from the foot,
Mischief the sap, and wickedness the rhinde:
So the ungodly like this withered tree,
Is slack in doing good, in ill too free.
Like this their wicked growth, too fast, too slow,
Too fast in sloth, too slow in virtues have,
They think their vice a friend, when it is a foe,
In good, in wickedness, too slow, too fast:
And as this tree decays, so do they all,
Each one copartner of the others fall.
Chapter II.

With the misgiuing verdict of misdeeds,
They know a fall will follow after pride,
And in so foul a heart grows many weeds:
Our life is short, quoth they, no it is too long,
Lengthned with evil thoughts, and evil tongue.
A life must needs be short to them that dies,
For life once dead in sin, does weakly live:
These die in sin, and mask in deaths disguise,
And never think, that death new life can give;
They say, life dead, can never live again,
O thoughts, o words, o deeds, fond, foolish, vain.

Abodes worse then are thoughts, thoughts worse then words,
Words half as ill as deeds, deeds sorrows odes,
Odes ill inchaunters of too ill records;
Thoghts, words, and deeds conoyined in one song,
May cause an Echo from destructions tongue.
Quoth they, it is chance whether we live or die,
Borne, or abortiue, be, or never be,
We worship fortune, she is our deity,
If she denies, no vital breath have we.
Here are we placed in this orb of death,
This breath once gone, we never look for breath.

Between our joy and grief, bliss and despair,
We here possess the fruit of what is here,
Borne ever for to die, and die deaths heir:
Our heritage is death annexde to life,
Our portion death, our death an endless strife,
What is our life but our lives tragedy,
Extinguishde in a momentary time?
And life to murder life, is cruelty
Vnripely withering in a flowrie prime;
And vrne of ashes pleasing but the shows,
Once dry, the toiling spirit wandering goes.

Gives way when Tytan resalutes the sea,
With new-changd flames guilding the Oceans floods,
Kissing the cabinet where I hetis lay:
So fares our life, when death does give the wound,
Our life is led by death, a captive bound.
When Sol bestrides his golden mountains top,
Lightning heavens tapors with his living fire,
All gloomye powers have their diurnall stop,
And never gains the darkness they desire;
So perishes our name when we are dead,
Our selves nere called to mind, our deeds nere read.

No time, but shadow of what time should be,
Days in the place of hours which never stays,
Beguiling sight of that which sight should see;
As soon as the begin they have their fine,
Nere wax, still waine, nere stay, but still decline,
Life may be called the shadow of effect,
Because the cloud of death does shadow it,
Nor can our life approaching death reject,
They both in one for our election sit;
Death follows life in every degree,
But life to follow death you never see.

Like limping winter, in our winter, sin,
Faulty we know we are, tush, what is a fault?
A shadowed vision of destructions gin;
Our life begun with vice, so let it end,
It is a servile labor to amend.
We ioyde in sin, and let our joys renew,
We ioyed in vice, and let our joys remain,
To present pleasures future hopes ensue,
And joy once lost, let us fetch back again;
Although our age can lend no youthful pace,
Yet let our minds follow our youthful race.

Anotomie of an age crooked clime,
Let mind perform that which our bodies lack,
And change old age into a youthful time;
Two heavy things are more then one can bear,
Black may the garments be, the body clear.
Decaying things be needful of repair,
Trees eaten out with years must needs decline,
Nature in time with foul does cloud her fair,
Begitting youthful days with ages twine;
We live, and while we live, come let us joy,
To think of after life, it is but a toy.

But we will unmake, and make our selves again;
Unmake that which is made, like winters storm*
Make unmade things to aggrauate our pain,
God was our maker, and he made us good,
But our descent springs from another blood.
He made us for to live, ^ee mean to die,
He made the heaven our seat, we make the earth,
Each fashion makes a contrariety,
God truest God, man falsest from his birth;
Quoth they, this earth shall be our chiefest heaven,
Our sin the anchor, and our vice the haven.

This earth is heaven, this heaven is earthly heaven:
Repugnant earth, repugnant heaven resist,
We joy in earth, of other joys bereauen;
This is the Paradise of our delight;
Here let us live, and die in heavens spght.
Here let the monuments of wanton sports
Be seated in a wantonness disguise;
Closde in the circuit of veneriall forts,
To feed the long starved sight of Amors eyes;
Be this the Chronicle of our content,
How we did sport on earth, till sport was spen^*

Heavens smoothest browe sometime is furrowed,
And clouds vsurp the clime in dim array,
Darkning the light which heaven had borrowed,
So in this earthly heaven we daily see,
That grief is placed where delight should be.
Here lives the righteous, bane unto their lives,
O sound from forth the hollow cave of woe,
Here lives age-crooked fathers, widowed wives;
Poor, and yet rich in fortunes overthrow;
Let them not live, let us increase their want,
Make barren their desire, augment their scant*

Our law to doom, is dooming laws offense,
Each one agrees in the others room,
To punish that which strives and wants defense;
This Cedar-like does make the shrub to bend,
When shrubs does wast their force but to contend.
The weakest power is subject to obey,
The mushroms humbly kiss the cedars foot,
The cedar florishes when they decay,
Because her strength is grounded on a root
We are the cedars, they the mushromes be,
Unabled shrubs, unto an abled tree.

The young the elder, and the foot the top,
The low, the high, the hidden powers, the face,
All beasts, the Lion, every spring, his stop;
Let those which practice contrariety,
Be joined to us with inequallity:
They say that we offend, we say they do,
Their blame is laid on us, our blame on them:
They stricke, and we retort the stricken blow,
So in each garment there is a differing hem;
We end with contraries as they begun,
Unequal sharing of what either wun.

Tongue new beginning what one tonque did end,
Made this cold battle hot in eithers wrong,
And kept no pawsing limits to contend;
One tongue was echo to the others sound,
Which breathed accents between mouth and ground
He which has virtues arms upon his shield,
Draws his descent from an eternal King:
He knows discretion can make folly yield,
Life conquer death, and vice a captive bring:
The other tutred by his mother sin,
Respects nor deeds, nor words, but hopes to win.

Reprooues the heart of thought, the eye of sight,
The ear of hearing ill, the mind of strife,
The mouth of speech, the body of despite;
^art thinks, eyes sees, ears hears, minds meditate,
Mouth vtters both the soul and bodies hate.
But Nature differing in each natures kind,
Makes differing hearts, each heart, a differing thought,
Some has she made to see, some folly blind,
Some famous, some obscure* some good, some naught.
So these which differs in each natures reason,
Had natures time, when t^me was out of season.

Our eyes of sight, our ears of hearing ill,
Our minds, our hearts in meditation linking,
Our mouths in speaking of our bodies will;
Because heart, sight, and mind do disagree.
Hee'ld make heart, sight, and mind of their decree.
He says, our heart is blinded with our eyes,
Our eyes are blinded with our blinded heart,
Our bodies on both parts defiled lies,
Our mouths the trumpets of our vices smart;
Quoth he, God is my Father, I his son,
His ways I take, your wicked ways I shun.

Within the deep crew of a wronged mind,
So meditated words is never past,
Before their sounds a settled harbor find;
The wicked answering to the latter words,
Begins to speak as much as speech affords.
One tongue must answer other tongues reply,
Beginning boasts, requires an ending fall;
Words lively spoke, do sometimes wordles dye,
If not, live Echoes unto speeches call;
Let not the shadow smother up the deed,
The outward leaf differs from in ward seed.

Does shape the substance in the shadows hue,
And shadow put in substance, will neglect
The wonted shadow of not being true:
Let substance follow substance, show a show,
And let not substance for the shadow go.
He that could give such admonition,
Such vaunting words, such words confirming vaunts,
As if his tongue had mounted to ambition,
Or clim'd the turrets which vainglory haunts:
Now let his father, if he be his son,
Undo the knot which his proud boasts have spun.
We are his enemies, his chain our hands,

Our stern embracements are his servile bands,
Where is the helper now which he should have?
In prison like himself, not to be found,
He wants help himself to be unbound.
Then since thy father bears it patiently,
To suffer torments, grief, rebuke, and blame,
It Is needful thou should bear equallity,
To see if meekness harbor in thy name,
Help father, for thy son in prison lies,
Help, son, or else thy helples father dies.

Drownde in oblivion with this vices reign,
God wants power (say they) of what we can,
The other would perform that which is vain;
Both faulty in one fault, and both alike,
Must have the stroke which our laws judgments strike
He calls himself a son, from heavens descent,
What can earths force aualie against heavens defense?
His life by immortality is lent:
Then how can punishment his wrath incense?
Though death her self in his arraignment deck,
He has his life's preserver at a beck.

Blind every function of a mortal eye,
Disarme the bodies powers of vital might,
Rob heart of thought, make living life to die:
So does the wicked with their vices look,
Infect the spring of clearest virtues brook.
This Basiliske mortalities chief foe,
And to the hearts long-knitted artery;
Does sometime perish at her shadows show,
Poysning her self with her own poisoned eye:
Needs must the sting fall out with ouer-harming,
Needs must the tongue burn out in ouer-warming.

Laden with many venomous adders stings,
Sometimes are blinded with their own device,
And tunes that song which their destruction sings;
Their mischeife blinds their mischeiuous eyes,
Like Basiliskes which in their shadow dies.
They go and yet they cannot see their feet,
Like blinded pilgrims in an unknown way,
Blind in perceiving things which be most meet,
But need nor sight nor guide to go astray;
Tell them of good, they cannot understand,
But tell them of a mischeife, that is at hand.
The Basiliske, was made to blind the sight,

The viper to devour, the dog to bite,
The nightingale to wake when others sleep;
Only man differs from his makers will,
Undoing what is good, and doing ill.
A god-like face he had, a heavenly hue,
Without corruption, image without spots.
But now is metamorphosed anewe,
Full of corruption, image full of blottes;
Blotted by him that is the plot of evil,
Undone, corrupted, vanquished by the devil.
Chapter III.
Phoebus face,
Nor shut the casement of his living flame,
Nor is there every soul which wants grace,
Nor every heart seducde with mischiefs name;
Life cannot live without corruption,
World cannot be without destruction.
Nor is the body all corrupt, or world
Bent wholly unto wickedness assault,
The adder is not always seen vncurlde,
Nor every soul found guilty in one fault;
Some good, some bad, but those whom virtues guard,
Heaven is their haven, comfort their reward.

Thrice happy step of immortality,
Thrice happy souls to gain such heavenly sight,
Springing from heavens perpetuity;
Oh peaceful place, but oh thrice peaceful souls,
Whom neither threats, nor strife, nor wars control*
They are not like the wicked, for they live,
Nor they, like to the righteous, for they die;
Each of their lives a differing nature give,
One thinks that life ends with mortality,
And that the righteous never live again,
But die as subjects to a grievous pain.

Knowing his hire, his payment, his reward?
To suffer winters cold, and summers heat,
Assured of his labors due regard?
The Be with summers toil will lade her hiue,
In winters frost to keep herself alive.
And what diuinest spirit would not toil,
And suffer many torments, many pains,
This worlds destruction, heavy labors foil,
When heaven is their hire, heavens joy their gains?
Who would not suffer torments for to die,
When deaths reward is immortality?

Death ends life, and death begins life,
Begins happy, ends in annoy,
Begins immortal peace, ends mortal strife;
Then seeing death and pains bring joy and heaven,
What need we fear deaths pain when life is given?
Say sickness or infairmities disease,
(As many harms hang over mortal heads)
Should be his worlds reward, yet heaven has ease,
A salve to cure, and quiet resting beds;
God makes in earths world, lament our pleasure.
That in heavens world, delight might be our treasure

After the ^^all follows the trust,
The clearest skin may have the soulest soul,
The purest gold will looner take the ruste:
The brook though nere so clear may take some foil,
The heart though nere so strong may take some foil.
Would thou be counted just? make thy self just,
Oh purify thy mire be spotted heart,
For god does try thy actions ere he trust,
Thy faith, thy deeds, thy words, and what thou art,
He will receive no mud, for clearest springs,
Nor thy unrighteous words for righteous things.

So he accepts none but perfect minds,
They ever prosper, flourish, live, and bud,
Like blessed plants, far from destructions winds:
Still bud, nere fade, still flourish, nere decay,
Still rise, nere fall, still spring, nere fade away.
Who would not covet to be such a plant?
Who would not wish to stand in such a ground?
Since it does neither fruit nor blessing want,
Nor ought which in this plant might not be found;
They are the righteous which enjoy this earth,
The figure of an euer-bearing birth.

The young to him which is of elder time,
The lowest place unto the highest seat,
And pale-facde Phoebe to bright Phoebus clime,
Vice is not gouerner of virtues place,
But blushes for to see see so bright a face.
Virtue is chief, and virtue will be chief,
Chief good, and chief Astraea, Justice mate,
Both for to punish and to yield relief,
And have dominion over every state:
To rghit the wrongs which wickedness has done,
Delivering Nations from life-lasting moan.

Sad facde petitioners with griefs request:
What seek you? heeres nor Justice, nor her heir,
But woe and sorrow with deaths dumb arrest:
Turn up your woe blind eyes unto the sky,
There sits the Judge can yield you remedy.
Trust in his power, he is the truest God,
True God, true Judge, true Justice, and true guide;
All truth is placed in his trueths abode,
All virtues seated at his verouous side:
He will regard your sure, and ease your plaint,
And mollify your miseries constraint.

Summoned with the trumpet of his ire,
To give account and reckning from their birth,
Where worthy or unworthy of their hire:
The godly shall receive their labors trial,
The wicked shall receive their joys denial.
They which did sleep in sin, and not regarded
The poor man's fortune, prostrate at their feet,
Even as they dealt, so shall they be rewarded,
When they their toyled souls destruction meet,
From Judges they petitioners shall be,
Yet want the sight which they do sue to see.

That hope which reason does enrich with hap,
That merit which is placde in wisdoms might,
Secure from mischiefs bait, or follies clap:
Wits labor, reasons hope, and wisedomess merit,
All three in one, make one thrice happy spirit.
Why set I happiness fore mortal eyes,
Which couets to be drencht in misery?
Mantling their foolish minds in follies guise,
Despising wisdoms perpetuity:
Sins labor, follies hope, and vices merit,
These three in one, make a thrice cursed spirit.

All foolish labors flows from follies tears,
Unprofitable works proceed from pain,
And pain ill labors duest guerdon bears:
Their vanities in one, and one in three,
Make three pains one, and one uncertainty,
A wicked King, makes a more wicked land,
Heads once infected, soon corrupts the feet,
If the tree falls, the branches cannot stand,
Nor children, be their parents indiscreet;
The man infects the wife, the wife the child,
Like birds, which in one nest be all defilde.

Is happier far, then a still tilled ground,
This sleeps with quietness in every year,
The other cursed if any tares be found,
The barren happier then she that bears,
This brings forth joy, the other tares and tears.
The Eunuch never lay in vices bed,
The barren woman, never brought forth sin,
These two in heavens happiness are led,
She fruit in soul, he fruit in faith does win:
O rare and happy man, for ever blessed,
O rare and happy woman, heavens guest.

Who looks for harvest among winters frost?
Or who in grief, will follow pleasures pipe?
What mariner can sail upon the coast?
That which is done in time, is done in season,
And things done out of time, is out of reason.
The glorious labor is in doing good,
In times observance, and in natures will,
Whose fruit is also glorious for our food,
If glory may consist in labors skill:
Whose root is wisdom, which shall never wither,
But spring, and sprout, and love, and live together.

Nor every plant brings forth expected fruit,
What this same ground may have, another wants,
Nor are all causes answered with one suit:
That tree whose root is sound, whose grounding strong,
May firmly stand when others lie along.
View natures beauty, mark her changing hue,
She is not always foul, nor always fair,
Chaste and unchaste she is, true and untrue,
And some springs from her in a lustful air,
And these adulterers be, whose seed shall perish,
Never shall lust and wickedness long flourish.

Yet is it molifide with lightest drops,
Hard is the water, when the wind's aloft,
Small things in time may vanquish greatest stops:
The longer grows the tree, the greater moss,
The longer soil remains, the more the dross.
The longer that the wicked lives on earth,
The greater is their pain, their sin, their shame;
The greater vices reign, and virtues dearth,
The greater goodness lack, and mischiefs name;
When in their youth no honor they could get,
Old age could never pay so young a debt.

Were but to make disparagement of both,
Both enemies they could not brook the case,
For honor to subvert dishonors growth:
Dishonor will not change for honors room,
She hopes to stay after their bodies doom.
Or live they long, or die they suddenly,
They have nor hope, nor comfort of reward,
Their hope of comfort is iniquity,
The bar by which they from their joys are bard:
O old new end, made to begin new grief,
O new beginning, end of old relief.
Chapter IIII.

If life in love, if love in better life;
Then unto many happiness is lent,
And long departed joy might then be rife:
Some happy if they live, some if they dye,
Happy in life, happy in tragedy.
Content is happiness, because content,
Barenes and barrennes is virtues grace,
Bare, because wealth to poverty is bent,
Barren, in that it scorns ill fortunes place:
The barren earth is barren of her tares,
The barren woman barren of her cares.

All-filling essence of diuinest rage,
And virtues true eternal memory,
Is barrennes, her souls eternal gage:
O happy soul that is engaged there,
And pawnes his life that barren badge to wear.
See how the multitude with humble hearts,
Lies prostrate for to welcome her return;
See how they mourn and wail when she departs
See how they make their tears her trophies vrne:
Being present they desire her, being gone,
Their hot desire is turnde to hoter moan.

So every one has not one natures mind;
Some think that dross which others take for gold,
Each difference comes from a differing kind:
Some do despise what others do embrace,
Some praise the thing which others do disgrace.
The barren does embrace their barrenness,
And hold it as a virtue worthy meede:
The other calls conception happiness,
And hold it as a virtue worthy deed:
The one is firmly grounded on a rock,
The other billows game and tempests mock.

The nettle has a sting, the rose a thorn,
This stings the hand, the other pricks the nose,
Harming that scent which her sweet birth had borne;
Weeds among herbs, herbs among weeds are found
Tares in the mantle of a corny ground.
The nettles growth is fast, the roses slow,
The weeds outgrow the herbs, the tares the corn,
These may be well compared to vices show,
Which couets for to grow ere it be borne:
As greatest danger does pursue fast going,
So greatest danger does ensue fast growing.

The highest tree is subject unto falls,
High soaring Eagles soon are stricken blind,
The tongue must needs be hoarse with many calls:
The wicked thinking for to touch the sky,
Are blasted with the fire of heavens eye.
So like ascending and descending air,
Both duskie vapors from two humerous clouds,
Lies withered the glory of their fair,
Unpleasant branches wrencht in follies floudes:
Unprofitable fruits like to a weed,
Made only to infect, and not to feed.

Made rather for infection than for meat,
Not worthy to be eaten of a beast,
Thy taste so sower, thy poison is so great:
Thou may be well compared to a tree,
Because thy branches are as ill as thee*
Thou have begot thine own confusion,
The witnesses of what thou do begin,
Thy doomers in thy life's conclusion,
Which will vnaskt and asked reveal thy sin:
Needs must the new hatched birds bewray the nest,
When they are nursed in a step-dames breast.

Her root is from an everlasting seed,
No weake-vnable grounding does connex,
Her neuer-limited memorialles deed:
She has no branches for a tempests pray,
No deeds, but scorns to yield unto decay.
She has no withered fruit, no show of store,
But perfect essence of a complete power,
Say that she dies to world, she lives the more,
As who so righteous but does wait deaths hour?
Who knows not death to be the way to rest?
And he that never dies is never blessed,

Thrice happy he which neither lived, nor died,
Which never saw the earth with mortal eyes,
Which never knew what miseries are tried:
Happy is life, twice happy is our death,
But three times thrice he, which had never breath.
Some thinks that pleasure is atchieude by years,
Or by maintaining of a wretched life,
When, out alas, it heapeth tears on tears,
Grief upon grief, strife on beginning strife:
Pleasure is weak, if measured by length,
The oldest ages has the weaker strength.

Old, mean, and young; mean, and old brings age,
The youth has strength, the mean decaying force,
The old are weak, yet strong in angers rage:
Three turnings in one age, strong, weak, and weaker,
Yet age, nor youth, is youths or ages breaker.
Some says that youth is quick in judging causes,
Some says that age is witty, grave, and wise:
I hold of ages side with their applauses,
Which judges with their hearts, not with their eyes:
I say grave wisdom lies in grayest heads,
And undefiled lives in ages beds.

Grave because aged, aged because young;
Long youth may well be called ages hew,
And has no differing sound upon the tongue:
God old, because eternities are old,
Young, for eternities one motion hold.
Some in their birth, some dies when they are borne,
Some borne, and some abortiue, yet all die,
Some in their youth, some in old age forlorn,
Some, neither young nor old, but equally:
The righteous, when he lives with the sinner,
Does hope for death, his better life's beginner.

The giddy drunkard in excess of wine,
He may corrupt the purest reasons gire,
And she turn virtue into vices sign:
Mischief is mire, and may infect that spring,
Which every flow and ebb of vice does bring.
Fishes are often deceived by the bait,
The baite-deceiuing fish does fish deceive;
So righteous are allurde by sins deceit,
And often enticed into sinners weaue:
The righteous be as fishes to their gin,
Beguilde, deceiude, allured into sin.
The fisher has a bait deceiving fish,

Both wishes to obtain their snaring wish,
Observing time like night-obseruing owls:
The fisher lays his bait, fowler his net,
He hopes for fish, the other birds to get.
This fisher is the wicked, vice his bait,
This fowler is the sinner, sin his net,
The simple-righteous-falles in their deceit,
And like a prey, a fish, a foul beset:
A bait, a net, obscuring what is good,
Like fish and foul took up for vices food.

Vice, nor the vicious sinner, not the sin
Can shut the righteous into prisons cares,
Or set deceiving baits to mew them in:
They know their lives deliverer, heavens God,
Can break their baits and snares with justice rod.
When vice abounds on earth, and earth in vice,
Then virtue keeps her chamber in the sky,
To shun the mischief which her baits entice,
Her snares, her nets, her guiles, her company:
As Soon as mischeife reigns upon the earth,
Heaven calls the righteous to a better birth.

The blinded heart can never see to see,
The blinded soul does always go astray,
All three want sight, in being blind all three:
Blind and yet see, they see and yet are blind,
The face has eyes, but eyelesse is the mind.
They see with outward sight Gods heavenly grace,
His grace, his love, his mercy on his Saints,
With outward faced eye, and eied face,
Their outward body inward soul depaintes:
Of hearts chief eye they chiefly are berest,
And yet the shadow of two eyes are left.

The faces eyes are not incurable,
The other wants healing to be whole,
Or seems to some to be indurable:
Look in a blinded eye, bright is the glass,
Though brightness banished from what it was.
So (quoth the righteous) are these blinded hearts,
The outward glass is clear, the substance dark,
Both seem as if one took the others parts,
Yet both in one have not one brightness spark:
The outward eye, is but destructions reader,
Wanting the inward eye to be the leader.
Our body may be calde a commonweal,

From thence comes hearts and souls united zeal,
All else inferiors be, which stand in fear,
This commonweal ruled by discretions eye,
Lives likewise if she live, dies if she die.
Then how can weal, or wealth common, or proper,
Long stand, long flow, long flourish, long remain,
When wail is weals, and stelth is welths chief stopper*
When sight is gone which never comes again:
The wicked sees the righteous loose their breath,
But know not what reward they gain by death.

See to despise, see to deride and mock,
But their revenge lies in Gods mighty arm,
Scorning to choose them for his chosen flock:
He is the shepherd, godly are his sheep,
They wake in joy, these in destruction sleep.
The godly sleep in eyes, but wake in hearts,
The wicked sleep in hearts, but wake in eyes;
These euer-wake eyes are no sleepie parts,
These ever sleep, for sleep is hearts disguise:
Their waking eyes do see their hearts lament,
While heart securely sleeps in eyes content.

And beats into their waking memories,
If they do sleep, ioy-waking does detest them,
Yet beats into their sleeping arteries:
Sleeping or waking they have fear on fear,
Waking or sleeping they are never the near.
If waking they remember what they are,
What sins they have commmitted in their waking,
If sleeping they forget tormentings fare,
How ready they have been in mischiefs making:
When they awake, their wickedness betrays them,
When they do sleep, destruction dismayes them.
Chapter V.

One slumber in the face, one in the mind,
So their two casements two varieties,
One unto heaven, and one to hell combinde:
The face is flattery, and her mansion hell,
The mind is just, this does in heaven dwell.
The face heauing her heavy eie-lids up,
From forth the chamber of eternal night,
Sees virtue hold plenties replenisht cup,
And boldly stands in Gods and heavens sight:
She opening the windows of her breast,
Sees how the wicked rest in their unrest.

Has tragically summoned to pain,
Were once the clouds, and clouders of my day,
Deprauers and depriuers of my gain;
The wicked hearing this descending sound,
Fear struck their lims to the pale-clothed ground.
Amazed at the freedom of her words,
Their tongue-tide accents drove them to despair,
And made them change their minds to woes records,
And say within themselves, lo what we are:
We have had virtue in derisions place,
And made a parable of her disgrace.

See, see, her labors crown upon her head,
See how the righteous live which erst did die,
From death to life with virtues loadsta^re led,
See those whom we derided, they are blessed,
They heavens, not hels, we hells, not heavens guest.
We thought the righteous had been furies son,
With inconsiderate speech, unstayed way,
We thought that death had his dishonor won,
And would have made his life destructions pray:
But we were mad, they just, we fools, they wise,
We shame, they praise, we loss, they have the prise.

We thought them mad, when we our selves were mad,
The heat which sprang from them, our folly cooles,
We find in us, which we but thought they had:
We thought their end had been dishonors pledge,
They but surueyd the place, we made the hedge.
We see how they are blessed, how we are cursed,
How they accepted are, and we refusde,
And how our bands are tied, their bands are burst,
Our faults are hourly blamde, their faults excusde:
See how heavens gratulate their welcomd sight,
Which comes to take possession of their right.

Too late we lie in a repentant tomb,
Too late we smoothe old hairs with happiness,
Too late we seek to ease our bodies doom:
Now falshoode has aduauncde her forged banner,
Too late we seem to verefie truths manner.
The sun of righteousness which should have shinde,
And made our hearts the cabines of his East,
Is now made cloudy night through vices wind,
And lodges with his downfall in the west:
That summers day which should have bin nights bar
Is now made winter in her icie carre*

Much labor we have took, but none in good,
We wearied our selves with our delight,
Endangering our selves to please our mood:
Our feet did labor much, it was for our pleasure,
We wearied our selves, it was for our leisure.
In sins perfection was our labor spent,
In wickedness preferment we did haste,
To suffer perils we were al content,
For the advancement of our vices past:
Through many dangerous ways our feet have gone,
But yet the way of God we have not known.

With huge risse billows of a swelling mind,
With tossing tumults of a flowing tide,
Leaving our laden bodies plungde behind;
What traffic have we got? our selves are drowned,
Our souls in hell, our bodies in the ground.
Where are our riches now? like us consumde,
Where is our pomp? decaide, where is glory? dead;
Where is the wealth of which we all presumde*
where is our profit? gone, our selves? misled:
All these are like to shadows what they were,
There is nor wealth, nor pomp, nor glory here.

Thou can not see it go, yet it is gone,
Like this the dial of thy fortunes power,
Which fades by stealth till thou art left alone.
Thy eyes may well perceive thy goods are spent,
Yet can they not perceive which way they went.
Lo, eu'ne as ships sailing on Tethis lap,
Plowes up the furrows of hard grounded waves,
Enforced for to go by Eoles clap,
Making with sharpest teeme the water graves:
The ship once past, the trace cannot be found,
Although she dug in the waters ground.

Scorning the dusty carpet of the earth,
Exempt from all her clogging gesses, flings
Up to the air, to show her mounting birth:
And every flight does take a higher pitch,
To have the golden sun her wings enrich.
Yet none can see the passage of her flight,
But only hear her houering in the sky,
Beating the light wind with her being light,
Or parting through the air where she might fly:
The ear may hear, the eye can never see,
What course she takes, or where she means to be.

Through the transparent and coole-blowing air,
Feeding upon the forces of the bow,
Else forcelesse lies in wanting her repair:
Like as the branches when the tree is lopt,
Wants the forces which they forcelesse cropped.
The arrow being fed with strongest shot,
Does part the lowest elementall breath,
Yet never separates the soft airs knot,
Nor never wounds the still-foote winds to death*
It does seioyne and join the air together,
Yet none there is can tell, or where, or whither.

Now live, now die, now borne, now fit for grave,
As soon as we have breath, so soon we spend,
Not having that which our content would have:
As ships, as birds, as arrows, all as one,
Even so the traces of our lives are gone.
A thing not seen to go, yet going seen,
And yet not showing any sign to go;
Even thus the shadows of our lives have been,
Which shows to fade, and yet no virtues show:
How can a thing consumde with vice be good?
Or how can falshoode bear true virtues food?

When she is drowned in obliuions sea,
Yet can she not forget presumptions wearing,
Nor yet the badge of vanities decay:
Her fruits are cares, her cares are vanities,
Two, both in one destructions liueries.
Vain hope is like a vane turnde with each wind,
It Is like a smoke scattred with every storm,
Like dust, sometime before, sometime behind,
Like a thin some made in the vainest form:
This hope is like to them which never stay,
But comes, and goes again, all in one day.

Some barren grounds there are, some clothd with fruit,
Nor has all nothing, nor has all her store,
Nor can all creatures speak, nor are all mute:
All die by nature, being borne by nature,
So all change feature, being borne with feature.
This life is hers, this dead, dead is her power,
Her bounds begins, and ends in mortal state,
Whom she on earth accounts as her flower,
May be in heaven condemnde of mortal hate:
But he whom virtue judges for to live,
The Lord his life and due reward will give.

And he that was a king, a servile slave;
Swans before death a funeral dirge do sing,
And waves their wings again ill fortunes wave.
He that is lowest in this lowly earth,
May be the highest in celestial birth.
The rich may be unjust, in being rich,
For riches do corrupt and not correct,
The poor may come to highest honors pitch,
And have heavens crown for mortal life's respect:
Gods hands shall cover them from al their foes,
Gods arm defend them from misfortunes blows.

His armor zelousie, his breast plate heaven,
His helmet judgment, justice, and remorce,
His shield is victories immortal steauen:
The world his challenge, and his wrath his sword,
Mischief his foe, his aid his gospels word.
His arm does overthrow his enemy,
His breast plate, sin, his helmet death and hell,
His shield preparde against mortallitie,
His sword against them which in the world do dwell:
So shall vice, sin, and death, world and the devil,
Be slain by him which slays every evil.

The sun shall dart forth fire commixt with blood,
The blazing stars from heaven shall be hurlde,
The pale-facde moon against the Ocean flood:
Then shall the thundering chambers of the sky,
Be lightened with the blaze of Titans eye.
The clouds shall then be bent like bended bows,
To shoot the thundering arrows of the air,
Thick hail and stones shall fall on heavens foes,
And Tethis ouerflowe in her despair:
The moon shall ouer-fill her horny hood,
With Neptunes Oceans ouer-flowing flood.

But burst the iron cages of the clouds?
And Aeole shall resign his office staves,
Suffering the winds to combat with the floods:
So shall the earth with seas be paled in,
As erst it has been ouerflowde with sin.
Thus shall the earth weep for her wicked sons,
And curse the concaue of her tired womb,
Into whose hollow mouth the water runs,
Making wet wilderness her driest tomb;
Thus, thus, iniquity has raignd so long,
That earth on earth is punished for her wrong.
Chapter VI.

Remorce took harbor in Gods angry breast,
Astraea to be pitiful began,
All heavenly powers to lie in mercies rest:
Forthwith the voice of God did redescend,
And his Astraea warnde all to amend.
To you I speak, (quoth she) hear, learn, and mark,
You that be Kings, Judges, and Potentates,
Give ere, (I say,) wisdom your strongest arc,
Sends me as messenger, to end debates:
Give care, (I say) you Judges of the earth,
Wisdom is borne, seek out for wisdoms birth.

Worthy the volume of all heavens sky,
I bring as messenger to right your wrong,
If so her sacred name might never die:
I bring you happy tidings, she is borne,
Like golden sunne-beames from a silver morn.
The Lord has seated you in judgments seat,
Let wisdom place you in discretions places,
Two virtues, one, will make one virtue great,
And draw more virtues with attractiue faces:
Be just and wise, for God is just and wise,
He thoughts, he words, he words, and actions tries.

Heap new lament on long-tosst miseries,
Do and undo by reason of degrees,
And drown your sentences in briberies:
Favor and punish, spare and keep in awe,
Set and unset, plant and supplant the law.
Oh be assured there is a Judge above,
Which will not let injustice flourish long,
If tempt him, you, your own temptation move,
Proceeding from the judgment of hid tongue:
Hard judgment shall he have which judges hard,
And he that barreth others shall be barred.

For he has made the poor, and made the rich,
Their bodies be alike, though their minds soar,
Their difference naught, but in presumptions pitch:
The carcass of a King is kept from soul,
The Beggar yet may have the cleaner soul.
The highest men do bear the highest minds,
The cedars skorne to bow, the mushromes bend,
The hiest often superstition blindes,
But yet their fall is greatest in the end:
The winds have not such power of the grass,
Because it lowly stoopeth when as they pass.

But now the young does teach the elder grace;
The shrubs do teach the Cedars to obey,
These yield to winds, but these the winds outface:
Yet he that made the winds to cease and blow,
Can make the highest fall, the lowest grow.
He made the great to stoop as well as small,
The lions to obey as other beasts,
He cares for all alike, yet cares for all,
And looks that all should answer his beheasts:
But yet the greater has the sorer trial,
If once he finds them with his laws denial.

You see how surges change to quiet calm;
You see both flow and ebb in follies tide,
How fingers are infected by their palm:
This may your caveat be, you being kings,
Infect your subjects, which are lesser things.
Ill sents of vice once crept into the head,
Does pearce into the chamber of the brain,
Making the outward skin diseases bed,
The inward powers as nourishers of pain:
So if that mischeife reigns in wisdoms place,
The inward thought lies figured in the face.

Being the portrature of heavens Queen,
But tyrants are no Kings, but mischiefs mire,
Not sage, but shows of what they should have been:
They seek for vice, and how to go amiss,
But do not once regard what wisdom is.
They which are Kings, by name are Kings by deed,
Both rulers of them selves and of their land,
They know that heaven is virtues duest meed,
And holiness is knit in holy band:
These may be rightly called by their name,
whose words and works are blazed in wisdoms flame.
To nurse up cruelty with mild aspect,

Kindenes with tigers never takes effect,
Nor proffered friendship with a foe-like friend:
Tyrants and tigers have all natural mothers,
Tyrants her sons, tigers the tyrants brothers.
No words delight can move delight in them,
But rather plow the traces of their ire,
Like swine that take the dirt defore the gem,
And skorns that pearl which they should most desire:
But Kings whose names proceed from kindness sound,
Do plant their hearts and thoghts on wisdo^s ground.

An ever fruitful earth, not fruitless way,
In whose dear womb the tender springs do lie,
which ever flows, and never ebbes away;
The sun but shines by day, she day and night,
Does keep one stayed essence of her light.
Her beams are conducts to her substance view,
Here eye is adamants attractiue force,
A shadow has she none, but substance true,
Substance out living life of mortal corse:
Her sight is easy unto them which love her,
Her finding easy unto them which prove her.

Is nothing but allurement into lust,
Which will forswear and take, scorn and annex,
Deny and practice it, mistrust, and trust:
Wisdom is chaste and of another kind,
She loves, she likes, and yet not lustful blind.
She is true love, the other love a toy,
Her love has eyes, the other love is blind,
This does proceed from God, this from a boy,
This constant is, the other vain combinde:
If longing passions follow her desire,
She offers her self, as labors hire

With sighs and passions, which all lovers use,
With hot affection, death, or life's decay,
With lovers toys, which might their loves excuse:
Wisdom is poor, her dowry is content,
She nothing has because she nothing spent.
She is not wooed to love, nor won by wooing,
Nor got by labor, nor possessed by pain,
The gain of her consists in honest doing,
Her gain is great, in that she has no gain:
He that betimes follows repentance way,
Sall meet with her his virtues worthy pay.
To think upon her, is to think of bliss,

Depeller of misdeeds which do amiss,
The blot of vanity, misfortunes scarre:
Who would not think; to reap such gain by thought?
Who would not love, when such a life is bought?
If thought be understanding, what is she?
The full perfection of a perfect power,
A heavenly branch from Gods immortal tree,
Which death, nor hell, nor mischief can devour:
Her self is wisdom, and her thought is so,
Thrice happy he which does desire to know.

She offers love, they offered love deny,
And hold her promises as loves abuses,
Because she pleads with an indifferent eye:
They think that she is light, vain and unjust,
When she does plead for love, and not for lust.
Hard hearted men (quoth she) can you not love,
Behold my substance, cannot substance please,
Behold my feature; cannot feature move?
Can substance, nor my feature, help or ease?
See heavens joy, defigured in my face,
Can neither heaven, nor joy, turn you to grace?

Her tongue, her heart, her heart, her souls affection?
Feign would she make mortality be strong,
But mortal weakness yields reiection:
Her care is care of them, they careless are,
Her love loves them: they neither love nor care.
Feign would she make them clients in her law,
Whose laws assurance is immortal honor,
But them, nor words, nor love, nor care can awe,
But still will fight under destructions bonner.
Though immortality be their reward,
Yet neither words, nor deeds will they regard.

Pleading for that which they should all desire,
Their appetite is heavy made of lead,
And lead can never melt without a fire:
Her words are mild and cannot raise a heat,
Whilst they with hard repulse her speeches beat.
Requested they; for what they should request,
Entreated they; for what they should entreat,
Requested to enjoy their quiet rest,
Entreated like a sullen bird to eat:
Their eyes behold joys maker which does make it,
Yet must they be entreated for to take it.

Whose game, in majesty's imperial throne,
Maiesticke portratures of earthly fame,
Releeuers of the poor in ages moan:
If your content be seated on a crown,
Love wisdom, and your state shall never down.
Her crowns are not as earthly diadems,
But diapasans of eternal rest,
Her essence comes not from terrestrial stems,
But planted on the heavens immortal breast:
If you delight in scepters and in reigning,
Delight in her your crowns immortal gaining.

Has been as accessory to your eyes,
Now will I show you the true substance hiew,
And what she is, which without knowledge lies:
From whence she is deriude, whence her descent,
And whence the lineage of her birth is lent.
Now will I show the sky, and not the cloud,
The sun, and not the shade, day, not the night,
Tethis her self, not Tethis in her flood,
Light, and not shadow of suppressing light:
Wisdom her self true tipe of wisdoms grace,
Shall be apparent before heart and face.

And hid the sun it self in enuies air,
My self might well be called natures strife,
Striving to cloud that which all clouds impair:
But Envy, haste thee hence, I loathe thy eye,
Thy love, thy life, thy self, thy company.
Here is the banner of discretions name,
Aduaunst on wisdoms euer-standing tower,
Here is no place for envy or her shame,
For Nemesis, or black Mageraes power:
He that is envious, is not wisdoms friend,
She ever lives, he dies when enuies end.

Happy, thrice happy king, whom wisdom swayes,
Where never poor laments, or souls complains,
Where folly never keeps discretions ways:
That land, that king does flourish, live and joy,
Far from ill fortunes reach, or sins annoy.
That land is happy, that king fortunate,
She in her days, he in his wisdoms force,
For fortitude is wisdoms sociate:
And wisdom truest fortitudes remorce:
Be therefore ruled by wisdom, she is chief,
That you may rule in joy, and not in grief.
Chapter VII.

What am I? naught, yes, what? sin and debate,
Three vices all in one, of one life bought,
Man am I not, what then? I am man's hate:
Yes man I am, man, because mortal, dead,
Mortality my guide, by mischief led.
Man, because like to man, man, because borne,
In birth no man, a child, child, because weak,
Weak, because weakened by ill fortunes scorn,
Scorned, because mortal, mortal, in wrongs reake:
My father like my self did live on earth,
I like my self, and him, follow his birth.

There had I this same shape of infamies,
Shape, ah no shape, but substance mischiefs taker,
In ten months fashion; months, ah miseries,
The shame of shape, the very shape of shame,
Calamity my self lament my name.
I was conceiude with seed, deceiude with sin,
Deceiude, because my seed was sins deceit,
My seed deceit, because it closde me in,
Hemd me about, for sins and mischiefs bait:
The seed of man did bring me into blood,
And now I bring my self, in what? no good.

Borne? when? yet borne I was, but now I bear,
Bear mine own vices, which my joys surpass,
Bear mine own burden full of mischiefs fear:
When I was borne, I did not bear lament,
But now unborn, I bear what birth has spent.
When I was borne, my breath was borne to me,
The common air which aires my bodies form,
Then fell I on the earth with feeble knee,
Lamenting for my life's ill fortunes storm:
Making my self the index of my woe,
Commencing what I could, ere I could go.

My milk was sweet, but tears did make it sower,
Meat and lament, milk and my tears I eat,
As bitter herbs commixt with sweetest flower:
Care was my swaddling clothes as well as cloth,
For I was swadled, and clothed in both.
Why do I make my self more then I am?
Why say I, I am nourished with cares,
When every one is clothed with the same,
Since as I fare my self, another fares?
No King had any other birth then I,
But waild his fortune with a watery eye.

Say what is woe, an entrance unto mirth,
That which begins with joy does not end so,
These go by change, because a changing birth:
Our birth is as our death, both barren, bare,
Our entrance wail, our going out with care.
Naked we came, into the world as naked,
We had nor wealth nor riches to possess,
Now differ we, which difference riches maked,
Yet in the end we naked nerethelesse:
As our beginning is, so is our end,
Naked and poor, which needs no wealth to spend.

My state, all states, my birth, all births alike,
My meditated passions could not find,
One freed thought which sorrow did not strike:
But knowing every ill is curde by prayer,
My mind besought the Lord my griefs allaier.
Wherefore I prayde, my prayer took effect,
And my effect was good, my good was gain,
My gain was sacred wisdoms bright aspect,
And her aspect in my respect did reign:
Wisdom that heavenly spirit of content,
Was unto me from heaven by prayer sent.

Because the crown of an eternal rest,
A present far more worthy then a throne,
Because the throne of heaven, which makes us blessed:
The crown of bliss, the throne of God is she,
Compared unto heaven, not earth to thee.
Her footstool is thy face, her face thy shame,
Thy shame her living praise, her praise thy scorn,
Thy scorn her love, her love thy merits blame,
Thy blame her worth, her worth thy being borne:
Thy self art dross to her comparison,
Thy valor weak unto her garrison.

Were likening day to night, and night to day,
The Kings high seat, to the low subjects place,
And heavens translucent breast, to earthly way:
For what is gold? her scorn, her scorn? her ire,
Melting that dross, with naught but angers fire.
In her respect it is dust, in her aspects
Earth, in respect of her it is little gravel,
As dust, as earth, as gravel she reiects,
The hope, the gain, the sight, the price, the travel:
Silver, because inferior to the other
Is clay, which two she in one look does smother.

Health as my life, and beauty as my light,
Each in performance of the others duty,
This curing grief, this leading me aright:
Two sovereign eyes, belonging to two places,
This guides the soul, and this the body graces.
The heart sick soul, is cured by heart-strong health,
The heart-strong health, is the souls brightest eye,
The heart-sick body healed by beauties wealth,
Two sunnie windolets of eithers sky,
Whose beams cannot be clouded by reproach,
Nor yet dismounted from so bright a coach.

What wealth, what honor, more then I possess?
My souls request is mine, which I did crave,
For sole redress in soul, I have redress:
The bodyly expenses which I spend,
Is lent by her, which my delight does lend.
Then I may call her author of my good,
Since good and goods are portions for my love,
I love her well, who would not love his food,
His joys maintatiner, which all woes remove?
I richest am, because I do possess her,
I strongest am, in that none can oppress her.

More gladder for to think that I was strong,
For lowest minds do covet highest pitch,
As highest braues proceed from lowest tongue:
Her first arrival first did make me glad,
Yet ignorant at first, first made me sad.
Joyful I was, because I saw her power,
Woeful I was, because I knew her not,
Glad that her face was in mine eyes locked bower,
Sad that my senses never drew her plot
I knew not that she was discretions mother,
Though I professed my self to be her brother.

Disgesting beauty apparitions show,
Viewing the painted outside of the books,
And inward works little regardes to know:
So I, feeding my fancies with her sight,
Forgot to make inquiry of her might.
External powers I knew, riches I had,
Internal powers I scarcely had discern,
Vntamedly I learned to be glad,
Faining I hated, verity I learnd:
I was not envious, learned to forsake her.
But I was loving, learned for to take her.

My loss, my perils hazard had proclaimde,
My peril had my life's destruction tossed,
My life's destruction at my soul had aimde:
Great perils hazarded from one poor loss,
As greatest filth does come with smallest dross.
This righteous treasure whosoever rightly uses,
Shall be an heir in heavens eternity,
All earthly fruits her heretage excuses,
All happiness in her felicity:
The love of God consists in her embracing,
The gifts of knowledge in her wisdoms placing.

My souls chief agent, pleader of my cause,
I speak these things, and what I speak I find,
By heavens judgment, not mine own applause:
God he is judge, I next, because I have her,
God he does know, I next, because I crave her.
Should I direct, and God subvert my tongue,
I worthy were of an unworthy name,
Unworthy of my right, not of my wrong.
Unworthy of my praise, not of my shame:
But seeing God directs my tongue from missing,
I rather look for clapping than for hissing.

My tongue does utter what his tongue applies,
He sets before my sight what I should see,
He breathes into my heart his verities:
He tells me what I think, or see, or hear,
His tongue a part, my tongue a part does bear.
Our words he knows, in telling of our hearts,
Our hearts he knows in telling of our words,
All in his hands, words, wisdom, works, and arts,
And every power which influence affords:
He knows what we will speak, what we will do,
And how our minds and actions will go.

The knowledge which I have, is Gods reward,
Both presents my forewarned senses lift,
And of my preservation had regard:
This teaches me to know, this to be wise,
Knowledge is wits, and wit is knowledge guise.
Now know I, how the world was first created,
How every motion of the air was framed,
How man was made, the devils pride abated,
How times beginning, midst, and end was named: now know I time, times change,
times date, times sho
And when the seasons come, and when they go.

And the division of all differing climes,
The situation of the stars and spheres,
The flowing tides, and the flow-ebbing times:
I know that every year has his four courses,
I know that every course has several forces.
I know that nature is in every thing,
Beasts furious, winds rough, men wicked are,
whose thoghts their scurge, whose deeds their iugme^ts sling,
Whose words and works their peril, and their care,
I know that every plant has difference,
I know that every root has influence.

True wisdom purchased in wisest wit,
A knowledge fitting age, wit fitting youth,
Which makes me young, though old with gain of it;
True knowledge have I, and true wisdoms store,
True hap, true hope, what wish, what would I more?
Known things I needs must know, since not unknown,
My care is knowledge, she does hear for me,
All secrets know I more because not shown,
My wisdom secret is, and her I see;
Knowledge has taught me how to hear known causes
Wisdom has taught me secrecies applauses.

Is reasons mate, discretions centinell,
More then a trine of joys, from virtues springs,
More then one union, yet in union dwell,
One for to guide the spring, summer the other,
One haruests nurse, the other winters mother.
Four mounts, and four high mounters, all four one,
One holy union, one begotten life,
One manifold affection, yet alone,
All one in peaces rest, all none in strife:
Sure, stable, without care, having all power,
Not hurtful, doing good, (as one all four.)
This peaceful army of four knitted souls,

Their weapons are discretions written roules,
Their quarrel, love, and amity their jar:
Wisdom director is, captain, and guide,
All other take their places, side by side.
Wisdom deuides the conflict of her peace,
Into four squadrons, of four mutual loves,
Each bent to war, and never means to cease,
Her wings of shot her disputation moves:
She wars unseen, and pacifies unseen,
She is wars victory, yet peaces Queen.

And yet the quiet rest in peaces night,
She guides martial troops, she honors arms,
Yet ioyns she fight with peace, and peace with fight:
She is the breath of Gods and heavens power,
Yet peaces nurse, in being peaces flower.
A flowing in of that which ebbeth out,
An ebbing out of that which flows in,
Presumption she does hate, in being stout,
Humility though poor her favors win:
She is the influence of heavens flow,
No filth does follow her, where ere she go.

That siluer-coloured brook, which has no mud,
That loome, which weaues, and never cuts the web,
That tree which grows, and never leaves to bud:
She constant is, inconstancy her foe,
She does not flow and ebb, nor come and go.
Phoebus does weep, when watrie clouds approach,
She keeps her brightness everlastingly,
Phoebe, when Phoebus shines forsakes nights coach,
Her day is night and day immortally:
The undefiled mirror of renown,
The image of Gods power, her virtues crown.

All four are places in one only grace,
They wisdom are, obedient to her will,
All four are one, one in all foures place:
And wisdom being one, she can do all,
Since one has four, all subject to one call.
Her self remaining self, the world renewes,
Renewing ages with perpetual youth,
Entering into the souls, which death pursues,
Making the^ Gods friends, which were friends to truth.
If wisdom does not harbor in thy mind,
God loves thee not, and that thy soul shall find.
For how can thou be lead without thy light,

If wanting her, which guides thy steps aright,
Thy steps from night into a path of day?
More beautiful then is the eye of heaven,
Guilding her self with her selfe-changing steau'n.
The stars are twinkling handmaides to the moon,
Both moon and stars, handmaids to wisdoms sun,
These shine at midst night, this at mid-noone,
Each new begins their light, when each has done:
Pale-mantled night, follows red mantled day,
Vice follows both, but to her own decay.
Chapter VIII.

The Monarchesle of the four cornerd earth,
The Princess of the seas, life without fine,
Commixer of delight with sorrows mirth:
What sovereign is she which ever reigns,
Which Queene-like gouerns al, yet none co^strains?
Wisdom, o fly my spirit with that word,
Wisdom, o lodge my spirit in that name,
Fly soul unto the mansion of her lord,
Although thy wings be findged in her flame:
Tell her my blacknes does admire her beauty,
I Will marie her in love, serve her in duty.

Christ is my brother, Angels are my kin,
The earth my dowry, heaven my aboade,
My rule the world, my life without my sin:
She is the daughter of immortal Jove,
My wife in heart, in thought, in soul, in love.
Happy for ever he that thought in heart,
Happy for ever he that heart in thought,
Happy the soul of both which bears both part,
Happy that love which thought har^, soul, has sought;
The name of love is happiest, for I love her,
Soul, heart, and thoughts, loves agents are to prove her.

Here may they be instructed, ruled and taught:
Ye children that would have your parents schoolde,
Feeding their wanton thirst with follies draught;
See here the school of discipline erected,
See here how young and old are both corrected.
Children, this is the Mistress of your bliss,
Your schoolemistris reformer of your lives,
Parents, you that do speak, think, do amiss,
Here Is she, which loves, and life's direction gives:
She teaches that which God knows to be true,
She chooses that, which God would choose for you.

What is our life? poor as our birth has been:
What is our age? forlorn in being old:
What is our end? as our beginnings scene:
Our birth, our life, our age, our end is poor,
what birth, what life, what age, what end has more
Made rich it is with vanities vain show,
If wanting wisdom it is follies game,
Or like a bended, or vnbended bow,
Ill fortunes scoff it is, good fortunes shame:
If wisdom be the riches of thy mind,
Then can thy fortune see, not seeing blind.

Ill fortune cannot end what she begins,
Thy fate at first will still remain thy fate,
Thy conduct unto joys, not unto sins:
If thou the bridegroom art, wisdom the bride,
Ill fortune cannot swim against thy tide.
Thou marrying her, do marry more than she,
Thy portion is not faculties, but bliss,
Thou needst not teaching, for she teaches thee,
Nor no reformer she thy mistress is,
The lesson which she gives thee for thy learning,
Is every virtues love, and sins deserving.

Why how can she be less than what she is?
The growth of knowledge does from wisdom grow*
The growth of wisdom is in knowing this:
Wisdom can tell all things, what things are past,
What done, what undone, what are doing last.
Nay more, what things are come, what are to come,
Or words, or works, or shows, or actions,
In her brains table-booke she has the sum,
And knows dark sentences solutions:
She knows what signs and wonders will ensue,
And when success of seasons will be new.

Who would not have a bride so wise, so fair?
Who would not lie in such a peaceful bed?
Whose canopy is heaven, whose shade the air:
How can it be that any of the skies
Can there be missing, where heavens kingdom lies?
If care-sicke, I am comforted with joy,
If surfeting on joy, she bids me care,
She says that overmuch will soon annoy,
Too much of joy, too much of sorrows fare:
She always counsels me to keep a mean,
And not with joy too fat, with grief too lean.

Feign would the mushrome kiss the cedars bark:
Feign would the seely worm a sporting be,
Feign would the sparrow imitate the lark:
Though I a tender shrub, a mushrome be,
Yet covet I the honor of a tree.
And may I not? may not the blossoms bud?
Does not the little seed make ears of corn?
Does not a sprig (in time) bear greatest wood?
Does not young eu'nings make an elder morn?
For wisdoms sake, I know, though be young
I shall have praises from my elders tongue.

And as my wit does rise, so shall my growth,
In wit I grow, both growths grow to be fit,
Both fitting in one growth, be fittest both:
Experience follows age, and nature youth,
Some aged be in wit, though young in ruth.
The wisdom which I have, springs from above,
The wisdom from above, is that I have,
Her I adore, I reverence, I love,
She Is my pure soul, locked in my bodies grave:
The judgment which I use, from her proceeds,
Which makes me maruelld at in all my deeds.

Sad secretary of dumb action,
Yet shall they give me place though I be young,
And stay my leisures satisfaction:
Even as a judge which keeps his judgments mute,
When clients have no answer of their suit.
But if the closure of my mouth vnmeetes,
And dives within the freedom of my words,
They like petitioners tongues welcome greetes,
And with attentive ear hears my accords:
But if my words into no limits go,
Their speech shall ebb, mine in their ebbing flow.

Vain glory seated in a shade of praise,
Mortalities descent, and follies flow,
The badge of vanity, the hour of days,
What glory is it for to be a King,
When care is crown, and crown is fortunes sling?
Wisdom is immortalities alline,
And immortality is wisdoms gain,
By her the heavens lineage is mine,
By her I immortality obtain,
The earth is made immortal in my name,
The heavens are made immortal in my fame.

Shall be the heritage which I possess,
My rule in heaven, directing earthly times,
My reign in earth, commencing earths redress,
One king made two, one crown a double crown,
One rule two rules, one fame a twice renown.
What heaven is this, which every thought contains,
Wisdom my heaven, my heaven is wisedoms heaven,
What earth is this, wherein my body raines?
Wisdom my earth, all rule from wisdom given:
Through her I rule, through her I do subdue,
Through her I reign, through her my empire grew.

An empire, not a slaughter house of lives,
A crown, not cruelty in furies mood,
A Scepter which restores, and not depriues:
All made to make a peace and not a war,
By wisdom concords Queen, and discords bar.
The coldest word often cooles the hottest threat,
The tyrants menaces, the calmes of peace,
Two coldes augmenteth one, two heates one heat,
And makes both too extreme, when both increase:
My peaceful reign shall conquer tyrants force,
Not arms, but words, not battle, but remorce,

Strong though ability has left his clime,
And good, because my wars and battails cease,
Or at the least lie smothered in their prime:
The sense once dug up with fears amaze,
Does rage untamed with follies senceles gaze.
If wisdom does not harbor in delight,
It breaks the outward passage of the mind,
Therefore I place my war in wisdoms might,
Whose heavy labors easy harbors find:
Her company is pleasure, mirth, and joy,
Not bitterness, not mourning, not annoy,
When every thought was balanced by weight

My heart and soul did hold the balance straight,
To see what thought was joy, what thought was wail:
But when I saw that grief did weigh down pleasure,
I put in wisdom to augment her treasure.
Wisdom the weight of immortallitie,
Wisdom the balance of all happiness,
Wisdom the weigher of felicity,
Wisdom the Paragon of blessedness:
When in her hands there lies such plenties store,
Needs must her heart have twice as much and more.
Her heart have I conjoined with her hand,

Two souls, one soul, two hearts, one bodies band,
And two hands made of four, by amors art:
Was I not wise in choosing earthly life?
Nay wise, thrice wise, in choosing such a wife?
Was I not good? good; then the sooner bad,
Bad, because earth is full of wickedness,
Because my body is with vices clad,
Anotomy of my sins heaviness:
As does unseemly clothes make the skin foul,
So the sin-inked body blots the soul.

Thus lay my soul bespotted with my sin,
Thus lay my self consumed in my desire,
Thus lay all parts ensnared in one gin:
At last my heart mounting above the mud,
Lay between hope and death, mischief, and good.
Thus panting ignorant to live or die,
To rise or fall, to stand or else to sink,
I cast a fainting look unto the sky,
And s^we the thought, which my poor heart did think
Wisdom my thought at whose seen sight I prayed,
And with my heart, my mind, my soul, I said.
Chapter IX.

Mercies true sovereign, pitties portraiture,
King of all kings, a birth surpassing birth,
A life immortal, essence ever pure:
Which with a breath ascending from thy thought,
Have made the heavens of earth, the earth of naught.
Thou which have made mortality for man,
Beginning life to make an end of woe,
Ending in him, what in himself began,
His earths dominion, through thy wisdoms flow:
Made for to rule according to desert,
And execute revenge with upright heart.

Behold a scepter, yet a sorrows guise,
More than the balance of my head can bear,
More than my hands can hold wherein it lies:
My crown does want supportance for to bear,
My scepter wants empire for to wear.
A leglesse body is my kingdoms map,
Limping in folly, halting in distress,
Give me thy wisdom (Lord) my better hap,
Which may my folly cure, my grief redress:
O let me not fall in obliuions cave,
Let wisdom be my bail, for her I crave.

As an apprentice to thy gospels word,
Behold his poor estate, his hot-cold fire,
His weake-strong limbs, his merry woes record:
Borne of a woman, woman-like in woe,
They weak, they feeble are, and I am so.
My time of life is as an hour of day,
It Is as a day of months, a month of years,
It never comes again, but fades away,
As one mornes sun about the hemispheres:
Little my memory, lesser my time,
But least of all my understandings prime.

Say that my time should never loose a glide,
Say that my self had earthly Majesty,
Seated in all the glory of my pride:
Yet if discretion did not rule my mind,
My reign would be like fortunes, follie-blinde.
My memory, a pathway to my shame,
My time, the looking-glass of my disgrace,
My self, resemblance of my scorned name,
My pride, the puffed shadow of my face:
Thus should I be remembered, not regarded,
Thus should my labors end, but not rewarded.

A vanity: to wear a shadowed crown?
A vanity: to love an outward thing?
A vanity: vain shadows of renown:
This King is king of shades, because a shade,
A king in show, though not in action made.
His shape have I, his cognizance I wear,
A smoaky vapor hemd with vanity,
Himself I am, his kingdoms crown I bear,
Unless that wisdom change my liuerie:
A king I am, God has inflamed me,
And lesser than I am I can not be.

Submissiue subjects to my votiue will,
A prince I am, and do what princes may,
Decre^, command, rule, judge, perform, fulfill;
Yet I my self am subject unto God,
As are all others to my judgments rod.
As do my subject honor my command,
So I at his command a subject am,
I build a temple on mount Sions sand,
Erect an altar in thy cities name:
Resemblances these are, where thou do dwell,
Made when thou framedst heaven, earth and hell.

It Was wisdom for to frame the heavens sky,
It Was wisdom for to make the earth so fit,
And hell within the lowest orb to lie:
To make a heavenly clime, an earthly course,
And hell, although the name of it be worse.
Before the world was made wisdom was borne,
Borne of heavens God, conceived in his breast,
Which knew what works would be, what ages worn,
What labors life should have, what quiet rest:
What should displease and please, in vice, in good,
What should be clearest spring, what fowlest mud.

Erect new elements, new aires, new skies,
The time I have is frail, the course untrue,
The globe unconstant, like ill fortunes eyes:
First make the world, which does my soul contain,
And next my wisdom, in whose power I reign.
Illumine earth, with wisdoms heavenly sight,
Make her ambassador to grace the earth,
Oh let her rest by day, and lodge by night,
Within the closure of my bodies hearth:
That in her sacred self I may perceive,
What things are good to take, what ill to leave.

The outward index of an outward deed,
The inward sins do keep an inward place,
Eyes, face, mouth, tongue and every function feed:
She is my face, if I do any ill,
I see my shame in her repugnant will.
She is my glass, my tipe, my form, my map,
The figure of my deed, shape of my thought,
My life's character, fortune to my hap,
Which understands all that heart has wrought:
What works I take in hand, she finisheth,
And all my vicious thoughts diminishes.
My facts are written in her foreheads book,

The sins I have she murders with a look,
And what one cheek denies, the other affords:
As white and red like battles, and retreates,
One does defend the blows, the other beats.
So is her furious mood commixt with smile,
Her rod is profit, her correction mirth:
She makes me keep an acceptable style,
And govern every limit of the earth:
Through her the state of monarchy is known,
Through her I rule, and guide my fathers throne.

Is ever falling feebly on the ground,
Submissiue body, heart above the air,
Which feign would know, when knowledge is not found:
Feign would it soar above the Eagles eye,
Though it be made of lead, and cannot fly.
The soul and body are the wings of man,
The soul should mount, but that lies drowned in sin,
With leaden spirit, but does what it can,
Yet scarcely can it rise when it is in:
Then how can man so weak, know God so strong?
What heart from thought, what thought from heart has sprung?

That every purpose has one final end,
Our thoughts (alas) are fears, fears horrors strike,
Horrors our life's uncertain course do spend:
Fear follows negligence, both death, and hell,
Unconstant are the paths wherein we dwell.
The hollow concaue of our bodies vaultes,
Once laden up with sins eternal graves,
Strait bursts into the soul the slime of faults,
And ouerfloweth like a sea of waves:
The earth as neighbor to our privy thought,
keeps fast the mansion which our cares have bought

Or, can we judge our own with our own hearts?
Alas we cannot; folly blindes our eyes,
Mischief our minds, with her mischievous arts:
Folly raigns there, where wisdom should bear sway.
And follies mischief bars discretions way.
O weak capacity of strongest wit,
O strong capacity of weaker sense,
To guide, to meditate, unapt, unfit,
Blind in perceiving earths circumfluence:
If labor does consist in mortal skill,
It Is g^eater labor to know heavens will.

Is tosst in casualties of fortunes seas,
He thinks it greater labor than he can,
To run his mortal course without an ease:
Then who can gain or find celestial things,
Unless their hopes a greater labor brings?
What volume of thy mind can then contain,
thoghts, words, and works, which god thinks, speaks, and makes,
When heaven it self cannot such honor gain,
Nor Angels know the counsel which God takes:
Yet if thy heart be wisdoms mansion,
Thy soul shall gain thy hearts made mention.

Or who in two days space will spend but one?
The one does keep his mean in ouerbroyle,
The other under mean, because alone:
Say, what is man without his spirit swayes him?
Say, what is the spirit if the man decays him?
An ill reformed breath, a life, a hell,
A going out worse than a coming in,
For wisdom is the bodies centinell,
Set to guard life which else would-fall in sin:
She does correct and love, swayes, and preserues,
Teaches, and favors, rules, and yet observes.
Chapter X.

For love in hate, is hate in too much love,
So chastisment is preseruations mate,
Instructing and preserving those we prove:
So wisdom first corrects, then favors,
But fortune favors first, then wauereth.
First, the first father of this earthly world,
First man, first father called for after time,
Unfashioned and like a heap was hurled;
Formed and reformed, by wisdom out of slime,
By nature ill reformed, by wisdom purer,
She mortal life, she better life's procurer.

What ever was he? but an ash^e caske,
By wisdom clothed in his best array,
If better may be best, to choose a task:
One gave him time to live, she power to reign,
Making two powers one, one power twain.
But o malign ill boading wickedness,
Like bursting gulfes orewhelming ve^tues seed,
Too furious wrath forsaking happiness,
Loosing ten thousand joys, with one dire deed:
Cain could see, but folly struck him blind,
To kill his brother in a raging mind.

Unhappy actor in deaths tragedy,
Murdring a brother, whose name murder gives,
Whose staying action, slaughters butcherie:
A weeping part had earth in that same play,
For she did weep herself to death that day.
Water distilled from millions of her eyes,
Upon the long dride carcass of her time,
Her watrie conduites were the weeping skies,
Which made her womb an ouerflowing clime:
Wisdom preserved it, which preserues all good,
And taught it how to make an arc of wood.

Upon the worlds huge billow-tossing sea,
It Was not the board, it was wisdom which suruiues,
Wisdom that arc, that board, that fence, that bay:
The world was made a water-rowling wave,
But wisdom better hopes assurance gave.
And when pale malice did advance her flagge,
Upon the raging standard of despite,
Fiends sovereign, sins mistr^s, and hells hagge,
Dunne Plutoes Lady, empress of the night:
Wisdom from whom immortal joy begun,
Preserved the righteous, as her faultlesse son.

The wicked were ensnared, they were preserved,
One kept in joy, the one of joy deprived,
One feeding, fed, the other feeding, steru'd,
The food which wisdom gives, is nourishment,
The food which malice gives, is languishment.
One feeds; the other feeds, but choking feeds,
Two contraries in meat, two differing meats,
This brings forth hate, and this repentance seeds:
This war, this peace, this battails, this retreats:
And that example may be truly tried,
These lived in Sodomes fire, the other did.

Which for their sakes bear nothing else but death,
The witness of it self with vices fed,
A smoaky testimony of sins breath:
This is my witness, my certificate,
And this is my sin weeping sociate.
My pen will scarce hold ink to write these woes,
These woes, the blotted inkie lines of sin,
My paper wrincles at my sorrows shows,
And like that land will bring no harvest in:
Had Lots unfaithful wife been without fault,
My fresh-inkt pen had never called her salt.

Is sauory bent to aggrauate salt tears,
And wets my paper with salt water groans,
Making me stick in agonising fears:
My paper now is grown to billows might,
Sometimes I stay my pen, sometimes I write.
O foolish pilate I, blind-harted guide,
Can I not see the clifts, but rent my bark,
Must I needs hoist up sails against wind and tide,
And leave my soul behind my wisdoms arc,
Well may I be the glass of my disgrace,
And set my sin in other sinners place.

Whose hope does lead me unto better hap,
Whose presence does direct my fore-run race,
Because I serve her as my beauties map:
L^ke Cain I shall be restored to heaven,
From shipwracks peril to a quiet hau'n.
When that by Cains hand Abel was slain,
His brother Abel, brother to his ire,
Then Cain fled, to fly destructions pain,
Gods heavy wrath, against his bloods desire:
But being fetched again by wisdoms power,
Had pardon for his deed, love for his lower.

And relaxation from the clogge of sin,
His painful labor, labors riches made,
His laboring pain, did plesures profit win:
It Was wisdom, wisdom made him to repent,
And newly placed him in his old content.
His body which was once destructions cave,
Black murders teritorie, mischiefs house,
By her, these wicked fins were made his slave,
And she become his bride, his wife, his spouse:
Enriching him which was too rich before,
Too rich in vice, in happynes too poor.
Maegera which did rule within his breast,
Lernas fen within his mind,
Both now displease him, which once pleased him best,
Now murdring murder with his being kind:
These which were once his friends are now his foes,
Whose practice he retorts with wisdoms blows.
Ye still lie they in ambush for his soul,
But he more wiser keeps a wiser way,
They see him; and they bark, snarle, grin, and houle,
But wisdom guides his steps he cannot stray:
By whom he co^quers, and through whom he knows
The fear of God is stronger then his foes.

And sold as bondsman unto sins command,
She she, forsook him not for infamy,
But freed him from his hearts imprisoned band:
And when he lay in dungeon of despite,
She interlinde his grief with her delight.
Though servile she with him; she was content,
The prison was her lodge, as well as his,
Till she the scepter of the world had lent,
To glad his fortune, to augment his bliss,
To punish false accusers of true deeds,
And raise in him immortal glories seeds.

Or new invent a nominating style,
Reciting ancient worth to make new fame,
Or new-old hierarchy from honors file:
Say, shall file out fame for virtues store,
And give a name not thought, nor heard before*
Then should we make her two, where now but one,
Then should we make her common to each tongue,
Wisdom shall be her name, she wise alone,
If alter old for new, we do old wrong,
Call her still wisdom, mistress of our souls,
Our lives deliverer from our foes controules.

Were to disarme the title of the power,
And think to make a raise, and make a fall,
Turn best to worst, a day unto an hour,
To give two sundry names unto one thing,
Makes it more commoner in Echoes sling.
She guides man's soul, let her be called a Queen,
She enters into man, call her a sprite,
She makes them godly, which have never been
Call her her self, the image of her might:
Those which for virtue plead, she prompts their tongue,
Whose suit no tyrant, nor no King can wrong.

She prompts their thoghts, their thoghts prompts speeches sound
Their tongues reward is honors diadem,
Their labors hire with duest merit crowned:
She is as judge and witness of each heart,
Condemning falsehood, taking virtues part.
A shadow in the day, star in the night,
A shadow for to shade them from the sun,
A star in darkness for to give them light,
A shade in day, a star when day is done:
Keeping both courses true, in being true,
A shade, a star, to shade and lighten you.

Had scorcht the inward palace of your powers,
Your hot affection coolde your hot desire,
Two heats once met make cool distilling, showers,
So likewise had not wisdom been your star,
You had been prisoner unto Phoebes car.
She made the red sea subject to your craves,
The surges, calmes, the billows, smoothest ways,
She made rough winds sleep silent in their caves,
And Aeole watch, whom all the winds obayes:
Their foes pursuing them, with death and doom,
Did make the sea their church, the waves their tome

Burying themselves with their own handie deed,
Sin dig'd a pit it self to bury sin,
Seed plowed up the ground, to scatter seed:
The righteous, seeing this same sudden fall,
Did praise the Lord, and ceased upon them all.
A glorious prise, though from inglorious hands,
A worthy spoil, though from unworthy hearts,
Tosst with the Oceans rage upon the sands,
Victorious gain, gained by wisdoms arts:
Which makes the dumb to speak, the blind to see,
The deaf to hear, the babes have gravity.
Chapter XI.

what thought a tongue, what tongue a show of fear
Having his ship balanste with such a fraught
Which calms the euer-weeping oceans tears:
Which prospers every enterprise of war,
And leads their fortune by good fortunes star.
A Pilate on the seas, guide on the land,
Through uncouth desolate untrodden way,
Through wilderness of woe, which in woes stand,
Pitching their tents where desolation lay:
In just revenge incountring with their foes,
Annexing wrath to wrath, and blows to blows.

Had made their bodies subject unto thurst,
And broyld their hearts, in wraths-allaying harms,
With fiery surges which from body burst:
That time had made the total sum of life,
Had not affection strove to end the strife.
Wisdom affectionating power of zeal,
Did cool the passion of tormenting heat,
With water from a rock which did reveal,
Her dear dear love, placde in affections seat:
She was their mother twice, she nursed them twice,
Mingling their heat with cold, their fire with ice:

From whence receiude they speech, from a mute rock?
As if all pleasure did proceed from moan,
Or all discretion from a senseless block:
For what was each but silent, dead, and mute?
As if a thorny thistle should bear fruit.
It Is strange how that should cure, which erst did kill,
Give life, in whom destruction is enshrinde,
Alas the stone is dead, and has no skill,
Wisdom gave life and love, it was wisdoms mind:
She made the store, which poisoned her foes,
Give life, give cure, give remedy to those.
Mars, which washed himself in gore,
Raignde in her foes thirst-slaughter-drinking hearts,
Their heads the bloody storehouse of bloods store,
Their minds made bloody streams disburst in parts:
What was it else but butchery and hate?
To przie young infants blood at murders rate:
But let them surffet on their bloody cup,
Carowsing to their own destructions health,
We drink the siluer-streamed water up,
Which unexpected flowed from wisdoms wealth:
Declaring by the thirst of our dry souls,
How all our foes did swim in murders boules.

Can be compared to the fire of thirst?
One be as both, for both the body kill,
And first brings torments in tormenting first:
Famine is death it self, and thirst no less,
If bread and water do not yield redress.
Yet this affliction is but virtues trial,
Proceeding from the mercy of Gods ire,
To see if it can find his truths denial,
His judgments breach, attempts contempts desire:
But oh, the wicked sleeping in misdeede,
Had death on whom they fed, on whom they feed.

Arraignde, tormented, torturde in one law,
Adiudgde like captives with destructions wreathe,
Arraignde like thieves before the bar of awe:
Condemnd, tormented, torturde, punished,
Like captives bold, thieves vnastonished.
Say God did suffer famine for to reign,
And thirst to rule amongst the choicest heart,
Yet father-like he easde them of their pain,
And proou'd them, how they could endure a smart:
But as a righteous King condemnd the others,
As wicked sons unto as wicked mothers.

Because the tabernacle of his name,
His mansion house, the place where he does dwell,
The cole-blacke visage of his nigrum fame:
So if the wicked live upon the earth,
Earth is their hell, from good to worser birth.
If present, they are present to their tears,
If absent, they are present to their woes,
Like as the snaile which shows all that she bears,
Making her back the mountain of her shoes:
Present to their death, not absent to their care,
Their punishment alike where ere they are.

And fed lament with care, care with lament?
Say, how can sorrow be with sorrow bailde,
When tears consumes that which smiles has lent?
This makes a double prison, double chain,
A double mourning, and a double pain.
Captivity hoping for freedoms hap,
At length does pay the ransom of her hope,
Yet frees her thought from any clogging clap,
Though back be almost burst with yrons cope:
So they indurde the more, because they knew,
That never till the spring the flowers grew.

Long-sought for bliss, Long far fet happiness,
Content they were to die for virtues right,
Since joy should be the pledge of heaviness:
When unexpected things were brought to pass,
They were amazde and wondered where God was.
He whom they did deny now they extol,
He Whom they do extol, they did deny,
He whom they did deride, they do enroll,
In register of heavenly majesty:
Their thirst was ever thirst, repentance stopped it,
Their life was ever dead, repentance propt it.
And had it not their thirst had burnd their hearts,

Their tongues had raised all their bodies parts,
Their bodies once in arms had made all die:
Their foolish practices had made them wise,
Wise in their hearts, though foolish in their eyes.
But they (alas) were dead to worship death,
Senseless in worshipping all shadowed shows,
Breathless wasting of so vain a breath,
Dumb in performance of their tongues suppose:
They in adoring death, in deaths behest,
Were punished with life, and living beasts.

The thing it self against the shadows will,
Which makes the shadows, sad woes in life's grave,
As naught impossible in heavens skill;
God sent sad-ohes, for shadows of lament,
Lions, and bears, in multitudes he sent.
Newly created beasts; which sight never saw,
Unknown, which neither eye nor ear did know,
To breathe out blasts of fire against their law,
And cast out smoke with a tempestuous blow:
Making their eyes the chambers of their fears,
Darting forth fire as lightning from the spheres.

By the profane ill-limnd, pale spectacles,
Making both fire and fear to be their guide,
Pulld down their vaine-adoring chronicles:
Then staring in their faces spit forth fire,
Which heats, and cools, their frosty-hot desire.
Frosty in fear, vnfrosty in their shame,
Cool in lament, hot in their powers disgraces,
Like lukewarm coals, half kindled with the flame,
Sat white and red mustring within their faces:
The beasts the^ selves did not so much dismay them,
As did their ugly eyes aspects decay them.

By the decree of heaven, degree of earth?
They have more strength then he, yet more he can,
He having reasons store, they reasons dearth,
But these were made to break subiections rod:
And show the stubernnesse of man to God.
Had they not been ordained to such intent,
Gods word was able to supplant their powers,
And root out them which were to mischief bent,
With wrath and vengeance, minutes in deaths hours:
But God does keep a full-direct-true course,
And measures pitties love, with mercies force.

Because he makes no show of what he is,
When God is loath to give their pride a fall,
Or cloud the day wherein they do amiss;
But should his strength be shown his anger rise,
Who could withstand the sunne-caues of his eyes.
Alas, what is the world against his ire?
As snowie mountains against the golden sun,
For'st for to melt, and thawe with frosty fire,
Fire hid in frost, though frost of cold begun:
As dew-distilling drops fall from the morn,
So nw-destructions claps fall from his scorn.

His wrath lies sleeping in his mercies joy,
Which very seldom rise at mischiefs coyles,
And will not wake for every sinners toy:
Boundless his mercies are, like heavens grounds,
They have no limittes they, nor heaven no bounds.
The promontary top of his true love,
Is like the end of neuer-ending streams,
Like Nilus water-springs which inward move,
And have no outward show of shadows beams:
God sees, and will not see, the sins of men,
Because they should amend, amend? oh when?

As does the father his begotten son,
She makes her lap their quiet sleeping tomb,
He seeks to care for life which new begun:
What care has he (think then) that cares for all,
For aged, and for young, for great and small?
Is not that father careful, filld with care,
Loving, long suffering, merciful, and kind;
Which made with love all things that in love are,
Unmerciful to none, to none unkind,
Had man been hateful, man had never been,
But perished in the springtime of his green.

Or how can anger follow mercies path?
How can unkindness hinder kindness gains?
Or how can murder bathe in pitties bath?
Love, mercy, kindness, pity, eithers mate,
Does scorn unkindness, anger, murder, hate.
Had it not been thy will to make the earth,
It still had been a Chaos unto time,
But it was thy will that man should have a birth,
And be preserude by good, condemnd by crime:
Yet pity reigns within thy mercies store,
Thou spar'st and love us all, what would we more?
Chapter XII.

Were placed in the mansion of their skin,
Each having daily motion to be rife,
Closde in that body which does close the^ in,
God sent his holy spirit unto man,
Which did begun when first the world began.
So that the body which was king of al,
Is subject unto that which now is king,
Which chastneth those whom mischief does exhale,
Unto misdeeds from whence destructions spring:
Yet merciful it is though it be chief,
Converting vice to good, sin to belief.

Balld because old, old because living long,
It is rejected often when it is called,
And wears out age with age, still being young:
Twice children we, twice feeble, and once strong,
But being old, we sin, and do youth wrong.
The more we grow in age, the more in vice,
A house-roome long unswept will gather dust,
Our long vnthawed souls will freeze to ice,
And wear the badge of long imprisoned rust:
So those inhabitants in youth twice borne,
Were old in sin, more old in heavens scorn.

Commencing words like foaming vices waves,
Committing and commencing mischiefs name,
With works and words sworn to be vices slaves:
As sorcery, witchcraft, mischievous deeds,
And sacrifice which wicked fancies feeds.
Well may I call that wicked which is more,
I rather would be low than be too hie,
Oh wondrous practisers clothde all in gore,
To end that life, which their own lives did buy:
More than swine-like eating man's bowelles up,
Their banquets dish, their blood their banquets cup.

Whose house the bloody shambles of decay,
More than a slaughterhouse which butchers made,
More than an Eschip seely bodies pray:
Through whose hearts a bloody shambles runs,
They do not butcher beasts, but their own sons.
Chief murdrers of their souls, which their souls boght
Extinguishers of light which their lives gave,
More than kniue-butchers they, butchers in thought,
Sextons to dig their own begotten grave:
Making their habitations old in sin,
Which God does reconcile and new begin.

That bloody slaughterhouse to peaces breast,
That lawless palace, to a place of right,
That slaughtring shambles to a living rest:
Made meet for justice, fit for happiness,
Unmeet for sin, unfit for wickedness.
Yet the inhabitants, though mischiefs slaves,
Were not dead-drencht in their destructions flood,
God hoped to raise repentance from sins graves,
And hoped that pains delay would make them good:
Not that he was unable to subdue them,
But that their sins repentance should renew them.

Delay is good, and yet delay is bad,
It Is virtue when it thawes repentance ice,
It Is vice to put off things we have or had:
But here it follows repentance way,
Therefore it is not sins nor mischiefs pray.
Delay in punishment is double pain,
And every pain makes a twice double thought,
Doubling the way to our lives better gain,
Doubling repentance which is single bought:
For fruitles grafts when they are too much lopt,
More fruitless are, for why their fruits are stopped.

The roots of mischief, tops of villainy,
They worser are with too much punishing,
Because by nature prone to injury:
For it is but folly to supplant his thought,
Whose heart is wholly given to be naught.
These seeded were in seed; oh cursed plant,
Seeded with other seed, Oh cursed root,
Too much of good does turn unto goods want,
As too much seed does turn to too much soote:
Bitter in taste, presuming of their height,
Like misty vapors in blacke-coloured night.
But god whose powerful arms one strength does hold

Will send his messengers both hot and cold,
To make them shadows of their own disgraces:
His hot Ambassador is fire, his cold
Is wind, which two scorn for to be controld.
For who dares say unto the King of kings,
What have thou done, which ought to be undone?
Or who dares stand against thy judgments stings?
Or dare accuse thee for the nations moan?
Or who dare say, revenge this ill for me?
Or stand against the Lord with villainy?

He weighs with the balance of his eyes,
What judgment he pronounces must be so,
And those he oppresses cannot rise:
Revenge lies in his hands, when he does please,
He can revenge, and love, punish, and ease.
The carved spectacle which workmen make,
Is subject unto them, not they to it,
They which from God a lively form do take,
Should much more yield unto their makers wit:
Since there is none but he which has his thought,
Caring for that which he has made of naught.

Which with a new device makes a new moule,
And what are we I pray but clayie bands,
With ashie body, ioynde to cleaner soul?
Yet we once made, scorn to be made again,
But live in sin like clayie lumps of pain.
Yet if hot anger smother cool delight,
He Will mould our bodies in destructions form,
And make our selves as subjects to his might,
In the least fuel of his angers storm:
Nor king, nor tyrant, dare ask or demand,
What punishment is this thou have in hand?

Out prison is the earth, our bands our sins,
And our accuser our own bodies groan,
Pressed down with vices weights, and mischiefs gins:
Before the bar of heaven we plead for favor,
To cleanse our sin-bespotted bodies savor.
Thou righteous art, our pleading then is right,
Thou merciful, we hope for mercies grace,
Thou ordrest every thing with looke-on sight;
Behold us prisoners in earths wandering race:
We know thy pity is without a bound,
And sparest them which in some faults be found.

Beginning all to end, yet ending none,
Son unto virtues son, and wisdoms friend,
Original of bliss to virtue shown:
Beginning good which never ends in vice,
Beginning flames which never end in ice.
For righteousness is good in such a name,
It righteous is, it is good in such a deed,
A lamp it is, fed with discretions flame,
Begins in seed, but never ends in seed:
By this we know the Lord is just and wise,
Which causes him to spare us when he tries.

Wise, because wisdom thinks what justice weighs,
One virtue makes two, and two more linckes,
Wisdom is just, and justice never straies:
The help of one does make the other better,
As is the want of one the others letter.
But wisdom has two properties in wit,
As justice has two contraries in force,
Heat added unto heat augmenteth it,
As too much water bursts a watercourse:
Gods wisdom too much proou'd does breed gods hate,
Gods justice too much mou'de breeds Gods debate.

Does keep the flaming heat imprisoned in,
Yet sometime will it burn, when flame it must,
And burst the ashie cave where it has bin:
So if Gods mercy pass the bounds of mirth,
It is not mercy then, but mercies dearth.
Yet how can love breed hate, without hates love?
God does not hate to love, nor love to hate,
His equity does every action prove,
Smothring with love that spiteful enuies fate:
For should the teene of anger trace his brow,
The very puffes of rage would drive the plow.

Now like a lover studies how to please,
And win their hearts again, whom mischief won,
Lodged in the mansion of their sins disease:
He made each mortal man two ears, two eyes,
To hear and see; yet he must make them wise.
If imitation should direct man's life,
It Is life to imitate a living corse,
The things example makes the thing more rife,
God loving is, why do we want remorce?
He put repentance into sinful hearts,
And sed their fruitless souls, with fruitful arts.

Should have such influence from mercies stream,
Kissing both good, and ill, flowers, and weeds,
As does the sunnie flame of Tytans beam,
A greater Tethis then should mercy be,
In flowing unto them which loves thee.
The sun which shines in heaven does light the earth
The earth which shines in sin does spite the haau'n,
Sin is earths sun, the sun of heaven sins dearth,
Both odd in light, being of height note even:
Gods mercy then which spares both good and ill,
Does care for both, though not alike in will.

Her company is bad, her food more worse,
She shames to sit upon her betters seat,
As subject beasts wanting the Lions force,
Mercy is virtues badge, foe to disdain,
Virtue is vices stop, and mercies gain.
Yet God is merciful, to mischief flows,
More merciful in sins and sinners want,
God chast'neth us, and punishes our foes,
Like sluggish drones, amongst a laboring ant:
We hope for mercy at our bodies doom,
We hope for heaven, the bail of earthly tomb.

They hope for vice, and they have hope of hell,
From whence their souls eternity is given,
But such eternity which pains can tell:
They live; but better were it for to die,
Immortal in their pain and misery.
Has hell such freedom to devour souls?
Are souls so bold to rush in such a place?
God gives hell power of vice, which hell controules:
Vice makes her followers bold with armed face,
God tortures both, the mistress and the man,
And ends in pain, that which in vice began.

Without repentance meet the middle way,
Making a mediocrity their friend,
Which else would be their foe, because they stray:
But if repentance miss the middle line,
The sun of virtue ends in wests decline.
So did it fare with these, which strai'd too far,
Beyond the measure of the middayes eye,
In errors ways, lead without virtues star,
Esteeming beast-like powers for deity:
Whose heart no thought of understanding meant,
Whose tongue no word of understanding sent.

Upon the tender heads of tendrer wit,
which tongue-tide are, having no tale to tell,
To drive away the childhood of their fit:
Unfit to tune their tongue with wisdoms string,
Too fit to quench their thirst in follies spring.
But they were trees to babes, babes sprigs to them,
They not so good as these, in being naught,
In being naught, the more from vices stem,
Whose essence cannot come without a thought;
To punish them, is punishment in season;
They children like, without or wit, or reason.

Derision bears a part tweene life and death,
Shame follows her with misery half fed,
Halfe-breathing life, to make half life and breath:
Yet here was mercy shown, their deeds were more,
Then could be wipte off by derisions score.
This mercy is the warning of misdeedes,
A trumpet summoning to virtues walls,
To notify their hearts which mischief feeds,
Whom vice instructs, whom wickedness exhal's:
But if derision can not murder sin,
Then shame shall end, and punishment begin.

Then how can shame take root in shamlesse plants,
When they their brows with shameless furrows fill,
And plows each place, which one plow-furrow wants:
Then being armed against shame with shamlesse face,
How can derision take a shameful place?
But punishment may smoth their wrinckled brow,
And set shame on the forehead of their rage,
Guiding the forefront of that shameless row,
Making it smooth in shame, though not in age:
Then will they say, that God is just and true,
But it is too late, damnation will ensue.
Chapter XIII.

The root must needs be weak, it branches fall,
Nature is vain, man cannot be her foe,
Because from nature, and at natures call:
Nature is vain, and we proceed from nature,
Vain therefore is our birth, and vain our feature.
One body may have two diseases sore,
Not being two, it may be ioynde to two,
Nature is one it self, yet two and more,
Vain, ignorant of God, of good, of show,
Which not regards the things which god has don,
And what things are to do, what new begun.

Why blame I nature? for her mortal men,
Why blame I men? it is she, it is she that weaues,
That weaues, that wafts unto destructions pen:
Then being blamefull both, because both vain,
I leave to both, their vanities due pain.
To prize the shadow at the substance rate,
Is a vain substance of a shadows hue,
To think the son to be the fathers mate,
Earth to rule earth, because of earthly view:
To think fire wind, air stars, water, and heaven,
To be as Gods, from whom their selves are given.

Wind as a God? oh vain, oh vainest voice,
Air as a God? when it is but duskie ground,
Star as a God? when it is but Phoebes choice:
Water a God? which first by God was made,
Heaven a God? which first by God was laid.
Say all has beauty, excellence, array,
Yet beautifide they are, they were, they be,
By Gods bright excellence of brightest day,
Which first implanted our first beuties tree:
If then the painted outside of the show,
Be radiant, what is the inward row.

Be so illumined with the sun-shin'd soul,
What is the thing it self which is within,
More wrencht, more cleansde, more purified from foul:
If elementall powers have Gods thought,
Say what is God, which made them all of naught.
It is a wonder for to see the sky,
And operation of each ayrye power,
A marvel, that the heaven should be so hie,
And let fall such a low distilling shower:
Then needs must he be high, higher then all,
Which made both hie and low with one tongues call.

In making that which else would be unmade,
The nere-thought thing, does always hidden lurk,
Without the maker in a making trade:
For had not God made man, man had not been,
But nature had decade, and nere been seen.
The workman never showing of his skill,
Does live unknown to man, though known to wit,
Had mortal birth been never in Gods will,
God had been God, but yet unknown in it:
Then having made the glory of earths beauty,
It Is reason earth should reverence him in duty.

A king, though sauadge as his subjects are,
Yet they with his obseruances are lead,
Obaying his beheasts what ere they were:
The Turks, the infidels, all have a Lord,
Whom they observe in thought, in deed, in word.
And shall we; differing from their savage kind,
Having a soul to live and to believe,
Be rude in thought, in deed, in word, in mind,
Not seeking him which should our woes relieve:
Oh no dear brethren, seek our God, our fame,
Then if we err we shall have lesser blame.

Oh that my tongue could fetch that word again,
Whose very accent makes me go astray,
Breathing that erring wind into my brain*
My word is past and cannot be recalde,
It is like aged time, now waxen balde.
For they which go astray in seeking God,
Do miss the ioyefull narrow-footed path,
(Joyful, thrice joyful way to his abode,)
Naught seeing but their shadows in a bath:
Narcissus-like pining to see a show,
Hindering the passage, which their feet should go.

O sugared kiss did with a poisoned lip,
The fantasies of these do die to miss,
Oh tossed fantasies, in follies ship:
He did to kiss the shadow of his face,
These live and die to life's and deaths disgrace.
A fault without amends, crime without ease,
A sin without excuse, death without aid,
To love the world, and what the world did please,
To know the earth, wherein their sins are laid:
They knew the world, but not the L. that framde it
They knew the earth, but not the L. that namde i^

Striving to heal himself, did himself harm,
These drownde them selves on earth, with their selves woe,
He in a water-brooke by furies charm;
They made dry earth wet with their follys weepi^g,
He made wet earth dry, with his furies sleeping.
Then leave him to his sleep: return to those,
Which ever wake in miseries constraints,
Whose eyes are hollow caves, and made sleeps foes,
Two dungeons dark with sin, blind with complaints:
They called images which man first found,
Immortal Gods: for which, their tongs are bound.

Like children in a pageant of gay toys,
Adoring images for saints abode,
Oh vain vain spectacles of vainer joys:
Putting their hope in blocks, their trust in stones,
Hoping to trust, trusting to hope in mones.
As when a carpenter cuts down a tree,
Meet for to make a vessel for man's use,
He pareth all the bark most cunningly,
With the sharp shauer of his knives abuse,
Ripping the seely womb with no entreat,
Making her woundy chips to dress his meat.

Crooked with ages growth, growing with crookes,
And full of wether-chinkes, which seasons marrde,
Knobbie and rugged, bending in like hooks:
Yet knowing age can never want a fault,
Encounters it with a sharp knifes assault.
And carues it well though it be selfe-like ill,
Observing leisure, keeping time and place,
According to the cunning of his skill,
Making the figure of a mortal face:
Or like some ugly beast in ruddy mould,
Hiding each crannie with a painters fould.

How age can botch up age, with crooked thread,
How his old hands, can make an old tree new,
And dead-like he, can make another dead:
Yet makes a substantive, able to bear it,
And she an adjective, nor see, nor hear it.
A wall it is it self, yet wall with wall,
Has great supportance bearing either part,
The image like an adjective would fall,
Were it not closed with an iron heart:
The workman being old himself, does know,
What great infirmities old age can show.

He burst into the flowing of his wit,
Tossing his brains with more then thousand theams,
To have a wooden stratagem so fit:
Wooden, because it does belong to wood,
His purpose may be wise, his reason good.
His purpose wise? no, foolish, fond, and vain,
His reason good? no, wicked, vild, and ill;
To be the author of his own lives pain,
To be the tragic actor of his will:
Praying to that which he before had framed,
For welcome faculties, (and not ashamed.)

Calling to sickness, for sick bodies health,
Calling to weakness, for a stronger fence,
Calling to poverty, for better wealth:
Praying to death, for life, for this he praide,
Requiring help of that, which wants aid.
Desiring that of it, which he not had,
And for his journey, that which cannot go,
And for his gain, her furdrance, to make glad,
The work which he does take in hand to do:
These windy words do rush against the wall
She cannot speak, twill sooner make her f^^^.
Chapter XIIII.

Kindled from forth the bosom of the flint,
As does one plague infect with it self name,
With watrie humors making bodies dint:
So, even so, this idol worshipper,
Does make another idol practiser.
The shipman cannot teeme dame Tethis waves,
Within a winde-taught-capring anchorage,
Before he prostrate lies, and suffrage craves,
And have a block to be his fortunes gage:
More crooked then his stern, yet he implores her,
More rotten then his ship, yet he adores her.

It Was avarice, it was she that found it out,
She made her crafts-man crafty in his trade,
He cunning was in bringing it about:
Oh had he made the painted show to speak,
It would have calde him vain, herself to wreake.
It would have made him blush alive, though he,
Did die her color with a deadly blush,
Thy pouidence (o father) does decree,
A sure sure way, amongst the waves to rush:
Thereby declaring that thy power is such,
That though a man were weak, thou can do much.

One death in death, the other death in fear,
This single bar, a board, a poor bords breath,
Yet stops the passage of each Neptunes tear:
To see how many lives one board can have,
To see how many lives one board can save.
How was this board first made? by wisdoms art,
Which is not vain, but firm, not weak, but sure,
Therefore do men commit their living heart,
To plancks which either life or death procure:
Cutting the storms in two, parting the wind,
Plowing the sea till they their harbor find.

Rusheth upon the hollow-sided bark,
With rough-sent kisses from the water grounds,
Raising a foaming heat with rages spark,
Yet sea, nor waves, can make the shipman fear,
He knows that die he must, he cares not where.
For had his timorous heart been did in white,
And sent an echo of resembling woe,
Wisdom had been unknown in follies night,
The sea had been a desolations show:
But one world hope lay houering on the sea,
When one worlds hap did end with one decay.
Phoebus drowned in the oceans world,
Phoebe disgrast with Tethis billow-roules,
And Phoebus firie-golden-wreath vncurl'd,
was seated at the length in brightness souls:
Man tosst in wettest wilderness of seas,
Had seed on seed, increase upon increase.
Their mansion house a tree upon a wave,
O happy tree, upon unhappy ground,
But every tree is not ordained to have
Such blessedness, such virtue, such abound:
Some trees are carved images of naught,
Yet God-like reuerenc'd, adored, besought.

The hands which fashion them, condemn their groth,
Cuts down their branches, vailes their forehead bare,
Both made in sin, though not sins equal both:
First God made man, and vice did make him new,
And man made vice from vice; and so it grew.
Now is her harvest greater then her good,
Her wonted winter, turned to summers air,
Her ice to heat, her sprig to cedars wood,
Her hate to love, her loathsome filth to fair:
Man loves her well by mischief new created,
God hates her ill, because of virtue hated.

More ugly then Alastors pitchie back,
Nights dismal summoner, and end of day,
Carrying all duskie vapors hemde in black:
Behold thy downfall ready at thy hand,
Behold thy hopes wherein thy hazards stand.
Oh spurn away that block out of thy way,
With virtues appetite, and wisdoms force,
That stumbling block of folly and decay,
That snare which does ensnare thy treading corse:
Behold thy body falls, let virtue bear it,
Behold thy soul does fall, let wisdom rear it.

Thy face is so disfigured with sin,
Young I do think thou art, in what? in good,
But old I am assured by wrinckled skin:
Thy lips, thy tongue, thy heart, is young in praying,
But lips, and tongue, and heart is old in straying.
Old in adoring idols, but too young,
In the observance of diuinest law,
Young in adoring God, though old in tongue,
Old and too old, young, and too young in awe:
Beginning that, which does begin misdeeds,
Inuenting vice, which all thy body feeds.

This caterpiller of eternity,
The foe to bliss, the canker unto good,
The new accustomed way of vanity:
It has not ever been, nor shall it be,
But perish in the branch of follies tree.
As her descent was vanities aline,
So her descending like to her descent,
Here shall she have an end, in hell no fine,
Vain glory brought her, vainly to be spent:
You know all vanity draws to an end,
Then needs must she decay because her friend.

To make eyes watrie, when they should be dry,
To grieve at that, which murders griefs annoy,
To keep a shower where the sun should lie?
But yet this folly-cloude does often appear,
When face should smile and watery eye be clear.
The father mournes to see his son life-dead,
But seldom mournes to see his son dead-liu'd,
He cares for earthly lodge, not heavens bed,
For death in life, not life in death suruiu'd:
Keeping the outward shadow of his face,
To work the inward substance of disgrace.

Keeping a shadow to be substance heir,
To raise the thing it self from shadows seed,
And make an element of liuelesse air:
Adoring that which his own hands did frame,
Whose heart invention gave, whose tongue the name.
But could infection keep one settled place,
The poison would not lodge in every breast,
Nor feed the heart, the mind, the soul, the face,
Lodging but in the carcass of her rest:
But this Idolatry once in man's use,
Was made a custom then without excuse.

And tyrants cannot speak without a doom,
Whose judgment does proceed from heart and hand,
From heart in rage, from hand in bloody tomb:
That if through absence any did neglect it,
Presence should pay the ransom which reject it.
Then to avoid the doom of present hate,
Their absence did perform their presence want,
Making the image of a kingly state,
As if they had new seed from sins old plant:
Flattring the absence of old mischiefs mother,
With the like form and presence of another.

Or rather presence with an absent view,
Deceiving vulgars with a day of night,
Which know not good from bad, nor false from true:
A crafts-man cunning in his crafty trade,
Beguiling them with that which he had made.
Like as a vane is turned with every blast,
Until it point unto the windy clime,
So stand the people at his word aghast,
He making old, new form in new-olde time,
Defies, and deifies all with one breath,
Making them live and die, and all in death,
Tantalus are fed with shoes,
Shows which exasperat: and cannot cure,
They see the painted shadow of suppose,
They see her sight, yet what does sight procure?
Like Tantalus they feed, and yet they starve,
Their food is carved to them, yet hard to carue.
The crafts-man feeds them with a staruing meat,
Which does not fill but empty hungers gape,
He makes the idol comely, fair, and great,
With well limnd visage, and best fashioned shape:
Meaning to give it to some noble view,
And feign his beauty with that flattring hue,

To diverse apparitions of delight,
Some did admire the portraiture so new,
Hewed from the standard of an old trees hight,
Some were allured through beutie of the face,
With outward eye to work the souls disgrace.
Adored like a God though made by man,
To make a God of man, a man of God,
It Is more then human life or could, or can,
Though multitudes applause in error trod,
I never knew since mortal life's abod,
That man could make a man much less a God.

Borrowing the essence from restored sin,
Man can be virtues foe, and vices taker,
Welcome himself without a welcome in:
Can he do this? yea more, oh shamlesse ill,
Shameful in shame, shameless in wisdoms will.
The river of his vice can have no bound,
But breaks into the ocean of deceit,
Deceiving life with measures of dead ground,
With carved idols, disputations bait:
Making captivity clothed all in moan,
Be subject to a God made of a stone.

Oh had they been as stony as the name,
They never had brought vulgars in such awe,
To be destructions pray, and mischiefs game:
Had they been stone-dead both in look and favor
They never had made life of such a savor.
Yet was not this a too sufficient doom,
Sent from the root of their sin-oregrowne tongue,
To cloud gods knowledge with hell mischiefs gloome
To overthrow truths right with falsehoods wrong:
But daily practiced a perfect way,
Still to begin and never end to stray.

With whispring horrors drumming in each ear,
Or other villainies did play their parts,
Augmenting horror to new stricken fear:
Making their hands more then a shambles stall,
To slay their children ceremonial.
No place was free from stain of blood or vice,
Their life was marked for death, their soul for sin,
Marriage, for fornications thawed ice,
Thought for despair, body for eithers gin:
Slaughter did either end what life begun,
Or lust did end what both had left undone.

For vice has more competitors then one,
A greater troop does evermore avail,
And villainy is never found alone,
The bloud-hound folows that which slaughter killed
And theft does follow what deceit has spild.
Corruption mate to infidelity,
For that which is unfaithful is corrupt,
Tumults are school fellows to perjury,
For both are full when either one has supt:
Unthankfulness, defiling, and disorders,
Are fornications and uncleanness borders.
See what a sort of rebels are in arms,

Opposing of them selves against all harms,
To the deposing of her empires gain:
O double knot of treble miseries,
Oh treble knot, twice, thrice, in villainies.
O idoll-worshipping, thou mother art,
She procreatresse of a he offense,
I know thee now, thou bearst a woman's part,
Thou nature have of her, she of thee sense:
These are thy daughters, too too like the mother,
Black sins I dim you all with inckie smother

To let your hearts blood in a wicked vein,
To make your bodies clear, your souls as clean,
To cleanse the sinkes of sin, with virtues reine:
Behold your cole-blacke blood my writing ink,
My papers poisoned meat, my pens foul drink.
New christened are you, with your own new blood,
But mad before; savage, and desperate,
Prophesying lies, not knowing what was good,
Living ungodly evermore in hate:
Thundering out oaths, pale Sergeants of despair,
Swore, and forswore, not knowing what you were.

The well-limnd image of an ill-limnd thought,
Say, are you worthy now of praise or blame,
That such selfe-scandall in your own selves wrought?
You were heart-sicke before I let you blood,
But now heart-well since I have done you good.
Now wipe blind folly from your seeing eyes,
And drive destruction from your happy mind,
Your folly now is wit, not foolish-wise,
Destruction, happiness, not mischief blind:
You put your trust in idols, they deceiude you,
You put your trust in God, and he receiude you.

The climes of good or ill, virtue or vice,
Had it not flowde into the tongues enrowles,
Ascribing mischiefs hate, with good advice:
Your tongue had spild your soul, your soul your tongue
Wronging each function with a double wrong.
Your first attempt was placed in a show,
Imaginary show without a deed,
The next attempt was perjury, the foe
To just demeanors, and to virtues seed:
Two sins, two punishments, and one in two,
Makes two in one, and more than one can do.

Single, yet double, double, yet in four,
It slayes the soul, it hems the body in,
It spills the mind, it does the heart devour:
Gnawing upon the thoughts, feeding on blood,
For why, she lives in sin, but dies in good.
She taught their souls to stray, their tongs to swear,
Their thought to think amiss, their life to die,
Their heart to err, their mischief to appear,
Their head to sin, their feet to tread awry:
This scene might well have bin destructions tent,
To pay with pain, what sin with joy has spent.
Chapter XV.

His heart with hate, his throne with cruelty,
His face with furies map, his browe with cloud,
His reign with rage, his crown with tyranny:
Gracious is he, long-suffering, and true,
Which rules all things with his mercies view.
Gracious, for where is grace but where he is?
The fountaine-head the euer-boundlesse stream,
Patient, for where is patience in amiss,
If not conducted by pure graces beam:
Truth is the moderator of them both,
For grace and patience are of truest groth.

As truth-beginning grace, does end in truth,
Now patience takes the moderators place,
Yong-olde in suffering, olde-yong in ruth:
Patience is old in being always young,
Not having right, nor ever offering wrong,
So this is moderator of Gods rage,
Pardoning those deeds, which we in sin commit,
That if we sin, she is our freedoms gage,
And we still thine, though to be thine unfit:
In being thine (o Lord) we will not sin,
That we thy patience, grace, and truth may win.

To right our wrong, and not to wrong the right,
Give us thy grace (o Lord) to make us blessed,
That grace might bless, and bliss might grace our sight:
Make our beginning and our sequel truth,
To make us young in age, and grave in youth,
We know that our demands rest in thy will,
Our will rests in thy word, our word in thee,
Thou in our orisons, which do fulfill,
That wished action, which we wish to be:
It Is perfect righteousness to know thee right*
It Is immortality to know thy might.

Good, to know good and ill, ill to know none,
In knowing all, we know thy sacred will,
And what to do, and what to leave undone:
We are deceived, not knowing to deceive,
In knowing good and ill, we take and leave.
The glass of vanity, deceit, and shows,
The painters labor, the beguiling face,
The diuers-coloured image of suppose,
Cannot deceive the substance of thy grace:
Only a snare, to those of common wit,
Which couets to be like, in having it.

This feeding avarice on senseless mind,
Is rather hurt, then good, a loss, then gain,
Which couets for to loose and not to find:
So they were colored with such a face,
They would not care to take the idols place.
Then be your thoughts coherent to your words,
Your words as correspondent to your thought,
It Is reason you should have what love affords:
And trust in that which love so dearly bought:
The maker must needs love what he has made,
And the desirers free of either trade.

Yes, it is thy trade, for thou a potter art,
Tempring soft earth, making the clay to bow,
But clayie thou, do bear too stout a heart:
The clay is humble to thy rigorous hands,
Thou clay, too tough against thy Gods commau^ds.
If thou want slime, behold thy slimie faults,
If thou want clay, behold thy clayie breast,
Make them to be the deepest centres vaults,
And let all clayie mountains sleep in rest:
Thou bear an earthly mountain on thy back,
Thy hearts chief prisonhouse thy souls chief wrack.

A God of clay, thou but a man of clay,
O suds of mischief, in destruction sod,
O vainest labor in a vainer play:
Man is the greatest work which God did take:
And yet a God with man is naught to make.
He that was made of earth, would make a heaven,
If heaven may be made upon the earth,
Sins heirs, the airs, sins plants, the planets seau'n,
Their God a clod, his birth, true virtues dearth:
Remember whence you came wither you go,
Of earth, in earth, from earth to earth in woe.

So will I end with what I did begin,
I am of earth, and I do what earth may,
I am of dust, and therefore will I sin:
My life is short, what then? I Will make it longer,
My life is weak, what then? I Will make it stronger.
Long shall it live in vice, though short in length,
And fetch immortal steps, from mortal stops,
Strong shall it be in sin, though weak in strength,
Like mounting Eagles, on high mountains tops:
My honor shall be placed in deceit,
And counterfeit new shows of little weight.

And feign would call him wicked to his face,
But then his breath would answe^ with a lie,
And stain my inck with an untruths disgrace:
Thy master bids thee write, the pen says no,
But when thy master bids, it must be so.
Call his heart ashes: oh too mild a name,
Call his hope vile, more viler then the earth,
Call his life weaker then a clayeie frame,
Call his bespotted heart, an ashye hearth:
Ashes, earth, clay, conioyn'd to heart, hope, life,
Are features love, in being natures strife.

For this he knows he is, and more, then less,
In saying what he is, thou do appease,
The foming anger which his thoughts suppress:
Who knows not, if the best be made of clay,
The worst must needs be clad in foul array.
Thou in performing of thy masters will,
Do teach him to obey his lords commands,
But he repugnant is, and cannot skill
Of true adoring, with heart-heau'd up hand:
He has a soul, a life, a breath, a name,
Yet is he ignorant from whence they came.

No substance, but a shadow for to please,
My life does pass, even as a pastime goes,
A momentary time to live at ease:
My breath a vapor, and my name of earth,
Each one decaying of the others birth.
Our conversation best, for there is gains,
And gain is best in conuersations prime,
A mart of lucre in our conscience reigns,
Our thoughts as busy agents for the time:
So we get gain ensnaring simple men,
It is no matter how, nor where, nor when.

We care not where, if before God or man,
We care not when, but when our crafts have powers,
In measuring deceit with mischiefs fan:
For wherefore have we life, form, and ordaining,
But that we should deceive, and still be gaining?
I made of earth, have made al earthen shops,
And what I sell is al of earthy sale,
My pots have earthen feet, and earthen tops,
In like resemblance of my bodies vale:
But knowing to offend the heavens more,
I made frail images of earthy store.

O heavy clod more than the earth can bear,
Was never creature clothde in savage weeds,
Which would not blush when they this mischief hear:
Thou toldst a tale which might have bin untold.
Making the hearers blush, the readers old.
Let them blush still that hears, be old that reads,
Then boldness shall not reign, nor youth in vice,
Thrice miserable they which rashly speeds,
With expedition to this bold device:
More foolish than are fools, whose misery
Cannot be changde with new felicity.

Have not they misery which never joy?
Which takes an idol for a Gods defense,
And with their self-willd thoghts themselves destroy?
What folly is more greater than is here?
Or what more misery can well appear?
Call you them gods which have no seeing eyes?
No noses for to smell, no ears to hear,
No life but that which in deaths shadow lies,
Which have no hands to feel, no feet to bear:
If gods can neither hear, live, feel, nor see,
A fool may make such gods of every tree.

Conceiving folly in a foolish brain,
Taught and instructed in a wodden school,
Which made his head run of a wodden vain:
It Was man which made them, he his making had,
Man full of wood, was wood, and so ran mad.
He borrowed his life, and would restore
His borrowed essence to another death,
He feign would be a maker, though before
Was made himself, and God did lend him breath:
No man can make a god like to a man,
He says he scorns that work, he further can.

He does deceive the folly-guided hearts,
Sin lies in ambush, he for sin does wait,
Here is deceit deceiude, in either parts:
His sin deceives him, and he his sin,
So craft with craft is mewed in either gin.
The crafts-man mortal is, craft mortal is,
Each function nursing up the others want,
His hands are mortal, deadly what is his,
Only his sins buds in destructions plant:
Yet better he, than what he does devise,
For he himself does live that ever dies.

Yet headless is he not, yet has he none:
Where is his godhead? fled; his power? dead*
His reign? decayed; and his essence? gone:
Now tell me, is this God the God of good?
Or else Siluanus monarch of the wood.
There have I pierst his bark, for he is so,
A wooden god, fainde as Siluanus was:
But leaving him, to others let us go,
To senseless beasts their new adoring glass:
Beasts which did live in life, yet died in reason,
Beasts which did seasons eat, yet knew no season.

Keep one knit union of a living love?
Can sea with land? can fish agree with fowls?
Tigers with lambs, a serpent with a dove?
Oh no, they cannot; then say, why do we,
Adore a beast which is our enemy.
What greater foe than folly unto wit?
What more deformity than ugly face?
This disagrees, for folly is unfit,
The other contrary to beauties place:
Then how can senseless heads, deformed shoes,
Agree with you when they are both your foes.
Chapter XVI.

Your lives associats, and your loves content,
That which begins in them, your folly ends,
Then how can vice with vice be discontent:
Behold deformity sits on your heads,
Not horns but scorns, not visage but whole beds.
Behold a heap of sins your bodies pale,
A mountaine-ouerwhelming villainy,
Then tell me, are you clad in beauties vale?
Or in destructions pale-dead liuerie:
Their life demonstrates; now alive now dead,
Tormented with the beasts which they have fed.

With follies-vaine let blood, from follies vein,
And almost sterude your selves, stopped up your breath,
Had not Gods mercy helped, and easde your pain,
Behold a newfound meat, the Lord did send,
Which taught you to be new, and to amend.
A strange disgested nutriment, even quails,
Which taught them to be strange unto misdeeds,
When you implore his aid, he never fails,
To fill their hunger, whom repentance feeds:
You see when life was half at deaths arrest,
He new created life at hungers feast.

Or is this God like to your handie frame,
If so, his power could not then afford,
Such influence which flows from his name:
He is not painted, made of wood and stone,
But he substantial is, and rules alone.
He can oppress, and help, help, and oppress,
The sinful incolants of his made earth,
He can redress, and pain, pain, and redress,
The mountaine-miseries of mortal birth:
Now tyrants you are next, this but a show,
And merry index of your after woe.

Hot because furies heat, and mercies cold,
Cold because limping, knit in frosty band,
And cold and hot in being shamefast-bolde:
They cruel were, take cruelty their part,
For misery is but too mean a smart.
But when the Tigers jaws, the Serpents stings,
Did summon them unto this life's decay,
A pardon for their faults thy mercy brings,
Cooling thy wrath with pitties sunnie day:
O tyrants tere your sin-bemired weeds,
Behold your pardon sealde by mercies deeds.

Those iaws that wounded, could not cure the wounds
To turn to stings for help, it were but vain,
To jaws for mercy, which wants mercies bounds:
The stings, o Savior, were pulled out by thee,
Their jaws claspt up, in midst of cruelty.
O sovereign salve, stop to a bloody stream,
O heavenly care and cure, for dust and earth,
Celestial watch to wake terrestrial dream,
Dreaming in punishment, mourning in mirth,
Now knows our enemies, that it is thee,
Which helps and cures, our grief and misery.

Our day appears, their night is not oreblowne,
We pardon have, they punishment for sins,
Now we are raisde, now they are overthrown:
We with huge beasts oppressed, they with a fly,
We live in God, and they against God die.
A fly, poor fly, to follow such a flight,
Yet art thou fed, as thou wast fed before,
With dust and earth, feeding thy wonted bite,
With selfe-like food, from mortal earthly store:
A mischiefe-stinging food, and sting with sting,
Do ready passage to destruction bring.

With sucking grasse-hoppers of weeping dew,
Man being earth is worms vermilion,
Which eats the dust, and yet of bloody hue:
In being grass he is her grazing food,
In being dust he does the worms some good.
These smallest actors were of greatest pain,
Of follies overthrow, of mischiefs fall,
But yet the furious dragons could not gain,
The life of those whom verities exhale:
These folly overcame, they foolish were,
These mercy cured, and cures, these godly are.

Were both as opposite against content,
(Because content with that which fortune brings,)
They eased were, when thou thy mercies sent:
The jaws of dragons had not hungers fill*
Nor stings of serpents a desire to kill.
Appal'd they were, and struck with timorous fears,
For where is fear, but where destruction reigns,
Aghast they were, with wet eye-standing tears,
Outward commencers of their inward pains:
They soon were hurt, but sooner healde and cured,
Lest black oblivion had their minds inured.

Is as impatient as a king in rage,
Seeing himself in his own bloody show,
Does rent the harbor of his bodies cage:
Scorning the base-housde earth, mounts to the sky,
To see if heaven can yield him remedy.
Oh sinful man, let him example be,
A pattern to thine eye, glass to thy face,
That Gods diuinest word is cure to thee,
Not earth, but heaven, not man, but heavenly grace:
Nor herb, nor plaster, could help teeth or sting,
But it was thy word which heals every thing.

But never draw corruption from our mind,
We lay a plaster for to keep in sin,
We draw forth filth, but leave the cause behind:
With herbs and plasters we do guard misdeedes,
And pare away the tops, but leave the seeds.
Away with salues, and take our Saviors word,
In this word Savior lies immortal ease,
What can thy cures, plasters, and herbs afford?
When God has power to please and to displease:
God has the power of life, death, help, and pain,
He leads down, and brings up again.

So shall thou live in death, not die in life,
Thou do presume, if give thy self the praise,
For virtues time is scarce, but mischiefs rife:
Thou may offend, man's nature is so vain,
Thou now in joy, beware of after pain.
First comes fury, after fury thirst,
After thirst, blood, and after blood, a death,
Thou may in fury kill, whom thou louedst first,
And so in quassing blood, stop thine own breath:
And murder done, can never be undone,
Nor can that soul once live, whose life is gone.

That subject is to death, because earth dies?
But when the living soul does want Gods grace,
It dies in joy, and lives in miseries:
This soul is led by God, as others were,
But not brought up again as others are.
This stirs no provocation to amend,
For earth has many partners in one fall,
Although the Lord does many tokens send,
As warnings for to hear when he does call:
The earth was burnt and drowned with fire and rain,
And one could never quench the others pain.

And only foes to them which were their foes,
That hate begun in earth what in them ends,
Sins enemies they which made friends of those:
Both bent both forces unto single earth,
From whose descent they had their double birth.
It Is strange that water should not quench a fire,
For they were heating-cold, and cooling hot,
It Is strange that wailes could not allay desire,
Wailes waters kind, and fire desires knot:
In such a cause, though enemies before,
They would join friendship to destroy the more.
The often weeping eyes of dry lament,

Which warms the caves from whence the tears are sent,
And like hot fumes, do foul their natures fair:
This contrary to icie-waters vale,
Does scorch the cheeks, and makes them red and pale.
Here fire and water are conioynde in one,
Within a red-white glass of hot and cold,
Their fire like this, double and yet alone,
Raging, and tame, and tame, and yet was bold:
Tame when the beasts did kill, and felt no fire,
Raging upon the causers of their ire.

Because they differ in each natures kind,
They differing colors have, and differing features,
If so, how comes it that they have one mind?
God made them friends, let this the answer be,
They get no other argument of me.
What is impossible to Gods command?
Nay, what is possible to man's vain ear?
It Is much he thinks that fire should burn a land,
When mischief is the brand which fires bear:
He thinks it more, that water should bear fire,
Then know it was Gods will, now leave t'enquire.

How God preserude the good; why? because good,
Ill fortune made not them unfortunate,
They Angels were, and fed with Angels food:
Yet may thou say (for truth is always had)
That rain falls on the good as well as bad.
And say it does; far be the letter P.
From R. because of a more reverent style,
It cannot do without suppression be,
These are two bars against destructions wile:
Pain without changing P cannot be rain,
Rain without changing R can not be pain.

And ground is dust, and what is dust but naught?
And what is naught is naught, with Alphaes sound,
Yet every earth the sun and rain has bought:
The sun does shine on weeds, as well as flowers,
The rain on both distills her weeping showers.
Yet far be death from breath, annoy from joy,
Destruction from all happiness allines,
God will not suffer famine to destroy,
The hungry appetite of virtues signs:
These were in midst of fire, yet not harmed,
In midst of water, yet but coolde, and warmed.

And fire-hot they were, not fire-burned,
Their foes were both, whose hopes destruction crowned:
But yet with such a crown which never returned,
Here fire and water brought both joy and pain,
To one disprofit, to the other gain.
The sun does thaw what cold has freezde before,
Undoing what congealed ice had done,
Yet heete the hail and snow did freeze the more,
In having heat more piercing then the sun
A mournful spectacle unto their eyes,
That as they die so their fruition dies.

Does houer vnrecall'd, slaughters untamed;
This wrath on fire no pity could assuage,
Because they pitiless which should be blamed:
As one in rage, which cares not who he have,
Forgetting who to kill and who to save.
One deadly foe is fierce against the other,
As vice with virtue, virtue against vice,
Vice hartned by death his hartlesse mother,
Virtue by God, the life of her device:
It Is hard to hurt or harm a villainy,
It Is easy to do good to verity.

But man does eat the cattle which eats grass,
And feeds his carcass, with their nursed up blood,
Lengthning the lives which in a moment pass:
Grass is good food if it be ioynde with grace,
Else sweeter food may take a sowrer place,
Is there such life in water and in bread?
In fish, in flesh, in herbs, in growing flowers,
We eat them not alive, we eat them dead,
What fruit then has the word of living powers?
How can we live with that which is still dead?
Thy grace it is, by which we all are fed.

Made to digest the burden at our hearts,
That leaden-weighted food, which we first eat,
To fill the functions of our bodies parts:
An indigested heap, without a mean,
Wanting thy grace, o Lord, to make it clean.
That ice which sulphur vapors could not thaw,
That hail which piercing fire could not bore,
The coole-hot sun did melt their frosty iaw,
Which neither heat nor fire, could pierce before:
Then let us take the springtime of the day,
Before the harvest of our joys decay.

Into four climes, though of it self but one,
The morn, the spring, the noone, the summers sphere,
The harvest next, evening the winters moon:
Then sow new seeds in every new days spring,
And reap new fruit, in days olds evening.
Else if too late: they will be blasted seeds,
If planted at the noonetide of their growing,
Commencers of unthankful too late deeds,
Set in the harvest of the reapers going:
Melting like winter-ice against the sun,
Flowing like follies tide, and never done.
Chapter XVII.

Sleep not too long in your destructions plesures
Amend your wicked lives, and new begin,
A more new perfect way to heavens tresures:
Oh rather wake and weep, then sleep and joy,
Waking is truth, sleep is a flattring toy.
O take the morning of your instant good,
Be not benighted with obliuious eye,
Behold the sun which kisseth Neptunes flood,
And resalutes the world with open sky:
Else sleep, and ever sleep: Gods wrath is great,
And will not alter with too late entreat.

Oh words, sad sargiants to arrest my thoughts,
If wakt, they cannot see, their eyes are blind,
Shut up like windolets which sleep has bought:
Their face is broad awake, but not their heart,
They dream of rising, yet are loath to start.
These were the practisers how to betray,
The simple-righteous with beguiling words,
And bring them in subjection to obey
Their irreligious laws and sins accords:
But nights black colored vale did cloud their will,
And made their wish rest in performance skill.

In being something black, and something dark,
But cole-blacke clouds makes it pour down amain,
Darting forth thunderbolts and lightnings spark:
Sin of it self is black, but black with black,
Augments the heavy burden of the back.
They thought that sins could hide their sinful shames,
In being demi-clouds, and semi-nights,
But they had clouds enough to make their games,
Lodged in black couerings of obliuious nights:
Then was their vice afraid to lie so dark,
Troubled with visions from Alastors park.

The greatest force, has still the greatest face,
Should night miss course, it would infect the day,
With foul risle vapors from a humorous place,
Vice has some clouds, but yet the night has more,
Because the night was framed and made before.
That sin which makes afraid, was then afraid,
Although enchambred in a dens content,
That would not drive back fear, which comes repai'd,
Nor yet the echoes which the visions sent:
Both sounds and shows, both words and action,
Made apparitions satisfaction.

Made thick with mists and oppsite to light,
As if Cocytus mansion did possess,
The gloomy vapors of suppressing sight,
A night more ugly then Alastors pack,
Mounting all nights upon his night-made back.
The moon did mourn in sable-suted vale,
The stars her hand maids were in black attire,
All nightly visions told a hideous tale,
The scrich-owles made the earth their dismal quire:
The moon and stars divide their twinkling eyes,
To lighten vice, which in oblivion lies.

Kindled by furies, raisde by envious winds,
Dreadful in sight, which put them to amaze,
Having before, furie-despairing minds:
What hair in reading, would not stand upright,
What pen in writing, would not cease to write
Fire is Gods Angel, because bright and clear,
But this an evil Angel, because dread,
Evil to them, which did already fear,
A second death to them which were once dead:
Annexing horror to dead stricken life,
Connexing dolor to live natures strife.

Mischief beguilde, a night surpassing night,
Vice fought with vice, and fear was then dismayde,
Horror it self appal'd at such a sight:
Sin^s snare was then ensnarde, the fisher cought,
Sins net was then entrapt, the fouler fought.
Yet all this conflict, was but in a dream,
A show of substance, and a shade of truth,
Illusions for to mock in flattring theme,
Beguiling mischief with a glass of ruth:
For boasts require a fall, and vaunts a shame,
Which two vice had, in thinking but to game.

And now become revenge, to right their wrong,
With hony-mermaids speech alluring seen,
Making new-pleasing words, with her old tongue:
If you be sick, quoth she, I Will make you whole,
She cures the body, but makes sick the soul.
Safe is the body, when the soul is wounded,
The soul is joyful in the bodies grief,
Ones joy upon the others sorrow grounded,
Ones sorrow placed in the ones relief:
Quoth si^, fear nothing, know that I am here,
When she alas, her self was sick for fear.

That fear should help a fear, when both are one,
She was as sick in heart, though not in face,
With inward grief, though not with outward moan:
But she claspt up the closure of the tongue,
For feate that words should do her body wrong.
Cannot the body weep without the eyes?
Yes and frame deepest canzons of lament,
Cannot the body fear, without it lies
Upon the outward show of discontent:
Yes, yes, the deeper fear sits in the heart,
And keeps the parliament of inward smart,

The dragons iaw, the hissing serpents sting,
Some lived, some did, some ran a fearful race,
Some did prevent that which ill fortunes bring:
All were officious seruitours to fear,
And her pale connizance in heart did wear.
Malice condemnd her self guilty of hate,
With a malicious mouth of envious spite,
For Nemesis is her own cruel fate,
Turning her wrath upon her own delight:
We need no witness for a guilty thought,
Which to condemn it self a thousand brought.

It fears it self in being still afraid,
It fears to weep, and yet it sheds a tear,
It fears it self, and yet it is obaid:
The usher unto death, a death to doom,
A doom to die in horrors fearful toome.
His own betrayer, yet fears to betray,
He fears his life, by reason of his name,
He fears lament, because it brings decay,
And blames himself in that he merits blame:
He is tormented, yet denies the pain,
He is the king of fear, yet loath to reign.

A waking sleep, and yet a sleepy waking,
Which passt that night more longer than a year,
Being griefs prisners, and of sorrows taking:
Slept in nights dungeon insupportable,
Lodgde in nights-horror too indurable.
Oh sleep, the image of long-lasting woe,
Oh waking image of long-lasting sleep,
The hollow cave where visions come and go,
Where serpents hiss, where mandrakes groan and creep
Oh fearful show, betrayer of a soul,
Dieng each heart in white, each white in foul.

Yet nor deceit, nor guile, in being dead,
Snare without snarer, net without a bait,
A common lodge, and yet without a bed:
A holow-sounding vault, known and unknown,
Yet not for mirth, but too too well for moan.
It Is a free prison a chainde liberty,
A freedoms cave, a sergeant and a bail,
It keeps close prisoners, yet does set them free,
Their clogges not iron, but a clog of wail:
It stays them not, and yet they cannot go,
Their chain is discontent, their prison woe.

Like greedy avarice without content,
Like to Auernus which is never glad,
Before the dead-liude wicked souls be sent:
Pull in thy head thou sorrows tragedy,
And leave to practice thy old cruelty.
The merry shepherd can not walk alone,
Tuning sweet Madrigals of haruests joy,
Caruing loves Roundelayes on every stone,
Hanging on every tree some amorous toy:
But thou with sorrow enterlines his song,
Opening thy jaws of death to do him wrong.

Thy freechainde prison, and thy clogged walk,
It Is gloomy darkness, sins eternal detter,
It Is poisoned buds, from Acharonticke stalk:
Sometime it is hissing winds which are their bands,
Sometime enchanting birds which binds their hands
Sometime the foaming rage of waters stream,
Or clattring down of stones upon a stone,
Or skipping beasts at Titans gladsome beam,
Or roaring lions noise at one alone:
Or babbling Echo tell-tale of each sound,
From mouth to sky, from sky unto the ground.

Within dry wilderness of wettest woe,
It was Gods providence, his will, his grace,
To make midnoone midnight in being so:
Midnight with sin, midnoone where virtue lay,
That place was night, all other places day.
The sun not past the middle line of course,
Did clearly shine upon each labors gain,
Not hindering daily toil of mortal force,
Nor clouding earth with any gloomy stain:
Only nights image was apparent there,
With heauy-leaden appetite of fear.
Chapter XVIII.

And how the Swallow takes a lower pich:
Ye kno the day is clear, and clearenes brings,
And how the night is pore, though gloomy rich:
This Eagle virtue is which mounts on hie,
The other sin which hates the heavens eye.
This day is wisdom, being bright and clear,
This night is mischief, being black and foul,
The brightest day does wisdoms glory wear,
The pitchie night puts on a blacker roll:
Thy saints (O Lord) were at their labors hire,
At whose heard voice the wicked did admire.

Captive to darkness, prisoner unto hell,
But it was sin it self, vice, and despite,
(Whose wished harbors do in darkness dwell,
Virtues immortal soul had middaies light*
Mischiefs eternal foul had middayes night.
For virtue is not subject unto vice,
But vice is subject unto virtues seat,
One mischief is not thawed with others ice,
But more adioynde to one, makes one more great:
Sin virtues captive is, and kneeles for grace,
Requesting pardon for her rude-run race.
The tongue of virtues life cannot pronounce

It Is merciful, and will not once renounce
Repentant tears to wash a sinful room:
Your sin-shine was not sunshine of delight,
But shining sin in mischiefs sunny night.
Now by repentance you are bathde in bliss,
Blessed in your bath, eternal by your deeds,
Behold you have true light, and can not miss,
The heavenly food which your salvation feeds:
True love, true life, true light, your portions true,
What hate, what strife, what night can danger you?

Your sin-like Eagles claws past growth of time,
All undermined with destructions vaults,
Full of old filth, proceeding from new slime:
Else had you been deformed like to those,
Which were your frinds, but now become your foes
Those which are worthy of eternal pain,
Foes which are worthy of immortal hate,
Dimming the glory of thy childrens gain,
With cloudy vapors set at darkness rate:
Making new laws which are too old in crime:
Making old-wicked laws, serve a new time.

If any worse may have a worser name,
Men: oh no, murdrers, not of men's remorce,
For they are shameful, these exempt from shame:
What? shall I call them slaughter-drinking hearts*
To good a word for their too ill deserts?
Murder was in their thoughts, they thought to slay,
And who? poor infants; harmless innocents,
But murder cannot sleep, it will betray
Her murdrous self, with self disparagements:
One child poor remnant did reprove their deeds,
And God destroyed the bloody murdrers seeds.

A judge severe, yet of a kind remorce,
Severe to those in whom there was no trust,
Kind to the babes which were of little force:
Poor babes half murdered in whole murders thought,
Had not one infant their escaping wrought.
It Was God which breathde his spirit in the child,
The lively image of his selfe-like face,
It Was God which drowned their children, which defilde
Their thoughts with blood, their hearts with murders place:
For that nights tidings our old fathers ioyd,
Because their foes by water were destroyed.

No, but a judge how blood should be repaid:
Wast he which gave them unto misery?
No, it was themselves which miseries obaid:
Their thoughts did kill and slay within their hearts,
Murdring themselves, wou^ding their inward parts.
When shines the sun, but when the moon does rest?
When rests the sun, but when the moon does shine?
When joys the righteous? when their foes are least,
And when does virtue live? when vice does pine:
Virtue does live when villainy does die,
Wisdom does smile when misery does cry.

The winter nights are longer than the days,
They show both virtues loves and vices spites,
Sins lowest fall, and wisdoms highest raise:
The night is foe to day, as naught to good,
The day is foe to night, as fear to food.
A king may wear a crown, but full of strife,
The outward show of a small-lasting space,
Mischief may live, but yet a deadly life,
Sorrow may grieve in heart, and joy in face:
Virtue may live disturbd with vices pain,
God sends this virtue a more better reign.

Yet cares, in having none, but selfe-like awe,
She has a scepter without care or fear,
Yet fears the Lord, and cares for the law:
As Much as she does rise, so much sin falls,
Subject unto her law, slave to her calls.
Now righteousness bears sway, and vice put down,
Virtue is Queen, treading on miscchiefes head,
The law of God sancited with renown,
Religion placde in wisdoms quiet bed:
Now joyful hymns are tuned by delight,
And now we live in love, and not in spite.

In the deep cesterne of the centers breast,
Wayling their living fortunes with dead sound,
Accents of grief, and actions of unrest:
It is not sin her self, it is her seed,
Which drowned in sea, lies there for seas foul weed.
It is the fruit of murders bloody womb,
The lost fruition of a murdrous race,
A little stone which would have made a tomb,
To bury virtue with a sin-bolde face:
Me thinks I hear the echoes of the vaults,
Sound and resound their old-new-weeping faults.

The outsides of the soul, case of the hearts,
Behold the king, behold the subjects fate,
Behold each lim and bone of earthen arts:
Tell me the difference then of every thing,
And who a subject was, and who a king.
The self same knowledge lies in this dead scene,
Valde to the tragike cipresse of lament,
Behold that man, which has a master been,
That king, which would have climde above content,
Behold their slaves, by them upon the earth,
Have now as high a seat as great a birth.

Those equal, which had inequality,
Yet all alike were fashioned by God
In bodies form, but not in hearts degree:
One difference had, in scepter, crown, and throne,
Yet crowned, ruled, placed, in care in grief in moan.
For it was care to wear a crown of grief,
And it was grief to wear a crown of care,
The king deaths subject, death his empires thief,
Which makes unequal state, and equal fare,
More dead then were alive, and more to die,
Then would be buried with a mortal eye.

O well-ill food, because both flesh and sin,
Sin made it sick, which never did it good,
Sin made it well, her well, does worse begin:
The earth more hungry then was Tantall's jaws,
Had flesh and blood held in her earthen paws.
Now could belief some quiet harbor find,
When all her foes were mantled in the ground,
Before their sin-enchauntments made it blind,
Their magic arts, their negromantick sound:
Now truth has got some place to speak and hear*
And what so ere she speaks, she does not fear,
Phoebes axletree, was limnd with pale,
Pale, which becomes night, night which is black,
Hemmed round about with gloomy shining vale,
Borne up by clouds, mounted on silence back?
And when nights horses, in the running waine,
Oretook the midst of their iournies pain.
Thy word o Lord descended from thy throne,
The royal mansion of thy powers command,
As a fierce man of war in time of moan,
Standing in midst of the destroyed land:
And brought thy precept? as a burning steauen,
Reaching from heaven to earth, from earth to heaven

Flew through sleepie thoughts and made them dream,
Hying apace to welcome sunny springs,
And give her time of day to Phoebus beam:
No sooner had she flowne unto the east,
But dreamy passage did disturb their rest.
And then like sleepie-waking hearts and eyes,
Turned up the fainting closures of their faces,
Which between day and night in slumber lies,
Keeping their wakie, and their sleepie places:
And lo, a fearing dream, and dreaming fear*
Made every eye let fall a sleepie tear.

Poor drie-wet tear, too moist a wet-drie face,
A white-red face, whose red-white color striude,
To make anotamy of either place:
Two champions both resolved in faces field,
And both had half yet either scornde to yield.
They which were wont to mount above the ground,
Has leaden-quick-glude sinews forced to lie,
One here one there in prison, yet unbound,
Heart-striuing life and death to live and die:
Nor were they ignorant of fates decree,
In being told before what they should be.

False because fantasies, true because haps,
For dreams though kindled by sleep-idle pause,
Sometime true indices of dangers claps:
As well does prove in these sin-sleeping lines,
That dreams are falsest shows, and truest signs.
By this time death had longer pilgrimage,
And was encaged in more living breasts,
Now every ship had fleeting anchorage,
Both good and bad were punished with vnrests:
But yet Gods heavy plague endured not long,
For anger quenched her self with her self wrong.

Nor cold can warm a cold, nor ice thaw ice,
Anger is fire, and fire is angers meat,
Then how can anger cool her hot device?
The sun, does thaw the ice, with melting harm,
Ice cannot cool the sun, which makes it warm.
It was celestial fire, terrestrial cold,
It was celestial cold, terrestrial fire,
A true and holy prayer which is bold,
To cool the heat of angers hot desire:
Pronounced by a servant of thy word,
To ease the miseries which wraths afford.

If one unknit they both have weaker strength,
The longer be the chain, the longer corse,
If measurde by duplicitie of length:
If weapons fail wit is the better part,
Wit failing: weapons have the weaker heart.
Prayer is weak in strength, yet strong in wit,
And can do more then strength, in being wise,
Thy word, o Lord, is wisdom, and in it,
Does lie more force, then forces can surprise:
Man did not overcome his foes with arms.
But with thy word, which conquers greater harms

The heavens made, mortality ordained,
That word it was, with which all men were namde,
In which one word, there are all words containde:
The breath of God, the life of mortal state,
The enemy to vice, the foe to hate.
When death pressed down the sin-dead-liuing souls,
And draw'd the curtain of their seeing day,
This word was virtues shield, and deaths controules,
Which shielded those which never went astray:
For when the dead did die, and end in sin,
The living had assurance to begin.

O sovereign word, chief of all words and deeds,
O salve of safrie, wisdoms strongest sword,
Both food, and hunger, which both starues, and feeds:
Food unto life, because of living power,
Hunger to those, whom death and sins devour.
For they which lived, were those which virtue loved,
And those which virtue loved, did love to live,
Thrice happy these, whom no destruction moved,
She present there, which love and life did give:
They bore the mottoes of eternal fame,
On diapasans of their fathers name.

Blushing against the nature of his face,
To see such bright aspects, such splendent view,
Such heavenly paradise of earthly grace:
And hid with life's quick force, his ebon dart,
Within the crannies of his meagre heart,
Descending to the place from whence he came,
With rich-stor'd chariot of fresh bleeding wounds,
Sore-greeued bodies, from a soules-sick name,
Sore-greeued souls, in bodies-sin-sick sounds:
Death was afraid to stay where life should be,
For they are foes and cannot well agree.
Chapter XIX.

Thy thirsty heart, thy longing ashie bones,
The righteous live, they be not in thy laws,
Nor subjects to thy deep oppressing mones.
Let it suffice that we have seen thy show,
And tasted but the shadow of thy woe.
Yet stay and bring thy empty car again,
More ashie vessels do attend thy pace,
More passengers expect thy coming waine,
More groaning pilgrims long to see thy face:
Wrath now attends the passage of misdeeds,
And thou shall still be stored with souls that bleeds,

With weake-forst tears, to moist a long-drie ground
But tears on tears, in time will make whole waves,
To bury sin with ouerwhelming sound:
Their eyes for mattocks serve, their tears for spades,
And they them selves, are sextons by their trades.
What is their fee? lament, their payment? woe,
Their labor? wail, their practice? misery,
And can their conscience serve to labor so,
Yes, yes, because it helps villainy:
Though eyes did stand in tears, and tears in eyes,
They did another folishnes devise.

And what the eyes did win the heart did loose,
Whom virtue reconcilde, vice did forgo,
Whom virtue did forgo, that vice did choose:
Oh had their hearts been just, eyes had bin winners
Their eyes were just, but hearts new sins beginners.
They digd true graves with eyes, but not with hearts,
Repentance in their face, vice in their thought,
Their deluing eyes did take the Sextons parts,
The heart undid the labor which eyes wrought:
A new strange death was portion for their toil,
While virtue sat as judge to end the broyle.

Had eyes bin joined to heart, heart then had seen,
But oh, in wanting eyesight it betrayed,
The dungeon of misdeeds where it had been:
So, many living in this orb of woe,
Have heau'd-vp eyes, but yet their hearts are low.
This change of sin, did make a change of feature,
A new strange death, a misery vntoulde,
A new reform of every olde-new creature,
New serving offices, which time made old:
New living virtue, from an old dead sin,
Which ends in ill what does in good begin.

The wicked ears of sin, and mischiefs seed,
Filling the mansion of eternal night,
With heauy-leaden clods of sinful breed:
Life sowde the plants of immortality,
To welcome olde-made new felicity.
The clouds, the gloomy curtains of the air,
Drawn and redrawne with the foure-winged winds,
Made all of borrowed vapors, darkesome fair;
Did ouershade their tents, which virtue finds,
The red seas deep, was made a dry trod way,
Without impediment, or stop, or stay.

Did drink the ruddy-oceans water dry,
Tearing the Zones hot-cold, whole-ragged ruffes,
With ruffling conflicts in the field of sky:
So, that dry earth did take wet waters place,
With sandy mantle, and hard grounded face.
That way which never was a way before,
Is now a trodden path, which was vntrod,
Through which the people went, as on a shore,
Defended by the stretcht-out arm of God:
Praising his wondrous works, his mighty hand,
Making the land of sea, the sea of land.

That breast where mercy wakes is angers cave;
When mercy lives, then Nemesis is dead,
And one for eithers coarse makes others grave:
Hate furrows up a grave, to bury love,
And love does press down hate, it cannot move.
This breast is God, which ever wakes in both,
Anger is his revenge, mercy his love,
He sent them flies in stead of cattels growth,
And multitudes of frogs for fishes strove:
Here was his anger shown, and his remorse,
When he did make dry land of water course.

All things beginning knows, but none their end,
The sequel unto mirth, is weeping grief,
As does mishaps with happiness contend:
For both are agents in this orb of weeping,
And one does wake, when other falls a sleeping.
Yet, should man's eyes pay tribute every hour,
With tributarie tears to sorrows shrine,
He would all drown himself with his own shower
And never find the leaf of mercies line:
They in Gods anger wailde, in his love ioyd,
Their love brought lust, ere love had lust destroyed.

And sat as Lord upon their sobbing heart,
For when one comfort lives, one sorrow dies,
Or ends in mirth what it begun in smart:
What greater grief than hunger-starued mood?
What greater mirth than satisfying food?
Quails from the fishy bosom of the sea,
Came to their comforts which were living starude,
But punishments fell in the sinners way,
Sent down by thunderbolts which they deserude:
Sin-fed these sinners were, hate cherished,
According unto both they perished.

And bred new sin with olde-digested meat,
Hate cherished, in being hatreds twins,
And sucking cruelty from tigers teate:
Was it not sin to err and go astray?
Was it not hate to stop a strangers way?
Was it not sin to see, and not to know?
Was it not sin to know, and not receive?
Was it not hate to be a strangers foe,
And make them captives which did them relieve?
Yes, it was greatest sin first for to leave them,
And it was greatest hate last to deceive them.

But still do staruing feed, and feeding starve,
How could you so deceive? how could you spill
Their loving selves, which did your selves preserve?
Why did you suck your pelican to death,
Which fed you too too well with his own breath?
Oh say that cruelty can have no law,
And then you speak with a milde-cruel tongue,
Or say that avarice lodgde in your iawe,
And then you do your selves but little wrong:
Say what you will, for what you say is spite,
Against ill-come strangers which did merit right.

Enticing baits, beguiling centinells,
You added grief to grief, and cares to cares,
Tears unto weeping eyes where tears did dwell:
O multitudes of sin, legions of vice,
Which thawes with sorrow sorrows frozen ice.
A banquet was preparde, the fare, deceit,
The dishes, poison, and the cup despite,
The table, mischief, and the cloth a bait,
Like spinners web t'entrap the strange flies flight:
Pleasure was strewed upon the top of pain,
Which once digested, spread through every vain.

Into a way of death, a path of guile,
Poor pilgrims which their own destruction meet,
In habitations of an unknown I Will:
Oh had they left that broad deceiving way,
They had been right and never gone astray.
But mark the punishment which did ensue,
Upon those ill-misleading villainies,
They blinded were themselves with their self view,
And fell into their own made miseries:
Seeking the entrance of their dwelling places,
With blinded eyes, and dark misguided faces.

Deceit, deceived, and mischief was mislead,
Eyes blinded sight, and thoughts the hearts defilde,
Life living in aspects, was dying dead:
Eyes thought for to misleade, and were mislead:
Feet went to make mis-treads, and did mis-treade.
At this proud fall the elements were glad,
And did embrace each other with a kiss,
All things were joyful which before were sad,
The pilgrims in their way, and could not miss:
As when the sound of music, does resound
With changing tune; so did the changed ground.

The Eagle p^tched low, the Swallow hie,
The Nightingale did sleep and uncontrolled
Forsook the prickle of her natures eye:
The seely worm was friends with all her foes,
And sucked the dew-teares from the weeping rose.
The sparrow tunde the larkes sweet melody,
The lark in silence sung a dirge of dole,
The linnet helped the lark in malady
The swans forsook the quire of billow-roule:
The drie-land foul, did make the sea their nest,
The wet-sea fish did make the land their rest.

In inward feeling of an outward loss,
And filde the quire of waves with lauing pain,
(Yet dancing in their wail, with surges toss:)
Forsook her cradle-billow-mountaine bed,
And hies her unto land there to be fed.
Her sea-fare now is land-fare of content,
Old change, is changed new yet all is change,
The fishes are her food, and they are sent,
Unto dry land, to creep, to feed, to range:
Now coolest water cannot quench the fire,
But makes it proud in hottest hot desire.

The eu'ning of a night is morn to day,
The one is Phoebes clime, which is pale-bright,
The other Phoebus, in more light array:
She maks the mountains limp in chil-cold snow
He melts their eyes and makes them weep for woe.
His beams ambassadors of his hot will,
Through te transparent element of air,
Does only his warm embassage fulfill,
And melts the icie iaw of Phoebes heir:
Yet those, though fiery flames could not thaw cold,
Nor break the frosty glue of winters mould.
Here nature slew herself, or at the least

All things have nature to be worst or best,
And must incline to that, which she affects:
But nature mist herself, in this same part,
For she was weak, and had not natures heart.
It Was God which made her weak, and makes her strong,
Resisting vice, assisting righteousness,
Assisting, and resisting, right, and wrong,
Making this Epilogue in equallnes:
It Was God his peoples aid, their wisdoms friend,
In whom I did begin, with whom I end.
A Jove surgit opus: de Jove finit opus.

