An Abstract, almost Verbatim (with some Necessary Addition,) of the Customers
APOLOGY, written 18. years ago, to show their Distress in the Out-ports,
as well through want of Maintenance and Means to bear out their Service; as
Countenance and Credit in regard of Others.
Now, see what has been said, and so have to an End.
The PRINCE (as aforesaid) is justly offended, and the Merchant likewise has
laid down his Griefs. These are the four sorts of Officers that attend on
Custome-causes: namely, CVSTOMERS, SERCHERS, COMPTROLLERS, and SVPERVISORS:
amongst whom, if any complain, these last have no Reason to look to be
pitied. For that, obtruding themselves into other men's work, and undertaking a
task exceeding their skill; as Men in a maze they strived to go forward, and in
doing less then Nothing, would theme to do all. Like ignorant austere
Huishers that know no Rules to teach by but beating the Scholars.

But by way of Parenthesis. Let this be worth the noting. How generally just as
consequently true, these ancient Rules of Art, and Assertions of Reason
continue and stand, namely, Quam frustra sit per plures quod fieri debet per
pauciores. And Institutio ab initio invtilis, ex post facto nunquam
convalescit. For, as these Supervisors doubting at the first the skill and good
abearing of those they sought to use, and were to put in trust: and seeing the
weak foundation of Comptrollers before them to be but Actum agere, and easily
out-fac;t: by their new Access, the Service grew so violent, so intricate, and
withal so out of Order; that the Serchers, who by office as they have the best
means to attend upon Traffic, so they should by Duty depend upon the
Customers, or concur with them at least; leave them to wild Company and
unquiet Customhouses, and swaruing with the ballast inquire out the nearest way
to their own private profit.

In which Distress, the Customers in displeasure with the PRINCE; in disgrace
with the world, in the midst of a hungry, lawless, ignorant and wilful kind of
Men, obtruded upon them by ialousie and misconceite, that like defective
Heteroclytes wrangle as it were with the very Rules of Grammar; pitying the
Merchant in regard of his Traffic; silently bemoan themselves in this manner.

That the means to enable them to perform their Duties, as well Maintenance as
Countenance, are so withheld from them, that leaving the world and all
preferments by it, to serve at the Altar, they are not thought worthy to
breath and live thereby, Their Scruice being every way like the Bricke-makers
of Egypt, who wanting means to do their Task, had idle Taske-maysters, to
ouer-see but what they wrought, whose Credites had no being, but in their
Disgrace.

That the Law it self, so good and just in general, Ialousie and Suspicion
out of superstitious zeal to Customs and Traffic, have ignorantly in all
ages so incensed PARLEMENTS against Customers, (without distinguishing the Out
ports from London) that of Freemen borne, like Bondslaues, they are beaten to
all works, with their hands tide behind them, and trusted with Nothing.
is made hurtful to the PRINCE in their public Functions, and injurious to
themselves in their private Callings. For that whereunto they become precisely
sworn at their Admissions, namely, the advancement of Customs and consequently
Traffic; the Customers of all Men are forbidden by Statute, to wit, not to
meddle or deal with Traffic, and their Service being every way no thanks to
themselves, is a special Means of Mamtenance and Countenance to others. SIC
VOS NON VOBIS fertis Aratra Boues, nideficatis Aues,

That they notwithstanding, underly all Expenses incident to Customs
unthankfully, which others never touch, and for only crying aim, reap thanks
and Reward. For (omitting extraordinaries ere they come to their Places) their
Bonds and Sureties for the Princes behoof and subjection besides, is an
unknown burden that the rest little feel.

They also are to hire and find out at each Port of their charge a conventent
Custom House (which the Prince should provide there as well as at London)
that, No Customhouses, no public Wharses nor Storehouses builded by the Prince
in the Out-portes, as there are at London.
alone besides Seats, Tables, Shelues, and other necessary things are hard to
be compassed under 4 or 5. pound. So that for example, where five Ports are in
charge, the Head-Customer stands chargeable yearly for five Custom Houses with
25. li.

At each of these Houses a discreet and able Person, and of honest education,
the Customer is to finds for his own indemnity, that stands bound for all.
Whereas Any fit the rest, The Farmers by aiming at these proportions, find it
by Experience to be most for theer profit.
be they never so untoward. And unto such, less then 100. marks per annum,
(to maintain a Family,) cannot well he given: which five all put together,
makes 400. pounds a year, the head Customer being but doubled according to
proportion.

At these five Custome-houses what is yearly spent in public, for Incke,
Parchment, paper, and wax, the Customer supplies, which may amount some years
to 8. or 10. li.

Besides the hazard of turning up to London, and putting in of moneys (before
Traffic became farmed) by Bills and otherwise, No Portage Money allowed
Customers, in the Out-Ports, as all Collectors in Counties have.
being allowed no Portage Money, as all Collectors else but Customers are,
which the Rest break no sleep for.

Theirs are also all Expenses casual, and needful (besides Travail for
their pains) about sending or riding from Port to Port, as well by Letters or
Directions from the Council, L. Thresaurer, or Exchequer; as by Processes and
Writs, how generally soever directed unto all.

Lastly, The Customers Charge and Expense in pasting Accounts.
they put in their Books (before the general Farm) twice a year duly to
their double charge and pains, which the others did but once with little or
none attendance, leaving still the Customers so to abide, follow, and pay all
Fees and duties, that the best half of their own, if not two parts of three
they leafte behind them, before they came to see their Quietus est, being
more encombred with the Entries and writings of the Others Books then of their
own, which they rather insulted on, then cared for to mend: coloring their
Doings still with the Princes only Service, and urging all Extremities, cride
The Most for the King.

This being the Countenance and Service of Customers in the Out-Portes of this
Kingdom, slightly run over for breuities sake, together with their charge;
now see but their Maintenance, which alone and by it self but indifferently
waighd, may help to excuse them, though the time for the present seem
hopeless of relief.

The Fees and Rewards jointly to Customers and Comptrollers (the Searchers are
allowed the moity of their Seisures) before the general Farm, The Fees and
Rewards to Customers, etc. in the Out-Ports allowed by the Prince.
amounted to the sum of 1240, li. little under or over: whereof the
Comptrollers had 340. and the remainder being 900. serud the Customers among
them. This 900. divided into three parts (as abouesaide) two being spent in
attending, clearing, and passing of Accounts, the remainder 300. is the
Customers only, to maintain both them and theyrs, and recompense their
Bondage, being less then that Comptrollers have with all freedom and ease. A
Proportion odly even, and hard to be believed without Experience, yet the same
compared with the late joint Supervisors, made a far stranger reckning. For
where the Head Customers being in number some 19. divided amongst them but
300 li. ( deductis deducendis as above said) and that upon Acompt to at the
years end: These Supervisors in number being but 4. received by Debentur at
every Quarters end, 425. li. which was 1700. li. a year for 16. yearee
together, without account or reckning.

These 4. supposing Traffic to be some Essex cheese, as it seemed by they
Endeavors, surueighd Her in the Out-Ports by wild Rats and Mice, and spirits
of the Air, and whipped Her up to London where now She lives confind: and left
the Customers like Bears tide to stakes, sit now for nothing but baiting and
beating, with the only choice and freedom to statue or live by shifts. So
that the Customers still setuing at the Altar, and yet held unworthy to breath
and live thereby, their fare growing slender, and their drink but small and
scant, by Cockets, Entries, and ordinary Fees, (as all public Offices and
officers have) out of meet necessity and want of Employments, they dippe but
their dishes in their Neighbors Cisternes (with good leave and liking) to
quench their thirst, and at noone tide in their Gardens crop a few of their
Locks (with their own free consents) to keep them from staruing: and this
now adds Oil to the fire of their Furnace, their breaths are accused to
infect with their sent and poison the air, though the rest eat Onions and
feed on Garlic. So that howsoever in others it stand with right and reason;
That, Volentibus non siunt injury, and, Quod Necessitas cogit, The only
motive of this Abstract.
necessitas defend^t, yet in Customers of all men it becomes a great and a
horrible Sin, Burglary at least, complaind of now in PARLEMENTS, and that by
Merchants, and those of London too

As if Customers (forsooth) by Companies and Societies, did bandy themselves,
and lived by Decrees of their own contriuings, neither fit nor to be squared
with GODS Laws, KINGS Laws, nor TREATISE of Intercourse, had broken into
STAPLES, profaned our Sovereigns MINTS, transported all his Load-stones
(ordaind to draw in BVLLION) turned Money into a Merchandise, vndermin'd the
State with Usury, and at Midnight robbed a CHVRCH, to keep GOD from his
Duties, and KINGS from their Rights as London Merchants do.

Namely, The Golden Fleece the Order of Honor of the Dukes of Burgundy, by
English Wools in Flanders.
as if They and none but they (I mean Customers of the Out-Ports, and none but
Customers, let others clear themselves and London to) engrossing all the Wools
and Woolfels of the Kingdom (the wonders of the world, and sometimes Englands
glory) and stapling them beyond seas, had made them foreign Trophies and
Ensigns of our shame, without Exchange of BVLLION, like Merchants of the old
Haunce, The Society or Company of Merchants of the Staple.
called Merchants of the STAPLE.

Or, As if they and none but they, being put in trust with the Cream as it
were, and Credit of the Kingdom (Cloth) by stapling it beyond Seas at private
Mart-Townes, had brought our Clothyers to distress, our Clothes to be despised
and our Clothing unto nothing, at least nothing less then Bullion, The Society
or Company of Merchant- Adventurers.
and turned our Customs into Usury by Hysteron proteron and Bills of Interest
which Merchants term Exchange, as the Merchant ADVENTVRERS were larely wont to
do.

Or, As if they (the Customers) and none but they, seeing Traffic clothed in
Whites, feed thousands beyond seas, and starve more then Millions, for want of
work at home, had undertaken to draw her stark naked, from the Lime-kill to
the Cole-pit, and by a new Deceptiovisus, The new Society or Company of
March-Aduenturers.
turn Cat but in the Pan, and dye her into Motleyes, and never think of
Bullion. As the New March-ADVENTVRERS do bear in hand to do.

Or, Lastly and Instar Omnium, As if they, and none but they, the Out-Port
Customers, seeing Traffic heartlesse, pulselesse, and almost out of breath,
like a horse already tired in a weary wild goase chase, offered to
Ranke-riders to be ridden again in post, without Diet, Drink or Dressing, The
Society or Company of East India Merchants.
had undertaken in the Indies to barter her for Drugs or pouldre her with
Pepper, or with her own Blood turn her wholly into Mummey, without regard of
Bullion. As the India Merchants do.

Whereby, as in the Empire it fares with Emperors, by Popes and Popery, so with
Christian Kings and Kingdoms, by Conclaues and Societies. For, As Honor and
Reverence (the Father and Mother of MALESTY) were brought to offer Sacrifice to
REMPHAM and to RIMMON, and MAJESTY'S self in Emperors compeld to do Homage to
their own Popes and Vassals, by Extremity and Usury; SOVERA'IGNTY being stripped
of all her best Subsistence and supplements of Bullion, Money became a
Merchandise (ordaind for public Vtility (what ere became of Honesty) was
turned to private gain: So MAJESTY in KINGS becomes to be ecclipsed in their
Kingdoms and Coins; their SOVERAIGNTIES supplanted, and Bounties vndermin'd,
(without which in SOVEREIGNS no Subjects can be happy) at least wise in
Great-Britaine where BOVNTY now commands, and all for want of Bullion. For, as
our Staples being transplanted, are still withheld beyond Seas by secular
Popes and Popery; Our Out-ports at home being like wise brought under by
Conclaues and Societies; Our Subsidies confounded of Tonnage and Poundage,
as well as our Customs by obstinate Precisenes, and out Traffic as bewitched by
Avarice and Ambition, confined within the Circle of the famous Port of London
(for Greatness and wealth,) and there set to sale au plus offrant, made apt to
be coniured: so Our Standarts by Degrees falling out to be uncertain, both
in Number, Waights and Measure, and our Moneys made a Merchandise engrost in
few men's hands: all things waxt dear, our KINGS became weak for want of Gold
and Silver, their Subjects poor for want of current Moneys or Employments at
least, whilst Coin it self by Usury, which Merchants term Exchange, eats
out industry in Trades; and Merchants by Monopolyes conspire to strangle
Traffic within themselves in London, and London by her Merchants made the Box
of Pandora to send forth all the evils that now perplex the Land. And all for
lack of Bullion, which Merchants by their Contracts and Societies pervert, or
else withstand by all the means they can.

O, that ever Merchants should sit so near our Holme! Yet, these are the
Persons that defiling the waters which run down the Thames and slide along our
Coasts, choke all our Ports with Oase, beray our cleannest Rivers, put
TRAFFIC to her shifts, and by daily aspersions fince fault with the Out
ports, and accuse the Customers, to excuse themselves; as if none but they were
sinners, or that London were a Sanctuary, and none but they were Saints.

But, Hij Nigri sunt Omnes, Hostu REX MAGNE caueto. For, These are the Men and
the Merchants to, that Trade-lesse themselves, and of no Occupations, by
Companies and Societies residing still in London, engrosse all our Trades, and
live by buying and selling: and so by buying as to sell for private gain, that
making Money a Merchandise, they raise all their profits still from others
Trades and pains, crying Lueri bonus oder est ex quolibet qualibet, and
preferring ever Vtile before Honestum Qua, null a permties mayor vitae hominum
potest afferri.

Yea, These are the persons, that to hold all men under, and themselves still
above, deal wholly out of sight, and with public weapons maintaining
contentions for private wrongs, breed nothing but complaints with unkind iarres
at home, and Envy abroad, to the endless care and cumber of KINGS and
COVNCELL-TABLES, and PARLEMENTS too. And all for lack of Staples.

For, Enter-lopers in England, are as Hugenots in France.
These are the Merchants and speculatiue kind of Men, that seuering themselves
from the Body of our Commerce, call all men Enter-lopers that are not of their
Conclaues or private Common wealths, and live by their Decrees, thought every
way as Catholic and as Freeborn an they, and perhaps better Christians,
though not so Iesuited. And wandering out of sight, bewitch all they meet
with, and were it but possible, would seduce the wise, persuading all and
every where, that TRAFFIC of her self is a parillous biting Beast, and that
to bring her home again unto her own Creekes and Ports, were to worry our
sheep in Cotsal Grounds, and sink our ships on Cheuiot Hills that sail on
Barham Downs And by a bare pretense of Order still, and orderly transporting
the Load-stones of the Land (without regard of BVLLION) as with a wodden
Dagger, stab all they find or hear of, that write or speak of Staples, for
sear of our Navy, and decay of our shipping.

As, if the cherishing of woods were the way to ruin Forests, and hide our
Timber Trees. Or, that the raising of our Hiues again were a consequence in
reason to spil all our Honey, and smother all our Bees. Whereas, al Men now
perceive it, and Experience makes it plain, though Customers hold their
peace, that as our Clothyers with their Clothes (such as they are) having lost
their homebred STAPLES (and therewithal, their Credits) are forced to come
like Pilgrims, from East, West, North, and South, to one only Blackewel Hall:
and there, if not against their Consciences, yet at least without Devotion,
pitifully complaming and bemoaning one another, to stoop to every Saint, to
crouch to every Cross, and run into Idolatry: so our Creekes in all our Coasts,
creep now to one River. All our Rivers in our Countries run now to one Port.
All our Ports about the Kingdom ioyue now to one Town. Al our Towns in all
our Shires, make now but one City. And all our Cities in each Province,
Metropolitan and all, are but Suburbs as it were, to one vaste, unweildy and
disorderly Babel, that out-swelling all proportions, and in danger like to
burst, contests within it self about the multitude of Buildings, which the
world calls LONDON. And London by her Merchants contracted in her self, made a
wilderness of Sin, and a Forest of Shifts. Whereby TRAFFIC now confined,
and every way possessed with Rats and Mice, and spirits of the air (of whom as
of Harpies may truly be said.

Tristius haud istis monstrum nec saeuior vlla,
Pestis and ira Deum stygiis sese extulit vndis.
No Monsters like to these may hap, nor curse from God befall,
Nor from the Pit of hell arise, to plague the Realm withal:)
Is so become tormented both by Water and by Land,
That how to help her now, God knows, I do not understand.
Except it be by PARLIAMENT to restaure again our STAPLES, that K. JAMES may
find his Bullion, as K. Edw. sometimes did after 15. years experience, and so
became most happy, til Merchants got the Helm again, and Himself out-shot
his mark, by transplanting that of Kent from Cantorburie to Calays.

For as London seems distempered now, and distracted in it self by the
multitude of people, and magnitude of Buildings; had it all our TEMPLES down
(as indeed it has our Staples) that men might run on Pilgrimage to the shrined
Saints of London; as our KING wantes his Customs, so GOD might seek his
Tithes, there or beyond seas, what ere became of Subsidies or Freewil-Offerings
either. And what ere betide of TRAFFIC, Traffic and Shipping are relatiues.
alias SHIPPING for all her Merchants Orders, so seriously pretended; our
Justice Commutatiue might take her Enter-Iopers, enquire for true Religion,
learn the way to heaven, and take her leave of LONDON, and ENGLAND too, for
all our Faires and Markets, or private Parish Churches.

On whose behalf therefore, without self or side Respects, though my Faith be
but frail, my spirits wel-nie spent, and my Credit almost gone, yet does my
vow compel me still to do my best endeavor, and to wish and pray for Staples
as heartily as I can, for the Consequences sake. But in the mean season, and as
the case now stands, seeing all make love to Tributes still, Al seek to farm
Traffic, in one thing or other, but care not for Customers.
and catch our Functions from us, both High and Low, Rich and Poor, Noble and
Ignoble, because their Lessons spell Silver and Gold, and yet our Names they
shun. Let Ialousie be called for now, and let Impudency smell what Ignorance
has gained, and Extremity reformed in all the Schools of Customs, by
spelling well the Letters, but mistaking the purpose of a witty PREVY
COVNCELLOR, that sometimes gave advice in this very case of Ours. Sir Tho:
Moors Epigram, de Fatorib. abolend.
Viz. Sectile ne tetros porrum tibi spiret odores,
Portinus a porre fac mibi cepe vores, etc.
In English thus:
Least eating CVSTOMERS.
LEEKES (says he) should make thy breath to smell,
Take COMPTROLLERS.
ONIONS strong, that sent will soon allay:
And if thereby the savor seem to excel,
SVPERVISORS.
GARLIC be sure will drive them both away.
But if the nasty smell of Garlic stay,
What helps us then? FARMERS.
TOBACCO? No: but at a word I think,
There are that dare to Searching, sharking, undertaking, raking Waiters, at
the Waters side.
UNDERTAKE, and make a viler stink.


These as the Obloquies of Customers and Custome-houses scandals, fish still in
pudled waters, and calling all things Customs, that indeed are nothing less,
profane the Name of KINGS. These hunt and ferret Traffic in every Port and
Creek, and so tumble and torment her as it were by Commission, to keep her
still from rest: that She her self complains now, as well within the
Out-ports, as at every gate of London.

Sicut Bufo Crati,
Maledicti tot Dominati.
Whilst the Out-port-Customers, being set to sweep the Houses that others
still defile, and left to feed on Thistles, or to live by the air; out of
heart, out of Friends, out of Credit and Request, dare find fault with
nothing, but make Signs with their Pens, and write only, ADSIT REGVLA.

Tho: Milles.

END

