THE CVSTVMERS APOLOGY.

That is to say, A general Answer to Informers of all sorts, and their
injurious complaints, against the honest reputation of the Collectors of her
Majesty's CVSTVMES, specially in the OVT-PORTES of this Realm.

Written only FOR UNDERSTANDING READERS AND WISE IN HIGHEST AVTHORITIE, to
Read and discern by. Always provided, In reading Read all, or nothing at
all.

Hand Natura potest Iusto secer^ere Iniquum,
Nec vincit Ratio hoc, tantund^^ vt p^ccet, i^^^que
Qui te^er^s caules ali^^i freg^rit h^rti,
Et qui n^ctur^^s Diu^^^^ sacralegeri^: AD SIT
REGVLA, peccatit qua p^^as irr^ge^ aquas.
.1599.

To the GRAVE and GODLY WISE, in Highest Authority.
A GENTLEMAN a friend and lover of learning, coming into a free School, where
diverse young Scholars were learning their Grammar, desirous to feel how they
thryud at their Books by some familiar question; demanded, (their Huishers
standing by) When an English is given to be made into Latin, what is first to be
done? The answer is easy, namely, To seek out the principal Verb: yet all
stood silent, and half amazed, till ONE at the last (the Question est-soones
repeated, and he urged to say, Men affecting to do the Prince and
Commonwealth service, in some honest calling, enter the charge of Custumes
simply, and doubting no harm.
What was to be done) replied; NO HARM SIR I HOPE, at least THAT I VVOT OF.
Which the Gentleman taking in very good part, as suspecting rather ignorance in
the Huishers, then want of wit in the Scholars, departed, smyling.

Most REVEREND and RIGHT HONORABLE. This Question and Answer includes the
present estate of all the students in the School of her Majesty's Custumes,
where such as the Teachers be, such are the Scholars. There is a reason for all
things. And the reason hereof is not so much, for want of wit or will in the
Learners, To deal justly between the Prince and her People (which in this
kind of doctrine is supposed to be the Principal verb) as in the ignorant and
indiscrete Husshers, who whilst the grave Masters and Moderators of the
School, were distracted and busied in the study and practice of higher points
of learning; have used no method, but bearing the Scholars.

"Qui paria esse volunt peccata, Ipsique laborant
"Cum ventum ad verum est: Sensus moresque repugnant,
"Atque ipsa vtilitas, Iusti prope matter and Aequi.
Which kind of discipline, discouraging al men and driving many good wits from
the School, to the secret injury of the whole Commonwealth; forcde me to my
Book, and as well as I could, to Analise my lesson, meaning thereby with the
foresaid plain Scholar (NO HARM AT ALL) such therefore as it is, I have
briefly set down in the Discourse following. The Matter whereof being partly
drawn from mine own Patience and experience, and partly observed and learned
from others: The Form is merely mine own, and has for my warrant the Rules
of my Grammar.

But since Things are then well done, when things are well taken; to clear and
acquit me from partial clamor, or the sin of presumption, The Will appliant
to Reason, is guiltless of passion, and Nature ouerborne appeals to
Necessity. Quae quod cogit, ipsa, solet vtique defendere. Hard therefore and
above measure extreme should their cases appear, that still subject to
beating, might neither bemoane themselves, nor be suffered to cry. And so much
the rather, when as (SO FAR AS I VVOT OF) in all their Complaints, The Law of
Nature and Nations both, allow all men, to stand in defense of their Callings
and honest Reputations.
there is nothing concluded nor included, at least intended thereby, but a
natural defense of their honest reputation in that kind of Calling, which the
Law it self by great wisdom has laid out, and reserved For men of the best
sort only, and a dutiful Zeal to find out thereby The principal Verb.

The Principles and general Maxims, whereon this Discourse is grounded:
making an Epitome of the whole.
ALl Commonwealths are established and maintained by Laws. The life of Law,
is Reason. Reason in making Laws aims at Equity. Equity is guided by
Certainty and Indifferency, the two Balances of Justice; for where these two
fail, men run into Extremities. Extremities find out Shifts. Shifts incur
Suspicion. Suspicion argues Ignorance. Ignorance groping for truth lights on
Errors. Errors prove Mischiefs. private Mischiefs turn to public
Inconveniences; the high way to Discord, Disorder, and Confusion. And as things
grow confounded, Offenses by consequence increase more and more. Which as
pudled waters and corrupted air, breed and engender nothing, but creeping
Informers, noisome Caterpillars, ravenous Harpyes and such like vermin, to
vex and torment a State withal.

By means whereof,

The PRINCE is abused, and so justly offended. The MERCHANTS are weried and
generally grieved. The CVSTVMERS ouerburdened are injuriously disgraced. The
COMMONS of all sorts empayring, repine: And The PORT-TOVVNES decay.
The reading of whose several Complaints, may make any UNDERSTANDING READER,
able to be his own Judge, and see. How in the present disordered estate of
Custume service:

1 TRAFFIC is become empayred, and so consequently her Majesty's Custumes
diminished. 2 The COMMONWEALTH grows disordred, and daily empoucrished. And 3
The STATE (besides the Common Enemy) is engaged and unkindly at Jar, with
her ancient Allies, and best foreign Friends.
The state of the CVSTVMES. Specially in the OVT-PORTES of this Realm.
GREAT HAS BEEN THE CARE, AND THE Inventions sundry, that have been
undertaken, for the aduauncing, collecting and true answering, of all such
Duties as upon things by way of Merchandise, Custumes defined.
Crossing the Seas, are either vented out or brought into this Land, according
to Laws and Contracts to that end.

But as in the State of a natural body, those diseases prove of most dangerous
consequence, that are of longest breeding, and most desperate to cure, whose
causes are unknown: so fares it at this day with that, which highly importing
the whole Commonwealth, is of it self, no small nor idle portion in the body
of the Princes Revenues. Namely, the state of the CVSTVMES; specially in the
OVT-PORTES of this Realm. The present condition whereof, being nearly
observed, may be fitly resembled to the diseases of the body, Resembled to
inueterate Diseases.
which the Physicians term Morbs Chronici. For as they engendered with time,
not seen to at first, or but slightly regarded, make work at the last for
Apothecaries and Surgeons, leading the part infected still from ill to worse:
so in the occasions and continuance of these kinds of sores or disorders, for
want of due inspection or true information, as the service grows confounded;
Offenses by consequence increase more and more.

For remedy whereof, though confident Emperiks never so boldly, with their
violent and repercussiue medicines, from all parts obtrude themselves, sucking
profit thereby at one hand or other: When all is done and said, the Grave and
Wise Physicians, Fit for none but grave and Physicians of experience
must put to their hands, who proceeding by method from An fieri possit, to
Quid fieri debet; by the pulse and Symptoma observe the disease, and conferring
with the Patients themselves, finding the cause; proportion Receipts for remedy.

For if Vrines prove deceitful, and Patients never speak:
No marvel then, if Physic fail and medicines be to seek.
In which respect, for the better information of the State of this Cause, this
present Discourse is conceived, The motive of this Discourse
that through it the UNDERSTANDING READER AND WISE IN AVTHORITIE, by reading
only, without passion or partiality might be their own Judges. Wherein (if
for the length in show it seem to be tedious) so the Form for the plainness
prove not off ensiue; The oftener read the better understood.
the Matter for importance deserves more then a reading.

Priuatio praesupponit habitum. Sickness does imply a habit of health, and the
disproportioned disposition of any Function, does argue an intention and
possibility of Order. To the understanding whereof, since particularities and
circumstances do best approve and lay open the truth or falsehood of any
Action or Assertion: In the Consultation and Resolution of this argument of
CVSTVMES, The Argument.
as well for their due Collecting and true Answering, as the infallible means
of their orderly advancing, to the glorious demonstration and happy upholding
of the wealth and peace of this State and Kingdom, both at home and abroad:
Four things do first offer themselves to mind and necessary consideration.

1 The CAUSE or Ground, whence such Duties grow and have their first being. 2
The MATTER what, and where upon such Duties growing are to be paid and taken.
3 The PERSONS, whom such Duties either immediately or by consequence touch and
concern. 4 The FORM how to collect such Duties, fit and peculiar to the
CAUSE, MATTER and PERSONS.
First therefore of the CAUSE of CVSTVMES for Orders sake, and so of the rest.

THe Nature of all things that consist in Action, is best seen and valued, by
the worthiness of that Object and End where to it tends.

The highest Object of human Actions (GOD only excepted) is the MAJESTY of
our SOVEREIGN and GOOD of our COUNTRY. And there is no Action more dutiful,
then at all hands to amplify the honor of the one, and to procure the peace
of the other; nor any more odious, then wittingly or willingly to impair the
Means, mutually meant for the maintenance of either.

The maine drift and purpose of the Argument.
It follows then as a consequence of all sides to be agreed on; That to
maintain the Princes Revenues, and to further the prosperity of her people
is, or ought to be, the special care of every man's best endeavor.

But, as in all things that depend on CAUSES, and consist of MATTER and FORM,
where the proprieties of either are not rightly understood nor seriously
observed, the first Error breeding Mischief, leads the high way to Disorder
and so to Confusion: so fares it at this day with the State and argument of
this Discourse, namly the public duties of CVSTVMES. That as well for the
CAUSE whence they proceed and their MATTER what it is, as in their FORM how
to stop the course of Errors and current of Abuses, has of long time been and
yet is a proposition diversely and strangely debated. Wherein howsoever
Confusion increase general offenses, Holding the Actors next hand still
subject to suspicion and blame. ( Ignorance and Impudency bearing the sway)
The ATTORNEY and
Experience and SOLICITOR general: for the Prince and her People.
Truth arguing the case before Equity and Reason, dispute the Question, and
resolve it thus.

Al Effects work only by and live or die with their proper CAUSES.

All CAUSES are either Efficient, Material, Formal, or Final.

Custumes described.
CVSTVMES are the Princes public Duties, growing by TRAFFIC, on Merchandise
outward and inward, payable according to the Equity of positive Laws and
foreign Contracts, freely and only given For defense of the Realm and safe
passage at Seas.

Thus CVSTVMES follow TRAFFIC as the Effect does the CAUSE; The CAUSE.
in which regard the Merchant at all hands is to be cherished, favored and
encouraged in every common-welth.

Traffic described.
TRAFFIC is a mutual bartering, or buying and selling of Vendible wares, by
Merchants, Subjects or Strangers, at Marketes convenient, according to the
Rulers of Reciproke Commerce, generally entending the honor of the Prince and
prosperity of the Commonweal.

There appear in TRAFFIC by this description four special parts, to be
severally considered and jointly maintained, as being so essentially coherent,
and necessarily concurrent, that where any one is failing, the rest have no
longer being. To wit, MATTER (as Vendible wares. Secondly PERSONS (Merchants
Subjects, or Strangers. Thirdly, PLACE (at Markets convenient) Fourthly ORDER
(rules of reciproke Commerce.)

1 First in the Condition of the MATTER whatsoever it be GOODNESS only (more or
less) makes it Vendible, as respected and fit for Trades. All GOODNESS is
either by Nature or by Art: And as in GOODNESS there is a proportion always
answerable to the first MATTER, wherein it consists: so in Trades, the
blessing of God by Nature, and the benefit of Industry by Art, is immediately
more or less admired, to the special reputation and profit of the PERSONS and
PLACES that first afford them.

2 In the quality of the PERSON of the Merchant, whosoever he be, Subject or
Stranger; only Loyalty and Alliance, makes his TRAFFIC auowed, without
distinction of Sex or years: For with known Traitors or open enemies, the
Law admits no Commerce.

3 In the PLACES Conueniencie at home or abroad, Easines of Access by Sea or
land and public Freedom with Safety for MATTER and PERSONS, is only
regarded in all Martes and Markets.

4 And the best Rules for ORDER to direct TRAFFIC by, are they which being
precisely squared out to the Generality, Indifferency and Certainty of the
Laws of the land and foreign Contracts, admit no particular, partial nor
doubtful; deceit, injury nor disturbance, to MATTER, PERSONS, nor PLACE.

Thus TRAFFIC supported by four special Pillars; The first is grounded on
GOODNESS. All GOODNESS is needful. TRAFFIC therefore either outward or inward
of things bred at home or abroad; in respect of the Use thereof ought to be
General. For look what the Soul is to the outward Actions of the body, in
ordering each member: so, as to Nature seems fittest for the good of the whole
Man: Such is the use of TRAFICK in disposing Mysteries and Trades to the
behoof of the whole Commonwealth. A consideration in no part of Civil
Government to be neglected, much less in this great CAUSE of CVSTVMES. For as
much as the GOOD intended thereby both to MATTER, PERSONS, and PLACES, by the
rules of Equity is so due to All, as cannot be justly restrained or denied
unto Any, without disorder and confusion. Bonum autem quo communius, ^o melius.

From TRAFFIC therefore CVSTVMES deryue their first Essence, and being, and
by it increase; to the Honor of Princes, and prosperity of Commonwealths.

To conclude; TRAFFIC is the true and assured practice of that mystical
Phylosophie (wherein so many wits have spent themselves, and blown the coals
in vain) whose heavenly Elixar (GOODNESS) the Quintessence of Nature and Art,
Lapis Philosophicus.
by divine sublimation, applied to Materials, begets Mysteries in Trades, and
purging all dross of deceit from Trades, turns Trades into Metals, and all
Metals into pure Silver and fine Gold: Vniuersalis Medecina.
And that general Restoratiue, which easing all grief in Sores, suppling all
Sores in Diseases, and curing all Diseases in particular Members, holds the
whole Body of the Commonweal in perfect health. The sacred Rules whereof, as
no profane Couetise could ever comprehend, nor confident Empericks attain to
practice, so none of private Discretion or Affection, may presume to alter or
control; as being a Doctrine and Study, peculiar to the GRAVE and GODLY WISE
only in highest Authority, and for PRINCES themselves.

The MATTER or Subject, 2 MATTER.
is al kind of wares that by way of Merchandise crossing the seas are either
transported and vented out, or imported or brought into the Realm; whereupon
such paiments are collected, as (For defense of the Realm, and safe passage at
Seas) loyally offered and graciously accepted, the Laws of TRAFFIC do
record by the names and titles. Of CVSTVMS Great and Small.
and SVBSIDIES of Pondage, and Tonnage.



The word CVSTVMES albeit it be used as a general name for all Duties upon goods
crossing the Seas, both inward and outward: yet it has his peculiar and
distinct signification. And is either that Duty which is taken upon Woolles,
Woolfels, Tin, Lead, and other Staple wares of this land, by the name of
Grand CVSTVME; Or the Duty of three pence upon the pound etc. Yielded only
by Strangers, by the title of PETIT-CVSTVME.

SVBSIDY, is but the Genus or General title to other duties, namely, Pondage
and Tonnage.

Pondage is a SVBSIDY paid generally upon all Merchandise, crossing the Seas,
of twelve pence the pound (not otherwise increased by special Statute as is
that of Corn). Whereof it sorts the name of Pondage, though in respect of the
use, it be more usually called SVBSIDY, Quia datur in subsidium Principi.

Tonnage, is also a SVBSIDY diversely collected according to diverse Statutes
limiting the same; being either generally granted for defense of the Realm,
and free trafique on the Seas, as the Tonnage of Wines, or for the particular
relief of some Port or Town, as that of Dover.

The MATTER being thus laid open: The PERSONS, are next to be weighed; 3. The
PERSONS
whom these Duties do for several respects concern, Either
Immediately or directly, as The PRINCE to whom they are given and by Law due.
The MERCHANT, that by Law is to pay them. The OFFICER, specially appointed to
Collect them to the Princes use.
Mediately, or by consequence; in regard of free Traffic. Viz. Generally,
The whole COMMONS of this Realm. Specially the PORTE-TOWNES whose inhabitants,
are Artificers and Trades. or M. of Ships and Mariners.


The.4. 4. FORM.
thing to be necessarily thought upon and understood, is the FORM and manner of
collection, fit and answerable to the MATTER and PERSONS. Forma dat esse rei.
For without it, the Prince, though much be given, is void of ordinary means
to be justly answered, and so not satisfied. Without it, the Merchant though
much be due, knows not how and with what discharge to pay it. And without it
the Officer, though much be to be received, is without sufficient warrant to
collect it by.

In the direction whereof therefore, Common equity is to be respected. viz.
That is in all other Duties having one and the same ground (Like twins) as
namely those upon lands and goods (De paribus autem est idem iudicium) the
Assesse once agreed upon, by competent authority; does entitle and satisfy
the Prince, bind and acquit the Subject, direct and warrant the Collector,
and so fulfils the Law by giving every one his right; so in these duties upon
Merchandise both inward and outward, the Assesse or Rate of things once
digested, is or ought to be a rule general and inviolable; the Equity
whereof, consisting in the Certentie and Indifferency of Assessement,
according to a reasonable valuation of things in use, and so experssely set
down and named, and commanding the like in Matters occurring.

But by reason of some uneven carriage in the MATTER and present FORM; the
PERSONS aforesaid in their several degrees and places, have their Offenses,
Griefs, and Complaints. The knowledge whereof comprehendes the whole State of
the Cause in question, and gives light to the grounds and occasions of the
present disorders. For

The PRINCE offended.
First, the PRINCE, is two ways highly displeased; namely, either in that her
Duties are by the Merchants defrauded, or by the Collectors ill answered into
the Exchequer: or in that they seem not so well husbanded for her, as private
Persons by Leases do make them for themselves. The satisfying of whom, may
make a way to relieve others.

The MERCHANT grieved.
The MERCHANTS griefs are likewise double, Public and Private. For Generally
they bemoane themselves, that as Subjects desirous to live under the rule and
direction of the Law; they are driven to incur the danger thereof, for want
of Indifferent and Certain proceedings. For where as one and the same Law
(though by several Statutes) do bind them to answer the Prince Subsidies,
and other duties on their lands and their goods, as well as their Merchandise;
yet in paying the one (though held with more assurance at home, and that paid
happily but once in the year) the Assesse is set down with a consideration of
each man's estate and charge; and in Collecting the other (though the payments
be more frequent and daily for one thing or other) there is far less regard
or feeling of the hazards they run, by Sea, by Enemies, by contrary winds,
Banckrowts and ill Markets. And whereas in the payments on lands and goods, the
Collector alone being satisfied, the party is acquit, without further charge,
trouble or delay: in the matter of Merchandise, beside the Princes and
Collectors due, Impositions and a multiplicitie of irregular exactions and fees
to Searchers, Comptrollers, Surueyours, Waiters, Wayers, Packers, Scauagers,
their Deputies, Clerks, Servants (and such like) is such a secret burden,
that in 6 or 7 years, the payments in this kind, do counteruaile their
Stocks.

Privately they grieve, that amongst themselves Trades under Companies and
Societies are drawn and abridged into a few men's hands; wherein, besides the
wrong offered to the Law and general freedom of the land, even within
themselves also, the welthier and best grounded, by odds of stocks,
restraints and other advantages, drive the weaker to the walls. That one Port
seems to give Law to all the rest, without warrant of Law, reason or Policy;
the danger whereof, more see and lament, then know how to prevent or remedy.
That in all Ports extremities attend them driving them to this issue, either to
quit their Trades altogether, Extremities drive the Merchants to shifts.
or to work it out by favor at one Port or other, to the displesure of the
Prince, as if they conceald he Custumes, when they get least by it, as may be
observed in the falling of sundry, and decay of a great many.

The OFFICER complains.
The OFFICER, thirdly, has his griefs and complaints; for unfolding whereof,
many things concurring are first to be laid open, namely, who that OFFICER is,
and what he is; for the service is pretended and attended on by many, each
valuing himself above other, and his place and standing to be of most
importance. In the viewing of whom a part and a sunder, REASON shall the
better discern and judge between them. Arist. coutra Sophist.
For Quaedam sunt and non videntur; Quaedam videntur and non sunt omnino.

Custumes being Effects of that CAUSE, whose Actions are conversant about no
meaner Objects then the Majesty of our Sovereign, and prosperity of her
People; imply a Service, which as it requires men of special regard and trust:
so none may undertake it, but with authority and power given them in lawful
manner. In the Function therefore of an Officer of CVSTVMES. Four grounds to
discern by, between the necessary institution and needelesse or bootles use
of their Functions
4. things are to be wayed and considered, to justify the lawfulness and
necessity of his calling. 1. The Institution, that gives him power to meddle
with Duties of that nature. 2. The PORT and Places allotted him for the
exercise of his Office. 3. The diligent performance of his service, according
to the importance and exigence of his charge. 4. And lastly the Countenance and
proportionable Maintenance which in that respect he deserves and receives.

The Officers therefore in the OVT-PORTES are four in number, and known by
the names of CVSTOMER, SEARCHER, COMPTROLLER and SVPERVISORS.

The CVSTVMERS Office
The CVSTVMERS hold their places by the Princes letters Patents and great seal
of England, whereby they are authorized and warranted, appointed and named
Collectors, as well of all ancient duties upon Wool, Woolfels etc. termed Grand
Custume and of the Petie Custume, paid only by Strangers: as also of the
Subsidy of Pondage and Tonnage, granted her Majesty in Primo of her Reign,
during her life Pro defensione Regni, and custodia Maris. Concluding all with
this Close. Ita quod de denarijs inde prouenientibus ad Scaccarit^m nostrum
nobis respondeas. In which behalf for the Princes security, before the
delivery or receipt of any letters Patents, the Custumers are bound by
themselves and good suerties, and sworn besides at their admissions, to do
their endeavors, To deal justly between the Prince and her People

The whole service toward the Prince and people, liable to the Custumers
only.
The PRINCE being secured, next follows the service of the Merchant. On whose
behalf, if any denial or unlawful delay be used to his hurt or hinderance,
the Law calls the Custumer in question only, and in that respect, the Office
seal is committed to him, and the form of all Warrants, of Cockets and Bonds,
to the use of the Queen run only in his name, as well from PORT to PORT as
otherwise.

This being the effect and whole sum of the Service; is the Custumers office
and charge only, 12. Ric. 2. cap. 2. And such had they need to be, for no
Officer in the Commonwealth may do more good or harm, then a Custumer in a
shire, or the Towns of his charge.
whom therefore the Law does point out and chose, From amongst the best and
most sufficient men to be found, to the Lord Treasurers estimation. And is no
more indeed then may well be performed by such a one; Provided the Law be his
Lodestone, and Equity his Compass, and enabled withal with Countenance and
Maintenance, fit for his calling.

Thus the whole service, as appears, has but two ends, the satisfaction of
the Prince, and dispatch of the Merchant. To which end, for the Custumers
relief, that being busied within doors, might want help abroad, out of the
necessity of the service: The SEARCHER was created: The SEARCHERS Office
described.
Whose Office is to see that no water pass by, without the Grinders knowledge,
but either to send them to the CVSTVME house, or drive them to the Exchequer,
as the words of his Patent do import and command: so as taking the moyetie of
al forfaits and seisures for his pains, De altera medietate nobis respondeas,
and fidelem inde computum in Scaccario nostro reddas. And thus what the
Custumer may not conveniently do, the Searcher performs. Keeping entries of
all Cockets, Bonds etc. passing by him from the Custumers hands, as of his own
seisures, and accomptable yearly, for the truth of his doings.

But as all Officers of account are subject to suspicion, and the man once
suspected, is said to be half hanged: So with Custumers above all men (as
things are mistaken) it is not enough to be an honest man. For the faults or
weakness of any one, is made a consequence to call the rest in question, as if
all were cast in one mould; without distinguishing the true Causes, whereby one
Error is made the Author of an other. Hence grew the institution of a third
Officer in name for an imaginary service; for wanting matter to make a new
function: He is to set with the Custumer; and in all things to imitate his
doings, Et quasi actum agere. This man albeit as the Custumer is either honest
or dishonest, be needless or bootelesse (only the Prince may charge her self
with fees to as many new Officers as she please) what wants in essence of a
function, Before her Majesty's time all Custumers acomptes, were written in
Rolls. The COMPTROLLER.
is recompensed in title: and for keeping a Counter-rowle of the Custumers
doings, is in his Patent called a Comptroller.

Though Rules and directions wherewith Functions are bounded, propound indeed
and intend perfection. Yet not that, whereto none can attain: but such as all
men must and may aim at, to the end, that as far as human care and
foresight can extend; it may take place. In which respect, what more effectual
Bond of dutiful endeavor may be urged, then the vows and pledges which
Custumers give for their fidelities at their first admission? The nature of
their service holding them withal, so subject to care and fear.

In whose behalf therefore and special defense: 1. Here might be much spoken
to approve and maintain, that in all Offices of charge and necessary trust,
Two general Propositions, affirmative, and necessary.
he that for his fidelity gives the uttermost of all security in use amongst
Christians, ought to be absolutely credited. And that, that being done; all
cautions besides, are but bootelesse effects of Jealousy and Suspicion,
injurious to the Reputation of that Officer and hurtful to the service. 2. And
that where the pledge is once given and taken, which is the uttermost of all
securities in use amongst Christians: Of consequence if that Officer be
dishonest, he is ill chosen, and so fit to be removed; or the Function in
matter or form defective, and so fit to be reformed.

But truth is called the daughter of Time, and Practice and Experience the
Midwiues that bring her to light, for the weakness of this third Provision or
Caution, in time gave easy way to a fourth kind of Officer, and so may do to
the fifth and a sixth in infinitum, so long as the grounds and causes of offenses
are mistaken or unknown.

Ignorance is called the mother of Error. Of Errors come Mischiefs, Truth best
found out by knowledge of Error.
and private Mischiefs prove public Inconveniences: which breeding Confusion,
point out Order and Perfection as Causes grow known. So that, Faelix qui
poterit rerum cognoscere Causas.

CVSTVMES paid by Merchants are subject to TRAFFIC as the Effect to the Cause.

Traffic subject to Occasions and Times.
TRAFFIC ryseth and falls with occasions and Times, the observing whereof,
requires Experience and Judgment to direct; and Freedom with Judustrie to
manage the same. Examples whereof are all Owners of lands, that by
distinguishing Soyles, and observing of Seasons, make use of their grounds.

But, as if a Lord of a Manor, that intending to make the best of his own, by
his immediate Servants, though the grounds be excellent, fertile, and good,
gives charge notwithstanding, and expressly forbids them both the use of the
Plough, Custumers forbidden all Trades and Traffic.
and all means besides of manuring their soiles: whereby their wills wanting
freedom to approve their endeavors, they reap none other yield, then as
nature affordes; and so at the end of harvest, falling out with his Servants,
farms the Land unto Strangers, who nearest themselves, first serve their own
turns, The farming of Custumes unnatural, and not so good to the Prince, as
injurious to the Subject.
and in raising their rents (for the most part) make spoil of the grounds: So
fares it with the Servants and lands of this great Feeld of revenues. And no
marvel at al, for where things are past over without distinction of Times,
Persons and Place; the Error in judgment makes the Actor next hand suspected
and blamde.

Thus first grew the occasion, that the CVSTVME of sundry things became farmed
out to sundry Persons, for yearly rents certain, and set terms of years.
But with what uncertain success, the times have declared, and the persons
have found.

For witness whereof, omitting times past to begin nearer hand; about the xij.
of the Queen, M. Smith took the Custumes of some PORTS to farm, M. Smith.
whose industry made his gains so envied, that all was resumde at the end of
his years.

After him, Sir Frauncis Walsingham was won to the like for some PORTS else
where; S. Fra. Walsingham.
but missing the method, how ever he thriued, after his death, the remainder
of his term was by composition surrendered up into her Majesty's hands.

Then grew it a question (things so meeting together) how the same might be
best husbanded, to her Majesty's own and immediate use, that had been so good
to some others at a second hand. And because the Custumers at al hands were
holden for Publicans and Sinners, a new and fourth sort of Officers became
created, who at the cost of Sir Francis having won their experience before,
undertook by themselves and Deputies, To reform all abuses, and advance the
Queens Custumes, in all PORTS of this Realm, LONDON excepted.

To these therefore, being four in number: a Commission is granted jointly, 4.
SVPERVISORS.
by the name of SVPERVISORS.

(...). l. Occultatio. truly describing the state of the service. Drawn from
concord in Music and Order in building.
To reform all abuses, and advance the Queens Custumes? Bid such men
wel-come, be they never so many; for that's the Dyapason of all our Music, so
the more the merier. And the base of that building so many have undertaken, and
so few have set forward; therefore the more hands the lighter work. Provided
always, they sing with the Company, and work in Gods name. Hoc opus, hic
labor est, committed to none but "Men of the best sort only. Religious and
honest indeed, as these pretend to be. Yet since in this and in all things,
Virtutis laus actio, and Carpenters are always best known by their chippes;
first hear their voices and examine their cunning, for so their consent and
harmony will show their skill in Music, and their Disposition and Order in
raising their work, will commend their building. For if into a Consort,
ordained to sing or sound, Any or Many, should obtrude themselves, and taking
up Instruments, pretending to tune them, regard neither Rests, nor give ear to
any Time, nor sound the Instruments to find out what compass of Music they
are ablest to maintain; but sing to themselves, and stand winding up Strings
till all break in sunder; would ye not catch the Instruments from the hands
of such Tuners, and as Persons either ignorant or impudent, desire such
Musicians of less acquaintance?

Likewise in the framing and rearing some ^ta^^ly piece of building, such as
might be the Steeple for Paul's (a work fair and far seen, and faisible
enough, for fit and skillful workmen) if Any or Many undertaking to advance
it, should begin at the height, and so build downward, or pitching the
Weathercocke beneath, strive to raise the base end upward, would any well
advised, stand near such builders for fear of danger? or at least, Spectatum
admissi, risum teneatis Amici?

Even such and no better proves the skill and proceedings of these forward
Reformers of abuses, and aduancers of Custumes. For whilst the Custumers, set
up as it were, and opposed with the Extremity.
Discant of their lesson enioynd them to learn, and finding their Merchants.
Instruments not able to maintain such a Compass in Music; were applying
themselves to the The equity of the Law.
Plaine-song, pricked out to the plesingest Ditty that ever was endited,
beginning thus.

Est Modus in rebus, sunt certi denique Fines.
There is a Mids between Extremes, much like a mark or white
Quos vltra citraque, nequit consistere Rectum.
Whereat who leuels short or gone, can never shoot aright.
Which fitting all Raates.
Strings (the Searchers withal, at every Close singing,

Then Measure is the merry Mean for Prince and People.) Makes a song in it
self of Good rhyme and Good reason, being perfectly learned and sung with good
Time and Tunable voices; Spo^daeum melos, (...) nisi Sua^e sonans.
far fuller of dainty streines of Music and heavenly harmony, then
Dowlands delight, or Persons Sweet In Nomine: whilst the Custumers (as said
is) were thus tuning and singing, as their skils and voices would serve; These
step in at adventure, and disgrace all the Custumers.
Musicians, for the hoarcenes of some, and accusing the Merchants.
Instruments for their low sound; wind up the Strings, to pitch all at the
highest, and with a Catch of four parts, like Harpers besides themselves, sing
blindly together, Chaunting it thus.

No fishing to the Sea,
Nor service to the King.
Which fitting no Raates.
Strings (their Deputies at all times lowly repeating,

For all on private profit wayt;
Where things go guided by Conceit.)
They that have ears to hear let them harken, how this private and chaunting
Discord, fitting neither Instruments nor voices, prove offensive to the State,
by disquieting the harmony and Concord between the Prince and her People.
Makes such a noise of No rhyme, or No reason, so full of discords, and far
from proportion, Phrygium melos, omniu^ classicum and tu^ultuosum.
so harsh for the voices, and strange for the sound: that their best RECTOR
CHORI by no rules of Art can beat out their Time, nor temper their Tune. Yet
see their good luck. They notwithstanding, thus pleasing themselves (whilst
all men besides, amazd at their Music, and doubtful success of their
building and work) stumbling on Fortune, proved more happy than wise. For
indeed and in truth (let REASON be judge) if ever men thriude under Prince by
ignorance and service in conceit: These may well say to themselves, Plus
quandoque valet in rebus promouendis opin^o hominum, quam rei veritas. And
Assay ben balla a chi fortuna suona.

But be it known to all men by these presents besides (of Understanding and
judgment) that as omne quod efficit Tale, oportet esse magis Tale; so the Law
setting down the Rates of Custumes, and Authority digesting the Form of their
payments, cannot properly be said to increase or diminish, but by the same
Power and Authority, or by This found Ma. Custumer Smith full true to his
happy avail, trading in some things himself, lending stocks unto others, and
dealing friendly with all men, to hold them in doings; which brought in his
profit still, for one thing or other.
Trafficks and free Commerce more or less. Otherwise, Nostrum, magis Nostrum
furi nequit. Which standing most true, and then this noted withal, namely:
That as it did not appear (almost in forty years together) how Trades of
this thing and that thing by occasions fell in, and with time increased, and so
of Custumes by consequence, the profits not seen nor observed, whilst by
Leases they ran through private men's hands: so it was their better hap than
foresight or skill, to come in at such an instant of Time, as when both the
grace of God in an admirable sort, gave increase to our The plenty of Come at
their beginning, their only good luck, whereof they called all gains,
Custume, to make a show of service.
grain, and al accesses of profit met in one, to her Majesty's immediate use
together.

Wherein their Industry can claim, neither art nor part, but in Conceit
only. For a full trial whereof (which here to set down, would be too
tedious to read) a bare collation of The want of these observations from time
to time, holds all Custumers so subject, as they are to disgraces, and
suspicious suggestions.
Matters and Times before them and since, for forty years past; would
satisfy all and make this no question.

(But by way of Parenthesis, if to profit the Hundred by impairing the Shire be
holden for gain, Pretense of zeal to the Prince, without regard of her
people, is preposterous and dangerous in all public service.
then do them no wrong, and let it be granted which they so desire. Yet take
this withal, That their service beginning with Ecclipsing the The equity of
the Law ecclipsed by licenses for Corn, showed their service at the first.
Moon, which never falls out but when she is at full: was a natural
consequence of their immediate Declining; and of a fearful assurance of a
Mischief to come. Whereof one The Dearth succeeding for want of the forestore,
exhausted by private licenses, against the wise provision of the Law
Storm is past, God send us no more, and let this be a lesson for ever
hereafter, that, To out run the Law, is to have to confusion.)

Yet since every new Officer, implies new matter fit for a new function, and
none may assume more to themselves; then a greater Power does confer, ( These
having erected to themselves a place for a private Office, and devised a
public Seal) as of the Rest, so see their Commission.

Their Commission is jointly, and contains only their Name, Their Commission.
with a power by themselves and Deputies; to do such and such service, as in a
Schedule is ordered, and there to annexed.

The Schedule has Articles twelve or thirteen. All formal and nothing
material at all. Their Schedule.
For what was assigned to Comptrollers before (if that were to purpose) is here
but repeated; as sitting and signing Cokets and Bonds, and keeping a Book as
the Custumers do. With searching of Ships for prohibited wares, contained in
the Searchers Patent likewise. Which serves to no use; but to charge the
Custumers at each accounts ending, with tedious delays, All Mischiefs are
heaped on the Custumers only.
and treble expenses for the Auditors pains. Two things only are specially
forbidden, that they delay not the Merchant, nor take any fees, and how they
are performed God knows best, but the Merchant can tell.

Thus. The CAUSE at the first, mistaken or unknown, bred Error in the MATTER
and FORM, and so consequently Defects in the general Service. Whereof
Ignorance taking hold, accused the CVSTVMER as Actor next hand and only bound
for all. Necessity, for the Custumers relief, fitly found out the use of a
SEARCHER; but his looseness and liberty bewraying his Negligence, (Ne quid
asperius) made Jealousy and Suspicion, devise a kind of COMPTROLLER. His
needless or bootelesse calling; gave easy way to the new SVPERVISORS and
their Retinue, whose confident Presumption, combining with Ignorance (their
special Vpholders) made them undertake they knew not what, and to go forward
they card not how, in Opinion only and Conceit, to cure all sentes of Leekes
or Onyons by eating Garlike. Hence grow Contentions, Disorders, Offenses and
Complaints of the PERSONS.

Clodius accusat Moechum, Catelina Cethegum.
Quis tulerit Gracchos de seditione querentes?
The Mischiefs whereof, though the MERCHANTS and CVSTVMERS in special divide
between them; the general Inconveniences extend to the PRINCE her self, her
Allies and most Loyal Subjects; the importance whereof, the GRAVE and godly
WISE; will in due time be pleased to consider, and remember with all:

That none prove Saints for seeming so to others,
Since all are men and all have sucked their Mothers.
Thus far the ATTVRNEY and SOLLICITER general, (Experience and Truth) having
pleaded before EQVITIE and REASON, on the behalf of TRAFFIC, no less
dangerously supplanted by the Custumers disgrace, then the Merchants
extremity; in true Zeal of the Princes honor, and Good of her People; began
here seriously to lament and bewail the unfaithfulness of such, as ignorantly
have been the cause, or wilfully persist to maintain the burdening of the
Custume houses, with such swarms of unfit and needless Instruments, that as
Razours cutting off the life of Custumes, and wrangling out disorder by a
greater confusion, so live by their places, that in time they must needs be
the death of the Nurse her self that feeds them. But the wisdom of the
Judges, moved rather with the weight of the CAUSE, then passion in their Plea
(looking back to the time) bid them go forward.

Now then, see what has been said; and so have to an end.

The PRINCE (as aforesaid) is justly offended, and the Merchant likewise has
laid down his griefs. These are the four sorts of persons that attend
Custume causes, amongst whom, if any complain; these last have no reason to
look to be pitied, for that obtruding themselves into other men's works,
undertaking a task exceeding their skill; like men in amaze, strive still to
go forward, and in doing less then nothing, would seem to do all. Accusing
the Custumers. Calumus and^ audacter, vt alis quid adhareat.
Not unlike to insolent and ignorant Huishers, that lawless themselves, know
no rules of teaching, but beating the Scholars.

But this by the way will be well worth the noting, how generally just, 1. (...)
regula veritatis
as necessary true, the old rules of Art and Propositions of reason, continue
and stand. Namely, Quam frustra fit per plures, quod fieri potest per
pauciores. 2. (...). regula Justitie
And Institutio ab i^stio inutilis, expostfacto non conualescit. For as these
Superuisors doubting at the first, 3. (...). regula sapientie
the holding out of their Deputies good abearing, and wisely looking into the
weak foundation of the Comptrollers, whose Office themselves foresaw to be
idle, and so easy to be out-faced; by their new Company and access, the
service is become so violent, so intricate and out of order, that in the
confusion, the Searchers that only have best means, and by Office should
concur and assist the Custumers, leave the QVEENE to the Custume house, and
enquire the next way to their own private profit.

The Custumers only have cause to complain.
In which distress, the CVSTVMERS in displeasure with the Prince, in disgrace
with the world, forsaken of their best Helps and Associats the SEARCHERS: Quam
inique comparatum sit, videri^t Reipub. Patres, ip^^y; Vnlitas, quum Quod
opti^^^ iure, Optimis tantum destinatum sit, Munus: nunc tandem e Vulgi
collu^ie hominum Pessimis prestituatur.
in the midest of a number of lawless, hungry, and for the most part
ignorantly wilful Deputies, that like defective HETEROCLYTS, wrangle with the
very rules of Grammar (pitying the Merchant) sup up their own griefs, and
bemoane themselves in this manner.

That the means to enhable them to service, viz. Countenance and Maintenance,
are withholden from them and conferred upon others. That their service
notwithstanding is like the making of Brick in Egypt, for wanting means to
perform their Taskes, yet have idle Task masters set over them, whose credit
has no (being) but in their disgrace.

That the Law it self, so good and just in general, is made both hurtful to
the Prince in their public function, and injurious to themselves in their
private callings. For that, whereto they are precisely enjoined at their
admissions, and which in respect of their places and charges, The Law is made
to debar Custumers from their best endeavors.
they should and might best perform; by one and the same way to the Princes
immediate profit, which others at the second hand have made so availeable for
themselves: The Custumers of all men are by statute forbidden, namely, to
meddle with any Trade or Traffic.

That their service besides is no thanks to themselves, but a Countenance and
means of Maintenance to others.

Sic vos non vobis nidificatis Aues fertis aratra boues etc. That They,
notwithstanding, underly all kind of Expenses and hazards incident to Custume
causes, and others not touching the burden with their fingers, for crying aim
only, reap thanks, reputation and reward. For (omitting extraordinaries)
their expenses for their Bands and Suerties, to answer al Duties and
subjection besides, is an unknown bondage and burden, in respect of the
liberty the rest do live in.

No Custume-houses built by the Prince in the Out-Ports.
They only are to provide, hire and furnish for every Port of their charge a
convenient Custume house, which besides Tables, Deskes and necessaries fit for
such places, are hardly hired for 40. a piece of yearly rent, So as where (for
examples sake) there are five Ports; he writers own chardge in Kent. 5.
Ports.
for five Custume houses, the Custumer is chargeable with the yearly rent. Of.
10. ot. 12.

At each of these five Custume houses, must be entertained a discreet Person:
for though any be fit enough for the Superuisors turns (as matters do stand)
yet it stands the Custumer in hand to use choice, and honest men of the best
education (the service passing in Latin) for his own security. And unto
such, less then twenty marks wages, and as much for diet cannot be offered.
Which yearly is a charge of two hundredth pounds, or more. the Head-Porte
considered in proportion.

At these five Custume houses, what ever is spent in Incke, Parchment, Paper,
and Wax, is supplied always by the Custumer only, which yearly may be a
Matter of some. 10. pounds.

. Besides. The hazard of the Queens money, that of necessity is to pass by
Bills of Exchange through sundry hands (being allowed no Portage money) is an
unknown hazard, trouble, W^^t of Portage m^ney.
and care to the Custumers only, which the rest break no sleep for.

Theirs also are all charges, expended in ryding or sending from place to
place, as the service falls out by letters, or Order from the Lord Treasurer or
Exchequer.

Lastly, They put in their Books twice a year, to their double charges, which
the rest perform but once yearly, for fashions sake only, without expense or
attendance, leaving the Custumers only to abide to follow; and to pay all
Duties, Fees, and whatsoever charges to Officers and others. Wherein the best
part of their wages and reward from the Prince is consumed, but usually the one
half, if not two parts of three, as being more delayed, and accumbred with the
confused entries, and writings of others Books, by careless and ignorant
Deputies, then any of their own, as the Auditors can witness. Which kind of
bondage of Custumers the rest in their freedom do many ways insult upon,
coloring their doings always with the general Pretense of her Majesty's
service.

Of all which expenses both certain and casual, the Searchers, Comptrollers,
and Superuisors, bear no part, each possessing his life with liberty, his
wages with quietness, and his Trade with credit, and as it were altogether
live as they list. Whilst the Custumers ouer-borne, and debarred all Traffic
and means of good service and thrift, are in case like the Merchant
(aforesaid) forced either to quit their places, though with loss, Quod
Necessitate cogitur, Necessitate defenditur.
or relieve themselves as they may by one means or other, as Necessity
compels them. Extremities breeding nothing but shifts.

Having thus far laid open the state of the service, (according to three of
the four Considerations before laid down) with the bondage and expenses
depending: Which (as appears) the Custumers only underly; there rests in a
word or two, fourthly, to show the proportions of rewards, which alone being
but indifferently weighed, ma^y happily help to excuse them hereafter, though
the age we live in, give small hope of relief.

Fees and rewards for Service allowed by the Prince.
The Fees and Rewards yearly allowed by the Prince to the Custumers and
Comptrollers jointly (the Searcher is allotted the moyetie of all seasures) in
all the OVT-PORTES of this Realm amount unto the sum of 1240. little under
or over, whereof the Comptrollers receiving for their parts about. 340. the
rest being some 900. serves the Custumers among the^. This 900 divided into
three parts, two at the lest are spent in passing, attending and clearing
accounts. So rests not above 300. diuisible among them, to recompense their
bondage and service, being less then the Comptrollers receive with freedom
and ease.

A proportion very hard and unknown, but to those that find it by experience,
yet the same compared with the Superuisors; (whose service and the Comptrollers
is one and the same;) commes to a far less reckoning. For where the
Custumers being in number 20. divide about 300. Deductis deducendis (as is
above said) among them all, and that upon account at the years end. The
Superuisors being but. 4. receive by Debentur out of the Exchequer, (for their
good service) 425. every quarter, 1700. li. Yearly for no service at all.
which coms to 1700. yearly without account or reckoning.

The Custumers stand cleared before God and the world, of the Princes offense,
and all other slanderous reports and suggestions against them and their
calling.
By this time the UNDERSTANDING READER may discern between est and videtur:
and who is that Officer has cause to complain. And the Prince has wherewith
to be satisfied in both the grounds of her displeasure, at least not to be
longer offended with the distressed Custumers. For by the Law of nature and
Nations both Imputari non debet ei per quem non stat, si non facit quod per
ipsum est faciendum. The reason is yielded withal Quia culpa caret, qui scit,
and probibere nequit.

................................ ADSIT REGVLA, Peccatis qua poenas irroget
aquas.

The Marchantes have been heard to say for themselves. Now the COMMONS press
forward to speak in their turns, but they are too many and the time almost
spent. Therefore hear but the PORT-TOVVNES, and read their short Petition.

The life of all Custumes is Traffic and Commerce: In which kind of calling,
the Merchant of all men is to be favored, cherished; and encouraged in all
Commonwealths.

All Traffic is either Ourward or Inward, of things bread at home or abroad.
And albeit that Kingdom or Country be holden most wealthy and happy, that
is ablest and aptest to spare and transport Commodities of their own, wherein
this Island may compare with the best; yet since no place is extant so
absolutely blist, as in all points to stand and subsist of it self, by the
benefit of Intercourse and Traffic, bounded by Laws, Special treatise,
Leagues, Oaths and Decrees, al wants are supplied, each Part intending the
best for it self, according to Reason, Wisdom and Policy. Which with us
here in England has evermore aymd at the increase of our Shipping. The
increase of the Navy.


This necessity of mutual Commerce, by the malice of Time stands mightily
envied, and by Enemies abroad many ways interrupted; if withal it become
disturbd among Equals at home, when the general is wrong, Particulars grieved
cannot but groan.

Abundance and obstructions distempering London, cause a disposition to
consumption in all Ports besides.
Such has been of late years, and yet is the State of dealings and Trades
within our selves; for the City of LONDON, as the Liver in the body receiving
the Chylus from all parts of the Stomach, by detaining the blood from the rest
of the veins; is both inflamed and distempered in it self, and injurious
withal to all her fellow Members.

In which estate, though the whole Commons seem engaged, and deeply interessed
(for it may be the case of each private Subject) the Port-Townes in special;
consisting of Artificers and Traders, Masters of Ships and Mariners, do most
grieve and therefore complain.

That albeit as Subjects vnderlying the brunts of all foreign attempts and
troubles, The Out-Ports Complaint.
living under one and the same Laws, ready at all commands of public service
by Sea and by Land, as the other Subjects and Towns of the Realm are: And as
liable to all duties and paiments of Custumes, Subsidies, Fifteenes, Privy
seals, Loanes, and such like, yea as LONDON it self, is every kind of way
(for the proportion of their abilities) yet contrary to the general liberty
of English Subjects, they are abridged envied, and as it seems, held This
has relation to the strange and unnatural courses, holden in that City, to
draw all dealings thither, debarring, and from hand to hand, by Tickets
limitting things sent into the Countries. As if all Cities, Towns and Places
else where were but S^burbes, All Ports but Creekes and Members, All Officers
but Deputies depending on London, No Matter vendible, and so no Traffic
lawful, but at, or for London. From whence as from the fatal Box of Pandora
are flowne, and do daily proceed a great part of the evils, wherewith the
whole Realm is become so perplexed. For thereby the free and lawful Traffic
between equal Subjects, is violently impeached. Trades and Occupations in the
Cities, and Inland Towns are generally decayed. Whereby the Commons
empayring, grow discontented, and the poor for want of work, forced out to
begging. The skirtes and Out-Ports of the Realm grow dangerously desolate of
Trades and destitute of Mariners and Shipping. The Princes Custumes, there
consequently decreased. The Custumers without distinction by all means
disgraced. And the Marchantes of all sorts discouraged, wearied and made a
pray to a world of ravening and lawless creatures, of whom, as of Harpies
may be truly spoken. Virg. Tristius haud illis Monstrum, nec saeuior vlla
Pestis and ira Deum, Stygiis sese extulit vndis.
No monsters like to these might hap, nor curse from God befall
Nor from the pit of Hell arise, to plague a Realm withal.

UNWORTHY, the very superfluities of that Cities abundance, to their
manifest decay, (for want of free Traffic) in their Inhabitants, Mariners and
Shipping. And that all things being drawn into Private societies, are there so
engrossed, that ENGLAND is but LONDON, and LONDON also seems abridged in it
self.

In which distress the PORT-TOVVNES appealing in all humility to the PRINCE,
their only comfort is, that albeit her Majesty as a Mother of all her
Children in her Sacred
Love and Royal.
Affection (as well may beseem Her) stand gracious to some more then the rest:
A natural and lively Similitude of the Princes PREROGATIVE
yet that her Storge and natural inclination to Justice, affords bread to the
meanest, and intends at least, that all should enjoy their birthrights in
the general treatise of Intercourse abroad, and Common Laws at home, to grow
up thereby to live to her Service and the Commonwealth.

Let not LONDON therefore envy her fellow Subjects to breath common air any
longer, living under one and she so good a SOVEREIGN; nor disgrace her fellow
servants of equal place and function, for the reasons before laid down.

And in LONDON more specially the Society of MERCHANTS The Argument of this
Discourse, being the Advancement of Custumes, and the drift thereof, Honor and
Peace to the Prince and her Kingdom: was resolud at the first to depend
efficiently on Traffic. That Traffic consisted of four essential Parts or
Pillars, Matter, Persons, Place, and Order. That to maintain Traffic and so
consequently Custumes, etc. Was to procure and cherish in all Matter,
Goodness: in all Persons, Loyalty and Friendship: in all Places Conueniencie
and Freedom: and in all Order general Equity, the best Rules whereof, were
only to be found in the Certainty and Indifferency of the positive Laws,
Treaties and Contracts of mutual Commerce. But the Merchants Adventurers, not
knowing or not regarding these four essential grounds together, run away with
Traffic, as if it stood only in the choice of Persons, and by their uneven,
uncertain and violent proceedings, hold all men under to keep themselves
above. Terming all Enterlopers that would live by the direct and set Laws of
Traffic, as if all were bastards, and scarce good Christians, at least no
Loyal Merchants nor Friends, but they and their Society. And by a bare and
idle pretense of the word Order and orderly transporting the Credit and Cream
of the Land (Cloth) have brought the Trade there of to a kind of confusion, and
themselves to such a Laborynth: that besides the distress of the (Clothiers)
withal their Dependants, and general complaints at home (to their Ho.
Lordships endless offense and trouble at the Council Table) the Commodity it
self is impaired, abased and in a sort despised, and the State withal
dangerously divided and unkindly at Jar with her ancient Allies and best
foreign Friends.
ADVENTVRERS, that sometime have been as curious to keep and debar men from
their MART-TOWNS as now they seem violent to force all men thither. Least by
their unquiet and uncertain Instruments and form of proceedings, they make
good at home amongs themselves and within themselves, against themselves, that,
Strangers have feared, written and forespoken, terming them a Private,
Particular, and Preventing company.

This is the state of the CVSTVMES, as they are at this present, fit for the
GRAVE and WISE to know and consider. The reformation whereof, though none but
Authority may promise and perform; yet common Duty makes it lawful in all
to wish and further. Unto whom therefore in all Submission, the PORT-TOVVNES
for themselves and their Cities and Inland Towns of this Realm.
FRIENDS, by way of remembrance, do make this Petition.

QVi Reipub. praesunt, Cic. Offic. li. 1.
vt duo praecepta teneant. Vuum, vt vtilitatem Ciuium sic tueantur, vt quicquid
agant, ad came referant, obliti commodorum suorum. Alterum, vt totum corpus
Reipub. curent, ne dum partem aliquam tueantur, reliquas deserant. Qui autem
parti consulunt, partemque negligunt, seditiones and discordias inducunt. Ex
quo fit, vt alij Populares, alij Optimi cuiusque studiosi videantur, pauci
vniuersorum.

An abstract or part of a Letter, written by Master Roger Askham (of most
honest and learned memory) from Auspurge the xj. of August, 1551. unto Master
Leauer.
A fit lesson for London, and all Cities and incorporations in England, to
prevent a Dearth by.
MAgdeburge passes the siege of Troy etc. The provision of Corn at Norenberge
is notable. I wrote it to M. Cheek and so I will to you, for I saw it. They
have eighteen store houses full of Wheat, whereof one flower was not taken
upon these ((...)) years, as does appear in their Records and writings, yet
the Wheat is good, it is so well kept.

This provision of Wheat makes that Corn does never fall nor rise above
twelve pence in a Quarter about Norenberge. For when a hard year comes that
Corn should be dear among the Poor, then the Senate of Norenberge do sell
to all that lack plentifully at the old price, and when Corn is so
plentiful that the Poor men can get no money for it, then the Senate buyeth
all that comes, and pays as much as the old price was. Thus their Wheat
except certain flowers is so renewed, that the people neither want Corn when
it is dear, nor money when it is good cheap. They have Laws and Statutes for
this good order. Such a Senate be Very Patres Reipub. God maintain them, and
give others grace to follow them. etc.


