THE CVSTVMERS ALPHABET and Primer.

Containing, Their CREED or Belief in the true Doctrine of Christian Religion.

Their TEN COMMANDEMENTES, or Rules of Civil life and Conversation, daily
Grace, general Confession, special Supplication and Form of Prayers.

Together With a pertinent Answer to All such, as either in jest or in
earnest, seeming doubtful themselves, would feign persuade others, that, the
bringing home of Traffic must needs decay our Shipping.

All tending to the true and assured advancement of his Majesty's Customs,
without possibility of fraud or Couyn.

Always provided, In reading Read all, or nothing at al.

ADSIT REGVLA. 1608.

A A a. e. i. o. u. b. c. d. f. g. h. k. l. m. n. p. q. r. s. t. w. x. z. and
perse. Con, perse. title, title, Est, Amen.

1.2.3.4.5.6.7.8.9.10.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE MY SPECIAL GOOD LLL: THOMAS BARON OF BVCKHVRST, Earl
of Dorset, and Lord-Treasurer of England. Henry Lord Howard of Marnehill,
Earl of Northampton, and Lord-Warden of the Cinq-Ports. And Robert Baron of
Essenden, Vicount Cranbourne, Earl of Salisbury, and Principal Secretary of
State to the KINGS Majesty. All Knights of the most Noble Order of the GARTER,
and Lords of his Highness most Honorable Preuy-Counsell.
MY Duty and Service to you honorable L.L.L. every way humbly premised: I have
thought it good to present the same with the loyal Endeavors of a willing
mind, though feeble wit, and weaker brain; the Argument I confess being of a
higher pitch and greater compass, then I did imagine when I took it in hand.

Hazard at the first did much discourage me, and in the mids, by Friends I had
been dissuaded in regard of the pains, but for the Enthousiasme still sounding
in mine ears.

Ton Ame ne doibt, ta flamme est si divine, etc. Thy Soul is so beset by vows
that are divine,
Thou shall not tread amiss, why should thy heart decline?
By whose persuasion when I had but begun, my Conscience thrust me forward, and
thus prevailed at last.

Ie veulx qu'un bell oser, etc. Then dangers stand aside, it is GOODNESS calls me
to it,
If ought do put me by, it is WISDOMS hand shall do it.
My stays besides were these: That TRVTH was all my Ground, which as Time did
suggest, Experience still supplyd. My Pen OPORTET made, and was ever apt to
mend: But ORDER gave the Form, which I most of all suspected, and saw some
cause to doubt, till PRAYER in conclusion did undertake to perfect or persuade
the best. So that if the Form for the plainness may pass without offense,
the Matter for importance may perhaps deserve a double and treble reading.

The Matter indeed is TRAFFIC, I mean our freeborne Traffic, that Nurse of
JUSTICE which feeds us all, and (here handled ab Effectis,) contains those
very CVSTVMS for which the Scholars in all the Free-schooles, of our
SOVEREIGNS daily Tributes, have so long been subject to bayting and beating:
and for which my self, of late so graciously chidden, was forced (by special
command,) to spell again my Letters, and con this PRIMER.

Now be it what it may be, as your WISDOMS shall esteem, and as GOD shall give
success, (to whom the Glory of All in All is due,) three principal reasons
have moved me to present it to your LLL: view, in the names of All the rest.
The FIRST, besides his knowledge and sufficiency of skill, by eminency and
Place has special Experience to judge of what I write. The SECOND, keeps the
Keys of all those very Ports that lymits out my Charge, for whose sakes
indeed reciproke Love did instant me to write. And the THIRD was the means to
make me first a Custumer, when I had given it over and little thought upon it.
For these regards (I say) and treble respects, (mine Ends being no ways
private, mine Intentions always Loyal, disclayming no man's Person, but Sin
and Dishonestie,) I held it meetest and safest, to present my Self, and the
Fruits of all my Vows, to your LLL: mylde Censures and Protections. By whose
special Favors, as I am but what I am, so I desire but to be known

Your LLL: by several Duties deuotedly bound Tho: Milles.

To the GRAVEST and GODLIEVVISE in Highest Authority.
A Gentleman, a friend, and a lover of learning, coming into a Free-Schoole,
where diverse young Scholars were learning their Grammers, desirous to feel
how they thryude at their Books by some familiar Question, demanded, (their
Huishers standing by) When an English is given to be made into Latin, what is
first to be done? The answer is easy: namely, To seek out the Principal
Verb: yet all stood silent and half amazed, till ( The writer hereof, having
spent the best of his youth in public services at home and abroad, and
desirous at last to settle himself in some stayed course of living; after the
Treaty at Barwick 1586. caled Foedus arctioris amicitiae inter potentissimos.
etc. (which with the grace of God, the truth of his Title and his own
patience, was a means that brought his Majesty so quietly and happily
hither,) was by his Friends persuaded to take the charge upon him of Custumer
of Sandwich and the Member-Ports in Kent, where he was borne, assuring him,
that thereby he^ might do God and his Country good service: upon which motive,
he undertook the same simply, and doubting no harm.
one) at the last, (the Question repeated, and he urged to say, What was to be
done) replied; No harm sir I hope, at least, that I wot of. Which the
Gentleman taking in very good part, suspecting rather ignorance in the
Huishers, then want of wit in the Scholar, departed smyling.

Most Reverend, and Right Honorable, This Question and Answer, includes the
state of all the Students in the Free-Schooles of our Sovereigns Custumes,
where such as the Teachers be, such are the Scholars. There is a reason for
all things. And the reason hereof is not so much, for want of wit, in the
Learners; To deal justly between the Prince and the people, which in this
kind of Doctrine is the Principal Verb, as in their angry and hasty
Huishers, who while the Graue-Maisters and Moderators of the Schools, were
distracted, and busied in the study and practice of highest points of Learning,
have used no Method, but beating the Scholars.

Qui paria esse volunt peccata. Ipsique laborant
Cum ventum ad verum est, Sensus moresque repugnant,
Atque (ipsa VTILITAS,) Iusti prope matter and Aequi.
That make all faults alike, yet they themselves are dome, When Truth in
question falls, each finger seems a thome, And ( Profits-selfe) empaird,
whence Just and Right should come. Which kind of Discipline discouraging all
men, and driving many good wits from the School, to the secret injury of the
whole Commonwealth; forcde me to my Book, and as well as I could, to Analise
my lesson, meaning thereby with the foresaid plain Scholar, No harm at all.
Such therefore as it was, I did briefly set forth in a The CVSTOMERS Apology.
Discourse then following. The matter whereof partly drawn from mine own
patience and experience, and partly observed and learned from others: the Form
was merely mine own, and had for my warrant the Rules of my Grammar.

And since Things are then well done, when things are well taken; to clear
and acquit me from partial clamor, and the sin of presumtion; I showed, That
the Will applyant to Reason, was guiltless of passion, and Nature ouer-borne
appeals to Necessity. Quae quod cogit, ipsa, solet vtique defendere. For hard
in deed, and above measure extreme should their cases seem, that still
subject to beating, might neither bemoane themselves, nor be suffered to cry.
And so much the rather, when as (so far as I wot of) in all those Complaints,
there was nothing concluded nor included, at least intended thereby, but a
natural Defense of an honest reputation in that kind of Calling, which the Law
it self in great wisdom has laid out, and reserved For men of the best
sort only, and a dutiful zeal to find out thereby The principal Verb.

Thus far forth, and in these very words, having sometimes undertaken a
private Defense in a Cause of importance both public and General, and
finding our groans and heavy Complaints are vanished like sounds, and valued
but as Echoes in the * Deserts and Playnes, near the FOREST OF SHIFTS, and
WILDERNESS OF SIN. Which whilst some went by, they heard not, some heard, but
understood not, some few understanding, regarded not, and none did pity: I
held it then best (like a barn so dingd that I durst no longer griet) to sup
up my griefs with silence.

But when I perceived, that though I sat still, the cause it self daily did
grow worse and worse: and remembered withal my Customers are sworn at their
first admission, to do their endeavors to deal justly between the Prince and
the People.
vow to my Patron and Founder of our Schools, at my first admission: in
discharge of my duty, which in this respect I owe to my God, to my Prince and
my Country, I once more resolved to speak with my pen, and examine all my
former writings, not as by way of Genesis to prescribe a new Art to our Grave
and Wise Masters, for that were presumption in the highest degree: nor as by
Analisis to contest with the Doctrine and Method of our seuerest Huishers, for
that were but humor and indescretion: but whilst others of higher Forms,
Learned Sir Henry Billingsley, sometimes Customer of London.
and far better learning distrusting their Schools, removed their seats to
a surer standing, Worthy Sir Thomas Ridgeway, Customer of Exeter and Dartmouth.
Now Treasurer of Ireland.
as a poor Scholar desirous to learn and thrive at my Book, to spell out my
Primer by the very letters and points of my lesson. That so redeeming the time,
I might best give way to the stream of disgraces in hope of better days now
coming: remembering withal, that Errors have no being but in absence of Truth.
And howsoever Errors past have multiplied themselves, the Ages succeeding must
reform as they may, and as there is a reason, so God has appointed a time for
all things, for Dies dat consilium.

Considering therefore the reuolutions now past, and present disposition of
these our happy days, the The KING.
Day Star being risen, and the The PRINCE.
Dawning in our eyes, reuiues our dull spirits, ads life to our hopes, and
makes Us breathe out yet this much and say, that the time may come, when this
hearty zeal of ours to our Sovereigns honor, and his Peoples happiness, may
be better regarded, and deserve not only thanks and good words, but make all
men confess and acknowledge themselves, as much indebted to these weak
endeavors of ours, even from an Sandwich.
Out-Port in the Desert, and humble Norton-Court.
Cottage of this Laud, as all their wealths are or can be made worth: And the
Ages to come, find something at least to muse and to marvel at ignorances
past, when it shall plainly appear by demonstratiue reasons, and no wandering
Discourse, that in poor Customers Truth was never Error, nor Virtue Vice, as
the World has been told, and so long borne in hand. For can they but see,
they shall learn to spell, and by joining their Letters, both read and
discern (besides other mattets,) that CVSTVMERS.
Publicans and SEARCHERS and WAITERS.
Sinners, are several words, and imply a distinction both of manners and men,
and were it, or might it be that Docible Persons were but suffered to learn,
Publicans could and would teach Sinners to be like themselves: not Saints nor
Hypocrites, but first humble Christians, and then plain honest men.

In my beginning therefore God be my speed. A Jove principium Musae Iouis
omnia plena. GOD Alsufficient, Alpha and Omega, only Wise, and eternally Just,
Great A
without precedent or pattern, out of Confusion first drew Perfection, and at
the end of his Work, delighted to behold that all he had made was so like
himself, Valde Bona, exceeding good.

The last of all was MAN, the Image of himself, his Microcosmus, Chief
D'oeuure, Little A.
Maister-peece, and model of Perfection. In whom, and by whom, he might
contemplate, direct, and make use of all the rest. But pride by presumption
persuading disobedience, Man became seduced, and by the least part of his
trust, bewraying his whole Corruption, in steed of blessing was worthily
accursed, both in him and his, had not Wisdom herself, out of love and
affection so belayed his fall, that the Word which made all of nothing, was the
means to restore all from nothing, and GOD became a MAN. A miracle of
miracles, and mystery to muse on, but not to express: whereby the greatest
loser, has made the greatest gain.

As the motive of the Work was the Creators only Will, the means his Word,
the way his Wisdom, the measure Aequum et Bonu^, bounds of his own Justice:
So the absolute perfection, and end of all, was his preserving and boundless
mercy, (the Prerogative of Deity,) for the Creature to admire on, as his
Creators infinite honor, and own eternal happiness.

Now, whatsoever Nature could afford, or Man thus restored was able to
possess, is Gods free gift from all beginning. That as a Lord peramount, his
honor and seuice might justly be known to all his Tennants by special duties,
and thankful acknowledgements of their casie Rents, and so rich a Fee-farme.

The titles of his Tenures are RELIGION and JUSTICE, the one maintains his
peculiar honor and personal Rights, the other, effects of Love and Loyalty,
for his Tennants mutual good: the Laws, Customs and Doctrine whereof, pend
by his Spirit, and drawn from the essence of heavenly Deity, are so
concurrent; that to perfect our happiness, where both of these are not, there
can be neither: and therefore Comparatively used in this our Lesson, shall both
sanctify our wits, bless our endeavors, and illustrate each other.

Qui per alium facit, per semetipsum facit. Gods immediate Prayers and
Thanksgiuin
Rents, God himself expects and receives at our hands, such is our Tenure: the
Tithes and Tributes.
rest he accepts, being faithfully paid to his Stewards and Vicegerents. In
which respect we stand also bound to reverence and admire the transcendent
respects of Sovereign sublumitie in earthly States, by their Attributes and
Tributes, as GODS among men.

Pre-eminence. Prerogative.
The Attributes of power in earthly Princes, are their PRE-EMINENCE and their
PREROGATIVE, ( Justice and Mercy) the two sacred Titles of Divine
Sovereignty: the one sets forth the Dignities of their Persons and Places, the
other transcends to the motions of their minds.

The first is that Storge, and natural inclination to Equity and Justice,
that distributing bread to the meanest of their Subjects, entendeth at least
that all should enjoy their Birthrights, to the general Treaties of Entercouse
abroad, and Common Laws at home, to grow up thereby to live to their service
and the Commonwealth.

By the other, out of mere Love and Affection it may well beseem them, to
stand gracious to some more then all the rest, even beyond the bounds of
Justice, and yet do no wrong.

The first shows them but from their Seats of Justice and height of Diguities
above other men.

The latter beyond the Thrones of Kings, extolls their Persons higher then
themselves, as more then the sons of mortal men.

These then are no Synonimas (in our dymme sights and vveake Conceits) but
words of distinct respects, and of Chiefest reverence, Cat' exochen.
the blending whereof, has breadde in the World such dangerous Contempts and
Capital Errors, as no Power but the Highest, no Wisdom but the Grauest, may
or can reform. To who^ therefore in all obedience we prostrately refer
them. Only in the first we spy the same form of Caracters, Pre-eminence.
PREROGATIVE. Whereof read more in the Description of (Traffic) hereafter.
as in the Alphabet of our Letters. But in the other, (being a Hyeroglificke
above our reach or Learning) we hear the full sound of all those vovvels,
that give life to our Mutes, and must direct our spelling in the Title of our
Tributes: the scope of Loyalty, and now our special Lesson.

Customers Creed and Belief, and Articles of Religion.
Leaving therefore the Rights of Religion to those learned Divines, that both by
life and doctrine, directing the way by Faith and Good-workes how to win
Heaven, teach us that Faith alone in the Action of saving, is the Cause of
Salvation; but in the Party saved, both must concur together. And not to those
destructive Doctors, Not Popish.
that to build up their Church, blow up Commonweals: and by Loosenes of life,
and Traditions of Men, to advance themselves, rob GOD of his honor. Nor these
distractiue Teachers, Nor Precise.
that to Reform our Church, disturb our Kingdom; and preposterously
propounding such fancies of Perfection as no reason can reach to, nor
themselves express, preferring Sacrifice before Obedience, dispense with
Charity to please selves, But the Catholic, Apostolic, and Christian Faith,
now truly taught, freely professed, and constantly defended, in the Churches
of England, Scotland and Ireland.
and obtrude upon GOD more then he requires. Assuring our selves, that to all
who^ his Spirit does make Repentant, GOD by CHRIST, is and will be a most
gracious GOD, and a loving Father. But GOD without CHRIST is a consuming fire.

This (I say) we leave to those sacred Divines that work obedience in Subjects
by the rules of Conscience; and admiring the blessedness of these our days,
pray for our Princes and Prelates, and all that uphold or have but a will to
further this our truly Catholic and Christian Religion.

The Decalogue of our Courts of Justice, whereto Customers frame the Rules of
their Civil life and conversation in England.
Leaving also the Duties of all our distributive Justice, to those most Worthy
and most Honorable Persons, that possessing our Courts, by MEVM and TVVM,
discern and decyde the Cases and Questions of special Right, and of general
Reason, as well between Subject and 1 Common Pleas.
Subject, as the Sovereign and his 2 King's Bench, and Court of Wards.
Vassalls, by the Laws and Statutes, or peculiar Customs, cast in the 3
PARLIAMENT.
Mould of Wisdom in our own Land; or moderate Extremes by 4 CHAVNCERY, and
Court of Requests.
Conscience among Men. And to the Grauest and Wisest in 5 STAR CHAMBER, and
Counsell-Table.
highest Authority, that to maintain the Good by censuring the Evil, Sic
irascuntur, vt vitia tantu^ perimant seruatis hominibus, atque ita tractatis vt
very boni necessario fiant: quantumque damni antea dederiut, in reliqua vita
resarcire queant. And to those Heroical 6 The high Conestable and
Censors of merit and valor, that being most Noble themselves, to decyde the
Doubts, and determine the Questions of reputation and worth in all the Degrees
of our Native Right, and Dative Honor, so maintain our Credits, Vt quum
Praedia, Feuda et Possessiones, pactis et transactionibus obnoxia:
Iuris-Communis, et forensibus procellis agitentur: NOBILITAS interea,
Earle-Marshalls Court of CHIVALRY.
solis Regibus beneficiaria, Institutis heroicis, et familiaribus ita
acquiescit. That

Per proauos numerantur aui, semperque renata
Nobilitate virent, et prolem Fata sequntur.
Continuum propria seruantia lege tenorem.
And to those learned Ciuilians, that per Aequum et Bonum, so belay the
public peace of our 7 ADMIRALTIE.
Seas, and our 8 ARCHES.
Land, that by doing us Justice, our Neighbors take no wrong.

These parts (I say) of distributive Justice, we gladly refer to those worthy
Judges that sit in our Courts, and by Law and Conscience protecting our Matter.
Livings, our Place.
Liberties, our Persons.
Lives, our Order.
Honor, and our End.
Peace; do justly deserve all Grace from our Sovereign, and all love at his
hands. These are the GRAVEMAISTERS and Moderators of our Schools, Our
Masters.
that by the Rules of our Books, examine our Lessons.

The Prince has his Courts apart, for 9 EXCHECKER.
Public Revenues and 10 GREENECLOTH.
Private Expenses: where Accountants are taught for the most part, by
Court-Rowles and Court-Rules, grounded on Presidents, Examples, or else
Discretion. Those first are our Huishers. Our Hushiers.


The Comfort is great where Men dwell in houses, whose foundation is laid on
assured grounds. In which regard we poor Customers.
Scholars, want words to express our Joys and Conceits, of the blessings of
GOD in these our days, for the stays of Religion and distributive Justice.
Were those Patrons of Honor whom Mercury should serve, by APOLLO but found
out: and the roofes of our Schools made wind-tight and water-tight in the
breaches and wants of Traffic.
Commutatiue Right: We (I say) with all those that serve in the Staples.
Temples of Concord, and Mynts.
Altars of Truth, would make verses in praise of our PRINCES and PEERS, and
sing Alleluiah to the great GOD of Heaven.

The Commutatiue part then that seems most out of frame, now falling out, and
fitted for our Lesson, we are by our Letters to spel out the words that belong
to the Titles of our PATRONS Customs.
. Subsidies
. Tonnage and
Pondage.
. Tributes. Wherein our mild Moderators vouchsafe to stand by us, help our dym
eye-sights, support our weak wits, and direct our shaking hands. And Christ's
be my speed, and the holy Ghost.

The Nature of all Things that consist in Action, is best seen and valued by
the eminency of the Object whereon it works, and End whereto it tends.

The highest Object (next GOD and Religion,) is the Majesty of our SOVEREIGN,
and Good of our Country, there being no Action more dutiful then to amplify
the honor of the One, and procure the prosperity of the Other: nor any more
odious, then wittingly or willingly to empayre the Means, mutually meant for
the maintenance of Either.

It follows then by consequence, at all hands agreed on, that to maintain the
Princes Revenues, and to further the prosperity and peace of his People, is
(or ought to be) the special care of every Man's best Endeavor.

The Duties which GOD has laid out, and for his honor reserved, by the words
of his Law were double only, and of two several kinds, daily Sacrifices and
Oblations of Free Will. The one proceeding, from the ordinary Obseruaunce that
gives the formal distinction between the Creature and the CREATOR. The other
demonstrates that francknes of Love and cheerful Devotion, that ought to
proceed from the hearts of his own and peculiar People.

Now that which Deity demands by the Laws of Religion, within his Church to
be honored by, does hold as a consequence for earthly Princes within their
Kingdoms to raise their Tributes by. Like Objects, like Ends, Majesty, and
Love, by two sorts of Duties, Necessity and Free Will. The One must subsist,
the Other cannot be bound. Give therefore as unto GOD himself that which is
GODS; so unto Caesar, that is due to Caesar.

Thus Customs that grow by Traffic, are due to our KING, and are no small
nor idle Portions in the Body of his Reuenews. But as in Religion and the
service of GOD, there is nothing has more disturbed the Conscience, nor
distracted Men's minds, then a misunderstanding, and diversity in conceits, of
the true sense and use of the word ( Church, Church and Customs, words that
are too generally taken: and so misvnderstoode.
) so fares it with Traffic about the Terms and use of Customs.

For though Customs (in this kind) do currantly run, and be usually taken
for all kind of Duties that acrue to the King on things Barterable or
Vendible, by way of Merchandise crossing the Seas, either Outward or Inward,
(for from Port to Port both Land and Seas are naturally free) yet it has a
peculiar sense, a special use and proper signification, implying either those
ancient Staple-Rights, on Wool, Wooll-fells, Tin, Lead and Lether, etc.
called Great and Grand Customs, Grand CVSTOMS.
outward; or the three pence on the pound, paid only by Strangers, by the name
of Petty-Customes. Petite CVSTOMS.


All Titles besides (of this kind) howsoever they be called, or generally
comprised and styled Customs, are notwithstanding, distinguished from them by
special Names, Subsidies Tonnage and
and different uses, as Subsidies, Subsidies Pondage.
or Aids. And those also subdivided into Tonnage and Pondage.

The use and end of CVSTOMS.
The first (properly, indeed only to be called Customs) by wisdom laid out
from all beginning, is Ius Coronae, an Inheritance of the Crown, the
preemption in Traffic, and protection of Traffic, being two Essential
parts of that personal Preeminence, and local Dignity, which fundamentally
our Kings have claimed, and for defense of the Kingdom, and safe passage at
Seas, justly may challenge. As consisting (to our Weak understandings) of the
chiefest Materials our State affoords, to to draw in Bullion by. Bullion.
Staples. Mynts. Exchange. Weights and Measure.
And in that respect holden for their Artificial Mines of Gold and Silver, to
maintain the Pulses of our Sovereigns Mynts, whose Exchange of Money, as a
Fountain for abundance, ought to fix and guide the true valuations of all
Things besides. For as the Standarts of all Weights and Measures for general
Justice, are the Sovereigns Treasure and peculiar charge, and the coining of
Moneys their only (Hoc age,) so their General Justice.
Coynage, a work for Matter and Form of principal Worth, and their Exchange
a Mystery of heavenly skill, by equality and proportions certain and
indifferent, are the Stern and Compass to steer all courses right.

The Use and End of the Subsidies of Tonnage and Pondage.
The later called Subsidies, are offered up at Parliaments, on things subject to
Restraints by Proclamations for special Causes and different use, and in that
regard given sometimes but on this Thing, sometimes but at that Port, and
sometimes Ad Tempus only. Though now for all Things, at all Ports, and for
term of our Sovereigns life, as urgent Necessity, or public Utility, for
the Freedom of Traffic, and behoof of the Ports have seemed to require; Due
likewise in their kinds and turns for reciprock Ends. The Body being by GOD
and Nature, so bound to serve and maintain the Head, as the Head is ordained
to govern and defend all the Members.

Thus Customs are those artificial duties that our Kings must have, and
Necessity has laid on Traffic by our Staple Co^merce, to supply their
natural defects, and wants of Bullion.

And Subsidies are those natural respects which Love is desirous and Loyalty
does offer, by Traffic to honor our Sovereigns by (besides their ancient
Customs,) that by all Means, and at all hands Majesty may be seen, and
Sovereignty subsist.

These are all the Titles of our Commutatiue Tributes, by the Laws of our
Schools, the bounds of our Lessons, and Alphabet of our Letters. Yet is there
a third, called Impostes, Impostes or Impositions.
or Impositions, whose Heteroclite use, and conuertible sound, we know not how
to spell: for being but the Genus to the former two, and held for a Species of
some other Duty in our weak conceits, has deceived many.

For whereas Majesty must, may and can but subsist; what Adoration and Tithes
are to GOD, the same are Customs and Subsidies to his Lieuetenants. And beyond
the bounds which Wisdom prescribes for the practice of Truth, Discretion may
hunt, but shall find naught save Error. For what exccedes, is but Popery in
the Church, and in Policy, devices to disturb Commonweals.

What rests then but this, that Omne minimum inimica Naturae, and Omne nimium
vertitur in vitium. Enough makes a feast, but abuses mar all, whereof we must
also spell some-thinges hereafter.

Impostes then by the Rules of our Books, and Letters of our Lessons, are
either the Customs we spoke of, and those Customs Impositions, that to
maintain the Essence of Majesty, Necessity found out: Or those Subsidies
aforesaid, that Merchants by Traffic do franckly and willingly impose upon
themselves: or else in our Natura Breuium, no where to be found.

But as Aliquid Boni propter Vicinum Bonum, so Multum mali propter vicinum
Malum. Our Neighbors sower Grapes have set our teeth on edge. Italian
Governments, and the Discords of the Netherlands.
For by their examples, drawn (as they call it) from their Princes
Prerogatives, but would say Preheminonce, if they understood themselves.
Impositions are made Taxes upon Merchandise, besides the duties aboue-sayde:
not so much by Statutes or Treaties of Intercourse, as by a kind of
discretion, which wanting place and use in the study of our Customs, have
likewise no part in the honorable ends thereby propounded and intended. For
being as they are, Effects of unknown Causes, of Matter uncertain, and of
form no ways fitting the Mould of our free Commerce, all men refuse to argue
thereof, to define, to divide, or to bring them into Question. The rather for
that, being in their nature irregular and litigious, The Popes ambitious Taxes
on our Clergy, impouerishing the Realm by exhausting our Treasure, made our
Kings draw on the Barrons wars, to supply their poverty and wants, upon the
People. Impositions do but aim at Order, and the preservation of our Shypping
by guess.
they have been occasions of much unrest and disorders in former times,
especially in the first and second ages of our Kings, till Magna Charta
compounded such griefs. And albeit the use of them since might happily aim at
the beating back of some Foreign idle Commodities, brought in and obtruded
upon us by Strangers, to the hinderance of our Traffic in Trades, and decay
of our Ports in Mariners and Shipping, which the wisdom of our State must
always maintain: yet gathering withal upon the natural and freeborn
Subjects, they repyne thereat, as men willing to obey, but not able to discern
between the dispositions of States, and changes of Times, The Ends of
Impositions, are Disorder of Traffic.
and so is a special ground of all our Disorders. The Subject still appealing
to the positive Laws of our own free Traffic, as their general
Inheritance, and Strangers urging their Treaties and mutual Contracts.

These Imposts of discretion or strayned Preheminance, (if we term them
right) have likewise begotten some other Impositions, of baser Nature, and more
dangerous Effects, whereby that sacred Word of Wisdom, and highest power,
(our Sovereigns Prerogative,) is irreverently prostituted, and many ways
profaned. For, being sometimes pleased, (as well may beseem them) out of
mere love and affection, in public restraints, by special favors to make
some of their Servants more happy then their fellows; the same by sales and
transactions, transmuted or transferred, is a means to make Subjects from hand
to hand, Wine, Beer, Coals, etc. And whatsoever in this kind is either sold
or put over to a second or third hand for Money.
to rack and impose, even upon and among themselves. When indeed and in truth,
the (Grace) loses Being, both in Matter, Form, and Use, upon the first
Exchange. For when Favorites get suits unfitting their Callings, or use them
not themselves: it is but Witcheraft and Sorcery that all such intend,
Simones-Magi.
as by Leases or Purchase for private gain, think PRINCES Prerogatives,
either vendible for Money, or subject to Exchange. Such Impost-Maisters
Religion has accursed, their Money therefore and themselves, (without
Repentance) must perish both together.

These Imposts we take it, (under our Graue-Maisters correction) are but Romish
Peter Pence, and Italian-Inuentions, where their PRINCES Prehemirence, and
forced kind of Dignities, Traffic ill beholden to all such English Gentlemen
as travailing for experience, make the Impositions of Italy a fit precedent for
the government of England, when they come home.
have little other Subsistence: Being therefore but borrowed, they may well be
sent home. England was never any vassal to Rome, and has or may have (being
but rightly used) enough of her own.

But o fortunatos Anglos bona si sua norint! For the Majesty of our Customs
sometimes so admired, seem now like Anticke Medalls, that reteyning but their
sound, have lost themselves in their Value and Use, both of Matter and Form.

Our Golden-Flees, the Trophee of the House of Bu gundy.
Thus our Woolls, (sometimes the wonder of the World,) are now the Trophies of
strange Lands, and signs of our shame, and turned into Cloth, our Cloth into
nothing; at least nothing less then Bullion. And the Rates upon Wool, Our
Cloth become confiscable beyond Seas, or by special favor returnable upon us.
first grounded by Statutes, laid on Cloth by Discretion, not justly discerning
the reason of our Customs in the Use of the One, and End of the Other.

Our basest Fell-wooll of Shorlings, the refuse of the rest, and sweepings of
our Staples, (never used in Cloth,) is by our kindest The Duch-Church at
Sandwich, who flying the tyranny of Body and Conscience at home, admitted to
refresh themselves but with our English air, laid the first foundation of true
making of Bays, Says, and Sarges there. (Trades never understood of us
before,) till abuses elsewhere ouer-whelmed them with others, with an Imposition
that well-neere breaks their hearts: yet hold they still their first
innocence, and maintain the credit of that Townes-Seale, both for Number,
Weight, and Measure, in all parts of the World.
Neighbors, in a new kind of Drapery, made the glory of our Wolls, and
credit of our Kingdom, and might be made a Pattern to reform all our
Clothing, and recover our Bullion.

Our Pells and our Leather forsake us by Licenses. GOD knows why, where, how
or whether, but without return of Bullion.

Our Tyn and our Lead, so lately well recovered, seems now again laid up in
Huxters handling, and might have been a sure and special help to have drawn
in Bullion.

Our Pettit-Customs, only seem still to hold their own, Lex Mercatoria.
but with uncertain Bya^, since Lex Mercatoria became obsolete, and to us
unknown.

In steed of all which, our Returns (for the most part) being but Silks and
Tobacco, Bells or Bables, of things needless or bootelesse, do show how
Strangers for better wares, can fat us up with pride, or fodder us with folly.

Our Subsidies that sometimes were so few, so easy, so lovingly offered, so
graciously accepted, and so willingly paid, as the Customs have failed, are
become the Subjects of Extremity, even to the tything of our smallest Mynt and
Comin. And our sweet Nurse and Mistress, TRAFFIC, distempered and distressed
with dangerous fits of a hot burning Fever. Not far from Frenzy; which we
poor Scholars cannot but see, and (what ere betyde us) bewail and lament;
and before our Grauest and Wisest Physicians, prostrate our selves for remedy.
And I among the rest, as the Apothecaries Boy, that for bringing but one The
Caution written against the Farming out of Subsidies under the name of Customs.
Pill to prevent the last access, was so shent for my labor. The Symptom and
Crysis of whose disease will best appear in our Lesson now following.

The fashion and face of our Customs being thus laid open, their Use by
practice but once made known; would inflame the world with admiration and love
of the special Blessings and Prudence of our Land; the Zeal whereof only
has prevented all our Studies, almost consumde our selves, and yet is the
motive of all our best Endeavors.

Customs therefore and Subsidies, both depending on Traffic, as Effects that
rise and fall with their efficient Cause: the raising of Traffic like Honey in
Hyues, must needs increase either.

TRAFFIC! O the compass and profunditie of this one and only word
(Traffic,) more fit for Wisdom to study, and Eloquence to utter, then our
weak brains to spell. In which regard we cannot but bewail the loss and
want of those worthy Wits of older times, that to tune the whole World, wrote
Volumes on this Theme.

SIBILLA CVMANA, she wrote 9. Books, whereof 6. she burnt, and sold the other
3. to Tarquine for the price she offered them all at first.
The three Books of SIBILLA, so well preserved, so dearly bought, and carfully
kept by Tarquine the Elder, are long since by Stillico that Traitor, blown up,
burnt and gone.

Ne tantum Patrijs saun et Proditor Armis,
Sancta SYBILLIN ae fata cremauit Opis.
ARISTOTLS abstruse Philosophy, to ALEXANDER the great, Horis matutinis in
Gymnasio Lyceo.
But, o, those Acroamata, and pryuate Instructions of kingly Doctrine! so
gravely discussed, so attentively heard, and richly rewarded with Talents of
Gold, are either forgotten, beyond our hearing, or out of our reach.

Card Poole spent abooue 2000. crowns in sending to the Lybrarie of Cracou^a
in Poland about it. A^^^ Sturm: Epist: lib: 1.
And Tully De Republica. A Book able to make a Wiseman in one days reading,
(as some believe and write) so carefully sought for, both far and near by
our late Cardinal Poole, has not yet been seen, except the Amalihean Vatican
of our new Sir Tho: Bodleyes Library at Oxforde.
TARQVINIVS PRISCVS have happily found it out, whose care, cost, and love to
Learning, in the Kingdom of the Muses, deserves a Golden Crown: yet this is
our comfort, that the light they saw by, was but beams of this Sun, their
Enthousiasme, but motions of this Good Spirit, and their cleerest water fet
from the streams of this flowing Fountain, that runs so franckly, and may
serve our Turn.

For TRAFFIC is but a free Bartering, or buying and selling of 1 Vendible
Wares. At 2 Markets convenient. By 3 Merchants, Subjects, or Strangers.
According to the 4 Rules of Reciprocke Commerce. Generally intending 5 Honor
to Princes, and Prosperity to Commonwealths.

And here at the first view appear all our five Vowells, in five Words, that
teach us all to spell, and make us all to speak; to wit, a MATTER, as Vendible
Wares. e PLACE, Markets convenient. i PERSONS, Merchants, Subjects or
Strangers. o ORDER, Rules of Reciprocke Commerce. And u END, Honor to Princes,
and Prosperity to v Common-v- wealths.

The first we call MATTER, must be vendible.
The second stands for PLACE convenient for Marts and Markets.
The third PERSONS, fit to Traffic.
The fourth is ORDER in Commerce.
The fifth stands for The KING
And ( PRINCE.
SIRS.) And The COVNSAILE.
My Lords. The Commonwealth.
And all.

Here were fit staying to admire on the Majesty of those two words of Power,
PReHeMiNeNS and Prerogative. e. i.
Whereof the first has two of our Vowels for PERSONS and PLACE, but the last
contaynes them all. a. e. i. o. u:
But we must not play too much with the beauty of those Letters: Let us fall
to our Books, and spell out our Lesson.

MATTER, must be vendible.
In the condition of the Matter laid out for Traffic, what ever it be,
Goodness more or less makes it first Vendible, as respected for the goodness
only, and so fit for Trades.

PLACE convenient for Marts and Markers.
In the Places, conueniencie at home or abroad; easiness of access by Sea or
by Land, and freedom with safety: for Matter and Persons is only regarded in
all Marts and Markets.

PERSONS, fit to Traffic.
In the quality of Merchants Persons whosoever they be, Subject or Stranger,
Loyalty and Alliance only makes their Traffic avowed. For with known
Traitors, or open Enemies, the Law admits no Commerce.

ORDER in Commerce.
The best Rules for Order to direct Traffic by, are those that being
precisely squared out, to the Generality, Certainty, and Indifferency of the
Laws of our Land, and foreign Contracts, admit no particular, partial, nor
doubtful deceit, injury, nor disturbance to Matter, Persons, nor Place.

END of Traffic.
The End of all Traffic, is Honor to Princes, and Prosperity to their
Kingdoms; whose policy and government, religious and Just, must needs be
formed to their Pattern DEITY, by the Object of Goodness, and end in Peace.

But all Goodness is needful: Traffic therefore in regard of the Use of
Goodness, must needs be general. For look what the Soul is to the outward
Actions of the Body, in ordering each Member, so as Nature finds fit for the
good of the whole Man: such is Traffic, in disposing Mysteries and Trades, to
the behoof of the whole Commonwealth. A consideration in no part of Civil
Government to be neglected, much less in this great Cause of Customs.

GOODNESS therefore, as the life of the Soul, to perfect our Traffic, both in
Matter, Place, Persons, Order and End, is the scope of our Study, and length
of our Lessons. That in Traffic, as in all things, it may at last appear,
that Finis coronat Opus.

Thus Customs from Traffic have their first Essens and being, and by it
increase, to the Honor of Princes, and Prosperity of Co^mon-weales. For
Traffic then it is that we Customers contend, and stand bound to contest what
ever betyde us, until she be relieved for our Lesson, let us play the good
Scholars, and ply our Books well, to spell out Goodness, that some Good Man at
last, may get us leave to play.

In regimine Ciuitatis. In Republica gubernanda, et in Orbis Imperio, Eusebius.
minimum est quod possunt homines: In Causa vero Religionis multo minus. Magna,
Magnus perficit DEVS. He whose only will, and absolute Power could work so
well, that all he made became exceeding Good, to his own eternal Glory, and
Man's immortal Bliss: GOD, I say GOD, I mean, and GOD the third time, though
ONCE for all. Whom only to know, is everlasting Life, and Joy but to hear
and make mention of his Name, being a law to himself; of his own Perfection,
does likewise perfect all he wills or does. His Goodness being the Form of all
things, from which to swerve is to return to Nothing, and which in him as the
Fountain we must admire, and most affect and desire in our selves.

GOODNESS then is the glorious center of DEITY it self, from whence all
Circumferences both in Heaven and Earth, derive not only Essence, but happiness
in Being.

From hence it is, that out of Learning and Zeal to Religious Rights, some
godly-disposed, have seemed to observe a kind of Traffic, and free Commerce,
between the Throne of Heaven, and the Church upon Earth, by Doctrine and
Prayer for the use of Goodness. All heavenly Inspirings downward, and all holy
Desires upwards, being as Angels or Merchants, between GOD and us. That as
his Doctrine does teach us our supreme Truth: so our Prayers might confess
him our sovereign Good. But this height and depth of Goodness we leave to
Divines. The length and breadth thereof, must lay forth our Lesson, by giving
GOD his Honor, and our Sovereign KING his Right. For Caelum Caelorum sibi
ipsi assumens, Terram dedit silijs hominum.

As therefore at first we prayde God for our speed,
So now in Goodness, God grant we proceed.
Tu mihi sum Opifex rerum Cor fingitio purum
Et Recti inspira renouatum pectore amorem.
Os mihi tute aperi. Tu dirige labra loquentis
Vt Tibi promeritae persoluant laudis honores.
We have speld already how our Customs and Subsidies live and die with
Traffic, as Effects that follow their Efficient Cause. In which respect,
first Trades and Tradesmen must be sought for, made of, and at all hands
nourisht. Then Merchants of all sorts, must be kindly entreated, and by
freedom encouraged in every Commonwealth.

All Traffic is either Outward and Inward, of Things bredde at home, or set
from abroad: and three things there are, that by the Spirit of Goodness, gives
it three degrees of life, and thrice-happy being. Viz. Commodities, Money, and
Exchange.

The first, as the BODY, vphelde the World in the infancy of Traffic, by
bartering Good-things for Good-things, Commodities.
to supply Necessities, till Fraud came in.

The second, Money.
as the SOVLE in the Body, Olim. Cum non esset Monetae vsus, nec aliud Merx,
aliud pretium dicereter: pro temporu^ rerumque ratione, vtilia vtilibus
permutabant bomines. Sed ob difficultatem contrabentium electa est Materia,
cuius publica et perpetua estimatio, premutationum difficultatibus
aequabilitate quantitatis subueniret.
being a weight of supreme worth, to maintain Equality, and prevent
Advantage by consent or Nations, first made Good-thinges vendible.

The third, as the SPIRIT in the Soul, Exchange.
is seated every where in the Sovereigns own bosom, to direct and control
by just proportions of length and breadth, weight and content, the truth,
worth, and use of Goodness, both in Money, and all Things else.

Kata panta. Regula Veritatis.
The first, whilst Goodness in plain dealing lay open to all like, knew not the
Titles of Kings nor Kingdoms.

Kat' auto. Regula Iustitiae.
The second, is the right hand of Justice, which crowning Kings, first laid the
foundation of that preheminent Dignity, that shows the difference and
distinction of Sovereigns and Subjects. Ius monetae proprium est Principis et
inter Regalia Magna censetur.


Kath' olou Proton. Regula sapientiae vel ordinis.
The third, is that form of Majesty, and transcendent Power, that of
Mortall-Men, makes Gods on Earth.

Thus in Traffic, Commodities both Barterable and Vendible, by Trades and
Mysteries are laid out for Subjects. Post ipsam Legem nil aeque vtile est ac
necessariu^ Reipub: vt Nu^moru^ vsus. Proinde Grecis Nomos merito appellatur.
Quasi dicas gubernandi Regula. Vel gubernaculum.
Money as the weight to value the worth, and Exchange the Measure, to set
forth the use of Goodness by, belongs only to PRINCES, the sacred Ministers of
heavenly Justice; Each supporting other by mutual supplies for Reciprocke
Ends. The PRINCE graciously beholding the prosperity and wealth of his loyal
Subjects, as the only Mirror of his own Greatness and Honor. And the Subjects
religiously admiring the Majesty of their Sovereign, as the glorious Object
of their Welfare and Good.

And thus it appears by the course of our spelling, set points of our Lesson,
and lines of this our Primer. That our Kings Trade is Coining, and his Mystery
is Exchange. His The KINGS Proprium and peculiar Right.
Right therefore, vni, soli, et semper. By the rules of all Truth, all Justice
and all Order must be Gold and Silver, Materials of Bullion.

The motyue of this work, was a natural defense of poor despised and
contemned Customers; The motyue of this ALPHABET, and main dryft of this
PRIMER.
by whose disgrace the King receives such loss, and the State more wrong. But
the main dryft and Scope of all, is an orderly advancing of our Sovereigns
Revenues in his duties of Customs, that so many have undertaken, and so few
have set forward. Wherein all that has been said, might pass but for
conceit, and contemplative discourse, without the hand of some Ministerial
function.

Customs therefore being Effects of that great Cause whose Actions are
conversant about no meaner Objects then the Sovereigns Honor, and Subjects
happiness, requires Collectors of choice respect, and absolute trust: Men
truly Religious and honest in deed, as Customers are every way intended to be.

And such were they sometimes reputed, till Neglect in their Choice, and
Contempt of their Persons, made Jealousy begin to suspect their endeavors,
whilst Ignorance and Impudency in countenance and maintenance supplanted
their Credites. First by Controllers, then Superuisors, and lastly by Farmers,
and Undertakers, besides Searchers and Wayters God knows how many.

I come therefore now to speak of that Function which vnderlying the charge of
so great a trust, none should obtrude on at adventure, or undertake in jest,
but such as Nature has fitted, and Authority admitted in lawful manner. For
how-soeuer the Name of Customers seem now out of favor, as the Objects of
Disgrace, and public Slander; the curious eye of the Law (still constant in
his choice, The Customers only known to the Law.
) call them kindly by their Names, and culls them all as curiously forth, (as
Shriefes in their Shieres) from among the best and most sufficient, that
Wisdom can find, The intention of the Law in choosing Customers.
or choice afford, as men most fit to attend upon Traffic, and in collecting
Customs, most likely of all others, To deals justly between the Prince and
People. Give therefore cheerfully, collect uprightly, and answer truly, as
unto GOD himself, all his due honor, in Oblations and Tithes: so to our KING,
all his due homages, in the Rights of his Customs, and loyal Supplies. Deal
(I say) justly between the Prince and the People.

HOC OPUS, HIC LABOR EST. This is the Dyapazon of all our Music, and full
compass of that Song wherein each must hold apart; here therefore pause a
while, that all may sing together.

For great has been the care from time to time, and the inventions sundry,
that have been undertaken, for the aduauncing, collecting, and true
aunswering, of all such duties as grow in this kind. But as in the State of a
natural Body, those diseases prove of most dangerous consequence, that are of
longest breeding, and furthest from cure, whose pulse is never felt, nor
Symptoma known; so has it long fared with this Argument of Customs. Wherein
sometimes about the Cause it self, (Traffic) whether freeborn or no, then
about the Matter, without difference or distinction of Art or Nature, Outward
or Inward, Abundance or Want, Duty or Free Will. And lastly about the Form of
their orderly directing, collecting, and true answering how to stop the
course of Errors, and current of Abuses, is become the greatest pretended care
at least and most serious Question.

For information and Reformation whereof, how-soeuer the Conscience of my
Calling under his sacred Majesty, and special duty besides, as his Highness
sworn Servant, have singled me forth, and pressed me still forward, by one
occasion or other. Quo fato nescio, sed non sine Numine, as my hope and comfort
is, first by Against Informers of all sorts.
A General Apollogie: the^ a second Against private Societies.
Replies, and A Treatise worth the reading.
The true use of Port Bands: and lastly, A Private The Satisfaction of the
offense conceived against that Caution, was the occasion of casting all the
rest into this new Mowld, called, 5 The Customers ALPHABET and PRIMER.
Caution, against the Farming out of Subsidies, under the name of Customs, to
presume thus with my pen, but to wish and further; I ever concluded that none
but the Grauest and Wisest in highest Authority, might promise and perform
it: Before whom now being so lately commanded to speak, I may not, I cannot,
I dare not hold my peace.

All humble respect of Duty therefore, and prostrate Reverence premised, I
proceed with my Lesson, and build on our Defense upon my first Religious and
reasonable grounds.

RELIGION and JUSTICE, are the fundamental stays of all States and Kingdoms,
the one by sanctifying, the other by assuring the perpetuities of all
tranquillity of Minds and earthly Honors. Justice being Distributive and
Commutatiue; the Commutatiue part includes Traffic.

There was a time when the Christian world was all set on fire, divided by
Disputes, and distracted in Opinions, The true Catholic and Christian
Religion, as soundly taught, and as freely professed in England, Scotland and
Ireland at this day, as in any private or public part of the World.
about the Catholicke-Church, and some points of Truth in the doctrine of
Religion: But the GOD of Heaven be praised, it has found the best footing in
these our days and Kingdoms that the world does afford, and his hand in our
Sovereign and his, forever uphold it.

Upon the compounding of the Discordes in the Netherlands.
The like seems now (I say, even now) to offer it self about the Use and Ends
of our freeborn Traffic, that Nurse of Justice which feeds us All. The
private perverting of whose general Intention to public Good, has much
disturbed our special Bliss, and gives occasion of this ALPHABETOR PRIMER.

Traffic then, being the hand that lays out all men their Work, prouides
all men their Food, and pays all men their Fees, ought at all hands to be
seriously supported, that so supports us all; and her willing Disturbers, and
witting Peruerters, held as Enemies to Order, that is to say, to God and Nature.

And since in all Actions, the safest path to walk in, and surest rule to
guide our selves by, is to follow Nature, the pattern laid out by the GOD of
Order: the way from Error to Truth, and from Confusion to Perfection, must be
by proportions, until we come to that End, which is able and sufficient to
perfect and preserve all our worldly happiness. Measure therefore must sit at
the Stern, and by steady proportions, cunne and steer this our Ship of
Traffic through all the storms of Extremities and dangers of Shyfts, to our
long-desired Port.

As the beauty of Nature is Order, so the way to Order is Number more or less,
to avoid the Rocks and Sands of Excess and Defect. Exchange therefore without
all exceptions, must lay the foundation, and absolute ground of all our
Endeavors, to this intended Redress.

The Writer hereof, alluding to his own trouble for the Caution he wrote
against the Farming out of Subsidies, under the name of Custom, sets forth
withal a true Idea of Traffic, by fayning a Ship (called the
Harry-Bonaduenture,) fraught with pitch, tar, mastes, salt and oil, and good
store of Bullion: that after a long voyage, in her return homewards to the
Island of Exchange, meets with a dangerous storm in the Narrow-Seas, and
doubting the Geodyn-sands, falls in with the Forelands, casts Ankor in the
Downs, and there ryding all Winds to death, puts in at last to
Sandwich-Hauen. Where finding neither Staple nor Staple-wares, (sometimes held
there, and sithence at Canterbury adjoining) of Fleece-wooll, Broad-clothes,
Tyn, Lead, nor Leather. etc barters her Commodities for Bays, Says, and other
Duch new Drapery there. And in Exchange for her Bullion, bespeaks Kentish
Broade-clothes against her next return: Provided, they be made and warranted
by the Rules of Sandwich Bays, and Seal of that Town only, and none other.
Exchange! have we spyde out Exchange? Then hail Masters, Mariners, and
Mates at all hands: Call up our loyal Merchants, true Patriots, Enterlopers
and all, and be of good cheer. Belay well the Bowlyne, keep your tacklins
tight and sure. Aloof aloof with the Maine for fear of the Goodwines. I
seem to see our Island, for the Fore-lands appear. CASTOR and POLLVX coming
both together, did boade us good-lucke. Our Bark is strong enough to bear out
her leakes. Our Loade-stone proves good, and our Compass is true, therefore
aloof (I say) with the Maine, by this Cape of Good-hope, to the Harbor of
Safety, and Haven of all our Rest. For Reliquis tantum Sinus est et Statio
malefida Carinis.

Now, all things consist of Matter and Form, et Forma dat esse rei: the
Matter being Weight, and Measure the Form, are fitted and esteemed by their
End and Object, GOODNESS. All Goodness is either by Nature or by Art. And as in
Goodness there is a proportion to fit with the Matter wherein it consists:
Omnis Forma infunditur secundum meritum Materiae.
So in Trades, the blessing of GOD by Nature, and the benefit of Industry by
Art, is more or less admired, to the special reputation and profit of those
Persons, and those Places that first afford them.

According to these grounds of the three things in Traffic before laid down,
as Money for the Matter, a Weight of greatest worth, and for the Form, a work
of royal esteem: So Exchange, a Measure of rarest perfection, and Mystery of
heavenly skill, fitting none but Sovereign States and Kings, must stint the
values, and guide the proportions of Goodness, in all Materials besides. But
all Goodness is needful. Exchange therefore, as the Spirit in the Soul, to
perfect our Traffic, by the Fountains of Staples.
Bullion, and store of Princes Mynts.
Coin, in respect of the use thereof, ought to be general. Forasmuch as the
good intended thereby, is so due to all, as cannot be disturbed or restrained
to any, without disorder and confusion, for Omne Bonum, est sui diffusinum.

This I say then, is that treble-twisted thread, twyned by loving and loyal
Ariadne, to guide our fatal THESEUS by, through all the Muces and Mazes of
that Labyrinth of Errors, (Marchandizing Exchange,) to free and redeem the
Bodies of Men, and Souls of Christians, from the yearly, monthly, and daily
devouring Jaws of that Monster of Creete, and Bawd of Bankers, (Usury,) to
the raising again, and perfect uniting of Religion and Justice, that Mercy and
Truth among Men, may sit kindly together, and Righteousness and Peace may kiss
each other.

Thus all things in Nature do tend to perfection by the Rules of Order, and
degrees of Goodness: but the use makes all. For Quo mihi Fortuna si non
conceditur vti?

The use of Mettalls, both Gold and Silver, as cheifest materials for Princes
Coin, is in this respect so vrgently needful, that where Nature fayles, Art
must make good: in which regard, the want of Mines in this Kingdom, has been
ever supplied by foreign Bullion, and ancient Customs.

The want of Coin in the Princes Treasury, shows defect of Natural Mines,
or neglect of artificial Supplies, whereof Bullion is chiefest. Neither is it
enough, fit, nor convenient, that being provided, or brought to the Mynt,
Cudendae monetae Ius proprium est Principis et inde publicae fiunt.
(the public pulse and heart of Traffic,) private Subjects presume to coin
it for themselves: least thereby Kings become servant to their own Vassalls,
and constrained to borrow that should be apt to lend. A course in Nature both
miserable and preposterous. For what harder condition, then to see Clothiers
compeld to work out other men's Wool, for a shred in the end of the selfsame
cloth? Yet this is worse. For where all Trades are valued by, and vented for
Money, this makes Coin both disvalue and sell it self. O hysteron proteron,
and ground of all Disorder. If KINGS above themselves have none but GOD, that
only makes homage join honor to their Crowns, and seeing their service does
yield them reward, all others below them being prostrate at their feet, the
names of Wages and Fees, is too base for Sovereigns from beneath them to
receive: and for Subjects to offer, preposterous, persumptuous, and every way
profane.

Constantinus Magnus, ne aliter quam sancte et legitime hoc regale vterctur:
effigiem suam nummu sic inseulpi voluit, vt hominis Deu^ flexis genibus
invocantis prae se ferret. Moneta aute^ dicta quod moneat ne quid frandis in
Materia signo vel pondere fiat.
If then the Type of Princes be their Thrones and Dignity; if the Object of
their Actions, (next the glory of that Deity whom they represent,) be their
own greatness and honor; if Merchants buy and sell Goodness but for their own
avail; what greater gain then for Subjects to attain to their Sovereigns
Dignity? And what harder estate, then to see Kings set a work, and waged by
their Servants?

If the Law pronounce it death, (and that most worthily) to counterfeit Princes
Coins, by what means soever; what can expiat that sin of Presumption, that
as it were with their own Hands and Stampes, usurp their Pre-eminence, and
disturb their Exchange?

In a word, let the heart by the liver, receive his tinctured Chylus, by his
own mouth and stomach, and the blood with the Spirits shall fill all the
veins. And if Nature have taught all men to affect the general Good by
particular Trades, and appointed each Trade his proper Materials by the help
and use of Money, leave Bullion for Princes, and the World can want no Coin;
the easy course and recourse of whose Exchange, shall set all things in tune,
and serve all Men's turns.

But to compare things by contraries, will best illustrate either. We all cry
out of Couetyse and Priuate-gaine, as good reason, for GOD himself has
pronounced it the root of all Evil, and the love of Money to be flat
Idolatry. Which being bad in Subjects, must needs be worst in Kings: How great
then must our happiness appear, to have Bounty it self come dwell among us?
And what hearty remorse ought it to move to some him and his, abridged or
deprived of the principal means to practice their virtues?

Great therefore, greater, and greatest of all, must their Accounts be to GOD
and Nature, that preposterously perverting his proper Materials, turn his
best helps for Bullion to their private advantage? to the intolerable
disturbance both of Court and Country, and almost unrecoverable wrong to the
King and his Crown. Wherein Customers wanting words to set out their griefs,
have made signs with their The second Reply. or Treatise of Exchange. etc.
pens. And yet cease not by Prayer to groan in this manner.

O that our Tongues or Pens could but express,
Or had the gist to make Men understand
Th^^^ great Effects of sacred happiness
Exchange (alone) would work, by Prince and Counsels hand:
Religious Justice should then so bless our Land,
That Men on Earth might see by this Idea made,
What Heaven it self does boade in this our Kingly Trade.
So far off, are Customers from guilt in this behalf.

Now see but what is past, and so put all together, to hear what words they
spell.

That, Goodness (whose Standerd is DEITY, Kaloca' gathia, id est, Aequum et
Bonum, Honestum et Vtile: Beauty and Bounty, Profit and Pleasure.
) applied to the active perfections of Commutaliue Right, by the rules of our
Book, and scope of our Lesson, is a beautiful aspect, and beneficial
influence of Heavenly Beatitude, in the operations of Nature Art, (which in
Greek is understood by Calocagathia.) Sanctifying and assuring the formal
Essence of all happy Beings: And GOD saw that all he had made was exceeding
Good.
For Bono suo consta^^ Omnia.

That Bullion or Billion, is a word of Art, given to the elementall
perfections of pureness and finenes in the solid Commodities of Gold and
Silver, Deprehensum a peritioribus est, in Mundi creatione, principe^ Deum
Arithmetica esse vsum, Geometria (...) Musica, siquide^ Arithmetica ratio^^^
^^^pacta connexaqu^ creduntur Elementa: Geometria vero Figuras effinxit vt inde
sirmitatem conse querenter, stabilitatem ac pro Naturae vi mobilitatem.
Proportiones adnexuit Musicane terra plus in terreno sentiretur Elemento, quam
Aquae in Aqueo, et in acreo aeris ^t Ignu in ign^a Natura: nec Elementorum
vllum omnino, in aliud resolui vlla ratione quires. Proinde, quum audis a DEO
esse vniuersa in numero creata et pondere ac mensura: intellige ad Arithmeticam
Numerum referri, pondus ad Musicam ad Geometraim vero Mensurae ad^ectum Nomen.
Quippe astringente grauitatem leuitate co^fouentur omniafulciu^tur que: in
meditullio namque, ign^^ potestate cohibetur Terra, sed et huic ignis
innititur. Ita prof^cto est, Magnitudo Exquisitissimi, nec laudati vnquam pro
dign^tate Operis; necnon late patens vis et motus, admirabilem Opificu prae se
fert potentiam. Dispositio vero excultissima, mirificam ost entat Sapientia^.
Vsiu vero ad optimu^ vbique co^ducens latius exubirantem nobis ingerit
bonitatem. Proinde summi Platonici vniuersum hoc v^lut augustissimam Dei
statuam eximie venerati sunt. Et que in co caeteris Maiestate Naturae praestare
videntur, tanquam Idearum certiora Simulachra. Caelij Rodigini, Lib. 1. Cap. 2.
laid out by nature at the Standert of TRVTH, to fix the proportions of Good,
Better, and Best in, for the easier extention of Goodness, by vendible Commerce:
For, as Omne Bonum est sui diffusiuum: so Quanto communius eo melius.

That Money or Coin, is a figured proportion of Number and Weight, laid out by
Art at the Standerd of JUSTICE to weigh the degrees of Goodness by, in all
things vendible; Vt quod vspiam ^^scitur Boni, id apud omnes affluat. The
worth whereof, none but Soueraine-wisedome can justly value or equalize, and
absolute Authority stamp and make current: because, Omne quod efficit Tale,
id ipsum esse magis Tale oportet.

And. That Exchange (whose Standerd is EQVITIE,) is that Rule is policy and
government of State, which sencibly demonstrates those heavenly Effects of
Power and Wisdom that DEITY imparts to mortal Gods, a^^ Counsels on
Earth, by means of Money, to maintain the worth, and show the true use of
all Things in Traffic, by their proper Objects, and peculiar Ends.

That as Goodness Divinely sublimated, becomes only fixed in Bullion: and
Bullion only coynd, deuides the proportions of Good, Better, and Best,
reciuing life in it self from Sovereign Essence, becomes current withal,
through all the parts of vendible Commerce: to show the preheminent potencie
that PRINCES have above their Subjects: So Exchange measuring proportions in
Gold and Silver by weights of more or less, to uphold the just value, and
maintain the true use of Goodness, as well of all things in Traffic, by
Coin, as in Coin it self; sets forth their singular Care, Providence,
Prudence and Wisdom.

The orderly practice whereof being outwardly observed, consists in the ready
exchange of current Coin, purged and ^repared by the fire of their Mynts, for
dead or drossie Bullion, laid down at the Altars of their public Temples,
for That is to say, Wares so censured at the Staples before they come to the
Ports to cross the Seas, as upon the honor of the Kingdom, and credit of the
Persons and Places that first assoorde them, are made as vendible without all
possibility of fraud or deceit from the Seller to the Buyer, as are our
Sandwich Bays. etc.
Stapled-Commodities, as the word it self both spells and imports. But the
mystery of this Art, is quietly conveyed in the lending and loanes of current
Coin to such as want, upon equal terms of HOMAGE and TRUST. The End of Money
being to make all things vendible, by equality of worth, and value of it
self, for the qu^ker dispatch and advancement of Traffic: and the Ends of
Traffic the Sovereigns honor, the Kidgdomes peace, and the Subjects wealth.
Thus moving and disposing all men's Endeavors, by willing Courses, and
perpetual Motions, to serve and work for ONE, and that ONE made able to
maintain the Synthesis, and protect the freedom of Traffic, by fitting all
Men's turns.

And thus is Traffic made the true and assured practice of that mystical
Philosophy, wherein so many wits have spent themselves, and blown the coals
in vain; Lapis Phylosophicus.
whose heaue^^y Elixar, (Goodness,) the Quintessence of Nature and Art, by
Divine sublimation applyde to Materials, breeds Mysteries in Trades, and
purging all dross of deceit from Trades, turns Trades into Mettalls, and all
Mettalls into pure Silver, an^ fine Gold.

And Exchange becomes that Cordial preservative, which easing all griefs and
sores, Vniuersalis Medecina.
suppling all sores in diseases, and curing all diseases in particular Members,
holds the whole Body of Kingdoms in health. The sacred Rules whereof, as no
profane Couetyse could ever comprehend, nor confident Empericke attain to
practice; so none of private Discretion, or partial Affection, may presume to
alter or control, as being a Doctrine peculiar to the Grauest and Wisest in
highest Authority, and for PRINCES themselves.

Of Traffic then, by Nature so admirable, and by Art made so amiable, thus
wonderfully wrought, and orderly taught by Rules of TRVTH, JUSTICE and EQVITY,
what can be less said, then, that her Doctrine is Heavenly, and fit for none
but Kings, and Counsaile-Tables, her seat being euery-where the Sovereigns
own Bosom. Whose voice well tunde, is the harmony of the World; to whom both
Courts and Courtiers owe Fealty and Homage: the meanest Subjects feeling her
Care, and the greatest Princes subject to her Providence; whom both Noble and
Unnoble admire, and love as the Nurse and Protectresse of all their earthly
Honors, Prosperities, Peace and Joy.

Since GOODNESS then is that purging Fire, that sent from Heaven, can only
purify from dross of Deceit, all the Materials prepared and presented at the
sanctified Altars of public Commerce, to make Kings adored, and Subjects
happy: And Gold and Silver, of all solid Bodies, the aptest and surest for
general behoof to fix this Goodness in: No marvel at all, if all men, Vt
mundo Natura Cursum. Soli Lumen et Aquae fluxum, sic gratia^ Auro.
if all men, admiring the Beauty and Bounty of the One and the Other, so
seriously affect them as their chiefest Treasure.

But admit it were granted, that some One Man alone might become possessed of
all the Gold which the world does co^taine, (...) ^f all the Silver that Nature
affoordes; or each Man as much as ^is heart could wish, yet the same vncoynd,
would prove but idle or combersome, for want of public use. For though
Goodness by DEITY universally infused, and in Bullion fixed by public
consent, be sufficient for worth to set forth it self, yet till Sovereignty
by Wisdom appoint out their use, and Power make them Current; even Coin is
not Coin, and has no life at all, but rests a weight of massy Mould, and
senseless Being. VVoe worth then all those PROMETHEY, that for private
respects, steal this Heauenly-fire, from the holy Mynts, by Coining for
themselves.
Altars of Unity and Truth, and in contempt of Majesty, rob and engrosse the
public store of our Staples, by Monopolies.
Temples of Justice. And all those NADABS and ABIHVES, that offering strange
fire, from profane Altars of privy Counterfetters of Coin.
Presumption, seek to poison our Traffic, and all parts of Commerce.

Money in a Kingdom, being the same that Blood is in the Body, and all
Allayes but humors. For when the Standerd of Goodness in Gold and Silver, is
vnsteddily fixed, and Money in weight inconstantly Coin, and for use
unworthily Current, as all Commodities besides, become deerer and (...); that
is to say, of more esteem then Money it self: So the People of that Kingdom,
grow troubled, and unquiet within themselves, according to the baseness of the
Coin when it is perceived.

That KING then that puts in his Coin much Bullion, and little Allay, makes
Himself powerfully admyred, his Nobles respectively honored, and his Commons
obediently diligent, and all Men willing to raise themselves by their
Industries and Trades; holding their times well spent, and labors well
employed, for such Money as they believe and find to be perfect Treasure.

Contrariwise, he that puts much A^^^y to little Bullion, makes Majesty it
self, contemptibly weak; the Nobles, neglectedly despised; and the Commons,
stubbornly careless, to work for that, they find aforehand and know, not
worth their labor: The only way to Reputation and Wealth, being left to
Religious Tillage and Honest Grasing. Victus and Vestitus being every Man's
want. Necessity upholding the estimation of their Commodities far above
Base-Money, whilst all men seek to them, and they almost to no man.

And as a steady Standerd, and store of Coin in the Princes Treasury, makes
all things else cheap, holds Trades in request, shows Kings to be powerful,
and Subjects wealthy: so, as the Standerd falls uncertain, and Money engrost
into private hands, all things grow dear, the King becomes weak, and his
Subjects poor, whilst Coin it self by Usury in Marchandizing Exchange, eats
out Industry and Trades; Marchandizing Exchange.
and Marchandizing Merchants by MONOPOLIES, conspyre to strangle Traffic.
Examples hereof may be Edw: MONOPOLYES.
3. 1338. at his going to conquer F^^^^^. And Edw. 4. overwhelmed by wars at
home.

For Money is not regarded for the Namesake, but for weight of true worth, and
use of current value. King Henry the 3. in his pound, or xx. s. of current
Silver coin, put xij. ounces sterling. Which then was, and yet is worth an
ounce of fine Gold, and so was paid his Rent. Edw: 4. raysd that ounce to
forty shillings, which he found but at four Nobles. And Edw: 6. received no
more in eight pounds-rent of Silver coin, then xij. ounces sterling; and so
lost to himself and his Nobility seven parts of their Revenues, the Land
being the same it was in Hen: 3. time, and not raised in proportion; which
their Tenants ever found.

The way to retain Gold and Silver within a Kingdom, and draw more unto it,
is to hold a perfect and steady Standerd at home, and call all Forraine-coynes
current, one penny in an ounce of Silver, and xij. pence in Gold above their
own. But above all that can be said, or any way devised, maintain the
Springhead, (Traffic,) and when all wants are supplied, Traffic, a more
assured means to supply our King with Bullion, then the Mines of INDIA.
the wast will seem needful, or at least not much regarded.

And thus is Gold and ^^luer (the seats of fixed Goodness,) fitly ab effectis,
Auro et Argento, Quid non? having GOD and a good cause to friend.
called King and Queen of the world, in making Kings as powerful in their
Thrones, to protect their Subjects both by Sea and Land, and dispose of
Traffic within their Kingdoms, as GOD by Goodness, in Number, Weight, and
Measure, first made the world, and still does guide the same. Each KING being
an Idea of DEITY it self, so much excelling in Pre-eminence of power for his
Person and Place, and in Prerogative of wisdom for Affection and Love, by how
much they endeavor, to express in themselves, and extend unto others, the
Characters of their Majesty, and Titles of their Glory, (JUSTICE and MERCY,)
in the true use of Coin.

But these Mathematics are Acroamaticall, fit for ALEXANDER the great, and
ARISTOTLE the wise, to walk and discourse of, Horis matutinis in Gymnasio
Lyceo, by themselves all alone, and not for us to speak of, or spell. Neither
had we thus presumed (despised as we are) from our desolate Schools, and lowly
Cottages, to step into the Court, and enter the Mazes of these sacred
grounds, The only cause of publishing hereof in this sort.
but to beat down and prevent the dangerous Suggestions of Imaginary
Doctrine, and Legete de maine wherewith some Speculatiue Men, risen up in our
time, bewitch all they meet, and (were it but possible,) would seduce the
Wise: who seuering themselves from the Body of our Commerce, and wandering out
of fight, to keep all men still under, and themselves above, would persuade
the world, that Traffic of herself is a perilous biting beast; and that to
bring her home to her own Creekes and Ports, must needs destroy all our
Sheep in Cotsall, and decay all our Shypping on Cheuiat-hills, and
Barham-downes: which Assertion of theirs, so strangely undertaken, and stiffly
maintained, if neither fond nor false, yet is it but as true, as the building
and raising of Tenterden-steeple, was the ruin and decay of our
Sandwich-Hauen, whom Land and Seas have set some 30. miles asunder. For
confutation whereof, this place and time requires that something now be said to
satisfy the Wise, though I must confess the easines is such, that how to
dispute it in any serious manner, I cannot well devise.

All Assertions whatsoever, that fall within the compass of human Discourse,
are made and maintained either by pregnancie of Wit, cleerenes of Reason, or
demonstratiue Experience, (for against Divine Revelations we mean not to
dispute,) the Mind consulting still with memory, and fancies Conceits. In
which respect it is, that Imagination is truly termed the Storehouse of Wit,
Memories Seat, and Fancies Palace. By means whereof, as the pulse declares
best how the heart does work; so the thoughts of our Minds, to purpose good or
bad, do soonst bewr^y themselves.

Upon this Anuile then we will begin to strike, and entering this Closet,
demand of these assured and confident Disputers, so boldly contesting against
all Comers, that the bringing home of Traffic, must needs decay our
Shipping; whether their wits in so deeming, be within them or without them. If
they answer, Within them, as likely they will: then they, (without their
wits,) must needs be distracted, frantic, or mad. And who is able cum
ratione insanire? And if to mend themselves, they confess their wits to be
without them, then must they stand as witless, their Conceits being but
Dreams, and their Dreams but Fancies.

But let their wits alone, and leave them to their fancies, till they find one
the other, for perhaps they see more reason then their Wits can devise, or
Conceits can utter; I ask them then, (as men that would seem at least to
understand themselves;) whether by this (our Shipping,) they mean Ships of
Burden, All Shyps are cyther for Burden, or Defense.
or Ships of Defense, or both, or neither?

If they say Shyps of Burden. How should fancy or frenzy, by Discourse of Wit
or Reason, maintain a Conceit, and persuade it unto others, which Experience
in the Ports does daily condemn, and demonstratly control? Complaining still
for want of Keys, Docks, and Wharfes to build on. Not of Matter, but of Place,
where Traffic once does come, and but unmask her face.

And should we think it possible, that she which has had the power to turn
Creekes into Ports, add Ports unto Towns, raise Towns into Cities, and
enrich whole Countries with Artificers and Trades, Mariners and Shipping, with
our Neighbors abroad in less then 50. years, should prove so idle, nay
hurtful now at home? Ships carry Traffic, as wheels do the Chariot. And
Traffic the trimphant Coach that bears the Glory of our KING the World round
about.
Traffic is the Chariot, and Shypping are the Wheels that bear our glorious
LIGHT, and is that Body shadowlesse that never wants the SVNNE?

But still they seem to mutter much, and muse among themselves, framing
Conclusions without the bounds of Reason, or due regard of all our former
premises, to see if fear with fancy may persuade the Wise. That if Traffic
be restored, and Strangers compeld to seek her here at home; it is not
unlikely, but to sexue their Turns, they will come provided with Shypping of
their own. And then what? Forsooth, though Traffic make us rich (as no
question but she will,) what boots our Wealth, when Innasion or Pyracie may
rob us of our store?

To which I answer thus. Let Sailors tend their Tacklings, their Masters
whistle, and Captains high command: Bring home our Staples, and CASTOR and
POLLVX the GODS of our Seas, made able and powerful to warrant our Traffic,
skillful PALINVRVS that sits at our Helm, observing our Compass, will safely
guide our Course, and direct all our Shypping. Protection and Direction being
essential parts of that Preheminent, Dignity, The Nany-Royall before Sluse,
1340. And before Callais, 1588.
and sacred Prerogative our KINGS have ever had, Experience has confirmed, and
our Counsels may challenge.

This care and fear therefore comes too near our Stern, importing a distrust
of the providence and prudence of our Land, and sauors of Presumption,
Blasphemy.
or something worse.

These curious casters beyond the Moon, would go further if they durst, and
enquire how GOD can hold the Sky, and keep the Sun from falling; Or what he
did before the World was made.

But admit it that affection and love to Traffic, (ne quid asperius,) have
made them fearful of others good, and icalous of their own; I wish the^ to
beware how they come too near the Helm for touching the Rudder. For what got
PROMETHEVS for his Sky-stolne fire at last, from the wheels of this Chariot,
when the simple Satyr for kissing it in kindness only, found it burnt his
lyppes?

Leaving therefore all those Holy grounds, and Cordialls of GOODNESS to our
sacred IDEAS of Majesty and Wisdom, that being Best themselves, must needs
be Good to others, but specially Traffic, whose heavy Spirits, so tumbled and
so tossed by Embargoes abroad, and Extremities at home, desirous of some rest;
reposing her self at their sanctified feet, gives us likewise leave to
return to our Books, and spell out our Lesson.

Now our Lessons are her Tributes and personal Rights, which Necessity does
call for, and Free Will does offer: namely, Customs and Subsidies, but
chiefly Customs, which only and alone could we once be taught distinctly but
to read, would ease all our Griefs, increase all our This is meant by the
OVTPORTS only.
Fees, and pay for all her Physic. For Customs then, lets now apply our
selves, and spell our Letters.

Customs (I say,) but not such Customs as conquering Romans devised, and
imposed upon the stubburne and stifnecked Jews, IVDEA.
whose Tributes were Cursses of Divine Justice, to keep them under. Whose S.
MATTHEW, sometimes a Publican.
Publicans became Christians themselves, and taught the foundations of Religion
to others, though their Searchers by nature became Harpyes, and their Wayters
by profession, were every way Sinners.

Nor such Customs as Tyranny does invent, ITALY.
and daily impose upon enthralled Subjects, to stand on, and raise it self by.

Nor such as tumultuous Wars have made our Neigbours devise, NETHER-LANDS.
and impose among and upon themselves, to defend their lives and their
liberties by.

But such Customs, as mildnes and mercy to relieve our Neighbors, our Allies,
and our Friends, the Wisdom of our Land has invested our KINGS, to
maintain the Majesty of our Kingdom by.

Such Customs as demonstratiuely showing the Real possession, and Actual
protection, our Sovereigns hold of every Man's wealth, leave notwithstanding to
every Subject his Meum and Tuum, and full use of his own.

Lastly, such Customs, as like easy Quit-rents of a fertile Feefarme, show
the power of the Lord, and greatness of the Manner, the defrauding whereof, does
worthily forfet all possession and protection of the immediate Freeholder.

For Customs of themselves, and properly taken, are but easy payments of a.
e. i. o. u.
Currant-Money, to Customers at their Ports, by Merchants, Subjects or
Strangers, for such Stapled Commodities, as Orderly bought, and for Number,
Weight, and Measure, sufficiently censured, before they cross the Seas; with
the Staple Seal, and special Certificate come warranted thither; for our
Sovereigns Honor, and Countries credit.

And here now who sees not in a very few words but thus put together, the
full use and found of all our five Vowells, for Matter, Place, Persons, Order,
and End, that the Ports and the Staples ralate each to other.

But as the Steward of a Manor, that sits to hold a Court, wanting the Rolls
and autenticke Records of his Lords Revenues, can neither call the Tennants
distinctly by their Names, demand their Quit-rents, nor understand their
Homage, how each does bound his Fee, o^ hold his own: so fares it with
Customers. For being tide to their Ports by careful attendance, for discharge
of their Bonds and peculiar trust: Their wares without warrant, and their
Staples out of sight, from whence their work should come. Their Vowels all
displaced, their Mutes are dombe, and Liquids jar. For without u SIRS, and u
my Lords, w has no sound, u u w C. st. m. s.
to speak or spell out Custumes: and all for lack of Staples.

Staples! Now see see my Lords, for Gods sake see, how Traffic falls a
weeping, Traffic, subject to the Syncope, or great swounding which here is
described, and the remedies.
her pulse is weak, and her Spirits fail, her face is pale and wan, at the
name and sound of Staples, the want whereof so wounds her Soul, that her heart
is set on bleeding; yet comfort her still, and hold her upright to keep her
from deadly swouning: and speak her fair, that she do not despair of the
Cordialls in your only keeping.

Tell her kindly withal, Priuatio praesupponit habitum, for never man yet was
so continually sick, whose health has not had a Being: and the
disproportioned disposition of Confusion it self, does argue an intention,
and possibilite of Order. Therefore speak my good Lords, to revive all her
spirits, for your words are full of power; yea speak aloude (I say) and
assure her you will belay all her Staples. KING PRINCE.
Yea, speak you, and you (SIRS) for your Bullion sake, for that is your right,
and no man's but yours, by the Rules of all Truth, and fixed Goodness. For your
Mynts sake, for that is your Honor, and no man's but yours by the Rules of
Justice. For your Exchange sake, for that is your Glory, and no man's but yours
by the Rules of Equality; and for your Customs sake, for that is your profit,
and no man's but yours, by the Rules of Justice and Equity, Quiquid enim
Iustum, id etiam vtile censent sumini Philosophi, itemque quod honestu id esse
Iustum. Ex quo essicitur. vt quicquid honestu^ sit, idem sit vtile. Cice:
offic: lib: 2.
so shall Honestum and Vtile concur both together: Honesty being evermore
the height and type of Honor, and public Utility, the Mother of Just and
Right, for each man's good and gain. Say not you can restore them, for that
she knows already, but say you will do it, and then she will believe you.
And we your poor Scholars, loyal Subjects and Servant, will every way
attend you with all our best endeavors. Or else farewell sweet Traffic, and so
farewell Customs, yea farewell Justice: nay farewell Religion, and then
farewell All. So far off are Customers from guilt also in this behalf.

But alas poor Customers, who does harken to your cries, or believe your
Reports? Who shall weigh your zeal, to our Soneraignes Honor, and his Peoples
Good, or care for your Endeavors? Yet be not dismayed; In magnis voluisse sat
est, sint caetera Dinu^. Stand still but awhile, and let GOD himself alone.
What though inveterate Errors of ages that are past have multiplied themselves,
and now seem to muster against our happy days: our DAYSTARRE that is risen,
and DAVVNING in our eyes, KING. PRINCE.
will in good time disperse them, or amend them as they may, and take but thus
much onwards. That Ignorance has been every way the Mother but of Errors, of
whom came Mischiefs, and of such our Inconveniences, which though they threat
Confusion, yet tell us notwithstanding, there is a way to Order, that leads us
to perfection, as Truth by the Causes of Truth shall come but to be known.

Now Truth indeed lies deep, and the danger such in diging, that no man has
the patience to delue until they find her: and I am to too weak ( The Writer
almost tired and out of heart, referres the Truth of all, to the Records of the
K: Treasury in his Exchequer, for Weights and Measures, Staple Accounts and
Orders.
alas,) to work her out alone. O that WISDOM therefore which only can
disclose the^, would make men admire those glorious Titles of Justice and
Mercy, (Emblemes of Truth,) that the Volumes in her Cabinet, and Treasury
contains! Then should we learn the Rules and proportions of Numbers,
Weights, and Measures. The use of Staples in former times, how they were kept,
and whether they be gone. Then should we see those wonderful effects of our
Loadstones at home, that have wrought such miracles in other forraino Lands,
and Nations from abroad, bringing Bullion in amain, make our Myntes.
Pulses to beat in more places the^ one. And we poor Scholars made confident
in our Customs, without possibility of fraud, cause of distrust, or fear of
blame.

Customs in England, or in English Traffic, always presuppose our Staples,
and live and dye or follow the^, as Effects their proper Causes.
In the mean time, since no men can pipe well that want their upper lyps,
consequence concludes it, and Truth makes it good, that as no Church has no
Tithes, and no Court no Quit-rents; so no Staples no Customs. Whereby
Necessity overtaken, being put to her shyfts, makes bold with Free Will, and
to aid PRE-EMINENCE, transcending to PREROGATIVE, The blending or mistaking of
Prerogatine for Pre-eminence, a dangerous means to profane the Sovereign
effects and reverence of Mercy in Kings.
turns Customs into Subsidies of Tonnage and Pondage, as if PRE-EMINENCE and
PREROGATIVE were merely Synonimas, and meant but one thing; and bounded
Justice that lays out all our Rights, were that boundless Mercy that makes us
all to live; and Mercy it self, but a word of prophanenes, or some ordinary
thing.

Merchants by Societies monopolizing our Staple Commodities, and Royal wares,
have found the way to Staple them still beyond Seas, and so confounding both
our Customs and diverting all our Bullion, fill the Realm with baser or more
needless matter in their returns.
Thus whilst our Grave Masters and Moderators of our Schools have been busied
and distracted in the study and practice of the higher points of learning our
Staples being stolen, transmuted and transplanted, our Customs are
confounded: and we poor Scholars still tide to our Stakes, seem fit for
nothing but beating and bayting. Hence grew the grounds of all our Disorders,
the breaches of our Schools, and our Traffic.
Nurses deadly sickness, that threatened all our Ruins: had not Wisdom from
above, out of love and affection so belayde our falls, that the power of that
WORD which made us first of nothing, became the means to redeem us all from
nothing; and KING.
BOVNTIE it self has laid the foundation, (and begun at the least) to become
the MAN: whereby our joys may be great, The comfort that Customers conceive of
the King and Prince.
and by so much the greater, by how much our greatest loss (as all men
thought) is like to become our greatest gain.

Our comforts then growing from our Sovereigns own PERSON, and our hopes
above hopes, from the power of his WORD; whose natural storge to Justice and
Right being every way good, their affections also free, and love without end:
Lets here rest awhile, and settling our selves, both think and thank God, and
learn to say Grace, that Grace in disgrace may pity our cases among the rest,
and raise our poor credites from impudent Ignorance, insolent Pride, and
shameless Disdain: saying;

The Customers daily Grace.
As God by his Goodness and Truth did direct us,
whose mercy endures for ever,
So his Grace and his favor vouchsafe to protect us,
for his mercy endures for ever.
That our Traffic by Staples in temper again,
for his mercy endures for ever,
Our Ports with their Customs may chau^t it amain
that his mercy endures for ever.
Thus far by poynting and spelling in this ALPHABET and PRIMER our weakness
has attaynd to resolve and read out. That the right of Kings being Bullion,
their Honor their Coin, their Glory their Exchange, and Customs, their
Homage and honest gain: shows that Majesty is preheminent and may well be
seen, and that Soneraigne Prerogatine may likewise subsist. But our PATRON
being robbed of his Staples, spoyld of his Bullion, and wanting the Customs
should grow from his store; his Mynts all decayed, and almost out of work, is
forced to seek aid by Subsidies, Impositions, Imposts, Lones of his own for
interest, and Merchants Supplies. Aye me alas, and woe is me therefore.

Transitio from Customs to Subsidies by a Simile, setting forth the odds and
difference of either.
There Is a Place in this Land where a great Man does dwell, in whose beautiful
Garden a stately Fountain stands, in the use and raising whereof, it seems
that Art contends with Nature, and both conspire together. The Spring by
plentiful streams, through Pypes and Quills serving all the Cesternes of the
Tenants adjoining, with a power in private, to stop or let out at pleasure.
By tract of time, corruptions abroad, or neglect at home the Spring becomes
perverted, the streams run wast, or the Fountaine's out of frame, that the
Lord of the soil, who should relieve others, by the bounty of his own,
wanting water himself, craves aid of the Tenants, whose Cesternes contain no
more of themselves then his current afforded and Conduct controld. His wants at
the first are gladly supplied. But the ofter the worse; for in these Elements
of life and vital subsistence, Religion bids Reason provide first for Nature,
and be next herself. Distresses being dangerous, if not deadly, when the
blood is retracted, and the Heart wants his own.

This must help for a time (till our Staples be found) by Meum and Tuum,
between Customs and Subsidies,) to compare and demonstrate, for want of the
One, the use of the other.

As in the two sacred words of highest power, aforesaid: so in the blending and
mistaking of Customs for Subsidies, Traffic is disordered, and Customers
being disgraced, humbly crave that the world might be satisfied, and
themselves better taught.
But here lets pause awhile, the better to join our Letters together, and
mistrusting our selves, crave aid of our Masters and Myld-Moderators: that
having eyes which can see, they may help us to spell, and ears that can
hear, they may harken how we read, and make us understand. 1. First, how it
comes to pass, that our Staples being dissolved or transplanted out of sight
(from whence all our Homagers were sometimes wont to come) and our Customs
retaining the least part of themselves, besides their voice and sound; All
Tributes covered under the title of Customs confusedly.
all Tytles notwithstanding seem did with their Tincture, and drowned as it
were, with the Echo of their Name. 2. And in calling for our Subsidies, where
and how to find out the Principal verb.

The way how to collect Custom confidently and truly.
For whilst our Staples were at home, and joined to our Ports, or so near
together, that each might answer other, our Loadestones drew in Bullion, for
our Mynts at hand to coin: and we reading in our The Staple-Certificats and
Customers-Entries, were certain Controlements each to other, without Books of
Rates. The way to receive Subsidies by Books of Rates, different from that of
Customs, and more partial and uncertain.
Rentalls as well in value as in quality and quantity, what our Merchants
there had bought, could call justly for our Customs before they crossed the
Seas, without fraud or covyn, or other Book of Rates. But in our Pondage and
Tonnage, we know not how to read or spell, and therefore seek to learn. For,

Haud Natura potest Iusto secernere iniquum,
Horatius.
Dividit vt bona diuersis, fugienda petendis:
Nec vincet ratio hoc tantundem vt peccet. Idemque,
Qui teneros Caules alieni fregerit horti
Et qui nocturans Diuum sacra legerit. ( ADSIT
REGVLA) peccatis qua poenas irroget aequas,
Ne scutica dignum horribili sectere flagell^.
It is not our weak strength alone can stay
Or hold the Skales of Good and Ill upright:
Nor is that Reason good that makes all one by day,
To crop a Neighbors garden- leekes, and rob a Church by night:
A RVLE must guide the whole to keep the parts from swaruing,
And punish faults in every one according to deserving.
And not to think that every slip,
Like deadly-Sinne deserves a whippe.
For: If Sovereign Dignity be that sacred Object which truelouing Loyalty is
apt to admire, and seeks to honor with natural respects, (such as all
Subsidies are or ought to be) who can be capable of so great a glory, by
personal Right, but selfe-subsisting Majesty? and who can accept of so great
affection, but the eye of Grace?

If these our Subsidies of Tonnage and Pondage, be those natural respects
which love is desirous that loyalty should offer, to honor our Sovereign and
Patron only by, befides his Customs, who can impose the^ but Loves own
affection? who can esteem them but the hand of Mercy? and what can increase
them but cheerful alacrity in the Giuers mind?

Lastly. If Tonnage and Pondage be those honorable Effects of affectionate
Loyalty which Merchants transcending their other duties, with joy present and
Mercy takes. Who shall direct and dilate their proportions by Number, Weight,
and Measure, for the mutual behoof of Love and Grace? Who I say, can teach
us this part of our Lesson, but the grauest and Wisest, and wisdom from the
Highest? namely, how to deal Justly between the Prince and the People?

For cheerfulness and alacrity, inducements unto Grace, the heart and Essence
of all our Aids, (as coldness in affection makes presents little worth)
whilst we sought to further, and by often repetition at all hands to increase
to our Patrons honor and his Peoples good, Hoc autem de quo nunc agimus, id
ipsum est quod vtile appellatur, in quo verbo lapsa co^suetudo deflexit devia.
Eoque sensam deducta est, vt honestatem ab vtilite secernens honestum aliquid
constituerit quod non sit vtile, et vtile quod non sit honestum qua, nulla
pernicies mayor vitae hominu^ potuit afferri. Cicero offic: Lib: 2.
that Honestum and Vtile might still keep together, by the rules of Right and
Reason: We are checked and controuled by Court-rolles and Court-rules, and made
to believe that Honesty in this case has naught to do with Profit.
Discretion commanding the most for the King; as if Honor here were
bootelesse, or some idle thing: and that public Utility were meant by
private Gain. We contest in nothing, but every way willing and desirous for
to learn, our harmless dispositions are scornd and despised; The mylde
discretion of Customers to advance Subsidies by, despised.
our Truth is held for Error, our Virtue Vice. And for crying but ADSIT
REGVLA, we are dingd so like Barnes that we dare not greit. And thus with the
grounds of our former Disorders, began the degrees of all our Disgraces; which
the sequel now shall show.

As in all other Functions, so in this of Customers, three things there are to
warrant the Calling, but without the fourth none can subsist. For beside, the
authority of our first Institution, that gives us power to be doing in this
kind. The Ports and Places allotted for Bounds that lymit our service. And the
diligent performance which in this respect the greatness of our trust does exact
and import: There is Countenance and maintenance to be fitted to our Charge,
which in this regard we deserve and may require. For the Ox is not muzeled
that treads out the Corn. Religion says. And Justice has appointed, that
the daily Labourer be truly paid his hyre. But Nos non nobis indificamus Aues.
We serve at the Altar both daily and hourly, and yet are held unworthy to
breathe or live thereby. For besides the penury of such Fees and Rewards as
our Functions deserve, and our charges require; our fare being slender, and
our drink very skant; we dip but our dishes in our Neighbors Cesternes to
quench our thirst, and at Noone in his garden crop a few of his Leekes, with
his own consent, to keep us from starving: And this adds oil to the fire of
our Furnace; here lies the gall of all our bitterness: Our breathes are said
to infect with their sent, and poison the air.

This is our horrrrible Sin, our Sacrilege, or Burglarie at least. As if We
hereby, and none but We, had spoyld the Kings Staples, stolen away his
Bullion, conceald his Customs, and at Midnight robbed a Church. Of all this
Ignorance but accusing, our Huishers bind us hand and foot, and Iealoufie
torments us with a kind of Controller. Whose skill can no ways help us, for
his Letters are those Characters that we would spell to read; and Actum agere,
the scope of all his Lesson.

This Man at the first seems doubly diligent, till Experience makes him wise,
being proud of his Name, CONTROLERS.
and content with the ease of his Place and credit; but his belly wanting
ears, he betakes him boldly to a Bed of Onyons, and spares our Neighbors
Leekes.

Now Leekes and Onyons thus meeting together, All men's errors and faults, still
laid on the Customers. Quonsque tande^ andebunt dicere, quicquam vtile quod non
sit honestu^? nullam enim peste^ maiorem dixerim vita et societati hominum
posse contingere quam little opinio qui ista distraxerint. Offic: Lib: 3.
and increasing the smell to our further disgrace, and only blame, made an
easy way to our late Supervisors, and their Factions Retinewe. Whose rules of
Extremity in hunting for Profit, and reforming our Schools disorder and
Abuses, so perfumed our Ports by eating Garlic, that Honor and Honesty
became both amazed, and remooud their Seats.

These at the first made a glorious show like the Moon at full, yet proou'd
but Commets, The 4. Supervisors that undertake to correct Magnificat in the
Out-Ports.
for men to gaze on as they hung in the Air, and their greatest Letters but
Ciphers in August when they came to the spelling. For stuffing our Houses with
swarms of such Instruments as love our Tributs but as Rats do love Cheese, so
bewitchd poor Traffic by Sorcerie, Traffic first bewitched: And
and shyfts, that as our Ports became abandoned, like places infected or
haunted with Spirits: All our Free Will offerings, The Out-Porti, first
abandoned.
effects of Loyalty; the true- loue-knots knit between Subjects and Prince,
and tokens of affection (religiously moved in minds, admyring the glorious
Object of their welfare and good) from the hearts of Merchants: humbly presented
to Sovereign Dignity, and to man else due; The Subsidies of Tonnage and
Pondage farmed out.
Au plus offrant being set to sale, were thrust at last into Huxters handling.
These, some call particular Farmers, some Farmers general, some Undertakers
with Farmers, not so much of Customs, as they would pretend, as of the
Subsidies before said, called Tonnage and Pondage.

Qui male agunt oderunt Lucem. Farmers. Undertakers.
The first sort of these, may be seen and known. The latter, neither seen nor
known in public sort, as Publicans be, have yet their meetings and
appointments together. And possessing the body, undertake by means to purge
the blood, and purify the Spirits of our weak, diseased and distracted
Traffic: some by Tobacco, and some by a worse and viler thing. Cuius
Camarinam, I dare not stir without pardon and reverence, first humbly sought,
and duly promised, Ne nauceam ciem.

It is strange I confess for men to behold what Art does and can do with the
meanest materials that nature affords, when she undertakes to work; The
Refiners of Gold and Silver in London.
for I have sometimes seen good and pure Bullion both drawn and refined from
the dirt and dust whereon the workmen stood: but these cleanse by water, and
then purge by fire, and their working may be seen.

Nay, I have often admired, and with joy beheld the store of current coin in
fine silver and pure gold, that sometimes was drawn from the shorlings of our
Fells, The Duch new Drapery of Bays, Says, etc, first devised in Sandwich,
and from thence learned and set up elsewhere within the Realm. no we.
the refuse of our woolles, and sweepings of our Staples, by the industry of
Art, and help of fire and water. But these Undertakers are Artists indeed,
that attend upon their Trades, and concur in their labor; their doings are
seen, The only Pattern of a free Staple.
their Persons known, their work squard out by the Standard of Truth, and
their Wares made vendible, only by degrees of Goodness. Lex Veritatis.


These Artists work in Gods Name, whose Elixar Goodness, by the mystery of
their Trades, turns their work unto Mettalls, and their Mettalls into
Bullion, to serve our public Myntes, that Merchants at their Ports may have
to pay their Tributes before they pass the Seas in ready current Coin, Lex
Iusticiae.
by the rules of Justice.

These are our skillful Workmen, Lex Sapientie et ordinis. Besides the Kings
and towns Seals, they have 3. Seals to distinguish the worth of every man's
wates and work, and that which deserves not the worst Seal, is cut into
pieces, or put by to be amended, as being no ways vendible at home nor abroad.
whose orderly proceedings for the use of Goodness, by the waights of Justice,
and skales of Truth, giving every man his Right, to Good, Better and Best, in
the value of his work, by the warrant of their SEALS, makes Deity in nature
to be generally adored, and Industry in Art to be more or less admired, to the
special praise and profit of those Persons and Places that first or last
afford them.

These are our honest Sacristaines, and sure friends to Traffic, fit for our
Altars of Unity and Truth, They have 12 sworn men (besides under officers,)
that as Judges examine each man's work before it pass the Seals: who being
skillful in all the Trades that belong to their Drapery, are impartriall
Censurets of all Defaults, as well in spinning, weauing, fulling, and dying, as
working, for the Buyers behoose, even to the mulct, and recompense of a thread
and a farthing.
whose religious affections to the practice of Justice, so bless their
Endeavors, that all men admiring the Beauty and Bounty of their Industries and
work, desire to possess them before Gold and Silver, to our Sovereigns great
Honor, and his Peoples special wealth.

These deal not with our Customs, nor obtrude upon our Subsidies, but
teaching the way how to find out the one, and with allacritie how to pay the
other, attend on Honestum and Vtile still together: O that our Fleese-wooll
were thus undertaken, and our Broad-clothes but made and dressed in this manner!

Lastly: The Staples of Kent in E: 1. E: 2. and Edward 3. time, kept at
Sandwich and Canterb: (where now they of the Duch Church dwell,) was removed
first for 15. years to Bridges, and after placed at Calice, the loss whereof,
being now 50. years since, would draw on a special Discourse besides this
PRIMER.
These I say, and none but these, (for all their followers elsewhere, have fayld
in their Rules, and crazd their credit,) are the childrens children of our
former holy Priests, that first found out the Pit in this Desert of our Land,
wherein so long a go the Read the second of the Machab: chap: 1.
Fire was hid that sanctified all our Tributes, and with the muddy moisture
only that therein they found, (as our Sun did lately shine,) drew down that
heavenly heat which warmd our frozen Traffic, and would revive our Staples,
if WISDOM saw it good,) even when the Pit was dry, and to all men's knowledge
the Fire was spent and gone.

But these Farming Undertakers, or undertaking Farmers, seem men of other
skill, and different professions: An Antithesis between the former Undertakers
of Sandwich, and those now of London. Tritemiae Abbas de occulta philosophia:
Ioannes Baptista de Porta: De furtiuis literarum Notis,
who drawing their Doctrine from Tritemius Abbas Steganographia, and de Portas
learned works, of their private Experience, have altered all our Rules of
Honestum and Vtile, to Lucri bonus odor ex re qualibet, and made an Art of
Traffic, to purge her spirits by, and refine her Tributes, from all the
virtuous vices and vicious virtues of Leekes, Onyons, and Garlic: by a kind
of distillation and strange Their new Book of Rates.
Limbecke of their own.

Now 1.

For if heavenly Goodness be the life of Traffic, from whence as Trades do
swerve they turn again to Nothing. And Gold and Silver our chosen
Materials, by true proportions to fix this Goodness in, as we have learnd to
spell: Then work not these in Gods Name, like plaine-meaning Men, but as
confident, How they work.
careless, and therefore dangerous Empericks, that shun the Rules of Truth,
who finding our Trades all subject to Monopolies, and apt to be contracted,
bring all our Mysteries to be pounded in one Mortar, and there so squeise the
Brains of Traffic, and refine her Tributes: that our Ports being once
confounded as well as our Staples, Honor might do them Homage, and public
Utility become their private gain.

If Current Coin the Soul of Traffic, and our Sovereigns only Trade, be
those proportions of Number and Weight to buy and sell by that makes Goodness
vendible for all our behoofes. Then are these Vndertaking-Farmers, Merchants,
that (Tradelesse themselves) live by buying and selling, and so by buying to
sell again: that raising all their profits from others Trades and pains, What
men they are:
are bound to pay their homage before they pass our Ports, with purpose to
transport our Goodness cross the Seas. And therefore made by Name incapable and
incompatible to undertake our Functions, or deal with our Tributes. As men
specially forbidden by the Statute-lawes and wisdom of our Land, 14 R: 2. No
Merchants that deal with straights of Ships, or have Shyps of their own, or
keep any Whatses, etc. shall have to do with the receipt of Customs, etc.
Item 20 H: 6. Cap: 5.
to obtrude upon our Customs: much less our Subsidies of Tonnage and Pondage,
least Merchants farming Merchants, and so go free themselves, presume to be
like Kings or Princes fellows; to whom alone such Rights are due, and
therefore to none other, as being the only knots to tie Majesty and Loyalty
so fast and sure together. Now, who strives to out-runne the Laws, makes have
but to confusion. But such it seems are these, by the course of their
proceedings. And therefore no marvel, if turning all our freedoms into their
bondage, and all our birthrights into their Farm or purchase: from all the
Goodness Traffic has, and all the Love our Merchants bear to our Patrons
happy being; they gain a mass of private wealth, by doing a world of harm.

If Exchange of Goodness by Gold and Silver, the Body and Blood of Kings and
Kingdoms (represented to us in current Coin,) be the Spirit of Traffic, and
mystical Cyment that glewes so fast together the mutual conjunction between
Sovereigns and Subjects, Whence their Doctrine comes.
by Love and Grace, as religious Justice has taught us to believe. Usury first
practiced in Rome, by the Bancks of Jews there, and in other Christian
Countries, to draw home the Popes Peter-pens, and other exactions upon the
Nations and kingdoms that obeyed their Religion.
Then draw these Undertakers their Methods all from ROME, where first was
taught the doctrine that enchaunts and transubstantiates our Eucharisticke
Sacraments, (representing to us the Body and Blood of CHRIST, by Bread and
Wine,) to Idolatrous Masses, and our Christian Exchange into Jewish Usury.

Lastly, if the KING be our Honor, the PRINCE our Sun, Traffic the Chariot,
and Shypping the wheels that bear our glorious Lights: These being but the
Horses, that so proudly set forward to undertake our Goodness, and draw us all
in triumph: Foreseeing as I did, (my standing made me see, and my seeing mooud
my Conscience not to hold my peace,) both the loosenes of their raynes; their
byt within their teeth, and danders of their course over Hills and Dales,
bawkes and many bywayes, and all without a Coachman or Guide that I would spy.
(They commanding all, Whereto their Doctrine tendes.
and controleable by none for hindering of their Farm) I could not (my good
Lords) out of Duty and zeal to our Patrons safety, and all your happy
beeings, but give Caution heere-to-fore of the fiercenes of their Courage, and
desperate Carreere; that such as stood so nigh them, might be warnd at least to
look but to their heels. But since like sleeping Minotaures they now possess
the LONDON.
Center of all our great Abuses, and inextricable Errors, and threatening all
our Trades with daily, monthly, and yearly Tributes, make Traffic offer
sacrifice to Extortion.
Remphan, and to Usury.
Rymmon: Let THESEUS now take heed, and ARIADNE look about her; and with a
smyle at least, at last revive the Spirits of their despised Scholars, whose
wits have no wills, and Endeavors no Ends, but how to spell, and learn to read
their Countries weal, the public Good, and Sovereigns special Honor, that
Honestum and Vtile might still hold hands together. A smyle (I mean) of favor
to the Out-Ports of this Land, as well as that of London: because, though
Justice have a quickening power, PRE-EMINENCE. PREROGATIVE.
and may protect our beeings; yet Grace it is relieues us all, and Mercy makes
us live.

By this which has been speld, your Wisdoms now may read, to what distress
and misery your Publicans are brought. That being Men as docible in Religion,
as capable of Reason; Free men by their birthes, and of best education, Men
every way made happy, save in their names and callings: and in nothing yet
more wretched then the Places of their Functions, (for I mean the Out-Ports
only, let London clear it self,) are notwithstanding in worse case, (if
worse may be) then were those Brickmakers that sometimes wrought in Egypt, who
vvanting means to do their task, had notwithstanding their idle
Task-Maisters, whose credits had no being but in their disgrace, commanded
even by those that should attend upon us, yea Searchers and Sinners.

But as the case now stands, since all make love to Tributes, and catch our
Functions from us, High and low, Rich and poor, both Noble and ignoble, All
catch and hunt for Customs, but shun the Name of Customers.
because our Lessons spell pure Silver and fine Gold: and yet our Names they
scorn. Let Jealousy be called for, and let Impudency smell, what Ignorance
has added, and Extremity reformed in the abuses of our Schools, by spelling
well the Letters, Sir The: Moors Epigram, De faetoribus abolendis.
but mistaking the purpose of a grave and witty Counselor, that sometimes
gave advise in this very case of ours.

Sectile ne tetros porrum tibi spiret odores
Protinus a porro fac mihi cepevores. etc.
Least eating Customer.
leekes (says he) should cause thy breath to smell Take Controller.
Onyons strong, that sent will soon allay; And if thereby the savor seem
t'excell, Supervisors.
Garlic be sure will drive them both away: But if the stinking breath of
Garlic stay, What helps us then? Farmors.
Tobacco? no, but at a word I think, There is a thing can Undertakers.
Undertake to make a viler stink. And let Experience now show, and Truth be
bold to speak, and tell them to their faces, Nota. This is meant by the myld
discretion of Customers in collecting the Subsidies of Tonnage and Pondage
only. For as for Customs which are so sought for, and said to be co^cealed,
how generally soever their Name and Title run: they presuppose always our
Staples. But our Staples being transplanted; as the Societies that have
engrost them, must give the K: and State account how they have bestowed them,
and whether they be gone: So by consequence, our Costomes.
that strive to raise themselves by seeking our disgrace: That God did put and
place as much Profit and Pleasure, (I say Profit as Pleasure,) harts-ease, and
honor, in the quiet endeavors of Customers (so long as they were trusted,)
through Mercy, Loyalty and Love; as the devil is able apt and wont, to mingle
care and comber, loss and shame in the turbulent undertakings of Extremity,
by Extortion and Shyfts.

And thus at last, the world may see and all men understand, in our Disgrace,
the KINGS great loss, and Kingdoms greater wrong. For besides that both our
Customs with our Staples, are gone or conuaid out of sight, (the ground of all
our woes, that we can no ways mend,) our Coin and our Exchange, being turned
into Usury, by Subjects like to Kings, or like to Princes fellows: our
Merchants by Societies call all men Enterlopers that are not of their Sects, or
linckt with them together. Our Arts engrost by men of diverse Trades. Our Trades
do meet in Companies, our Companies at Halls, and our Halls become Monopolies
of Freedom, tide to London: where all our Crafts and Mysteries are so laid up
together, that outrunning all the prudence and wisdom of the Land, Brewers
made free of Bakers, Bakers free of Grocers, Grocers free of Fishmongers,
Fishmongers free of Goldsmithes, and all men free of Coynage, that only serves
for Kings.
men live by Trades they never learnd, nor seek to understand. By means
whereof, all our Creekes seek to one River, all our Rivers run to one Port,
all our Ports join to one Town, all our Towns make but one City, and all
our Cities but Suburbs to one vast, unwieldy, and disorderly Babell of
buildings, which the world calls London: and London likewise co^tracted in it
self, is made a Forest of shyfts, and Wilderness of sin. Where Traffic
lives confind, and being possessed by Rats and Mice, Traffic possessed with
Spirits.
and spirits of the Air, of whom as of Harpies may truly now be said:

Tristius haud istis Monstrum, nec saeuior vlla
Pestis et ira Deum stygijs sese extulit vndis.
No monsters like to these may hap, nor curse from God befall, Nor from the pit
of hell arise, Searching wayters, and waiting Searchers.
to plague the Realm withal: Is so by fits tormented, both by water and by
Land,
That how to help her now, we do not understand.
But though faith be frail, and all our credit gone, yet does our vows,
compel us still by fasting and by prayer to do our best Endeavors.

For, faults there are no doubt, ever were, and ever will be many; PERFECTION
knows no residence but Heaven. And if we say we have no sin, there is no
Truth within us. Wherefore we wish, and pray all those that read this ALPHABET
and PRIMER, to join with our Devotions, and with pure hearts and humble voice,
to the Throne of GOD and his heavenly Grace, to pray but in this manner, saying
after me.

Customers general Confession.
ALmighty and most merciful Father, we have erred and strayed from thy ways
like lost sheep, we have followed too much the devices and desires of our own
hearts, we have offended against thy holy Laws, we have left undone the
things we should do, and we have done the things we ought not to do, and there
is no health in us. But thou O Lord have mercy upon us miserable offenders,
spare thou us, O Lord, which confess our saultes, and restore them that are
penitent, according to thy promises, declared unto mankind in Christ Jesus our
Lord: and grant O most merciful Father for his sake, that we may hereafter
live a godly, a righteous, and a sober life, to the glory of thy holy Name.

A Prayer for the Kings Majesty.
O Lord our heavenly Father, high and mighty, King of Kings, Lord of Lords,
the only Ruler of Princes, Customers daily and Christian Prayers.
which do from thy Throne behold all the dwellers upon Earth, we humbly
beseech thee with favor to behold our most gracious and Sovereign Lord King
JAMES, and per se.
and so replenish him with the grace of thy holy Spirit, that he may always
incline to thy will, and walk in thy way. Endue him plentifully with heavenly
gyfts, grant him in health and wealth long to live, that finally after this
life, he may attain to everlasting joy and felicity, through Jesus Christ our
Lord.

A Prayer for the Queen and Prince, and other the King and Queens Children.
ALmighty God, which have promised to be a Father of thine Elect and of their
seed, we humbly beseech thee to bless and preserve our gracious Queen ANNE,
Prince HENRY, and all the King and Queens royal Progeny. Endue them with
thy holy Spirit, enrich the^ with thy heavenly Grace, prosper them with all
happiness, and bring them to thine everlasting kingdom, through Jesus Christ
our Lord and only Savior.

A Prayer for the Clergy, Lords of the Counsel, all Magistrates, all
Nations, and the Common People.
ALmighty and everlasting God, we most humbly beseech thee to illuminat all
Bishops, Pastors, and Ministers of ye Church, with the true knowledge and
understanding of thy Word, and that both by their preaching and living, they
may set it forth, and show it accordingly. To endue the Lords of his Majesty's
most honorable PREVY-COVNSELL, and all the Nobility, with grace, Con, per se.
wisdom, and understanding. To bless and keep our Magistrates, giving them
grace to execute Justice, and mainetaine Truth. To give all Nations Unity,
Peace and Concord, And finally, to give us an heart to love and dread thee, and
diligently to live after thy Commandments. Grant this, O Lord, for the honor
of our Advocate, and only Mediator Christ Jesus.

THe Customers of the Out-Ports prostrate Petition to the KING our Sovereign,
for his Son the PRINCES sake, to be made but as able as they are every way
willing to do their Duties; that eating the Bread of good Conscience daily, and
freed from temptations of Obloquy and shyfts, his Kingdom being come, may
still continue; and his Will performed in all Places alike; Forgiving all as
they would be forgiven: Conclude this their PRIMER with the sanctified words;
and enclude their Petition within the compass of that effectual Prayer which
our Lord and Savior (the Son of GOD) has commanded, and taught, saying;

OUr Father which art in heaven, hallowed be thy Name, thy Kingdom come, thy
will be done in Earth, as it is in Heaven: Give us this day our daily Bread:
and forgive us our Trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us:
Let us not be led into temptation, but deliver us from evil: For thine is the
KINGDOM, Tittle, tittle, tittle, Est Amen.
the POWER, and the GLORY: for ever and ever. SO BE IT. Amen.

The Publicans humble Confession and private Prayer.
Nil sum, nulla miser novi solatia, Massam
Humanam nisi quod tu quoque CHRIST geris.
Tume sustenta, fragilem tu CHRIST guberna,
Fac vt sim Massae surculus Ipse tuae.
Magna, Magnus perficit DEVS.


