THE PHOENIX, AS It has been sundry times Acted by the Children of Paul's,
And presented before his Majesty.



LONDON Printed by E.A. for A, I, and are to be sold at the sign of the white
horse in Paules-Churchyard. 1607.

THE Phoenix:
Enter the old Duke of Ferrara, Nobles, Proditor, Lussurioso, and Infesto, with
Attendants. Du MY Lords,
Know that we far from any natural pride
Or touch of temporal sway, have seen our face
In our grave counsels foreheads: where does stand
Our truest glass, made by Times wrinckled hand.
We know wee're old, my days proclayme me so:
Fortie-fiue years, I Have gently ruld this Dukedom,
Pray heaven it be no fault,
For there is as much disease, though not to the eye,
In too much pity, as in Tyranny.

Infest. Your grace has spoke it right.

Duke. I know that life
Has not long course in me, twill not be long
Before I show that Kings have mortal bodies
As well as Subjects, therefore to my comfort,
And your succesfull hopes I have a Son
Whom I dare boast of; --

Lus. Whom we all do boast off,
A Prince elder in virtues then in years,

Infest. His judgment is a Father to his youth,

Prod. I, I, would he were from Court,

Infest. Our largest hopes grow in him,

Prod. And it is the greatest pity Noble Lord,
He is vntraueld,

Lus. It Is indeed my Lord.

Prod. Had he but travail to his time and Virtue -- oh he should near
return again.


Duke. It shall be so, what is in hope begun,
Experience quickens, travail confirms the man,
Who Is else lives doubtful, and his days often sorye,
"Who Is rich in Knowledge, has the stock of glory.

Prod. Most true my royal Lord.

Duke. Some one attend our Son.

Enter Prince attended by Fidelio. Infest. See, here he comes my Lord.

Duke. Oh you come well.

Phoe. It Is always my desire my worthy Father.

Duke. Your Serious studyes, and those fruitful hours
That grow up into judgment, well become
Your birth, and all our loves: I weep that you are my son,
But Virtuously I weep, the more my gladness:
We have thought good and meet by the consent
Of these our Nobles, to move you toward Travail,
The better to approve you to your self
And give your apter power, foundation:
To see affections actually praesented,
Even by those men that owe them, yield more profit,
I more content, then singly to read of them,
"Since love or fear, make Writers partial,
The good and free example which you find,
In other Countries, match it with your own,
The ill to shame the ill, which will in time,
Fully instruct you how to set in frame,
A kingdom all in pieces.

Phoe. Honored Father,
With care and duty I have listened to you,
What you desire, in me it is obedience,
I do obey in all, knowing for right,
"Experience is a Kingdoms better sight.

Prod. Oh it is the very luster of a Prince,
Travail! it is sweet and generous,

Du. He that knows how to obey, knows how to reign
And that true knowledge have we found in you,
Make choice of your Attendants.

Phoe. Their soon chose, only this man my Lord, a loving servant of mine.

Du. What none but he?

Phoe. I do entreat no more,
For that is the benefit a private Gentleman
Enioyes beyond our state, when he notes all,
Himself unnoted,
For should I bear the fashion of a prince,
I should then win more flattery, then profit,
And I should give them time and warning then
To hide their Actions from me, if I appear a Sun,
They Will run into the shade with their ill deeds,
And so prevent me.

Prod. A little too wise, a little too wise to live long.

Duk. You have answered us with wisdom, let it be.
Things private are best known through priuacy.
Exeu^t
Manet Phoenix and Fidelio. Phoe. Stay you my elected servant.

Fid. My kind Lord.

Phoe. The Duke my Father has a heavy burden,
Of years upon him.

Fid. My Lord it seems so, for they make him stoop.

Phoen. Without dissemblance he is deep in age,
He bows unto his grave, I wonder much
Which of his wild Nobility it should be
(For none of his sad counsel has a voice in it)
Should so far travail into his consent,
To set me over into other Kingdoms.
Upon the stroke and minute of his death?

Fid. My Lord, it is easier to suspect them all,
Then truly to name one.

Phoen. Since it is thus,
By absence, i will obey the Duke my father,
And yet not wrong my self.

Fid Therein my Lord,
You might be happy twice.

Phoen. So it shall be,
I Will stay at home, and travail;

Fid. Would your Grace
Could make that good.

Phoe. I can, and indeed a Prince need no travail farther then his own
Kingdom, if he apply himself faythfullye, worthy the glory of himself
and expectation of others: and it would appear far nobler industry in him,
to reform those fashions that are already in his Country, then to bring new
ones in, which have neither true form nor fashion; to make his Court an Owl,
City an Ape, and the Country a Wolf, preying upon the ridiculous pride of
either, and therefore I hold it a safer stern upon this luckie advantage,
since my father is nere his setting, and I upon the Eastern hill to take my
rise, to look into the heart and bowels of this Dukedom, and in disguise,
mark all abuses ready for Reformation or Punishment.


Fid. Give me but leave unfeignedly to admire you,
Your wisdom is so spacious and so honest,

Phoen. So much have the complaints and suits of men, seven, nay seauenteene
years neglected, still interposd by coin and great enemies, preuaild with my
pity, that I cannot otherwise think but there are infectious dealings in
most offices, and foul mysteries throughout al Professions: and therefore I
nothing doubt but to find travail enough within my self, and Experience I
fear too much: nor will I be curious to fit my body to the humblest form and
bearing, so the labor may be fruitful: for how can abuses that keep low,
come to the right view of a Prince, unless his looks lie level with them,
which else will be longest hid from him, he shall be the last man sees 'em.

For often between Kings Eyes, and subjects Crimes
Stands there a bar of brybes, the under office
Flatters him next above it: he the next,
And so of most, or many, Every Abuse will choose a brother,
It Is through the world, this Hand will rub the other.

Fid. You have set down the world briefly my Lord.

Phoen. But how am I assured of faith in thee?
Yet I durst trust thee.

Fid. Let my soul be lost,
When it shall loose your secrets: nor will I only be a preserver of them,
but if you so please an assister.


Phoen. It suffices:
That King stands sur'st who by his virtue rises
More then by birth or blood, that Prince is rare,
Who strives in youth to save his age from care,
Let Us be preparde away.
Exit Phoen.
Fid. I Will follow your Grace,
Thou wonder of all Princes, President, and Glory,
True Phoenix, made of an unusual strain,
"Who labors to reform is fit to reign.
How can that King be safe that studies not
The profit of his people? See where comes
The best part of my heart, my love.

Enter Niece. Niece. Sir, I am bound to find you, I heard newly
Of sudden Travail which his grace intends
And only but your self to accompany him.

Fid. You heard in that, little beside the truth,
Yet not so sudden as to want those manners,
To leave you unregarded.

Niece. I did not think, so vnfashionably of you:
How long is your return?

Fid. It Is not yet come to me, scarce to my Lord,
Unless the Duke refer it to his pleasure,
But long I think it is not, the Dukes age,
(If not his apt experience) will forbid it.

Neec. His grace commands, I must not think amiss, farewell

Fid. Nay stay, and take this comfort,
You shall hear often from us, i will direct
Where you shall surely know, and I desire you
Write me the Truth, how my new father in law, the
Captain bears himself toward my Mother,
For that marriage, knew nothing of my mind,
It never flourisht in any part of my affection.

Niece. Me thinks sha's much disgraced herself.

Fid. Nothing so: if he be good and will abide the touch, a Captain may marry
a Lady, if he can sail into her good will.


Niece. Indeed that's all,
Exit
Fid. It Is al in all, commend me to thy breast, farwell.
So by my Lords firm policy we may see,
To present view, what absent forms would be.

Exit. Fidelo. Enter the Captain with Souldiering fellows. 1 There Is Noble
purchase Captain.

2 Nay admirable purchase.

3 Enough to make us proud for ever.

Cap. Hah?

1 Never was opportunity so Gallant.

Cap. Why you make me mad.

2 Three Ships not a poope less.

3 And euerieone so wealthily burdned upon my manhood.


Cap. Pox on it, and now am I tied even as the Devil would have it.


1 Captain, of all men living I would have sworn thou would nere have married.


Cap. S'foot, so would I my self man, give me my Due, you know I ha sworn
all heaven over and over:


1 That you have y faith.

Cap. Why go too then.

1 Of a man that has tasted salt water to commit such a fresh Trick.


Cap. Why it is abominable I grant you now I see it:

1 Had there been fewer Women --

2 And among those Women fewer Drabs --

3 And among those Drabs fewer pleasing --

Cap. Then t'ad been something:

1 But when there are more women, more common pretty sweet hearts, then ever
any age could boast off.


Cap. And I to play the Artificer and marry: to have my wife dance at home,
and my Ship at Sea, and both take in salt water together: oh Leiftenant you are
happy, thou keepst a Wench.


1 I hope I am happyer then so Captain, for a my Troth she keeps me.


Cap. How? is there any such fortunate man breathing? and I so miserable to
live honest? I envy thee Lieutenant, I envy thee, that thou art such a happy
Knave, here is my hand among you, share it equally, I Will to sea with you.


2 There spoke a Noble Captain.

Cap. Lets hear from you, there will be news shortly.

1 Doubt it not Captain.
Exeunt
Cap. What lustful passion came aboard of me, that I should marrye, was I
drunk? yet that cannot altogether hold, for it was four a clock 'ith
morning, had it been five, I would ha sworn it: that a man is in danger
every minute to be cast away, without he have an extraordinary Pilot that
can perform more then a man can do: and to say truth too, when 'ime abroad
what can I do at home? no man living can reach so far: and what a horrible
thing it would be to have horns brought me at Sea, to look as if the Devil
were 'ith ship: and all the great Tempests would be thought of my Raising,
to be the general curse of all Merchants: and yet they likely are as deep
in as my self, and that's a comfort: O that a Captain should live to be
married! nay, I that have been such a Gallant salt-theefe, should yet live to
be married: What a fortunate Elder Brother is he, whose father being a Ramish
Plough-man, himself a perfumde Gentleman, spending the laboring reeke from
his Fathers: Nosthrils in Tobacco: the sweat of his Fathers body in monthlye
Phisickc for his pretty quesie Harlot: he sowes a pace 'ith Country: the
Tailor oretakes him in the City, so that often times before the Corn comes to
Earning, it is up to the ears in high Collars, and so at every harvest the
Reapers take pains for the Mercers, ha! why this is stirring happiness
indeed, would my father had held a plow so, and fed upon squeaz'd Curds and
Onions, that I might have bathed insensualitie: but he was too ruttish
himself to let me thrive under him, cansumde me before he got me, and that
makes me so wretched, now to be shackled with a wife, and not greatly rich
neither.


Enter his Lady. Lady. Captain, my Husband.

Cap. S'life call me husband again, and i will play the Captain and beat you.

Lady. What has disturbed you sir, that you now look so like an Enemy upon
me?


Cap. Go make a Widdower, hang thy self,
How comes it that you are so opposite
To love and kindenes? I deserve more Respect,
But that you please to be forgetful of it.

Lady. For love to you, did I neglect my state,
Chide better fortunes from me,
Gave the world talk, laid all my friends at waste.

Captain. The more fool you, could you like none but me?
Could none but I supplye you?
I am sure you were sued to* by far worthyer men,
Deeper in wealth and Gentry.
What could thou see in me, to make thee doat so on me,
If I know, I am a Villain: what a torments this? why did thou marry me?
you think as most of your insatiate Widows, that Captains can do wonders,
when 'lasse the name does often prove the better man.


Lady. That which you urge, should rather give me cause to repent then your
self.


Cap. Then to that end I do it.

Lady. What a miserable state am I led into?

Enter Seruus. Cap: How now sir?

Seruus: Count Proditer is now alighted.

Cap. What, my Lord: I must make much of him, heel one day write me Cuckold:
it is good to make much of such a man, even to my face, he plyes it hard I
thank him: --

Enter Proditer. what, my worthy Lord!


Prod: I Will come to you in order Captain.

Cap: Oh that's in order: a kiss is the Gammoth to pricksong.

Prod. Let me salute you Captain.

Cap. My dear esteemed Count, I have a life for you:

Prod. Hear you the news?

Cap. What may it be my Lord?

Prod. My Lord, the Dukes Son is upon his travail to several Kingdoms.


Cap, May it be possible my Lord, and yet so little rumord?


Prod. Take It of my Truth, nay, twa's well managed, things are as they are
handled: but all my care is still, pray heaven he return safe, without danger
Captain.


Cap. Why, is there any doubt to be had of that my Lord?

Prod. I by my faith Captain.
Princes have private enemies, and great:
Put case a man should grudge him, for his Virtues:
Or envy him, for his wisdom: why you know
This makes him lie bare brested to his foe.

Cap. That Is full of certainty my Lord, but who be his Attendants?

Prod. Thence Captain comes the fear, but singlie attended neither (my best
gladness) only by your Son in Law Fidelio.


Cap. Is it to be believed? I promise you my Lord then I begin to fear him
my self, that fellow will undo him: I durst undertake to corrupt him with
twelve pence over and above, and that's a small matter: has a whorish
Conscience, he is an inseparable Knave, and I could near speak well of that
fellow.


Prod. All we of the younger house, I can tell you do doubt him much, -- the
Ladies remoou'd, shall we have your sweet soscietie Captain?


Cap. Though it be in mine own house, I desire I may follow your Lordship.


Prod. I love to avoid strife,
Not many months Phoenix shall keep his life.
Exit.
Cap. So, his way is in, he knows it,
We must not be discourteous to a Lord,
Warn him our house it were vilde: his presence is an honor, if he lie with
our wives, it is for our credit, we shall be the better trusted, it is a sign
we shall live ith world: O Tempests and Whirlewinds (who but that man whom the
forefinger cannot daunt, that makes his shame his living:) Who but that man I
say, could endure to be thoroughly married? Nothing but a divorce can relieve
me: any way to be rid of her would rid my torment: if all means fail I Will kill,
or poison her, and purge my fault at sea: but first I Will make gentle Try of a
Divorce: But how shall I accuse her subtle honesty? I Will attach this Lords
coming to her, take hold of that: ask counsel: and now I remember, I have
acquaintance with an old crafty Client, who by the puzzle of suites and
shifting of Courts, has more tricks and starting holes, then the dizzie pates
of fifteen Atturneys: one that has been muzled in Law like a Bear, and lead
by the Ring of his spectacles from office to office: him I Will seek out with
haste, all paths I Will tread,

All deaths I Will die ere I die married.
Exit.
Enter Proditor with the Captains wife. Prod. Puh, you do resist me hardly.

Lad. I beseech your Lordship cease in this,
It Is never to be granted: if you come as a friend unto my honor and my
husband, you shall be ever welcome, if not, I must entreat it --


Prod. Why assure your self, Madame, it is not the fashion.

Lad. It Is more my grief my Lord, such as my self are judged the worse for
such.


Prod. Faith y' are too nice, you will see me kindly forth:

Lady. And honorably welcome.
Exeunt.
Enter a Groom before Phoenix, and Fidelio, alighting into an Inn. Groom.
Gentlemen, y' are most neately welcome.

Phoe. Y' are very cleanelye Sir, prithee have a care to our Geldings.

Groom. Your Geldings shall be well considered.

Fid. Considered?

Phoe. Sirrah, what Guess does this Inn hold now?

Groom. Some five and twenty Gentlemen besides their beasts.

Phoe. Their Beasts?

Groom. Their wenches I mean sir, for your worship I nowes those that are
vdder men are beasts.


Phoe. How does your Mother sit?

Groo. Very well in health I thank you heartily sir.

Phoe. And so is my Mare y faith.

Groom. I Will do her commendations indeed sir.

Fid. Well kept up Shuttle-cocke:

Phoe. But what old fellow was he that newly alighted before us?

Gro. Who he? as arrant a crafty fellow as ere made water on horseback: some
say he is as good as a Lawyer, (marry 'ime sure he is as bad as a Knave) if
you have any suites in law, he is the fittest man for your company: has
been so* toward and lug'd himself* that he is able to affoo^d you more
knauish counsel for ten groates, then another for ten shillings.


Phoe. A fine fellow: but do you know him to be a Knave, and will lodge him.


Groom. Your worship begins to talk idly, your bed shall be made presently;
if we should not lodge knaves, I wonder how we should be able to live
honestlye, are there honest men enough think you in a Term time to fill all
the Innes in the town, and as far as I can see* a knaves Gelding eats no more
hay then an honest man's: nay thieves Gelding eats less, i will stand to it, his
Master allows him a better Ordnarie: yet I have my eightpe^ce day and night,
twere more for our profit I wus, you were all thieves, if you were so
contented: I shall be called for: give your worships good morrow.


Phoe. A royal knave y faith: we have happened into a Godly Inn.

Fid. Assure you my L. they belong al to one church.

Phoe. This should be some old busy turbulent fellow: villainous Law-worme,
that eats holes into poor men's causes.


Enter Tangle with two suitors. 1 May it please your worship to give me leave?

Tang. I give you leave sir, you have your Veniam, now fill me a brown Toste
sirrah.


Groom. Will you have no drink to it sir?

Tang. Is that a question in law?

Groom. Yes, in the lowest Court: 'ith Sellor sir.

Tang. Let me haa't removed presently sir.

Groom. It shall be done sir.

Tang. Now as you were saying Sir, i will come to you immediately too.


Phoe. Oh very well sir:

Tang. I Am a little busy sir,

1 But as how sir?

Tang. I pray sir?

1 Has brought me into the Court, marry my adversary has not declarde yet.

Tang. Non declarauit Aduersarius say thou: what a Villain's that, I have a
trick to do thee good: I will get thee out a Proxe, and make him declare with
a Pox to him.


1 That will make him declare to his fore grief, I thank your good worship: but
put case he do declare?

Tang. Si declarasset, If he should declare there,

1 I would be loath to stand out to the judgment of that Court

Tang. Non ad iudicium, do you fear corruption? then i will relieve you agaen:
you shall get a Supers^diae, Non molest andam; and (...) it big her.


1 Very good.

Tan. Now if it should ever come to a Testificandum, what be his witnesses?


1 I little fear his witnesses.

Tan. Non metuis testes? more valiant man then Orestes

1 Please you sir to dissolve this into Wine, Ale, or Beer, I come a hundred
mile to you I protest, and leave all other counsel behind me.


Tan. Nay you shall always find me a sound Card, I stood not ath Pillorie for
nothing in eighty eight, all the world knows that: now let me dispatch you
sir; I come to you Presenter.


2 Faith the party has removed both body and cause with a habeas corpus.

Tan. Has he that knauerie? But has he put in bail above can tell?


2 That I can assure your worship, he has not.

Tan. Why then thy best course shall be, to lay out more money, take out a
Procedendo, and bring down the cause and him with a Vengeance.


2 Then he will come indeed

Tan. As for the other party, let the Audita querela alone, take me out a
special Supplicauit, which will cost you enough, and then you pepper him. For
the first party after the Procedendo you will get costs, the cause being sound,
you will have a Judgment, Nunc pro Tunc, you will get a Venire facies to warn your
Jury, a December tales to fill up the number, and a Capias vt Legatum for your
execution.


2 I thank you my learned counsel.

Phoe. What a busy Caterpiller's this? let us accost him in that manner.


Fid. Content my Lord.

Phoe. O my old admirable fellow, how have I all this while thirsted to salute
thee? I knew thee in Octauo of the Duke. --


Tang. In Octauo of the Duke: I remember the year well.

Phoe, Bi^h mass a lusty proper man.

Tang. Oh was I?

Phoe. But still in law*

Tang. Still in Law. I had not breathed else now, it is very marrow, very manna
to me to be in law: i would been dead ere this else: I have found such sweet
pleasure in the vexation of others, that I could wish my years over and over
again, to see that fellow a Beggar, that bawling Knave a Gentleman: a matter
brough^ 'een to a judgment to day, as far as ere it was to begin again to
morrow: O Raptures I here a writ of Demur, there a Procedendo, here a Sui
surrara, there a Capiendo, Tricks, Delays* Money-lawes:


Phoe. Is it possible old Lad?

Tang. I have been a Tearme-trotter my self any time this five and forty
years, a goodly time and a gracious: in which space I ha been at least
sixteen times beggard, and got up again: and in the mire again, that I have
stunke again, and yet got up again.


Phoe. And so clean and handsome how?

Tan. You see it apparently* I cannot hide it from you: nay more, in foelice
hora be it spoken, you see i am old, yet have I at this present, nine and
twenty suits in Law.


Phoe. Deliver us man!

Tang. And all not worth forthy shillings.

Phoe. May it (...) cu'd?

Tang. The pleasure of a man is all.

Phoe. An old fellow and such a stinger.

Tang. A stake pulled out of my hedge, there is one: I was well beaten I remember,
that is two: I took one a bed with my wife again her will, that is three: I was
called cuckold for my labor* that is four: I took another a bed again, that is
five the^ one called me wittal that is six: he killed my Dog for Barking, sea^en:
my Maid Servant was knocked at that time, eight: my wife miscarryed with a
push, Nine, and sic de coeteris, I have so vexed and beggerd the whole parish,
with process, Suppoeneas, and such like molestations, they are not able to
spare so much ready money from a Term, as would set up a new Weather-cocke:
the Churchwardens are feign to go to law with the Poores money.


Phoen. Fie, fie.

Tan. And I so fetch up all the men every Term time that it is impossible to be
at civil cuckoldry, within our selves, unless the whole country rise upon our
wives.


Fid. A my faith a pretty policy.

Phoen. Nay an excellent stratagem: but of all I most wonder at the continual
substance of thy wit, that having had so many suits in law from time to time,
thou have still money to relieve 'em.


Fid. Has the best fortune for that, I never knew him without.

Tan. Why do you so much wonder at that? why this is my course: my Mare and I
come up some five days before a Term.


Phoen. A good Decorum.

Tan. Here I Lodge as you see amongst Innes, and places of most receipt --


Phoen. Very wittily.

Tan. By which advantage I diue into Country men's causes, furnish 'em with
knauish counsel, little to their profit, buzzing into their Ears, this
course, that writ, this office, that Vltimum refugium, as you know I have words
enough for the purpose.


Phoen. Enough a conscience y faith.

Tan. Enough a law, no matter for conscience. For which busy and laborious
sweating courtesy, they cannot choose but feed me with money, by which I
maintain mine own suits: ho, ho, ho.


Phoen. Why let me hug thee, Caper in mine arms.

Tan. Another special trick I have, no body must know it, which is, to prefer
most of those men to one Attorney whom I affect best, to answer which
kindness of mine, he will sweat the better in my cause, and do them the less
good, take it of my word, I helped my Attorney to more Clients the last Term
then he will dispatch all his life time: I did it.


Phoen. What a noble memorable deed was there?

Enter Groom. Groo. Sir.

Tan. Now sir.

Groo. There Is a kind of captain, very robustiously enquires for you.


Tan. For me? a man of war: a man of law is fit for a man of war: we have
no leisure to say prayers: we both kill a Sunday mornings: I Will not be long
from your sweet company.

Exit
Phoen. O no I beseech you.

Fid. What captain might this be?

Phoe. Thou Angel sent amongst us, sober Law.
Made with meek Eyes, persuading Action,
No loud immodest Tongue, voic'd like a virgin,
And as chaste from sale,
Save only to be heard, but not to rail.
How has abuse deformed thee to all Eyes?
That where thy virtues sat, thy vices rise,
Yet why so rashly for one villains fault*
Do I arraigne whole man? Admired Law,
Thy upper parts must needs be sacred, pure,
And incorruptible, they are grave and wise,
It Is but the dross beneath 'em, and the clouds
That get between thy glory and their praise,
That make the visible and foul Eclipse,
For those that are near to thee, are upright,
As noble in their conscience, as their birth,
Know that damnation is in every bribe,
And rarely put it from 'em: rate the Presenters,
And scourge 'em with five years imprisonment,
For off ring but to tempt 'em.
Thus is true justice exercisde and used,
"Woe to the giver when the Bribe's refusde.
It Is not their will, to have law worse then war,
Where still the poor'st die first,
To send a man without a sheet to his grave,
Or bury him in his Papers.
It Is not their mind it should be, nor to have
A suit hang longer then a man in chains
Let him be nere so fastened, they least know
That are above, the tedious steps below.
I thank my time, I do.

Fid. I long to know what captain this should be:

Phaen. See where the Bane or every cause Returns.

Enter Tangle, with Captain. Fid. S'foote it is the captain my father in law,
my L.

Phaen. Take heed.

Cap. The Divorce shall rest then, and the five hundred crowns shall stand in
full force and virtue.


Tan. Then do you wisely Captain.

Cap. A way sail I, fare thee well.

Tan. A lusty crack or wind go with thee.

Cap. But ah!

Tan. Hah:

Cap. Remember a Scriuener

Tan. I Will have him for thee. Why thus am I sought after by all professions;
here is a weather beaten Captain, who not long since new married to a Lady
widow, would now feign have sued a Divorce between her and him, but that her
honesty is his only hinderance: to be rid of which, he does determine to
turn her into white money, and there is a Lord his Chapman has bid five hundred
Crowns for her already.


Fid. How?

Tan. Or for his part, or whole in her.

Phaen. Why, do she ^eaue to sell his wife?

Tang. His wife? I bith mass, he would sell his soul if he knew what Merchant
would lay out money vppon't, and some of 'em have need of one they swear so
fast.


Phae. Why, I never heard of the like.

Tang. Non audiuisti, didstnere here of that trick? why Pistor a Baker sold
his wife the other day to a cheesemonger, that made Cake and Cheese: another to a
Coferer: a third to a common player: why you see it is common: nere fear the
Captain, be has not so much wit to be a praesident himself: I promisd to
furnish him with an odd Scriuener of mine own* to draw the bargain, and sale
of his Lady, your horses stand here Gentleman.


Phae. I, I, I.

Tang. I shall be busilye plunged till toward bed time, above the chin in
profundis.

Exit
Phae. What monstrous days are these?
Not only to be vicious, most men study,
But in it to be ugly, strive to exceed,
Each other in the most deformed deed.

Fid. Was this her private choice? did she neglect
The presence and opinion of her friends, for this?

Phae. I wonder who that one should be,
Should so disgrace that Reverend Name of Lord,
So loathsomly to buy Adultery?

Fid. We may make means to know.

Phae. Take courage man, we will beget some defense.

Fid. I am bound by nature.

Phae. I by Conscience -- To sell his Lady: indeed she was a Beast to marry
him, and so he makes of her, come, i will through now 'ime entered.

Exeunt.
Enter Iewellers wife with a Boy. I^w. Is my sweet Knight coming, are you
certain he is coming?


Boy. Certain for sooth, I am sure I saw him out of the Barbers shop, ere I
would come away.


Jew. A Barbers shop, O he is a trim Knight, would he venture his body into a
Barbers shop, when he knows it is as dangerous as a piece of Ireland: O yonder,
yonder, he comes, get you back again, and look you say as I aduiz'de you.


Enter Knight. Boy. You know me mistress?

Jew. My mask, my mask.

Knig. My sweet Reuenewe!

Jew. My pleasure welcome: I have got single, none but you shall accompany me
to the Justice of peace my Fathers.


Knight. Why, is thy Father Justice of Peace, and I not know it?


Jew. My father! in faith sir I, simply tho I stand here a Citizens wife: I am
a Justice of Peaces Daughter.


Knight. I love thee the better for thy birth.

Knight. He Is at thy service my sweet Reuenewe, for thy money paid for them.


Jew. Why then let him run a little before I beseech thee, for a my troth he
will discover us else.


Knight. He shall obey thee, before sirrah* trudge: but do you mean to lie
at your Fathers all night?


Jewel. Why should I desire your company else?


Knight. S'foot where shall I lie then.


Jewel. What an idle question's that? why do you hinke I cannot make room for
you in my Fathers house, as well as in my husbands, they are both good for
nothing else?


Knight. A man so resolute in valor as a Woman in desire, were an absolute
Leader.

Exeunt.
Enter two suitors with the Justice Falso. 1 May it plese your good worship
master Justice.


Falls. Please me and please are your self,
That's my word.

1 The party your worship sent for, will by no means be brought to appear.


Falls. He will not, then what would you aduize me to do therein?


1 Only to grant your worships warrant, which is of sufficient force to
compel him.


Falls. No by my faith: you shall not have me in that Trap: am I sworn Justice
of Peace, and shall I give my warrant to fetch a man against his will? why
there the peace is Broken, we must do all quietly, if he come he is welcome,
and as far as I can seeyet, he is a fool to be absent, I by this gold is he
(which he gave me this morning)


1 Why, but may it please your good worship. --


Falls. I say again please me and please your self, that's my word still.


1 Sir, the world esteems it a Common favor, upon the Contempt of the party,
the justice to grant his warrant.


Falls. I, it is so common, it is the worse again, twere the better for me twere
otherwise.


1 I protest sir, and this Gentleman can say as much, it lies upon my half
undoing.


Falls. I cannot see yet, that it should be so -- I see not a cross yet.


1 I beseech your worship show me your immediate favor, and accept this small
trifle but as a remembrance to my succeeding Thankfulness.


Falls. Angels? i will not meddle with them, you give them to my wife not to me.


1 I, I sir.


Falls. But I pray tell me now, did the party Vina Voce, with his own mouth
deliver that contempt, that that he would not appear, or did you but iestint?


1 Iest^ no a my troth sir, such was his insolent answer

Falls. And do you think it stood with my credit to put up such an abuse? will
he not appear says he? I Will make him appear with a Vengeance Latronello.


Latr. Does your worship call?


Falls. Draw me a strong limbd warrant for the Gentleman speedily, he will be
bountiful to thee: go and thank him within.


1 I shall know your worship hereafter.

Exeunt,
Falls. I, I prithee do. Two Angels one party, four another: and I think it
a great spark of wisdom and policy (if a man come to me for Justice) first
to know his greefes by his fees, which be light and which be he ^ie: he may
cou^terfet else, and make me do Justice for nothing: I like not that* for when I
mean to be just, let me be paid well for it: the deed so rare, purges the
bribe: how now, what is the news thou art come so hastily? how fares my
Knightly Brother?


Furt. Troth he nere farde worse in his life sir: he nere had less stomach to
his meat since I knew him.


Fall. Why sir?


Furt. Indeed he is dead sir.


Fall. How sir?


Furt. Newly deceasd I can assure your Worship: the Tabacco-pipe new dropped out
of his mouth before I took horse, a shrewd sign: I knew then there was no way
but one with him, the poor pipe was the last man he took leave off in this
world, who sell in three pieces before him, and seemed to mourn inwardly, for
it looked as blacke'th mouth as my master.


Fall. Would he die so like a Politician, and not once write his mind to me?


Fur. No I Will say that for him sir: he dyed in the perfect state of memory,
made your worship his full and whole executor: bequeathing his Daughter, and
with her all his wealth, only to your disposition.


Falls. Did he make such a godly end say thou? did he die so comfortably, and
bequeath all to me?


Fur. Your niece is at hand sir, the will, and the witnesses.

Falls. What a precious joy and comfort's this, that a Justices brother can die
so well, nay in such a good and happy memory, to make me full executor. Well he
was too honest to live, and that made him die so soon: now I beshrew my heart,
I am glad he is in heaven, has left all his cares and troubles with me, and
that great vexation of telling of Money, yet I hope he had so much grace
before he died to turn his white money into gold, a great ease to his Executor.


Furt. See here comes your Niece my young mistress sir,

Falls. Ah my sweet Niece, let me kiss thee, and drop a tear between thy
lips: one tear from an old man is a great matter, the cocks of age are dry,
thou have lost a virtuous father, to gain a notable uncle.


Niece. My hopes now rest in you next under heaven

Falls. Let 'em rest, let 'em rest.

Gent. Sir?

Falls. You Are most welcome ere ye begin sir.

Genesis We are both led by oath and dreadful promise,
Made to the dying man at his last sense,
First to deliver these into your hands,
The suerties and reuealers of his state.

Falls. Good.

Genesis With this his only daughter and your Niece,
Whose fortunes are at your disposing set,
Uncle and father are in you both met.

Falls. Good in faith, a well spoken Gentleman, you are not an Esquire sir?


Gent. Not sir.

Falls. Not sir? more's the pity: by my faith better men then you are, but a
great many worse: you see I have been a Scholar in my time, tho I Am a
Justice now: Niece you are most happily welcome, the charge of you is wholly and
soly mine own: and since you are so fortunately come Niece, I Will rest a
perpetual widower.


Niece. I take the meaning chaster then the words:
Yet I hope well of both, since it is thus,
His phraise off ends least that is known humourous.

Fall. I make my brother (says he) full and whole Executor, honestly done of
him in faith, seldom can a man get such a brother: and here again says he, very
virtuously, I bequeath all to him and his disposing: an excellent fellow a my
troth, would you might all die no worse, Gentlemen.


Enter Knight with Iewellers wife. Genesis But as much better as might be.

Kni. Bless your uprightness master Justice,

Falls. You Are most soberly welcome sir: daughter you have that ye kneel for, rise,
salute your weeping coozen.


Jew. Weeping coozen?

Niece. I coozen.

Kni. Eye to weeping is very proper, and so is the party that spoke it
believe me, a pretty, fine, slender, straight, delicate knit body.

Oh how it moves a pleasure through our senses!
How small are women's wastes to their expenses?
I cannot see her face, that is under water yet.

Jew. News as cold to the heart as an old man's kindness: my uncle dead?


Niece. I have lost the dearest Father.

Fall. If she marry by your consent, choice and liking make her dowry five
thousand crowns: hum, five thousand crowns? therefore by my consent she shall
nere marry, I will neither choose for her, like of it, nor consent to it.


Kni. Now by the pleasure of my blood a pretty coozen: I would not care, if I
were as nere kin to her, as I have been to her kinswoman.


Falls. Daughter, what Gentleman might this be?

Jew. No Gentleman sir, he is a Knight.

Falls. Is he but a knight? troth, I would a sworn had been a Gentleman, to
see, to see, to see.


Jew. He Is my husbands own brother, I can tell you (sir:

Fall. Thy husbands brother: speak certainly prithee.

Jew. I can assure you father, my husband and he has lain both in one belly.


Fall. I Will swear then he is his brother indeed, and by the surer side: I crave
hearty pardon sweet kinsman that thou have stood so long unsaluted in the way
of kindred.

Welcome to my board: I have a bed for thee,
My daughters husbands brother shall command,
Keys of my Chests and Chambers. -- I have stable for thy horse, chamber for
thy self, and a loft abou for thy lowzie lackie, all fit, away with
handkirchers, dry up eyes, at funeral we must cry: now let us be wise.

Exeu^t.
Jew. I told you his affection.

Fall. It falls sweetly.

Jew. But here I bar you from all plots to night,
The time is yet too heavy to be light.

Kni. Why, I Am content, i will sleep as chaste as you,
And wager night by night who keeps most true.

Jew. Well we shall see your temper.
Exeunt.
Enter Phoenix and Fidelio. Phoen. Fear not me Fidelio: become you that
invisible Rope-maker the Scriuener, that binds a man as he walks yet all his
joints at liberty, as well as i will fit that common folly of Gentry, the
easie-affecting venturer, and no doubt our purpose will arrive most happily.


Fid. Chaste duty my Lord works powerfully in me, and rather then the poor
Lady my mother should fall upon the common side of rumor to beggar her name,
I would not only undergo all habits, offices, disguised professions, tho even
opposite to the temper my blood holds: but in the stainlesse quarrel of her
reputation, alter my shape for ever.


Phoe. I love thee wealthier, thou have a noble touch, and by this means which
is the only safe means to preserve thy mother from such an ugly land and sea
monster as a counterfeit Captain is, he resigning and basely selling all his
estate, title, right, and interest in his Lady, as the form of the writing
shall testify.

What otherwise can follow but to have,
A Lady safe delivered of a knave?

Fid. I am in debt my life, to the free goodness of your inventions.


Phoen. Oh they must ever strive to be so good,
"Who sels his vow is stamped the slave of blood.
Exeunt
Enter Captain his Lady following him. Cap. Away.

Ladi. Captain, my husband.

Cap. Hence, we are at a price for thee, at a price, wants but the telling, and
the sealing, then --


Lady. Have you no sense, neither of my good name or your own credit?


Cap. Credit? pox of credit, that makes me owe so much: it had bine better for
me by a thousand Royals I had lost my credit, seven year ago, t'as undone
me, that is it that makes me fly: what need I to sea else, in the Spring time,
when Woods have leaves, to look upon balde Oak.

Happier that man say I, whom no man trusts,
It makes him valiant, dares outface the prisons,
Upon whose carcass no Gownde Raven iets,
Oh he that has no credit owes no debts.
It Is time I were rid on it.

Lady. Oh why do you so wilfully cherrish your own poison? and breath against
the best of life, chaste credit.

Well may I call it chaste, for like a Maid
Once falsely broke it ever lives decaide.
O Captain, husband, you name that Dishonest,
By whose good power all that are honest live,
What madness is it to speak ill of that,
Which makes all men speak well, take away credit
By which men amongst men, are well reputed,
That man may live, but still lives executed.
Oh then show pity to that noble Title
Which else you do Usurp: you are no true Captain,
To let your enemies lead you, foul disdain,
And everlasting Scandal, Oh believe it!
The money you receive for my good name
Will not be half enough to pay your shame.

Cap. No, i will sell thee then to the Smock: see here comes my honorable
Chapman.


Enter Proditor. Lady. Oh my poison!
Him, whom mine honor and mine eye abhors.
Exit.
Prod. Lady, what so vniouially departed?

Cap. Fine she policy? she makes my back her Bolster, but before my face,
she not indures him, Tricks.


Prod. Captain, how haps it she removed so strangely?


Cap. Oh for Modesties cause awhile my Lord: she must restrain her self,
she is not yours yet:

Beside, it wear not wisdom to appear,
Easy before my sight, fah, wherefore serves modesty but to pleasure a Lady
now and then, and help her from susspect, that is the best use it is put too.


Prod. Well observed of a Captain.

Cap. No doubt you will be soon friends my Lord.

Prod. I think no less.

Cap. And make what have I can to my ship, I durst wager you will be under sail
before me.


Prod. A pleasant voyage Captain.

Cap. I, a very pleasant voyage as can be: I see the hour is Ripe, here
comes the Prisons Bawd the bond-maker, one that binds heirs before they are
begot.


Prod. And here are the Crowns Captain, go? attend,
Let our bay Courser wait.

Enter Phoenix and Fidelio both disguized. Lackey. It shall be obeyed.

Cap. A Farmers son, is it true?

Fid. Has crowns to scatter?

Cap. I give you your salute sir.

Phoen. I take it not unthankfully sir.

Cap. I hear a good report of you sir -- you have money.

Phoen. I have so, true.

Cap. An excellent virtue.

Phoe. I, to keeep from you -- hear you me Captain?
I have a certain generous itch sir, to loose a few Angels in the way of
profit: it is but a game at Tennis,

Where if the ship keep above line, it is three to one:
If not, there is but three hundred Angels gone.

Cap. Is your venture three hundred? you are very pretiously welcome: here is a
voyage toward will make us all. --


Phoen. Beggarly fools, and swarming knaves.


Prod. Captain, what is he?

Cap. Fear him not my Lord, he is a Gull', he ventures with me, some filthy
Farmers son, the father's a Jew, and the son a Gentleman:pha. --


Prod. Yet he should be a Jew too, for he is new come from giving over swine.


Cap. Why, that in our Country makes him a Gentleman.

Prod. Go to, tell your money Captain.

Capi Read aloft Scriuener. 1.2. --

Fid. To all good and honest Christian people, to who^ this present writing
shall come: know you for a certain, that I Captain, for and in the
consideration of the sum of five hundred crowns, have clearly bargained,
sold, given, granted, assigned and set over, and by these presents do
clearly bargain, sell, give, grant, assign and set over, all the right,
estate, title, interest, demand, possession, and term of years to come,
which I the said Captain have, or ought to have. --


Phoen. If I were as good as I should be, --

Fid. In and to Madona Castiza, my most virtuous, modest, loving, and obedient
wife. --


Cap. By my troth my Lord and so she is. -- 3.4.5.6.7.

Phoe. The more Slave he that says it, and not sees it.

Fid. Together, with all and singular those admirable qualities with which her
noble breast is furnished.


Cap. Well said Scriuener, have put'em all in: you shall hear now my L.


Fid. In primis, the beuties of her mind, chastity, temperance, and above
all, patience:

Cap. You have bought a Jewel in faith, my L, nine and thirty, forty.

Fid. Excellent in the best of Music, in voice delicious: in conference wise
and pleasing: of age contentful: neither too yo^g to be a pish, nor too old to
be sottish


Cap. You have bought as lovely a penny-woorth my Lord, as ere you bought in
your life.


Pro Why should I buy her else Captain?

Fid. And which is the best, of a wife a most comfortable sweet companion.


Cap. I could not afford her so y faith, but that I am-going to sea and have
need of money.


Fid. A most comfortable sweet companion.

Prod. What again? the Scriuener reads in passion.

Fid. I read as the words move me: yet if that be a faul it shall be seen no
more, -- which said Madona Casti^^a lying, and yet being in the occupatio^ of
the said captain


Cap. Ninteene -- occupation? Pox out, out with occupation, a Captain is of no
occupation, man.


Phoen. Nor thou of no religion.

Fid. Now I come to the Habendum, to have and to hold, use and --


Cap. Use? put out use too for shame.
Till we are all gone, I prithee.

Fid. And to be acquitted of and from all former bargains, former sales:


Cap. Former sails, nine and twenty thirty, by my troth my Lord, this is the
first time that ever I sold her.


Prod. Yet the writing must run so Captain.

Cap. Let it run on then, nine and forty, fifty, --

Fid. Former sales, Guiftes, Grants, Surrenders. Reentryes. --

Cap. For Reentryes, I will not swear for her.

Fid. And furdermore (I the said) of and for the consideration of the sum of
five hundred Crowns to set me a board before these presents utterly disclaim
for ever, any Title, estate, right, interest, demand, or possession, in or to
the said Madona Castiza, my late virtuous, and unfortunate wife.


Phoe. Unfortunate indeed, that was well placed.

Fid. As also neither to touch, attempt, molest, or incumber any part, or
parts whatsoever: either to be namde or not to be namde: either hidden or
vnhidden, either those that boldly look abroad, or those that dare not show
their face.


Cap. Faces: I know what you mean by faces: Scriuener, there is a great figure
in faces.


Fid. In witness whereof, I the said Captain have interchangeably set to my
hand and seal: in presence of all these, the day and date above written.


Cap. Very good sir, I Will be ready for you presently, four hundred and
twenty. 1.2.3.4.5. --


Phoe. Of all deeds, yet this strikes the deepest wound
Into my apprehension,
Reverend, and honorable Matrimony,
Mother of lawful sweetes, vnshamed mornings:
Dangerlesse pleasures, thou that make the bed,
Both pleasant, and legitimately fruitful: without thee,
All the whole world were soyled Bastardy.
Thou art the only and the greatest form.
That put'st a difference between our desires
And the disordered appetites of Beasts,
Making their mates, those that stand next their lusts.
Then, -- with what base injury is thy goodness paid
First, rare to have a Bride commence a Maid,
But does beguile joy of the purity:
And is made strickt by power of Drugs and Art,
An Artificall Maid, a Doctord Virgin,
And so deiceues the glory of his bod:
A foul contempt, against the spotless power
Of sacred wedlock, but if chaste and honest,
There is another Devil hauntes marriage,
(None fondly loves but knows it) Jealousy,
That Wedlocks yellow sickness, that whispering separation every minute.
And thus the curse takes his effect or progress,
The most of men in their first sudden furyes,
Rail at the narrow bounds of marriage,
And cal't a prison then it is most just,
That the disease'ath prison, Jealousy
Should still affect a'm, but oh! here I am fixed,
To make sale of a wife, monstrous and foul,
An act abhord in nature, could in soul:
Who that has man in him, could so resign,
To make his shame, the poesye to the Coin?

Cap. Right in faith, my Lord fully five hundred,

Prod. I said how you should find it Captain, and with this competent sum
you rest amplye contented.


Cap. Amply contented.

Fid. Here Is the Pen Captain: your name to the sale.

Cap. S'foote do take me to be a penman? I protest I could nere write more
then A, B, C, those three letters in my life.


Fid Why those will serve Captain.

Cap. I could nere get further.

Phoe. Would you have got further then A B C? ah Base Captain, that is far
enough in faith.


Fid. Take the Seal off Captain.

Cap. It goes on hardly, and comes off easily.

Phoe. I just like a Coward.

Fid. Will you write witness Gentleman?

Cap. He? he shall, prithee come and set thy hand for witness Rogue, thou
shall venture with me?


Phoe. Nay, then I ha reason Captain that commands me?


Cap. What a fair fist the pretty whorsone writes, as if he had had manners
and bringing up, a farmers Son: his Father dam's himself to sell mustie
Corn, while he ventures the Money, twill prosper well at Sea no doubt he
shall nere see it agein


Fid. So, Captain you deliver this as your deed.

Cap. As my deed, what else sir?

Phoe. The ouglyest deed that ere mine eye did witness

Cap. So my Lord, you have her, clip her, enjoy her, she is your own, and let
me be proud to tell you now my Lord, she is as good a soul if a man had a
mind to live honest, and keep a wench, the Kindest, sweetest, comfortablest
Rogue. --


Prod. Hark in thine ear,
The Baser slave art thou: and so i will tell her,
I love the Pearl, thou soldst, hate thee the Seller --
Go, to Sea, the end of thee -- is Lousy.

Cap: This fine work: a very brave end, hum --

Pro. Well thought upon, this Scriuener may furnish me

Phoe. Why should this fellow be a Lord by birth?
Being by blood a Knave, one that would sell
His Lordship if he likt her Ladyship.

Fid. Yes my Lord.

Phoe: What Is here Now?

Prod: I have employment for a trusty fellow, bold, sure --

Fid. What if he be a Knave my Lord?

Prod. There thou comst to me, why he should be so, and men of your quill are
not unacquainted.


Fid. Indeed al our chief living my Lord, is by fools and knaves, we could
not keep open shop else* Fools that enter into bonds, and Knaves that bind
them.


Prod. Why now we meet.

Fid. And as my memory happily leads me: I know a fellow of a standing
estate, never flowing: I durst convey treason into his bosom,

And keep it safe nine years.

Prod. A goodly Time.

Fid. And if need were would press to an attempt,
And cleave to Desperate action.

Prod. That Last fits me.
Thou have the measure right, look I hear from thee.

Fid. With duteous speed.

Prod. Expect a large reward:
I will find time of her to find regard.
Exit.
Cap. The end of me is lowzie.

Fid. Oh my Lord! I have strange words to tell you.

Phoe. Stranger yet? i will choose some other hour to listen to thee, I am yet
sick of this, discover quickly.


Fid. Why, will you make yourselfe known my Lord

Phoe. I.
Who scourges sin let him do it dreadfully.

Cap. Pox of his dissemblance: I will to s^n.

Phoe. Nay, you shall to sea, thou would poison the whole land else -- why
how now Captain?


Cap. In health.

Fid. What, drooping?

Phoen. Or a shamde of the sale of thine own wife?

Cap. You might count me an ass then in faith.

Phoe. If not a shamed of that, what can you be a shamd ofthen?

Cap. Prithee ha done, I am ashamed of nothing.

Phoe. I easily believe that.

Cap. This Lord sticks in my stomach.

Phoe. How? take one of thy feathers down, and fetch him up.

Fid. I Would make him come.

Phoe. But what if the Duke should hear of this?

Fid. I, or your Son in Law, Fidelio knows of the sale of his mother.


Cap. What and they did, I sell none but mine own: as for the Duke, he is
abroad by this time, and for Fidelio he is in labor.


Phoe. He, in labor?

Cap: What call you Traveling?

Phoe. That Is true: -- but let me tell you Captain: whether the Duke hear
on it, or Fidelio know on it: or both, or neither, twa's a most filthy
loathsome part.


Fid A base unnatural deed --

Cap: Slave and fool: -- ha, who? oh --

Phoe. Thou hateful villain: thou should choose (to sincke
To keep thy baseness shrouded.

Enter his Lady. Fid. Ougly wretch.

La: Who has laid violence upon my husband?
My dear sweet Captain, help --

Phoe. Lady you wrong your value,
Call you him dear that has sold you so cheap?

Lady I do beseech your pardon good my Lord.

Phoe. Rise.

Fid. My abused Mother:

La. My kind Son,
Whose liking I neglected in this match.

Fid. Not that alone, but you far happyer fortunes.

Cap Is this the Scriuener and the Farmers Son,
Fire on his Lordship he told me they Trauaild.

Phoe. And see the sum told out to buy that Jewel
More precious in a Woman then her eye, her honor:
Nay take it to you Lady, and liudge it,
Too slight a recompense, for your great wrong, but that his riddance helps it.


Cap: S'foot he undoes me, I am a Rogue and a Beggar,
The Aegiptian plague creepes over me already,
I begin to be lousy.

Phoe: Thus happily prevented, you are set free,
Or else made over to adultery.

Lad. To heaven and to you my modest thanks.

Phoe. Monster, to sea, spit thy al herred foame,
Where it may do least harm, there is air and roeme.
Thour't Dangerous in a Chamber, Virulext Venem,
Unto a Ladies name, and her chaste breath
If past this euenings verge, the Dukedom hold thee,
Thou art reserved for abject punishment.

Cap: I do beseech your good Lordship consider the state of a poor downe-cast
Captain.


Phoe. Captain, off with that noble title thou becomst it vildely, I nere saw
the name fit worse, i will sooner allow a Pandar a Captain then thee.


Cap. More's the pity.

Phoe. Sue to thy Lady for pardon.

Lad. I give it without suite.

Cap. I do beseech your Ladyship not so much for pardon, as to bestow a few of
those Crowns upon a poor vnfethered Rouer that will as truly pray for you,
and wish you hanged, as any man breathing.


Lady. I give it freely all.

Phoe. Nay by your favor:
I will contain you Lady, here* be gone:
Use slaves like slaves -- wealth keeps their faults unknown.

Cap. Well 'ime yet glad, i have liberty and these:
The Land has plagued me, and i will plague the seas.
Exit.
Phoe. The Scene is cleared, the bane of brightness fled
Who sought the death of honor, is struck dead.
Come modest Lady:

Fid: My most honest mother.

Phoe. Thy virtue shall live safe from reach of shames,
That Act ends nobly, preserues Ladies fames.
Exeunt.
Enter Justice, Knight, Jewel. Falls. Why this is but the second time of your
coming Kinsman, visit me oftener, Daughter, I charge you bring this Gentleman
along with you: Gentleman, I I cry ye mercy sir, I call you Gentleman still:
I forget you are but a Knight, you must pardon me sir.


Knight. For your worships kindenes -- worship I cry you mercy sir, I call
you worshipful still, I forget, you are but a Justice.


Falls. I am no more in faith.

Knig. You must pardon me sir.

Falls. It Is quickly done sir, you see I make bold with you Kinsman, thrust my
Daughter and you into one Chamber.


Knight. Best of all sir: Kindred you know may lie any where.

Falls True, true sir, Daughter receive your blessing -- take heed the Coach
iopper not to much* have a care to the fruits of your body -- look to her
Kinsman.


Knight. Fear it not sir.

Jewel. Nay Father though I say it, that should not say it, he looks to me
more like a husband then a Kinsman.


Falls. I hear good commendations of you sir.

Knig. You hear the worst of me I hope sir, -- I salute my leave sir.

Falls. You Are welcome all over your body sir: nay, I can behave my self
courtly, though I keep house 'ith Country: what, does my Niece hide herself,
not present, ha? Latronello.


Latr. Sir.

Falls. Call my Niece to me.

Latr. Yes sir.

Falls. A foolish, coy, bashful thing it is, she is afraid to lie with her own
Uncle: i would do her no harm in faith, I keep my self a widdower a purpose, yet
the foolish Girl will not look into it, she should have all in faith, she
knows I have but a time, cannot hold long, see where she comes, pray whom am
I Niece?


Niece. I hope you are your self.
Uncle to me, and Brother to my Father.

Falls. Oh am I so, it does not appear so, -- for surely you would love your
Fathers Brother for your Fathers sake, your Uncle for your own sake.


Niece. I do so.

Falls. Nay you do nothing Niece.


Niece. In that love which becomes you best I love (you.

Falls. How should I know that love becomes me best?

Niece. Because it is chaste, and honorable.

Falls. Honorable! it cannot become me then Niece.
For'ime scarce worshipful: Is this an age,
To entertain bare love without the fruits
When I received thee first, I looked
Thou should have been a wife unto my house
And saved me from the charge of marriage.
Do you think your Fathers five thousand pound would ha made me take you else?
no, you should near a ha been a charge to me.

As far as I can perceive yet by you,
I Have as much need to marry as ere I had: would not this be a great grief
to your friends think you, if they were alive again?


Niece: Twould be a grief indeed.

Falls. You Have confessed
All about house, that young Fidelio
Who in his Travails does attend the Prince,
Is your vowde love.

Niece. Most true, he is my vowed Husband.

Falls. And what is a Husband is not a Husband a stranger at first, and will you
lie with a stranger before you lie with your own Uncle? take heed what ye
do Niece, I counsel you for the best: strangers are drunken fellows I can
tell you, they will come home late a nights, beat their wives, and get nothing
but Girls: look to it, if you marry, your stubbernes is your Dowry: five
thousand Crowns were bequeathed to you, true, if you marry with my consent:
but if ere you go to marrying by my consent, i will go to hanging by yours: go
too* be wise and love your Uncle.


Niece. I should have cause then to repent indeed.
Do you so far forget the Offices
Of blushing modesty? Uncles are half Fathers,
Why they come so near our bloods they are ene part of it.

Falls. Why now you come to me Niece: if your Uncle be part of your own flesh
and blood, is it not then fit your own flesh and blood should come nearest to
you? answer me to that Niece.


Niece. You do allude all to incestuous will,
Nothing to modest purpose: turn me forth,
Be like an Uncle of these latter days,
Periurde enough, enough unnatural,
Play your Executorship, in Tyranny,
Restrain my fortunes, keep me poor, I care not,
In this alone most women i will excel,
I Will rather yield to beggary then to hell.
Exit.
Falls. Very good, a my troth my Niece is Valiant, sha's made me ritcher by five
thousand Crowns, the price of her Dowry: are you so honest, I do not fear
but I shall have the Conscience to keep you poor enough Niece, or else I am
quite altered a late -- The News, may it please you sir?


Latron. Sir, there is an old fellow, a kind of Law-driuer, entreates
conference with your worship.


Falls. A Law-driuer, prithee drive him hither.


Enter Tangle. Tan. No, no I say if it be for defect of Appearance, take me out
a special Significauit.


Whin. Very good sir.

Tan. Then if he purchase an Alias or Capias, which are Writs of custom, only
to delay time, your Procedendo does you Knights service -- that is nothing at
all, get your Distringas out as soon as you can for a Jury.


Whi. I Will attend your god worships coming out.

Tan. Do I prithee, attend me, i will take it kindly, a Voluntate.

Falls. What, old Seigneur Tangle!

Tan. I am in debt to your worships remembrance.

Falls. My old master of Fence: come, come, come, I have not exerciz'd this
twelve Moons, I have almost forgot all my Law-weapons.


Tan. They are under fine and Recovery, your worship shall easily recover them.


Falls. I hope so: when there?

Latron. Sir.

Falls. The Rapler and Dagger foyles instantly: and what is thy suite to me old
Tangle, i will grant it presently.


Tang. Nothing but this sir, to set your worships hand to the commendation of a
Knave whom no body speaks well on.


Falls. The more shame for them, what was his offense I pray?

Tang. Vestras Deducite Culpas -- nothing but robbing a Vestrie.

Falls. What, what! alas poor Knave, give me the Paper, he did but save the
Churchwardens a labor: come, come, he has done a better deed in it then the
parish is a aware off, to prevent the Knaves, he robs but seldom, they once a
quarter: me thinks twere a part of good justice, to hang them at years end, wen
they come out of their office, to the true terrifying of all Collectors and
Sidemen.


Tang. Your worship would make a fruitful Commonwealths man, the Constable
lets them alone, looks on, and says nothing.


Falls. A less good man, he lets them alone for quietness sake, and takes half a
share with them: they know well enough too, he has an impediment in his tongue,
he is always drunk when he should speak.


Tang. Indeed your worship speaks true in that sir: they blind him with
beer, and make him so narrow eyde, that he wincks naturallye at all their
Knaueries,


Falls. So, so, heeres my hand to his commendations.

Tangle. A Charitate, you do a charitable deed in it sir.

Falls. Nay, if it be but a Vestrie matter, visit me at any time, old Signeor
Law-thistle! O well done, here are the Foiles, come, come sir, i will try a
Law-bout with you.


Tan. I am affraide I shall overthrow you sir in faith.


Falls. It Is but for want of use then sir.


Tan. Indeed that same odd word Use, makes a man a good Lawyer, and a woman an
arrant -- tuh tuh, tuh, tuh, tuh, now am I for you sir: but first to bring you
into form, can your worship name all your weapons?


Falls. That I can I hope, let me see, Longswoord, what is Longsword? I am so
duld with doing justice, that I have forgot all in faith.


Tan. Your long sword, that's a writ of delay.

Falls. Mass that swords long enough indeed, I ha known it reach the length
of fifteen Terms.


Tang Fifteen Terms, that is but a short sword.

Falls. Me thinks it is long enough, proceed sir.

Tang. A Writ of Delay, Long-sword.
Scandala Magnatum, Backesword.

Falls. Scandals are back-swords indeed

Tang. Capias cominus, Case of Rapyers.

Falls. Oh Desperate!

Tang. A Latitat, sword and Dagger.

Falls. A writ of Execution, Rapier and Dagger.

Falls. Thou art come to our present weapon, but what call you sword and Buckler
then?


Tang. Oh! that is out of use now, sword and Buckler was called a good
conscience, but that weapons left long ago, that was too manly a fight, too
sound a weapon for these our days, sl'id we are scarce able to lift up a
Buckler now, our arms are so bound to the Pox: one good bang upon a Buckler
would make most of our Gentlemen fly a pieces, it is not for these lintie
times, our Lawyers are good Rapyer and Dagger men, they will quickly dispatch your
-- money.


Falls. Indeed since sword and buckler time, I have observed, there has been
nothing so much fighting: where be all our gallant Swaggerers? there are no
good frayes alate.


Tang. Oh sir, the properties altered, you shall see less fighting every day
then other, for every one gets him a Mistress, and she gives him wounds enowe,
and you know, the Surgeons cannot beehere and there too, if there were red
wounds too, what would become of the Reinish wounds?


Falls. Thou say true in faith, they would be but il favouredly looked to then.


Tang. Very well sir.

Falls. I expect you sir.

Tang. I lie in this court for you sir, my Rapyer is my Attorney, and my Dagger
his Clarke.


Falls. Your Attorney wants a little oyling, me thinks, he looks very Rustily.


Tang. It Is but his proper color sir, his Father was an Iremonger, he will nere
look brighter, the rust has so eat into him, has never any leisure to be made
clean.


Falls. Not in the vacation.

Tang. Non Vacat exiguis rebus adesse Ioui.

Falls. Then Jove will not be at leisure to scour him, because he ^ere came to
him before.


Tang. You Are excellent at it sir -- and now you least think on it, I arrest you
sir.


Falls. Very good sir.

Tang. Nay very bad sir by my faith -- I follow you still, as the Officers will
follow you as long as you have a penny.


Falls. You speak sentences sir -- by this time have I tried my friends, and
now I thrust in bail --


Tang: This bail will not be taken sir, they must be two Citizens that are no
Cuckolds.


Falls. Berlady then 'ime like to lie by it, I had rather twere a hundred that
were.


Tang. Take heed I bring you not to an Nisiprius sir.

Falls. I must ward my self as well as I may sir.

Tang. It Is Court day now, Declarat Atturnatus, my Attorney gapes for money.


Falls. You shall have no Advantage yet, I put in my Answer.

Falls. I follow the suit still sir.

Falls. I like not this Court birlady -- I: take me out a writ of Remove, a writ
of Remove, do you see sir?


Tang: Very well sir.

Falls. And place my cause higher.

Tang, There you started me sir -- yet for all your Demurres, Plures, and
Sursurarers, which are all Longswords: that is Delays: all the comfort is, in
nine years a man may overthrow you.


Fall. You must thank your good friends then sir.

Tang. Let nine years pass, five hundred crowns cast away a both sides, and
the suite not twenty, my Counselors wife must have another hood you know,
and my Atturneyes wife will have a new forepart, yet see at length law, I shall
have law: now beware, I bring you to a narrow exigent, and by no means can
you avoid the Proclamation --


Falls. Oh!

Tang. Now follows a writ of execution, a Capias, vt Legatum, gives you a
wound mortal, trippes up your heels, and lays you ith Counter.


Falls. O Villain!

Tang. I cry your worship heartily mercy sir, I thought we had been in Law
together, Aduersarius contra aduersarium by my troth.


Falls. Oh! reach me thy hand, I nere had such an overthrow in my life.


Tang. Twa's long of your Attorney there, he might a staide the execution of
Capias vt Legatum, and removed you with a Supersedeas non molestandum into the
Court of Equity.


Falls. Pox on him, he fell out of my hand when I had most need of him,

Tan. I was bound to follow the suite sir.

Falls. Thou could do no less then overthrow me,
I must needs say so.

Tang. You had recovered cost else sir.

Falls. And now by the mass I think I shall hardly recover without cost.


Tang. Nay, that is Certoscio, an execution is very chargeable.


Falls. Well, it shall teach me wit as long as I am a Justice: I perceive by
this trial, if a man have a sound fall in Law, he shall feel it in his bones
all his life after.


Tang. Nay, that is Recto upon Record, for I my self was overthrown in eighty
eight by a Tailor, and I have had a Stitch in my side ever since, oh!

Exeunt.
Toward the close of the music, the Justices three men prepare for a robbery.
Enter Justice Falso, untrust. Falls. Why Latronello, Furtiuo, Fucato, where be
these lazy knaves that should trusse me, not one stirring yet?


A cry within. Follow, follow, follow.


Falls. What news there?

A cry. This way, this way, follow, follow.

Falls. Hark you sluggish Soporiferous villains, there is knaves abroad when you
are a bed, are ye not a shamed on it, a Justices men should be up first, and
give example all knaves.


Enter two of his men tumbling in, in False beards. Latro. Oh I beseech your
good worship.

Fuca. Your worshipful worship.

Fall. Thieves, my two hand sword, i am robbed 'ith Hal, Latronello, Knaves, come
down, my two hand sword I


Latron. I am Latronello, I beseech your worship, (say.

Falls. Thou Latronello, thou lie, my men scorn to have beardes.

Latr. We forget our beards, now I beseech your worship quickly remember us.


Falls. How now?

Fuc. Nay there is no time to talk of how now, it is don.

A cry. Follow, follow, follow.

Latro. Four mark and a Liuerie is not able to keep life and soul together,
we must fly out once a quarte, it is for your worships credit to have money in
our pursse, our Fellow Furtiuo is taken in the Action.


Fall. A pox on him for a lazy knave, would he be taken?

Fuc. They bring him along to your worship, your the next Justice, now or never
show your self a good master, an upright Magistrate, and deliver him out of
their hands.


Falls. Nay, he shall find me -- apt enough to do him good I warrant him.


Latr: He comes in a false beard sir.

Falls. S'foot what, should he do here else? there is no coming to me in a
true on: if he had one, -- the slave to be taken: do not I keep Geldings
swift enough?


Latron. The goodlyest Geldings of any Gentleman in the shire.


Falls. Which did the whoreson knave ride upon?


Enter. Upon one of your best sir.

Fucat. Stand and deliver.

Falls. Upon Stand and Deliver: the very Gelding I choose for mine own riding,
as nimble as Pegasus the flying horse yonder: go shift your selves into your
coats, bring hither a great chair, and a little table.


Fucat. With all present speed sir.

Falls. And Latronello.

Latron. I sir.

Falls. Sit you down, and very soberly take the examnation.

Latro. I Will draw a few horse heads in a paper, make a show: I hope I shall
keep my countenence.


Falls. Pox on him again, would he be taken? he frets me: I have been a youth
my self, I ha seen the day I could have told money out of other men's purses
(Mass so I can do now) nor will I keep that fellow about me that dares not
bid a man stand: for as long as drunkenness is a vice, stand is a virtue: but
I would not have 'em taken. I remember now betimes in a morning I would have
peept through the green boughs, and have had the party presently, and then to
ride away sinelye in fear, it was even Venerie to me in faith, the pleasantst
course of life, one would think every Woodcok a Constable, and every Owl an
officer, but those days are past with me: and a my troth I think I am a
greater thief now, and in no danger: I can take my ease, sit in my Chair,
look in your faces now, and rob you, make you bring your money by authority
put off your hat, and thank me for robbing of you, O there is nothing to a
thief under Covert Barn.


Enter Phoenix, Fidelio being robbed, Constable, Officers and the Thief Furtino.
Constable. Come Officers bring him away.

Falls. Nay, I see thee through thy false beard, thou mid-winde chinde Rascal,

How now my Masters, what is he? ha?

Con. Your worship knows, I never come but I bring a thief with me.


Falls. Thou have left thy wont else Constable.

Phoe. Sir, we understand you to be the only up rightnes of this place.


Falls. But I scare understand you sir.

Phoe. Why then you understand not your self sir.

Falls. Such another word, and you shall change places with the Thief.


Phoe. A maintayner of equal causes I mean.

Falls. Now I have you, proceed sir.

Phoe. This Gentleman and my self, being led heather by occasion of business,
have been offered the discurtesie of the Country, set upon by three thieves
and robbed.


Falls. What are become of the other two, Latronello, and Fuca?

Latro. Here sir.

Phoe. They both made away from us, the cry pursues them, but as yet none but
this taken.


Falls. Latronello.

Latron. Sir.

Falls. Take his examination.

Latro. Yes sir.

Falls. Let the Knave stand single.

Furt. Thank your good worship.

Falls. Has been a suter at Court sure, he thanks me for nothing.

Phoe. He Is a Thief now sure.

Falls. That we must know of him, what are you sir?

Furt. A piece next to the Tail sir -- a Seruingman.

Falls. By my troth a pretty phrase and very cleanly handled, put it down
Latronello: thou may make use on it. Is he of honor or worship whom thou
seruest?


Fur. Of both dear sir, honorable in mind, and worshipful in body.


Falls. Why would one wish a man to speak better?

Phoen Oh sir, they most commonly speak best, that do worst.

Falls. Say you so sir, then we will try him farther, -- Does your right
worshipful master, go before you, as an ensample of Vice, and so encourage
you to this slinking iniquity? he is not a Lawer, is he?


Furt. Has the more wrong sir, both for his conscience, and honesty, he
deserves to be one.


Fall. Pity he is thief in faith, I should entertain him else.

Phoen. I, if he were not as he is, he would be better then himself.


Furt. No it is well known sir, I have a master, the very picture of wisdom,


Lat. For indeed he speaks not one wise word.

Furt. And no man but will admire to hear of his Virtues.

Lat. Because he nere had any in all his life.

Falls. You write all down Latronello.

Latr. I warrant you sir.

Furt. So sober, so discrete, so judicious:

Falls. Hum.

Furt. And above all, of most reverend gravity.

Falls. I like him for one quality, he speaks well of his master, he will
fare the better: -- Now sir, let me touch you,


Fur. I sir.

Falls. Why, serving a Gentleman of such worship and wisdom, such sobriety and
virtue, such discretion and judgment as your master is, do you take such a
beastly course, to stop horses, hinder Gentlewomen from their meetings, and
make Citizens never ride but a Sundaies, only to avoid Morning prayer and you:
is it because your worshipful Ma. feeds you with lean spits, paies you with
Irish money, or clothes you in northern doze^s?


Furt. Far be it from his mind, or my report, It Is well known he kept
worshipful cheer the day of his wives burial, pays our four marks a year as
duly by twelve pence a quarter as can be.


Phoe. His wisdom swallows it.

Furt. And for Northren dozens, fie, fie, we were nere troubled with so many.

Falls. Receiving then such plenteous blessings from your virtuous and bountiful
master, what cause have you to be thief now? answer me to that geere:


Furt. It Is even as a man gives his mind to it sir.

Falls. How sir?

Furt. For alas, if the whole world were but of one trade; traffic were
nothing: if we were all truemen, we should be of no trade: what a pitiful
world would here be, heaven forbid we should be all truemen: then how
should your worships next suite be made? not a Tailor left in the land: of
what stuff would you have it made? not a Merchant left to deliver it, would
your worship go in that suit still? You would ha more thieves about you then
those you have banished, and be glad to call the great ones home again, to
destroy the little.


Phoe. A notable Rogue.

Fall. A my troth, a fine knave, and has answered me gloriously, what wages
will thou take after thou art ha^g'd?


Furt. More then your worship's able to give, I would think foul scorn to be
a Justice then.


Fall. He says true too yfayth, for we are all full of corruption here, --
hark you my friends.


Phoe. Sir.

Fall. By my troth if you were no crueller then I, I could find in my heart to
let him go.


Phoe. Could you so sir, the more pitiful Justice you.

Fall. Nay I did but to try you, if you have no pity, I Will ha none, away he is
a Thief, to prison with him.


Furt. I am content sir.

Fall. Are you content, bring him back, nay then you shall not go.


Fall. I Will be as cruel as you can wish: you are content, belike you have a trick
to break prison, or a bribe for the Officers.


Constable. For us sir?

Fall. For you sir? what colour's silver I pray, you nere saw money in your life:
-- I Will not trust you with him, Latronello and Fucato, lay hold upon him, to
your charge I commit him.


Furt. Oh, I beseech you sir.

Fall. Nay if I must be cruel, I will be cruel.

Furt. Good sir, let me rather go to prison.

Fall. You desire that* -- I Will trust no prison with you, I Will make you lie in
mine own house, or I Will know why I shall not.


Furt. Merciful sir.

Falls. Since you have no pity I will be cruel.

Phoe. Very good sir, you please us well.

Falls. You shall appear to morrow sirs.

Furt. Upon my kees sir.

Fall. You shall be hanged out a'th way, away with him Latronello, and Fucato,
-- Officers I discharge you my house, I like not your company.

Report me as you see me, fire and fuel,
If men be Jews, Justices must be cruel.
Exeunt.
Phoe. So sir, Extremes set of all Actions thus,
Either too tame, or else too tyranous:
He being bent to fury, I doubt now
We shall not gain access unto your love or she to us.

Fid. Most wishfully here she comes.

Enter Niece. Phoen. Is that she?

Fid. This is she my Lord.

Phoen. A modest presence.

Fid. Virtue bless you Lady,

Niece. You wish me well sir.

Fid. I Would first in charge this kiss, and next this paper,
You Will know the language, it is Fidelios.

Niece. My ever vowed love, how is his health?

Fid. As fair as is his favor with the Prince.

Nee. I Am sick with joy, does the Prince love him so?

Fid. His life cannot requite it,
Not to wrong the remembrance of his love,
I had a token for you, kept it safe,
Till by misfortune of the way this morning,
Thieves set upon this Gentleman and my self,
And with the rest robbed that.

Niece. Oh me, I Am deerly sorry for your chance, was it your loss?
They boldly look you in the face that robbed you,
No farther villains then my uncles men.

Phoen. What Lady?

Niece. It Is my grief I speak so true.

Fid. Why my Lord?

Phoen. But give me pawsing Lady: was he one that took the examination?

Niece. One and the chief.

Phoe. Henceforth hang him that is no way a thief,
Then I hope few will suffer, -- nay all the jest was, he committed him to the
charge of his fellows, and the rogue made it lamentable, cried to leaue'em.

None live so wise but fools may once deceive em?

Fid. An uncle so insaciate?

Phoen. I, Is It not strange too,
That al should be by Nature vicious, and he bad against
Nature?

Niece. Then you have heard the sum of al my wrongs.

Phoe. Lady, we have, and desire rather now
To heal 'em, then to hear 'em:
For by a letter from Fidelio
Direct to us, we are entreated jointly,
To hasten your remove* from this foul den,
Of theft and purposed incest:

Niece. I rejoice in his chaste care of me, I Will soon be furnished.

Fid. He writes that his return cannot be long.

Niece. I Am chiefly glad, -- but whither is the place?

Phoen. To the safe seat of his late wronged mother.

Niece. I desire it, --
Her conference will fit mine, well you prevail,

Phoen. At next grove we will expect you:

Niece. I Will not fail.
Exeunt.
Enter Knight, and Iewella. Knig. It stands upon the frame of my reputation I
protest Lady.

Jewel. Lady, that word is worth an hundred Angels at all times, for it cost
more: if I live til tomorrow night, my sweet pleasure thou shall have them.


Kni. Could you not make 'em a hundred and fifty think you?

Jew. I Will do my best endeavor to multiply, I assure you.

Kni. Could you not make 'em two hundred?

Jew. No by my faith. --

Kn. Peace, i will rather be confined in the hundred and fifty.

Jewel. Come even much about this time, when Tauerns give up their Ghosts, and
Gentlemen are in their first cast. --


Knig. I Will observe the season.

Jew. And do but whirle the Ring a'th door once about, my maid-seruant shall
be taught to understand the language.


Kni. Enough my sweet Reuenew.

Jew. Good rest my effectual pleasure.
Exeunt.
Enter Proditor, and Phoenix. Prod. Come hither Phoenix.

Phoe. What makes your honor break so early?

Prod. A toy, I have a toy.

Phoe. A toy my Lord.

Prod: Before thou layest thy wrath upon the duke, -- be aduiz'd.

Phoe: I, I, I warran you my Lord.

Prod. Nay, give my words honor, hear me,
I Will strive to bring this Act into such form,
And credit amongst men, they shall suppose.
Nay verily believe the Prince his son,
To be the plotter of his Fathers murder.

Phoe: Oh that were infinitely admirable!

Prod. Were not, it pleases me beyond my bliss:

Prod. Then if his son meet death as he returns,
Or by my hired Instruments turn up,
The general voice will cry -- O happy vengeance!

Phoe. O blessed vengeance!

Pro. I, i will turn my brain
Into a thousand uses, Tire my inventions,
Make my blood sick with study, and mine eye
More hollow then my heart, but I will fashion,
Nay I will fashion it, -- Can counterfeit?

Phoe. The Princes hand, more truly, most direct,
You shall admire it.

Prod. Necessary mischief.
Next to a woman, but more close in secrets
You Are all the kindred that my breast vouch safes,
Look into me anon, -- I must frame, and muse, and
fashion --
Exit.
Phoe. It Was time to look into thee, in whose heart
Treason grows ripe, and therefore fit to fall,
That slave first sinkes, whose envy threatens all,
Now is his Venom at full height.
Voices within.
1 Voic. Lying, or being in the said County in the Tenor and occupation
aforesaid.


2 Voice. No more then, a writ of course upon the matter of --


3. Voice. Silence.

4. Voice. Oh o-o-o-yes Carlo Turbulenzo, appear or loose twenty mark in the
suites.


Phoe: Ha? whether have my thoughts conveyed me? I am now within the Dizzie
murmur of the law.


1 Voice. So that then, the cause being found clear, upon the last Scitation.


4 Voice. Carlo turbulenzo, Come into the Court.

Enter Tangle with two after him. Tang. Now, now, now, now, now, upon my knees
I praise Mercury the God of law, I have two suits at issue, two suites at issue.


1 Do you hear sir?

Tang. I will not hear, i have other business.

1 I beseech you my learned Counsel.

Tang. Beseech not me, beseech not me, I am a mortal man, a Clyent as you are,
beseech not me.


1 I would do all by your worships direction.


Tang. Then hang thy self.

2 Shall I take out a special supplycauit.

Tang. Mad me not, torment me not, tear me not, you will give me leave to hear
mine own cause, mine own cause


1. Voice. Nay moreover, and farther --


Tang. Well said my Lawyer, well said, well said.

1. Voice. All the opprobious speeches that man could invent all malicious
inuectiues, called Wittoll to his face.


Tan. That's I, that's I, thank you my learned counsel for your good
remembrance: I hope I shall overthrow him horse and foot.


1. Nay but good sir.

Tang: No more sir, he that brings me happy news first i will relieve first.


Both. Sound executions rot thy cause and thee.
Exeunt:
Ta: I, I, I, pray so still, pray so still, they will thrive the better


Phoe. I wonder how this fellow keeps out madness?
What stuff his brains are made on?

Tan. I suffer, I suffer, -- till I here a judgment.

Phoe. What old Signior?

Tan Prithee I will not know thee now, it is a busy time, a busy time with me.


Phoe. What not me Signeur?

Tang. Oh cry thee mercy, give me thy hand, -- fare thee well, -- has no
relief again me then, -- his demurs will not help him, his Sursararaes will but
play the knaves with him.


Enter Justice Falso. Phoen. The Justice: it is he


Falls. Have I found thee in faith? I thought where I should smell thee out old
Tangle.


Tan. What old Signeur Iusticer, -- embrace me another time and you can
possible: how does all thy wives children, -- well? that is well said yfayth.


Falls. Hear me old Tangle.

Tan. Prithee do not ravish me, let me go.

Falls. I must use some of thy counsel first.

Tan. Sirrah, I ha brought him to an Exigent* hark that is my cause, that's my
cause yo^der, I twind'g him, I twind'g him.


Falls. My Niece is stolen away.


Tan. Ah, get me a ne exeat Regno quickly, nay you must not stay vppo'nt, i would
feign have you gone.


Falls. A ne exeat Regno, i will about it presently, -- adue.

Phoe. You seek to catch her Justice, she will catch you.

1 A judgment, a judgment.
Enter 1.
Tang. What, what, what?

1 Overthrown, overthrown, overthrown.

Tan. Ha, a, a.

2 News, news, news.
Enter 2.
Tan. The devil, the devil, the devil.

2 Twice Tangle's overthrown, twice Tangles overthrown.

Tang. Hold:

Phoen. Now old cheater of the Law,

Tang. Pray give me leave to be mad.

Phoen. Thou that have found such sweet pleasure in the vexation of others.


Tang. May I not be mad in quiet?

Phoe. Very Marrow, very manna to thee to be in law.

Tang. Very sirrop of Toades, and perseru'd Adders.

Phoe. Thou that have vexed, and beggerd the whole
Parrish, and made the honest Church wardens go to
Law with the poores money.

Tang. Hear me, do but hear me, I pronounce a terrible, horrible curse upon
you al -- and wish you to my Attorney: see where a Praemunire comes a Dedimus
potestatem, and that most Dreadful Execution, Excommunicato Capiendo, there is
no bail to be taken, I shall rot in fifteen Iayles: make Dice of my bones, and
let my Counselors Son play away his Fathers money with them; may my bones
revenge my quarrel! -- A Capias Cominus? here, here, here, here: quicklye
dip your Quilles in my blood, off with my skin and write fourteen lines of a
side -- there is an honest conscionable fellow, he takes but ten shillinges of
a Bellowes-mender -- here is another deals all with charity, you shall give
him nothing, only his wife an embrodered Pettycoate, a gold frindge for her
tail, or a border for her head, ah sirrah! you shall catch me no more in the
sprindge of your Knaueries.

Exeunt.
1 Follow, follow him still, a little thing now sets him forward.


Phoe. None can except against him, the man's mad,
And priuiledgd by the Moon, if he say true:
Less madness it is to speak sin, then to do.
This wretch that loved before, his food, his strife,
This punishment falls even with his life.
His pleasure was vexation, all his bliss
The torment of another.
Their heart, his health: their starued hopes his store,
Who so loves Law, dies either mad or poor.

Enter Fidelio. Fid. A miracle, a miracle!

Phoe. How now Fidelio?

Fid. My Lord a miracle!

Phoe. What is it?

Fid. I have found
One quiet, suffering, and vnlawyer'd man.
An opposite, a very Contrary
To the old turbulent fellow.

Phoe. Why he is mad.

Fid. Mad, why he is in his right wits, could he be madder then he was, if he
be any way altered from what he was, it is for the better, my Lord.


Phoe. Well, but where is this wonder?

Fid. It Is coming my Lord: A man so truly a man, so indifferently a creature,
using the world in his right nature but to tread upon, one that would not
bruise, the cowardly est enemy to man, the worm, that dares not show his malice
till we are dead: nay my Lord, you will admire his temper! see where he comes,
I promisd your acquaintance, sir

Enter Quieto. Yon is the Gentleman I did commend for Temper.

Qui. Let me embrace you simply.
That Is perfectly, and more in heart then hand:
Let affectation keep at Court.

Phoe. I, let it.

Qu. It Is told me you love quiet

Phoe. Above wealth.

Qu. I above life: I have been wild and rash
Committed many and unnatural crimes,
Which I have since repented.

Phoe. Twa's well spent.

Qui. I was mad, stark mad, nine years together.

Phoe. I pray! as how?

Qui. Going to law, in faith it made me mad.

Phoe. With the like frenzy not an hour since
An aged man was struck.

Qui. Alas I pity him.

Phoe. He Is not worth pitying, for twa's still his gladness to be at variance.


Qui. Yet a man's worth pity,
My quiet blood has blessed me with this gift,
I have cured some, and if his wits be not
Too deeply cut, I will assay to help them.

Phoe. Sufferance does teach you pity.

Enter his Boy. Boy. O Master, Master, your abominable next neighbor came
into the house, being half in drink, and took away your best Carpet.


Qui. Has he it?

Boy. Alas sir:


Qui. Let him go, trouble him not, lock the door quietly after him, and have
a safer care who comes in next.


Phoe. But sir, might I aduize you, in such a cause as this, a man might
bouldlye, nay* with conscience go to Law.


Qui. Oh, i will give him the table too first. Better endure a fist then a sharp
sword: I had rather they should pull off my clothes then flea of my skin, and
hang that on mine enemies hedge.


Phoe. Why, for such good causes was the law ordaind:

Qui. True, and in it self it is glorious and divine,
Law is the very Master piece of heaven:
But see yonder.
There Is many Clouds between the sun and us,
There Is too much cloth before we see the Law:

Phoe. I Am content with that answer, be mild still,
It Is honor to forgive those you could kill.

Quie. There do I keep.

Phoe. Reach me your hand, I love you,
And you shall know me better.

Quie. It Is my suit.

Phoe. The night grows deep -- and --

Enter two Officers. 1 Off: Come away, this way, this way.

Phoe. Who be those? stand close a little.

Iars the Ring of the Door, the Maid enters catches him. Maid. Oh, you are come
as well as ere you came in your life, my Maister's new gone to bed, give me
your Knightly hand, I must lead you into the blind Parlor, my mistress will be
down to you presentlye.


Takes in Phoenix, amazde. 1 Off. I tell you our safest course will be to
arrest him when he comes out a'th Tavern: for then he will be half drunk,
and will not stand upon his weapon.


2 Our safest course indeed, for he will draw.

1 That he will, though he put it up again, which is more of his courtesy, then
of our deserving.

Exeunt.
Qui. The world is nothing but vexation,
Spite and uncharitable Action.

Fid. Did you see the Gentleman?

Qui. Not I.

Fid. Where should he be, it may be he is past by,
Good sir, lets overtake him.
Exeunt
Enter Phoenix with the Maid. Maid. Here sir, now you are there sir, she will
come down to you instantlye, I must not stay with you, my Mistress would be
jealous, you must do nothing to me, my mistress would find it quickly.

Exit.
Phoe. S'foot whether am I led? brought in byth hand? I hope it can be no
harm to stay for a woman, tho indeed they were never more dangerous, I have
ventured heatherto and safe, and I must venture to stay now, this should be a
fair Rome, but I see it not, the blind Parlor cal's she it?


Enter Jewel. Jew. Where art thou, O my Knight!

Phoe: Your Knight, I am the Dukes knight.

Jew. I say you are my knight, for I Am sure I paid for you

Phoe. Paid for you hum, -- S'foot a light. --

Jew. Now out upon the Marmoset, have thou served me so long, and offer to
bring in a Candle?


Phoe: Fair Room, villainous face, and worse woman, I ha learnt something by a
glimpse ath Candle:


Jew. How happened it you came so soon, I looked not for you these two hours:
yet as the sweet chance is, you came as well as a thing could come, for my
hus: band's newly brought a bed.


Phoe. And what has Jove sent him?

Jew. He nere sent him any thing since I knew him, he is a man of a bad
nature to his wife, none but his Maids can thrive under him.


Phoe. Out upon him.

Jew. I, judge whether I have a cause to be a Curtezan or no? to do as I do,
an elderly fellow as he is, if he were married to a young Virgin, he were
able to break her heart, tho he could break nothing else: here, here, there is
just a hundred and fifty, but I stole them so hardlye from him, twold ee'ne
have grieud you to have seen it.


Phoe So twould in faith.

Jew. Therefore prithee my sweet pleasure, do not keep company so much, how
do you think I am able to maintain you? though I be a Iewellers wife,
Jewels are like women, they rise and fall, we must be content to loose
sometimes, to gain often, but you are content always to loose, and never to
gain: what need you ride with a Footeman before you?


Phoe: Oh that's the grace,

Jew. The grace? it is sufficient grace that you have a Horse to ride upon, you
should think thus with your self every time you go to bed if my head were
laid, what would become of that horse? he would run a bad race then as well
as his Master.


Phoe. Nay, and you give me money to chide me: --

Jewel. No, if it were as much more, I would think it foul scorn to chide
you, I advise you to be thrifty, to take the time now, while you have it, you
shall sildome get such an other fool as I am, I warrant you: why there is
Mettrezza Auriola keeps her love with half the cost that I am at, her friend
can go a foot like a good Husband, walk in wosted Stockings, and enquire for
the Six-penny ordinary.


Phoe. Pox on it, and would you have me so base?

Jew. No, I would not have you so base neither: but now and then, when you keep
your Chamber, you might let your Footeman out for eighteen pence a day, a great
relief at years end I can tell you.


Ph. The age must needs be foul when vice reformes it.

Jew. Nay, I Have a greater quarrel to you yet.

Phoe. In Faith, what is it?

Jew. You made me believe at first the Prince had you in great estimation, and
would not offer to Travail without you, nay, that he could not travail
without your Direction and intelligence.


Phoe. I Am sorry I said so in faith, but sure I was overflowed when I spoke
it, I could nere ha said it else.


Jew. Nay more, you swore to me, that you were the first that taught him to
ride a great horse, and tread the Ring with agilitie.


Phoe. By my troth I must needs confess I swore a great lie in that, and I
was a villain to do it, for I could nere ride great horse in my life.


Iewl. Why lo, who would love you now but a Citizens wife? so inconstant, so
for sworn: you say women are false Creatures, but take away men, and thei'd
be honester then you -- Nay last of all, which offends me most of all, you
told me you covld countenance me at Court, and you know we esteem a friend
there, more worth then a Husband here.


Phoe. What I spoke of that. Lady, i will maintain.

Jew: You maintain? you seen it court?

Phoe. Why by this Diamond --

Jew. Oh take heed, you cannot have that, it is always in the eye of my husband.


Phoe. I protest I will not keep it, but only use it for th is virtue, as a
token to fetch you,and approve my power, where you shall not only ye be
received, but made known to the best and chiefest.


Jewel. Oh are you true?

Phoe. Let me loose my Reuenewe else.

Iewl. That Is your word indeed, and upon that condition take it this kiss
and my love for ever.


Phoe. Enough.

Jew. Give me thy hand, i will lead thee forth.

Phoe. I Am sick of al professions, my thoughts burn:
He travails best, that knows when to return.
Exeunt.
Enter Knight, two Officers after him. Kni. Adue, farewell, to bed you, I to my
sweet Cittybird, my precious Reuennew, the very thought of a hundred and
fifty Angels, increases Oil and Spirit, ho:


1. Off. I arrest you sir.

Knig. Oh!

1 Off. You have made us wait a goodly time for you, have you not think you?
you are in your Rowses and Mulwines a pox on you: and have no care of poor
Officers staying for you.


Kni. I drunk but one health I protest, but I could void it now: at whose suit
I pra'y?


1 Off. At the suit of him that makes suits, your Tailor,

Kni. Why, he made me the last, this, this that I wear

1. Off. Argo, nay, we have been Scholars I can tell you, we could not have
been knaves so soon else, for as in that notable City called London, stand
two most famous Universities, Poultrie and Woodstreet, where some are of
twenty years standing, and have took all their degrees from the Masters
side, down to the Mistress side, the Hole, so in like manner --


Knig. Come, come, come, I had quite forgot the hundred and fifty Angels.


2 Off. S'lid where be they?

Knight. I Will bring you to the sight of them presently.

1 Off. A notable Lad, and worthy to be arrested: we will have but ten for
waiting, and then thou shall choose whether thou will run away from us, or we
from thee.


Knight. A match at running, come, come, follow me.

2 Off. Nay, fear not that.

Knig. Peace, you may happen to see toys, but do not see them.

1 Off. Pah.

Knig. That's the Door.

1 Off. This? -- knockes.

Knight. S foot Officer you have spoilde all already?

1 Off. Why?

Knig. Why? you shall see, you should have but whirld the ring once about, and
there is a Maid servant brought up to understand it.


Maid. Whose at door?

Knig. Als well again: phist, it is I, it is I.

Maid. You, what are you?

Kni. Puh, where is thy mistress?

Maid. What of her?

Knigh. Tell her One, she knows who, her Pleasure's here, say.

Maid. Her Pleasure? my mistress scorns to be without her pleasure at this time
of night: is she so void of friends think you? take that for thinking so: a
Box


1 Off. The hundred and fifty Angels are locked up in a Box, we shall not see
them tonight.


Knig. Howe's this? am I used like a hundred pound Gentleman? Does my Reuennew
forsake me? Dam me if ever I be her pleasure again. -- Well I must to prison.


1. Off. Go prepare his room, there is no remedy, i will bring him along, he is
tame enough now.


Kni. Dare my Tailor presume to use me in this sort?
He steals and I must lie in prison for it.

1. Off. Come, come away sir.

Enter a Gentleman with a Drawer. Gent. Art sure thou saw him arested Drawer?

Draw. If mine eyes be sober.

Gent. And that is a question, Mass here he goes, he shall not go to prison,
I have a trick shall bail him -- away.


1. Off. Oh!
Blinds the officer.
Gent. Guess, guess, who am I? who am I?

1. Off. Who the Devil are you? let go, -- a Pox on you, who are you? I have
lost my prisoner.


Gentle. Prisoner: I Have mistook, I cry you heartily mercy, I have done you
infinite injury, a my troth I took you to be an honest man.


1. Off. Where were your eyes? could you not see I was an Officer, stop, stop,
stop, stop.


Gent. Hah, hah, hah, ha.
Exeunt.
Enter Proditor and Phoenix. Prod. Now Phoenix.

Phoen. Now my Lord.

Prod. Let princely blood
Nourish our hopes, we being confusion now.

Phoen. A terrible sudden blow.

Prod. I:what day is this hangs over us?

Phoen. Bith Mass Monday.

Prod. As I could wish my purpose will thrive best.

Twa's first my birthday, now my fortunes day,
I see whom fate will raise needs never pray.

Phoe. Never.

Prod. How is the air?

Phoe. Oh full of trouble.

Prod: Does not the sky look pittiously black

Phoe. As if twere hung with Rich men's Consciences.

Prod. Ah, Stuck not a Comet like a Carbuckle
Upon the dreadful browe of Twelve last night?

Phoe. Twelve, no twa's about one.

Prod. About one most proper, for that's the Duke.

Phoe. Well shifted from thy self.

Prod. I could have wished it between one and two
His son and him.

Phoe. I Will give you comfort then.

Prod, Prithee.

Phoe. There was a villainous Raven seen last night,
Over the presence chamber in hard Iustle
With a young Eglet.

Prod. A Raven! that was I, what did the Raven?

Phoe. Mary my Lord the Raven -- to say truth,
I left the combat doubtful.

Prod. So it is still,
For all is doubt, till the deed crown the will,
Now bless thy loins with Freedom, wealth and honor,
Think all thy seed young Lords, and by this Act.
Make a foote-cloathd posterity: now imagine
Thou see thy Daughters with their trains borne up,
Whom else despised want, may curse to whoredom,
And public shames, which our state never threate,
She Is never lewd, that is accounted great.

Phoe. I Will alter that Court-Axiom* thus renewd,
She Is never great, that is accounted lewd.

Prod. Stand close, the presence fills, here, here the place
And at his rizing, let his fall be base,

Beneath thy foot.

Phoe. How for his Guard my Lord?

Prod. My gold and fear keeps with the chief of them

Phoe. That Is rarely well.

Prod. Bold heedlesse slave, that dares attempt a deed which shall in pieces
rend him my Lords both.


Enter Lussurioso, and Infesto two Lords. Lus. The happiness of the day.

Phoe. Time my returning,
Treasons have still the worst, yet still are spurning.

Prod. The Duke!

Phoe. I nere was gladder to behold him.

Prod. All. Long live your Grace.

Duke. I do not like that strain,
You know my age affoords not to live long.

Prod. Spoke truer then you think for.

Duke. Bestow that wish upon the Prince our Son.

Phoe, Nay, he is not to live long neither.

Prod. Him as the wealthy Treasure of our hopes,
You as posession of our present Comfort,
Both in one heart, we reverence in one.

Phoe. Oh Treason of a good complexion.
Horn winded.
Enter Fidelio. Duke. How now, what fresher news fills the Courts ear?

Prod, Fidelio!

Fid. Glad Tidings to your Grace,
The prince is safe returned, and in your Court.

Duke. Our joy breaks at our eyes, the Prince is come!

Prod. Soul qucking news -- pale vengeance to my blood.

Fid. By me presenting to your serious view,
A brief of all his Travails.

Du. It Is most welcome.
It shall be Dear and precious to our Eye.

Prod. He Reads, i am glad her reads.
Now take thyopportunitie, leave that place.

Phoe. At his first rising let his fall be base.

Prod. That must be altered now.

Phoe. Which? his rising or his fall?

1 rod. Art thou dull now?
Thou hear'st the Prince is come.

Duke. What Is here my Lord?

Prod. My Lord?

Duke. I have got such a large portion of knowledge, most worthy father, by the
benefit of my Travail,


Prod. And so he has no doubt my Lord.

Duke. That I am bold now to warn you of Lord
Proditors insolent Treason, who has irreligiouslye seduced a fellow, and
closely conuaide him even in the presence-chaire to murder you:


Phoen. Oh guilty, guilty.

Duke. What was that fell? what is he?

Phoen. I am the man.

Prod. O slave!

Phoe. I have no power to strike,

Prod. I Am gone, i am gone.

Duke. Let me admire heauen's wisdom in my Son.

Phoe. I confess it, he hired me --

Prod. This is slave,
It Is forged against mine honor and my life,
For in what part of reason cannot appear,
The Prince being Trauaild should know Treasons here
Plain counterfeit --

Duke. Do thou make false our Son?

Prod. I know the prince will not affirm it.

Fid. He can and will my Lord.

Phoe. Most just, he may:

Duke. A guard.

Luss. We cannot but in loyal zeal our selves,
Lay hands on such a Villain. --

Duke. Stay you, I find you here too.

Lus. Us my Lord?

Duke. Against Lussurioso and Infesto, who not only most ryotouslye consume
their houses in vicious gaming, morgaging their livings to the Merchant, whereby
he with his heirs enter upon their lands, from whence this abuse comes, that
in short time the Son of the Merchant has more Lordships then the Son of
the Nobleman(which else was never borne to inheritance) but that which is more
impious, they most adulterously train out young Ladies to Midnight banquets,
to the utter defamation of their own honors, and ridiculous abuse of their
Husbands.


Lus. How could the Prince hear that?

Phoe. Most true my Lord.
My Conscience is a witness against it self,
For to that execution of chaste honor,
I was both hyr'd and led.

Lus. I hope the Prince out of his plentious wisdom
Will not give wrong to us: as for this fellow
He Is poor, and cares not to be desperate.
Enter Justice Falso.
Fall. Justice my Lord, I have my Niece stolen from me
She Has left her Dowry with me, but she is gone,
I Would rather have had her love then her money I,
This, this, is one of them, Justice my Lord:
I know him by his face, this is the Thief.

Prod. Your grace may now in milder sense perceive
The wrong done to us by this impudent wretch,
Who has his hand fixed at the throat of law,
And therefore durst be desperate of his life,

Duk. Peace, you are too foul, your crime is in excess:
One spot of him, makes not your Ulcers less.

Prod. Oh!

Duk Did your Violence force away his Niece?

Phoe. No my good Lord; ilestil confess what is truth.
I did remove her from her many wrongs,
Which she was pleased to leave, they were so vilde.

Duke. What are you named?

Falls. Falso my Lord, Justice Falso, i am known by that name.

Du. Falso, you came fitly,
You are the very next that follows here.

Falls. I hope so my Lord, my name is in all the Records
I can assure your good grace.

Du. Against Justice Falso.

Falls. Ah.

Du. Who having had the honest charge of his Niece committed to his trust, by
the last will and Testament of her deceased father, and with her all the power
of his wealth, not only against faith and conscience detaines her Dowry, but
against Nature and humanity assaies to abuse her body.


Niece. I Am present to affirm it my loved Lord.

Falls. How? what make I here?

Niece. Either I must agree.
To loathed lust, or despisde beggary.

Du. Are you the plaintiue here?

Falls. I my good Lord,
For fault of a better.

Du. Sildome comes a worse -- and moreover not containde in this vice only,
which is odious to much, but against the sacred use of Justice, maintains
three threeues to his men.


Falls. Cuds me!

Du. Who only take Pursses in their Masters liberty, where if any one chance
to be taken, he appears before him in a false Beard, and own of his own
fellows takes his examination.


Falls. By my troth as true as can be, but he shall not know on it.

Du. And in the end will execute Justice so cruellye upon him, that he will
not trust him in a prison, but commit him to his fellows chamber.


Falls. Can a man do nothing in the Country but it is told at Court? there is some
busy informing knave abroad, a my life.


Phoe. That this is true, and these, and more my Lord.
(Be it under pardon spoken for mine own)
He the disease of Justice, these of honor,
And This of Loyalty and Reverence:
The unswept venom of the Palace,

Prod. Slave!

Phoen. Behold the Prince to approve it.

Prod. Oh, where?

Phoe. Your Eyes keep with your Actions, both look wrong.

Prod. An infernal to my spirit.

All. My Lord the Prince:

Prod. Tread me to dust, thou in who^ wonder keeps,
Behold the Serpent on his belly creepes.

Phoen. Ranckle not my foot, away.
Treason, we laugh at thy vain-labouring strings,
Above the foot thou have no power ore Kings

Duke. I cannot with sufficient joy receive thee,
And yet my ioye's too much,

Phoen. My royal Father,
To whose unnatural murder I was hired,
I thought it a more natural course of travail,
And answering future expectation,
To leave far Countries, and enquire mine own,

Duk. To thee let Reverence all her powers engage,
That art in youth a miracle to age.
State is but blindness, ethou had piercing Art,
We only saw the knee; but thou the heart.
To thee then power and Dukedom we resign,
*He Is fit to reign, whose knowledge can refine:

Phoen. Forbid it my obedience.

Duke. Our word's not vain,
I know thee wise can both obey and reign,
The rest of life we dedicate to heaven.

All. A happy and safe reign to our new Duke.

Phoe. Without your prayers safer, and happier: Fidelio.

Fid. My royal Lord.

Phoe. Here take this Diamond:
You know the virtue on it, it can fetch vice:
Madam Castiza:

Fid: She attends my Lord.

Phoen. Place a guard near us.
Know you you fellow Lady?

Lad. My honors evil.

Prod. Torment again?

Phoen. So ugly are thy crimes,
Thine eye cannot endure 'em.
And that thy face may stand perpetually
Turned so from ours, and thy abhorred self,
Neither to threaten wrack of state or credit,
An everlasting banishment ceaze on thee.

Prod. Oh Fiend!

Phoen. Thy life is such it is too bad to end.

Prod. May thy Rule, life, and all that is in thee glad,
Have as short time -- as thy begetting had.
Exit.
Phoen. Away, thy curse is idle, the rest are under reformation, and therefore
under pardon.


All. Our duties shall turn edge upon our crimes.


Falls. S'lid I was afraid of nothing, but that for my theeuerie, and bawderie I
should have been turned to an Inkeeper: my daughter, I am ashamed her worship
should see me.


Enter Jewel: with Fidelio.. Jew. Who would not love a friend at Court? what
fine Galleries and rooms am I brought through? I had thought my knight durst
not have shown his face here, I.


Phoe. Now mother of pride, and daughter of lust, which is your friend now?


Jew. Ah me!

Phoe. I Am sure you are not so unprovided to be without a friend here, you will
pay enough for him first.


Jew. This is the worst room that ever I came in.

Phoen. I am your servant Mistress, know you not me!

Jew. Your worship is to great for me to know: I Am but a small timbred-woman
when I Am out of my apparel, and dare not venture upon greatness.


Phoen. Do you deny me then? know you this purse?

Jew. That purse? O death has the Knight served me so? given away my Favors?


Phoe. Stand forth -- thou one of those, for whose close lusts the plague never
leaves the City.
Thou worse then common: private, subtle harlot,
That do deceive Three with one feigned lip,
Thy husband, the worlds eye, and the laws whip.
Thy zeal is hot, for it is to lust and frawde,
And do not dread to make thy book thy Bawd,
You Are curse enough to husbands il-got gains,
For whom the Court reiects, his gold maintains:
How dear and rare was Freedom wont to be,
Now few but are by their wives copies free,
And brought to such a head that now we see,
City and Suburbs wear one liuerie.

Jew. It Is long of those, an't like your grace, that come in upon us, and will
never leave marrying of our widows till they make 'em all as free as their
first husbands.


Phoen. I perceive you can shift a point well.

Jew. Let me have pardon I beseech your grace, and I Will peach 'em all, all the
close women that are, and upon my knowledge there is above five thousand within
the walls and the liberties.


Phoen. A band* they shall be sent against the Turk, Infidels against Infidels.


Jew. I will hereafter live so modestly, I will not lie with mine own husband,
nor come near a man in the way of honesty.


Fall. I Will be her warrant my Lord.

Phoen. You are deceived, you think y' are still a Justice.

Fall. S'foot, worse then I was before I kneeld, I am no Justice now, I know I
shall be some Inne-keeper at last.


Jew. My father! it is mine own father.

Phoen. I should have wondered else, lust being so like.

Niece Her birth was kin to mine, she may prove modest, for my sake I beseech
you pardon her.


Phoen. For thy sake I Will do more, Fidelio hand her,
My favors on you both, next all that wealth
Which was committed to that Periur'ds trust.

Fall. I Am a beggar now, worse then an Inne-keeper.

Enter Tangle mad. Tang. Your Mittimus shall not serve, I Will set my self free
with a Deliberandum, with a Deliberandum, mark you:


Duke. What Is he? a guard!

Phoe. Under your sufferance, worthy Father,
His harm is to himself,
One that has loved vexation so much,
He cannot now be rid on it,
Has been so long in suits that he is Law-mad.

Tang. A judgment, I crave a judgment, yea! Nunc pro tunc, Corruptione
alicuius, I peept me a Raven in the face, and I thought it had been my
Solister: oh the pens prick me.

Enter Quieto.
Phoen. And here comes he (wonder for temperance:)
Will take the cure upon him.

Quie. A blessing to this fair assembly.

Tang. Awa, yile have none ont, give me an Audita querela, or a Testificandum,
or a dispatch in twelve Terms, there is a blessing, there is a blessing.


Phoen. You see the unbounded rage of his disease,

Quie. It Is the foul fiend my Lord has got within him the rest are fair to
this, this breeds in Ink,

And to that color turns the blood possessed,
For instance, now your grace shall see him dressed.

Tan. Ah hah I rejoice then he is puzzled* and muzled too Is It come to a Soepe
corpus?


Quie. Ah, good sir, this is for want of patience.

Tang. That Is a fool.
She never saw the Dogs and the Bears fight,
A Country thing.

Quie. This is for lack of grace,

Tan. I Have other business, not so much idle time.

Quie. You never say your prayers.

Tan. I Am, aduizde by my learned counsel,

Quie. The power of my charm come over thee,
Place by degrees thy wits before thee,
With silk en patience here I bind thee,
Not to move till I unwind thee.

Tan. Yea! is my cause so muddy? do I stick, do I stick (fast?
Advocate here is my hand, pull, art made of flint?
Wilt not help out? -- alas there is nothing in it.

Phoen. Oh do you sluice the Vein now?


Quie. Yes my honored Lord.

Phoen. Pray let me see the issue.

Quie. I therefore seek to keep it, -- now burst out
Thou filthy stream of trouble, spite and doubt.

Tan. Oh an extent, a Proclamation, a Summons, a Recognisance, a Tachment. and
Iniunction, a Writ, a Seysure, a Writ of praeisement, an Absolution, a Quietus
est.


Qui. You Are quieter I hope by so much Dreggs.
Behold my Lord:

Phoen. This, why it out frowns Ink:

Quie. It Is the diseases Nature, the Fiends drink.


Tan. Oh sick, sick, Signior Ply-fee, sick: lend me thy Nightcap, oh!


Quie. The Balsum of a temperate brain,
I pour into this thirsty vein,
And with this blessed oil of quiet,
Which is so cheap, that few men buy it,
Thy stormy Temples I allay,
Thou shall give up the Devil and pray,
Forsake his works, the'yre foul and black,
And keep thee bare in pursse and back.
No more shall thou in paper quarrel,
To dress up Apes in good apparel.
He throws his stock, and all his flock,
Into a swallowing gulf,
That sendes his Goose unto his Fox,
His Lamb unto his Wolf.
Keep thy increase,
And live at peace,
For war's not equal to this battle,
That eats but men this men and cattaile,
Therefore no more this combat choose:
Where he that wins, does always loose,
And those that gain all, with this curse receive it,
From fools they get it, to their sons they leave it.

Tan. Hail sacred patience, I begin to feel
I have a Conscience now, Truth in my words, Compassion in my heart, and above
al, in my blood peaces music,

Use me how you can,
You shall find me an honest-quiet man.
Oh, pardon, that I dare behold that face,
"Now I Have least law, I hope have most grace,

Phoen. We both admire the workman and his piece:
Thus when all hearts are tunde to Honors strings,
There is no music to the Quire of Kings.

FINIS.
Prologus
THe marks and notions extant in each spirit,
Sealed by the industrious hand of art and merit,
Me thinks appear transparant (as the mind
By fence were bounded and might seem confind
In the external eye) nor shall our tragic muse,
(If strong hope fail not) need a coynd excuse
But to those marginall noates of yours do bring
(In following nombers from the learned spring)
Matter instructiue to enrich their parts
Where knowledge reigns crowned with it own deserts,
Let such with serious and impartial hearing
Sound sense, quick sight and judgment never erring:
Suruay and censure the mineruall frame
Of his elaborate work: and if his name
Merit regard, and you vouchsafe to grace him
With eminent love, or mongstthose lawreats place him,
That with the magic of sweet poesy,
Transfer Pernassus into Brittany,
He shall digest the Chaos of his brain,
To tunefull order and acquire a strain,
Near to the music of the heavenly spheres,
To fit Times guard and ravish choysest ears.
FINIS.
Epilogus.
FAme and Opinion like the two vvingd cap
On Hermes head, do lift all Poets up:
Some, though deserving, yet above the Sphere
Of true impartial censure, whose tuned ear
Listens to all and can with judgment say,
Others sing well, though Thracian Orpheus play.
Our Muse affects no excellence: if Fame tell
And through her shrill trompe at the Muses well
(Where the thrice trebled bench of learning sits
In strict examination of others wits)
Sound ours, though humbly strains, whose infant growth
Nor dares, nor will, with times hugd darlings quarrel,
Nor stand the lightning with the sacred Laurel)
We rest content: yet thus far may conceit
Carry each laboring Artist, where the weight
Of his oyld task is over, that his tongue
May like a father of his tender young
Speak natures language and not be withstood,
When with our Muse he says, that This is good.
FINIS.
This Epilogue should have been printed at the end of the book, but there was
no spare place for it.


