THE CIRCLE OF COMMERCE OR THE BALANCE OF Trade, in defense of free Trade:
Opposed To Malynes Little Fish and his Great Whale, and poized against them in
the Scale. Wherein also, Exchanges in general are considered: and therein the
whole Trade of this Kingdom with foreign Countries, is digested into a
Balance of Trade, for the benefit of the Public. Necessary for the present
and future times.

By E. M. Merchant.

Prove. Cap. 26. Verse. 4. and 5. Answer not a fool according to his folly,
least perhaps thou make thy self also like to him. Answer a fool according to
his folly, least peradventure he be wise in his own eyes.

LONDON, Printed by John Dawson, for Nicholas Bourne: and are to be sold at the
Royal Exchange. 1623.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, THE EARL OF MIDLESEX, LORD HIGH TREASVRER OF ENGLAND,
etc.
A Great Grande of Italy, Right Honorable, delighted much in the delightful
skill of Picture; sent a Courtier in post haste to all the principal Cities
thereof, to take a touch, of the rarest and best Masters in that Science, for
his choice of some rare and exquisite Piece. The Messenger posting from place
to place, and getting of every one something, at last found out Giotto, a very
famous man, and second to none of his time in that skill; as Angelus Politianus
thus saye's in his praise,

-- Per quem pictura revixit, In Epitaphium Iotti. Peachams Compl. Gent. Cap.
12.

Cui quam recta manus tam fuit and facilis:
Of him I say, this Messenger desired, as he had done of the rest, some Master
Piece, to present unto his Lord and Master. Giotto, willing to show the
dexterity of his Art and wit, and the facility of his hand, called for a sheet
of paper, and in the turning of an hand, drew a Circle so perfect and exact;
that it was impossible for any man living, to circinat, or circulat, with the
help of a Compass, a more absolute Orb. The Courtier not being an Artist,
ask't if that were all: yes said Giotto, and it may be, more then all. And so
indeed it proov'd. For when the Messenger had presented to his Lord and Master
all the Pieces, Giotto's Circle was preferred to all the rest, and he honored
above the rest: and thence it went into a Proverb in Italy, Piu tondo ch'il
Circolo di Giotto: more round then Giotto's Circle. Others, My Lord, may
present unto Your Lordship, Little Fishes, Great Whales, Par's of Exchange,
Pieces of greater price; I have nothing but a Circle: not (...), the Circle of
learning; but the Circle of Commerce: yet such a Circle, as comprehends within
the Periphery, or circumference thereof, the Balance of Trade. There Is my
draught: or rather My Lord, it is Yours.

For although the Balance of Trade, is an ancient Piece, which in elder times,
has been in great use in this Kingdom, as I shall show in this Circle, in
it is own Angle: yet it was almost worn out and defaced, but renewed and
refresh't by none, but by Your Lordship only. When the Eye of Heaven, in the
Eye of the King, had looked upon You, and picked You out, and placed You in an
higher Orb; You were first seen in this Circle, of the Balance of Trade:
Other fair Pieces You had, but this was Your Master Piece, because all the
rest had reference unto this. For all your services done to The King, and in
The King, The Kingdom: of what Longitude, or Latitude soever those Pieces
were, you tried them all by this Scale: You discerned the Right from the
Oblique, by this Circle, by this Parallel.

The Oracles of Apollo, being ask't when the wars of Greece should have a
Period, Replied, when they could Double the Cubique Altar in Delphos: which
Plato expounded to them, to be an answer in reproof of their ignorance in
Geometry. For the Doubling of the Cube in Solids, P. Ramus Geom. lib. 4.
and the Quadrature of the Circle in Plain, is a Mathematical problem, not
to be known without the knowledge of that Art. And surely if any man ask,
when we shall have an end, of this decay of Trade: it may be answered, when
Your Lordship will Double this Cube, and Quadrat this Circle of Commerce in the
Balance of Trade. Which prooue's a Hercules labor unto Others, but will be
easy unto You: because You see with Your Own; They with others eyes.

And hence it is that we here below, have had so much stir, about Malyne's
Par: the Parity and Disparity whereof, amongst ignorant men, is made a Mystery
in Exchange, and to have in it a great deal of Causality of the Decay of
Trade. But we are happy in Your Lordship, which can easily discern this
Flemish, from our Sterling Standard. No gloss, no false face, can deceive Your
Lordships sight. For as You were Of us, and now You are far Above us: so can
You judge, as far Beyond us, as You are Distant from us. I shall therefore
be a Suitor to Your Lordship, that if there be any place or use, in the whole
Circle of Commerce, for Malyne's Par of Exchange, that Your Lordship will let
him be the Master of that office when it is Created: if not, that Malynes may
know the price of these pains, to teach us a new doctrine, which we never
learnt of Your Lordship: and with such counterfeit stuff to abuse The State,
which happily does enjoy Your Lordship, and in You the knowledge of Commerce.

Your Balance of Trade, my Lord, will soon discover the lightness of this
vanity. That, not This, was Your (...), let it be Your (...) also. That was
the Foundation, let it be the Consummation of Your Noble building. Let none
build upon Your Lordships foundation, finish it, perfect it Your Self, Your
Self shall have all the honor.

Go on therefore Noble Lord,

Spartam quam nactus es constanter tueri. You are the Mirror of Merchants, the
Luster of London, the Renown of your name, the Beauty of Your Family, the
Glory of Your Country, an Honor to Nobility, and the Choice of the Choicest
King. Honor His choice, in the choicest service, You can do, to So Good, to
So Great a King. Adorn the Nobility, do good to Your Country, Embellize
Your Family, make Your Name more and more Noble, love London, and make much of
Merchants.

And I pray God, with increase of Honor, give you increase also of the gifts
and graces of Gods Spirit: without which You can do none of these: and with
which, You may do So and So, and More also.

The Lord of Lords, give You favor with God and Man, and conserve Your
Lordship long, Regi, Gregi, mihi; to The King, The Kingdom: And last of all,
to him that is least of all,

But Affected most of all, to do your Lordship service, EDW. MISSELDEN.

TO THE GENTLE AND Judicious Readers.
GEntlemen, I had hoped, in a cause of such consequence, as is the Restoration
of Trade, wherein all of us by Sympathy have our part, and feel the weight;
the very Vinculum amicitiae, would have knit us all together, in that same Idem
velle and nolle, to have been all of one mind for the Common good. Or if I
had therein seemed to any of you, more forward then wise, you would have hid
that fault under your good interpretation of my zeal for the public, wherein
all of you have your interest: And that every one of you would have been more
ready, to have lent me a supply in your confirmation, then a reply by way of
refutation: that so Iunctis operis, we might all of us have essayed to repair
the decay of Trade, none to ruinate. Nor indeed can I so say of any of you: for
Malynes is with us, but he is not of us: if he had been of us, he had not
been against us, in the Common-good. You know, it is the Counsel of The King
of Counsel, to beware of those that come to us in Sheeps clothing: Malynes
would teach our Gentlemen a way how to improve their Wolles: but under that
color, would cozen us of the Cloth. This is one mark, whereby you may know,
he is not of us: and if yet you would have another, compare him with his Par:
and by these two you shall know him Ex vngue. Two such Pars to Pare away the
Wealth, of our Commonwealth, as I have not observed to be proiected by any in
all my time. Him and them I leave to your Judgment, when you have perused this
ensuing short Discourse. The charge and trouble whereof, but worth neither, you
may thank your selves, to have drawn upon you, by your too ready entertainment
of such things as these. Hereafter I doubt not, but your experience will direct
your acceptance, unto things of better worth. If not, or if you respect me; I
shall expect that you Pair me with some better Par. In the mean time, I shall
presume, that in your interpretation and sentence, you will be like your
selves: and if any thing herein, chance to be less pleasing to any of you;
that you will be pleased to believe, that I may have some reason also for that,
more then was fit to write. Here and there, if you meet with a little Latin,
or the like, which you do not like; let it alone for their sakes that
understand it: and if you will take my word, there is sense besides, and not a
word of it but of some use, in the whole discourse: and no more reason to be
thurst out of the Circle of Commerce, then out of the Circle of all other
sciences, which have ever enjoyed that liberty, without exception. God grant
that your perusal and my pains, may bring some glory to God, honor to the
King, benefit to the Public: to all which I am truly devoted, and therein,

Am all, and every one of yours, E. M.
You may if you please, receive this from London, if any of you like it not
from Hackney, the 14. of June. Anno. 1623.
THE CIRCLE OF COMMERCE.
The Prooeme.
HERODOTVS in his CLIO, reports that CROESVS King of LYDIA had a son borne
dumb: and his Country being invaded, and the King himself in imminent danger
of death by a certain Persian ready to lay violent hands on him; the Kings
son affected with the present danger, then spoke that never spoke before, and
cried alowd, O homo ne perimas Patrem! O man kill not the King! (...). Herodot.
in Clio lib. 1.


And surely my self being conscious of mine own wants, yet as sensible as
any, of the terrors without, and errors within, wherewith the Commerce of this
Kingdom is encountered; laid mine hand on my mouth and kept long silence:
because it was a subject fit for a more able man, and a more exquisite pen: but
when I beheld this former flourishing Trade of ours, to be threatened by many
as eminent as imminent dangers, and the very life thereof to lie a bleeding;
whilst I was musing the fire kindled, and at the last I spoke with my pen, as I
never spoke before, O homines ne perimatis Patriam! O men kill not the Kingdom!

Or had I still been silent, and were all men mute, surely the cause it self
would have called for redress: or the stones would have cried to the timber,
the ships to the seas, the seas to the shores, one deep to another deep,
because it is the complaint not of a common man, but of a Commonwealth; not of
a Company of men, but of a Kingdom.

Things once out of order, repetitis passibus, double their pace, and run
hastily unto ruin. The fire that even now was spyed in a sparkle, has
enflamed the whole City, all the Kingdom. The Clowd that ere while rose up
like a man's hand, is spread abroad, and has ouerspread all our Horizon.

These were the motives that led me along to that labor, which I lately
offered to the honor of the King, and service of the public. Therein I laid
a Basis or foundation only, for a more skillfull worke-man to erect a more
stately building. Mine, was but a model or frame, rough hewn, slightly set up
and pinned together; to try how the parts and joints thereof would trent and
fit the square: that so in due time I might have wrought over, and fitted each
part and piece for their place and use. But now his Majesty, whose eye is not
dim, and whose hand is steadie to the going down of the Sun; who waketh
when his subjects sleep, and whose candle goes not out by night; who stands
in the Watchtower all day, and keeps the Sentinel by night; out of his
Princely prudence and providence and unwearied watchfulness over the welfare
of his subjects, has been graciously pleased, first, to grant a special
Committee, as a preparatiue or inquiry; and now a special Commission as a
wholesome medicine or remedy, for the dangerous disease of the decay of Trade.
Which last, it has pleased his Majesty to direct to many Noble Personages of
dignity, and other worthy Persons of rank and quality, selected and
collected like a Court Parliament, from all the parts and places of the
Kingdom.

And that no due information might be wanting, which might conduce to the
reformation of so many growing grieuances in Trade, it has pleased the State
to honor some men of my profession to be joined in this Commission, who
according to their choice and worth, will no doubt infinitely supply whatsoever
might have occurred unto me, for this service. So that now I shall only draw
the Circle of Commerce, and contract trade to its own Center, the Balance of
trade: and leave those other pieces, unto these Master-workemen, to be polisht
for their use, in this Royal Edifice, commanded and commended by his Highness
to their structure. The rather for that heretofore some Noble and learned in
this Kingdom, observing some concurrence in the causes and remedies by me
lately published, In Free Trade.
with those of more worthy Persons reported to his Majesty; conceived that
their labors had been published by my pen: wherein, as I must acknowledge the
unworthiness of my person, to receive such guests under my roof, and the
unfitness of my pen, to represent such pieces; so also had I not the happiness
to attend Those then, or These since, in any of their assemblies as did other
Merchants; whereby my discourse might have received some life and force from
their worth and influence.

Their good acceptance of my poor endeauours, together with the approbation
of many other Noble and learned, grave and judicious, is more then I could have
hoped to merit: which will abundantly support me and it against the Malignitie
of one Malynes only, amongst thousands of better instructed and affected
persons. Whose palate being fallen, is become so far out of taste, that he
can relish no meats not cook't by himself; and his own cookerie has in it so
much of his Coliquintida, his stir about his Par, that it has spoiled all
his pot of porrage. Himself, his subject, much more his rude style, and
unmannerly manner of writing, deserve contempt rather then the honor of an
answer. But for some Gentlemen's sakes of quality, to whom I owe my self, who
do profess they know not in many things what the man means, for when he
that writes vnstandeth not what he says, how shall he that reads? For their
sa^es I say, not for his, I am I know not how, enclosed within this Circle,
through the Center whereof I will draw a Diameter, and divide the whole Circle
into two Semicircles.

In the first, I will consider, whether Malynes objections scattered here and
there in his little Fish, and great Whale, against my Tract of Free Trade, may
have any place within the Peripheria or circumference of this Circle. which if
you please, may also be the first part or draught of this Balance of Trade.

In the other Semicircle, I will demonstrate the nature and use of Exchanges in
general, and therein the Balance of the Trade of this Kingdom with foreign
Countries: which also may be the second part or draught, of this Balance of
Trade.

But before I begin with either, I am discomforted in both: Because I am led
within the lists, to deal with a dastardly Combatant: of whom Martial could
tell me long ago, that I might expect conquest, but no contentment:

Seu victus seu victor eris, maculere necesse est, Martial.

Si sit cum vili stercore pugnatibi:
Nor flight, nor fight, will bring thee but disgrace,
If that thou fight with one that is vile and base.
Nor can there be any delight to those that are lookers on: for Malynes
received my Model in some form, but returned it to me pulled in pieces, all
out of frame. You know I considered Trade, as it is Deformed, as it might be
Reformed. Trade Deformed, I considered in the Causes, in the Effects. In the
Causes, the Matter and Form of Trade. The Matter I showed to be either
Natural or Artificial. The Form occurred in Governed or Ungoverned trade.
The Effects reflected on the King, the Kingdom. Trade Reformed, I presented in
the Remedies: to every malady, a medicable remedy: and these I pursued every
one in their order.

But now these Ranks are broken: this order's disordered: nor Right nor Left
hand file is left, nor Front, nor Rere. Now I must follow my Leader: whether
you find Posture or Imposture in his order; it is his not mine. I shall
therefore in this my Semicirculary Angle, or first Draught of my Balance,
first display Malynes Colors; and then pursue his Postures in his own
Disorder. His Colors are set up in his Title, thus:

The maintenance of free Trade according to the three Essential parts of
Trafique: namely, Commodities, Moneys, and Exchange of moneys by bills of
Exchange for other Countries.

THE FIRST PART. Malynes objections refuted.
WHat hope can we have of this man's Treatise, Section 1.
when he fails in his Title? The Causes of things are wont to be considered,
in the Efficient, and Matter; the Form, and the End. Some say these causes are
either External or Internal. External, as the Efficient and End. Internal,
as the Matter and Form. All agree in this, that these two, to wit, the Matter
and Form of things, do constitute their Essence. There is no place in the
Essence of things, for any third thing. Commodities and money, are the Matter of
trade: the manner of buying and selling, is the Form of trade: He that tradeth
the Efficient: gain the End of trade. So that the Matter and Form of trade,
are the Essential parts of trade. But if Malynes would make Exchanging of
moneys to be a kind of buy-and selling, and consequently to fall within the
Form of trade; or as it is a merchandise to be the Matter of trade, yet here is
no third thing to approve his Title.

Yea, but Malynes will have you take the Head of this his little fish, and the
fin or tail of his great Whale, and put them both together: and then he will
give you an answer past peradventure. Will you hear what he says?

Great Whale, Page 500.
Concerning the being, essence or Existence of things, he will make no
difference between natural things, and things artificial: and so there is
but two essential parts of Materia and Forma: albeit that some Philosophers
have established three beginnings of Natural things, Matter, Form, and
Deprivation. The Matter has no other office or function, but the changing from
one form into another; Deprivation giving an inclination thereunto: for
deprivation is an Imperfection so conjoined to the matter, that without her, if
she were separated, nothing would be ingendered: and therefore in Heaven
there is no Deprivation, and consequently no generation, ne corruption. The
Form therefore gives perfection to the thing and being also, and without
her, the Matter is more imperfect then the eye is without the faculty of
seeing, or the ears without hearing. But in Artificials, the being has her
parts, as Trafique has three, namely, Commodities, Money, and Exchange: so
other things may consist of more beeings or simples, wherein the terms of Art
are not excluded.

COntra principia negantem, minime disputandum:. 2.
It is against Art to dispute with a man that denies the Principles of Art.
This sentence shows Malynes gross ignorance, not to have learned to
distinguish the Principles of natural things from their Essence. Wherein first
he would make a difference between the Essence or being of things Natural,
and things Artificial. And next he confounds the Principles of Physical or
Natural things, with their Essence, as if they were all one.

For although some Philosophers say, that Matter, Form, and Privation, are the
Principles of Natural things, yet what is that to their Essence? Therefore to
take off this Pterygium or thick skin from Malynes eyes; we will first
consider the Essence of things, and then their Principles.

For the Former of these, there was never any Philosopher, Heathen or
Christian, nor any man of Divine or Humane learning, that ever assigned any
other parts then the Matter and Form, to the Essence of things, whether
Natural or Artificial. In the Former, we may take for an instance, Man, that
Masterpiece of Natural things: Homo conslat anima and copore: A man consists
of soul and body. Now the Matter of a Man is a corporeal substance, common
to other creatures: but the Form of Man is his rational soul: whereby he
differs from them all. To whose existence no third thing can be added. It is
true, that Body, Soul, and Spirit, are sometimes put together in the
Scripture: but by Spirit is there meant the faculty of the soul. Which surely
that learned holy Apostle did not so conioyne without a mystery. For the word
Soul in the holy languages, sometimes signifies the Mortal life, (...).
Anima.
and sometimes and more commonly, the Immortal soul. Now as it signifies the
Mortal life, it is common to all other creatures as well as Man. But as it
signifies the Immortal soul, it is propper and peculiar to Man alone. So
that by the Body, Soul, and Spirit, the Apostle distributes the whole Man
into the Body, and the Spiritual soul; to answer that which he knew the
Philosophers called the Rational soul.

There is also alike Entity or Essence of Matter and Form, in Artificial
things: wherein Malynes no less grossly erreth. The Matter of an House, is
stone and timber: the Form of it, is the fashion or proportion after which it
is built. To which no third thing can be added to give unto it being. And
thence it is that the Logicians say, that Forma dat esse rei, the form gives
to the thing, the perfection of being: because it gives the denomination of
the thing. For a Man is not said to be a Man in respect of his matter or
corporeal substance: for then a beast should be a man: but in respect of his
Rational soul, whereby he excels all other creatures. An House is not an
house in respect of the Matter whereof it is made; for then all other stone and
timber should be an house: but in respect of the Form of it, whereby it is
known to be a house. And so likewise in the trafique of Merchants, which is
also an Artificial thing, there are no other Essential parts, then the Matter
and Form of Trade. The Matter as I showed before, is merchandise and money,
whether exchanged or not exchanged: the Form is buying and selling, and as we
say, chopping and changing of one thing for another: which in one word is
called Commerce. Without which there would be no traffic amongst men,
notwithstanding the materials of trade. And thus much briefly for the Essence
of Natural and Artificial things. Colleg. Conimb. in Phys. Arist. lib. 1.
cap. 7. partic. 2. Finitu^, infinite. Quiesc. mobile. Par, Impar. Rectu^,
ebliquu^. Vnum multit. Lume^, tenebra. Dextru^, sinistr. Bonum, malum. Mas,
soemina. Qu^drat. long. Eeode^ Comment. lib. 1. cap. 7. partic. 3.


Now for the Principles of Natural things, which Malynes cannot discern from
their Essence: Some Philosophers say there is but One, as the Earth, as does
Hesiodus in his Theogonia and others. Some the Water, as Thales Milesius and
others. Some the Air, as Anaximines and others. Some the Fire, as Hippasius
Metapontinus, and others. Other Philosophers say there are Ten, as the
Pythagoreans, who reduced the whole frame of Nature into Decada or Denaria,
into Ten coniugations of Principles. All which Aristotle reduces into Matter,
Form, and Privation: yet so as he excludes Privation from the Being of
natural things: for thus he says, (...). Arist. in Phys. lib. 1. cap.
Secundu^ Paciu^. 9. Pacii Comment. in Phys. Arist. c. 8. partic. 20.
Idempartic. 17.
Privation is not Ens or Being, because it is not in the subject which is made
by it. And therefore Pacius upon Aristotle thus concludes: Materia and forma
sunt Principia per se, Privatio vero per accidens: There are simply but two
principles of natural things, to wit, Matter and Form; but after a sort a
third, Privation. Because says he, dupliciter consideratur forma, qua abest
and qua adest: The Form is considered two ways, as it is Absent, and there is
the Terminus a quo: and as it is Present, and there is the Terminus ad quem:
which Absence is nothing else but Privation.

This cannot so well be understood of those that that are not acquainted with
these things, as by example: which we will instance first, in some Natural,
and then in some Artificial thing. The Eye is a Natural thing, the Matter
whereof is an Oculary substance: the Form is Seeing. Blindness takes away the
sight of the Eye, and is therefore called Privation of the sight: whereby the
first form of seeing is changed into blindness. A Ship is an Artificial thing:
the Matter whereof is timber and iron: the Form is the mould and proportion of
the Ship. Now if you will break up this Ship, and take her in pieces, and
thereof build an House, there will be a Privation of the first form, and a
mutation thereof into a second, to wit, of a Ship into an House. So then a
blind man will not say, that blindness is any part of seeing: and he is an ill
Carpenter that cannot know a House from a Ship: and as ill a Sophister is
Malynes, not to discern Privation from the Essence of Natural or Artificial
things. Which he might have better understood, if he had been able to consult
with Aristotle, or any of his Interpreters. But alas, how should he understand
him or them, when he cannot so much as translate a sentence of him out of
Latin, much less out of the Original, into proper or significant words?
Witness these three in his one sentence above recited, Established,
Beginnings, and Deprivation, for Assigned or Constituted, Principles, and
Privation. Wherein a smatterer in Art, could not have shown himself so
ignorant. These are this Captains Colors. His Postures follow, I fear
Impostures. This for one,

That the Author of Free trade, Epist. p. 2.
either ignorantly or wilfully has omitted to handle the predominant part of
Trade, namely the mystery of Exchange.

MEndacem oportet esse memorem.. 3.
If Malynes had not forgot himself, he might have perceived his Par of
Exchange put out of the Remedies of trade, in Cap. 7. Fol. 104. of my
discourse, Free Trade. cap. 7.
with the reasons thereof: and therefore not omitted. Neither was it the scope
of my discourse to handle every thing that might occur a man's imagination after
Malynes manner; but such things only as tended to the hinderance of the Trade
of the Kingdom, and to present their remedies. Now there being no such
Causality nor Remedy, in that his Par of Exchange, as I shall prove anon, there
was no more Ignorance nor Wilfulnes in me to pass by that, then all other
impertinent things. But it is not strange, that he traduceth me, when he
dares be so bold with the Nobility of the Kingdom: thus,

I have these forty years spent much time and charges at the pleasure of great
Personages: Epist. p. 6.
and nothing did encounter me but ingratitude.

A Very scandalous aspersion laid upon the Nobility of the Kingdom!. 4.
And it is much more unlikely for him to deserve, then not to receive more then
his desert of any great Personage. His time and charges if he has spent any,
are more likely to have been spent in proling Proiects: and I wish all were so
served that follow that trade. Nay will you hear him what he says of the
whole Kingdom?

The Kingdom of England would have been more sensible of the like loss,
Little fish. P. 18.
if the hostile depredations heretofore made, had not supplied the same.

VOx profecto pecudis non hominis!. 5.
What, is the man mad? has he no less a crime to accuse the Kingdom with,
then with Depredation, with robbing, and pilling, and poling? Its pity such
stuff as this should pass the Press. I leave him and it, to the judgment
and censure of the State. But by this time I hope this Captains passion's
past, and he come to himself: for now he professes to speak ingeniously,
although before he spoke without fear or wit: Now he will discourse of
Merchants, of whose profession himself would seem to be, though by
usurpation only.

To speak ingeniously, P. 4.
Merchants cannot enter into consideration of the quantity of foreign
Commodities imported at dear rates, and the home Commodities exported at
lesser rates respectively in former times: by the disproportion whereof comes
an evident ouer-ballancing of Commodities.

Merchants do not regard whether the moneys of a Kingdom are undervalued in
exchange, by the inhansing of moneys in foreign parts, whereby our moneys are
exported, when the exchange does not answer the true value by bills, and the
moneys of other Countries cannot be imported, but with an exceeding loss,
which every man shunneth. True it is, that they observe within the Realm to
keep the price of money at a stand, according to the Kings valuation: but in
foreign parts they run with the stream headlong down with other Nations,
without consideration of their own hinderance.

Merchants do not know the weight and finenesse of moneys of each Country,
and the proportions observed between gold and silver: nor the difference of
several standards of coin: a matter so necessary for them to know, to make
thereby profitable returns of the provenue of our home Commodities, either in
Money, Bullion, or Wares.

Finally, Merchants seeking their Privatum Commodum, take notice only of what
is prohibited and commanded: whereas it may fall out also, that to require
their opinion for the reformation of some abuses, they may be thought many
times as unfit, as to call the Vintners to the consultation of laws to be made
against Drunkards.

A Las poor man,. 6.
how shall he speak Ingeniously or wittily, that has no Genius at all? His
speech bewrays his want of wit and honesty. No marvel that in page 64. he
confesses that to the judicious Merchants, Little fish. P. 64. 48.
be knows he has given cause of offense, to have written so much in the
defense of Exchange: and in page 48. that he has made himself odious to his
own Nation. It is an ill bird, that fowls his own nest. And surely if
Malynes had learned any good manners, or but common humanity, or had himself
ever been Merchant, Modern or Ancient; he would never have abused so many
worthy Persons of that profession; of ours, of others, yea of his own Nation:
amongst which as well as ours, that I may give them their due, there are many
learned and expert Merchants, that are ashamed of his ignorance and folly. For
who can enter into consideration of the quantity or quality of Commodities,
whether native or foreign, exported or imported, dear or cheap, comparable
to Merchants? And if the Ballancing or over Ballancing of trade by the
disproportion thereof, can be said to be evident to any, surely it can be
evident to none more then to expert Merchants. Or who are more quicke-sighted
into the values of moneys, both domestic and foreign, gold and silver, weight
and finenes, then Merchants; whose continual practice it is, to pry into the
price and value of all things? For there is no Merchant of any experience, but
as he has one eye upon the value of his Commodity, so has he the other eye
upon the money, both Intrinsique, in the inward value or finenes, and
Extrinsique, in the outward denomination or account as it is current in every
Country, together with the course of Exchange, whither he does direct his
trade. Otherwise, if the money rise in denomination, above it true worth in
valuation, and the Exchange also rise accordingly: if this Merchant do not
raise the price of his Commodity in due proportion answerable thereunto; he
shall be sure to come home by weeping cross, how ever he make his return,
whether by Exchange; or in Money, Bullion, or Wares. And is it not lawful for
Merchants to seek their Privatum Commodum in the exercise of their calling? Is
not gain the end of trade? Is not the public involved in the private, and
the private in the public? What else makes a Commonwealth, but the
private-wealth, if I may so say, of the members thereof in the exercise of
Commerce amongst themselves, and with foreign Nations? And by your leave
Malynes, who are more fit then Vintners, if not to execute, yet to consult of
laws against Drunkards; or Merchants to unmask the mysteries of
Mounte-bankes, Iugglers, and Imposters of trade? I marvel who made Malynes a
Lawmakers for Merchants, if he be so ignorant of their profession! He should
have been called, before he came to this Council. The profession of a
Merchant is more noble, then to be so disabled and disgraced by such a fellow
as Malynes is. Merchants are of high account in all parts of the world, in
times of peace, and in times of war.

Merchants are wont to be supported of Kings and Princes, cherished of Nobles,
favored of Statesmen, honored of all men, disgraced of none: because the
strength of Kingdoms, the revenue of Princes, the wealth of every
Commonwealth, has a Correlation with this Noble Profession.

Merchants are wont to make it their glory, to advance their fortunes, renown
their names, embellize their houses, beautify their families with the honor
of this faculty: and to perpetuate the same unto posterity, as an hereditary
title of honor unto their name and blood. And this is it, that has made many
houses and families of Merchants famous in foreign parts: and makes those
Commonwealths flourish, where there is such a Spring, such an Offspring. For
where the father does thus ingenerate his son, and the son does not
degenerate from his father, there the Estate is kept entire, in it is own
stock: there the Spring does not spread it self into straggling streams: in
which their fame is lost, their name put out, the Estate consumed in riot: and
this is a Common loss unto our Commonwealth.

Merchants I say, besides their knowledge of Commodities, and the course of
Exchanges, and the values, weight, and finenes of moneys, and the standards of
several Countries, and their general judgment in all manner of trade; all
which are but the elements of merchandising, and a kind of inbred knowledge in
a well-bred Merchant; are acquainted with the Manners, Customs, Languages,
Laws of foreign Nations, yea with the Religion, Revenue, Strength, and Policy
of foreign Princes and States: whence it is, that the States and Statesmen,
Governors, Counselors, and Magistrates of Venice, Luca, Genoa, Florence, the
United Provinces of the Low Countries, and many other well governed
Commonwealths, are by education Merchants: In so much as I may truly say, and
I hope without any suspicion or offense, there is none more fit to make a
minister for a King, then an expert and judicious Merchant.

But if Malynes has no more skill of Merchants, how will you take his word for
Merchandise? yes, he will show you that, under three simples, simply enough I
warrant you: thus,

Commodities, moneys, P. 2.
and exchange of moneys may be aptly compared to the Body, Soul, and Spirit
of traffic.

The first, as the Body, vpheld the world by Commutation and bartering, until
money was devised to be coined.

The second, as the Soul in the Body, did infuse life to traffic by the
means of equality and equity, preventing advantage between Buyers and
Sellers.

The third, as the Spirit and faculty of the Soul, being seated every where,
corroberateth the vital Spirit of traffic, directing and controlling by just
proportions, the prises and values of Commodities and moneys.

VPheld the world by Commutation:. 7.
admirable Oratory, and as incomparable a comparison! for the Body without the
Soul or life is dead: but so was not Co^merce in former times without money:
else he had much mistaken his voyage, that when Sir Thomas Mores Vtopia was
first discovered, would needs in all haste go dwell there, because there was
such a flourishing Commonwealth without money.

And to speak of the soul, without the spirit, or faculties of the soul, is
absurd: for the soul and the faculties of the soul, are inseparable. But
before there was any Exchange in moneys, trade and traffic did consist in
money and merchandise, and subsist without it: and so do the trades of many
Countries at this day, which have no exchange for moneys at all. See another
Simile,

Even as money is the square and rule to set a price unto all Commodities, P. 3.
and therefore called Publia mensura: even so is the exchange of money by
bills, the public measure between us and foreign Countries, according to
which all Commodities are bought and sold in the course of traffic.

THe Proposition is true,. 8.
that money is Publica mensura: but the Reddition is false, that the Exchange
is the public measure between us and foreign Nations, whereby Commodities
are bought and sold in the course of traffic. For Merchants, as I have
showed, do use to value the Commodities of every Country, by the finenes or
baseness of the money of each Country, and by their observation, whether the
same Commodities are in more or less request, and not by the Exchange. For it
is not the rate of Exchange, whether it be higher or lower, that makes the
price of Commodities dear or cheap, as Malynes would here infer; but it is
the plenty or scarcity of of Commodities, their use or Non-vse, that makes
them rise and fall in price. Otherwise if Malynes rule were true, that the
prices of Commodities should perpetually follow the rates of Exchange; then
Commodities should all rise and fall together, as the Exchange rises or
falls. But Merchants of experience know, that commonly one Commodity rises,
when another falls: and that they fall and rise, as they are mor or less in
request and use. See yet another dissimilitude,

As the Elements are joined by Symbolization, P. 5.
the air to the fire by warmnes, the water to the air by moisture, the earth
to the water by coldness: so is Exchange joined to Moneys, and Moneys to
Commodities by their proper qualities and effects.

I Would there were a Symbolum or affection in his Elements,. 9.
and not an Asymbolum or disaffection or confusion in them, as Du Bartas
observed sometimes to be in the other: whereof he thus speaks,

La terre, l'air, le feu, se tenoyent dans la mer: De la Sepmaine 1. Iour.

La mer, le feu, la terre, estoyent logez dans l'air:
L'air, lamer, et le feu dans la terre: et la terre
Chez l'air, le feu, la mer. --
Earth, air, and fire, were with the waters mixed:
Water, fire, earth, within the air were fixed:
Air, water, fire, about the earth did glide:
Earth, fire, water, did in the air reside.
But Malynes has more skill in Philomythy then Philosophy:. 10.
he will tell you a tale of a voyage into Barbary, P. 7.
where he learned so much experience in Navigation, that now he can tell you,
that the Rudder of a Ship is the Efficient cause of sailing. P. 8.
Is this man fit to give his judgment in matters of weight, and affairs of
State, that shows such gross ignorance, in so easy and familiar things? If
he had consulted with a Yonker or Novice that had made but one voyage to Sea,
he would have told him, that the Rudder is the cause of stearing or guiding of
the Ship, but the wind of sailing. For a Ship may sail without a Rudder, as
sometimes the East India Companies Ship the Dragon did, a great part of the way
from the East Indies: but for a Ship to sail without wind, it is impossible.
For that is Causa sine qua non, as the Logicians speak. Or if he had well
understood the name of the thing, he might have given a better guess at the
nature and use thereof: according to that of the Poet, Convenient rebus nomina
saepe suis: For the Rudder of a Ship is therefore called Gubernaculum a
Gubernando, because it governs and guides the Ship. But Velum, and in
French La voile the sail, is derived a volando, of flying and running swiftly.
For a Ship sailing with a great gale of wind, is said to fly before the wind.
And thence it is that we are wont to say, Avis volat, and Navis volat: the Bird
flies, and the Ship sails: the one being a proper, Calep.
the other a Metaphorical speech. Or Malynes mother tongue might have taught
him so much mother wit, as to have known, that Het Roer van't schip is so
called, a Roeren or Rueren, to touch or stir a thing, because a Ship feels
the very touch of the Rudder. Which phrase has in it a fine insinuation of the
wondrous volubility and facility of turning about that huge and massy body of
the Ship, by the touch or stirring of so small an instrument as is the Rudder
thereof. And Stieren in Dutch, signifies to guide or direct a Ship, and
Stierman the Pilot of a Ship: none of them to sail a Ship. But God keep our
Ship of traffic from all such Pilots as Malynes is, least it come on ground.

ANd thus Malynes having abused the terms of Art, which indeed it is not
possible for him,. 11.
or a wiser then he to understand, without knowledge of the Art it self; and
improperly compared his Par of Exchange like a Parret, to Clocks, and Ships,
and Dialls, and Active, and Passive, and what he list himself; the rest of
the pages of his preamble, and of other passages in his Pamphlet, he has
stuffed with immodest terms of his own Art against me. But knowing that I
could not touch pitch and not be defiled, nor reprove a scandalous person
without receiving ill language, I shall leave him and it to the judgment of
the wise, having taken it for my direction, Not to answer Malynes in his
foolishnes.

In the next place, P. 11.
he promises to bring to the Anvill, whether the under valuation of his
Majesty's Coin, be the immediate cause of our want of money in England: will
you see how he hammers it?

He concurreth with me in the price of the Real, P. 12.
to go in Holland at 51. Stuyters: in the Rate of Exchange, to come from
thence at 33. sh. 4. d. Flemish: in the value of the Flemish money, that 5.
Reals of 8. make 42. sh. 6. d. in the value of the Sterling money, that so many
Reals make 25. sh. 6. d. that the gain between Spain and Holland at those
rates is 25. per Cento: that the gain between England and Holland at those
rates is 15. per Cento. Yet because he will be adverse in something, he says,

The 15. in the hundred to be gotten in Holland more then in England, P. 12.
is altogether Imaginary and not Real. For example, let 5. of these Reals of
8. be bought here for 22. sh. sterling, and be transported into Holland, and
there buy Commodities with the same, according as the price of them is inhansed
there; no man makes any doubt, but that the said Commodities are also raised
in price, according to the money inhansed. So that the gain becomes
uncertain, for the Commodities may be sold to loss.

IF this were true, that the Commodities in Holland were raised in price
according to the value of the money;. 12.
yet this is no answer to the carrying out of his Majesty's Coin. For his
Majesty's Coin may be carried out, to be recoyned abroad in foreign Coin:
and not remitted, neither in commodities, nor by Exchange. Others that carry it
out to remit it back, do not respect the prices of Commodities whether they
be dear or cheap, so long as the Exchange affords them means to return
their money with advantage. But at that time when I wrote, both the Exchange,
and Commodities also, did afford encouragement for returns into England. For
the Exchange came then at 33. sh. 4. d. from thence, which is a very low
Exchange; and the Commodities of Holland were also low in price. The former no
Merchant will deny: The latter you may examine if you please, either in Spices,
Silks, or Linen cloth, which are the principal Commodities of the Low
Countries. But better in the former, then either of the latter: because Spices,
are known by their sorts: Silks, and Linnens, by their goodness. In Spices, if
you will, take Cloves for an instance: which have gone constantly these three
or four years last past at 11. sh. the pound weight in the Low Countries, and
at 6. sh. 6. d. and 6. sh. 8 here at London. Take the Medium of this price,
which which is 6. sh. 7. d. and that brings out the just rate of the Exchange
at 33. sh. 4. d. The difference of time and weight, is usually set against the
Custom and charges. So then whether you make return of those 5. Reals of 8.
whereof Malynes speaks, in Cloves at 11. sh. the pound, or at 33. sh. 4. d.
by Exchange, is all one. And the like you may find in the rest: And Malynes
also as false in the rest: for thus he goes on,

That the Merchants trading in Spain, which cause their Reals to be sent from
Spain thither, P. 12.
or do transport them from the Downs, rely wholly upon the low Exchange,
whereby they are enabled to deliver their money there by Exchange at an under
value, in giving there but 33. sh. 4. d. and under, to have 20. sh. sterling
paid by bill of Exchange in England, whereby the kingdom makes good unto them
the said 15. upon the hundred.

THen by Malynes own confession, here is a double encouragement for the
carrying away of the Kings Coin:. 13.
One in the high price of the money in Holland; the other in the low rate of
the Exchange from thence back again for England. But that the Kingdom makes
good unto them 15. upon the hundred, that make home money from Holland or any
other foreign part, at a low Exchange; whereby he would infer, that the
Kingdom thereby loses 15. per Cento, is most false. For the lower the rate of
the Exchange is abroad, whereby you would remit home your money for England,
the less of that foreign money you shall pay for the English money you would
receive at home. And the less you pay of the foreign money, the more you
shall receive of your own money: and the more you pay abroad, the less you
shall receive at home. And in this case the gain of the Subjects is the gain
of the Kingdom and contrariwise. So that indeed, the loss to the Kingdom, is
of the money it self that is carried out, as I have at large declared in my
tract of Trade: Free Trade. cap. 1.
the 15. per Cento is gained by them that carry it: the money being abroad, is
better remitted for the Kingdom, at a low then a high rate: the prises of
Commodities being answerable to the rate of the Exchange, alter not the case.
So then it follows, that the gain in exportation of Reals is real, but
Malynes surmises are imaginary. Will you hear another of his slurres?

This Real of 8. was valued but at 42. stuyvers, P. 13.
when the Par of Exchange was made to be 33. sh. 4. d in the year 1586. when
Robert Dudley Earl of Leicester, went to take the government of those
Countries.

I Think Malynes has told this tale over 1586.. 14.
times, to one or other, and not a word of it true. For in that year, when the
Earl of Leicester was sent over by Queen Elizabeth, into the Low Countries,
there was a treaty or agreement made of the rates of their and our moneys,
indifferently between either Country. Then was it agreed upon, that the
English shilling should go current in the Low Countries at 10. Stuyvers, which
making 20. d. Flemish, produces 33. sh. 4. d. for 20. sh. Sterling. But that
this 33. sh. 4. d. was then or at any time since, set for a Par of Exchange
amongst Merchants, I might produce more then 1586. witnesses against him. For
all the Merchants Books of his own and our Nation kept there and here, which
are the Records of Merchants affairs will testify, that neither the Exchange
in the year 1586. nor at any time since, went constantly at 33. sh. 4. d. but
sometimes was higher, sometimes lower then that rate. For this is a custom
amongst Merchants, to keep exactly the rates of Exchanges, for all places
every week throughout the year, from time to time: not only as one or other
of them is a taker or deliverer of money continually, but as it is a
commendable property of a good Merchant, to advise and be advised of the
rates of all Exchanges in all places, from time to time. So that this is
Testimonium omni excepsione maius: A clowd of witnesses against Malynes, not to
be denied. But for want of better proof, he will give you a precept,

That the rule is infallible, P. 14.
when the Exchange does answer the true value of our moneys according to their
intrinsique weight and finenes, and their extrinsique valuation, they are never
exported, because the gain, is answered by exchange, which is the cause of
transportation.

A Lius peccat,. 15.
alius plectitur: The Stranger commits the fault, and Malynes would have the
English punished. A Rule most fallible, most unequal! For it is the Stranger
that raises the money in foreign parts, and not the English: It is the
Stranger that carries away our money, and not the English. But it is the
English that is here the common taker of money by Exchange, and not the
Stranger. Now if the gain of the carrying out of our money be 10. or 15. per
Cento to the stranger, then the Exchange by his own rule must be set so much
higher to answer the said gain and to prevent the exportation, and
consequently must fall upon the English who is the common taker thereof. What
Malynes comes short in English, you shall have in good Dutch I warrant you. Nay
he will fit you with other feats of Exchange, and Exchangers: as

To lay their money with gain in any place of the world where Exchange lies.
P. 16.

To gain and wax rich, and never meddle with any Princes Commodity: or,
To buy any Princes Commodity with the Subjects money, and not one penny of
their own, etc.
IF every bird had her own feather,. 16.
this goose would grase with short wings. All Malynes Pamphlet from one end to
the other, is piec't together with stolen stuff. So he began, so he goes
on. In Milles his Customers Reply: in his Epist. ded. p. 5. In Milles his
Customers Alphabet and Primer. p. 15.
Traffic by nature admirable, by art amiable, stolen out of Milles his
Reply. His great comparison of Body, Soul, and Spirit, enspired out of Milles
his Alphabet and Primer. And in this place, here is no less then 20. pieces
together, taken out of an old Manuscript, In a Manuscript of Moneys and
Exchanges. p. 12.13.14.
which I have seen in many men's hands in London, the copy whereof I also have
my self: whose Original is therein said to be a Record in the Exchequer of
the 28. year of Edward the 3. From whence, as also from the former, Malynes
has stored himself of all this stuff, which he would now feign vent to the
world, both in his Little fish, and his Great whale, for Mysteries in Exchange.
I might be infinite, if I would trace Malynes in all his by-ways. But to save
that labor, if you will take the pains to compare this his Little fish, with
his Great whale, you shall find it a mere Spawne thereof: This swimming out
of That: That swallowing up This again: and both, nothing else but a
Gallamalfrey, or Dutch Hotchpotch of other men's Cookeries. It Is pity the
Press was oppressed with such base stuff: or the same suffered to be cast in
the face of the world: much more to be presented to the King, to such a King!

The Second cause says Malynes, P. 19.
of the want of money in England, is the superfluity of Plate, generally in
private men's hands. Here he has omitted to note the great quantity of silver
consumed in the making of silver thread, spangles, purles, oaes, and the like.

THe causes which I conceived of the want of money,. 17.
Malynes received them from me by order, not by number. But for the matter he
obiecteth to me of omitting the great quantity of silver thread, he has my
answer already, that it was improper for me to meddle with any impertinent
thing, unless with him I should have handled all Heterogeneall things, out of
kind and out of order, as he does every where. For this Manufacture of the
silver thread, his Majesty had settled, before I wrote, and opened the
Importation thereof to the Subject, as in former times. And if there be any
cause to resume that action, that Noble Gentleman, who has bestowed much time
and charge therein, will not stand in need of my defense, nor be afraid of his
defyance.

The third cause says Malynes, P. 22.
of the want of money in England, is the consumption of foreign Commodities.

YOu see we are now all in numbers,. 18.
and the causes here pulled in pieces by Malynes, which I hope he found in some
better form. He professes in his title, that his discourse and mine, are
Contraria iuxta se: and yet in this, and all the other causes, he concurreth
with me: but goes over and over the same things again, to spend time, abuse
the Reader, and fill up the pages of his Pamphlet with unnecessary repetitions.
And for want of matter, he here maligneth the Merchants-Adventurers; and
accuses them to be guilty of the Vnder-ballancing of Trade, by selling the
Cloth and other the native Commodities cheap, and bringing in Silks, Linen
cloth, Cambricks, Lawnes, and other Commodities dear, whereby the strangers
Scale is made the heavier, in the Balance of Trade. Which is a most unjust and
scandalous aspersion laid on so worthy a Company, by so unworthy a Person. For
there are no Merchants of the Kingdom, no dispraise to any, that do so much
improve the price of the Cloth, and the native Commodities abroad; or
dis-improue the foreign, and sell the same so cheap at home, as these
Merchants do. And for bringing in of money and treasure into the Kingdom,
wherein is the benefit of bringing the Trade of this Kingdom to an evener
Balance with other Countries, this Company therein exceeds and excels all
other Merchants. Which trade alone has brought in above 200. thousand pounds
in Gold since September last. And it were happy for the Kingdom, that if all
the other Trades thereof were brought into a Balance, they could produce such
a foot of Account, toward the advancement of the Exportation beyond the
Importation, as may be found alone in the Merchants-Adventurers Trade, But this
worthy and famous Society, needs not my testimony, nor can his obloquy
detract from it, that has always obtained such honorable approbation of the
State from time to time.

MAlynes must also have a fling at the French Company, P. 15.. 19.
that the Merchants thereof do also hinder the Balance of Trade, by bringing
in wines too dear. But if the rate of the Crown be risen from 64. to 75.
souls in exchange between England and France, then our Merchants that deliver
their money here, do receive so much the more there, whereby they may afford
their wines the better cheap. And if the wines be bought dear, and our
Native Commodities sold dear, what does this hinder the Balance of trade? And
if there were no other cause of dearnes of those or other wines, or other
foreign Commodities, then the price they cost abroad, or the under valuation
of our Exchange at home, which he so much talks of here and elsewhere, and is
nothing else but a mere Petitio principij, A begging of the question, without
any truth or proof; neither Merchants nor Tradesmen could justly complain of
the dearenes of foreign Commodities.

THe Levant Company also he will not let pass without some censure: P. 26..
20.
The restraint forsooth of Corints makes no Free trade. You may see by this,
what freedom of trade it is that Malynes means. He would feign have Corints
come in again in Flemish bottoms, that Strangers might be employed, and our
own Ships and Men lie by the walls. That all sorts of men might come into
that, and all other Companies, how unfit soever: (...) such men let in, as
would let in the Strangers trade with them. The trade of the Levant Company is
managed by many grave, expert, and discreet Merchants, into whose Society those
that are of quallity, may be admitted for a reasonable consideration.

The fourth cause of our want of money, P. 26.
in Malynes account, is the great want of our East India stock: whereas most
men would have expected, that the ready moneys sent in Reals of Plate to make
the employment of the said trade, should rather have been mentioned.

THis Company also,. 21.
that deserves so much pity, cannot escape Malynes envy. For here he
endeavors closely and cunningly to insinuate, that the cause of our want of
money is the ready moneys sent to the East Indies in Reals of Plate. Wherein
the East India Company has again and again, satisfied the State; that first,
they carry away none of the moneys of this Kingdom: next, that they furnish
themselves from foreign parts, of all that they send out: and lastly, that
they keep themselves within the compass of his Majesty's gracious grant,
having sent out much less, even of foreign money then they might, and had
need to have done from time to time. And if it should be granted, that some of
that money which is brought in for their use, might also be brought in for the
Kingdoms use, if their trade were not: yet can it not be denied, that the
increase of the stock of the Kingdom by that trade, is incomparably a far
better and greater means to bring in treasure into the Kingdom from other
parts of Christendom, then the other can be imagined to hinder the same. And
whatsoever is now carried out by the English, would be carried out by the
Hollanders, if this trade of ours were not.

Wherein, the action it self, and the disaffection of Malynes and others of
his mind, do seem to exact from me a word or two of the benefits, that may
arise to this Kingdom, by this trade. Those I shall reduce in a word, either
to such as concern the Trade, or such as concern the Treasure of the
Kingdom. In both which consists the happiness of every Commonwealth. Now the
Trade of this Kingdom, may thereby be encreast, in Stock, in Strength. In
Stock: for one hundred thousand pounds employed in that trade, and returned
from the East Indies, in Spices, Callicoes, and Indico, besides the hopes of
the Persian trade of Raw Silks, will yield Five hundred thousand pounds to
this Kingdom, in increase of Stock. In Strength: for this trade will yearly
employ not so little as Ten thousand tons of shipping, and Three thousand
Mariners, Carpenters, and other Artificers, in the First Employment out and
home: and almost as many more in a Second Employment after they are come home;
by way of transportation of these Indian Commodities, from hence into all parts
of the world. Which is an excellent means to advance our Navigation, and to
employ our Multitudes of poor.

The Treasure also of the Kingdom may thereby be abundantly encreast, both in
respect of the Revenue of The King, and of The Kingdom. Of The King: in the
increase of Customs, which always increase with trade. Of The Kingdom: in
the increase of treasure, which is not as some think carried out, but rather
conveyed in through the channels of this trade. For first, the Treasure
exported from hence into the East Indies, is not dig'd out of any Mines of our
own, but is purchased from foreign parts, for return of such East India
Commodities, as the Kingdom cannot spend, and are therefore exported from
hence into other parts of the world. And next, it must be considered, that if
One hundred thousand pounds stock sent out from hence, purchases Five hundred
thousand pounds returns from the East Indies; and this Kingdom at the most
spends but one fourth part thereof: all the residue being issued out, must
needs procure the Kingdom so much ready money, for return thereof as the
value of the goods amounts to; or at least, such other necessary commodities
for the Kingdoms use, in stead of that money: For which, either so much money
must have gone out to procure the same, or so much less money must have come
in, as those Commodities would amount unto.

But every one of these particulars would require a more large and serious
discourse, then the limitation of my pursuit of Malynes will permit. I shall
therefore leave this subject to him, that has already so worthily labored
therein: of whom, Mr. Tho Mun in his discourse of the East India trade.
I hope it will be thought no flattery, if I say, that his observation of this
trade, his judgment in all trade, his diligence at home, his experience
abroad, have adorned him with such endowments, as are rather to be wished in
all, then easy to be found in many Merchants of these times.

I shall also leave the action to the Royal protection of his Majesty, to
tender it, as a Elower of his Regal Crown and dignity. The rather because
this also is a Flower, which Opens with the Rising of the Sun, and Shuts
when the Sunne-setteth. It is subject, as all great Actions are, to Fraction
abroad, to Faction at home. Both and either are evil Engines, to subvert
Companyes, yea, Kingdoms also. But when the Sun arises in his glory, all
these foggs and mists will vanish away. His Majesty vouchsafed to descend,
from his throne of Majesty, into that late Colloquy with the Dutch: And with
the indefessiue pains of his own Royal Person, and the continual labor of
the Lords, has at last reconciled all the differences with the Dutch: much
more will He not suffer any discord amongst His own. All which Wars and
Iarres being hushed and over-blowne, and the trade pursued with the Grace and
Favor of his Majesty, Good order and government in the Company, and Unfeigned
amity and unity one with another; there cannot but be great hope, by Gods
blessing, of a Glorious harvest, from so Gracious a Seed-time: and I hope, that
those that have Sown in tears, shall in due time Reap in Joy.

Sr D. Diggs in his Defense of the East India Trade.
There Is a Noble Gentleman of this Kingdom, did once put the Dutch in mind of
their own Embleame, Si Collidimur frangimur, If the Potts knock, they will
quickly crack: It was then taken for another Meridian; but it may serve for
London and Amsterdam, and the East Indies also.

But Malynes takes notice of Master Mun's Discourse of the East India Trade,
P. 27.
whereby he is forced to confess, that the employment of the East India
Company is very profitable and necessary: That the gain of the Trade is very
good: That thereby the increase of the stock of the Kingdom is very great:
That the same is a means to bring in much Treasure: and yet like himself,
kick's down all this at once with his foot, concluding with this abominable
untruth, That the vnder-valuation of our monyes in Exchange, P. 28.
diverteth the same, and that the loss thereof is greater to this Kingdom,
then all the moneys employed to the East Indies comes unto. So that this man
you see, can Simul sorbere and flare, he can be with them, and against them,
and all with a breath.

The fifth cause of the want of money, P. 30.
in Malynes Arithmetique, is the Wars of Christendom. Touching the
exportation of monyes by the Wars of Christians, P. 31.
where he declares an urgent instance, that the Riecks Daller is raised from
two marks Lubish to twenty marks Lubish in many places of Germany, whereby
abundance of money is drawn unto the Mints of other Countries, from all the
Mines and parts of Christendom; herein he is much mistaken; for when monyes
are inhansed, they are never carried to the Mints to be converted into other
Coin.

OR rather Malynes has need of an Interpreter,. 22.
to help him understand what I have said in plain words. For I have not so
much as inferred that which he here concludes, that the Riecks Daller being
inhansed to twenty marks Lubish, is carried to the Mint to be converted into
other Coin. But rather that the Riecks Daller, and other monyes of Germany
running there so high, has drawn over abundance of our money, which has
there been converted into their Coin. And this, nor he, nor any man can deny.
And that the Riecks Daller then went at twenty marks Lubish in Silesia,
Austria, and Moravia, and the parts adjacent, both the Soldiers that have
received them so in pay, and the Merchants both English and Dutch, that trade
in the Linnens of those parts, will abundantly satisfy any man that doubts
in this matter. In so much as it has there been observed for a great
indiscretion in the Boores, or Country people of those parts, to take the
Riecks Daller at so excessive an high rate in payment for their Linnens, and
not to raise the price thereof answerable thereunto. Which has been the cause
that the Linnens of Germany have these two or three years last, come thence so
cheap, notwithstanding the Wars, which naturally are wont to make things
dear: because they have been bought with money given out of so high a rate,
and the Commodity not raised. Which quite overthrows another of Malynes
fallacies, that wheresoever the monyes are inhansed, There the Commodities are
also raised according to the money inhansed. P. 12.
And as well is he over-seene in Aristotle's terms of Action and Passion, thus;

No marvel therefore that he does invert things, P. 38.
and runs into a Labyrinth, without distinction between the thing Active
and Passive, by approving money to be the rule and square, whereby things
receive estimation and price: And yet commending the commutation before money
was devised to be coined. Aristotle says, that Action and Passion are merely
Relatiues, and that they differ no more, then the way from Thebes to Athens,
and from Athens to Thebes. We will therefore leave this Merchant to walk
between both, until he can discern the one from the other.

BY Malynes sentence when I speak of money and merchandise,. 23.
and do not misapply thereunto his improper and ignorant terms of Action and
Passion, I run into a Labyrinth. Which terms he has every where worn so
threadbare, that they look like himself. Neither is it possible for any man
living, to understand what he means by them: or to imagine, that himself
knows what he would say of them. And I pray you what indiscretion is it, to
approve of money to be the rule and square, whereby things receive their
estimation and price; and yet commend the Commutation of wares for wares,
before money was devised.

As for his Quotation of Aristotle, he uses him, as others whom he abuses:
and understands Action and Passion, as well as he did Matter, Form, and
Privation. Alas poor man, how should he understand Aristotle, that has
neither wit nor art? For if it should be granted that Action and Passion are
Relatiues, Yet money is the thing Active, and commodities become the thing
Passive. Little fish. p. 15. The exchange of moneys is in effect like the
instrument that strikes the clock, being therein the thing Active: and
commodities and moneys are therein become things passive. ibid. page 6.
does that prove money to be Active, and commodities Passive, as he here
infers, and elsewhere affirms, page 15? And why then does he in another
place say, that the Exchange is Active, and Commodities and Money are Passive,
page 6. But that in truth the man knows not what he says? Or if either, or
neither of them were Active and Passive, what is that to the thing here by him
brought in question, whether Co^mercium be Co^mutatio merciu^ or not: A change
of wares for wares, or money for wares? As if forsooth he would have no
difference made between Money and Commodities, in that his distinction:
ignorantly supposing in the one, that Aristotle takes Action and Passion, and
the way between Thebes and Athens to be one and the same thing: and being as
far wide in the other, that Money and Commodities have in them the affection
of Relation, because Action and Passion are Relatiues. I will therefore show
him out of his own Author his gross ignorance in both.

Aristotle disputing in his Physics de Agente and Patiente, says thus: (...).
Arist Phys. lib. 3. cap. 2. In Pacij Co^me^t. in Phys. Arist. l 1. c. 2. part.
10.
And although to do and to suffer were the same, yet are they not so to be
understood, as if the reason of their Essence were one and the the same, as is
of the garment and raiment; but as of the way which leads from Thebes to
Athens, and from Athens to Thebes. Which Pacius would have taught Malynes to
have understood, thus; Atqui facere and pati, vel docere and discere, non
dicuntur omnino esse idem, seu habere eandem essentiam and definitionem: sed
dicuntur aliquo modo esse idem, sicut adscensus and descensus, vel profectio
Athenis Thebas, and Thebis Athenas, dicuntur esse idem, quia idem est spacium,
sed essentiae ratio non est eadem. But to do and to suffer, or to teach and to
learn, are not said to be altogether the same, or to have the same essence
and definition: but are said after a sort to be the same, as ascending and
descending, or going from Athens to Thebes, and from Thebes to Athens, are said
to be the same, because it is the same distance, but in respect of the Essence
it is not the same thing.

Or if Malynes will not believe Pacius, let him hear Aristotle thus expounding
himself; (...). In Phys. lib. 3. c. 2. partic. 12.
And that I may speak all in a word, neither is the act of teaching and
learning, nor is Action and Passion properly the same: But the motion wherein
these things are, is the same: for to be the act of the Agent in the Patient,
and of the Patient from the Agent, is in reason different. And therefore if
Action and Passion, and the way from Athens to Thebes, and from Thebes to
Athens be in reason different, then it must needs follow, that Money and
Commodities by Malynes own comparison, and in common sense and reason, are
different also. Aristotle will also tell Malynes, It is manifest that Relatiues
are reciprocal. It appears that they are together in nature. Arist. Categor.
cap 7. partic. 16.17.
that Money and Commodities are not Relatiues. For the Philosopher teaches,
that (...).
Relatiues must be Reciprocal or of mutual affection, the one not subsisting
without the other: and they must be both at once, or both together in nature;
as a Servant and a Master, or a Father and a Son: for a man cannot be said to
be a Master, but in respect of his Servant: or to be a Servant, but in regard
of his Master: or a Father, but in reference to his Son: or a Son, but in
relation to his Father. Now Money and Commodities are not Reciprocal, or of
mutual affection, fot Money may be without Commodities, and Commodities
without Money. Nor were they together in nature: for Commodities were in nature
long before Money was invented: and it is not the Matter, but the Form gives
the Denomination of the thing, as the Logicians speak.

And thus I have taken this pains, to walk a little betwixt Thebes and
Athens, to show Malynes the way to either: least when he should go to Thebes,
he go with his Owls to Athens.

BY this time Malynes is come to Usury: which he numbers for the second cause
of the decay of trade.. 24.
And although he concur with me in this cause also, yet wanting other
matter, he must Aut accusari, aut mori: He must Malign, P. 39.
or not be Malynes. He accuses me to have taken the whole substance of my
discourse, out of other men's works: and brings for his Voucher, his Englands
view, worth no man's view, I Will warrant you. Some poor stuff of his belike he
means, so called or miscalled, as his manner is: as if I had supplied my self
with matter thence: which, I protest in the word of an honest man, never came
to my view, nor ever shall. Neither durst any but Malynes have found this
fault, himself so grossly faulty: to whom all is fish that comes to Net. Whose
Whale devours all, both great and small, whole sholes of fish: So that he has
caught himself by the nose, and his Turpe Doctori resulteth in his own face:
thus,

Turpe est Doctori, cum culpa redarguit ipsum:
Quae culpare soles, ea tu ne feceris ipse.
To such a Criple Doctor it is a shame,
To censure halting, and himself goes lame.
Yet for all that, he will persuade you, he has some oversight in Hebrew. For
thus he says,

If the Brokers had been Jews, P. 41.
I might have bestowed some Hebrew upon them, in detestation of the word
Neshech, which is nothing else but a kind of biting, as a dog uses to byte
and gnaw upon a bone: otherwise to use many languages in a little Treatise of
Free trade, may seem impertinent.

A Las poor man,. 25.
I would he had learnt good English first! But in the best he has shown in
this Little Fish and his Great Whale, the Reader may perceive great defect, and
many of his sentences Nonsense. He is beholding to the Divines for
translating Neshech into common Characters; otherwise he might have said of
it, as some said of Greek in Erasmus time, Graecum est, non legitur. But if he
had been but a smatterer in Hebrew, he might better have understood the
Notation of Neshech, which is commonly taken for the biting or sucking of a
Serpent, not of a Dog, as Rabbi Bechai observes: Because says he, (...) Rab.
Bechai in Comment. in legem fol. 113.
It byteth or sucketh like a Serpent, and is not felt. Whereof the Gloss says
thus: Creditor mordet cum exigit quod non dedit: Debtor mordetur, cum reddit
quod non accepit: The Creditor is said to byte, when he exacteth that which
he delivered not: And the Debtor is said to be bitten, when he restores
that which he received not. Whence it is, I think, that our word Snake, by a
Metathesis of the letters answers to Neshech. But as for Malynes he does
neither byte, not is bitten of this Seprent. He is as little troubled with
that, as he is ouer-burthened with the Hebrew, Greek, and Latin tongues, and
the knowledge of the Arts. That cost he will spare, because to use many
languages in a little Treatise of Free trade may seem impertinent. Wherein he
seems to check the use of tongues in discourse of Trade: Indeed to use them
as Malynes does, is to abuse them: for sometimes he translates them wrong, and
sometimes denies the Author of them the honor of his own. Otherwise the use of
languages is both lawful and laudable. And thence it is that Bodin, Bodin de
Reg.
that great Politician of France, in his books De Republica, and therein also
of Merchants and Merchandise, does so often cite Hebrew, Greek, and Latin
testimonies. The like does Grotius that learned Netherlander, in his Mare
Liberum, his Free Sea trade, Grotius in Mare lib.
and other of his Works. And this did that famous Orator M. T. Cicero, the
Master of Eloquence, De Off. lib. 1.
both practice himself, and command to his son: Semper cum Graecis, says
he, Latina coniunxi: neque id in Philosophia solum, sed etiam in dicendi
exercitatione feci, idem tibi censeo faciendum. I have always, says the
Orator, joined Latin with Greek: neither have I done that in Philosophy
only, but also in the exercise of declaiming: and the same I think fit for
thee to do. Besides it is against the rule of Justice, that the use of
Testimony should be denied to any man, in speech or writing. For there is
nothing so clear, but may require Testimony, either for confirmation, or
Ilustration of the matter, to which it is applied: And the want of Testimony,
is the want of Authority also. P. Ram. de Dialect. cap. 32.33.
Now all Testimony may be said to be either Divine or Humane. Divine, as the
Holy Scriptures. Humane, as the Law it self, or Illustrious Sentences. The
Testimony of Law, is of the Written, or Not written Law. The Testimony of
Illustrious Sentences, consists in Maxim's, Principles, Proverbs, and the
Sayings of Wise men of all Nations, and in all Languages. Now you cannot do an
Author a greater honor, then to use his own words: least in translating of
him into another tongue, you translate him also into another sense, as Malynes
does Aristotle. I know it is grown in use in this Kingdom, to cite in speech
and writing, the Translation for the Original. But surely it is more common,
then commendable. Because it tends to the loss of time, and brings no benefit
to the Auditor to hear a double translation. For if the Text be Hebrew, and it
be rendered in Greek; or Greek, and rendered in Latin; or as the manner is,
to cite Latin for both; neither the Author has any honor, nor the Auditor
benefit, more of the Latin, then of the English, because they are both
Translations. And if there be many Auditors that understand not the Original,
so are there not a few, that understand not the Latin Translation also. Which
use of the Latin Translation, has brought out of use, the most necessary and
learned Languages. Wherein there is not an Iota in the Greek, nor a Title in the
Hebrew without a mystery: In which last and best, our English tongue has as
great a part, as any other Language of the Christian world: which I speak for
the honor of our Language, and the encouragement of those that delight in
Tongues.

And thus much briefly for Languages, and for defense of those which I have
used for divine and humane testimony, which in Malynes sentence do seem
Impertinent.

THe third cause of the decay of Trade, P. 41.. 26.
in Malynes account, are Litigious Lawsuits. To the Efficiency whereof,
Malynes cannot altogether agree, but rather to the Remedy. But I shall
willingly pardon him that: for he that is so ignorant in the Essential causes,
must needs be nescious in the Efficients also. I would there were no cause, for
their sakes whose case it is, to dispute this Causalitie. Whereby many of his
Majesty's loving Subjects are deprived, some of their liberties, I had almost
said, of their lives, many of their livings. Wherein I doubt not, but the
grave, sage, and learned Judges, the Reverend Fathers of the Law, will at the
last consider, and consult of some effectual means, for shortning of the time
of Suits, and lessning of the charge of Law. Amongst whom, double honor
belongs to him, that governes so well, and labors so much in the Word and
Doctrine. Good luck have thou with thine honor. Ride on, according to the
Word of Truth, and moderation of Justice. The Spirit of Elijah rests on
Elishah: Walk in his Steps, who living honored thee; and dead, lives, and is
honored in thee: Sic tibi conting at viuere, sicquemori.

Malynes in the next place, though in a wrong place, takes occasion to speak
of Anno 1588. And denies that the Kingdom was then in such great distress,
to be termed, in Articule temporis, when the Merchants-Adventurers supplied a
Ships lading of Powder and Shot from Hamburgh: I pray God grant we never know
the like distress, nor ever be wanting to acknowledge so great a deliverance.

Malynes fourth cause, P. 42.
is the Fishing. Wherein he is better then his word, for he concurreth with me
therein also. And is not the neglect of Trade, the decay of Trade? And is not
the Strangers pulling the bread out of the Natives mouths, the decay of Trade?
Therefore proper enough Malynes. But because here he wants fuel for his fury
against me, like a mad man he strikes the next man he meets. And no less then
the State first, and diverse worthy Merchants next. P. ibid.
Against the State he dares say, That this Action of the Fishing has been in
continual agitation above thirty years, to make Busses and Fisher Boats,
but the Action is still interrupted, because other Nations do find too great
favor and friends here, to divert all the good intentions of such as have
employed their time and good means therein. And for the Merchants, he
accuses the Merchants-Adventurers, East-land Merchants, and the Muscony
Company, to have opposed this cause at the Council board. And as if he were a
Clerk of the Council, takes upon him to set down ten several articles,
which were there had in consultation with the Lords.

For his Scandalum Magnatum, I remit that, to his former reckoning; where he
has more then enough to answer. And for his accusation of those worthy
Merchants, I am persuaded that, there are none of all his Majesty's Subjects,
can be more ready and willing then they, to further so noble a design.

From the Fishing, he comes to the Clothing, P. 45.
which he desciphers for the fifth cause of the decay of Trade. Wherein also he
concurres with me, notwithstanding his challenge. Nevertheless, for want of
other matter to fill up the pages of his waste paper, he turne's himself to
the Dying and dressing Project: and says thus,

I cannot omit to observe the Practices which were used by combination with
other Nations abroad, P. 46.
and domestique Intelligences at home, whereby many good actions are
overthrown, to the general hurt, and with little advancement to the
particular.

HEre Malynes endeavors to lay a Tacit and secret aspersion on the Merchants
Adventurers:. 28.
but not being able to produce any ground for so malicious a scandal, is
obnoxious to punishment, and ought to be taken for the Intelligencer himself,
until he produce his proofs for so unjust an accusation.

Another Digression he makes for the defense of his gross error committed in
his Canker of of Englands Commonwealth: In his Canker. p. 46.
where he wished, That other Nations might take upon them to make our Clothes,
which might says he, be easily remedied, by selling our wolles the dearer,
whereof they must make them. Can there be any defense for such a defeisance?
You shall hear the best he has,

In the latter time of Queen Elizabeth of blessed memory, P. 47.
and until the second year of our most gracious Lord King James, wolles were
permitted to be transported by the Staplers and others. And the makers of cloth
beyond the Seas, must needs have them to cover their wolles in the Indraping,
which is now prohibited, and the case altered.

HEre you see the defense is as lame as the Defendant:. 29.
Because there was then permitted a tolleration for the transportation of
wolles; was it therefore necessary, or reasonable, or to be wished of any good
Subject, that there should have been a transportation of our Clothing also? Or
would he have had the Staplers carry away all our wolles, that his Countrymen
might have made all the cloth? God forbid Malynes! Sic tu be as amicos? Will thou play the Ape in the Apologue, and kill us with kindness? But the tree
cannot be better known then by the fruit; nor Malynes, then by this mark.
This is he that would seem so good a Subject to our King and Kingdom, to diet
us with the Fleece, and to feed his own Country and Nation with the Flesh and
Fat: to confine us to the Wolles, and convey our Clothing to them, then which
there is not a more Royal manufacture in all the world. There could not have
been devised, no not by an enemy, so mischievous a project, as to bereave so
many thousand families of this Kingdom, that depend on the making of cloth,
of such an excellent living and liuely-hood. The other part of his defense, is
as false, as the former is feigned. For to affirm, That the Makers of cloth
beyond the Seas, cannot make their cloth without our English woll, is as true
as that, wherewith the State has been so much abused, That the Dutch could
not subsist without our English cloth. That the latter is false, our own ill
experience can tell us: That the former is foolish; all Malynes Countrymen, and
those that know the State of Dutch-land, will witness against him. But because
he cannot Excuse, he will Accuse: First Envy, P. 48.
For looking asquint upon him: whereby he says, he has lost one Eye, in his
reputation with his own Countrymen, and now must loose the other Eye with our
Nation, like Belisarius mentioned in my discourse. Indeed in blindness he may
resemble Belisarius, but in nothing else: more like he is to blind
Bartelmeus, who the more he was forbid, the less he held his peace. And next
he accuses his ill luck, P. ibid.
For his invention of farthing tokens: for which he says, He is accused to
bring the use of copper moneys into the Kingdom. But he mistakes the
accusation, which was rather, that if not himself, some foul of his feather,
might be vehemently suspected, to have brought in counterfeit copper tokens
into the Kingdom. Which whether it be right or wrong, I cannot tell, but it
is probable, that the tenth part of the copper tokens at this day in the
Kingdom, were never coined in the Kingdom.

At last he is returned from these long digressions, to the thing proposed,
which is the Cloth trade: but with a change of his note and his coat too. For
now he begin's to personate others. Now you may hear a song of four parts:
but set by a very ill Musition, one that knows not his Gammuth, nor can prove
a note, not keep tune or time. You may hear the very voice of the Strangers,
of the Staplers, of the Interlopers, and of the Ports; all in one Noise, and
the poor Merchants Adventurers are made the burden of the song. I am sorry for
them all! For These, that they are so unjustly accused: For Those, that their
complaint is so much abused. For thus Malynes canteth and chaunteth,

That the Merchants Adventurers having engrossed into their hands, P. 50.
by color of their last Letters Patents, the sole power of exporting all white
Clothes, colored Clothes, Kersies, Bays, Says, Serges, Perpetuanaes, and all
other new Draperies, into Holland, Zealand, Brabant, and other parts of the low
and higher Germany, has abated the trade. For all Merchants-Strangers, might,
and did heretofore export white Clothes out of the Kingdom, paying double
Custom, which now they may not.

THe Divines say, Consuetudo peccandi, tollit sensum peccati: The custom of
sinning,. 30.
takes away the sense of sin. This man has used himself to such liberty of
speech, that now he dare's say any thing.

For the Merchants Adventurers, upon whom it has pleased his Majesty out of
His singular Grace and Favor, to confer many excellent Privileges and
Immunities, in their last Letters Patents: yet in point of exportation of White
and colored Clothes, Kersies, Bays, Says, and other new Draperies of the
Kingdom, there is no more power given them in these latter, then his Maistie
and his Royal Predecessors have honored them with, in other former Letters
Patents, from time to time.

In the eight year of Hen. 4. the trade of White and colored Clothes,
Kersies, Bays, Says, and other the Native Commodities of the Kingdom, into
Holland, Zealand, Brabant, and Flanders, was entrusted unto them, by the Kings
Letters patents, to be managed under government. In the first year of Hen. 5.
the said Letters Patents were approoved and confirmed. In the eight year of
Hen. 6. the former Charters, with the consent of the Lords Spiritual and
Temporal in Parliament assembled, were accepted and allowed. In the second
year of Edw. 4. the said Letters Patents and every part of them, were ratified
and confirmed. In the first year of Ric. 3. the said Letters Patents were
approved and confirmed. In the twentieth year of Hen. 7. the said Merchants
were honored with the title of Merchants Adventurers, and had power to keep
their Courts, and hold their Marts in the Town of Calais. In the fourth year
of Hen. 8. the said Letters Patents in all points were ratified and confirmed.
In the first year of Edw. 6. all the former Patents were recited and approved.
In the first year of Philip and Mary, the said Letters Patents were examined,
allowed and confirmed. In the second year of Q. Elizabeth, of ever-living
memory, the former Patents were recited, approved, and enlarged. In the sixth
year of her reign, their former Charters were reviewed, and they were
inscribed by the name of Merchants Adventurers of England, and authorized To
exercise their government in any part of the Kingdom, to have a Common Seal,
to be a perpetual Succession, to purchase lands in the name of the Company. In
the 28. year of her reign, their Charters were again reviewed and confirmed,
with power To keep their Courts, and To exercise their trade as amply in
Germany, as before they had done in the Low Countries: And straightly forbad,
upon pain of forfeitures and imprisonment, all others of her Subjects not free
of the said fellowship, to trade into any of their said Privileged places. In
the second year of the happy reign of our most gracious Sovereign Lord The
Kings Majesty, the former Letters Patents, Privileges, and Princely grants,
were recented, revised and ratified. And last of all in the 15. year of His
Majesty, the said Letters Patents were again perused and approved, Whereby it
is manifest that the Cloth, and other The manufactures of this Kingdom, traded
into Germany, and the Low Countries; have with the favor of the State, bin
conferred on the Merchants Adventurers, not only by their last Letters Patens,
but by many other former grants before recited. Which certainly had never
been so long continued, so often renewed, nor they so much cherished, had not
the trade of Clothing bin quickened and enlivened, by the prudent ordering of
the Merchants Adventurers trade from time to time. And these things I have not
by hearsay or relation, but by mine own collection, and observation; having
had occasion to take some special pains in the perusal of these particular
grants, for the service of the State.

And whereas Malynes suggesteth, P. 50.
That all Merchants Strangers might, and did heretofore export white Clothes,
That is as far from truth as the former. For whereas by the Statutes of the
3. Hen. 7. the 3. of Hen. 8. and the 20. and 23. of the same King, it is
enacted, that no white Clothes might be transported rough, above 40. sh. a
Cloth in the time of Hen. 7. and 4. marks, and 4. li. a Cloth, in the time of
Hen. 8. it came to pass, by the discreet carryage of the Cloth-trade in the
Merchants Adventurers hands, that the trade of Cloth thrived so fast, and the
prises of Clothes risse so much, that few or no Clothes could be shipped out
by any, whether English or Stranger, but by a Non obstante to the said
Statutes: whereupon special Licenses were granted from the State, as Q. Eliz.
free license of Thirty Thousand white Clothes a year, to the Merchants
Adventurers; and other licenses to the Earl of Cumberland, and others. But
when any question arisse upon any of them, they were restrained to the
Merchants Adventurers only.

If Malynes had said, that the Merchants Strangers might heretofore export
White and colored Clothes dressed, Kersies, Bays, Says, Perpetuanoes, and
other the New Draperies of the Kingdom, into the Merchants Adventurers
privileges, paying Strangers Custom, he had said true: And so they either
do, or may do now; and perhaps for less then Strangers Custom also. And
therefore the Merchants Adventurers have not the sole power of exporting those
things, as is mis-inform'd and mis-affirmed also. You have heard Malynes plain
song, will you hear his descant?

The Merchants of the Staple, from all the Staple Ports, P. 50.
as London, Westminster, Bristoll, Southhamton, Hull, Boiston, and New Castle,
have heretofore exported either Cloth, or Woll, or both, which now they may
not.

THe Merchants of the Staple never shipped any Clothes at any time as Staplers,
31.
but as Merchants-Adventurers. And so they may do still, such of them as are
free of the Merchants-Adventurers Company, whereof there are many.

But this point having of late upon occasion, been resumed into the
consideration of the State, it was boldness for Malynes to meddle therewith, and
to make question of that, which is out of question, in the judgment of all
indifferent men. Or will you hear his voluntary?

All other Merchants at large, as well at London, P. 50. 51.
as all other parts of the Kingdom, have usually heretofore exported colored
Clothes, Kersies, Bays, Says, Serges, Perpetuanoes, etc. which now they may
not. So that all the trade of the Merchants of the Staple, of the Merchants
Strangers, and of all other English Merchants, concerning the exportation of
all the Commodities made of woll, into those Countries, where the same are
especially to be vented, is in the power of the Merchants Adventurers only:
and it is come to be managed by 40. or 50. persons of that Company, consisting
of three or four Thousand.

IF there be three or four Thousand of the Merchants-Adventurers, 32.
then certainly there is the less need of more help. And if there be so many
of them that forbear, and so few that trade, then there will be but cold
comfort for new men to begin, where the old have left. It is true, the number
of the Merchants-Adventurers, is very ample and great, consisting of diverse
worthy members, of London, and of all the Ports, and of the Staplers Company
also; who both do, and may trade with them at their pleasure. But it is as
true, that the trade, through the late disturbance of it, the great quantities
of Cloth made in foreign parts, and the too heavy charge fallen upon the
cloth, is become so poor and lean, that there is now no comfort in the world
in it, for new nor old. But it is most false, That 40. or 50. persons manage
that trade, when there is at this day more traders, then can well live one by
another. And that the trade of Colored Clothes, Kersies, Bays, Says, Serges,
Perpetuanoes, etc. is not in the power of the Merchants-Adventurers only, I
have already declared, in the Section going before. But he that can talk at
large thus in gross, can do it also by retayle. Thus,

Nay one man alone, P. 51.
has compassed into his hands the whole trade of colored Clothes and Kersies
for these parts, by the means of Exchanges and moneys taken up at Interest.

THat one man which Malynes out of malice picks and points at, 33.
is indeed an ample trader in Colored Cloth, but not in Kersies: yet so, as
there are very many others of the Company, that are also traders in Colored
Cloth, as well as he. Malynes may bark, but he cannot bite. It is not Malynes
Malignitie, that can detract any thing from the worth of so worthy a Merchant.
Who, because he comes within my Circle, I can do no less, then deleat and
blot out Malynes Oblique line, and give him his Right and direct line: that is,
that he contains himself within his own Circle, his Compass, his Course,
his Calling, with great judgment and discretion, fair and Merchantlike
action. But because, for some reasons, I may not say of him what I might; I
shall wish what I ought, that we had more such Merchants, no more such
Malynes. From him Malynes turns himself again toward the Merchants
Adventurers, and vpbraideth them,

To have borrowed 50. or 60. Thousand pounds at use, for the service of the
Company, P. 51.
and thereby engaged the trade, and set themselves in debt.

TTantumne est ab re tua otij; tibi, aliena vt cures, eaque nihil quae ad te
attinent. 34. Teran heaut.
This man certainly has nothing to do of his own, that is so busy in other
men's affairs. It is true that the Merchants-Adventurers trade is engaged in a
great sum of money: yet not for the service of the Company, but of the State:
and therefore it is a very audacious part for a man of his quality, to cast
such a calumny, in the face of so worthy a Company. It were a great happiness
unto that trade, and other trades also that depend on it, that some good means
were thought upon, either that which has been proposed, or some such other as
might be thought more fit in the wisdom of the State, for case therein:
whereby the Trade of Cloth, and the Traders therein, both Clothier and
Merchant, might be more encouraged. The Merchants-Adventurers have strugled
much to lessen this charge, even with the withdrawing of pensions and deserved
stipends from many: which alas, is like a drop of water to the Ocean: And as it
can conduce little to the case of so great a charge, so may it much hazard the
honor and reputation of the government of so famous a fellowship in foreign
parts, which heretofore has shined in the eyes of Strangers above all other
Nations. Wherein also there is a relation to the honor of the King, and
Kingdom: both which are represented unto Strangers in foreign parts in their
government: and therefore it is pity that those that therein have excelled
others, should now be inferior unto all. Neither does this man so much as
spare his aspersions from the Clothier: for thus he says,

This small number to manage so great a trade, P. 51.
incourageth the Clothier to adventure to make false Cloth, because it is
impossible, that so few Merchants can search and vifit every Cloth, as it ought
to be done, and the Clothiers conscience is satisfied, for he says, that the
falsest Cloth is answerable to the best price.

VTquisque est vir optimus, ita difficilime esse alios Improbos suspicatur. 34.
Cic. ad Quint.
If Malynes were good himself, he would think better of other men. I cannot
think there is any Clothier so bad, that would speak so ill. Ill will
speake's well of none: nor Malynes of Merchant nor Clotheir. For it is not the
small or great number of Merchants that incourageth the Clothiers to make false
cloth, but merely the want of execution of the Statute, Free trade. cop. 2.
and 7.
of 4. of the King, enacted for clothing, as I have else where showed at large.
Now the Statute provideth, that cloth be searched wet and not dry, as it
comes out of the Mill, and not as it comes to the Market. And therefore the
wisdom of Parliaments has appointed the search to be made, where the clothes
are made. So that if the search be neglected there, it is not the multitude of
Merchants, that can help the search, or indeed try the search as it ought to
be. For in the winter time, the season of the year will not afford drying for
the tenth Cloth, to be wet and dried again for timely exportation. And should
the Clothier be detained from his money, and the cloth from the market, till
such a kind of unkindly search or review were made, both Merchants and
Clothiers would soon be a weary of such a trial. Neither is there any
necessity for the Merchants to make this review, for then the great numbers of
the Clothworkers in London, that are set a work by the Merchants-Adventurers
to visit their Clothes, would lose their employment. So that if Malynes had
said true, that there wants Merchants, yet there is no want of Clothworkers to
perform this work.

Many other things he speaks at Random of the Clothiers, of the Ports, of
Chapmen, and others, as generally he does throughout the whole scope of his
book, which deserve not repetition, much less the honor of an answer; and
concludes these digressions thus,

Shall this be proclaimed a free trade, P. 53.
when within our selves we are in bondage, and have lost the benefit of the two
essential parts of traffic, namely, the rule of money and Exchange?

And a little after, P. 54.
The Merchant Staplers have observed that the Merchants Adventurers have an
inevitable opportunity of combination, to set what price they please upon
Cloth to the Clothier, of Woll to the grower, and of all Commodities exported
and imported.

ASpis a vipera venenum mutuatur: 36.
Malynes calls the Staplers to witness against the Merchants Adventurers: when
he and they are both their professed Adversaries. But for the accusation, no
Subjects, I dare say, of this Kingdom, are more free of these crimes, then the
Merchants-Adventurers: neither have they any opportunity of such combination,
as is most untruly suggested. For there are no Merchants of the Kingdom, that
do more bid, and out-bid one another at the market, then they. If they did
trade as some Merchants do, in a joint stock, there might be some suspicion of
it: but where there are so many buyers, as are continually of the
Merchants-Adventurers, every man in that case is nearest to himself. And if
all the Orders which ever they made, since they had the honor of their name,
were searched out, and sisted over; there would not be found a syllable in them
of that sound, whereof Malynes makes such a noise. For the Free trade whereof
he speaks, and whereby he points at my Tract of trade: I would to God
that those grievances therein mentioned, were remooved: and then mauger Malynes
or any other, if any be of his mind, I durst proclaim, that this Kingdoms
trade, would both be free and flourish. Wherein nevertheless, I have dealt
freely and fairly, in wishing, That the Kings high way of trade, Free Trade.
cap. 3.
upon such reasonable terms as might concur with the wisdom of the State,
might be opened unto all men.

But I perceive there is no discourse of Free trade will please Malynes, and
others of his mind, without a Par of Exchange, or complaint against Companies,
the Merchants-Adventurers especially. But you the Merchants-Adventurers, who
worthily have obtained, honor of his Majesty, favor of the Nobility, fame in
the world, love of Strangers, good report of all; that you I say, should come
under Malynes pen, and be made the subject of his style, the object of his
envy, is such a disgrace, as the State was never wont to let you suffer, or
the honor of your name to undergo. What should be the cause of this man's
envy? Is his eye evil, because the gracious eye of his Majesty is so good, to
have beheld your famous fellowship with His own aspect? For his Majesty looking
back upon some former and later experiments made upon this trade, and looking
forward upon the danger and inconvenience of Innovations; has as his Royal
Predecessors ever did, vouchsafed his Royal grace and favor to These
Merchants, This trade. Because the Cloth-trade is the Dowry of the Kingdom,
the great Revenue of the King. It is the Axis of the Commonwealth, whereon all
the other trades of the Kingdom do seem to turn, and have their revolution.
And therefore it has ever been the policy of State, to entrust this trade, to
such men as are Probatae fidei, of approoved credit and trust, wisely to manage
the same: and not to Novices and new-made Merchants, by whose inexperience the
trade might be subject to be betrayed into the hands of foreign Nations. And
certainly the Commonwealth would lose more, by the loss of one expert
Merchant discouraged and driven out, then it could hope to gain by twenty
Novices let in, into a trade which they do not understand. So that this
restraint is the cause of this envy: which is in nature an innate and inbred
thing, Eleg. 3.4.
according to that of the Poet, Nittimur invetitum semper, cupimusque negata:
Men are commonly most fond of that, which they are most forbid. Otherwise I am
as confident, as I am conscious of it, that there is no trade of this Kingdom,
gives so little allurement to those that are without, or so small
encouragement to those that are within, as does the Merchants-Adventurers trade
at this day. Which notwithstanding, I hope his Royal Majesty shall ever find
in them, that loyal resolution, which heretofore they have shown, to cast
down themselves and their trades in all humility, at his Majesty's feet, to be
disposed of, according to the good pleasure of his Majesty's high wisdom and
grace.

And yet I would have no man think, that I would seem hereby to take upon me
to personate them, or meddle in their matters, further then you see Malynes
has led me into the same. Wherein I must use this just defense for them and
me: that I have neither had commission from them, nor consulted with them, or
any of theirs, about this thing, or any thing contained herein: But with an
even hand and heart, have without partiality, Crassa Minerva, according to the
plainenes and simplicity of mine own poor Genius, pursued Malynes from point
to point. Neither do the Merchants-Adventurers of all others stand in need of
my help. For they are happy in enjoying him, who for his learning and
integrity, deserves praise: of whom, if I say, that he is not second to any,
of his quality, in this Kingdom, I shall neither flatter him, nor iniure any,
as all that know him do know, and will acknowledge. To him therefore I shall
commend this theme, as most proper to his person and office: who for his parts
is more able, and for his place is more fit then my self, to take upon him
this defense, if there be cause. It is true, I am a brother, though unworthy
of that worthy Society: and so I am of other Companies also: and so also am I
a member, though one of the least, of the great Commonwealth of this Kingdom:
wherein I have learnt to prefer, that public, to all these particular
obligations. Amicus Plato, Amicus Socrates, sed magis Amica veritas. Those
Companies, and that course of trade, shall be my discourse of Free trade, which
shall be best approved of the State, and wherein the honor of The King, and
the welfare of the The Kingdom, are most involved.

BY this time Malynes is come to Monopolies: the discourse whereof,. 37.
if you will take his word, P. 60.
Is without Ryme or Reason, because his pure Par of Exchange is not appendix't
to it. And indeed there is some reason that such a Par as he parret's of,
should have had some place assigned it amongst Monopolies. For I Will undertake,
that there is not any worse Monopoly in the Kingdom, then he would make of
this, If he might have his will. For other Monopolists would be sole sellers
and buyers in merchandise, he in the Exchange. But if you doubt of his
judgment in this project, he will produce his Monsieur Bodin, to approve it
by this French proverb, Il entend le par: P. 61.
which was never yet known for any good phrase in the French, much less for a
proverb and is as ill a proof as a proverb, to approve his experience. For,

Celuy qui est d'experience, entend le par:
Malynes n'entend pas le par: Ergo,
Malynes n'est point d'experience.
The proposition is prooved by his own Proverb: the Assumption, by his
Project, as the event will manifest. But now you talk of a Sill^gisme, will
you hear Malynes make a Paralogisme? Thus,

Nothing causes. Merchants to export more money out of the Realm then they
bring in, P. 61.
but only the bringing in of more Commodities into the Realm then they
carried out.

The vnder-valuation of our moneys, causes no more Commodities to be brought
into the Realm, then is carried out.

Ergo, the vnder-valuation of our moneys, causes not more money to be carried
out of the Realm, then is brought in.

NEve negativis recte concludere scibis:. 38. Seton.
There is no good conclusion can be drawn from Negatiues. And therefore the
Philosophers say, Ex nihilo, nihilfit: You cannot make something of nothing.
Neither has it the shape of a Syllogism, for all the Propositions in it, are
Negative: which cannot come under any Mood or Figure of Aristotle. Or if it had
the form of a Syllogism, yet it makes nothing against any thing I have said.
For I do not say any where, that the vnder-valuation of our money causes more
money to be carried out of the Realm then is brought in; but that it causes
money to be carried out of the Realm, when it is brought in: against which,
this Paralogisme, if it had been a Syllogism, could have concluded nothing.
For money must be first brought into the Realm, before it be carried out.
Again, although it should be granted, that the vnder-valuation of our money,
does not cause more money to be carried out of the Realm then is brought in,
yet for all that, it may cause a great part of that which is brought in to be
carried out.

Thus you see this Sophister how he chops Logic! And great care forsooth he
takes, that it breed not a Dilemma, which he understands as well as he does a
Syllogism. For a Dilemma is that, which convinces both ways: which his
Paralogisme does no way: or rather convinces him of folly. For his argument
may easily be retorted upon hinselfe: thus,

If nothing causes Merchants to export more money out of the Realm then they
bring in, but only the bringing in of more Commodities into the Realm then
they carried out, then it is not for want of a Par of Exchange.

But the the first is true, by his own argument: and therefore the second.

Or will you hear of a hound, that has a better sent of a Syllogism then
Malynes? The hound having lost the sent, coasts the Country: and runs toward
the East, and back to the West, and then to the North: and thus recenteth and
concludes,

Either the Dear is gone East, or West, or North, or South. But he is not
gone East, nor West, nor North: Ergo the Dear is gone South.

But we are not so well as to be a hunting,. 39.
for Malynes has led us a wilde-goose race He proposed Monopoly, but keeps a
loofe from in as the Parson did, that took his Text of fasting and preached of
feasting. For now he is fallen into a laborinth between the Extrinsique and
Intrinsique values of moneys: and therein takes upon him to refute a sentence
of mine, before he understands it. For I speak of the value of money in
Denomination; he of the Finenes. And I pray you, when we say, P. 61.
that plenty or scarcity of commodities makes their Price: will any man think
that to be the cause of their Goodness? And when I say, that the plenty or
scarcity of moneys, causes their Values: would any man but Malynes have
thought I spoke of their Finenes? By Price in the one, is meant Valuation: by
Value in the other, is meant Denomination or account. This man will take upon
him to teach distinctions, before he can distinguish. So then though Malynes
say, I deny, and prove nothing; yet to the Judicious it will appear, that my
deny all of his Par of Exchange, P. 62.
is confirmed, with an undeniable argument, of The plenty or scarcity of
moneys, which perpetually does cause the Exchanges to rise and fall: and which
does as certainly, in foreign parts where moneys go uncertain, rule their
Values or denomination, as the plenty or scarcity of Commodities does their
Price. It is true, the name of a thing does not alter it really, but nominally:
and denomination of money, does alter it in name, though not in substance. The
cloth does not measure the yard, but the yard the cloth: but the greater the
measure is, the fewer yards the cloth contains, and the less the measure,
the more yards: and so is the denomination of money, the measure thereof to him
that receives it, whereby it is more or less in account. And thus Malynes
having run himself out of breath, P. 63.
and outrun Monopolium, with telling us a tale, of a Cock and a Bull, of a
Pewterer and a Parater: at last he begins to define it, and understands
Monopolion in Greek, as well as he does Neshech in Hebrew. P. 69.
As you may perceive by this his distinction,

And as this may be done by authority, so may the abouesayd coursed also be
committed under the color of authority, by the Princes grant, or Letters
Patents.

I Marvel what is the difference between Authority, and the Princes Letters
Patents?. 40.
And why Malynes should term the Princes grant, or Letters Patents, The color
of authority? But something he will say, though nothing to the purpose: and
rather then nothing, worse then nothing. For first he accuses The Turkey
Merchants, of finding fault with his Majesty's preemption of Time: P. 80.
should be 70.
and then he falls into the Allome Mines: and there finds fault himself
with his Majesty's grant, That it makes that Commodity dearer to the Subject,
P. 82. should be 72.
and better cheap to the transporter or Sranger. And so he is posted from
Monopoly, and is now come to Want of government in trade. And there he finds
fault, with Too many distinctions, which in a little Treatise, P. 84.
he says, may seem superfluous.

A Little Treatise of Free trade, of a few weeks meditation, may be as
methodically distributed,. 42.
as a Lex Mercatoria, or Great Whale of Great Whale, P. 8.
fifty years breeding and observation. And although the Treatise be little,
yet the Subject matter thereof is great, and trencheth deep: and I dare say,
the Method is according to Art, though Malynes know it not. For in all
Logical Distributions, and Definitions also, there ought to be Affectio
reciprocationis, a certain Reciprocal affection in both: Illic Partiu^ omniu^
cum Toto: P. Ram. Dialect lib. 1. c. 25.
hic Definitionis cum Definito. Of all the Parts with the Whole, in the one: of
the Definition with the thing Defined, in the other, as the Logicians speak.
Definition teaches what a thing is: Distribution, how manifold it is. This is
like the Diameter, which divides the Circle in ye midst: That the Perimeter,
which co^prehends the compass or circumference thereof. Without true
Definition, and exact Distribution, that work is weak and imperfect, which
otherwise seems never so learned. Definition is said to be Perfect, or
Imperfect. A Perfect Definition consists of Essential Causes: An Imperfect, of
Other Arguments: Distributio sumitur exargumentis toti quidem consentaneis,
inter se autem diffentaneis. Itaque tanto accuraetior erit, quanto partium cu^
toto corsensio, and inter se dissentio mayor fuerit. Eodem. cap. 25.
and then it is called Description. Distribution is that, which divides the
Whole, into the Parts. The Whole is that, which contains the Parts. The Part
is that, which is contained of the Whole. That Distribution is most exquisite
and accurat, which is taken of Arguments, Most Consentany with the Whole, and
Most Dissentany in the Parts. Those Arguments, are Most Consentany with the
Whole, when the Parts are Essential to the whole. Those which are Most
Dissentany in the Parts, are when the Parts are most opposed One to another.
The Parts are most opposed One to another, in Contraries only: because those
are opposed, not Many to many, or One to many, but only One to one. So then
those Distributions are most Excellent, which are Dichotomies or of two parts:
and those Dichotomies best, which are of Contraries. A Dichotomy may be
perfect, in Arguments that are either Diverse, or Opposite, or Disparat, because
they are all Dissentanies: but it is most Exquisit, when it is most Opposite. But
a Distribution into Many parts, can neither be Perfect nor Excellent. It
cannot be Perfect, because Many parts cannot be truly Consentany with the
Whole, nor Dissentany in the Parts. It cannot be Excellent, because Many parts
cannot be said to be Contrary. And as we must labor for this knowledge, so on
the other side we must not be so curious in our Distributions, that in
striving for the Method we lose the Matter, for want of a Dichotomy. For Ramus
himself, that famous Logician of France, was sometimes forced to distribute,
De Dialect. lib. 1. cap. 3. Idem cap. 23.
into Twice two parts: as the Causes, into the Efficient and Matter, the Form
and End. And his Ort Arguments, into Coniugat and Notation, Distribution and
Definition. Which is not without some mystery: for therein I am persuaded, it
pleases The only wise God, to hide something from wise and learned men, that
They may know, that They do not know, but in part: and that all Perfection of
knowledge is in God alone. As a good Logician of our time says, That the
cause, why men cannot dichotomize some things, is, O^^ defectum Intellectus:
for want of understanding. Syntagma Logicum. cap. 48 (...), etc. Plato in Timaeu
And hence it is that Plato that Divine Philosopher affirms, that To reduce
things infinite in multitude, into two parts, is very difficult, but Divine. And
Aristotle, Platoe's Scholar, was honored for Dichotomizing, with this known
Distichon,

Summus Aristoteles trutinando Cacumina rerum, In duo divisit, quicquid in
Orbefuit.

Aristotle Prince of learning in his time,
Poizing the heads of things with skill Divine,
Did part them all in twain, distinct in sense:
And those he called, Substance and Accidence.
And as these were renowned among the Heathen, so is Ramus no less honored,
of those that understand him, amongst Christians. Who was so admirable in all
the Arts, and above all the rest, in this Logical skill of Dichotomizing; that
he says of himself, If he should desire, a Memoriae Sacrum, Si me de vigiliis
studijsque meis interroges, sepulchri mei columnam e Logica artis institutione
desiderem. In dialect Epist.
A monument upon his grave, he would wish it of the Institution of the Art of
Logic. And thus much briefly in defense of those Definitions and
Distributions, which I have used in my little Treatise of Free trade, which in
Malynes sentence do seem superfluous.

All the rest that Malynes says in his 4. Chapter, trencheth no way upon any
thing that I have said, notwithstanding his challenge. He thinks it enough to
set my Title, Of want of Government in trade, over this Chapter, and the title.
Of Remedies over the next, as he uses to do the names of his books, which
like Ianus faces look two ways, or like Watermen, that look one way and row
another: and that is his best refutation of either. Only here is a tale or two
of his own telling, worth observing: the one of himself, in these words,

Insomuch, P. 80.
that if I receive here one hundredth Pieces of 20. shillings, I can send 90.
Pieces to pay my bill of Exchange, and put ten Pecies in my pocket, for an
overplus and gain.

SO that hereby it seems,. 42.
Malynes is well vers't in this mystery of transportation of the Kings Coin,
eitherby practice in himself, or observation of others. Which deserve
examination in both. P. 92.
The other of a Flemish reckoning, of his own making up, between a Londoner,
and an Amsterdamer: wherein for want of his Par of Exchange, this Kingdom
forsooth, was deprived of a thousand pounds at a clap, in a bargain of a
thousand pounds employment only. This is Mirabile dictu! more strange then
true. For his report, as the Poet speaks of Fame, is Tam ficti pravique
tenax, Aen. 4.
quam nuncia very. For in this story Malynes would suppose, that the Londoner
and Amster damer made a contract together. The Londoner sent Clothes to
Amsterdam, to the value of 1000. li. The Amsterdamer sent Silks to London, for
1500. li. Flemish. The Amsterdamer says he, desired to have his money sent him
over in Specie, and so got 15. in the hundred, which is 150. li. and the
Kingdom says he, lost the whole 1000. li. The Londoner saye's Malynes, could
not do the like, because the moneys were inhansed at Amsterdam, 15. in the
hundred, higher then at London. So that the Londoner is forced to receive his
1000. li. home by Exhange at a low rate, or at 33. sh. 4d. whereby says
Malynes he does receive the said 1000. li. with no gain at all. This tale
deserue's the title of Cuius contrarium: for it is neineither true, in Manner,
nor Matter. Not in the Manner, for first he propounds such a rate of Exchange,
as was never known between Amsterdam and London, and yet reckons the
Londoners 1500. li Flemish, at 33.4 d. which is no less then 100. li.
difference in 1000. li. Nor in the Matter, for when Malynes told this tale, it
was October, 1622. And then By the Royal Intercession of his Majesty, the
States had decried their moneys in the United Provinces, Great Whale. p. 313.
314.
whereof Malynes himself takes notice in his Great Whale. So that Vice versa,
the case is quite altered. For the Londoner brought over from Amsterdam his
1500. li. in good Iacobus pieces to profit: But Malynes friend the Amsterdamer
as is reported, happened upon an ill Exchange from London: For he would needs
change his 1000. li. into Spanish Reals, and ship them at Saint Katherins, and
the Searcher took them up at Graues-end. And if Malynes for his part, would
have been as nimble, in fetching an hundred twenty shillings pieces from
Amsterdam, he might now, as well have put ten Pieces in his pocket, in bringing
them thence, as he sometimes seemed to do, in carrying of them hence: and
more safely too: for money is there a Merchandise, here a treasure: there
tolerated to be exported, here prohibited.

And thus Malynes being put to his shifts, and wanting powder and shot to
charge, or discharge any longer; is at last encountered of the Remedies:
Against which he is forced to mount his great Ordinance: wot you what it is, a
Piece of wood, after Malynes block, painted like a Brass Piece: and yet
braue's it like himself, and promises A Remedy of great facility, P. 83. P.
85.
a Remedy that comprehends all Remedies: No less I can tell you, then his
Engine of Exchange. His Par forsooth, pro Pari, must stand him in stead Ad
Omnia quare; as the chief Oar in his boat, the Key of his work, his only
Antidote. But this his Quare, must not pass without a Quaere: For,

Homine Imperito nunquam quicquam Iniustius: Ter. in Adelph.
Quinisi quod ipse facit, nihil rectum putat. THE CIRCLE OF COMMERCE.
The Second PART. Of Exchanges in general: and therein of the Balance of the
Trade of this Kingdom, with foreign Countries.
THere are certain Empericks or Quacksaluers in the world, Section. 1.
that use a Pill they call Panchreston, that is, a medecin for every malady, a
salve for every sore. And if Malynes had been but a Smatterer in any Science, I
should have thought him of their College: for he will needs have his Par of
Exchange to be the sole and sovereign remedy for all the grieuances of Trade.
If he had used the Flemish phrase, that Butter is good for all things, he had
spoke more like himself, and you might better have believed his word.

This Par of Exchange is an old foiled project of his,. 2.
of 22. years growth. For in An. 1601. he pas't the Press with a Pamphlet
called after his manner, The Canker of Englands Commonwealth. That, he then
dedicated to that worthy and noble Statesman Sir Robert Cecill, then Secretary
of State to Qu. Eliz. wherein if there had been any thing of worth, he could
neither have presented it to a more worthy Statesman, nor could there any thing
have fallen to the ground, that might either have concerned the Revenue of the
Crown, or the Common-good of this Kingdom. But this project being then found
of no worth; both he and it were worthily rejected. Which might have made a
sober man to have suspected his own judgment, or at least for borne to trouble
the world any more with such a toy. But he, as if he were still in travel with
a monster, has fallen a fresh again on this stale stuff, in his Pamphlet,
misnamed, The Mainte nance of Trade, and again in his Great Whale: and has
dared with his waxen wings to sore as high as the Sun, to present the same
trimmed up in a turned coat, to no less then the Sacred Person of the King.
Which, he that will take the pains to compare together, may say of them as
sometimes the Comisk said of Menanders Andria and Perinthia; Ter. In Prolog.
Andriae
Qui vtramuis recte norit, ambas nouerit* He that knows one of them, knows
all of them. Only, as the man is grown more crasie, so are these latter
writings stuffed with more vanity, and much less modesty then the former.

Therefore we will leave the man for a while,. 3. Exchanges in general, may
be said to be Personal or Provincial.
and consider the matter. Exchanges may be understood (...) and (...), in many
and manifold notions. For the knowledge of Commerce, and the wealth of a
Commonwealth, consist in the use of Exchange. Exchange and Permutation, and
Commutation are all one. Exchange is a kind of Commerce exercised in money, in
merchandise, in both, in either; of one man with another, of one Country with
another. All Exchanges then, may be said either to be Personal, or
Provincial. Personal, which respect the Exchange of money or Merchandise,
between man and man. Provincial, which respect the Exchange of money and
Merchandise of one Kingdom with another. The former has relation to matter of
Trade: The latter to matter of of State. In the one consist's the gain or
loss of a Merchant: In the other the gain or loss of a Kingdom in the
Balance of Trade.

All Personal Exchanges may be considered Largely, or Strictly. Largely,. 4.
Personal Exchanges Largely taken.
when there is an Exchange, or Permutation of any one thing for an other:
whether it be, With money or Without Money. With money, when either Merchandise is
exchanged For money; or Money for money. The former of these is called Buying and
Selling: because money is now become the price of all things; which from the
beginning was not so. For as the world increased in people, so did it also in
Commerce and trade. So that where before money was invented, there was an
Exchange, or Permutation in moveable and mutable things only, as Corn, Wine,
Oil, and the like: and afterward in immovable and immutable things, as
Houses, Lands and the like; there was a necessity of money, to value such things
with money as could not be exchanged. And so by degrees all things came to be
valued with money, and money the value of all things.

The latter,. 5. Exchange with money.
when money is exchanged for money is called Mony-changing, when money is bought
with money. And such Mony-changers, the Grecians called (...), and the Romans
Nnmularii; which were Bankers or Exchangers of money for money with gain. Such
were those in Christ's time, as appears by the Phrase in the Original, (...).
Matthew. 21.12.
whom Christ whipped out of the Temple, for the abuse not of the thing, but the
place. But, God knows, were never in any age nor language, understood for
Officers of a: Merchants Exchange, as Malynes fondly faineth, amongst other his
fictitia, or feigned fables in his Great Whale; Page. 37.8.
whose fond conceits deserve to be whipped out of the Commonwealth, for abuse
of the thing, and the place also.

The Exchange without money, is properly called Commerce;. 6. Excchange without
money Free trade. Cap. 1. p. 20.
which as I have showed elsewhere, is Commutatio mercium, an Exchange of wares
for wares: and in Merchants terms is called Trucking or Bartering. And if
there be any mystery in merchandising, there is more in this kind of
Exchanging, then in that of moneys: for the Commodities of all Countries are
more various, then the moneys: and the weight and bulk of trade consists more
in Commodities then in moneys. And a skillful Merchant will often prefer a
barter for Commodity, before a sale for money: because he much more aduanceth
the price of his Commodity: in which skill, he that has most skill, has most
advantage. A Commonwealth also may subsist with the trade of Commodities
without money: but it cannot subsist with the trade of money without Commodities.
Wherein consisted the policy of Platoe's Commonwealth, and the fine conceit of
Sr. Tho. Mores Vtopia, so much honored in the world.

And thus much for Personal Exchanges at large. Personal Exchanges strictly
understood,. 5. Exchanges strictly taken.
are such as are restrained only to bills of Exchange, in use amongst Merchants:
Which is done, when one lends or lets a sum of money, and another
borrows or takes it, to pay the like value by a bill of Exchange to a third
person in some remote place. Or it is a voluntary contract, made by the mutual
consent of two parties, at such price and time as they can agree, for the
conueying of money to, or the drawing of money from, any remote or foreign part.
Or in a word, it is nothing else but a transmutation of money from place to
place without transportation.

So that this kind of Exchange or Permutation,. 8. The Name of the Exchange.
will appear to be of singular note and observation, if we consider the Name,
or the Thing it self. The Name is taken, either from the Subject, or from the
Adiunct thereof. The Subject is the place, and therefore it is called in Latin
Cambium: and Cambire is quasi cum-ire, or conuenire: taken from the place,
where Merchants and others come together. And so it is in Spanish and Italian
called Cambio. The Adiunct respects, either the Action there done, as the
Exchanging of money; or the Actors, the Exchangers thereof. And thence it is
called the Exchange or Burse. The latter is common in most languages, derived
of the Greek word (...), signifying the Purse or Treasury where money is to be
sought upon all occasions. The Name and form of the place, some think was
taken from the Castle in Carthage. Whereof Virgil makes this mention;

Mercatique solum, facti de nomine Byrsam,
Taurino quantum possent circundare tergo.
A piece of ground both long and wide
Was bought, gir't round with Dido by subtlety obtained of K. Iarbus as much
ground as she could compass with a Bulls hide: which being thought to be
little, was easily granted. But she caused the skin to be cut in small
pieces, and stretched out in such length, as it compa'st 22. stadia or furlongs
of that measure, whereon she built Carthage, and in the midst thereof a
Castle, which she called Byrsa, from the name of the Bulls hide: and by a
Metonimy, a Purse. Strabe lib. 17.
a Bulls hide:
Whereon a Tower rare to be seen
Was buil't, called Burse by Dido Queen.
And indeed the Burses for Merchants assemblies in most places, are of stately
Structure; as is our Burse of London: the model whereof was taken from the
Burse of Antwerpe, which twain are much alike, and excel all others that I
know. That of Amsterdam resembles ours: but ours far exceeds that in
extent and costly architecture: and was worthily named of Qu. Elizabeth The
Royal Exchange.

And thus much of the Name: The Thing it self follows.. 9. The Thing or
matter, considered in the Exchange Naturallor Politic.
Which may be said either to be Natural or Politic. A Natural Exchange is
when money is exchanged Value for Value, according to the Intrinsique or inward
finenes, or true value thereof. The Intrinsique value or finenes of moneys,
cannot be known, but by a dissolution and melting down of the same into their
proper bodies: and by a separation of the pure from the impure, the fine silver
or gold, from the allay or copper by assay. In which Natural Exchange, there
is no rate nor price to be admitted for the delivering or taking of money: but
look how much fine silver or gold you receive in one place, just so much, and
no more you must pay or deliver in another. And this is a better direction,
then limitation of Exchanges. For the finenes of moneys, is that Cynosure or
Center, whereunto all Exchanges have their natural propension. But if you
should so limit or restrain Exchanges, that no man should take or deliver any
money, but according to the just finenes: then the use of Exchanges in all
places would be taken away. For then there would be no advantage left neither
to him that delivers, nor him that takes, when money must be answered with
money in the same Intrinsique value. For as it is the goodness of a Commodity
that directs the price; yet that price is greater or less, according to the
use of the thing, or the judgment of the buyer and seller: even so, it is the
finenes of money, that directs the price or value of the Exchange, yet that
price is greater or less according to the occasions of both parties
contracting for the same: which cannot be done in the Natural Exchange,
because it admits no advantage to either.

The Politic Exchange, is when money is exchanged value for value,. 10. The
Politic Exchange.
according to the extrinsique or outward valuation. Such as is the intrinsique
finenes to the Natural Exchange, such is the extrinsique value to the Politic
Exchange. Wherein Merchants are wont to reckon the certain value of money in
finenes, at an uncertain valuation, in denomination and account: sometimes at
a higher, sometimes at a lower rate. Which is therefore in Merchants terms,
called the price, or course, or rate of the Exchange. And this valuation is
thus uncertain, because it is greater or less, according to the circumstances
of time, and place, and persons. Of time, when money is taken by Exchange for
longer or shorter time. Of place, where money is more plentiful or scarce. Of
persons, when the party taking money, is of greater or less credit, or has
more or less need thereof. In all these respects, the rates of moneys
delivered and taken by Exchange, are always more or less. For as it is a
common thing amongst men to sell one and the same commodity, to diverse men at
diverse prises: so is it also in Exchange, when one and the same finenes of
money, is answered by a different value in denomination or account. Neither is
there any certainty of gain to the deliverer of money in the first Exchange,
although he seem to have some advantage in the price thereof above the value of
fine silver; nor of loss to the taker, though he seem to have some
disadvantage in the price thereof under the value of fine silver: because the
deliverer may perhaps be subject to remit his money back, in the second or
foreign Exchange, as much under the value of fine silver, as he had before
above the value in the first Exchange: And it may fall out also, that the taker
may gain by the rising of the Exchange abroad; that, which he seemed to lose
by the falling thereof at home. And if it happen that the money delivered in the
first Exchange, be not remitted in the second Exchange, but otherwise employed
in trade; that alter's not the case, by Malynes own rule; which is, Page 3.
That commodities are bought and sold according to the public measure of the
Exchange. So that in these Exchanges, there is no certainty of gain or loss
to the parties taking or delivering of money, until the time be run out, and
the return come back, from those parts and places, whether the money was first
delivered by Exchange: during which time, the manifold occurrents which are
contigent to trade, may vary the gain or loss to either party.

But because Malynes would make the world believe,. 11. The use of Exchange.
that there is some great mystery in this kind of Exchange, let us come a
little nearer home, in considering the Use, or Abuse thereof. This kind of
Politic Exchange, is an excellent policy of trade, I might say of State: and
concerns both The King and Kingdom. It concerns The King: when by the
benefit of the Exchange, his Majesty's affairs of State and high consequence,
may be furnished with moneys in foreign parts, upon all occasions, without
the exportation of any of his own treasure. It concerne's The Kingdom: both
in respect of Noblemen, and Tradesmen. Of Noblemen: when by the benefit of
Exchange, young Noblemen and Gentlemen may be supplied with moneys in their
travels, without the danger and inconuenie^ce of carrying over money, which
without the Exchange could not be avoided. Of Tradesmen: and that principally
in respect of Merchants and Clothiers. Of Merchants, Old and Young. Of Old
Merchants: whose means although good, yet through the deadnes of times and
trades, a good man's estate may be out of his hands in debts and wares: which
may be supplied by the benefit of Exchange. Of Young Merchants: who having
little means, and less credit with the usurer without a surety, whom every
Young man, nor Old neither, has at command, may supply themselves upon their
own credits with great sums of money by Exchange: the least part whereof,
they could not have had without a surety at interest. Which is a singular
benefit to Young Merchants, and tends to a very great enlargement of trade. Of
Clothiers: for when the Cloth-markets are dead, and when the Clothier cannot
sell his Cloth, and the Merchant has not money to buy his Cloth; the Exchange
becomes a succoure, and supply to both. When thereby, upon a sudden, the
Merchant can finnish himself with money, and take off the Cloth from the
Clothiers hand, to the comfort of the Clothier, and the poor people that
depend on him, and to the great quickening of the Cloth-trade: which is highly
to be tendered in this Commonwealth.

And thus much briefly for the Use of this Politic Exchange:. 12. The abuse
of Exchange.
the Abuse follows. Which Malynes has Monopolized to himself, in his Par of
Exchange, which is the only Abuse thereof. Malynes in diverse parts of his
Little Fish, and in his Great Whale, where the same is sucked in again; would
persuade the world, that there is a great vnderualuation of our moneys in
Exchange, to those of Germany and the Low Countries. Which is the foundation
and maine pillar to support his Par, and perilous project: so if you take that
away, all falle's to the ground. In An. 1586. he says, the Real of 8. was set
in the Low Countries at Page 12.
42. Stuyuers, and the Exchange at Page 12.
33. s. 4. d. Flemish for our 20. s. Sterling: and the Riecks Daller went then
in Germany at Page 32.
32. shillings Lups, and the Exchange at Page 33.
24. s. 9. d, Hamburgh money for our 20. shillings Sterling. The Real says he,
is now raised in the Low Countries to Page 13.
51. Stuyuers: and the Riecks Daller in Germany to Page 34.
54. Shillings Lups. Whereby Malynes would infer, that by how much these
moneys are inhansed above those ancient values, which is not so little as 20.
in the hundred, by so much our moneys are undervalued in Exchange unto those
parts: and by so much our native Commodities are sold in foreign parts too
cheap, and the foreign brought in as much too dear: and to be the cause also
of the exportation of our money; and the hinderance of the importation of
foreign Coin into this Kingdom. These are fearful effects; if we may give
credit to Malynes Report. And this I take to be the substance of Malynes
supposition.

Whereunto I answer, that first denomination of moneys, do alter their names
only, not their true values.. 13.
For there is no more fine silver in a Real of 8. when it goes at 51
Stuyuers, then when it goes at 42 Stuyuers: nor in a Riecks Daller when it
goes at 54 shillings Lups, then when it goes at 32 shillings Lups. And next,
that as the money has been raised in Germany and the Low Countries, from that
it was in An. 1586. so likewise has the Exchange there rissen since that time
accordingly: which being opposed to the rising of the money, makes the one
equivalent to the other. Wherein Malynes error is so gross, that I wonder, how
any man of understanding could be deceived therewith: for he reduces the
inhansed dutch money into English money, at the low rate of Exchange: whereas he
should have taken as well, the inhansed rate of Exchange, as the inhansed money;
and then the difference had been none at all.

This may be made more perspicuous by a familiar example.. 14. An Example of
Exchange.
A Gentleman goes over into the Low Countries, and makes over 100. l.
Sterling to bear his charges there. The money he delivers by Exchange in London
for Amsterdam, after the rate of 33 sh. 4 d. vzance. At which rate he is to
receive at Amsterdam L 1^6.13.4. Flemish for his 100 l. delivered at London.
This L 1^6.13.4. Flemish is paid him in Amsterdam in Hollands Dallers, at 2
Guilders or 40 Stuyuers the Daller, which amounts to just 500 Dallers. So
then these 500 Dallers, and that L 166.13.4. Flemish, are both equal in value
to this 100 l. Sterling. It falls out that this Gentleman is otherwise
supplied of money in the Low Countries for his ^^pence; so that being again to
return for England, he is to remit his money back again by Exchange for
London. And by this time the Hollands Daller is risen from 2 Guilders to 42
Stuyuers the Daller: so that now his L 166.13.4. Flemish is in denomination
come to be 175 l. Flemish: but withal the Exchange is also risen to 35.
shillings Flemish. Now the question is, what this Gentleman shall gain by the
rising of the money thus upon his hand in Holland? Surely that which the
Dutchmen say, is Goet in de ooge, quaet in de buydel; and we say, that you may
put it in your eye, and not see the worse, which is just nothing at all. For
his 125 pounds Flemish, being to be delivered by Exchange for London at 35.
shillings, that is, to receive 20. shillings Sterling at London for 35.
shillings Flemish delivered at Amsterdam; is all one, as to have delivered his
L 166.13.4. at 33. shillings 4 pence: and both of them produce only his 100 l.
Sterling again, and not a penny more.

But if this Gentlemen would learn of Malynes to reckon without his host;
that is, to reckon his Flemish money risen high, at his low Exchange, he might
have deceived himself, as Malynes deceives others, with his Flemish
reckoning. Or if it had been lawful for this Gentleman, to have sent over his
100. l. in Spanish Reals, when the Real of 8. went at 51. Stuyuers at
Amsterdam, and to have had the luck of a low Exchange from thence, to have
delivered his money back, which is very rare, when the Species run high; he
might have got 25. in the hundred as they did that carried Reals thither last
year: as I have elsewere showed upon the like occasion. Otherwise, when the
Species run high, Free trade Cap. 1. p. 8.
and the Exchange runne's high: hoc aliquid, nihil: all this something
produces nothing.

And this is all the Mystery that is in this deep speculation of Exchange,. 15.
wherewith Malynes would amaze the world: Sometimes there is some gain:
sometimes there is some loss: sometimes there is neither gain nor loss: but
as the rate of the foreign Exchange falls out, whereby that money is to be
remitted, which was before delivered by Exchange; so is the gain or loss,
whatsoever the denomination be. Which Malynes himself proclaims in his
Great Whale, Great Whale p. 371.
in these words, Know ye therefore, that the benefit or profit of Exchange is
never known directly, but by the rechange thereof.

But because this Rechange is uncertain,. 16.
the gain or loss thereof must needs also be uncertain. Whereof there is no
other reason to be given, then of the uncertainty of all other things, which
are bought and sold in the market. For when there is plenty of things, they are
commonly cheap, and dear as they are more scarce, or more or less in use.
And so it is in Exchanges, as there is plenty or scarsity of money, so is the
price or rate of the Exchange in all places. And thence it is that the King of
Spaines money is so soon recented and felt of all the Exchanges in all places
round about. For his moneys that are yearly disposed, for payment of his
Soldiers in the Low Countries, whether Exchanged with the Genoaises, or
tra^sported in Specie, are first felt in the Exchange of Antwerpe, and
afterward in all the other Exchanges, as of London, Paris, Lions, Roan,
Amsterdam, Delft, Middelburgh, Hamburgh, Venice, and elsewhere where Exchanges
are in use: which for that cause, commonly follow the Exchange of Antwerpe. And
therefore as all other Natural things must have their course, so also must
Exchanges, and will no more endure a forced Par to be put upon them, then the
market will endure to have the prises of all things prefixed or set.

But yet to come a little closer to Malynes:. 17.
let us leave 1586. and the uncertain rates of moneys and Exchanges that have
been ever since, and take the present state of the time, and the Intrinsique
and Extrinsique value of our moneys and of the Low Countries, and the rate of
the Exchange as it goes at this day, and bring Malynes Tenet to this
touchstone. And amongst other Species, because we have had so much dispute
about the Spanish Reals, and that these are all one in Intrinsique value or
finenes, with our money: that is, a leaven ounces two penny weight fine. In Great
Whale. Page 314.
These Malynes takes notice to be now set in the Low Countries by a Placcaet
or Proclamation, published the 21. July. 1622. at 2 Guilders 8 Stuyuers, or 8
shillings Flemish the piece. Now 4 Reals of 8 are equal to our 20 shillings
Sterling in the United Provinces, in Extrinsique and Intrinsique value: and
both are equal to 35 shillings Flemish, which is the present rate of the
Exchange. The Real of 8. waigheth in the Low Countries, 17. English or penny
weight and 25. ases or grains: And the English shilling waigheth 3. English or
penny weight and 28. ases or grains.
For 4 Reals of 8, weigh 77 English or Penny weight, and 25 Ases or Grains: and
20 shillings Sterling waieth 77. English, and 16 Ases: which is but 9 Ases
difference in 35 shillings Flemish, which is not a penny Sterling in the whole.
Again, 4 Reals of 8 at 2 Guilders 8 Stuyuers the Real of 8, produce just 35
shillings Flemish: And 20 shillings Sterling at 10 Stuyuers for every Shilling,
as they are also set by the said Proclamation, produce the very same value. So
then our English silver money, and the Spanish Reals, and the value of both in
the Low Countries, and the rate of the Exchange, do all agree. Where Is the
vnderualuation then that Malynes makes all this stir about? The Iacobus
piece, and the golden Rider, contain 24. 8/1^ Pieces in the Flemish Mark.
And our gold money is rather ouer-valued: for Malynes knows, that the Iacobus
piece, and the Great golden Rider are of one finenes. Now this Golden Rider by
the Proclamation aforesaid is set at 11 Guilders 6 Stuyuers, which is 37 sh.
and 8. d. Flemish: And the Iacobus pieces proclaimed for Bullion. The cause of
plenty of Iacobus pieces brought into England.
But if you will reckon them but at the price of the Rider, and at the rate of
the Exchange aforesaid, the gain is 10 d. Flemish in a piece, to bring them
from Holland into England. For indeed the Iacobus piece and the Double Rider
being of one finenes, and the Iacobus piece proclaimed Bullion, ought there to
be valued under the Rider, so much as is the coynage of the Rider: But the
Iacobus pieces being now so much sought after there, to be brought over hither;
the price of them is raised 4 d. Flemish above the Rider, viz. to 38 sh.
Flemish, and yet abundance of them are still brought over by Dutch and English:
or else our complaint of want of money had been far greater in this Kingdom.

What use is there then of Malynes Par?. 18.
Or rather what Abuse would there be by such a Dispar, which he presses so
hard, and wherewith he would oppress us much more? For under the color of the
vnderualuation of our money in Exchange, which I have showed to be but
Imaginary, and a dream of his own weak brain, he would bring a Real loss
of 20. in the hundred by raising of the Exchange, upon all the English
Merchants estates in Germany and the Low Countries, and by a secret conueyance
would confer the same upon the Stranger; which would all fall upon the Cloth
Trade of this Kingdom. For all men know, that in England the Stranger is
commonly the Deliverer of money, and the English the Taker. Because the English
commonly takes money at home, either to draw home his means from foreign
parts, or else to enlarge his trade. And the Stranger is the Deliverer of money
here, because when he has sold his foreign Commodities here, he is to remit
his money home by Exchange. But in foreign parts, the English is commonly the
Deliverer, and the Stranger the Taker: because the proceed of the Cloth and
other the native Commodities of the Kingdom sold in foreign parts,
administreth continual occasion to the English, of Delivering of money for
return thereof. By means whereof, this great loss would fall upon the
English, both in England and Beyond the Seas, and become so much gain to the
Dutch. For the higher the Exchange is in England, the more loss it is to the
Taker, and the more gain to the Deliverer: because the Taker must give to the
Deliverer, so much more Flemish money abroad, for the English money he takes up
by Exchange at home, as the rate or price of the Exchange is raised. And the
higher the Exchange is in Dutch-land, the more loss to the Deliverer, and
gain to the Taker by the same reason: because the Deliverer must there give to
the Taker, so much more Flemish money, as the Exchange is rissen, for the
English money he is to receive at home. As for Example: suppose the Exchange go
from London to Amsterdam at 35 sh. Flemish, for every 20 shillings Sterling:
then if I take up 100. l. Sterling of a Dutch Merchant in London, I must pay
him or his Assigns 175. l. Flemish at a Months time in Amsterdam. Or if I am
at Amsterdam, and will there deliver 100. l. Sterling for London, and the
Exchange from thence for London, go at 34. shillings 9 pence Flemish, for
every 20. shillings Sterling: then if I deliver there 173 pounds 15 shillings
Flemish, I shall receive 100 pounds Sterling, at a months time in London. But
if the price or rate of the Exchange should be raised in London, from 35
shillings to 40 shillings Flemish, for every 20 shillings Sterling; which is
much less then the suggested difference before mentioned, then I must pay in
Amsterdam 200 pounds Flemish for 100 pounds Sterling received in London. Or if
I be a deliverer of money at Amsterdam; where I shall be sure to find the
Exchange to rise in proportion to the Exchange at London, as Malynes himself
confesses, Little Fish p. 86.
That the price of the Exchange will alter there accordingly, then I must
deliver 198 pounds 15 shillings Flemish, at 39 shillings 9 pence, to receive
100. pounds Sterling at a months time in London. Whereby my loss will be in
proportion to the other, with the difference of time.

If this be the Inconvenience, what will be the event?. 19. The Decay of the
Cloth-trade threatened by Malynes Par of Exchange.
Surely no less then the Decay of the Cloth-trade. For the Exchange is that,
which represents to the English Merchant, his whole estate beyond the Seas,
for his ready use and employment thereof in England upon all occasions. Which
is the cause, that the English Merchants which trade into Germany and the Low
Countries, do buy their cloth with Ready Money, when other Merchants that have
not this benefit of the Exchange, are feign to Take time of the Clothiers, to
pay them at the return of their Estate in Wares. So that if there should be a
stop in the Course of the Exchange, then either the English Merchant will
forbear to take up money by Exchange; or else he will look to recover the
loss of the Exchange, upon his Cloth. If he forbear to take up money by
Exchange, then he can neither buy so much cloth, nor give ready money for the
same as he was wont. Whereby will follow a stand in Black-well-Hall, which is
wont much to be refreshed by the ready use of the Exchange. And if the English
will not take, the Stranger cannot deliver: and if he cannot deliver, of
necessity he must be thrust upon the Transportation of Money, more then ever he
was before: and then the remedy will be far worse then the disease. And if the
English Mercha^t must needs recover the loss of the Exchange upon the Cloth;
it must either be done in the buying of it at home, or selling of it abroad.
But it cannot be done in the sale of the Cloth abroad: for the Cloth-trade
groans already under the present burden that lye's upon it, which presses it
down so sore, that it cannot recover it self: whereof there are 2. principal
witnesses, the Quantity, and the Price of Cloth, both diminished. Therefore of
necessity, this loss must be expected of the Clothier: which would be a
matter of grievous consequence, as the terms of trade now stand.

But will you hear Malynes Prolepsis or anticipation of these objections?. 20.
Thus,

1 Some make doubt, that the price of Exchange being risen, Page 90. Malynes
objections.
there will be no takers of money, and then the deliverer is more thrust upon
the exportation of money. 2 Others say, that those Merchants which have sold
their Clothes beyond the Seas, shall receive a loss in the making over their
money from thence. 3 Others say, that they shall not be able to vent their
Cloth, according to the high Exchange, especially now the same is out of
request: and would have the matter of reformation deferred until another time.
1 The first Objection is answered before, that the Taker is ruled by the
Deliverer, who will not give his money by Exchange, under the true value,
according to the Proclamation to be made: and the Deliverer being the Merchant
stranger here, will sooner be thrust upon the Statute of Employment; for by
the exportation of money he shall have no gain: whereas some of the discreeter
sort, would not have the Statute too strictly pressed upon the stranger,
because the trade should not be driven into their hands. 2 To the second, the
Proclamation limiting a time for execution, gives Merchants ability to recover
their moneys, or to sell their bills of debt for money, or to buy Commodities for
them, as the manner is. 3 To the third, experience makes a full answer to
both, that there did want no Takers, when the late inhancing of money at
Hamburgh, caused the Exchange to rise from under 28. shillings to above 35.
shillings; which is more then the present alteration will be: and Wool was at
33. shillings the todde, which is now fallen under 20. shillings. So that the
vent of our Cloth was not hindered, when it was sold dearer by one full third:
but there was above 80. thousand Clothes sold yearly, where there is not sold
now 40. thousand Clothes.
All which objections and answers,. 21.
are a Colloquy or rather a soliloquy of his own. Malynes did well to think
on such objections, as he could best answer. Because indeed the manifold
objections which his project brings with it, are unanswerable. But Malynes is
so easy a Combatant, that a man may give him any advantage of the weapon. Let
us take it for granted, that these are all the objections that might occur
this project, and apply our selves unto a Reply thereunto.

To his first answer therefore I say,. 22. Malynes oblections refuted.
Contractus est conuentio, qua ex duoru^ pluriumue in idem negotium seu placitum
consensu, obligatio ad dandum quid vel faciendum contrahitur. Alth. Dicaeolog.
l. 1. cap. 64.
that it is no more true, that the Taker is ruled by the Deliverer; then that
the Deliverer is ruled by the Taker. Which Taking and Delivering, as it is A
voluntary Contract, made by the mutual consent of both parties; so are both
alike free to Take and Deliver at their own pleasure, as in all other
contracts and bargains of buying and selling. And trade has in it such a kind
of natural liberty in the course and use thereof, as it will not endure to be
fors't by any. If you attempt it, it is a thousand to one, that you leave it
not worse then you found it. And therefore Bodin says excellently, Estenim
libertas naturalis huiusmodi, vt voluntas been a natura informata, imperium
alterius post Deum Immortalem reiiciat. Natural liberty is such a thing, as
the will being by nature rightly informed, will not endure the command of any,
but of God alone. Which must be understood of natural liberty in the use of
things indifferent; and not of Regal authority in the exercise of government.
And hence it is gone into a Proverb, Quoa natura dedit, tollere nemo potest.
That which nature gives, no man can take away.

Justice is said to be Distributive or Commutatiue.. 23.
Distributive Justice is so called a Distribuendo, because it gives every man
his own, by a Geometrical proportion, as the Ciuilians speak: that is, with
respect to the quality of the Person, not the Thing. Commutatiue Justice a
Commutando, because cause it gives to every man his own, by an Arithmeticall
proportion: that is, with respect to the equality of the Thing, not the Person.
This last is placed in Commerce and Contracts, because by the rule of Justice
there ought to be an equality in buying and selling: wherein Par est vtriusque
conditio, as the Ciuilians also speak, the Buyer and the Seller, he that
Lets, and he that Takes, ought to be upon equal terms. And therefore
you break this law Malynes, when you w^^l have the Taker of money ruled by the
Deliverer.

Malynes adds, That the Merchant Stranger will be sooner thrust upon the
Statute of Employment, for by the exportation of money he shall have no gain:
how quickly Malynes has forgot his own practice, which he spoke of but ere
while, in putting 10 Iacobus pieces in his pocket, by sending over 90 Pieces to
Amsterdam! And surely those discreet persons, that find fault with the
strangers employments here in this Kingdom, are none of Caesar's friends, nor
friends to Caesar's subjects.

To the second I reply, that Malynes takes care only for the present,. 25.
as those beast of Ephesus did, of whom Saint Paul speaks, (...) 1. Cor.
15.32. Ede, bibe, dormi, post mortem nulla voluptas.
* Let us eat and drink, for to morrow we shall die. For by this limitation
of the Proclamation, the English Merchants should once escape this loss of 20.
in the hundred, and ever after pay it to the Dutch. The Ephramites were known
by the pronouncing of Sibboleth, and so may Malynes by his Language, be known
what Countriman he is.

To the 3.. 26.
I reply, that although there wanted not takers of money by Exchange for
Hamburgh, when the Exchange risse from 28 shillings to 35 shillings, yet it
does not follow, that therefore there would be takers at his Par of Exchange:
for it is a plain Dispar, a different case. For those that then took money for
Hamburgh, the Takers gained and the Deliuerers lost: because the Exchange risse
faster at Hamburgh, by reason of the raising of the moneys there, then it did
at ^^ndon. Which if Malynes be ignorant of, he was surely a sleep in his Great
Whales belly at that time. But in Malynes case, the Deliuerers will get, and
the Takers must lose: because his rate of the Exchange at home must be higher,
then the foreign Exchange; Page 14.
else the strangers gain of transportation of money cannot be answered by
Exchange, according to his own fallible rule.

Headdeth,. 27.
that our Wool was at 33 shillings a todde, which now is fallen under 20
shillings: and that there was above 80 thousand Clothes sold yearly, where now
there is not sold 40. thousand. Animus meminisse horret, luctuque refugit.
Malynes produces such a miserable esfect, of the decay of the Cloth-trade of
this Kingdom, as would make a man's ears tingle to hear it. What Is the
inference? mary that his Par of Exchange, may prove also another Bar to
trade; and cause the Cloth-trade both in the Clothier and Merchants hands, to
be so much dearer to them, and cheaper to the stranger, by how much he would
alter the natural course of the Exchange, to the great advantage of his own,
and the loss of our Nation.

This is the profit of this and the like Proiects! These are ill seeds sown in
a fertile soil! These are like Cadmus serpents teeth sown in the Earth, Met.
4.
which brought up men in arms killing one another. Or like the Apples of
Sodom, that are specious in show, but if you touch them, they will fall to
powder. Qui praemonetur, praemunitur: A man fore-warned is half armed. And I
hope we shall ever be warned by those harms, not to disturb trade for any
gilded probability, nor innouate the same, without evident vtility.

And thus it appears, that as Malynes objections are feigned, so are his
answers also. Such is his Par, and such is his Person. I shall therefore leave
him and it, to the wisdom of the State: to which I doubt not, it is as clear
as the Sun, that there is no such Cause as Malynes pretends, and therefore
no need of any such Remedy: That his Project is dangerous and damnable: and not
so difficult to be discerned, as perilous to be put in practice.

ANd thus much of the Personal Exchange between man and man, in money, in
merchandise: 2^ Of the (...) uinciall (...) change.
It remaine's now to speak in a word of the Provincial Exchange between
Country and Country in the Balance of trade. Such as is the Personal Exchange
between party, and party: Such is the Provincial Exchange between Country
and Country. That, respects the gain of one Man with another: This, the
gain of one Kingdom with another: That, concerns the Subject; This, the
Soueraigue.

The Provincial Exchange, is that general permutation before noted, which one
Country makes with another, in money, in Merchandise, in all kind of Commerce.
And therefore it may well be sad to be the Periphery or Circumference of the
Circle of Commerce; and The Balance of trade, the very Center of this Circle.
For as in the Personal Exchange between man and man, the gain or loss of
such Exchanging cannot be known, but by the return of the money exchanged:
that is, till that money be come back in Exchange, which was at first
delivered, as is before declared: So also in the Provincial Exchange between
Country and Country, the gain or loss which one Kingdom makes upon another,
cannot be known until the Returns thereof be made: that is, till the
foreign Commodities be brought in, for the Native Commodities issued and
carried out; and both cast into the Balance of Trade, to be waighed and tried
one against the other.

For as a pair of Scales or Balance, is an Invention to show us the weight of
things, whereby we may discern the heavy from the light, and how one thing
differs from another in the Scale of weight: So is also this Balance of
Trade, an excellent and politic Invention, to show us the difference of
weight in the Commerce of one Kingdom with another: that is, whether the
Native Commodities exported, and all the foreign Commodities Imported, do
balance or ouerballance one another in the Scale of Commerce.

If the Native Commodities exported do weigh down and exceed in value the
foreign Commodities imported; it is a rule that never faile's, that then the
Kingdom growe's rich, and prosper's in estate and stock: because the overplus
thereof must needs come in, in treasure. But if the Foreign Commodities
imported, do exceed in value the Native Commodities exported; it is a manifest
sign that then trade decays, and the stock of the Kingdom wastes apace:
because the overplus must needs go out in treasure. As for example: If this
Kingdom send out Clothes and other the Native Commodities thereof into foreign
parts, which are there sold for one thousand pounds of our money in value; and
receive back again in return, the foreign Commodities of other Kingdoms to
the value of eight hundred pounds, for the thousand pounds sent out, it is
manifest that the other two hundred pounds, being also due to this Kingdom,
must needs come in, in treasure, to balance and make even the thousand pounds
at first sent out. Which of necessity, must either come in, in money or
merchandise: if not in money, then in merchandise: if not in merchandise, then
in money: and consequently the more come's in, in money, the less in
merchandise: and the less in merchandise the more in money. But if this
Kingdom shall receive in, twelve hundred pounds in value of the foreign
Commodities of other Kingdoms, for the thousand pounds sent out, then it is
manifest, that this Kingdom spends more of the foreign, then other
Kingdoms do spend of our Native Commodities, by two hundred pounds in the
value of one thousand pounds: whereby this Kingdom is become so much in debt
to those foreign Kingdoms: which of necessity must go out from hence in
treasure, to satisfy that which was brought in, more then that which was
carried out. And this experiment is therefore called The Balance of Trade.
Which you may yet more illustrate, if you consider the Form, and the End
thereof. In the One, there is a Quo modo: In the Other, there is a Cui bono. How
it may be done, in the One: Why it may be done, in the Other. There Is a
benefit in both, and both within the Circle of Commerce.

We will therefore consider this Form, first Comparatiue,. 29. The
Comparatiue form of the Balance.
and then Positive. In the former we will compare and confer together, some
Forms of Former and Later times. In the other we will collect the state of
the Present time, and digest the same into a Balance of Trade.

The Comparison shall be of two precedent Forms which I have found out.
Whereby it may appear, that this Balance of the Kingdoms trade is no conceit
or Nouelty, but has been the wisdom and policy even of elder times; to make a
privy search and strict enquiry, by this kind of scrutiny, into the state of
times and trades. The former of these Precedents, shall be an ancient Balance of
Trade, which is said to be found upon Record in the Exchequer in the eight and
twentieth year of Edward the third, In the Manuscript before mentioned, in P.
18. thereof.
in this form following. Viz.

li. sh. d. One and thirty thousand six hundred fifty one sacks and a half of
Wool at six pounds value each sack, amount to L 189909.00.00 195982. 01. 08
Three thousand thirty six hundred sixty five Fels, at forty shillings value
each hundred of six score, amount to L 006073.01.08 Whereof the Custom
amount's to, 081624. 01. 01 Fourteen Last, seuenteen dicker and five hydes of
leather, after six pounds value the last. 000089. 05. 00 Whereof the Custom
amount's to, 000006. 17. 06 Four thousand seven hundred seventy four Clothes
and a half, after forty shillings value the Cloth, is, L 9549.00.0 016266. 18.
04 Eight thousand sixty one pieces and a half of worsted, after sixteen
shillings eight pence value the piece. L 6717.18.4 Whereof the Custom amount's
to, 000215. 13. 07 Summa of the Out-carried Commodities in value and Custom
amounts to 294184. 17. 02

li. sh. d. One thousand eight hundred thirty two Clothes, after six pounds
value the cloth 010992. 00. 00 Whereof the Custom amount's to 000091. 12. 00
Three hundred ninety seven quintals and three quarters of wax, after forty
shillings value the hundred or quintall 000795. 10. 00 Whereof the Custom is
000019. 17. 05 One thousand eight hundred twenty nine Tons and a half of
Wine, after forty shillings value the Tun, amou^'ts to 003659. 00. 00 Whereof
the Custom is 000182. 19. 00 Linen Cloth, Mercery, and Grocery wares, and all
other manner of mercha^dize 022943. 06. 10 Whereof the Custom is, 000285. 18.
03 Somma of the In-brought Commodities in value and Custom is 038970. 03. 06
Somma of the In-plusage of the Out-carried above the In-brought Commodities
amountch to 255214. 13. 08

The other shall be of a Balance of trade of fresher memory,. 30.
made in the eleventh year of the reign of our Sovereign Lord the King, by
order of the right Honorable the Lords of his Majesty's most Honorable Privy
Counsel, upon the motion of the now right Honble The Earl of Middlesex, Lord
Treasurer of England. It was made in this form. viz.

Merchandise Exported from Christmas An. 1612. to Christmas An. 1613.
li. sh. d. Custom of the Port of London 061322. 16. 07 Custom of the
Out-Ports 025471. 19. 07 Wrappers being the tenth Cloth, Bay, and Cotton
007000. 00. 00 Fish of our own fishing, and freed from Custom by statute
007000. 00. 00 Foreign Goods Imported and Exported again, free of Custom by
Privy Seal 003737. 04. 05 The Total of the Custom. 104532. 00. 07

The which is the twentieth part of Goods Exported: and being multiplied by
twenty, produces the value of all the Exportations to be 2090640. 11. 08 The
Custom of these Goods amounts to 0086794. 16. 02 The Impost paid Out-wards
0010000. 00. 00 The Merchants Gains, freight, and other petty Charges here and
abroad 0300000. 00. 00 The Total of all the Exportations. 2487435. 07. 10

Merchandise Imported from Christmas An. 1612. to Christmas An. 1613.
li. sh. d. Custom of the Port of London 048250. 01. 09 Custom of the
Out-ports 013030. 09. 09 Custom of the Silks 015477. 00. 00 Custom of Venice
Go^d and Silver 000700. 00. 00 Custom of French Wines 002000. 00. 00 Custom
of Spanish Wines 001200. 00. 00 Allowance of 5. per Cento 004000. 00. 00 To be
added for the vnderrating of Silks one third part of that they cost, valued at
12000. pounds. 004000. 00. 00 To be added for the vnderrating of Wines, two
third parts of that they cost 006400. 00. 00 To be added for the vnderrating of
Linen and other Merchandise, one third per Cento for 36000. pounds. 012000.
00. 00 The Total of the Custom. 107057. 11. 06

The which is the twentieth part of the Goods Imported, and being multiplied by
twenty, produces the value of all the Importations to be 2141151. 10. 00 The
total of all the Exportations, is 2487435. 07. 10 The total of all the
Importations, is 2141151. 10. 00 So there remains more carried out, then is
brought in this year, the Sum of 0346283. 17. 10

In the Comparison of Those ancient,. 31.
with These modern times, there is as great a difference, as there is a distance
between them. For in the Former, there is an Example beyond Example, a great
Exportation, a small Importation. In the Latter, the Exportation, the
Importation, are very great in both. In the Former, the foreign Commodities
have little place or price: In the Latter, the far fetched and dear bought,
are brought in price and use. A great deal of Policy, frugality may be seen
in the One: much prodigality, superfluity, may be found in the Other. Yet in
this latter, because we had the cast of the Balance, and that the Exportation
did exceed the Importation, though infinitely short of the proportion of the
former time; the Subjects prospered, Trade flourished, Treasure was imported:
And it was such Treasure as stayed with us, and went not again from us: nor
were there such complaints known then, as now are heard in our streets. That
Elder time, was like the Golden age: the Later, like the Silver age: but the
Present time, is like the Iron age. And therefore we will pass from this
Comparatiue, to the Positive form of our Balance, to bring to the Scale, the
state of the present time and trade.

Wherein, because the other Forms are different,. 32.
and as long as there are, Tot sensus quot capita, as many minds as men; every
man abounding in his own sense; so long there will be some dispute about any
Form: it will not be impertinent, to speak a word of Caution, and then of
the Constitution, of this Form of ours. In which Caution, although his
Majesty's Records, and books of Customs, are the best* and readiest
direction, to lead us to the value of the trade of the Kingdom, by the
Customs of the Kingdom: yet because there are some things of special
consideration, which cannot be discerned by the Customs: we will therefore
consider such things as are therein obuious unto us, in point of Exportation,
and Importation. And first of either A part: and then of both together.

In our Exportations, we are to reckon our foreign Commodities imported,. 33.
Caution in point of Exportation for the forming of a Balance.
and not spent in the Kingdom, but Exported again into foreign trade, as the
Native Commodities of the Kingdom. Because whatsoever the Kingdom spends
not of the foreign, is all one, as that it spends not of it is own.

Also the Fishing trades, whether within his Majesty's Dominions or without,
exercised by his Majesty's Subjects, are not to be discerned by the Customs,
because the same is freed thereof by Statute: which must nevertheless be
brought into the Scale of Exportation, by the discreet collection and
observation of Judicious Merchants, as part of the Kingdoms stock.

Also the Custom and petty charges, the freight and Merchants gain, must be
reasonably valued and cast into the Scale of Exportation: because those are a
part of the stock of the Kingdom: for if that money were not laid out in
charges, it would be employed in the Native Commodities, to the increase of
the Kingdoms stock.

In our Importations, we must consider,. 34. Caution in point of Importation,
for the forming of the Balance.
that much water is wont to go by the Mill; which, although at first sight a
man might think, might be set, like the Hares head against the Goose Giblets:
yet certainly, there is a great weight hang's upon the Scale of Exportation in
this regard. For our Native Commodities, as Cloth, Tin, Lead, and the like,
are of great Bulk and Massy, and not easy to be stolen out: but the foreign
Commodities are of small bulk, little in quantity, great in value: as Jewels,
Cloth of Gold and Tissue, Venice Gold and Silver thread, Silks wrought and
unwrought, Cambricks and Lawnes, fine Holland Cloth, Cuchanel, Tobacco, and the
like: which as they are easy to be pocketed and conveyed, so are they very
rich to be valued: and this one consideration alone, may turn the Scale of
Importation much against us, in the Balance of Trade.

Also whereas in the Importation, the Customs do not lead a man so near to
the value of the goods, as in the Exportation: so that thereby you can neither
know, what the goods imported cost with charges abroad, nor what the same are
worth at home: there must be due consideration had, of the one and the other
in the Balance of Trade. For if a Commodity cost 100. pounds sterling at
Amsterdam, and is there paid for, by the Cloth of this Kingdom, and will yield
but 90. pounds in England, and perhaps is rated in the Custom but at 60.
pounds; yet the Importation in the Balance of Trade, is to be charged with the
value of the Goods as they cost with charges, and not as they are worth to be
sold, much less as they are rated in the Customs: because that which they
cost more then they are worth, and more then at which they are rated in the
Customs, is also part of the Stock of the Kingdom.

And lastly In both, in the Exportations I say, and Importations.. 35. Caution
in Exportation and Importatio^ together, for the form of the Balla^ce of Trade.
there must be Verity, there must not be Variety. The Collections must be
truly made, and one form must be duly observed: least if the one be not
Exact, or the other Various: the uncertainty of either, may breed obscurity in
both. For he that waigheth a draught, either with false waights, or such as are
of different standards, can never tell whether he get or lose by his weight:
even so in the Balance of Trade, if either the Collections be imperfect, or
the form of the Balance different; you shall never know whether the Kingdom
gains or loses, by the cast of the Scale in the Balance of Trade.

Therefore if it may seem good to his Majesty's high wisdom, to grant a
Commission every year to some of his Majesty's principal Fermers of his
Highness Customs, and to some of the most expert and judicious Merchants of the
City of London, and elsewhere, to confer and agree upon a constant Form to be
kept every year; and as constantly every year to take a Balance of the Trade
of the Kingdom, according to the practice of other Princes and Countries; it
will prove both facile and familiar unto them, and an excellent Policy of State
unto the King and Kingdom, in the course of trade.

And now we will come to the Positive Constitution of our own Form, to bring
to the Balance,. 36. The positive constitution of the form of a Balance for
the present time and trade.
the state of the present time and trade: wherein I will give you a taste of
one years collections of the Kingdoms trade, in this form following. viz.

The Balance of the Trade of the Kingdom is Debtor, for all the Exportations
of the Merchandise thereof, for one whole year, from Christmas An. 1621. to
Christmas An. 1622. as follows.

li. sh. d. Custom of the Port of London 50406. 06. 04 Custom of the
Out-ports 26756. 18. 00 The Custom of Wrappers of Clothes, Bays, and Cottons,
free of Custume, being the tenth part of 50000. pounds, which is the Custom of
them all. 05000. 00. 00 The Custom of the Fish of our own fishing, and which
is freed from Custom by Statute, by computation 07000. 00. 00 The Custom of
Goods shipped out by Certificate: viz. of foreign goods brought in, and for want
of vent in the Kingdom, shipped out again: which are freed of Custom by his
Majesty's gracious grant of Privy Seal 08050. 00. 00 The Total of all the
Custom is 97213. 04. 04

li. sh. d. Which Total being multiplied by twenty, because the Custom is
valued by twelve pence in the pound, produces the value of all the Goods
Exported to amount unto 1944264. 07. 01 The Net Custom of which value, at
twelve pence in the pound, the Wrappers, Fish, and Goods shipped out by
certificate deducted, is the 2. sums first before mentioned, and is 0077163.
04. 04 The Impost of Bays, Tin, Lead, and Pewter, which only are imposed
outward, amounts to 0007370. 01. 05 The Merchants gain, freight, and petty
charges upon 1944264. li. being the whole value of the Exportations as above
appears, at 15. per Cento, is 0291639. 00. 00 The Total Exportations with
charges, Amount to 2320436. 12. 10

The Balance of the Trade of the Kingdom is Creditor, for all the
Importations of the merchandise thereof, for one whole year, from Christmas
An. 1621. to Christmas An. 1622. as follows.
li. sh. d. The Custom of the Port of London 68280. 09. 01 The Custom of the
Out-Ports 19579. 02. 06 The Custom of Wines of all sorts, all other
Merchandise heing included in the former, is 03200. 00. 00 The Custom amounts
to 91059. 11. 07 One third part thereof to be added, for the vnderrating of
Goods in Custom, to that they are worth, or cost, is 30353. 03. 10 Also the
allowance of 5. per Cento upon L 91059. 11. 7. is 04552. 19. 07 The Total
Sum amounts to 125965. 15. 00

Which total, being multiplied by 20 produces the value of all the Goods
Imported, to amount unto 2519315. 00. 00 Fine Goods secretly conveyed inwards,
more then outward. 0100000. 00. 00 The Total Importations amount to 2619315.
00. 00 The Total Exportations 2320436. 12. 10 The Remainder shows, that
there is more imported this year then was Exported, by the sum of 0298878.
07. 02

So then we see it to our grief, that we are fallen into a great
Vnder-ballance of Trade with other Nations. We felt it before in sense; but
now we know it by science: we found it before in operation; but now we see it
in speculation: Trade alas, faile's and faint's, and we in it.

And now we are come to the End of this Balance of Trade,. 37. The End of the
Balance of Trade.
which in Place is last, but in Purpose first and chiefs't, according to that
in Philosophy, Finis est Principium in Intention: The End is the beginning, in
purpose and intent.

A Merchant when he will inform himself how his Estate stands, is said to
take a Balance of his Estate: wherein he collecteth and considers all his
Wares, and Monyes, and Debts, as if he would cast every thing into the Scale
to be tried by weight: Which is therefore in Merchants and Accomptants terms,
so called a Balance of Account, or a Balance of Trade. And to what End does
he this? Surely to try in what Estate he is: whether he goes forward or
backward, whether he has got or lost. And if it appear to him by his
Balance, that his Gain does not answer his Expense; the first and last is,
he must either Gain more, or Spend less, or else look to come behind hand.

A Father or Master of a Family, does thus also consider his Estate, by
comparing his Expense with his Revenue: and if he find, that his Expense
exceeds his Revenue; either he must Lessen his charge, or else Consume his
Estate.

The Royal Merchant, the Regal Father of that great family of a Kingdom, if
He will know the Estate of his Kingdom, He will compare the Gain thereof
with the Expense; that is, the Native Commodities issued and sent out, with the
Foreign Commodities received in: and if it appear that the Foreign
Commodities do exceed the Native: either he must increase the Native, or
Lessen the Foreign, or else look for nothing else, but The decay of Trade:
and therein The loss of his Revenue, and Impouerishing of his People.

So then, the End of the Balance of Trade, may be said either to be Propior,
or Remotior. There Is One End nearer hand; There Is Another End farther off. One
End of it is, to find out The cause of the Malady: The other, to present a
Medicable Remedy, for the decay of trade.

Hic labor hoc opus erat: in both these I bestowed my former time and pains,
Free Trade published, An. 1622.
in that Little tract of Trade, wherein I marshalled those Causes and Remedies,
into their rancks, in the best order I could: and to which I refer those,
that desire more distinctly to understand the same, lest I should seem to
Tautologize, after Malynes manner, in unnecessary repetitions. For as all those
Causes do forcibly conduce unto the Vnder-ballancing of Trade: so also the
removing of them, must needs concur unto the Remedy thereof: and you may
safely conclude, that until the Kingdom come to an Ouer-ballance of Trade,
the causes of the decay of Trade cannot be taken away: for the Decay of Trade,
and the Ouer-ballance of Trade, cannot stand together.

But if all the Causes of our Vnder-ballance of Trade,. 38. The causes of our
vnder-ballance of trade, contracted to Poverty, and Prodigality.
might be contracted in two words, surely they might be represented, in two
extremities of the Kingdom at this day: Poverty alas, and Prodigality. The
Poor sterue in the streets for want of labor: The Prodigal excel in
excess, as if the world, as they do, ran upon wheels. The one drawe's on the
Ouer-ballance of Foreign Trade: The other keepe's back in Vnder-ballance our
Trade. The one causes an Excess in theirs: The other causes a Defect in our
own. In the one, there is Too much: in the other, there is Too little: would God
there were a good Medium in both.

What Is the fruit of these things? The Sun blusheth to see, the ground groans
to carry, the persons of savage cruel blood-shedders, unheard of monstrous
murderers of these times: who seem to strive to outstrip Caiin and Iudas'
sins. I want words to give them titles! I know not to whom to liken them,
vales to him whose they are! It make's me afraid of Idleness and Excess: that
These and Those, are all of one breed* He that is Idle, is fit for any Evil: He
that is Prodigal, is a prey to the Devil. There was never more, nor more
excellent Planters and Waterers, then in this age, in this Island, in this City.
Our Hemishphere is sprinkled and spangled, with glistering Stars like the
Firmament in a clear night. If St. Hierome so long a gone said, Hieron. ad
Paulinum.
De Hierosolymis and de Britannia eaqualiter, patet aula Coelestis: Heaven is
as wide open in Britain, as in Jerusalem; what would he have said, if he had
seen this our clear light of the Gospel at this day in this Kingdom? Is it
possible then, that such match-lesse desperate deeds of darkness, should be
done in so clear a light? Is it not a wonder, that the Seed being so good, the
Soil so fertile, the Sowers so skillfull, that the Weeds, Such weeds should
come up so fast? No wonder at all! Because the Envious man come's by night, and
sowes these Tares. But be not you discouraged ye worthy Workmen: The Lord of
the harvest, will have them grow together until the harvest. Go on
therefore, sow the Lords seed, which is the Immortal seed of the Word of God.
Fight the Lords battles: be instant in season, and out of season: cease not
to teach, to refute, to correct, to instruct: and pray continually, that this
great Dragon, that old Serpent, which is come down into the Earth, may not
thus devour the people. You are The light of the world set upon a hill: Shine
forth ye glorious Lights: keep on your course: break through these Clouds:
let no Planet obscure you: let no Erring Star deceive you: you are now placed
in this lower Orb, you shall one day be fixed in an higher Region, where your
Sun shall be the King of glory: your King the Blessed Trinity: your Law,
Charity: and your Time, Eternity: there you shall shine in a Paradise of glory,
for ever and ever.

The first End of our Balance of trade is to show us the state thereof.
If the people of this Kingdom were numbered from Dan to Bersheba, I am
persuaded, there were never more people, never less employment: never more
Idleness, never so much Excess! And this is the first End of our Balance of
Trade. It shewe's us our Case in what Estate we stand: It shewe's the Causes of
our Decay of trade: It represents those causes in Capital Characters, that he
that run's may read Excess and Idleness.

. 39. The second End of the Balance of Trade is to direct us to the Remedy,
which is to lessen our Importations.
What Is the other End of it? Surely to direct us to the Remedy: which in a word,
is nothing else, but to make our Importations less, and our Exportations more.
Our Importations may be lessened, by a restraint of such superfluous and
unnecessary things, as either we have of our own, or can make our own, as may
best concur with the Policy of Trade, and the Wisdom of the State, to which
as it become's me, I humbly commend the same.

. 40. Or to increase our Exportations. By Precept.
Our Exportations may be Improued, either by Precept, or Practice. Longum Iter
per praecepta, breue per Exemplum. Example is the best precept. We are sent to
the Belgicke Pismire to learn a Precept, Prou. 30.27.
and why not to the Belgicke Grasshopper? For The (...) Ex multitudine dicitur.
Sic Belgae per Mare, atque in omni terra multi. Arbch Hebraice quasi Herbae:
quia ex gramine locust. Belgae veroberb^ and radicib^^ modice vescuntur.
Grasshopper has no King, yet they march out, all in Troops. We need go no
further then the Low Countries, to learn this Lesson. Although, the Kingdom
of Naples, the Signory of Venice, the Commonwealths of Genoa, Florence,
Milan, Marcelles, and many others, might teach us the same thing; yet the Low
Countries do seem to be an Epitome of all the Rest. Which certainly for
Policy and Industry, may read a Lecture to all the other people of the world.
There you shall see, their Gates stand wide open: you may carry out as much
money as you will: It is there held no Paradoxe, to let money go out, and yet
not to want it within: because they have an Eye to the Balance of Trade;
whereby they are assured, that although it may go out at one door, yet it will
come in at another. But there you shall see no Excess in superfluous
consumptions of foreign Commodities. No Proiects, nor Proiectors, but for the
Common-good. All kind of Manufactures invented, that will fit the times, and
please the minds of foreign Nations. Their own Commodities eased of charge,
the foreign Imposed. Frugality, industry, policy, all working together for the
public. All kind of Staples, of Corn, of Wine, of Cloth, of Fish, of Silk,
of Spices, of Flax, of Hemp, of what not? And all these, not to breed or feed
homebred Consumption, but to maintain Trade and Foreign Negotiation. For
indeed their whole Country is nothing else, but a Magazin, a Staple, a
Receptacle, of the Commodities of all other Countries. And this is a living
Precept, a Pattern, a Form, a plat-forme for our Imitation, for the increase
of our Exportation: and this will restore our ancient Balance of Trade.

Or if it be too far for us to go to them to learn this Precept, they will
come to us. Look upon Norwich, Colchester, Bocking, Canterbury, and other
Cities peopled with the Dutch. There you shall see at Home, what you might
seek Abroad. There you shall not see that gross abuse committed, and so much
complained of in our Old and New Draperies. The falsifying whereof has
diminished their quantities half in half. Which as it tends to a great
lessening of our Exportations: so cannot the same possibly be recovered,
without reformation of this abuse in the Clothing of the Kingdom, which is the
principal trade thereof. The Remedy come's on so slow, that it is to be
feared, we shall need a Precept also, from some of those of Norwich,
Colchester, or Canterbury, to help us execute the Statute for Clothing, of 4.
of the King. As for the difficulty in Perpetuanoes, the Reformation whereof is
thought to want a new Law: I suppose under favor, those may come under the
name and title of dozens mentioned in that old Law, as do Devonshire and
Hampshire Kersies, which are either double or single dozens, and so are
Perpetuanes also. And it were better to have fewer Laws, with better
Execution; then more Laws, with more trouble and less use.

From this Precept,. 41. By Practice.
we come to the Practice, in the use of those means, which Almighty God in
great bounty offers unto us, both Within, and Without the Land. Within the
Land, we have Materials and Instruments. Materials of our own growth,
Materials of foreign growth, none are wanting. Instruments we have of our
own Nation, Instruments of foreign Nations, none are wanting. We want not
Means, if our Minds be not wanting: we want not Action, if we wanted not
Affection: but alas our children are brought to the birth, and there want's
strength, to bring them forth. Or rather we have strength, and do not put
forth our strength: we have means and use it not. If I should tell you, that
there is ten thousand pounds a year, cast away in the streets of one City in
this Kingdom, it would seem very strange! But he that will consider how many
thousand persons there are in London, that give to idle poor in the streets,
and what one man commonly giue's in a year; may computate at least twice that
Sum, given in the City and the Suburbs. This Sum of money thus great, thus
given, is not only for the most part lost, but it make's the City swarm with
poor, with idle poor: who as long as they can live by begging, will never
fall to working, nor live by labor. I speak not against any man's charity, but
wish from my heart, that he that is charitable, were more charitable, so the
same were not abused, or at least were better used, for the public good. For
there is not only the loss of so great a sum, but of the exceeding great
benefit also, which the employment thereof, in our Native and Foreign
Manufactures, would purchase to the public; if the same were orderly
collected, and prudently ordered, for the Employment of the poor. Wherein I
know not how to wish a greater glory to the City of London, then to have the
honor, to be the Founder of so worthy a work, to raise a Stock, out of the
free will offerings of the Citizens, and wisely to dispose thereof for the
poore's employment: whereby all their own poor might be set on work; and an
excellent pattern of piety and pity, given to all the other Cities of the
kingdom, to pursue so noble an enterprise by their good example. And it need
not be thought to be a new charge to the City, for we see the thing is done
already, only it is not so well done: wherein my self, the unworthiest of all
her Citizens, had rather, if I were worthy, be the first, then the last, to
further so happy and hopeful a work. For it will bring to God, glory: to the
King, honor: to the Kingdom, treasure: to the Subjects, trade: to the poor,
employment: and prove by Gods blessing, a most excellent means, to increase
our Exportations, and to recover our Balance of Trade.

Without the Land,. 42. Or Without the Land.
the Persia trade will not let me pass, nor the Fishing neither without a word
of either. Both these do promise much supply unto our Exportation. Both of
them, are of very high and important consideration, for the honor and welfare
of this Kingdom. The one is a work for The King: the other for all The
Kingdom. The one, if we will, is our own: the other, unless we will not,
may be made our own.

For the Trade of Persia, In the Persia trade.
it needs the glory of the Sun, to dispell some clouds that do obscure and
hide from us, the excellency of this Trade. Which if it will please His Majesty
to vouchsafe; I am persuaded it would prove a very happy Commerce unto this
Kingdom, not inferior unto any foreign Trade. It promises to vent our
Clothes and other our Native Commodities, in great abundance: to yield returns
of these Clothes, that will employ multitudes of our poor: to spare us the
treasure that now we export to the Indies, through the necessity of that
trade: to employ many great Ships and good men, with much more fafety, then in
those other trads: to furnish the other parts of the Indies by the means of
that trade, without other supply from hence: to purchase the rich trade of the
Red Sea, and the benefit of trading there from Port to Port in the Indian
commodities; which in it self, will be another East Indian Trade: to turn the
Current of the Trade of Persia from Turkey; to the weakening of the Turks tyranny
over the Christian world: Lastly to draw the employment of many Millions of
money into this Kingdom for the Persian silck; which the Venetians,
Marcellians, and other Cities and Commonwealths of the Italians, French, and
Dutch, do now employ into Turkey, in that one Commodity only: which by Gods
blessing, we may be able to deliver them as cheap from hence, as now they
fetch it thence: with more contentment also to them, and more glory and gain
to us, in the atchieuement of so high and noble an enterprise. And these are
but two or three clusters, for a taste, of the fruit of the Land: This Canaan
cannot be known, until you have past ore Jordan: the perfection of it
consit's in the fruition thereof. And this is also another means no less
excellent, to enlarge our exportation, and therein also to help the cast of our
Scale, in the Balance of Trade.

Last of all,. 43. Or the Fishing Trade.
for the Fishing Trade, Res ipsa loquitur: I shall need to say no more of that,
if what is said were done. It is a work that has in it, vtility to inuit,
and capacity to receive, all the Kingdom. Wherein the Ports, which are the
walls and gates of the Kingdom, might be supported, and trade imported to
those Parts and places, which now are destitute thereof. Yea all the Cities,
or if you will the Counties, may find room enough to employ their means in
this trade. And surely if profit will not move men, Auri sacra fames is false,
and nothing will move them. There is no fiishing to the Sea, nor Sea-fare for
the Kingdoms welfare, to the fishing trade! wherein for the encouragement of
the Adventurers; it is fit, if so it may be thought fit in his Majesty's high
wisdom and grace; that every County, yea every City if it will, may have the
mannaging and disposing of their own adventures, without any General or
promiscuous confusion with others, and with such Immunities, privileges, and
encouragements conferred upon them from the fountain of his Majesty's grace,
as may at last bring that to action and execution, which we have so long had
in discourse and contemplation. A brave desseigne it is, as Royal as Real: as
honorable as profitable. It promises Renown to the King, Revenue to the
Crown, treasure to the Kingdom, a purchase for the land, a prize for the sea,
ships for Navigations, Navigations for ships, Maririners for both: entertainment
of the rich, employment for the poor, advantage for the adventurers, and
increase of Trade to all the Subjects. A Mine of Gold it is: the Mine is deep,
the veins are great, the Ore is rare, the Gold is pure, the extent unlimited,
the wealth unknown, the worth inualuable. And this is also another means, not
inferior unto any, for the recovery of our Exportations, in the Balance of
Trade.

THE CONCLUSION.
THese means well pursued, and the Remedies of our former Discourse applied,
and such other means added, as in the wisdom of the State, may be more
seriously thought upon, doubtless will restore our ancien Balance of Trade,
and in it, the former flourishing Commerce, which heretofore this Kingdom
happily did enjoy. This is that Provincial and indeed Potentiall Exchange,
between us and foreign Countries, that must be the public measure of all
our Merchandise. This is that true Par of Exchange, that will not change, that
has no imposture, froth, nor fallacy to abuse us with. This is the practice of
foreign Princes, and their Policy in point of Commerce, to have a continual
eye, to this Par pro Pari, the Balance of Trade: whereby they enrich their
Countries, and win ground of others that neglect the same. An instance is set
before our eyes, in that Spanish Proclamation, which closely and covertly
aims at the same thing, for the benefit of that Kingdom. This is that
prospectiue sight, that will draw Commerce from a far of, Quel miracle en
nature se peult trouuer plus grand, que ceste machine de vitre que fit
construire Sapores Roy Persien? la quelle estoit si grande, qu'il estoit assis
au Center d'icelle, comme en la sphere and rondeur de la terre, voyant souz ses
pieds les astres and estoiles qui se couchoient and leuoient: en sort que
co^bien qu'il fut mortel, il sembloit estre, sur toute la hautesse
d'immortalite. Theat. du monde. De l'excellence de l'homme.
to a Princes eye. It is said of Sapor King of Persia, that he caused a great
globe to be made of Glass, of such curiosity and excellency, that himself
might sit in his throne, and he and it, in the Center thereof, and behold the
motions and reuolutions of the Stars, rising and falling under his feet: as
if he that was a mortal man, would seem Immortal. And surely if a King would
desire to behold from his throne, the various reuolutions of Commerce, within
and without his Kingdom; he may behold them all at once in in this Globe of
glass, The Balance of Trade.

For indeed if there be any virtue in the Theorick part of Commerce, that
might attract a Princes Eye to be cast upon it; surely it is in this kind of
Exchange, that one Country makes with another in the Balance of Trade. All
the mysteries of other Exchanges are hid in this mystery. All the knowledge
of Commerce, is presented and represented to the life in this story, in this
history. All the rivers of Trade spring out of this source, and empt themselves
again into this Ocean. All the weight of Trade falle's to this Center, and
come's within the circuit of this Circle. This is that Par pro Pari, that
waighe's down Malynes Parity, Imparity, Impurity in the Scale: and is only
worthy of the Quaere, of th'enquiry of a King. This is that (...), the very Eye
of the Eye: or it is (...) the pupil or apple of the Eye, or as the Rabbis
call it, the daughter or image in the Eye: the beauty, the ornament, the
complement, the accomplishment of Commerce.

And now at last I have done with Malynes and with his Par, his Dispar of
Exchange: and with Ariadnes thread, I have got out of the Labyrinth of his
Little Fish, and his his Great Whale. Which having poised and found as light as
vanity in the Balance, and therefore deserve no place within the Circle of
Commerce, I shall dismiss as sometimes St. Augustine did the Erroneous
writings of the Maniches, with this farewell, that his Project pursued in both,
In Manich. Lib. 13. cap. 6.
is Puerile ludibrium, Principium truncum, medium putridum, finis ruinosus. A
childish toye, a blockish beginning, a rotten middle, and a ruinous end. Or
with the same Father, that it is Paries doalbatus, In Psalm. 103.
foris tectorium, intus lutum. It Is like a Mudde wall; daubed over without,
all dirt within. And such also is his Little Fish, such his Great Whale: full
fraught with stolen stuff, out of French Copies, Dutch Books, and English
manuscripts: whole books swallowed up in them for his own: with which, those
that are acquainted, will as easily point them out, as Ex vngue Leonem, to know
The Lion by the pawe. The plants were good and prosper'd well, when they grew
in their own soil: but being pulled up by the roots, and as ill transplanted,
by an unskillful workman, in a barren ground ore grown with weeds: must needs
be choackt, wither, and hang their heads. I once thought to have put an Index
purgatorius, or an Errata to his Lex Mercatoria; but that I should have seemed,
to take upon me one of Hercules labors, and as it is in the Proverb, Augiae
stabulum repurgare, To ferme or cleanse Augias stalles, which was a work for
Hercules only. His Law Merchant, should have Merchants Law, or rather Marshall
Law, to have been better purged, before it had been approved. I would Malynes
had consulted with the wise man, to have held his peace, that he might have
seemed wise. Sed Tacitus pasci si posset coruus, haberet, Plus Dapis, and vixae
multo minu^s inuidiaeque Hor.
Or that he had not been like to Horace his Crow, by too much chattering to
loose his cheese: or like Aesops dog, pardon the word, by too much gaping to
let fall his bone. Qualis vir, talis Oration: the man is confused, and so is
his matter. There Is a piece in Ovid resemble's it right,

Quem dixere CHAOS, rudis, indigestaque moles,
Nec quicqua^ nisi pondus iners congestaque eodem,
Non been iunctarum discordia semina rerum.
A CHAOS rude it is called, confused heap,
A dull and heavy weight and nothing else,
Discording seeds ill mixed to sow or reap
Conferred in one, where all disorder dwel's.
Or if you will have it nearer mach't, there is a masterpiece in Horace
represent's it to the life,

Humano capiti ceruicem pictor equinam
Inngere si velit, Horat.
and varias inducere plumas:
Vndique coliatis membris, vt turpiter atrum
Desinat in piscem mulier formosa superne:
Credit Pisones isti tabulae fore librum
Per similem, cuius velut aegri somnia, Vanae
Fingentur species, vt nec pes, nec caput vni
Reddatur formae. --
As if a Painter void of wit or Art,
Should represent man's head that lofty part,
And thereunto should join an Asses crest,
And deck with diverse feathers all the rest:
Strange parts co^ferd, which Mermaidlike appear
Black fish below, above a maiden clear.
Trust me Malyn's, thine ill digested theme
Is like such pictures, like a sick man's dream,
That faigneth forms, and yet in no degree,
Nor head, nor foot, will thereunto agree.
But not willing to be Censorious, I shall leave him and it, to the sentence of
the wise, with this my just defense also, against his Censure, of Wilfulnes at
least, though not of Ignorance: Little Fish Ep. dedic. P. 2.
of both which he has accused me, to no less, then The Majesty of so great A
King. But I have thought it my happiness o Caesar, to have answered before Thee,
of all these things, Apostrophe ad Regem.
whereof I am accused and maligned of Malynes: For my Lord The King, is as an
Angel of God. Before whom I shall ever acknowledge, my want of knowledge: or
if I know any thing, it is only this, Scire, me Nescire: to know, that I do
not know.

Alme Deus pellas coelesti lumine pellas
Ingenii Genii Nubila crassa mei:
Discere me doceas, dediscere caetera prae Te,
Scire nihil nisi Te, nam Tua scire sat est.
FINIS.

