The Roaring Girl. OR Moll Cutpurse.

As it has lately been Acted on the Fortune-stage by the Prince his Players.

Written by T. Middleton and T. Dekkar.

My case is altered, I must work for my living.



Printed at London for Thomas Archer, and are to be sold at his shop in Popes
head-pallace, near the Royal Exchange. 1611.

To the Comicke, Play-readers, Venery, and Laughter.
THE fashion of play-making, I can properly compare to nothing, so naturally,
as the alteration in apparel: For in the time of the Great-crop-doublet, your
huge bombasted plays, quilted with mighty words to lean purpose was only
then in fashion. And as the doublet fell, neater inventions began to set up.
Now in the time of sprucenes, our plays follow the nicenes of our Garments,
single plots, quaint conceits, letcherous jests, dressed up in hanging sleeves,
and those are fit for the Times, and the Tearmers: Such a kind of light-colour
Summer stuff, mingled with diverse colors, you shall find this published
Comedy, good to keep you in an afternoon from dice, at home in your chambers;
and for venery you shall find enough, for sixepence, but well coucht and you
mark it. For Venus being a woman passes through the play in doublet and
breeches, a brave disguise and a safe one, if the Statute vnty not her
cod-peece point. The book I make no question, but is fit for many of your
companies, as well as the person itself, and may be allowed both Gallery
room at the playhouse, and chamber-roome at your lodging: worse things I must
needs confess the world has taxt her for, then has been written of her; but
it is the excellency of a Writer, to leave things better then he finds 'em;
though some obscoene fellow (that cares not what he writes against others, yet
keeps a mystical baudy-house himself, and entertaines drunkards, to make use
of their pockets, and vent his private bottle-ale at midnight) though such a
one would have ripped up the most nasty vice, that ever hell belcht forth, and
presented it to a modest Assembly; yet we rather wish in such discoueries,
where reputation lies bleeding, a slackenesse of truth, then fullness of
slander.

THOMAS MIDDLETON.

Prologus.
A Play (expected long) makes the Audience look
For wonders: -- that each Scoene should be a book,
Composed to all perfection; each one comes
And brings a play in's head with him: up he sums,
What he would of a Roaring Girl have writ;
If that he finds not here, he m^wes at it.
Only we entreat you think our Scoene.
Cannot speak high (the subject being but mean)
A Roaring Girl (whose notes till now never were)
Shall fill with laughter our vast Theater,
That Is all which I dare promise: Tragic passion,
And such grave stuff, is this day out of fashion.
I see attention sets wide open her gates
Of hearing, and with covetous listening waits,
To know what Girl, this Roaring Girl should be.
(For of that Tribe are many.) One is she
That roares at midnight in deep Tavern bowls,
That beats the watch, and Constables controuls;
Another roares in the day time, swears, stabbes, gives braues,
Yet sells her soul to the lust of fools and slaves.
Both these are Suburbe-roarers. Then there is (besides)
A civil City* Roaring Girl, whose pride,
Feasting, and riding, shakes her husbands state,
And leaves him Roaring through an iron grate.
None of these Roaring Girls is ours: she flies
With wings more losty. Thus her character lies,
Yet what need characters? when to give a guess,
Is better then the person to express;
But would you know who it is? would you hear her name?
She is called mad Moll; her life, our acts proclaim.
Dramatis Personae.
Sir Alexander Wentgrane, and Neats-foot his man. Sir Adam Appleton. Sir Dauy
Dapper. Sir Bewteous Ganymed. Lord Noland. Young Wentgrane, Jack Dapper, and
Gull his page. Goshawke. Greenewit. Luxton. Tilt-yard. Ciues and Vxores.
Openworke. Gallipot. Mol the Roaring Girl. Trapdoore. Sir Guy Fitz-allard.
Mary Fitz-allard his daughter. Curtilax a Sergiant, and Hanger his Yeoman.
Ministri.
The Roaring Girl.
Act. 1. Scoe. 1.
Enter Mary Fitz-Allard disguised like a sempster with a case for bands, and
Neatfoot a seruingman with her, with a napkin on his shoulder, and a trencher
in his hand as from table.
Neatfoote. THe young gentleman (our young master) Sir Alexanders son, is it
into his ears (sweet Damsel) (emblem of fragility) you desire to have a
message transported, or to be transcendent.


Mary A private word or two Sir, nothing else.


Neat. You shall fructify in that which you come for: your pleasure shall be
satisfied to your full contentation: I will (fairest tree of generation) watch
when our young master is erected, (that is to say up) and deliver him to this
your most white hand.


Mary Thanks sir.

Neat. And withal certify him, that I have culled out for him (now his belly
is replenished) a daintier bit or modicome then any lay upon his trencher at
dinner -- has he notion of your name, I beseech your chastity.


Mary One Sir, of whom he be spoke falling bands.

Neat. Falling bands, it shall so be given him, -- -- if you please to venture
your modesty in the hall, amongst a curlepated company of rude seruingmen, and
take such as they can set before you, you shall be most seriously, and
ingeniously welcome.


Mary I have dyed indeed already sir.

Neat. -- -- Or will you vouchsafe to kiss the lip of a cup of rich Orleans in
the buttry amongst our waiting women.


Mary Not now in truth sir.

Neat. Our young Master shall then have a feeling of your being here presently
it shall so be given him.

Exit Neatfoote,
Mary I humbly thank you sir, but that my bosom
Is full of bitter sorrows, I could smile,
To see this formal Ape play Antic tricks:
But in my breast a poisoned arrow sticks,
And smiles cannot become me, Love wouen slightly
(Such as thy false heart makes) wears out as lightly,
But love being truly bred ith the soul (like mine)
Bleeds even to death, at the least wound it takes,
The more we quench this, the less it slakes: Oh me!
Enter Sebastian Wengraue with Neatfoote.
Seb. A Sempster speak with me, say thou.

Neat. Yes sir, she is there, viua voce, to deliver her auricular confession.


Seb. With me sweet heart. What is it?

Mary I have brought home your bands sir.

Seb. Bands: Neatfoote.

Neat. Sir.

Seb. Prithee look in, for all the Gentlemen are upon rising.

Neat. Yes sir, a most methodicall attendance shall be given.

Seb. And do hear, if my father call for me, say I am busy with a Sempster.


Neat. Yes sir, he shall know it that you are busied with a needle woman.


Seb. In's ear good Neat-foote,

Neat. It shall be so given him.
Exit Neat-foote.
Seb. Bands, you are mistaken sweet heart, I bespake none, when, where, I
prithee, what bands, let me see them.


Mary Yes sir, a bond fast sealed, with solemn oaths,
Subscribed unto (as I thought) with your soul:
Delivered as your deed in sight of heaven,
Is this bond canceld, have you forgot me.

Seb. Ha! life of my life: Sir Guy Fitz-Allards daughter,
What has transformed my love to this strange shape?
Stay: make all sure, -- so: now speak and be brief,
Because the wolfe's at door that lies in wait,
To prey upon us both albeit mine eyes
Are blessed by thine, yet this so strange disguise
Holds me with fear and wonder.

Mary Mines a loathed sight,
Why from it are you banished else so long.

Seb. I must cut short my speech, in broken language,
Thus much sweet Moll, I must thy company shun,
I court another Moll, my thoughts must run,
As a horse runs, that's blind, round in a Mill,
Out every step, yet keeping one path still.

Mary Vmh: must you shun my company, in one knot
Have both our hands byt'h hands of heaven been tied,
Now to be broke, I thought me once your Bride:
Our fathers did agree on the time when,
And must another bedfellow fill my room.

Seb. Sweet maid, lets loose no time, it is in heavens book
Set down, that I must have thee: an oath we took,
To keep our vows, but when the knight your father
Was from mine parted, storms began to sit
Upon my covetous fathers brow: which fell
From them on me, he reckond up what gold
This marriage would draw from him, at which he swore,
To loose so much blood, could not grieve him more.
He then diswades me from thee, called thee not fair,
And asked what is she, but a beggars heir?
He scorned thy dowry of (5000) Marks.
If such a sum of money could be found,
And I would match with that, he would not undo it,
Provided his bags might add nothing to it,
But vowed, if I took thee, nay more, did swear it,
Save birth from him I nothing should inherit.

Mary What follows then, my ship-wracke.

Seb. Dearest no:
Tho wildly in a laborinth I go,
My end is to meet thee: with a side wind
Must I now sail, else I no haven can find
But both must sink for ever. There Is a wench
Called Mol, mad Mol, or merry Moll, a creature
So strange in quality, a whole city takes
Note of her name and person, all that affection
I owe to thee, on her in counterfeit passion,
I spend to mad my father: he believes
I doat upon this Roaring Girl, and grieves
As it becomes a father for a son,
That could be so bewitched: yet i will go on
This crooked way, sigh still for her, feign dreams,
In which i will talk only of her, these streams
Shall, I hope, force my father to consent
That here I anchor rather then be rent
Upon a rock so dangerours, Art thou pleased,
Because thou see we are waylaid, that I take
A path that's safe, tho it be far about,

Mary My prayers with heaven guide thee,

Seb. Then I will on,
My father is at hand, kiss and begone;
Hours shall be watched for meetings; I must now
As men for fear, to a strange I doll bow.

Mary Farewell.

Seb. I Will guide thee forth, when next we meet,
A story of Moll shall make our mirth more sweet.
Exeunt Enter Sir Alexander Wengraue, Sir Dauy Dapper, Sir Adam Appleton,
Goshake, Laxton, and Gentlemen.
Omnes Thanks good Sir Alexander for our bounteous cheer:

Alex. Fie, fie, in giving thanks you pay to dear.

S. Dap. When bounty spreades the table, faith it were sin,
(at going of) if thanks should not step in.

Alex. No more of thanks, no more, I mary Sir,
The Inner room was too close, how do you like
This Parlour Gentlmen?

Omnes Oh passing well.

Adam What a sweet breath the air casts here, so cool,

Gosh. I like the prospect best.

Lax. See how it is furnished.

S. Dap. A very fair sweet room.

Alex. Sir Dauy Dapper,
The furniture that does adorn this room,
Cost many a fair gray groat ere it came here,
But good things are most cheap, when they are most dear,
Nay when you look into my galleries,
How bravely they are trimmed up, you all shall swear
Yare highly pleased to see what is set down there:
Stories of men and women (mixed together
Fair ones with foul, like sunshine in wet wether)
Within one square a thousand heads are laid
So close, that all of heads, the room seeemes made,
As many faces there (filled with blithe looks)
Show like the promising titles of new books,
(Writ merrily) the Readers being their own eyes,
Which seem to move and to give plaudities,
And here and there (whilst with obsequious ears,
Thronged heaps do listen) a cut purse thrusts and leeres
With hawks eyes for his prey: I need not show him,
By a hanging villainous look, your selves may know him,
The face is drawn so rarely, Then sir below,
The very flower (as twere) waves to and fro,
And like a floating Island, seems to move,
Upon a sea bound in with shores above,
Enter Sebastian and M. Greene-wit.
Omnes. These sights are excellent.

Alex. I Will show you all,
Since we are met, make our parting Comicall.

Seb. This gentleman (my friend) will take his leave Sir.

Alex. Ha, take his leave (Sebastian) who?

Seb. This gentleman.

Alex. Your love sir, has already given me some time,
And if you please to trust my age with more,
It shall pay double interest: Good sir stay.

Green. I have been too bold.

Alex. Not so sir. A merry day
Among friends being spent, is better then gold saved.
Some wine, some wine. Where be these knaves I keep.
Enter three or four Seruingmen, and Neatfoote.
Neat. At your worshipful elbow, sir.

Alex. You are kissing my maids, drinking, or fast asleep.

Neat. Your worship has given it us right.

Alex. You varlets stir,
Chaires, stools and cushions: prithee sir Dauy Dapper,
Make that chair thine.

Sir Dap. It Is but an easy gift,
And yet I thank you for it sir, I Will take it.

Alex. A chair for old sir Adam Appleton.

Neat. A back friend to your worship.

Adam. Mary good Neatfoot,
I thank thee for it: back friends sometimes are good.

Alex. Pray make that stool your perch, good M. Goshawke.

Gosh. I stoop to your lure sir.

Alex. Son Sebastian,
Take Master Greenewit to you.

Seb. Sit dear friend.

Alex. Nay master Laxton -- furnish master Laxton
With what he wants (a stone) a stool I would say, a stool.

Laxton. I had rather stand sir.
Exeunt servants.
Alex. I know you had (good M. Laxton.) So, so --
Now here is a mess of friends, and (gentlemen)
Because times glass shall not be running long,
I Will quicken it with a pretty tale.

Sir Dap. Good tales do well,
In these bad days, where vice does so excel.

Adam. Begin sir Alexander.

Alex. Last day I met
An aged man upon whose head was scor'd,
A debt of just so many years as these,
Which I owe to my grave, the man you all know.

Omnes. His name I pray you sir.

Alex. Nay you shall pardon me,
But when he saw me (with a sigh that brake,
Or seemed to break his heart strings) thus he spoke:
Oh my good knight, says he, (and then his eyes
Were richer even by that which made them poor,
They had spent so many tears they had no more.)
Oh sir (says he) you know it, for you ha seen
Blessings to rain upon mine house and me:
Fortune (who slaves men) was my slave: her wheel
Has spun me golden threads, for I thank heaven,
I nere had but one cause to curse my stars,
I ask't him then, what that one cause might be.

Omnes. So Sir.

Alex. He paused, and as we often see,
A sea so much becalmed, there can be found
No wrinckle on his brow, his waves being drowned
In their own rage: but when the imperious wind,
Use strange invisible tyranny to shake
Both heavens and earths foundation at their noise:
The seas swelling with wrath to part that fray
Rise up, and are more wild, more mad, then they.
Even so this good old man was by my question
Stirred up to roughness, you might see his gall
Flow even in's eyes: then grew he fantastical.

Sir Dap. Fantastical, ha, ha.

Alex. Yes, and talk odly.

Adam. Pray sir proceed,
How did this old man end?

Alex. Mary sir thus.
He left his wild fit to read ore his cards,
Yet then (though age cast snow on all his hairs)
He joyed because (says he) the God of gold
Has been to me no niggard: that disease
(Of which all old men sicken) Avarice
Never infected me.

Lax. He means not himself i am sure.

Alex. For like a lamp,
Fed with continual oil, I spend and throw
My light to all that need it, yet have still
Enough to serve my self, oh but (quoth he)
Tho heauens-dew fall, thus on this aged tree,
I have a son that's like a wedge does cleave,
My very heart root,

S, Dap. Had he such a son,

Seb, Now I do smell a fox strongly.

Alex. Lets see: no Master Greene-wit is not yet
So mellow in years as he; but as like Sebastian,
Just like my son Sebastian, -- such another.

Seb. How finely like a fencer my father fetches hisby-blowes to hit me, but if
I beat you not at your own weapon of subtilty.


Alex. This son (says he) that should be
The column and maine arch unto my house,
The crutch unto my age, becomes a whirlewind
Shaking the firm foundation,

Adam It Is some prodigal.

Seba. Well shot old Adam Bell.

Alex. No city monster neither, no prodigal,
But sparing, wary, civil, and (tho wiuelesse)
An excellent husband, and such a traveler,
He has more tongues in his head then some have teeth,

S. Dap. I have but two in mine

Gosh. So sparing and so wary,
What then could vex his father so.

Alex. Oh a woman.

Seb. A flesh fly, that can vex any man.

Alex. A scuruy woman,
On whom the passionate old man swore he doated:
A creature (says he) nature has brought forth
To mock the sex of woman. -- It is a thing
One knows not how to name, her birth began
Ere she was all made. It Is woman more then man,
Man more then woman, and (which to none can hap)
The Sun gives her two shadows to one shape,
Nay more, let this strange thing, walk, stand or sit,
No blazing star draws more eyes after it.

S. Dap. A Monster, it is some Monster.

Alex. She Is a varlet.

Seb. Now is my cue to bristle.

Alex. A naughty pack.

Seb. It Is false.

Alex. Ha boy.

Seb. It Is false.

Alex. What Is false, I say she is naught.

Seb. I say that tongue
That dares speak so (but yours) sticks in the throat
Of a rank villain, set your self aside. --

Alex. So sir what then.

Seb. Any here else had lied.
I think I shall fit you --
aside.
Alex. Lie.

Seb. Yes.

Sir Dap. Does this concern him.

Alex. Ah sir boy.
Is your blood heated: boyles it: are you stung,
I Will pierce you deeper yet: oh my dear friends,
I am that wretched father, this that son,
That sees his ruin, yet headlong on does run.

Adam. Will you love such a poison.

S. Dap. Fie, fie.

Seb. You Are all mad.

Alex. Thou Art sick at heart, yet feelst it not: of all these,
What Gentleman (but thou) knowing his disease
Mortal, would shun the cure: oh Master Greenewit,
Would you to such an Idol bow.

Green. Not I sir.

Alex. Here Is Master Laxton, has he mind to a woman
As thou have.

Lax. No not I sir.

Alex. Sir I know it.

Lax. There good parts are so rare, there bad so common,
I will have naught to do with any woman.

Sir Dap. It Is well done Master Laxton.

Alex. Oh thou cruel boy,
Thou would with lust an old man's life destroy,
Because thou see I Am half way in my grave,
Thou shouelst dust upon me: wod thou might have
Thy wish, most wicked, most unnatural.

Dap. Why sir, it is thought, sir Guy Fitz-Allards daughter
Shall wed your son Sebastian.

Alex. Sir Dauy Dapper.
I have upon my knees, wood this fond boy,
To take that virtuous maiden.

Seb. Hark you a word sir.
You on your knees have cursed that virtuous maiden,
And me for loving her, yet do you now
Thus baffle me to my face: were not your knees
In such intreates, give me Fitz-Allards daughter.

Alex. I Will give thee rats-bane rather.

Seb. Well then you know
What dish I mean to feed upon.

Alex. Hark Gentlemen,
He swears to have this cutpurse drab, to spite my gall.

Omnes. Master Sebastian.

Seb. I am deaf to you all.
I Am so bewitched, so bound to my desires,
Tears, prayers, threats, nothing can quench out those fires
That burn within me.
Exit Sebastian.
Alex. Her blood shall quench it then,
Loose him not, oh diswade him Gentlemen.

Sir Dap. He shall be weand I warrant you.

Alex. Before his eyes
Lay down his shame, my grief, his miseries.

Omnes. No more, no more, away.
Exeunt all but sir Alexander.
Alex. I wash a Negro,
Loosing both pains and cost: but take thy flight,
I Will be most near thee, when I Am least in sight.
Wild Bucke i will hunt thee breathless, thou shall run on,
But I will turn thee when I Am not thought upon.
Enter Ralph Trapdore: Now sir what are you, leave your Apes tricks and
speak.

Trap. A letter from my Captain to your Worship.

Alex. Oh, oh, now I remember it is to prefer thee into my service.


Trap. To be a shifter under your Worships nose of a clean trencher, when
there is a good bit upon it.


Alex. Troth honest fellow -- humh -- ha -- let me see,
This knave shall be the axe to hew that down
At which I stumble, has a face that promises
Much of a villain, I will grind his wit,
And if the edge prove fine make use of it.
Come hither sir, can thou be secret, ha.

Trap. As two crafty Atturneys plotting the undoing of their clyents.


Alex. Did never, as thou have walked about this town
Hear of a wench called Moll, mad merry Moll.

Trap. Moll cutpurse sir.

Alex. The same, do thou know her then,

Trap. As Well as I know twill rain upon Simon and Iudes day next, I will sift
all the tauerns ith city, and drink half pots with all the Watermen ath
bankside, but if you will sir I Will find her out.


Alex. That task is easy, doot then, hold thy hand up.
What Is this, is it burnt?

Trap. No sir no, a little sindgd with making fire works.

Alex. There Is money, spend it, that being spent fetch more.

Trap. Oh sir that all the poor soldiers in England had such a leader. For
fetching no water Spaniell is like me.


Alex. This wench we speak of, straies so from her kind
Nature repents she made her. It Is a Mermaid
Has told my son to shipwreck.

Trap. I Will cut her comb for you.

Alex. I Will tell out gold for thee then: hunt her forth,
Cast out a line hung full of silver hooks
To catch her to thy company: deep spendings
May draw her that's most chaste to a man's bosom.

Trap. The gingling of Golden bells, and a good fool with a hobbyhorse, will
draw all the whoores ith to wneto dance in a morris,


Alex. Or rather, for that's best, (they say sometimes
She goes in breeches) follow her as her man.

Trap. And when her breeches are off, she shall follow me.

Alex. Beat all thy brains to serve her.

Trap. Zounds sir, as country wenches beat cream, till butter comes.


Alex. Play thou the subtle spider, weaue fine nets
To ensnare her very life.

Trap. Her life.

Alex. Yes suck
Her heart-bloud if thou can, twist thou but cords
To catch her, I Will find law to hang her up.

Trap. Spoke like a Worshipful bencher.

Alex. Trace all her steps: at this shee-foxes den
Watch what lambs enter: let me play the sheepeheard
To save their throats from bleeding, and cut hers.

Trap. This is the goll shall doot.

Alex. Be firm and gain me
Ever thine own. This done I entertain thee:
How is thy name.

Trap. My name sir is Raph Trapdore, honest Raph.

Alex. Trapdore, be like thy name, a dangerous step
For her to venture on, but unto me.

Trap. As fast as your sole to your boot or shoe sir.

Alex. Hence then, be little seen here as thou can.
I Will still be at thine elbow.

Trap. The trapdores set.
Moll if you budge you are gone: this me shall crown,
A Roaring Boy, the Roaring Girl puts down,

Alex. God a mercy, loose no time.
Exeunt. The three shops open in a rank: the first a Poticaries shop, the next
a Fether shop: the third a Sempsters shop: Mistress Gallipot in tho first,
Mistress Tiltyard in the next, Master Openworke and his wife in the third, to
them enters Laxton, Goshawke and Greenewit.
Mi. Open. Gentlemen what is it you lack. What is it you buy, see fine bands and
ruffes, fine lawnes, fine cambrickes, what is it you lack Gentlemen, what is it
you buy?


Lax. Yonder Is the shop.

Gosh. Is that she.

Lax. Peace.

Green She that minces Tobacco.

Lax. I: she is a Gentlewoman borne I can tell you, tho it be her hard fortune
now to shread Indian pot-hearbes.


Gosh. Oh sir it is many a good woman's fortune, when her husband turns bankrout,
to begin with pipes and set up again.


Lax. And indeed the raising of the woman is the lifting up of the man's head at
all times, if one flourish, the other will bud as fast I warrant ye.


Gosh. Come thou art familiarly acquainted there, I grope that.

Lax. And you grope no better ith dark you may chance lie ith ditch when you are
drunk.


Gosh. Go thou art a mystical letcher.

Lax. I will not deny but my credit may take up an ounce of pure smoke.


Gosh. May take up an ell of pure smock; away go, it is the closest striker. Life
I think he co^mits venery 40 foot deep, no man's aware on it, I like a palpable
smockster go to work so openly, with the tricks of art, that I Am as aparantly
seen as a naked boy in a vial, and were it not for a gift of treachery that I
have in me to betray my friend when he puts most trust in me (mass yonder he
is too --) and by his injury to make good my access to her, I should appear
as defective in courting, as a Farmers son the first day of his feather, that
does nothing at Court, but woe the hangings and glass windows for a month
together, and some broken waiting woman for ever after. I find those
imperfections in my venerie, that were it not for flattery and falsehood, I
should want discourse and impudence, and he that wants impudence among women,
is worthy to be kicked out at beds feet. -- He shall not see me yet.


Green. Troth this is finely shred.

Lax. Oh women are the best mincers.

Mist. Gal. 'Thad bin a good phrase for a Cooks wife sir.

Lax. But 'twill serve generally, like the front of a new Almanacke; as thus:
Calculated for the meridian of Cooks wives, but generally for all Englishwomen.


Mist. Gal. Nay you shall ha'te sir, I have filled it for you.
She puts it to the fire.
Lax. The pipe's in a good hand, and I wish mine always so.

Gree. But not to be used a that fashion.

Lax. O pardon me sir, I understand no french.
I pray be couerd. Jack a pipe of rich smoke.

Gosh. Rich smoke; that is 6. pence a pipe is it?

Green. To me sweet Lady.

Mist. Gal. Be not forgetful; respect my credit; seem strange;
Art and Wit makes a fool of suspicion: -- pray be wary.

Lax. Push, I warrant you: -- come, how is it gallants?

Green. Pure and excellent.

Lax. I thought 'twas good, you were grown so silent; you are like those that
love not to talk at victuals, tho they make a worse noise in the nose then a
common fiddlers prentice, and discourse a whole Supper with snuffling; -- I must
speak a word with you anon.


Mist. Gal. Make your way wisely then. (ners,

Gosh. Oh what else sir, he is perfection it self, full of man-
But not an acre of ground belonging to 'em.

Green. I and full of form, h'as never a good stool in's chamber.


Gosh. But above all religious: he prays daily upon elder brothers.


Green. And valiant above measure; h'as run three streets from a Serieant.


Lax. Puh, Puh.
he blows tobacco in their faces.
Green. Gosh. Oh, puh, ho, ho.

Lax. So, so.

Mist. Gal. What Is the matter now sir?

Lax. I protest I Am in extreme want of money, if you can supply me now with
any means, you do me the greatest pleasure, next to the bounty of your
love, as ever poor gentleman tasted.


Mist. Gal. What Is the sum would pleasure ye sir?
Tho you deserve nothing less at my hands.

Lax. Why it is but for want of opportunity thou know; I put her off with
opportunity still: by this light I hate her, but for means to keep me in
fashion with gallants; for what I take from her, I spend upon other wenches,
bear her in hand still; she has wit enough to rob her husband, and I ways
enough to consume the money: why how now? what the chin-cough?


Gosh. Thou have the cowardliest trick to come before a man's face and strangle
him ere he be aware, I could find in my heart to make a quarrel in earnest.


Lax. Pox and thou do, thou know I never use to fight with my friends,
thou'l but loose thy labor in it. Jack Dapper!

Enter I. Dapper, and his man Gull.
Green. Mounsier Dapper, I diue down to your anckles.

I. Dap. Save ye gentlemen all three in a peculiar salute.

Gosh. He were ill to make a lawyer, he dispatches three at once.


Lax. So well said: but is this of the same Tobacco mistress Gallipot?


M. Gal. The same you had at first sir.

Lax. I wish it no better: this will serve to drink at my chamber.


Gosh. Shall we taste a pipe on it?

Lax. Not of this by my troth Gentlemen, I have sworn before you.


Gosh. What not Jack dapper.

Lax. Pardon me sweet Jack, I Am sorry I made such a rash oath, but foolish
oaths must stand: where art going Jack.


Iac. Dap. Faith to buy one fether.

Lax. One fether, the foole's peculiar still.

Iac. Dap. Gul.

Gul. Master.

Iac. Dap. Here Is three halfepence for your ordinary, boy, meet me an hour
hence in Powles.


Gul. How three single halfepence; life, this will scarce serve a man in sauce,
a halporth of mustard, a halporth of oil, and a halporth of viniger, what is
left then for the pickle herring: this shows like final beer ith morning
after a great surfeit of wine ore night, he could spend his three pound last
night in a supper amongst girls and brave baudy-house boys, I thought his
pockets cackeld not for nothing, these are the eggs of three pound, I Will go
sup'em up presently.

Exit Gul.
Lax. Fight, nine, ten Angles, good wench in faith, and one that loves darkness
well, she puts out a candle with the best tricks of any drugsters wife in
England: but that which mads her I rail upon opportunity still, and take no
notice on it. The other night she would needs lead me into a room with a candle
in her hand to show me a naked picture, where no sooner entered but the candle
was sent of an arrant: now I not intending to understand her, but like a puny
at the Innes of venery, called for another light innocently, thus reward I all
her cunning with simple mistaking. I know she cosens her husband to keep me,
and I Will keep her honest, as long as I can, to make the poor man some part of
amends, an honest mind of a whooremaister, how think you amongst you, what a
fresh pipe, draw in a third man.


Gosh. No your a horder, you ingrose bith ounces.
At the Fether shop now.
Iac. Dap. Puh I like it not.

M. Tiltyard What fether is it you would have sir.
These are most worn and most in fashion,
Amongst the Beuer gallants the stone Riders.
The private stages audience, the twelu penny stool Gentlemen,
I can inform you it is the general fether.

Iac. Dap. And therefore I mislike it, tell me of general.
Now a continual Simon and Iudes rain
Beat all your feathers as flat down as pancakes.
Show me -- -- a -- spangled fether,

Mist. Tilt. Oh to go a feasting with,
You Would have it for a hinch boy, you shall.
At the Sempsters shop now.
May. Open. Mass I had quite forgot,
His Honors footeman was here last night wife,
Ha you done with my Lords shirt.

Mist. Open. What Is that to you sir,
I was this morning at his Honors lodging,
Ere such a snake as you crept out of your shell.

May. Open. Oh 'twas well done good wife.

Mt. Op. I hold it better sir, then if you had don't your self.

Ma. Op. Nay so say I: but is the Countesses smock almost done mouse.


Mi. Op. Here lies the cambricke sir, but wants I fear me.

Ma. Op. I Will resolve you of that presently,

Mi. Op. Haida, oh audacious groom,
Dare you presume to noble women's linen,
Keep you your yard to measure sheepeheards holland,
I must confine you I see that.
At the Tobacco shop now.
Gosh. What say you to this geere.

Lax. I dare the arrants critticke in Tobacco
To lay one falt upon it.
Enter Mol in a freese I^rkin and a black sauegard.
Gosh. Life yonder is Mol.

Lax. Mol which Mol.

Gosh. honest Mol.

Lax. Prithee lets call her -- Mol.

All. Mol, Mol, pist Mol.

Mol. How now, what is the matter.

Gosh. A pipe of good tobacco Mol.

Mol. I cannot stay.

Gosh. Nay Moll puh, prithee hark, but one word in faith.

Mol. Well what is it.

Green. Prithee come hither sir.

Lax. Heart I would give but too much money to be nibling with that wench, life,
she has the Spirit of four great parishes, and a voice that will drown all the
City, me thinks a brave Captain might get all his soldiers upon her, and
nere be beholding to a company of mile-end milk sops, if he could come on,
and come off quick enough: Such a Moll were a maribone before an Italian, he
would cry bona roba till his ribs were nothing but bone. I Will lay hard siege to
her, money is that Aqua fortis, that eats into many a maidenhead, where the
walls are flesh and blood I Will ever pierce through with a golden auguer.


Gosh. Now thy judgment Moll, is it not good?

Mol. Yes faith it is very good tobacco, how do you sell an an ounce, farewell.
God b'y you Mistress Gallipot,


Gosh. Why Mol, Mol.

Mol. I cannot stay now in faith, I am going to buy a shag ^uffe, the shop will
be shut in presently.


Gosh. It Is the maddest fantasticalst girl: -- I never knew so much flesh and
so much nimblenesse put together.


Lax. She slips from one company to another, like a fat Eele between a
Dutchma^s fingers: -- I Will watch my time for her.


Mist. Gal. Some will not stick to say she is a man
And some both man and woman.

Lax. That were excellent, she might first cuckold the husband and then make
him do as much for the wife.

The Fether shop again.
Moll. Save you; how does Mistress Tiltyard?

I. Dap. Mol.

Mol. Jack Dappper.

I. Dap. How do Mol.

Mol. I Will tell the by and by, I go but toth' next shop.

I. Dap. Thou shall find me here this hour about a fether.

Mol. Nay and a fether hold you in play a whole hour, a goose will last you
all the days of your life. Let me see a good shag ruff.

The Sempster shop.
May. Open. Mistress Mary that shall thou in faith, and the best in the shop.


Mist. Open. How now, greetings, love terms with a pox between you, have I
found out one of your haunts, I send you for hollands, and you're ith the low
countries with a mischief, I Am served with good ware byth shift, that makes
it lie dead so long upon my hands, I were as good shut up shop, for when I open
it I take nothing.


May. Open. Nay and you fall a ringing once the devil cannot stop you, I Will
out of the Belfry as fast as I can -- Moll.


Mist. Open. Get you from my shop.

Mol. I come to buy. (shop

Mist. Open. I Will sell ye nothing, I warn ye my house and

Mol. You goody Openworke, you that prick out a poor living
And sowes many a bawdy skin-coate together,
Thou private pandresse between shirt and smock,
I wish thee for a minute but a man:
Thou should never use more shapes, but as thou art
I pity my revenge, now my spleenes up,
Enter a fellow with a long rapier by his side. I would not mock it willingly
-- ha be thankful.
Now I forgive thee.

Mist. Open. Mary hang thee, I never asked forgiveness in my life.


Mol. You goodman swinesface.

Fellow What will you murder me.

Mol. You remember slave, how you abusd me the other night in a Tavern.


Fell. Not I by this light.

Mol. No, but by candlelight you did, you have tricks to save your oaths,
reseruations have you, and I have reserved somewhat for you, -- as you like
that call for more, you know the sign again.


Fell. Pox ant, had I brought any company along with me to have borne witless
on it, 'twold never have grieved me, but to be struck and nobody by, it is my ill
fortune still, why tread upon a worm they say twill turn tail, but indeed a
Gentleman should have more manners.

Exit fellow.
Lax. Gallantly performed ifath Mol, and manfully, I love thee for ever fort,
base rogue, had he offered but the least counter-buffe, by this hand I was
prepared for him.


Mol. You prepared for him, why should you be prepared for him, was he any more
then a man.


Lax. No nor so much by a yard and a handful London measure..


Moll. Why do you speak this then, do you think I cannot ride a stone horse,
unless one lead him bith snaffle.


Lax. Yes and sit him bravely, I know thou can Mol, it was but an honest
mistake through love, and I Will make amends fort any way, prithee sweet plumpe
Mol, when shall thou and I go out a town together.


Mol. Whether to Tyburne prithee.

Lax. Mass that's out a town indeed, thou hangst so many jests upon thy
friends still. I mean honestly to Brainford, Stains or Ware.


Mol. What to do there.

Lax. Nothing but be merry and lie together, I Will hire a coach with four
horses.


Mol. I thought 'twould be a beastly journey, you may leave out one well, three
horses will serve, if I play the jade my self.


Lax. Nay push thou art such another kicking wench, prithee be kind and lets
meet.


Mol. It Is hard but we shall meet sir.

Lax. Nay but appoint the place then, there is ten Angels in fair gold Mol, you
see I do not trifle with you, do but say thou will meet me, and I Will have a
coach ready for thee.


Mol. Why here is my hand I Will meet you sir.

Lax. Oh good gold, -- the place sweet Mol.

Mol. It shall be your appointment.

Lax. Somewhat near Holborne Mol.

Mol. In Graies-Inne fields then.

Lax. A match.

Mol. I Will meet you there.

Lax. The hour.

Mol. Three.

Lax. That will be time enough to sup at Braineford.
Fall from them to the other.
Ma. Op. I am of such a nature sir, I cannot endure the house when she scolds,
sh'has a tongue will be hard further in a still morning then Saint
Antlings-bell, she railes upon me for foreign wenching, that I being a freema^
must needs keep a whore ith subburbs, and seek to impouerish the liberties,
when we fall out, I trouble you still to make all whole with my wife.


Gosh. No trouble at all, it is a pleasure to me to join things together.


May. Open. Go thy ways, I do this but to try thy honesty Goshawke.

The Fether shop.
Iac. Dap. How like thou this Mol.

Mol. Oh singularly, your fitted now for a bunch, he looks for all the world
with those spangled feathers like a noblemans bedpost: The purity of your wench
would I feign try, she seems like Kent unconquered, and I believe as many
wiles are in her -- oh the gallants of these times are shallow letchers, they
put not their courtship home enough to a wench, it is impossible to know what
woman is thoroughly honest, because she is nere thoroughly tried, I am of that
certain belief there are more queanes in this town of their own making,
then of any man's provoking, where lies the slacknesse then? many a poor soul
would down, and there is nobody will push Women are courted but nere soundly
tried, (em: As many walk in spurs that never ride.

The Sempsters shop.
Mist, Open. Oh abominable.

Gosh. Nay more I tell you in private, he keeps a whore ith subburbs.


Mist. Open. O spittle dealing, I came to him a Gentlewoman borne. I Will show you
mine arms when you please sir.


Gosh. I had rather see your legs, and begin that way.

Mist. Openworke It Is well known he took me from a Ladies service, where I was
well beloved of the steward, I had my Lattine tongue, and a spice of the French
before I came to him, and now does he keep a subberbian whore under my
nostrils.


Gosh. There Is ways enough to cry quite with him, hark in thine ear.


Mist. Open. There Is a friend worth a Million.

Mol I Will try one spear against your chastity Mist. Tiltyard
Though it prove too short by the burgh.

Trap. Mass here she is. Enter Ralph Trapdore I Am bound already to serve her,
tho it be but a sluttish trick. Bless my hopeful young Mistress with long
life and great limbs, send her the upper hand of all balifes, and their hungry
adherents.


Mol. How now, what art thou?

Trap. A poor ebbing Gentleman, that would gladly wait for the young flood of
your service.


Mol. My service! what should move you to offer your service to me sir?


Trap. The love I bear to your heroicke spirit and masculine womanhood.


Mol. So sir, put case we should retain you to us, what parts are there in you
for a Gentlewomans service.


Trap. Of two kinds right Worshipful: moveable, and immovable: moveable to
run of arrants, and immovable to stand when you have occasion to use me.


Mol. What strength have you.

Trap. Strength Mistress Mol, I have gone up into a steeple, and staid the
great bell as 'thas been ringing; stopped a windmill going.

Mols trips up his heels he falls.
Mol. And never struck down your self.

Trap. Stood as upright as I do at this present.

Mol. Come I pardon you for this, it shall be no disgrace to you: I have
struck up the heels of the high Germans size ere now, -- what not stand.


Trap. I am of that nature where I love, I Will be at my mistress foot to do
her service.


Mol. Why well said, but say your Mistress should receive injury, have you the
spirit of fighting in you, durst you second her.


Trap. Life I have kept a bridge my self, and drove seven at a time before me.


Mol. I.

Trap. But they were all Lincolneshire bullockes by my troth.

aside.
Mol. Well, meet me in Graies-Inne fields, between three and four this
afternoon, and upon better consideration we will retain you.


Trap. I humbly thank your good Mistreship,
I Will crack your neck for this kindness.
Exit Trapdore
Lax. Remember three.
Mol meets Laxton
Moll. Nay if I fail you hang me.

Lax. Good wench In Faith.
then Openworke.
Moll. Whose this.

May. Open. It Is I Mol.

Moll. Prithee tend thy shop and prevent bastards.

May. Open. Well have a pint of the same wine in faith Mol.
The belrings.
Gosh. Hark the bell rings, come Gentlemen.
Jack Dapper where shals all munch.

Iae. Dap. I am for Parkers ordinary.

Lax. He Is a good guest to'm, he deserves his board,
He draws all the Gentlemen in a term time thither,
We Will be your followers Jack, lead the way,
Look you by my faith the fool has fetherd his nest well.
Exeunt Gallants. Enter Master Gallipot, Master Tiltyard, and servants with
water Spaniels and a ducke.
May. Tilt. Come shut up your shops, where is Master Openworke.


Mist. Gal. Nay ask not me Master Tiltyard.

May. Tilt. Where Is his water dog, puh -- pist -- hur -- hur-pist

May. Gal. Come wenches come, we are going all to Hogsden.


Mist. Gal. To Hogsden husband.

May. Gal. I to Hogsden pigs ny.

Mist. Gal. I Am not ready husband.
spits in the dogs mouth
May. Gal. Faith that's well -- hum -- pist -- pist.

May. Gal. Come Mistress Openworke you are so long.

Mist. Open. I have no joy of my life Master Gallipot.

May. Gal, Push, let your boy lead his water Spaniel along, and we will show
you the brauest sport at parlous pond, he trug, he trug, he trug, here is the
best ducke in England, except my wife, he, he, he, fetch, fetch, fetch, come
lets away Of all the year this is the sportfulst day.

Enter Sebastian solus.
Seb. If a man have a free will, where should the use
More perfect shine then in his will to love.
All creatures have their liberty in that,
Enter Sir Alexander and listens to him. Tho else kept under servile yoke and
fear,
The very bondslaue has his freedom there,
Amongst a world of creatures voyc'd and silent.
Must my desires wear fetters -- yea are you
So near, then I must break with my hearts truth;
Meet grief at a back way -- well: why suppose.
The two leaud tongues of slander or of truth
Pronounce Mol loathsome: if before my love
She appear fair, what injury have I,
I have the thing I like? in all things else
Mine own eye guides me, and I find 'em prosper,
Life what should aile it now? I know that man
Nere truly loves, if he gainesayt he lies,
That winkes and marries with his fathers eyes.
I Will keep mine own wide open.
Enter Mol and a porter with a viallon his back.
Alex. Here Is brave wilfulness,
A made match, here she comes, they met a purpose.

Por. Must I carry this great fiddle to your chamber Mistress Mary.


Mol. Fiddle goodman hog-rubber, some of these porters bear so much for
others, they have no time to carry wit for themselves.


Por. To your own chamber Mistress Mary.

Moll. Who Will hear an Ass speak: whither else goodman pagent-bearer: the're
people of the worst memories.

Exit Porter.
Seb. Why 'twere too great a burden love, to have them carry things in their
minds, and a'ther backs together.


Mol. Pardon me sir, I thought not you so near.

Alex. So, so, so.

Seb. I would be nearer to thee, and in that fashion,
That makes the best part of all creatures honest.
No otherwise I wish it.

Mol. Sir I am so poor to requite you, you must look for nothing but thanks
of me, I have no humor to marry, I love to lie aboth sides ath bed my self;
and again ath' other side, a wife you know ought to be obedient, but I fear
me I am too headstrong to obey, therefore I Will nere go about it, I love you so
well sir for your good will I Would be loath you should repent your bargain
after, and therefore we will nere come together at first, I have the head now of
my self, and am man enough for a woman, marriage is but a chopping and
changing, where a maiden looses one head, and has a worse ith place.


Alex. The most comfortablest answer from a Roaring Girl, that ever mine ears
drunk in.


Seb. This were enough now to affright a fool for ever from thee, when it is the
music that I love thee for,


Alex. There Is a boy spoils all again.

Mol. Believe it sir I am not of that disdainefull temper, but
I could love you faithfully.

Alex. A pox on you for that word. I like you not now,
You Are a cunning roarer I see that already.

Mol. But sleep upon this once more sir, you may chance shift a mind to
morrow, be not too hasty to wrong your self, never while you live sir take a
wife running, many have run out at heels that have don't: you see sir I speak
against my self, and if every woman would deal with their suter so honestly,
poor younger brothers would not be so often gul'd with old cosoning widows,
that turn ore all their wealth in trust to some kinsman, and make the poor
Gentleman work hard for a pension, fare you well sir.


Seb. Nay prithee one word more.

Alex. How do I wrong this girl, she puts him of still.

Moll. Think upon this in cold blood sir, you make as much have as if you were
a going upon a sturgion voyage, take deliberation sir, never choose a wife as if
you were going to Virginia.


Seb. And so we parted, my too cursed fate.

Alex. She is but cunning, gives him longer time in it.
Enter a Tailor:
Tailor Mistress Mol, Mistress Mol: so ho ho so ho.

Mol. There boy, there boy, what do thou go a hawking after me with a red
clout on thy finger.


Tailor I forgot to take measure on you for your new breeches.


Alex. Hoyda breeches, what will he marry a monster with two trinckets, what
age is this? if the wife go in breeches, the man must wear long coats like a
fool.


Mol. What fidlings here, would not the old pattern have served your turn.


Tailor. You change the fashion, you say you will have the great Dutch slop
Mistress Mary.


Mol. Why sir I say so still.

Tailor. Your breeches then will take up a yard more.

Mol. Well pray look it be put in then.

Tailor. It shall stand round and full I warrant you,

Mol. Pray make em easy enough.

Tailor. I know my fault now, the other was somewhat stiff between the legs,
I Will make these open enough I warrant you.


Alex. Here Is good geere toward, I have brought up my son to marry a Dutch
slop,. and a French dublet, a codpice daughter.


Tailor. So, I have gone as far as I can go.

Mol. Why then farewell.

Tailor. If you go presently to your chamber Mistress Mary, pray send me the
measure of your thigh, by some honest body.


Mol. Well sir, I Will send it by a Porter persently.
Exit Mol.
Tailor. So you had need, it is a lusty one, both of them would make any
porters back ache in England.

Exit Tailor.
Seb. I have examined the best part of man,
Reason and judgment, and in love they tell me,
They leave me uncontrolled, he that is swayd
By an unfeeling blood, past heat of love
His spring time must needs err, his watch nere goes right
That sets his dyall by a rusty clock,

Alex. So, and which is that rusty clock sir you.

Seb. The clock at Ludgate sir, it nere goes true.

Alex. But thou go falser: not thy fathers cares
Can keep thee right, when that insensible work,
Obayes the workemans art, lets off the hour
And stops again when time is satisfied,
But thou runst on, and judgment, thy maine wheel,
Beats by all stoppes, as if the work would break
Begun with long pains for a minutes ruin,
Much like a suffering man brought up with care.
At last bequeathed to shame and a short prayer,

Seb. I taste you bitterer then I can deserve sir.

Alex. Who has bewitch thee son, what devil or drug,
Has wrought upon the weakness of thy blood,
And betrayed all her hopes to ruinous folly?
Oh wake from drowsy and enchanted shame,
Wherein thy soul sits with a golden dream
Flatred and poisoned, I am old my son, (mine own
Oh let me prevail quickly, for I have waightier business of
Then to chide thee: I must not to my grave,
As a drunkard to his bed, whereon he lies
Only to sleep, and never cares to rise,
Let me dispatch in time, come no more near her.

Seb. Not honestly, not in the way of marriage,

Alex. What say thou marriage, in what place, the Sessions house, and who
shall give the bride, prithee, an indictment.


Seb. Sir now ye take part with the world to wrong her.

Alex. Why, would thou feign marry to be pointed at,
Alas the numbers great, do not over burden't,
Why as good marry a beacon on a hill,
Which all the country fix their eyes upon
As her thy folly doates on. If thou longst
To have the story of thy infamous fortunes,
Serve for discourse in ordinaries and tauernes
Thou Art in the way: or to confound thy name,
Keep on, thou can not miss it: or to strike
Thy wretched father to untimely coldness,
Keep the left hand still, it will bring thee to it.
Yet if no tears wrung from thy fathers eyes,
Nor sighs that fly in sparkles, from his sorrows,
Had power to alter what is wilful in thee,
Me thinks her very name should fright thee from her,
And never trouble me.

Seb. Why is the name of Mol so fatal sir.

Alex. Many one sir, where suspect is entered,
For seek all London from one end to the other,
More whoores of that name, then of any ten other.

Seb. What Is that to her? let those blush for themselves.
Can any guilt in others condemn her?
I Have vowed to love her: let all storms oppose me,
That ever beat against the breast of man,
Nothing but deaths black tempest shall divide us.

Alex. Oh folly that can dote on naught but shame.

Seb. Put case a wanton itch runs through one name
More then another, is that name the worse,
Where honesty sits possessed in it? it should rather
Appear more excellent, and deserve more praise,
When through foul mists a brightness it can raise.
Why there are of the devils, honest Gentlemen,
And well descended, keep an open house,
And some ath (good man's) that are arrant knaves.
He hates unworthily, that by rote contemnes,
For the name neither saues, nor yet condemns,
And for her honesty, I have made such proof an't,
In several forms, so nearly watched her ways,
I will maintain that strict, against an army,
Excepting you my father: here is her worst,
Sh'has a bold spirit that mingles with mankind,
But nothing else comes near it: and oftentimes
Through her apparel somewhat shames her birth,
But she is loose in nothing but in mirth,
Would all Mols were no worse.

Alex. This way I toil in vain and give but aim
To infamy and ruin: he will fall,
My blessing cannot stay him: all my joys
Stand at the brinke of a devouring flood
And will be wilfully swallowed: wilfully.
But why so vain, let all these tears be lost,
I Will pursue her to shame, and so all is crossed.
Exit Sir Alexander
Seb. He is gone with some strange purpose, whose effect
Will hurt me little if he shoot so wide,
To think I love so blindly: I but feed
His heart to this match, to draw on the other.
Wherein my joy sits with a full wish crowned;
Only his mood excepted which must change.
By opposite policies, courses indirect,
Plain dealing in this world takes no effect.
This mad girl I Will acquaint with my intent,
Get her assistance, make my fortunes known,
Twixt lovers hearts, she is a fit instrument,
And has the art to help them to their own,
By her advise, for in that craft she is wise,
My love and I may meet, spite of all spies.
Exit Sebastian. Enter Laxton in Graies-Inne fields with the Coachman.
Lax. Coachman.

Coach. Here sir.

Lax. There Is a tester more, prithee drive thy coach to the hither end of
Marybone park, a fit place for Mol to get in.


Coach. Marybone park fir.

Lax. I, its in our way thou know.

Coach. It shall be done fir.

Lax. Coachman.

Coach. A non sir.

Lax. Are we fitted with good phrampell iades.

Coach. The best in Smithfield I warrant your sir.

Lax. May we safely take the upper hand of any coacht velvet cappe or
tuftaffety iacket, for they keep a vilde swaggering in coaches now a days,
the hye ways are stopped with them.


Coach. My life for yours and baffle em to sir, -- why they are the same iades
believe it sir, that have drawn all your famous whores to Ware.


Lax. Nay then they know their business, they need no more instructions.


Coach. The're so vsd to such iourneis sir, I never use whip to em; for if they
catch but the sent of a wench once, they run like devils.

Exit Coachman with his whip.
Lax. Fine Cerberus, that rogue will have the start of a thousand ones, for
whilst others trot a foot, heel ride prauncing to hell upon a coach-horse.

Stay, it is now about the hourse of her appointment, but yet I see her not,
hark what is this, one, two three, three by the clock The clock striks three.
at Sauoy, this is the hour, and Graies-Inne fields the place, she swore
she'ed meet me: ha yonder is two Innes a Courtmen with one wench, but that's not
she, they walk toward Islington out of my way, I see none yet dressed like her,
I must look for a shag ruff, a freeze ierken, a shortsword, and a safeguard,
or I get none: why Mol prithee make have, or the Coachman will curse us anon.

Enter Mol like a man.
Mol. Oh heeres my Gentleman: if they would keep their days as well with
their Mercers as their hours with their harlots, no bankrout would give seven
score pound for a seriants place, for would you know a catchpoole rightly
deririu'd, the corruption of a Citizen, is the generation of a seriant, how
his eye hawks for venery. Come are you ready sir.


Lax. Ready, for what sir.

Mol. Do you ask that now sir, why was this meeting pointed.


Lax. I thought you mistook me sir,
You seem to be some young barrister,
I have no suite in law -- all my land's sold
I praise heaven for it; t'has rid me of much trouble,

Mol. Then I must wake you sir, where stands the coach,

Lax. Whose this, Mol: honest Mol.

Mol. So young, and purblind, your an old wanton in your eyes I see that.


Lax. Thou Art admirably suited for the three pigions at Brainford, I Will swear I
knew thee not.


Mol. I Will swear you did not: but you shall know me now.

Lax. No not here, we shall be spyde efaith, the coach is better, come.


Mol. Stay.

Lax. What will thou untruss a point Mol.
She puts of her cloak and draws.
Mol. Yes, here is the point that I untruss, 'thas but one tag, 'twill serve
tho to tie up a rogues tongue.


Lax. How. (here is her pace,

Mol. There Is the gold with which you hired your hackney,
She rackes hard, and perhaps your bones will feel it,
Ten angels of mine own, I Have put to thine, win em, and wear em,

Lax. Hold Moll, Mistress Mary.

Mol. Draw or I Will serve an execution on thee
Shall lay thee up till doomes day.

Lax. Draw upon a woman, why what do mean Mol?

Mol. To teach thy base thoughts manners: thou art one of those
That thinks each woman thy fond flexable whore,
If she but cast a liberal eye upon thee,
Turn back her head, she is thine, or amongst company,
By chance drink first to thee: then she is quite gone,
There Is no means to help her: nay for a need,
Wilt swear unto thy credulous fellow letchers.
That thou art more in favor with a Lady at first sight
Then her monky all her life time,
How many of our sex, by such as thou
Have their good thoughts paid with a blasted name
That never deserved loosly or did trip
In path of whooredome, beyond cup and lip.
But for the stain of conscience and of soul,
Better had women fall into the hands
Of an act silent, then a bragging nothing,
There Is no mercy in it -- what durst move you sir,
To think me whoorish? a name which I Would tear out
From the hye Germans throat, if it lay ledger there
To dispatch privy slanders against me.
In thee I defye all men, there worst hates,
And their best flatteries, all their golden witchcrafts,
With which they entangle the poor spirits of fools,
Distressed needlewomen and trade-fallne wives.
Fish that must needs bite, or themselves be bitten,
Such hungry things as these may soon be took
With a worm fastened on a golden hook.
Those are the letchers food, his prey, he watches
For quarrelling wedlockes, and poor shifting sisters,
It Is the best fish he takes: but why good fisherman,
Am I thought meat for you, that never yet
Had angling rod cast toward me? cause youl'e say
I Am given to sport, I Am often merry, jest,
Had mirth no kindred in the world but lust?
O shame take all her friends then: but how ere
Thou and the baser world censure my life,
I Will send 'em word by thee, and write so much
Upon thy breast, cause thou shall bear't in mind,
Tell them 'twere base to yield, where I have conquered.
I scorn to prostitute my self to a man,
I that can prostitue a man to me,
And so I greet thee.

Lax. Hear me.

Mol. Would the spirits of al my slanders, were claspt in thine.
That I might vex an army at one time,

Lax. I do repent me, hold,
They fight.
Mol. You Will die the better Christian then.

Lax. I do confess I have wronged thee Mol.

Mol. Confession is but poor amends for wrong,
Unless a rope would follow.

Lax. I ask thee pardon.

Mol. I Am your hired whore fir.

Lax. I yield both purse and body.

Mol. Both are mine, and now at my disposing.

Lax. Spare my life.

Mol. I scorn to strike thee basely.

Lax. Spoke like a noble girl in faith.
Heart I think I fight with a familiar, or the Ghost of a fencer, Sh'has
wounded me gallantly, call you this a letcherous viage? Here Is blood would have
served me this seven year in broken heads and cut fingers, and it now runs all
out together, pox athe three pigions, I would the coach were here now to carry
me to the Chirurgions.

Exit Laxton.
Mol. If I could meet my enemies one by one thus,
I might make pretty shift with 'em in time,
And make 'em know, she that has wit, and spirit,
May scorn to live beholding to her body for meat,
Or for apparel like your common dame,
That makes shame get her clothes, to cover shame.
Base is that mind, that kneels unto her body,
As if a husband stood in awe on's wife,
My spirit shall be Mistress of this house,
As long as I have time in it. -- -- oh
Enter Trapdore. Here comes my man that would be: it is his hour.
Faith a good well set fellow, if his spirit
Be answerable to his vmbles; he walks stiff,
But whether he will stand to it stiffly, there is the point;
Has a good calfe for it, and ye shall have many a woman
Choose him she means to meke her head, by his calfe;
I do not know their tricks in it, faith he seems
A man without; I Will try what he is within,

Trap. She told me Gr^ies-Inne fields twixt three and four,
I Will fit her Mistreship with a piece of service,
I Am hired to rid the town of one mad girl.
She iustles him What a pox ailes you sir?

Mol. He begins like a Gentleman,

Trap. Heart, is the field so narrow, or your eyesight:
Life he comes back again.
She comes toward him.
Mol. Was this spoke to me sir.

Trap. I cannot tell sir.

Mol. Go you are a coxcombe.

Trap. Coxcombe.

Mol. You Are a slave.

Trap. I hope there is law for you sir.

Mol. Ye, do you see sir.
Turn his hat.
Trap. Heart this is no good dealing, pray let me know what house your off.


Mol. One of the Temple sir.
Philips him.
Trap. Mass so me thinks.

Mol. And yet sometime I lie about chicke lane.

Trap. I like you the worse because you shift your lodging*
I Will not meddle with you for that trick sir. (so often

Mol. A good shift, but it shall not serve your turn.

Trap. You Will give me leave to pass about my business sir.

Mol. Your business, I Will make you wait on me before I ha done, and glad to
serve me too.


Trap. How sir, serve you, not if there were no more men in England.


Moll. But if there were no more women in England
I hope you would wait upon your Mistress then,

Trap. Mistress.

Mol. Oh your a tried spirit at a push sir,

Trap. What would your Worship have me do.

Mol. You a fighter.

Trap. No, I praise heaven, I had better grace and more manners.

Mol. As how I pray sir.

Trap. Life, 'thad been a beastly part of me to have drawn my weapons upon my
Mistress, all the world would a cried shame of me for that.


Mol. Why but you knew me not.

Trap. Do not say so Mistress, I knew you by your wide straddle, as well as if
I had been in your belly.


Mol. Well, we shall try you further, ith mean time we give you
intertainement.


Trap. Thank your good Mistreship.

Mol. How many suites have you.

Trap. No more suites then backs Mistress.

Mol. Well if you deserve, I cast of this, next week,
And you may creep into it.

Trap. Thank your good Worship.

Mol. Come follow me to S. Thomas Apostles,
I Will put a livery cloak upon your back, the first thing I do,

Trap. I follow my dear Mistress.
Exeunt omnes Enter Mistress Gallipot as from supper, her husband after her.
May. Gal. What Pru, Nay sweet Prudence.

Mist. Gal. What a pruing keep you, I think the baby would have a teate it
kyes so, pray be not so fond of me, leave your City humors, I Am vexed at you
to see how like a calfe you come bleating after me.


May. Gal. Nay honey Pru: how does your rising up before all the table show?
and flinging from my friends so vnciuily, fiye Pru, fie, come.


Mist. Gal. Then up and ride in faith.

May. Gal. Up and ride, nay my pretty Pru, that's far from my thought,
ducke: why mouse, thy mind is nibbling at something, what is is it, what lies upon
thy Stomach?


Mist. Gal. Such an ass as you: hoyda, you are best turn midwife, or Physician:
you are a Poticary already, but I Am none of your drugs.


May. Gal. Thou art a sweet drug, sweetest Pru, and the more thou art
pounded, the more precious.


Mist. Gal. Must you be prying into a woman's secrets: say ye?

May. Gal. Woman's secrets.

Mist. Gal. What? I cannot have a qualme come upon me but your teeth waters,
till your nose hang over it.


May. Gal. It is my love dear wife.

Mist. Gal. Your love? your love is all words; give me deeds, I cannot abide a
man that's too fond ouerme, so cookish; thou do not know how to handle a woman
in her kind,


May. Gal. No Pru? why I hope I have handled. --

Mist. Gal. Handle a fools head of your own, -- fih -- fih.

May. Gal. Ha, ha, it is such a waspe; it does me good now to have her sing
me, little rogue.


Mist. Gal. Now fie how you vex me, I cannot abide these aperne husbands: such
cotqueanes, you ouerdoe your things, they become you scuruily.


May. Gal. Upon my life she breeds, heaven knows how I have straind my self
to please her, night and day: I wonder why we Citizens should get children so
fretfull and untoward in the breeding, their fathers being for the most part as
gentle as milch kine: shall I leave thee my Pru.


Mist. Gal. Fie, fie, fie.

May. Gal. Thou shall not be vexed no more, pretty kind rogue, take no cold
sweet Pru.

Exit May. Gallipot.
Mist. Gal. As your wit has done: now Master Laxton show your head, what news
from you? would any husband suspect that a woman crying, Buy any scurui-grasse,
should bring love letters amongst her herbs to his wife, pretty trick, fine
conueyance? had iealousy a thousand eyes, a silly woman with scuruy-grasse
blinds them all; Laxton with bays crown I thy wit for this, it deserves praise.

This makes me affect thee more, this proves thee wise,
Lack what poor shift is love forced to devise? (toth' point)
She reads the letter. O Sweet Creature -- (a sweet beginning) pardon my long
absence, for thou shall shortly be possessed with my presence; though Demophon
was false to Phillis, I will be to thee as Pan-da-rus was to Cres-sida: tho
Eneus made an ass of Dido, I will dye to thee ere I do so; o sweetest creature
make much of me, for no man beneath the silver moon shall make more of a woman
then I do of thee, furnish me therefore with thirty pounds, you must do it of
necessity for me; I languish till I see some comfort come from thee, protesting
not to dye in thy debt, but rather to live so, as hitherto I have and will. Thy
true Laxton ever. Alas poor Gentleman, troth I pity him,
How shall I raise this money? thirty pound?
It Is thirty sure, a 3 before an 0,
I know his threes too well; my childbed linen?
Shall I pawn that for him? then if my mark
Be known I am undone; it may be thought
My husband's bankrout: which way shall I turn?
Laxton, what with my own fears, and thy wants,
I Am (...) needle twixt two adamants.
Enter Master Gallipot hastily.
May. Gal. Nay, nay, wife, the women are all up, ha, how, reading a letters?
I smell a goose, a couple of capons, and a gammon of bacon from her mother out
of the country, I hold my life, -- steal, -- steal.


Mist. Gal. O beshrow your heart.

May. Gal. What letter's that? I Will see it.
She tears the letter.
Mist. Gal. Oh would thou had no eyes to see the downfall of me and thy
self: I Am for ever, for ever I Am undone.


May. Gal. What ailes my Pru? what paper's that thou tear'st?

Mist. Gal. Would I could tear
My very heart in pieces: for my soul
Lies on the rack of shame, that tortures me
Beyond a woman's suffering.

May. Gall: What means this?

Mist. Gall. Had you no other vengeance to throw down,
But even in height of all my joys?

May. Gal. Dear woman.

Mist. Gal. When the full sea of pleasure and content seemed to flow over me.


May. Gal. As thou desire to keep me out of bedlam, tell what troubles
thee, is not thy child at nurse fallen sick, or dead?


Mist. Gal. Oh no.

May. Gal. Heavens bless me, are my barnes and houses
Yonder at Hockly hole consumed with fire,
I can build more, sweet Pru.

Mist. Gal. It Is worse, it is worse.

May. Gal. My factor broke, or is the Jonas suncke.

Mist. Gal. Would all we had were swallowed in the waves,
Rather then both should be the scorn of slaves.

May. Gal. I Am at my wits end.

Mist. Gal. Oh my dear husband,
Where once I thought my self a fixed star,
Placed only in the heaven of thine arms,
I fear now I shall prove a wanderer,
Oh Laxton, Laxton, is it then my fate
To be by thee orethrowne?

May. Gal. Defend me wisdom,
From falling into frenzy, on my knees. (thy bosom.
Sweet Pru, speak, what is that Laxton who so heavy lies on

Mist. Gal. I shall sure run mad.

May. Gal. I shall run mad for company then: speak to me,
I Am Gallipot thy husband, -- Pru, -- why Pru.
Art sick in conscience for some villainous deed
Thou were about to act, did mean to rob me,
Tush I forgive thee, have thou on my bed
Thrust my soft pillow under another head?
I Will wink at all faults Pru, las that's no more,
Then what some neighbors near thee, have done before,
Sweet honey Pru, what is that Laxton?

Mist. Gall. Oh.

May. Gal. Out with him.

Mist. Gall. Oh he is borne to be my vndoer,
This hand which thou calst thine, to him was given,
To him was I made sure ith sight of heaven.

May. Gal. I never heard this thunder.

Mist. Gall. Yes, yes, before
I was to thee contracted, to him I swore,
Since last I saw him twelve months three times told,
The Moon has drawn through her light silver bow,
For ore the seas he went, and it was said,
(But Rumor lies) that he in France was dead.
But he is alive, oh he is alive, he sent,
That letter to me, which in rage I rent,
Swearing with oaths most damnably to have me,
Or tear me from this bosom, oh heavens save me,

May. Gal. My heart will break, -- shamed and undone for ever.


Mist. Gal. So black a day (poor wretch) went ore thee never.

May. Gal. If thou should wrestle with him at the law,
Thou Art sure to fall, no odd slight, no prevention.
I Will tell him thou art with child.

Mist. Gal. Vmh.

May. Gall. Or give out one of my men was taken a bed with thee.


Mist. Gal. Vmh, vmh.

May. Gal. Before I loose thee my dear Pru;
I Will drive it to that push.

Mist. Gal. Worse, and worse still,
You embrace a mischief, to prevent an ill.

May. Gal. I Will buy thee of him, stop his mouth with Gold,
Think thou twill do.

Mist. Gall. Oh me, heavens grant it would,
Yet now my senses are set more in tune,
He writ, as I remember in his letter,
That he in riding up and down had spent,
(Ere he could find me) thirty pounds, send that,
Stand not on thirty with him.

May. Gal. Forty Pru, say thou the word it is done, we venture lives for
wealth, but must do more to keep our wives, thirty or forty Pru.


Mist. Gal. Thirty good sweet
Of an ill bargain lets save what we can,
I Will pay it him with my tears, he was a man
When first I knew him of a meek spirit,
All goodness is not yet dryd up I hope.

May. Gall. He shall have thirty pound, let that stop all:
Loves sweets taste best, when we have drunk down Gall.
Enter Master Tiltyard, and his wife, Master Goshawke, and Mistress
Openworke. Gods so, our friends; come, come, smoth your cheek;
After a storm the face of heaven looks sleeke.

May. Tilt. Did I not tell you these turtles were together?

Mist. Tilt. How do thou sir? why sister Gallipot?

Mist. Open. Lord how she is changed?

Gosh. Is your wife ill sir?

May. Gal. Yes indeed la sir, very ill, very ill, never worse,

Mist. Tilt. How her head burns, feel how her pulses work.

Mist. Open. Sister lie down a little, that always does me good.


Mist. Tilt. In good sadness I find best ease in that too,
Has she laid some hot thing to her Stomach?

Mist. Gal. No, but I will lay something anon.

May. Tilt. Come, come fools, you trouble her, shal's go Master Goshawke?


Gosh. Yes sweet Master Tiltyard; sir Rosamond I hold my life Gallipot has
vexed his wife.


Mist. Open. She has a horrible high color indeed.

Gosh. We shall have your face painted with the same red soon at night, when
your husband comes from his rubbers in a false alley; thou will not believe me
that his bowls run with a wrong byas.


Mist. Open. It cannot sink into me, that he feeds upon stale mutten
abroad, having better and fresher at home.


Gosh. What if I bring thee, where thou shall see him stand at rack and manger?


Mist. Open. I Will saddle him in's kind, and spur him till he kick again.


Gosh. Shall thou and I ride our journey then.

Mist. Open. Here Is my hand.

Gosh. No more; come Master Tiltyard, shall we leap into the stirrops with
our women, and amble home?


May. Tilt. Yes, yes, come wife.

Mist. Tilt. In Troth sister, I hope you will do well for all this.

Mist. Gal. I hope I shall: farewell good sister: sweet Master Goshawke.


May. Gal. Welcome brother, most kindly welcome sir.

Omnes Thanks sir for our good cheer.
Exeunt all but Gallipot and his wife.
May. Gal. It shall be so, because a crafty knave
Shall not out reach me, nor walk by my door
With my wife arm in arm, as 'twere his whore,
I Will give him a golden coxcombe, thirty pound:
Tush Pru what is thirty pound? sweet ducke look cheerely.

Mist. Gal. Thou art worthy of my heart thou bui'st it dearly.
Enter Laxton muffled.
Lax. Vds light the tide's against me, a pox of your Potticarishp: oh for some
glister to set him going; it is one of Hercules labors, to tread one of these
City hens, because their cocks are still crowing over them; there is no
turning tale here, I must on.


Mist. Gal. Oh, husband see he comes.

May. Gal. Let me deal with him.

Lax. Bless you sir.

May. Gal. Be you blessed too sir if you come in peace.

Lax. Have you any good pudding Tobacco sir?

Mist. Gal. Oh pick no quarrels gentle sir, my husband
Is not a man of weapon, as you are,
He knows all, I have opned all before him, concerning you.

Lax. Zounes has she shown my letters.

Mist Gal. Suppose my case were yours, what would you do.
At such a pinch, such batteries, such assaults*
O^ father, mother, kindred, to dissolve
The knot you tied, and to be bound to him?
How could you shift this storm off?

Lax. If I know hang me.

Mist. Gal. Besides a story of your death was read
Each minute to me.

Lax. What a pox means this ridling?

May. Gal. Be wise sir, let not you and I be tossed
On Lawiers pens; they have sharp nibs and draw
Men's very heart blood from them; what need you sir
To beat the drum of my wifes infamy,
And call your friends together sir to prove
Your precontact, when sh'has confessed it?

Lax. Vmh sir, -- has she confessed it?

May. Gal. Sh'has 'faith to me sir, upon your letter sending.

M. is it. Gal. I have, I have.

Lax. If I let this iron cool call me slave,
Do you hear, you dame Prudence? think thou vile woman
I Will take these blows and wink?

Mist. Gal. Upon my knees.

Lax. Out impudence.

May. Gal. Good sir.

Lax. You goatish slaves,
No wild foul to cut up but mine?

May. Gal. Alas sir,
You make her flesh to tremble, frighr her not,
She shall do reason, and what is fit.

Lax. I Will have thee, were thou more common
Then an hospital, and more diseased. --

May. Gal. But one word good sir.

Lax. So sir.

May. Gal. I married her, have line with her, and goy
Two children on her body, think but on that;
Have you so beggarly an appetite
When I upon a dainty dish have fed
To dine upon my scraps, my leauings? ha sir?
Do I come near you uow sir?

Lax. Be Lady you touch me.

May. Gal. Would not you scorn to wear my clothes sir?

Lax. Right sir.

May. Gal. Then pray sir wear not her, for she is a garment
So fitting for my body, I Am loath
Another should put it on, you will undo both.
Your letter (as she said) complained you had spent
In quest of her, some thirty pound, I Will pay it;
Shall that sir stop this gap up twixt you two?

Lax. Well if I swallow this wrong, let her thank you:
The money being paid sir, I am gone:
Farewell, oh women happy's he trusts none.

Mist. Gall. Dispatch him hence sweet husband.

May. Gal. Yes dear wife: pray sir come in, ere Master
Thou shall in wine drink to him,
Exit Master Gallipot and his wife. (Laxton part
Mist. Gal. With all my heart; -- how do thou like my wit?

Lax. Rarely, that wile
By which the Serpent did the first woman beguile,
Did ever since, all women's bosoms fill;
You Are apple eaters all, deceivers still.
Exit Laxton. Enter Sir Alexander Wengraue: Sir Dauy Dapper, Sir Adam Appleton,
at one door, and Trapdore at another door.
Alex. Out with your tale Sir Dauy, to Sir Adam.
A Knave is in mine eye deep in my debt.

Sir Da. Nay: if he be a knave sir, hold him fast.

Alex. Speak softly, what egg is there hatching now.

Trap. A Ducks egg sir, a ducke that has eaten a frog, I have cracked the
shell, and some villainy or other will peep out presently; the ducke that sits
is the bouncing Rampe (that Roaring Girl my Mistress) the drake that must
tread is your son Sebastian.


Alex. Be quick.

Trap. As the tongue of an oister wench.

Alex. And see thy news be true.

Trap. As a barbars every satterday night -- mad Mol.

Alex. Ah.

Trap. Must be let in without knocking at your back gate.

Alex. So.

Trap. Your chamber will be made baudy.

Alex. Good.

Trap. She comes in a shirt of male.

Alex. How shirt of male?

Trap. Yes sir or a male shirt, that is to say in man's apparel.

Alex. To my son.

Trap. Close to your son: your son and her Moon will be in conjunction, if
all Alminacks lie not, her black saueguard is turned into a deep sloppe, the
holes of her upper body to button holes, her wastcoate to a dublet, her placket
to the ancient seat of a codpice, and you shall take 'em both with standing
collers.


Alex. Art sure of this?

Trap. As every throng is sure of a pick-pocket, as sure as a whore is of the
clyents all Michaelmas Term, and of the pox after the Term.


Alex. The time of their tilting?

Trap. Three.

Alex. The day?

Trap. This.

Alex. Away ply it, watch her.

Trap. As the devil does for the death of a baud, I Will watch her, do you catch
her.


Alex. She Is fast: here weaue thou the nets; hark,

Trap. They are made. (maintain't.

Alex. I told them thou did owe me money; hold it up:

Trap. Stiffly; as a Puritan does contention,
Fox I owe thee not the value of a halfepenny halter.

Alex. Thou shall be hanged in it ere thou escape so.
Varlet I Will make thee look through a grate.

Trap. I Will do'tpresently, through a Tavern grate, drawer: pish.

Exit Trapdore
Adam. Has the knave vexed you sir?

Alex. Asked him my money,
He swears my son received it: oh that boy
Will nere leave heaping sorrows on my heart,
Till he has broke it quite.

Adam. Is he still wild?

Alex. As is a russian Bear.

Adam. But he has left
His old haunt with that baggage.

Alex. Worse still and worse,
He lays on me his shame, I on him my curse.

S. Dauy. My son Jack Dapper then shall run with him,
All in one pasture.

Adam. Proves your son bad too sir?

S. Dauy. As villainy can make him: your Sebastian
Doares but on one drabb, mine on a thousand,
A noise of fiddlers, Tobacco, wine and a whore,
A Mercer that will let him take up more,
Dyce, and a water spaniell with a Ducke: oh,
Bring him a bed with these, when his purse gingles,
Roaring boys follow at's tale, fencers and ningles,
(Beasts Adam nere gave name to) these horse-leeches suck
My son, he being drawn dry, they all live on smoke.

Alex. Tobacco?

S. Dauy Right, but I have in my brain
A windmill going that shall grind to dust
The follies of my son, and make him wise,
Or a stark fool; pray lend me your advise.

Both. That shall you good sir Dauy.

S. Dauy. Here Is the sprindge
Iha set to catch this woodcocke in: an action
In a false name (unknown to him) is entered.
In The Counter to arrest Jack Dapper.

Both. Ha, ha, he.

S. Dauy. Think you the Counter cannot break him?

Adam. Break him?
Yes and bre^ake's heart too if he lie there long.

S. Dauy. I Will make him sing a Counter tenor sure.

Adam. No way to tame him like it, there he shall learn
What money is indeed, and how to spend it.

S. Dauy. He Is bridled there.

Alex. I, yet knows not how to mend it,
Bedlam cures not more madmen in a year,
Then one of the Counters does, men pay more dear
There for there wit then any where; a Counter
Why it is an university, who not sees?
As scholars there, so here men take degrees,
And follow the same studies (all alike.)
Scholars learn first Logic and Rhetoric.
So does a prisoner; with fine honied speech
At's first coming in he does persuade, beseech,
He may be lodged with one that is not itchy;
To lie in a clean chamber, in sheets not lowsy,
But when he has no money, then does he try,
By subtle Logic, and quaint sophistry,
To make the keepers trust him.

Adam. Say they do.

Alex. Then he is a graduate.

S. Dauy. Say they trust him not,

Alex. Then is he held a freshman and a sot,
And never shall commence, but being still barred
Be expulst from the Masters side, toth' twopenny ward,
Or else in the hole, beg placed.

Adam. When then I pray proceeds a prisoner.

Alex. When money being the theme,
He can dispute with his hard creditors hearts,
And get out clear, he is then a Master of Arts;
Sir Dauy send your son to Woodstreet College,
A Gentleman can no where get more knowledge.

S. Dauy. There Gallants study hard.

Alex. True: to get money.

S. Dauy. 'lies bith' heels in faith, thanks, thanks, I ha sent
For a couple of bears shall paw him.
Enter Seriant Curtilax and Yeoman Hanger.
Adam. Who comes yonder?

S. Dauy. They look like puttocks, these should be they.

Alex. I know 'em, they are officers, sir we will leave you.

S. Dauy. My good knights.
Leave me, you see I Am haunted now with spirits.

Both. Fare you well sir.
Exeunt Alex. and Adam,
Curt. This old muzzle chops should be he
By the fellows description: Save you sir.

S. Dauy. Come hither you mad varlets, did not my man tell you I watched here
for you.


Curt. One in a blew coat sir told us, that in this place an old Gentleman
would watchforvs, a thing contrary to our oath, for we are to watch for every
wicked member in a City.


S. Dauy. You Will watch then fot ten thousand, what is thy name honesty?


Curt. Seriant Curtilax I sir.

S. Dauy. An excellent name for a Seriant, Curtilax.
Seriants indeed are weapons of the law,
When prodigal ruffians far in debt are grown,
Should not you cut them; Citizens were orethrowne,
Thou dwel'st hereby in Holborne Curtilax.

Curt. That Is my circuit sir, I conjure most in that circle.

S. Dauy. And what young toward welp is this?

Hang. Of the same litter, his yeoman sir, my name's Hanger.

S. Dauy. Yeoman Hanger.
One pair of sheeres sure cut out both your coats,
You have two names most dangerous to men's throats,
You two are villainous loades on Gentlemen's backs,
Dear ware, this Hanger and this Curtilax.

Curt. We are as other men are sir, I cannot see but he who makes a show of
honesty and religion, if his claws can fasten to his liking, he draws blood;
all that live in the world, are but great fish and little fish, and feed upon
one another, some eat up whole men, a Seriant cares but for the shoulder of a
man, they call us knaves and curres, but many times he that sets us on,
worries more lambs one year, then we do in seven.


S. Dauy. Spoke like a noble Cerberus, is the action entered?

Hang. His name is entered in the book of unbelievers.

S. Dauy. What booke's that?

Curt. The book where all prisoners names stand, and not one amongst forty,
when he comes in, believes to come out in have.


S. Da. Be as dogged to him as your office allows you to be.

Both. Oh sir.

S. Dauy. You know the unthrift Jack Dapper.

Curt. I, I, sir, that Gull? as well as I know my yeoman.

S. Dauy. And you know his father too, Sir Dauy Dapper?

Curt. As damned a usurer as ever was among Jews; if he were sure his fathers
skin would yield him any money, he would when he dies flea it off, and sell
it to cover drums for children at Bartholmew fair.


S. Dauy. What toades are these to spit poison on a man to his face? do you
see (my honest rascals?) yonder gray-hound is the dog he hunts with, out of
that Tavern Jack Dapper will sally sa, sa; give the counter, on, set upon him.


Both. We Will charge him vppo'th back sir.

S. Dauy. Take no bail, put mace enough into his caudle, double your files,
trauerse your ground.


Both. Brave sir.

S. Dauy: Cry arm, arm, arm.

Both. Thus sir.

S. Dauy. There boy, there boy, away: look to your prey my true English
wolves, and and so I vanish.

Exit S. Dauy
Curt. Some warden of the Seriants begat this old fellow upon my life, stand
close.


Hang. Shall the ambuscado lie in one place?

Curt. No uooke thou yonder.
Enter Mol and Trapdore.
Mol. Ralph.

Trap. What says my brave Captain male and female?

Mol. This Holborne is such a wrangling street,

Trap. That s because Lawiers walks to and fro in it.

Mol. Here Is such iustling, as if every one we met were drunk and reeled.


Trap. Stand Mistress do you not smell carrion?

Mol. Carryon? no, yet I spy ravens.

Trap. Some poor winde-shaken gallant will anon fall into sore labor, and
these men-midwiues must bring him to bed in the counter, there all those that
are great with child with debts, lie in.


Mol. Stand up.

Trap. Like your new maypoll.

Hang. Whist, whew.

Curt. Hump, no.

Mol. Peeping? it shall go hard huntsmen, but I Will spoil your game, they look
for all the world like two infected maltmen coming muffled up in their cloakes
in a frosty morning to London.


Trap. A course, Captain; a bear comes to the stake.
Enter Jack Dapper and Gul.
Mol. It should be so, for the dogs struggle to be let loose.


Hang. Whew.

Curt. Hemp.

Moll. Hark Trapdore, follow your leader.

Jack Dap. Gul.

Gul. Master.

Jack Dap. Did ever see such an ass as I am boy?

Gul. No by my troth sir, to loose all your money, yet have false dice of your
own, why it is as I saw a great fellow used the other day, he had a fair sword
and buckler, and yet a butcher dry beat him with a cudgel.


Both. Honest Serieant fly, fly Master Dapper you will be arrested else.


Jack Dap. Run Gul and draw.

Gul. Run Master, Gull follows you.
Exit Dapper and Gull.
Curt. I know you well enough, you are but a whore to hang upon any man.


Mol. Whores then are like Seri^ants, so now hang you, draw rogue, but strike
not: for a broken pate they will keep their b^ds, and recover twenty marks
damages.


Curt. You shall pay for this rescue, run down shoelane and meet him.


Trap. Shu, is this a rescue Gentlemen or no?

Mol. Rescue? a pox on 'em, Trapdore let us away,
I Am glad I have done perfect one good work to day,
If any Gentleman be in Scriueners bands,
Send but for Mol, she will bail him by these hands.
Exeunt. Enter Sir Alexander Wengraue solus.
Alex. Vnahppy in the follies of a son,
Led against judgment, sense, obedience,
And all the powers of nobleness and wit;
Enter Trapdore Oh wretched father, now Trapdore will she come?

Trap. In man's apparel sir, I am in her heart now,
And share in all her secrets.

Alex. Peace, peace, peace.
Here take my Germane watch, hanged up in sight,
That I may see her hang in English for it.

Trap. I warrant you for that now, next Sessions rids her sir,
This watch will bring her in better then a hundred constables.

Alex. Good Trapdore say thou so, thou cheer'st my heart
After a storm of sorrow, -- my gold chain too,
Here take a hundred marks in yellow linkes.

Trap. That will do well to bring the watch to light sir.
And worth a thousand of your Headborowes lanthornes.

Alex. Place that a'the Court cubbart, let it lie
Full in the veiw of her theefe-whoorish eye.

Trap. She cannot miss it sir, I see it so plain, that I could steal't my
self.


Alex. Perhaps thou shall too,
That or something as weighty; what she leaves,
Thou shall come closely in, and filch away,
And all the weight upon her back I Will lay.

Trap. You cannot assure that sir.

Alex. No, what lets it?

Trap. Being a stout girl, perhaps she will desire pressing,
Then all the weight must ly upon her belly.

Alex. Belly or back I care not so I Have one.

Trap. You Are of my mind for that sir.

Alex. Hang up my ruff band with the diamond at it,
It may be she will like that best.

Trap. It Is well for her, that she must have her choice, he thinks nothing
too good for her, if you hold on this mind a little longer, it shall be the
first work I do to turn thief my self; would do a man good to be hanged
when he is so well provided for.


Alex. So, well said; all haugs well, would she hung so too,
The sight would please me more, then all their gilsterings:
Oh that my mysteries to such streights should run,
That I must rob my self to bless my son.
Exeunt. Enter Sebastian, with Mary Fitz-Allard like a page, and Mol.
Seb. Thou have done me a kind office, without touch
Either of sin or shame, our loves are honest.

Mol. I Would scorn to make such shift to bring you together else*

Seb. Now have I time and opportunity
Without all fear to bid thee welcome love.
Kiss.
Mary. Never with more desire and harder venture.

Mol. How strange this shows one man to kiss another.

Seb. I Would kiss such men to choose Moll,
Me thinks a woman's lip tastes well in a dublet:

Mol. Many an old madam has the better fortune then,
Whose breathes grew stale before the fashion came,
If that will help 'em, as you think 'twill do,
They Will learn in time to pluck on the hose too.

Seb. The older they wax Moll, troth I speak seriously,
As some have a conceit their drink tastes better
In an outlandish cup then in our own,
So me thinks every kiss she gives me now
In this strange form, is worth a pair of two,
Here we are safe, and furthest from the eye
Of all suspicion, this is my fathets chamber,
Upon which floor he never steps till night.
Here he mistrusts me not, nor I his coming,
At mine own chamber he still pries unto me,
My freedom is not there at mine own finding,
Still checked and curbed, here he shall miss his purpose.

Mol. And what is your business now, you have your mind sir;
At your great suite I promisd you to come,
I pitied her for names sake, that a Moll
Should be so crossed in love, when there is so many,
That owes nine lays a piece, and not so little:
My tailor fitted her, how like you his work?

Seb. So well, no Art can mend it, for this purpose,
But to thy wit and help we are chief in debt,
And must live still beholding.

Mol. Any honest pity
I Am willing to bestow upon poor Ring-doues.

Seb. I Will offer no worse play.

Moll. Nay and you should sir,
I should draw first and prove the quicker man,

Seb. Hold, there shall need no weapon at this meeting,
But cause thou shall not loose thy fury idle,
Here take this vial, run upon the guts,
And end thy quarrel singing.

Mol. Like a swan above bridge,
For look you here is the bridge, and here am I.

Seb. Hold on sweet Mol.

Mary. I Have heard her much commended sir, for one that was nere taught.


Mol. I Am much beholding to 'em, well since you will needs put'vs together sir,
I Will play my part as well as I can; it shall nere be said I came into a
Gentleman's chamber, and let his instrument hang by the walls.


Seb. Why well said Mol in faith, it had been a shame for that Gentleman then,
that would have let it hung still, and nere offered thee it.


Mol. There it should have been still then for Mol, for though the world judge
impudently of me, I nere came into that chamber yet, where I took down the
instrument my self.


Seb. Pish let them prate abroad, thou art here where thou art known and loved,
there be a thousand close dames that will call the vial an unmannerly instrument
for a woman, and therefore talk broadly of thee, when you shall have them sit
wider to a worse quality.


Mol. Push, I ever fall a sleep and think not of them sir, and thus I dream.


Seb. Prithee let us hear thy dream Mol.

Mol. I dream there is a Mistress,
And she lays out the money,
The song. She goes unto her Sisters,
She never comes at any.
Enter Sir Alexander behind them She says she went to the Bursse for
patterns, You shall find her at Saint Katherns, And comes home with never a
penny.
Seb. That Is a free Mistresse' faith.

Alex. I, I, I, like her that sings it, one of thine own choosing.

Mol. But shall I dream again?
Here comes a wench will brave ye,
Her courage was so great,
She lay with one of the Navy,
Her husband lying in the Fleet.
Yet often with him she cauel'd,
I wonder what she ailes,
Her husbands ship lay grauel'd,
When here is could hoyse up sails,
Yet she began like all my foes,
To call whore first: for so do those;
A pox of all false tails.

Seb. Marry amen say I.

Alex. So say I too.

Mol. Hang up the vial now sir: all this while I was in a dream, one shall
lie rudely then; but being awake, I keep my legs together; a watch, what is a
clock here.


Alex. Now, now, she is trapt.

Moll. Between one and two; nay then I care not: a watch and a musician are
cossen Germans in one thing, they must both keep time well, or there is no
goodness in 'em, the one else deserves to be dashed against a wall, and the other
to have his brains knocked out with a fiddle case, what? a loose chain and a
dangling Diamond.

Here were a brave booty for an euening-theefe now,
There Is many a younger brother would be glad
To look twice in at a window for it,
And wriggle in and out, like an eele in a sandbag,
Oh if men's secret youthful faults should judge 'em,
'T would be the general'st execution,
That ere was seen in England; there would be but few left to sing the
ballets, there would be so much work: most of our brokers would be chosen for
hangmen, a good day for them: they might renew their wardrops of free cost then.


Seb. This is the roaring wench must do us good.

Mary. No poison sir but serves us for some use, which is confirmed in her.


Seb. Peace, peace, foot I did here him sure, where ere he be.

Mol. Who did you hear?

Seb. My father, 'twas like a sight of his, I must be wary,

Alex. No wilt not be, am I alone so wretched
That nothing takes? I Will put him to his plundge for it.

Seb. Life, here he comes, -- sir I beseech you take it,
Your way of teaching does so much content me,
I Will make it four pound, here is forty shillings sir.
I think I name it right: help me good Mol,
Forty in hand.

Mol. Sir you shall pardon me,
I have more of the meanest scholar I can teach,
This paies me more, then you have offered yet.

Seb. At the next quarter
When I receive the means my father 'lowes me.
You shall have the other forty,

Alex. This were well now,
Were to a man, whose sorrows had blind eyes,
But mine behold his follies and untruths,
With two clear glasses -- how now?

Seb. Sir.

Alex. What Is he there?

Seb. You Are come in good time sir, I Have a suite to you,
I Would crave your present kindness.

Alex. What is he there?

Seb. A Gentleman, a musician sir, one of excellent fingring*

Alex. I, I think so, I wonder how they escaped her.

Seb. Has the most delicate stroke sir,

Alex. A stroke indeed, I feel it at my heart,

Seb. Puts down all your famous musicians.

Alex. I, a whore may put down a hundred of 'em.

Seb. Forty shillings is the agreement sir between us,
Now sir, my present means, mounts but to half on it.

Alex. And he stands upon the whole.

Seb. I indeed does he sir.

Alex. And will do still, he will nere be in other tail,

Seb. Therefore I Would stop his mouth sir, and I could,

Alex. Hum true, there is no other way indeed,
His folly hardens, shame must needs succeed.
Now sir I understand you profess music.

Mol. I am a poor servant to that liberal science sir.

Alex. Where is it you teach?

Mol. Right against Cliffords Inn.

Alex. Hum that is a fit place for it: you have many scholars.

Mol. And some of worth, whom I may call my masters.

Alex. I true, a company of whooremaisters; you teach to sing too?


Mol. Marry do I sir.

Alex. I think you will find an apt scholar of my son, especially for
pricke-song.


Mol. I have much hope of him.

Alex. I am sorry for it, I have the less for that: you can play any lesson.


Mol. At first sight sir.

Alex. There Is a thing called the witch, can you play that?

Mol. I would be sorry any one should mend me in it.

Alex. I, I believe thee, thou have so bewitched my son,
No care will mend the work that thou have done,
I have bethought my self since my art fails,
I Will make her policy the Art to trap her.
Here are four Angels marked with holes in them
Fit for his cracked companions, gold he will give her,
These will I make induction to her ruin,
And rid shame from my house, grief from my heart
Here son, in what you take content and pleasure,
Want shall not curb you, pay the Gentleman
His latter half in gold.

Seb. I thank you sir.

Alex. Oh may the operation an't, end three,
In her, life: shame, in him; and grief, in me.
Exit Alexander.
Seb. Faith thou shall haue'em it is my fathers gift,
Never was man beguild with better shift.

Mol. He that can take me for a male musician,
I cannot choose but make him my instrument,
And play upon him.
Exeunt omnes. Enter Mistress Gallipot, and Mistress Openworke.
Mi. Gal. Is then that bird of yours (Master Goshawke) so wild?

Mist. Open. A Goshawke, a Puttocke; all for prey: he angles for fish, but he
loves flesh better.


Mist. Gal. Is It possible his smoth face should have wrinckles in it, and we not
see them?


Mist. Open. Possible? why have not many handsome legs in silk stockins
villainous splay feet for all their great roses?


Mist. Gal. Troth firra thou say true.

Mist. Op. Did never see an archer (as tho'ast walked by Bunhill) look a
squint when he drew his bow?


Mist. Gal. Yes, when his arrows have flin'e toward Islington, his eyes have
shot clean contrary toward Pimlico.


Mist. Open. For all the world so does Master Goshawke double with me.


Mist. Gal. Oh fie upon him, if he double once he is not for me.

Mist. Open. Because Goshawke go* in a shag-ruffe band, with a face sticking
up in it, which shows like an agget set in acrampe ring, he thinks I Am in
love with him.


Mist. Gal. Alas I think he takes his mark amiss in thee.

Mist. Open. He has by often beating into me made me believe that my husband
kept a whore.


Mist. Gal. Very good.

Mist. Open. Swore to me that my husband this very morning went in a boat with
a tilt over it, to the three pidgions at Brainford, and his puncke with him
under his tilt.


Mist. Gal. That were wholesome.

Mist. Open. I believed it, fell a swearing at him, curssing of harlots, made
me ready to hoyse up sail, and be there as soon as he.


Mist. Gal. So, so.

Mist. Open. And for that voyage Goshawke comes hither incontinently, but sir
this water-spaniell dives after no ducke but me, his hope is having me at
Braineford to make me cry quack.


Mist. Gall. Art sure of it?

Mist. Open. Sure of it? my poor innocent Openworke came in as I was poking my
ruff, presently hit I him in the teeth with the three pidgions: he forswore
all, I up and opened all, and now stands he (in a shop hard by) like a musket
on a rest, to hit Goshawke in the eye, when he comes to fetch me to the boat.


Mist. Gal. Such another lame Gelding offered to carry me through thick and
thin, (Laxton sir) but I am ridd of him now.


Mist. Open. Happy is the woman can be rid of 'em all; alas what are your
whisking gallants to our husbands, weigh 'emrightly man for man.


Mist. Gall. Troth mere shallow things.

Mist. Open. Idle simple things, running heads, and yet let 'emrun over us
never so fast, we shopkeepers (when all is done) are sure to have 'em in our
pursnets at length, and when they are in, Lord what simple animalls they are.


Mist. Open. Then they hang head.

Most. Gal. Then they droupe.

Mist. Open. Then they write letters.

Mist. Gal. Then they cogge.

Mist. Open. Then they deal under hand with us, and we must ingle with our
husbands a bed, and we must swear they are our cosens, and able to do us a
pleasure at Court.


Mist. Gal. And yet when we have donc our best, all is but put into a riuen
dish, we are but frumpt at and libelled upon.


Mist. Open. Oh if it were the good Lords will, there were a law made, no
Citizen should trust any of them all.

Enter Goshawke.
Mist. Gal. Hush sir, Goshawke flutters.

Gosh. How now, are you ready?

Mist. Open. Nay are you ready? a little thing you see makes us ready.


Gosh. Us? why, must she make one in the voyage?

Mist. Open. Oh by any means, do I know how my husband will handle me?


Gosh. 'Foot, how shall I find water, to keep these two mils going? Well since
you will needs be clapped under hatches, if I sail not with you both till all
split, hang me up at the maine yard, and duck me; it is but lickering them
both soundly, and then you shall see their cork heels fly up high, like two
swannes when their tails are above water, and their long necks under water,
diuing to catch gudgions: come, come, oars stand ready, the tyde's with us, on
with those false faces, blow winds and thou shall take thy husband, casting out
his net to catch fresh Salmon at Brainford.


Mist. Gal. I believe you will eat of a coddes head of your own dressing, before
you reach half way thither.


Gosh. So, so, follow close, pin as you go.
Enter Laxton muffled.
Lax. Do you hear?

Mist. Gal. Yes, I thank my ears.

Lax. I must have a bout with your Poticariship,

Mist. Gal. At what weapon?

Lax. I must speak with you.

Mist. Gal. No.

Lax No? you shall.

Mist. Gal. Shall? away soust Sturgion, half fish, half flesh.

Lax. 'Faith gib, are you spitting, I Will cut your tail puscat for this,


Mist. Gal. Alas poor Laxton, I think thy tayle's cut already: your worst;


Lax. If I do not, --
Exit Laxton.
Gosh. Come, ha'you done?
Enter Master Openworke. Sfoote Rosamond, your husband. welcome,

May. Open. How now? sweet May. Goshawke, none more
I have wanted your embracements: when friends meet,
The music of the spheres sounds not more sweet,
Then does their conferenc: who is this? Rosamond:
Wife: how now sister?

Gosh. Silence if you love me.

May. Open. Why maskt?

Mist. Open. Does a mask grieve you sir?

May. Open. It does.

Mist. Open. Then you are best get you a mumming.

Gosh. S'footeyou'l spoil all.

Mist. Gall. May not we cover our bare faces with maskes
As well as you cover your bald heads with hats?

Ma. Op. No maskes, why, they are thieves to beauty, that rob
Of admiration in which true love lies, (eyes
Why are maskes worn? why good? or why desired?
Unless by their gay couers wits are fiered
To read the vild'st looks; many bad faces,
(Because rich gemmes are treasured up in cases)
Pass by their privilege current, but as caves
Dambe misers Gold, so maskes are beauties graves,
Men nere meet women with such muffled eyes,
But they curse her, that first did maskes devise,
And swear it was somebeldame. Come off with it.

Mist. Open. I will not.

May. Open. Good faces maskt are Jewels kept by spirits.
Hide none but bad ones, for they poison men's sights,
Show then as shopkeepers do their broidred stuff,
(By owl light) fine wares cannot be open enough,
Prithee (sweet Rose) come strike this sail.

Mist. Open. Sail? (eyes:

May. Op. Ha? yes wife strike sail, for storms are in thine

Mist. Open. They Are here sir in my brows if any rise.

May. Open. Ha brows? (what says she friend) pray tell me
Your two flagges were aduaunst; the Comedy, (why
Come what is the Comedy?

Mist. Open. Westward hoe.

May. Open. How?

Mist. Open. It Is Westward hoe she says.

Gosh. Are you both mad?

Mist. Open. Is It Market day at Braineford, and your ware not sent up yet?


May. Open. What market day? what ware?

Mist. Open. Apy with three pidgions in it, it is drawn and stays your cutting
up.


Gosh. As you regard my credit.

May. Open. Art mad?

Mist. Open. Yes letcherous goat; Baboone.

May. Open. Baboone? then toss me in a blancket,

Mist. Open. Do I it well?

Mist. Gall. Rarely.

Gosh. Belike sir she is not well; best leave her.

May. Open. No,
I Will stand the storm now how fierce so ere it blow.

Mist. Open. Did I for this loose all my friends? refuse
Rich hopes, and golden fortunes, to be made
A stale to a common whore?

May. Open. This does amaze me.

Mist. Open. Oh God, oh God, feed at reuersion now?
A Strumpets leaving?

May. Open. Rosamond,

Gosh. I sweat, wo'ld I lay in cold harbor.

Mist. Open. Thou have struck ten thousand daggers through my heart.


May. Open. Not I by heaven sweet wife. (thee

Mist. Open. Go devil go; that which thou swear'st by, damnes

Gosh. S'heart will you undo me?

Mist. Open. Why stay you here? the star, by which you sail, shines yonder
above Chelsy; you loose your shore if this moon light you: seek out your
light whore.


May. Open. Ha?

Mist. Gal. Push; your Western png.

Gosh, Zounds now hell roares.

Mist. Open. With whom you tilted in a pair of oars, this very morning.


May. Open. Oars?

Mist. Open. At Brainford sir.

May. Open. Rack not my patieuce: Master Goshawke, some slave has buzzed
this into her, has he not? I run a tilt in Brainford with a woman? it is a lie:
What old baud tells thee this? God's Death it is a lie.


Mist. Open. It Is one to thy face shall justify all that I speak.

May. Open. Vd'soule do but name that rascal.

Mist. Open. No sir I will not.

Gosh. Keep thee there girl: -- then!

Mist. Open. Sister know you this varlet?

Mist. Gall. Yes.

May. Open. Swear true,
Is there a rogueso low damned? a second Judas? a common hangman? cutting a
man's throat? does it to his face? bite me behind my back? a cur dog? swear
if you know this hell-hound.


Mist. Gall. In truth I do,

May. Open. His name?

Mist. Gall. Not for the world;
To have you to stab him.

Gosh. Oh brave girls: worth Gold.

May. Open. A word honest master Goshawke.
Draw out his sword
Gosh. What do you mean sir?

May. Open. Keep off, and if the devil can give a name to this new fury,
holla it throngh my ear, or wrap it up in some hid character: I Will ride to
Oxford, and watch out mine eyes, but I'leheare the brazen head speak: or else
show me but one hair of his head or beard, that I may sample it; if the siend
I mect (in mine own house) I Will kill him: -- the street.

Or at the Church door: -- there -- (cause he seeks to vnty
The knot God fastens) he deserves most to die.

Mist. Open. My husband titles him.

May. Open. Master Goshawke, pray sir
Swear to me, that you know him or know hiw not, (wives,
Who makes me at Brainford to take up a peticote beside my

Gosh. By heaven that man I know not.

Mist. Open. Come, come, you lie.

Gosh. Will you not have all out?
By heaven I know no man beneath the moon
Should do you wrong, but if I had his name,
I Would print it in text letters.

Mist. Open. Print thine own then,
Did not thou swear to me he kept his whore?

Mist. Gal. And that in sinful Brainford they would commit
That which our lips did water at sir, -- ha?

Mist. Open. Thou spider, that have wouen thy cunning web
In mine own house t'insnare me: have not thou
Sucked nourishment even underneath this roof,
And turned it all to poison? spittiug it,
On thy friends face (my husband?) he as it were sleeping:
Only to leave him ugly to mine eyes,
That they might glance on thee.

Mist. Gal. Speak, are these lies?

Gosh. Mine own shame me confounds:

Mist. Open. No more, he is stung;
Who'd think that in one body there could dwell
Deformity and beauty, (heaven and hell)
Goodness I see is but outside, we all set,
In rings of Gold, stones that be counterfeit:
I thought you none.

Gosh. Pardon me.

May. Open. Truth I do.
This blemish grows in nature not in you,
For man's creation stick even moles in scorn
On fairest cheeks, wife nothing is perfect borne.

Mist. Open. I thought you had been borne perfect.

May. Open. What Is this whole world but a gilt rotten pill?
For at the heart lies the old chore still.
I Will tell you Master Goshawke, I in your eye
I have seen wanton fire, and then to try
The soundness of my judgment, I told you
I kept a whore, made you believe 'twas true,
Only to feel how your pulse beat, but find,
The world can hardly yield a perfect friend.
Come, come, a trick of youth, and it is forgiven,
This rub put by, our love shall run more even.

Mist. Open, You Will deal upon men's wives no more?

Gosh. No: -- you teach me a trick for that.

Mist. Open. Troth do not, they will o're-reach thee.

May. Open. Make my house yours sir still.

Gosh. No.

May. Open. I say you shall:
Seeing (thus besieged) it holds out, 'twill never fall.
Enter Master Gallipot, and Greenewit like a Somner, Laxton muffled a loofo
off.
Omnes How now?

May. Gall. With me sir?

Green. You sir? I have gone snaffling up and down by your door this hour to
watch for you.


Mist. Gall. What Is the matter husband?

Green. -- I have caught a cold in my head sir, by sitting up late in the rose
tavern, but I hope you understand my speech.


May. Gal. So sir.

Green. I cite you by the name of Hippocrates Gallipot, and you by the name of
Prudence Gallipot, to appear upon Crastino, do you see, Crastino sancti
Dunstani (this Easter Term) in Bow Church.


May. Gall. Where sir? what says he?

Green. Bow: Bow Church, to answer to a libel of precontract on the part and
behalf of the said Prudence and another; you are best sir take a copy of the
citation, it is but tweluepence.


Omnes A Citation?

May. Gal. You pocky-nosed rascal, what slave fees you to this?


Lax. Slave? I ha nothing to do with you, do you hear sir?

Gosh. Laxton is it not? -- what fagary is this?

May. Gal. Trust me I thought sir this storm long ago had been full laid,
when (if you be remembered) I paid you the last fifteen pound, besides the
thirty you had first, -- for then you swore.


Lax. Tush, tush sir, oaths,
Truth yet I Am loath to vex vou, -- tell you what;
Make up the money I had an hundred pound,
And take your belly full of her.

May. Gall. An hundred pound?

Mist. Gal. What a 100 pound? he gets none: what a 100 pound?


May. Gal. Sweet Pru be calm, the Gentleman offers thus,
If I will make the monyes that are past
A 100 pound, he will discharge all courts,
And give his bond never to vex us more.

Mist. Gal. A 100 pound? Alas; take sir but threescore,
Do you seek my undoing?

Lax. I Will not bate one sixpence, -- I Will mall you pusse for spitting.


Mist. Gal. Do thy worst,
Will fourscore stop thy mouth?

Lax. No.

Mist. Gal. You Are a slave,
Thou Cheat, I Will now tear money from thy throat,
Husband lay hold on yonder tauny-coate.

Green. Nay Gentlemen, seeing your women are so hot, I must loose my hair
in their company I see.


Mist. Open. His hair sheds off, and yet he speaks not so much in the nose as
he did before.


Gosh. He has had the better Surgeon, Master Greenewit, is your wit so raw
as to play no better a part then a Somners?


May. Gal. I pray who plays a knacke to know an honest man in this company?


Mist. Gall. Dear husband, pardon me, I did dissemble,
Told thee I was his precontracted wife,
When letters came from him for thirty pound,
I had no shift but that.

May. Gal. A very clean shift: but able to make me lowsy, On.


Mist. Gal. Husband, I plucked (when he had tempted me to think well of him)
Get feathers from thy wings, to make him fly more lofty.


May. Gall. A'the top of you wife: on.

Mist. Gal. He having wasted them, comes now for more,
Using me as a ruffian does his whore,
Whose sin keeps him in breath: by heaven I vow,
Thy bed he never wronged, more then he does now.

May. Gal. My bed? ha, ha, like enough, a shop-boord will serve to have a
cuckolds coat cut out upon: of that we will talk hereafter: you are a villain*


Lax. Hear me but speak sir, you shall find me none.

Omnes Pray sir, be patient and hear him.

May. Gal. I am muzzled for biting sir, use me how you will.

Lax. The first hour that your wife was in my eye,
My self with other Gentlemen sitting by,
(In your shop) tasting smoke, and speech beng used,
That men who have fairest wives are most abused,
And hardly escaped the horn, your wife maintained
That only such spots in City dames were stained,
Justly, but by men's slanders: for her own part,
She vowed that you had so much of her heart;
No man by all his wit, by any wile,
Never so fine spunne, should your self be guile,
Of what in her was yours.

May. Gal. Yet Pru it is well: play out your game at Irish sir: Who winnes?


Mist. Open. The trial is when she comes to bearing:

Lax. I scorned one woman, thus, should brave all men,
And (which more vexed me) a shee-citizen.
Therefore I laid siege to her, out she held,
Gave many a brave repulse, and me compelled
With shame to sound retrait to my hot lust,
Then seeing all base desires raked up in dust,
And that to tempt her modest ears, I swore
Nere to prsumne again: she said, her eye
Would ever give me welcome honestly,
And (since I was a Gentlman) if it run low,
She would my state relieve, not to overthrow
Your own and hers: did so; then seeing I wrought
Upon her meekness, me she set at naught,
And yet to try if I could turn that tide,
You see what stre^me I strove with, but sir I swear
By heaven, and by those hopes men lay up there,
I neither have, nor had a base intent
To wrong your bed, what is done, is meriment:
Your Gold I pay back with this interest,
When I had most power to do it I wroug'd you least.

May. Gal. If this no gullery be sir,

Omnes No, no, on my life,

May. Gal. Then sir I am beholden (not to you wife)
But Master Laxton to your want of doing ill,
Which it seems you have not Gentlemen,
Tarry and dine here all.

May. Open. Brother, we have a jest,
As good as yours to furnish out a feast.

May. Gal. We Will crown our table with it: wife brag no more,
Of holding out: who most brags is most whore.
Exeunt omnes. Enter Jack Dapper, Moll, Sir Beauteous Ganymed, and Sir Thomas
Long.
Jack Dap. But prithee Master Captain Jack be plain and perspicuous with
me; was it your Megge of Westminsters courage, that rescued me from the
Poultry puttockes indeed.


Mol. The valor of my wit I ensure you sir fetched you off bravely, when you
werre in the forlorn hope among those desperates, Sir Bewtious Ganymed here,
and sir Thomas Long heard that cuckoe (my man Trapdore) sing the note of your
ransom from captiuty.


Sir Bewt. Vds so Mol, where is that Trapdore?

Mol. Hanged I think by this time, a Justice in this town, (that speaks
nothing but make a Mittimus a way with him to Newgate) used that rogue like a
fire-worke to run upon a line betwixt him and me.


Omnes how, how?

Mol. Marry to lay trains of villainy to blow up my life; I smelt the powder,
spied what linstocke gave fire to shoot against the poor Captain of the
Gallifoyst, and away slid I my man, like a shouell-board shilling, he stroutes
up and down the suburbs I think: and eats up whores: feeds upon a bauds
garbadg.


T. Long. Sir Jack Dapper.

Iac, Dap. What sai'st Tom Long?

T. Long. Thou had a sweet faced boy hail fellow with thee to your little
Gull: how is he spent?


Jack. Dap. Troth I whistled the poor little buzzard of a my fist, because
when he waited upon me at the ordinaries, the gallants hit me in the teeth
still, and said I looked like a painted Aldermans tomb, and the boy at my elbow
like a deaths head. Sir Jack, Mol.


Mol. What says my little Dapper?

Sir Bewt. Come, come, walk and talk, walk and talk.

Jack. Dap. Mol and I Will be in the midst.

Mol. These Knights shall have squiers places belike then: well Dapper what say
y ou?


Jack. Dap. Sir Captain mad Mary, the gull my own father (Dapper) Sir Dauy)
laid these London boote-halers the catch poles in ambush to set upon me.


Omnes Your father? away Jack.

Jack. Dap. By the tassels of this handkercher it is true, and what was his
warlicke stratageme think you? he thought because a wicker cage tames a
nightingale, a lowsy prison could make an ass of me.


Omnes A nasty plot.

Jack. Dap. I; as though a Counter, which is a park, in which all the wild
beasts of the City run head by head could tame me.

Enter the Lord Noland.
Moll. Yonder comes my Lord Noland.

Omnes Save you my Lord.

L. Nol. Well met Gentlemen all, good Sir Bewtious Ganymed, Sir Thomas Long?,
and how does Master Dapper?


Jack. Dap. Thanks my Lord.

Mol. No Tobacco my Lord?

L. Nol No faith Jack.

Jack. Dap. My Lord Noland will you go to Pimlico with us? we are making a
boon voyage to that ^appy land of spice-cakes


L. Nol. Heeres such a merry ging, I could find in my heart to sail to the
worlds end with such company, come Gentlemen let us on.


Jack. Dap. Here Is most amorous weather my Lord.

Omnes Amorous weather.
They walk.
Iac. Dap. Is not amorous a good word?
Enter Trapdore like a poor Soldier with a pateh over one eye, and Teare-Cat
with him, all tatters.
Trap. Shall we set upon the infantry, these troops of foot? Zounds yonder
comes Mol my whoorish Master and Mistress, wo^ld I had her kidneys between
my teeth.


Tear-Cat. I had rather have a cow heel.

Trap. Zounds I am so patcht up, she cannot discover me: we will on.


T. Cat. Alla corago then.

Trap. Good your Honors, and Worships, enlarge the ears of commiseration, and
let the sound of a hoarse military organ-pipe, penetrate your pitiful bowels
to extract out of them so many small drops of silver, as may give a hard
strawbed lodging to a couple of maimed soldiers.


Jack Dap. Where are you maimed?

T Cat. In both our nether limbs.

Mol. Come, come, Dapper, lets give 'em something, las poor men, what money
have you? by my troth I love a soldier with my soul.


Sir Bewt. Stay, stay, where have you served?

T. Long. In any part of the Low countries?

Trap. Not in the Low countries, if it please your manhood, but in Hungary
against the Turk at the siedge of Belgrad.


L. Nol. Who served there with you sir?

Trap. Many Hungarians, Moldauians, Valachians, and Transiluanians, with some
Sclauonians, and retyring home sir, the Venetian Galleys took us prisoners,
yet freed us, and suffered us to beg up and down the country.


Jack. Dap. You have ambled all over Italy then.

Trap. Oh sir, from Venice to Roma, Uecchio, Bononia, Romania, Bolonia, Modena,
Piacenza, and Tuscana, with all her Cities, as Pistoia, Valteria,
Mountepulchena, Arrezzo, with the Siennois, and diverse others.


Mol. Mere rogues, put spurs to 'em once more.

Jack. Dap. Thou look like a strange creature, a fat butterbox, yet speak
English,

What art thou?

T. Cat. Ick mine Here. Ick bin den ruffling Teare-Cat.
Den, brave Soldade, Ick bin dorick all Dutchlant.
Gueresen: Der Shellum das mere Ine Beasa
Ine woert gaeb.
Ick slaag vin strokes ou tom Cop.
Dastick Den hundred touzun Devil halle,
Frollick miue Here.

Sir Bewt. Here, here, let us be rid of their iobbering,

Moll. Not a cross Sir Bewtiout, you base rogues, I have taken measure of you,
better then a tailor can, and I Will fit you, as you (monster with one eye) have
fitted me,


Trap. Your Worship will not abuse a soldier.

Moll. Soldier? thou deseru'st to be hanged up by that tongue which
dishonours so noble a profession, soldier you skeldering varlet? hold, stand,
there should be a trapdore here abouts.

Pull off his patch
Trap. The balls of these glasiers of mine (mine eyes) shall be shot up and
down in any hot piece of service for my invincible Mistress.


Jack Dap. I did not think there had been such knavery in black patches as
now I see.


Mol. Oh sir he has been brought up in the I Will of dogs, and can both fawn
like a Spaniell, and bite like a Mastiue, as he finds occasion.


L. Nol. What are you sir? a bird of this feather too.

T. Cat. A man beaten from the wars sir.

T. Long. I think so, for you never stood to fight.

Iac. Dap. What Is thy name fellow soldier?

T. Cat. I am called by those that have seen my valor, Tear-Cat.

Omnes Teare-Cat?

Moll. A mere whip-Iacke, and that is in the Commonwealth of rogues, a slave,
that can talk of sea fight, name all your chief Pirates, discover more
countries to you, then either the Dutch, Spanish, French, or English ever found
out, yet indeed all his service is by land, and that is to rob a Fair, or some
such venturous exploit; Teare-Cat, foot sir I have your name now I remember
me in my book of horners, horns for the thumb, you know how.


T. Cat. No indeed Captain Mol (for I know you by sight) I am no such nipping
Christian, but a maunderer upon the pad I confess, and meeting with honest
Trapdore here, whom you had cashierd from bearing arms, out at elbowes under
your colors, I instructed him in the rudements of roguery, and by my map made
him sail over any Country you can name, so that now he can maunder better then
my self.


Jack. Dap. So then Trapdore thou art turned soldier now.

Trap. Alas sir, now there is no wars, it is the safest course of life I could
take.


Mol. I hope then you can cant, for by your cudgels, you sir are an upright
man.


Trap. As any walks the high way I assure you.

Mol. And Teare-Cat what are you? a wild rogue, an angler, or a ruffler?


T. Cat. Brother to this upright man, flesh and blood, ruffling Teare-Cat is my
name, and a ruffler is my style, my title, my profession.


Mol. Sir where is your Doxy, halt not with me.

Omnes Doxy Mol, what is that?

Mol. His wench.

Trap. My doxy I have by the Solomon a doxy, that carries a kitchen mort in her
slat at her back, besides my dell and my dainty wild del, with all whom I Will
tumble this next darkmans in the strommel, and drink ben baufe, and eat a fat
gruntling cheat, a cackling cheat, and a quacking cheat.


Jack. Dap. Here Is old cheating.

Trap. My doxy stays for me in a bousing ken, brave Captain.


Mol. He says his wench stays for him in an alehouse: you are no pure rogues.


T. Cat. Pure rogues? no, we scorn to be pure rogues, but if you come to our
lib ken, or our stalling ken, you shall find neither him nor me, a quire
cuffin.


Mol. So sir, no churl of you.

T. Cat. No, but a ben cave, a brave cave, a gentry cuffin.

L. Nol. Call you this canting?

Jack. Dap. Zounds, I Will give a schoolemaister half a crown a week, and teach
me this pedlers French.


Trap. Do but strowle sir, half a harvest with us sir, and you shall gabble
your belly-full.


Mol. Come you rogue cant with me.

T. Long. Well said Mol, cant with her sir, and you shall have money, else not
a penny.


Trap. I Will have a bout if she please.

Mol. Come on sir.

Trap. Ben mort, shall you and I heave a booth, mill a ken or nip a bung, and
then we will couch a hogshead under the Ruffemans, and there you shall wap with
me, and I Will niggle with you.


Mol. Out you damned impudent rascal.

Trap. Cut benar whiddes, and hold your fambles and your stampes.


L Nol. Nay, nay, Mol, why art thou angry? what was his gibberish?


Mol. Marry this my Lord says he; Ben mort (good wench) shall you and I heave
a booth, mill a ken, or nip a bung? shall you and I rob a house, or cut a purse?


Omnes Very Good. (man's:

Mol. And then we will couch a hogshead under the Ruff-
And then we will lie under a hedge.

Trap. That was my desire Captain, as it is fit a soldier should lie.


Mol. And there you shall wap with me, and I Will niggle with you, and that is
all.


Sir Bewt. Nay, nay Mol what is that wap?

Jack. Dap. Nay teach me what niggling is, I Would feign be niggling.


Mol. Wapping and niggling is all one, the rogue my man can tell you.


Trap. It Is fadoodling: if it please you.

Sir Bewt. This is excellent, one fit more good Moll,

Mol. Come you rogue sing with me.
A gage of ben Rom-bouse
In a bousing ken of Rom-vile.

T. Cat. Is Benar then a Caster,
Pecke, pennam, lay or popler,
Which we mill in deuse a vile.
Oh I wud lib all the lightmans.
The song. Oh I would lib all the darkemans,
By the sollamon under the Ruffemans.
By the sollamon in the Hartmans.

T. Cat. And scour the Quire cramp ring,
And couch till a pallyard docked my dell,
So my bousy nab might skew rome bouse well
Auast to the pad, let us bing,
Auast to the pad, let us bing.

Omnes Fine knaves in faith.

Jack. Dap. The grating of ten new cart-wheeles, and the gruntling of five
hundred hogs coming from Rumford market, cannot make a worse noise then this
canting language does in my ears; pray my Lord Noland, let us give these
soldiers their pay.


Sir Bewt. Agreed, and let them march.

L. Nol. Here Mol.

Mol. Now I see that you are stal'd to the rogue, and are not ashamed of your
professions, look you: my Lord Noland here and these Gentlemen, bestows upon
you two, two boordes and a half, that is two shillings six pence.


Trap. Thanks to your Lordship.

T. Cat. Thanks heroical Captain.

Mol. Away.

Trap. We shall cut ben whiddes of your Masters and Mistreship, wheresoever
we come.


Moll. You Will maintain sir the old Justices plot to his face.

Trap. Else trine me on the cheats: hang me.

Mol. Be sure you meet me there.

Trap. Without any more maundring I Will do it, follow brave Tear-Cat.

Exeunt they two manet the rest.
T. Cat. I prae, sequor, let us go mouse.

L. Nol. Mol what was in that canting song? (only milk

Mol. Troth my Lord, only a praise of good drink, the
Which these wild beasts love to suck, and thus it was:
A rich cup of wine, oh it is juice Divine,
More wholesome for the head,: hen meat, drink, or bread,
To fill my drunken pate, with that, I Would sit up late,
By the heels would I lie, under a lowsy hedge die,
Let a slave have a pull at my whore, so I be full
Of that precious liquor; And a parcel of such stuff my Lord
Not worth the opening.
Enter a Cutpurse very gallant, with four or five men after him, one with a
wand.
L. Nol. What gallant comes yonder?

T. Long. Mass I think I know him, it is one of Cumberland.

1 Cut. Shall we venture to shuffle in amongst yon heap of Gallants, and strike?


2 Cut. It Is a question whether there be any silver shells amongst them, for
all their satin outsides.


Omnes Let Us try?

Mol. Pox on him, a gallant? shadow me, I know him: it is one that cumbers the
land indeed; if he swim near to the shore of any of your pockets, look to
your purses.


Omnes Is It possible?

Mol. This brave fellow is no bettet then a foyst.

Omnes. Foyst, what is that?

Mol. A diuer with two fingers, a picke-pocket; all his train study the
figging law, that is to say; cutting of purses and foysting; one of them is a
nip, I took him once in the twopenny gallery at the Fortune; then there is a
cloyer, or snap, that dogs any new brother in that trade, and snappes will
have half in any booty; He with the wand is both a stale, whose office is, to
face a man in the streets, whilst shells are drawn by an other, and then with
his black coniuring rod in his hand, he by the nimblenesse of his eye and
iugling stick, will in cheaping a piece of plate at a goldsmithes stall, make
four or five ringes mount from the top of his caduceus, and as if it were at
leape-frog, they skip into his hand presently.


2. Cut. Zounds we are smoakt.

Omnes. Ha?

2. Cut. We are boiled, pox on her; see Moll the roaring drabbe.


1. Cut. All the diseases of sixteen hospitals boil her: away.

Mol. Bless you sir.

1. Cut. And you good sir.

Mol. Do not ken me man?

1. Cut. No trust me sir.

Mol. Heart, there is a Knight to whom I Am bound for many favors, lost his
purse at the last new play in the Swanne, seven Angels in it, make it good you are
best; do you see? no more.


1. Cut. A Sinagogue shall be called Mistress Mary, disgrace me not; pacus
palabros, I will conjure for you, farewell:


Mol. Did not I tell you my Lord?

L. Nol. I wonder how thou came to the knowledge of these nasty villains.


T. Long. And why do the foul mouths of the world call thee Mol cutpursse? a
name, me thinks, damned and odious.


Mol. Dare any step forth to my face and say,
I have taken thee doing so Mol? I must confess,
In younger days, when I was apt to stray,
I have sat amongst such adders; seen their stings,
As any here might, and in full play houses
Watched their quicke-diuing hands, to bring to shame
Such rogues, and in that stream met an ill name:
When next my Lord you spy any one of those,
So he be in his Art a scholar, question him,
Tempt him with gold to open the large book
Of his close villainies: and you your self shall cant
Better then poor Mol can, and know more laws
Of cheaters, lifters, nips, foysts, puggards, curbers,
Withal the devils black guard, then it is fit
Should be discovered to a noble wit.
I know they have their orders, offices,
Circuits and circles, unto which they are bound,
To raise their own damnation in.

Jack. Dap. How do thou know it?

Moll. As you do, I show it you, they to me show it.
Suppose my Lord you were in Venice.

L. Nol. Well.

Mol. If some Italian pander there would tell
All the close tricks of curtizans; would not you
Hearken to such a fellow?

L. Nol. Yes.

Mol. And here,
Being come from Uenice, to a friend most dear
That were to travel thither, you would proclaim
Your knowledge in those villainies, to save
Your friend from their quick danger: must you have
A black ill name, because ill things you know,
Good troth my Lord, I am made Mol cut purse so.
How many are whores, in small ruffes and still looks?
How many chaste, whose names fill slanders books?
Were all men cuckolds, whom gallants in their scorns
Call so, we should not walk for goring horns,
Perhaps for my mad going some reprove me,
I please my self, and care not else who loves me.

Omnes A brave mind Mol in faith.

T. Long. Come my Lord, shal's to the Ordinary?

L. Nol. I, it is noone sure. (or to the world:

Mol. Good my Lord, let not my name condemn me to you
A fencer I hope may be called a coward, is he so for that?
If all that have ill names in London, were to be whipped, (there
And to pay but twelve pence a piece to the beadle, I would ra-
Have his office, then a Constables.

Jack. Dap. So would I Captain Moll: 'twere a sweet tickling office in faith.

Exeunt. Enter Sir Alexander Wengraue, Goshawke and Greenewit, and others.
Alex. My son marry a thief, that impudent girl,
Whom all the world stick their worst eyes upon?

Green. How will your care prevent it?

Gosh. It Is impossible.
They marry close, thei'r gone, but none knows whether.

Alex. Oh Gentlemen, when has a fathers heart strings
Enter a servant. Held out so long from breaking: now what news sir?

Servant. They were met vppo'th water an hour since, sir,
Putting in toward the Sluice.

Alex. The Sluice? come Gentlemen,
It Is Lambith works against us.

Green. And that Lambith, ioynes more mad matches, then your six wet towns,
twixt that and Windsor-bridge, where fares lie soaking.


Alex. Delay no time sweet Gentlemen: to Black Friars,
We Will take a pair of Oars and make after 'em.
Enter Trapdore.
Trap. Your son, and that bold masculine rampe
My mistress, are landed now at Tower.

Alex. Hoyda, at Tower?

Trap. I heard it now reported.

Alex. Which way Gentlemen shall I bestow my care?
I Am drawn in pieces betwixt deceit and shame.
Enter sir Fitz-Allard.
Fitz-Alla. Sir Alexander.
You Are well met, and most rightly served,
My daughter was a scorn to you.

Alex. Say not so fir.

Fitz-All. A very abject, she poor Gentlewoman,
Your house had been dishonored. Give you joy sir,
Of your sons Gaskoyne-Bride, you will be a Grandfather shortly
To a fine crew of roaring sons and daughters,
'Twill help to stock the suburbs passing well sir.

Alex. O play not with the miseries of my heart,
Wounds should be dressed and healed, not vexed, or left
Wide open, to the anguish of the patient,
And scornful air let in: rather let pity
And advise charitably help to refresh 'em.

Fitz-All. Who'd place his charity so unworthily.
Like one that gives alms to a cursing beggar,
Had I but found one spark of goodness in you
Toward my deserving child, which then grew fond
Of your sons virtues, I had cased you now.
But I perceive both fire of youth and goodness,
Are raked up in the ashes of your age,
Else no such shame should have come near your house,
Nor such ignoble sorrow touch your heart,

Alex. If not for worth, for pitties sake assist me.

Green. You urge a thing past sense, how can he help you?
All his assistance is as frail as ours,
Full as uncertain, where is the place that holds 'em?
One brings us wa^er-newes; then comes an other
With a full charged mouth, like a culuerins voice,
And he reports the Tower; whose sounds are truest?

Gosh. In vain you flatter him sir Alexander.

Fitz-All. I flatter him, Gentlemen you wrong me grossly.

Green, He does it well in faith.

Fitz-All. Both news are false,
Of Tower or water: they took no such way yet. (plundges?

Alex. Oh strange: hear you this Gentlemen, yet more

Fiz-Alla. They Are nearer then you think for yet more close, then if they were
further off.


Alex. How am I lost in these distractions?

Fitz-Alla. For your speeches Gentlemen,
In taxing me for rashness; fore you all,
I will engage my state to half his wealth,
Nay to his sons revenues, which are less,
And yet nothing at all, till they come from him;
That I could (if my will stuck to my power),
Prevent this marriage yet, nay banish her
For ever from his thoughts, much more his arms.

Alex. Slack not this goodness, though you heap upon me
Mountains of malice and revenge hereafter:
I Would willingly resign up half my state to him,
So he would marry the meanest drudge I hire.

Green. He talks impossibilites, and you believe 'em.

Fitz-Alla. I talk no more, then I know how to finish,
My fortunes else are his that dares stake with me,
The poor young Gentleman I love and pity:
And to keep shame from him, (because the spring
Of his affection was my daughters first,
Till his frown blasted all,) do but estate him
In those possessions, which your love and care
Once pointed out for him, that he may have room,
To entertain fortunes of noble birth,
Where now his desperate wants casts him upon her:
And if I do not for his own sake chiefly,
Rid him of this disease, that now grows on him,
I Will forfeit my whole state, before these Gentlemen.

Green. Troth but you shall not undertake such matches,
We Will persuade so much with you.

Alex. Here Is my ring,
He will believe this token: fore these Gentlemen,
I will confirm it fully: all those lands,
My first love lotted him, he shall straight possess
In that refusal.

Fitz-All. If I change it not, change me into a beggar.

Green. Are you mad sir?

Fitz-All. It Is done.

Gosh. Will you undo your self by doing,
And show a prodigal trick in your old days?

Alex. It Is a match Gentlemen.

Fitz-All. I, I, sir I.
I akse no favor; trust to you for none,
My hope rests in the goodness of your son.
Exit Fitz-Allard.
Green. He holds it up well yet.

Gosh. Of an old knight in faith.

Alex. Cursed be the time, I laid his first love barren,
Wilfully barren, that before this hour
Had sprung forth friutes, of comfort and of honor;
He loved a virtuous Gentlewoman.
Enter Moll.
Gosh. Life, here is Mol.

Green. Jack.

Gosh. How do thou Jack?

Mol. How do thou Gallant?

Alex. Impudence, where is my son?

Moll. Weakensse, go look him.

Alex. Is this your wedding gown?

Mol. The man talks monthly:
Hot broth and a dark chamber for the knight,
I see he will be stark mad at our next meeting.
Exit Moll
Gosh. Why sir, take comfort now, there is no such matter,
No Priest will marry her, sir, for a woman,
Whiles that shape's on, and it was never known,
Two men were married and conioyn'd in one:
Your son has made some shift to love another.

Alex. What ere' she be, she has my blessing with her,
May they be rich, and fruitful, and receive
Like comfort to their issue, as I take in them,
Has pleased me now, marrying not this,
Through a whole world he could not choose amiss.

Green. Glad you are so penitent, for your former sin sir.

Gosh. Say he should take a wench with her smocke-dowry,
No portion with her, but her lips and arms?

Alex. Why? who thrive better sir? they have most blessing,
Though other have more wealth, and least repent,
Many that want most, know the most content.

Green. Say he should marry a kind youthful sinner.

Alex. Age will quench that, any offense but theft and drun-
Nothing but death can wipe away. (kennesse,
There sins are green, even when there heads are gray,
Nay I despair not now, my heart's cheered Gentlemen,
No face can come unfortunately to me,
Now sir, your news?
Enter a servant.
Servant. Your son with his fair Bride is near at hand,

Alex. Fair may their fortunes be.

Green. Now you are resolved sir, it was never she,

Alex. I find it in the music of my heart,
Enter Mol maskt, in Sebastians hand, and Fitz-Allard. See where they come.

Gosh. A proper lusty presence sir.

Alex. Now has he pleased me right, I always counseld him
To choose a goodly personable creature,
Just of her pitch was my first wife his mother.

Seb. Before I dare discover my offense, I kneel for pardon.

Alex; My heart gave it thee, before thy tongue could ask it,
Rise, thou have raised my joy to greater height.
Then to that seat where grief dejected it,
Both welcome to my love, and care for ever,
Hide not my happiness too long, all is pardoned,
Here are our friends, salute her, Gentlemen.
They unmask her.
Omnes. Heart, who this Mol?

Alex. O my reviving shame, is it I must live,
To be struck blind, be it the work of sorrow,
Before age take it in hand.

Fitz-All. Darkness and death.
Have you deceau'd me thus? did I engage
My whole estate for this.

Alex. You asked no favor,
And you shall find as little, since my comforts,
Play false with me, I Will be as cruel to thee
As grief to fathers hearts.

Mol. Why what is the matter with you?
Less too much joy, should make your age forgetful,
Are you too well, too happy?

Alex. With a vengeance.

Mol. Me thinks you should be proud of such a daughter,
As good a man, as your son.

Alex. O monstrous impudence.

Mol. You had no note before, an vnmarkt Kinght,
Now all the town will take regard on you,
And all your enemies fear you for my sake,
You may pass where you list, through crowdes most thick,
And come of bravely with your pursse vnpickt,
You do not know the benefits I bring with me,
No cheat dares work upon you, with thumb or knife,
While you have a roaring girl to your sons wife.

Alex. A devil rampant.

Fitz-Alla. Have you so much charity?
Yet to release me of my last rash bargain,
And I Will give in your pledge.

Alex. No sir, I stand to it, I Will work upon advantage,
As all mischiefs do upon me.

Aitz-All. Content, bear witness all then
His are the lands, and so contention ends.
Here comes your sons Bride, twixt two noble friends.
Enter the Lord Noland, and Sir Bewtious Ganymed, with Mary Fitz-Allard
between them, the Citizens and their wives with them.
Mol. Now are you gulled as you would be, thank me for it,
I Would a fore-singer in it.

Seb. Forgive me father,
Though there before your eyes my sorrow feigned,
This still was she, for whom true love complained.

Alex. Blessings eternal, and the joys of Angels,
Begin your peace here, to be signed in heaven,
How short my sleep of sorrow seems now to me,
To this eternity of boundless comforts,
That finds no want but utterance, and expression.
My Lord your office here appears so honorably:
So full of ancient goodness, grace, and worthiness,
I never took more joy in sight of man,
Then in your comfortable presence now.

L. Nol. Nor I more delight in doing grace to virtue,
Then in this worthy Gentlewoman, your sons Bride,
Noble Fitz-Alards daughter, to whose honor
And modest fame, I am a servant vowed,
So is this Knight.

Alex. Your loves make my joys proud,
Bring forth those deeds of land, my care laid ready,
And which, old knight, thy nobleness may challenge,
Joined with thy daughters virtues, whom I prise now,
As dearly as that flesh, I call mine own.
Forgive me worthy Gentlewoman, 'twas my blindness
When I rejected thee, I saw thee not,
Sorrow and wilful rashness grew like filmes
Over the eyes of judgment, now so clear
I see the brightness of thy worth appear.

Mary. Duty and love may I deserve in those,
And all my wishes have a perfect close,

Alex. That tongue can never err, the sound's so sweet,
Here honest son, receive into thy hands,
The keys of wealth, possession of those lands,
Which my first care provided, thei'r thine own,
Heaven give thee a blessing with 'em, the best joys,
That can in worldly shapes to man betide,
Are fertile lands, and a fair fruitful Bride,
Of which I hope you are sped.

Seb. I hope so too sir.

Mol. Father and son, I ha'done you simple service here,

Seb. For which thou shall not part Moll unrequited.

Alex. Thou art a madd girl, and yet I cannot now condemn thee.


Mol. Condemn me? troth and you should sir,
I Would make you seek out one to hang in my room,
I Would give you the slip at Gallows, and cozen the people.
Heard you this jest my Lord?

L. Nol. What is it Jack?

Mol. He was in fear his son would marry me,
But never dreamt that I would nere agree.

L. Nol. Why? thou had a suitor once Jack, when wilt marry?

Mol. Who I my Lord, I Will tell you when in faith,
When you shall hear,
Gallants void from Serieants fear,
Honesty and truth vnslandred,
Woman manned, but never pandred,
Cheates booted, but not coacht,
Vessels older e're they are broacht.
If my mind be then not varied,
Next day following, I Will be married.

L. Nol. This sounds like domes-day,

Moll. Then were marriage best,
For if I should repent, I were soon at rest.

Alex. In Troth tho'art a good wench, I Am sorry now,
The opinion was so hard, I conceived of thee.
Some wrongs I Have done thee.
Enter Trapdore.
Trap. Is the wind there now?
It Is time for me to kneel and confess first,
For fear it come too late, and my brains feel it,
Upon my paws, I ask you pardon mistress.

Mol. Pardon? for what sir? what has your rogueship done now?


Trap. I have been from time to time hired to confound you, by this old
Gentleman.


Mol. How?

Trap. Pray forgive him,
But may I connsell you, you should never do it.
Many a snare to entrapp your Worships life,
Have I laid privily, chains, watches, Jewels,
And when he saw nothing could mount you up,
Four hollow-hearted Angels he then gave you,
By which he meant to trap you, I to save you.

Alex. To all which, shame and grief in me cry guilty,
Forgive me now, I cast the worlds eyes from me,
And look upon thee freely with mine own:
I see the most of many wrongs before he,
Cast from the jaws of envy and her people,
And nothing foul but that, I Will never more
Condemn by common voice, for that is the whore,
That deceiues man's opinion; mockes his trust,
Cozens his love, and makes his heart unjust.

Mol. Here be the Angels Gentlemen, they were given me
As a Musician, I pursue no pity,
Follow the law, and you can cucke me, spare not
Hang up my vyall by me, and I care not.

Alex. So far I Am sorry, I Will thrice double 'em
To make thy wrongs amends,
Come worthy friends my honorable Lord,
Sir Bewteons Ganymed, and Noble Fitz-Allard,
And you kind Gentlewoman, whose sparkling presence,
Are glories set in marriage, beams of society,
For all your loves give luster to my joys,
The happiness of this day shall be remembered,
At the return of every smiling spring:
In my time now it is borne, and may no sadness
Sit on the brows of men upon that day,
But as I am, so all go pleased away.

Epilogus,
A Painter having drawn with curious Art
The picture of a woman (every part,
Limbed to the life) hung out the piece to sell:
People (who passed along) veiwing it well,
Gave several verdicts on it. some dispraised
The hair, some said the brows too high were raised,
Some hit her over the lips, mislik'd their color,
Some wished her nose were shorter; some, the eyes fuller,
Others said roses on her cheeks should grow,
Swearing they looked too pale, others cried no,
The workman still as fault was found, did mend it,
In hope to please all; (but this work being ended)
And hung open at stall, it was so vile,
So monstrous and so ugly all men did smile
At the poor Painters folly. Such we doubt
Is this our Comedy, Some perhaps do floute
The plot, saying; it is too thin, too weak, too mean,
Some for the person will revile the Scoene.
And wonder, that a creature of her being
Should be the subject of a Poet, seeing
In the worlds eye, none weighes so light: others look
For all those base tricks published in a book,
(Foul as his brains they flowed from) of Cutpurse,
Of Nips and Foysts, nastie, obscoene discourses,
As full of lies, as empty of worth or wit,
For any honest ear, or eye unfit. And thus,
If we to every brain (that is humerous)
Should fashion Scenes, we (with the Painter) shall
In striving to please all, please none at all.
Yet for such faults, as either the writers wit,
Or negligence of the Actors do commit,
Both crave your pardons: if what both have done,
Cannot full pay your expectation,
The Roaring Girl her self some few days hence,
Shall on this Stage, give larger recompense. (you,
Which Mirth that you may share in, her self does woe
And craves this sign, your hands to becken her to you.
FINIS.

