A Trick to catch the Old-one. As it has been lately Acted, by the Children
of Paul's.



AT LONDON Printed by George Eld, and are to be sold at his house in
Fleete-lane at the sign of the Printers-Presse. 1608.

A Trick to catch the old one.
Enter Witt-good a Gentleman, solus. Witt-good. All Is gone! still you are a
Gentleman, that is all; but a poor one, that is nothing: What Milk brings thy
Meadows forth now? where are thy goodly Vp-lands and thy Downe-lands, all
sunck into that little pit Lechery? why should a Gallant pay but two
shillings for his Ordnary that nourishes him, and twenty times two for his
Brothell that consumes him? but where is Long-acre? in my Uncles conscience,
which is 3. years voyage about; he that setts out upon his conscience, nere
finds the way home again, he is either swallowed in the quicksands of
Law-quillits, or splits upon the Piles of a Praemunire; yet these old
Foxe-braind -- and oxe-browde Uncles, have still defenses for their Avarice,
and Apologies for their practices, and will thus greet our follyes.

He that does his youth expose,
To Brothell, drink, and danger,
Let him that is his nearest Kin,
Cheat him before a stranger.
And that is his Uncle, it is a principle in Usury; I dare not visit the City,
there I should be too soon visited, by that horrible plague my Debts, and by
that means I loose a Virgins love, her portion and her Virtues, well, how
should a man live now, that has no living; hum? why are there not a million of
men in the world, that only soiourne upon their brain, and make their wits
their Mercers; and am I but one amongst that Million and cannot thrive upon it;
any Trick out of the compass of Law now, would come happily to me.


Enter Curtizan. Curt. My love.


Wit. My lothing; have thou been the secret consumption of my purse? and now
comst to undo my last means, my wits? wilt leave no virtue in me and yet thou
nere the better? hence Curtizan, round webd Tarantula.
That dryest the Roses in the cheeks of youth.

Cur. I have been true unto your pleasure, and all your lands thrice rackt,
was never worth the Jewel which I prodigally gave you, my virginity;
Lands morgag'd may return and more esteemde,
But honesty once pawnd, is nere redeemd.

Wit. For give I do thee wrong,
To make thee sin, and then to chid thee fort.

Cur. I know I am your loathing now, farewell.


Wit. Stay best invention, -- stay.


Cur. I that have been the secret consumption of your purse shall I stay now
to undo your last means, your wits? hence Currizan away.


Wit. I prithee, make me not mad at my own weapon, stay, (a thing few women
can do I know that, and therefore they had need wear stays;) be not contrary,
do love me?

Fate has so cast it that all my means I must derive from thee.


Cur. From me! be happy then,
What lies within the power of my performance,
Shall be commanded of thee.

Wit. Spoke like an honest drab in faith, it may prove som-thing what Trick is
not an Embrion at first, until a perfect shape come over it.


Cur. Come I must help you where abouts left you,
I Will proceed.
Tho you beget, it is I must help to breed,
Speak what is it, I Would feign conceive it.

Wit. So, so, so, thou shall presently take the name and form upon thee of a
rich country widow four hundred a year valiant, in Woods, in Bullocks, in
Barnes and in Rye-stacks, we will to London* and to my covetous Uncle.


Curt. I begin to applaud thee, our States being both desperate, they' are
soon resolute, but how for horses?


Wit. Mass that is true, the Jest will be of some continuance, let me see,
Horses now, a bottes on em; Stay, I have acquaintance with a mad Host, never
yet Bawd to thee, I have rinzde the whoresons gums in Mull-sack many a time
and often, put but a good Tale into his ear now, so it come off cleanely, and
there is Horse and man for us I dare warrant thee.


Curt. Arm your wits then speedily, there shall want nothing in me, either
in behavior, discourse or fashion, that shall discredit your intended purpose.
I will so art-fully disguise my wants,
And set so good a courage on my state,
That I will be believed.

Wit. Why then all is furnished; I shall go nigh to catch that old Fox mine
Uncle, tho he make but some amends for my undoing, yet there is some comfort
in it -- he cannot otherwise choose (tho it be but in hope to coozen me again)
but supply any hasty want that I bring to town with me, the Device well and
cunningly carried, the name of a rich Widow, and four hundred a year in
good earth, will so conjure up a kind of Usurers love in him to me, that he
will not only desire my presence, which at first shall scarce be granted him,
I Will keep off a purpose, but I shall find him so officious to deserve, so
ready to supply, I know the state of an old man's affection so well, if his
Nephew be poor indeed, why he letts God alone with him, but if he be once
rich, then heel be the first man that helps him.


Curt. It Is right the world, for in these days an old man's love to his
kindred, is like his kindness to his wife, it is always done before he comes
at it.


Wit. I owe thee for that Jest, be gone, here is all my wealth; prepare thy
self, away? I Will to mine Host withal possible have, and with the best Art,
and most profitable form, power the sweet circumstance into his ear, which
shall have the gift to turn all the wax to hunny; how no; oh the right
worshipful Seniors of our Country --


1. Whose that;


2. Oh the common Rioter, take no note of him.


Witg. You will not see me now, the comfort is ere it be long you will scarce
see your selves.


1. I wonder how he breathes, has consumed all upon that Curtizan?


2. We have heard so much.


1 You have heard all truth, his Uncle and my Brother, have been these three
years mortal Adversaries. Two old tough spirits, they seldom meet but
fight, or quarrel when it is calmest;
I think their anger be the very fire
That keeps their age alive:

2. What was the quarrel sir?


1. Faith about a purchase, fetching over a young heir; Master Hoord my
brother having wasted much time in beating the bargayne, what did me old Lucre*
but as his conscience moved him, knowing the poor Gentleman* stepped in between
them and couzned him himself.


2. And was this all sir:


1. This was even it sir, yet for all this I know no reason but the match might
go forward betwixt his wives Son and my Niece, what tho there be a
dissension between the two old men, I see no reason it should put a
difference between the two younger, it is as natural for old folks to fall out,
as for young to fall in? A scholar comes a wooing to my Niece, well, he is
wise, but he is poor, her Son comes a wooing to my Niece, well, he is a fool,
but he is rich --


2. I marry sir?


1. Pray now is not a rich fool better then a poor Philosopher.


2. One would think so in faith?


1. She now remains at London with my brother her second Uncle, to learn
fashions, practice Music, the voice between her lips, and the violl between
her legs, she will be fit for a consort very speedily, a thousand good pound
is her portion, if she marry, we will ride up and be merry, --


3. A match, if it be a match?

Exeunt.
Enter at one door, Witt-good, at the other Host. Wit. Mine Host?


Host. Young master Wit-good.


Wit, I have been laying all the Town for thee.


Host. Why what is the news Bully-Hadland?


Wit. What Geldings are in the house of thine own? answer me to that first.


Host. Why man, why?


Wit. Mark me what I say, I Will tell thee such a tale in thine ear, that thou
shall trust me spite of thy teeth, furnish me with some money, will, nille,
and ride up with me thy self Contra voluntatem et profession em.


Host. How: let me see this trick, and I Will say thou have more
Art then a Coniurer.

Wit. Do thou joy in my advancement?


Host. Do I love Sack and Ginger?


Wit. Comes my prosperity desiredly to thee?


Host. Come forfeitures to a Usurer, fees to an officer, punkes to an Host,
and Pigs to a Parson desiredly? why then la.


Wit Will the report of a Widow of four hundred a year boy, make thee
leap, and sing, and dance, and come to thy place again.


Host. Will thou command me now? I am thy spirit, conjure me into any shape.


Wit. I ha brought her from her friends, turnde back the Horses by a slight,
not so much as one amongst her six men, goodly large Yeomanly fellows, will
she trust with this her purpose: by this light all vnmand; regardlesse of her
state, neglectfull of vainglorious ceremony, all for my love; oh it is a fine
little voluble tongue mine Host, that wins a widow.


Host. No it is a tongue with a great T my boy that winnes a widow.


Wit. Now sir, the case stands thus, good mine Host, if thou love my
happiness assist me.


Host. Command all my beasts ith house.


Wit. Nay that's not all neither, prithee take truce with thy joy, and listen
to me, thou know I have a wealthy Uncle in the City, somewhat the wealthier
by my follyes; the report of this fortune well and cunningly carried, might be
a means to draw some goodness from the Usuring Rascal, for I have put her
in hope already of some estate that I have either in land or money: now if I be
found true in neither, what may I expect but a sudden breach of our love,
utter dissolution of the match, and confusion of my fortunes for ever.


Host. Will thou but trust the managing of thy business with me?


Wit. With thee? why will I desire to thrive in my purpose? will I hug four
hundred a year? I that know the misery of nothing? will that man wish a rich
widow, that has nere a hole to put his head in? with thee mine Host, why
believe it, sooner with thee then with a Couy of Counselors?


Host. Thank you for your good report in faith sir, and if I stand you not
instead, why then let an Host come off Hic and haec hostis, a deadly enemy to
Dice, Drink, and Venery; come where is this widow?


Wit. Hard at Parke-end.


Host. I Will be her Seruing-man for once.


Wit. Why there we let off together, keep full time, my thoughts were
striking then just the same number.


Host. I knew't, shall we then see our merry days again?


Wit. Our merry nights -- which nere shall be more seen.


Exeunt. Enter at several doors, old Lucre, and old Hoord, Gentlemen coming
between them, to pacify 'em. Lampr. Nay good Master Lucre, and you Master
Hoord* anger is the wind which you*re both too much troubled with all.


Hoord. Shall my adversary thus daily afront me, ripping up the old wound of
our malice, which three Summers could not close up, into which wound the very
sight of him, drops scalding Lead instead of Balsamum.


Luc. Why Hoord, Hoord, Hoord, Hoord, Hoord; may I not pass in the state of
quietness to mine own house, answer me to that* before witness, and why?
I Will refer the cause to honest euen-minded Gentlemen, or require the mere
indifferences of the Law, to decide this matter, I got the purchase, true;
was it not any man's case? yes, will a wiseman stand as a Bawd, whilst another
wipes his nose of the bargain, no, I answer no in that case.


Lampr. Nay sweet Master Lucre.


Hoord. Was it the part of a friend: no, rather of a Jew, mark what I say,
when I had beaten the bush to the last bird, or as I may term it, the price to
a pound, then like a cunning Usurer to come in the evening of the bargain, and
gleane all my hopes in a minute, to enter as it were at the back-doore of the
purchase, for thou nere camst the right way by it.


Luc. Have thou the conscience to tell me so, without any impeachment to thy
self?


Hoord. Thou that can defeat thy own Nephew, Lucre, lap his lands into
bonds, and take the extremity of thy kindreds forfeitures because he is a
rioter, a wast-thrift, a brothell-maister, and so forth -- what may a Stranger
expect from thee, but Vulnera delacerata, as the Poet says, delacerate dealing?


Luc. Vpbraidst thou me with Nephew? is all imputation laid upon me? what
acquaintance have I with his follyes, if he riott, it is he must want it, if
he surfeit, it is he must feel it: if he Drab it, it is he must lie by it,
what is this to me?


Hoord. What Is all to thee? nothing, nothing; such is the gulf of thy desire,
and the Wolf of thy conscience, but be assured old pecunious lucre, if ever
fortune so bless me, that I may be at leisure to vex thee, or any means so
favor me, that I may have opportunity to mad thee, I will pursue it with that
flame of hate, that spirit of malice, vnrepressed wrath, that I will blast thy
comforts.


Lu. Ha, ha, ha!


Lamp. Nay master Hoord you*re a wise Gentleman.


Hoord. I will so cross thee,


Luc. And I thee.


Hoord. So without mercy fret thee.


Luc. So monstrously oppose thee?


Hoord. Do scoff at my just anger? oh that I had as much power as usury
has over thee?


Luc. Then thou would have as much power as the devil has over thee.


Hoord. Toade!


Luc. Aspick.


Hoord. Serpent.


Luc. Viper.


Spi. Nay Gentlemen, then we must divide you perforce.


Lamp. When the fire grows too unreasonable hot, there is no better way then
to take of the wood.

Exeunt.
Manet Sam and Monyloue. Sam. A word good Signior.


Money. How now, what is the news?


Sam. It Is given me to understand, that you are a rival of mine in the love
of Mistress Joyce, master Hoords Niece: say me I, say me no.


Money. Yes, it is so.


Sam. Then look to your self, you cannot live long, I Am practizing every
morning, a month hence I Will challenge you.


Monyt. Give me your hand upon it there is my pledge I Will meet you?

Strikes him. Exit.
Sam. Oh, oh -- what reason had you for that sir to strike before the mouth,
you knew I was not ready for you, and that made you so cranck, I am not such a
coward to strike again I warrant you, my ear has the law of her side for it
burns horribly, I will teach him to strike a naked face, the longest day of
his life, slid it shall cost me some money, but I Will bring this box into the
Chancery.

Exit.
Enter Wit-good and the Host. Host. Fear you nothing sir, I have lodgd her in
a house of credit I warrant you.


Wit. Have thou the writings?


Host. Firm sir


Wit. Prithee stay, and behold two the most prodigious rascals that ever slipped
into the shape of men, Dampit sirrah, and young Gulf, his fellow Cater-piller.


Host. Dampit? sure I have heard of that Dampit.


Wit. Heard of him? why man he that has lost both his ears, may hear of
him, a famous infamous Trampler of time; his own phraze: note him well, that
Dampit sirrah, he in the uneven Beard, and the Serge cloak, is the most
notorious, usuring, blasphemous, Atheistical, Brothell, vomiting rascal, that
we have in these latter times now extant, whose first beginning was the
stealing of a mastie Dog from a Farmers house.


Host. He looked as if he would obey the commandment well, when he began
first with stealing.


Wit. True, the next Town he came at, he set the Dogs together by the ears.


Host. A sign he should follow the law by my faith.


Wit. So it followed indeed, and being destitute of all fortunes, stakte his
Mastie against a Noble, and by great fortune his Dog had the day, how he
made it up ten shillings I know not, but his own boast is, that he came to
town but with ten shillings in his purse, and now is credibly worth ten
thousand pound?


Host. How the devil came he by it?


Wit. How the devil came he not by it, if you put in the devil once riches
come with a vengeance, has been a Trampler of the Law sir, and the devil has
a care of his footmen, the Rogue has spied me now, he nibled me finely once
too; a pox search you, oh master Dampit, the very Loins of thee; cry you
mercy master Gulf, you walk so low I promise you I saw you not sir?


Gulf. He that walks low walks safe, the Poets tell us.


Wit. And nyer hell by a foot and a half then the rest of his fellows, but
my old Harry.


Damp. My sweet Theodorus?


Wit. It Was a merry world when thou came to town with ten shillings in thy
purse.


Damp. And now worth ten thousand pound my Boy, report it, Harry Dampit, a
trampler of time, say, he would be up in a morning, and be here with his
Serge Gown, dashed up to the hams in a cause, have his feet stincke about
Westminster hall and come home again, see the Galleouns, the Galleasses the
great Armadoes of the Law, then there be Hoyes and petty vessels, Owers and
Scullers of the time, there be picklocks of the Time too, then would I be
here, I would trample up and down like a Mule; now to the Judges, may it
please your reverend -- honorable father-hoods: then to my Counselor, may it
please your worshipful patience, then to the examiners Office, may it please
your Maistershippes Gentleness, then to one of the Clerks, may it please your
worshipful Lowzinesse, for I find him scrubbing in his codpeice, then to the
hall again, then to the Chamber again;


Wit. And when to the sellar again?


Damp. Even when thou will again; Tramplers of time, Motions of Fleete-streete,
and Visions of Holborne, here I have fees of one, there I have fees of another,
my clients come about me, the Fooli-aminy and Cocks-combri of the Country, I
still trasht and trotted for other men's causes, thus was poor Harry Dampit made
rich by others laziness, who, tho they would not follow their own Suites, I
made them follow me with their purses.


Wit. Did thou so old Harry?


Damp. I, and I souc'st them with bills of Charges ifayth, twenty pound a year
have I brought in for boate-hire, and I nere stepped into boat in my life.


Wit. Tramplers of time.


Dampit. I, Tramplers of time, Raskalls of time, Bulbeggars:


Wit. Ah you are a mad old Harrie? kind Master Gulf, I am bold to renew my
acquaintance.


Gulf. I embrace it sir.


Music. Exeunt. Incipit ACT. 2.
Enter Lucre. Lucre. My Adversary evermore twittes me with my Nephew, forsooth
my Nephew: why may not a virtuous uncle have a dissolute Nephewe? what tho he
be a Brotheller, a wast-thrift, a common Surfetter, and to conclude a beggar,
must sin in him, call up shame in me: since we have no part in their
follies, why should we have part in their infamies? for my strickt hand toward
his morgage that I deny not, I confess I had an Uncles penworth: let me see,
half in half, true, I saw neither hope of his reclayming, nor comfort in his
being, and was it not then better bestowed upon his Uncle, then upon one of
his Aunts, I need not say bawd, for every own knows what Aunt stands for in
the last Translation now sir.


Ser. 2. There Is a Country Seruing-man sir, attends to speak with your worship.


Lu. I Am at best leisure now, send him in to me;


Enter Host like a Seruingman. Host. Bless your venerable worship.


Lu. Welcome good fellow.


Host. He calls me thief at first sight, yet he little thinks I am an Host?


Luc. What Is thy business with me?


Host. Faith sir, I am sent from my Mistrisse to any sufficient Gentleman
indeed, to ask advise upon a doubtful point, it is indifferent sir, to whom I
come, for I know none, nor did my Mistres direct me to any particular man, for
she is as mere a stranger here as my self, only I found your worship within,
and it is a thing I ever loved sir to be dispacht as soon as I can:


Lu. A good blunt honesty, I like him well what is thy Mistres?


Host. Faith a Cuntry Gentlewoman and a widow sir, yesterday was the first
flight of us, but now she entends to stay till a little Term business be
ended.


Lu. Her name I prithee?


Host. It runs there in the writings sir, among her Lands, widow Medler?


Lu. Meddler? mass have I near heard of that widow?


Host. Yes, I wa^^nt you, have you sir, not the rich widdowe in Staffordsheere:


Lu. Cuds me, there it is indeed, thou have put me into memory, there is a
widow indeed, ah that I were a batchiler again.


Host. No doubt your worship might do much then, but she is fayrely promised to a
bachiler already.


Lu. Ah what is he I prithee?


Host. A Country Gentleman too, one whom your worship knows not I Am sure: has
spent some few follies in his youth, but marriage by my faith begins to call
him home, my Mistress loves him sir, and love couers faults you know, one
master VVit-good if ever you have heard of the Gentleman:


Lu. Ha? Wit-good say thou?


Host. That's his name indeed sir; my Mistress is like to bring him to a goodly
seat yonder, four hundred a year by my faith,


Lu. But I pray take me with you.


Host. I sir*


Luc. What Countryman might this young Wit-good be?


Host. A Lestershire gentleman sir.


Lu. My Nephew, by th* mass my Nephew, I Will fetch out more of this in faith, a
simple Country fellow, I Will workte out of him, and is that Gentleman say thou
presently to marry her?


Host. Faith he brought her up to town sir, has the best card in all the bunch
fort, her heart: and I know my Mistress will be married, ere she go down, nay
I Will swear that, for she is none of those widows that will go down first,
and be married after, she hates that I can tell you sir.


Luc. By my faith sir, she is like to have a proper Gentleman and a comely,
I Will give her that gift?


Host. Why does your worship know him sir?


Luc. I know him! dos not all the world know him, can a man of such exquisite
qualities be hid under a bushel?


Host. Then your worship may save me a labor, for I had charge given me to
enquire after him.


Lu. Enquire of him? if I might counsel thee, thou should nere trouble thy
self further, enquire of him of no more but of me, I Will fit thee? I grant he
has been youthful, but is he not now reclaimde; mark you that sir, has not
your Mistress think you been wanton in her youth? if men be wagges, are there
not women wagtayles?


Host. No doubt sir:


Lu. Does not he return wisest, that comes home whipped with his own follies.


Host. Why very true sir.


Lucr. The worst report you can hear of him I can tell you is that he has
been a kind Gentleman, a liberal and a worthy, who but lusty Wit-good,
thrice Noble Wit-good.


Host. Since your worship has so much knowledge in him, can you resolve me
Sir what his living might be, my duty binds me sir to have a care of my
mistress estate, she has been ever a good mistress to me though I say it, many
welthy Suitors has she Nonsuted for his sake, yet tho her Love be so fixed, a
man cannot tell whether his Nonperformance may help to remove it sir; he
makes us believe he has lands and living.


Luc. Who young master Wit-good! why believe it he has as goodly a fine living
out yonder, what do you call the place?


Host. Nay I know not in faith.


Luc. Hum, see like a Beast if I have not forgot the name, puh, and out yonder
again, goodly grown woods and fair meado ves, pax ont, I can nere hit of that
place neither, he; why hes Wit-good of Wit-good-Hall, he, an unknow thing.


Host. Is he so sir, to see how rumor will alter, trust me sir we heard once he
had no lands, but all lay morgagde to an Uncle he has in town here.


Luc. Push, it is a tale, it is a tale.


Host. I can assure you sir it was credibly reported to my Mistress.


Luc. Why do you think in faith he was ever so simple to morgage his lands to
his Uncle? or his uncle so unnatural to take the extremity of such a morgage.


Host. That was my saying still sir.


Luc. Puh, nere think it.


Host. Yet that report goes current.


Luc. Nay then you urge me,
Cannot I tell that best that am his Uncle,

Host How sir! what have I done.


Luc. Why how now in a Sown, man*


Host. Is your worship his Uncle sir.


Luc. Can that be any harm to you sir.


Host. I do beseech your sir do me the favor to conceal it, what a Beast was
I to utter so much: pray sir do me the kindness to keep it in, I shall have
my coat pulled ore my ears, ant should be known, for the truth is an't
please your worship, to prevent much rumor and many suitors, they entend to
be married very suddenly and privately.


Lucre. And do thou think it stands with my Judgment to do them injury,
must I needs say the knowledge of this marriage comes from thee? am I a fool
at fifty four? do I lack subteltie now that have got all my wealth by it?
there is a leash of Angels for thee, come let me woe thee, speak where lie
they?


Host. So I might have no anger sir --


Luc. Passion of me not a jot, prithee come.


Hostis. I would not have it known it came by my means, --


Luc. Why am I a man of wisdom?


Host. I dare trust your worship sir, but I Am a stranger to your house, and to
avoid al Intelligencers I desire your worshippes ear.


Luc. This fellowe's worth a matter of trust -- come sir, why now you are an
honest lad: ah sirrah Nephew?


Host. Please you sir now I have begun with your worship when shall I attend,
for your advice upon that doubtful point, I must come warily now.


Lucr. Tut, fear thou nothing, to morrowes evening shall resolve the doubt.


Host. The time shall cause my attendance.


Exit. Lucre. Fare thee well: there is more true honesty in such a Cuntrie
Seruingman, then in a hundred of our cloak companions, I may well call them
companions, for since blew coats have been turned into cloakes, we can
scarce know the man from the Master -- George --


Geo. Anon sir?


Lucr. List hither, -- keep the place secret, commend me to my Nephewe, I
know no cause tell him but he might see his Uncle?


Geog. I will sir.


Luc. And do you hear sir, take heed you use him with respect and duty.


Ge. Here Is a strange alteration, one day he must be turned out like a Beggar,
and now he must be called in like a Knight!

Exit.
Luc. Ah Sirrah, that rich widow, 400. a year, beside I here she lays Claim
to a title of a hundred more, this falls unhappily that he should bear a
Grudge to me now being likely to prove so rich, what is it tro that he makes me
a Stranger for? hum, I hope he has not so much wit to apprehend that I cozned
him, he decaues me then? good heaven, who would have thought, it would ever
have come to this pass, -- yet he is a proper Gentleman in faith, give him his
due -- marry that's his Morgage, but that I nere mean to give him, i will make him
rich enough in words if that be good, and if it come to a piece of money I will
not greatly stick fort, there may be hope some of the widows lands too, may
one day fall upon me if things be carried wisely: now sir, where is he?


Geo. He desires your worship to hold him excusde, he has such weighty Business
it commands him wholly from all men.


Luc. Were those my Nephews words?


Geo. Yes indeed sir.


Luc. When men grow rich they grow proud too, I perceive that, he would not
have sent me such an answer once within this tweluemonth, see what it is when a
man's come to his lands, return to him again sir, tell him his Uncle desires his
company for an hour* I Will trouble him but an hour say, it is for his own good
tell him, and do you hear sir, put worship upon him, go too, do as I bid you,
he is like to be a Gentleman of worship very shortly.


Geo. This is good sport in faith.

Exit.
Luc. Troth he uses his Uncle, discourteously now, can he tell what I may do
for him, Goodness may come from me in a minute that comes not in Seven year
again, he knows my humor I am not so usually good, it is no small thing that
draws kindness from me, he may know that, and he will; the chief cause that
inuites me to do him most good, is the sudden astonishing of old Hoord my
Adversary, how pale his malice will look at my Nephews Advancement, with what
a dejected Spirit he will behold his Fortunes, whom but last day, he
proclaymde Riotter, Penurious Make-shift, despised Brothell Master; ha, ha,
twill do me more secret Joy then my last purchasse, more precious comfott then
all these widows Reuennewes, -- Now Sir. --


Enter Wit-good. Geo. With much entrety he is at length come sir,


Lu Oh Nephew, let me salute you sir, your welcome Nephew


Wit. Uncle I thank you.


Luc. Yaue a sault Nephew, your a Stranger here, well Heaven give you joy.


Wit. Of what Sir?


Luc. Hah, we can hear.
You might have known your Uncles house in faith, you and your widow, go too,
you were too blame; If I may tell you so without offense.

Wit. How could you hear of that sir?


Luc. Oh pardon me,
It was your will to have it kept from me I perceive now.

Wit. Not for any defect of Love I protest Uncle.


Luc. Oh it was Unkindness Nephew, fie, fie, fie.


Wit I am sorry you take it in that sense sir.


Luc. Puh, you cannot color it in faith Nephew.


Wit. Will you but hear what I can say in my just excuse sir.


Luc. Yes faith will I, and welcome.


Wit. You that know my danger ith City sir so well, how great my debts are,
and how extreme my Creditors could not out of your pure judgment sir, have
wished us hither.


Luc. Mass a firm reason indeed,


Wi. Else my Uncles house, why tad been the only make -- Match. --


Luc. Nay and thy credit.


Wit. My credit? nay my countenance, push, nay I know uncle you would have
wrought it so by your wit you would have made her believe in time the whole
house had been mine --


Luc. I and most of the goods too --


Wit. La you there; well, let them al prate what they will there is nothing like
the bringing of a widow to ones Uncles house.


Luc. Nay let Nephews be ruled as they list, they shall find their Uncles
house, the most natural place when all is done.


Wit. There they may be bold.


Luc. Life, they may do any thing there man, and fear neither Beadle nor
Somner, an Uncles house! a very coale-harbour? Sir, I Will touch thee near now,
have thou so much interest in thy widow, that by a token thou could
presently send for her?


Wit. Troth I think I can uncle.


Luc. Go too, let me see that?


Wit. Pray command one of your men hither Uncle.


Luc. George?


Georg. Here sir.


Luc. Attend my Nephew? I love a life to prattle with a rich widow, it is pretty
me thinks when our tongues go together, and then to promise much and perform
little; I love that sport a life in faith, yet I am in the mood now to do my
Nephew some good, if he take me handsomely: what have you dispacht?


Wit. I ha sent sir?


Luc. Yet I must condemn you of unkindness Nephew.


Wit. Heaven forbid Uncle?


Luc. Yes faith must I; say your debts be many, your creditors importunate,
yet the kindness of a thing is all Nephew, you might have sent me close word
on it, without the least danger, or praeiudice to your fortunes.


Wit. Troth I confess it Uncle, I was too blame there, but indeed my intent
was to have clapped it up suddenly, and so have broke forth like a joy to my
friends, and a wonder to the world, beside there is a trifle of a forty pound
matter toward the setting of me forth, my friends should nere have known
on it, I meant to make shift for that my self*


Luc. How Nephew? let me not hear such a word again, I beseech you, -- shall I
be beholding to you?


Wit. To me alas, what do you mean Uncle?


Luc. I charge you upon my love: you trouble no body but my self.


Wit. You Have no reason for that Uncle.


Luc. Troth I Will nere be friends with you while you live and you do.


Wit. Nay and you say so Uncle, here is my hand, I will not doote --


Luc. Why well said, there is some hope in thee when thou will be ruled, i will
make it up fifty faith, because I see thee so reclaimde; peace, here comes my
wife with Sam her the other husbands Son.


Wit. Good Aunt --


Sa. Couze^ Wit-good? I rejoice in my salute, your most welcome to this Noble
City governed with the sword in the Scabbard,


Wit. And the wit in the pommell, good Master Sam fredome I return the salute.


Luc. By the mass she is coming wife, let me see now how thou will entertain
her.


Wife. I hope I am not to learn sir, to entertain a widdowe, it is not so long
ago since I was one my self?


Wit. Uncle?


Luc. She Is come indeed?


Wit. My Uncle was desirous to see you widow, and I praesum'd to enuite you.


Curti. The praesumption was nothing Master Wit-good, is this yours Uncle sir?


Luc. Marry am I sweet widow, and his good Uncle he shall find me, I by this
smack that I give thee, you are welcome, wife, bid the widow welcome the same
way again.


Sam. I am a Gentleman now too, by my fathers occupation, and I see no reason
but I may kiss a widdowe by my Fathers Copy, truly I think the Charter is
not against it, surely these are the words, the Son once a Gentleman, may
revel it, tho his father were a dauber, it is about the 15 page, -- i will to her
--


Lucre. You Are not very busy now, a word with thee sweet widow --


Sam. Coades-Nigs, I was never so disgrac'st, since the hour my mother whipped
me.


Luc. Beside, I have no child of mine own to care for, she is my second wife,
old, past bearing, clap sure to him widow, he is like to be my heir I can tell
you?


Curt. Is he so sir?


Luc. He knows it already and the knaves proud on it, jolly rich widows have
been offered him here ith City, great merchants wives, and do you think he
would once look upon them? forsooth heel none, you are beholding to him ith
Country then; ere we could be, nay, i will hold a wager widow if he were once
known to be in town, he would be presently sought after, nay and happy
were they, that could catch him first.


Curt. I think so?


Luc. Oh, there would be such running to and fro widow, he should not pass
the streets for them: he'ed be took up in one great house or other presently,
fah, they know he has it and must have it; you see this house here widdowe,
this house and all comes to him, goodly Rooms ready furnished, seeld with
plaster of paris, and all hung above with cloth of arras. Nephew!


Wit. Sir --


Luc. Show the widdowe your house, carry her into all the Rooms, and bid her
welcome, -- you shall see widow -- Nephew? -- strike all sure above and thou
be a good boy -- ah --


Wit. Alas sir, I know not how she would take it:


Luc. The right way I warrant tee, a pox, art an ass, would I were in thy
stead, get you up, I am a shamde of you, so: let them agree as they will now?
many a match has been struck up in my house a this fashion, let them try all
manner of ways still there is nothing like an Uncles house to strike the
stroke in, -- I Will hold my wife in talk a little, now Ginnee; your son there
goes a wooing to a poor Gentlewoman but of a 1000. portion, see my Nephew, a
lad of less hope, strikes at four hundred a year in good Rubbish*


Wif. Well we must do as we may sir.


Lucr. I Will have his money ready told for him, again he come down, let me
see too, by the mass I must present the widdowe with some Jewel, a good piece
a plate or such a device, twill harten her on well, I have a very fair
stranding cup, and a good hie standing cup will please a widow above al other
pieces.

Exit.
Wif. Do you mock us with your Nephew, I have a plot in my head son, in faith
husband to cross you.


Sam. Is it a tragedy plot, or a comedy plot, good mother.


Wif. It Is a plot shall vex him, I charge you of my blessing Son Sam, that
you presently withdraw the Action of your love from Master Hoords Niece.


Sam. How mother.


Wif. Nay I have a plot in my head in faith, here take this chain of gold and
this fair diamond, dog me the widow home to her lodging, and at thy best
opportunity fasten them both upon her -- nay I have a Reach, I can tell you thou
art known what thou art son among the right worshipful; all the twelve
companyes.


Sam. Truly I thank 'em for it.


Wif. He, he is a scab to thee, and so certify her, thou have two hundred a
year of thy self, beside thy good parts -- a proper person and a lovely, if I
were a widow I could find in my heart to have thee my self, son, I, from em
all.


Sam. Thank you for your good will mother, but in deed I had rather have a
Stranger: and if I woe her not in that Violent fashion, that I will make her be
glad to take these gifts ere I leave her, let me never be called the heir of
your body.


Wif. Nay I know there is enough in you son if you once come to put it forth.


Sam. I Will quickly make a Bolt, or a shaft ont.

Exeunt.
Enter Hoord and Monyloue. Mo. Faith Master Hoord, I have bestowde many months
in the Suite of your Niece, such was the dear love I ever bore to her virtues,
but since she has so extremely denied me, I am to lay out for my fortunes
else where.


Hoor. Heaven forbid but you should fir, I ever told you my Niece, stood
otherwise affected.


Mo. I must confess you did sir, yet in regard of my great loss of time, and
the zeal with which I sought your Niece, shall I desire one favor of your
worship.


Hoo. In regard of those two it is hard but you shall sir.


Mon. I shall rest grateful, it is not full 3. hours sir, since the happy
rumor of a rich Country widow came to my hearing.


Hoo. How a rich Country widow?


Mon. Four hundred a year landed.


Hoo. Yea?


Mon. Most firm sir, and I have learnt her lodging, here my suite begins sir,
if I might but entreat your worship to be a countenance for me, and speak a
good word: for your words will pass, I nothing doubt, but I might set fair
for the widdowe, nor shall your labor sir end altogether in thanks, two
hundred Angels --


Hoo. So, so, what suitors has she?


Mon. There lies the comfort sir, the report of her is yet but a whisper, and
only solicited by young Riotous Wit-good, Nephew to your mortal adversary.


Hoo. Ha? art certain he is her suitor?


Mon. Most certain sir, and his Uncle very industrious to beguile the widow,
and make up the match!


Hoo So? very good?


Mon. Now sir you know this young Wit-good is a spend-thrift -- dissolute fellow.


Hoo. A very Rascal:


Mon. A midnight surfetter.


Hoo. The spume of a Brothel-house.


Mon. True sir? which being well told in your worshippes phraze, may both
heave him out of her mind, and drive a fair way for me to the widows
affections.


Hoo. Attend me about 5.


Mon. With my best care sir.

Exit.
Hoo. Fool thou have left thy treasure with a thief, to trust a widdower with
a suite in love, happy revenge I hug thee, I have not only the means laid
before me, extremely to cross my adversary, and confound the last hopes of
his Nephew, but thereby to enrich my state; augment my reuennewes, and build
mine own fortunes greater, ha, ha.
I Will mar your phraze, ore-turne your flatteries,
Undo your windings, policies, and plots,
Fall like a secret and dispatchfull plauge on your secured comforts, why I am
able to buy 3. of Lucer, thrice out-bid him, let my out-monies be reckond and
all.

Enter three Creditors. 1. I am glad of this news.


2. So are we by my faith.


3. Young Wit-good will be a gallant again now.


Hoo. Peace?


1. I promise you Master Cockpit she is a mighty rich widow.


2. Why have you ever heard of her.


1. Who widow Medler, she lies open to much rumor.


3. Four hundred a year they say in very good land.


1. Nay take it of my word if you believe that, you believe the least.


2. And to see how closse he keeps it.


1. Oh sir there is policy in that to prevent better suitors.


3. He owes me a hundred pound, and I protest I near lookte for a penny.


1. He little dreams of our coming, heel wonder to see his creditors upon
him.

Exeunt.
Hoo. Good, his creditors, i will follow, this makes for me, all know the
widows wealth and it is well known, I can estate her fairly, I and will.
In this one chance shines a twice happy Fate,
I both deiect my foe, and raise my state.

Music. Exit. Incipit ACT. 3.
Wit-good with his Creditors. Wit. Why alas, my Creditors? could you find no
other time to undo me but now, rather your malice appears in this then the
justness of the debt.


1. Master Wit-good I have forborne my money long.


Wit. I pray speak low sir, what do you mean?


2. We hear you are to be married suddenly to a rich Country widow?


Wit. What can be kept so closse but you creditors here on it, well, it is a
lamentable state, that our chiefest afflicters should first hear of our
fortunes, why this is no good course in faith sirs, if ever you have hope to be
satisfied, why do you seek to confound the means that should work it,
there is neither piety, no nor policy in that, shine favorably now, why I may
rize and spread again, to your great comforts.


1. He says true in faith.


Wit. Remove me now, and I consume for ever.


2. Sweet Gentleman?


Wit. How can it thrive which from the Sun you sever.


3. It cannot indeed?


Wit. Oh then show patience, I shall have enough to satisfy you all.


1. I, if we could be content a shame take us.


Wit. For look you, I am but newly sure yet to the widow, and what a Rend
might this discredit make: within these 3. days will I bind you lands for
your securities.


1. No, good Master Wit-good,
Would twere as much as we dare trust you with?

Wit. I know you have been kind, how ever now either by wrong report, or
false incitement your gentleness is iniurde, in such a state as this a man
cannot want foes.

If on the sudden he begin to rize,
No man that lives can count his enimyes.
You had some intelligence I warrant ye, from an ill-willer.

2. Faith we heard you brought up a rich widow sir, and were suddenly to
marry her.


Wit. I, why there it was, I knew it was so, but since you are so well resolude of
my faith toward you, let me be so much fauor'd of you, I beseech you all --


All. Oh, it shall not need in faith sir, --


Wit. As to lie still a while, and bury my debts in silence, till I be fully
possessed of the widow, for the truth is, I may tell you as my friends --


All. Oh -- o -- o --


Wit. I am to raise a little money in the City, toward the setting forth of my
self, for mine own credit, and your comfort, now if my former debts should be
diuulg'd, all hope of my proceedings were quite extinguished!


1. Do you hear sir, I may deserve your custom hereafter, pray let my money
be accepted before a strangers, here is forty pound I received as I came to
you, if that may stand you in any stead make use on it, nay pray sir, it is at
your service --


Wit. You do so ravish me with kindness, that I Am constrainde, to play the
maid and take it?


1. Let none of them see it I beseech you.


Wit. Fah --


1. I hope I shall be first in your remembrance after the marriage rites.


Wit. Believe it firmly.


1. So, what do you walk sirs?


2. I go -- take no care sir for money to furnish you, within this hour i will
send you sufficient: come Master Cockpit we both stay for you.


3. I ha lost a ring in faith, i will follow you presently -- but you shall find
it sir, I know your youth and expenses have disfurnisht you of all Jewels,
there is a Ruby of twenty pound price sir, bestow it upon your widow, -- what
man, twill call up her blood to you, beside if I might so much work with you,
I would not have you beholding to those bloud-suckers for any money.


Wit. Not I believe it.


3. The'ar a brace of cut-throates?


Wit. I know them.


3. Send a note of all your wants to my shop and i will suply you instantly.


Wit. Say you so, why here is my hand then no man living shall do it but thy self.


3. Shall I carry it away from them both then.


Wit. I faith shall thou?


3. Troth then I thank you sir.


Wit* Welcome good master Cockpit!

Exit. ha, ha, ha? why is not this better now, then lying a bed, I perceive
there is nothing coniures up wit sooner then poverty, and nothing lays it down
sooner then wealth and lechery? this has some savor yet, oh that I had the
morgage from mine Uncle as sure in possession as these trifles, I would
forswear Brothel at noone day, and Muscadine and eggs at midnight.


Enter Curtezan. Curt. Master Wit-good? where are you?


Wit. Holla.


Cur. Rich News!


Wit. Would twere all in Plate,


Cur. There Is some in chains and Jewels, I am so haunted with shuters Master
Wit-good, I know not which to dispatch first.


Wit. You have the better term by my faith


Cur. Among the number, one Master Hoord an Ancient Gentleman.


Wit. Upon my life my Uncles adversary.


Cur. It may well hold so, for he rayles on you,
Speaks shamefully of him.

Wit. As I could wish it.


Cur. I first denied him, but so cunningly,
It rather promisde him assured hopes,
Then any loss of labor.

Wit. Excellent,


Cur. I expect him every hour, with Gentlemen,
With whom he labors to make good his words,
To approve you Riotous, your state consumde, your Uncle, --

Wit. Wench, make up thy own fortunes now, do thy self a good turn once in
thy Days, he is rich in money, moueables, and lands, -- marry him, he is an old
doting fool, and that's worth all, marry him, twould be a great comfort to me
to see thee do well in faith, -- marry him, twould ease my conscience well to see
thee well destowd, I have a care of thee in faith.


Cur. Thanks sweet master Wit-good.


Wit. I reach at farther happiness; first I am sure it can be no harm to thee,
and there may happen goodness to me by it, prosecute it well, lets send up for
out wits, now we require their best and most pregnant Assistance!


Cur. Step in, I think I hear them.

Exit.
Enter Hoord and Gentlemen with the Host, -- seruingman. Hoo. Art thou the
widows man, by my faith sh' as a company of proper men then.


Host. I am the worst of six sir, good enough for blew-coates.


Ho. Hark hither, I hear say thou art in most credit with her.


Host. Not so sir.


Hoo. Come, come, you are modest, there is a Brace of royalls, prithee help me
to the speech of her.


Hos. I Will do what I may sir always saving my self harmless.


Hoo. Go too do it I say, thou shall hear better from me.


Hos. Is not this a better place then 5. Mark a year standing wages; say a
man had but 3. such clients in a day, me thinks he might make a poor living
ont, beside I was never brought up with so little honesty, to refuse any man's
money never; what g^lles there are a this side the world, now know I the
widows mind, none but my young master comes in her clutches, ha, ha, ha.

Exit.
Hoo. Now my dear Gentlemen stand firmly to me, you know his follyes, and my
worth.


1. We do sir.


2. But Master Hoord, are you sure he is not ith house now?


Hoo. upon my honesty* I chose this time,
A purpose, fit, the spend-thrift is abroad,
Assist me: here she comes* now my sweet widow,

Cur. Y are welcome Master Hoord.


Hoo. Dispatch, sweet Gentlemen, dispatch,
I am come widow, to prove those my words,
Neither of envy Sprung nor of false tongs,
But such as their desar^s and Actions,
Do merit and bring forth, all which these Gentlemen well known and better
reputted will confess.

Cur. I cannot tell,
How my affections may dispose of me,
But surely if they find him so desartlesse,
They Will have that reason to withdraw themselves.
And therefore Gentlemen I do entreat you,
As you are fair in Reputation,
And in appearing form so shine in truth;
I am a widow and alas you know,
Soon ouerthowen, it is a very small thing,
That we with-stand, our weakness is so great,
Be partial unto neither, but deliver,
Without affection your opinion,

Hoo. And that will drive it home,


Cur Nay I besecch your silence Master Hoord,
You are a party.

Ho. Widow? not a word!


1. The better first to work you to belief,
Know neither of us owe him flattery,
Nor the other malice, but vnbribed censure,
So help us our best fortunes.

Cur. It suffizes?


1. That Wit-good is a riotous undone man,
Imperfect both in fame and in estate:
His debts welthier then he, and executions
In wait for his due body, we'ele maintain
With our best credit, and our dearest blood.

Curt. Nor land, nor living say you, pray take heed you do not wrong the
Gentleman?


1. What we speak,
Our lives and means are ready to make good.

Cur. Alas, how soon are we poor souls beguild!


2. And for his Uncle. --


Ho. Let that come to me,
His Uncle a severe extortioner,
A Tyrant at a forfeiture, greedy of others miseries,
One that would undo his brother; nay swallowe
Up his father, if he can
Within the fadomes of his conscience.

1. Nay believe it widow,
You had not only matched your self to wants,
But in an evil and unnatural stock.

Hoo. Follow hard, Gentlemen, follow hard?


Curt. Is my love so deceau'd, before you all
I do renounce him, on my knees I vow
He nere shall marry me, --

Wit. Heaven knows he never meant it?


Hoo. There, take her at the bound, --


1. Then with a new and pure affection,
Behold you Gentleman, grave, kind and rich:
A match worthy your self, esteeming him,
You do regard your state.

Hoo. I Will make her a ioynture say.


1. He can join land to land, and will possess you of what you can desire.


2. Come widow come.


Curt. The world is so deceitful?


1. There it is deceitful,
Where flattery, want, and imperfection lies:
But none of these in him? push --

Curt. Pray sir.


1. Come you widows are ever most back-ward, when you should do your selves
most good, but were it to marry a chin not worth a hair now, then you would
be forward enough? come, clap hands, a match.


Hoo. Withal my heart widow, thanks Gentlemen,
I will deserve your labor, and thy love.

Cur. Alas, you love not widows but for wealth,
I promise you I ha nothing sir,

Hoo. Well said, widdowe, well said, thy Love is all I seek, before these
Gentlemen.


Cur. Now I must hope the best,


Hoo. My joys are such they want to be expressed,


Cur. But Master Hoord, one thing I mus^ remember you of before these
gentlemen your friends, how shall I suddenly avoid the loathed Solleciting of
that periurd Wit-good, and his Tedious -- dissembling Uncle, who this very uery
day has appointed a meeting for the same purpose too, where had not truth come
forth I had been undone, utterly undone.


Hoo What think you of that Gentlemen.


1. It Was well deuized.


Hoo. Hark thee widow, train out young Wit-good single, hasten him thither
with thee, somewhat before the hour where at the place appointed these
Gentlemen and my self will wait the opportunty, when by some slieght removing
him from thee we will suddenly enter and surprise thee, carry thee away by boat
to Coale-harbour, have a Priest ready and there Clap it up instantly, how
like it widow?


Cur. In that it pleases you, it likes me well.


Hoo. I Will kiss thee for those words, come* Gentlemen,
Still must I live a Suitor to your favors,
Still to your aid beholding.

1. We Are engade sir.
It Is for our credits now to see it well ended.

Hoo. It Is for your honors Gentlemen; nay look toote,
Not only in joy, but I in wealth excel,
No more sweet widow, but sweet wife, farewell.

Cur. Farewell sir. --

Exeunt. Enter Wit-good.
Wit. Oh for more scope, I could laugh eternally,
Give you joy Mistres Hoord, I promise your fortune was good forsooth, you have
fell upon wealth enough, and there is young Gentlemen enough can help you to the
rest; now it requires our wits: carry thy self but heedfully now, and we are
both --

Host. Master Wit-good your Uncle --

Enter Lucre?
Wit. Cuds me, remove thy self a while, i will serve for him?


Luc. Nephew, good morrow, Nephew?


Wit. The same to you kind Uncle.


Luc. How fares the widow, does the meeting hold?


Wit. Oh no question of that sir?


Luc. I Will strike the stroke then for thee, no more days.


Wit. The sooner the better Uncle, oh she is mightily followed, --


Lucre. And yet so little rumourd.


Wit. Mightily? here comes one old Gentleman, and heel make her a ioynture of
three hundred a year forsooth, another welthy suitor will estate his son in
his life time, and make him weigh down the widow, here a Merchants son will
possess, her with no less then three goodly Lordships at once, which were all
pawnes to his Father.


Luc. Peace Nephew let me hear no more of them, it mads me, thou shall
prevent them all, no words to the widow of my coming hither, let me see, it is
now upon nine, before twelve. Nephew we will have the bargain struck, we will
faith boy.


Wit. Oh my precious Uncle.

Exit.
Hoord and his Niece. Hoo. Niece, sweet Niece, prithee have a care to my
house, I leave al to thy discretion, be content to dream a while, i will have a
husband for thee shortly, put that care upon me wench, for in choosing wives
and husbands I am only fortunate, I have that gift given me.

Exit.
Niece. But it is not likely you should choose for me,
Since Nephew to your chiefest enemy:
Is he whom I affect, but oh forgetful,
Why do thou flatter thy affections so:
With name of him, that for a widows bed,
Neglects thy purer love, can in be so?
Or does report dissemble: how now sir?

Geo. A letter with which came a private charge.


Nee. Therein I thank your care -- I know this hard,
Reads. Deerer then sight, what the world reports of me yet believe not,
rumor will alter shortly, be thou constant, I am still the same that I was in
love, and I hope to be the same in fortunes.

Theodorus Wit-good.


I am resolude, no more shall fear or doubt,
Raise their pale powers to keep affection out.
Exit.
Enter with a Drawer, Hoord, and two Gentlemen. Dra. You're very welcome
Gentlemen, Dick show those Gentlemen the Pomgranite there, --


Hoo. Hist --


Dra. Up those stairs Gentlemen.


Hoo. Pist Drawer, --


Dra. Anon sir?


Hoo. Prithee ask at the Bar, if a gentlewoma^ came not in lately?


Dra. William at the Bar did you see any Gentlewoman come in lately, speak you
I, speak you no.


Within. No, none came in yet but mistres Florence.


Dra. He says none came in yet sir, but one Mistres Florence.


Hoo. What is that Florence? a widow!


Dra. Yes a duch widow.


Hoo. How?


Dra. That's an English drab sir, give your worship good morrow.


Hoo. A merry knave in faith, I shall remember a dutch widow the longest day of
my life.


1. Did not I use most art to win the widow.


2. You shall pardon me for that sir, Master Hoord knows I took her at best
vantage.


Hoo. What Is that sweet Gentlemen, what is that?


2. He will needs bear me down that his art only, wrought with the widow
most.


Hoo. Oh you did both well Gentlemen, you did both well, I thank you.


1. I was the first that moved her.


Hoo. You were in faith.


2. But it was I that took her at the bound.


Hoo. I, that was you, faith Gentlemen, it is right.


3. I boasted least, but it was I joined their hands,


Hoo. By The mass I think he did, you did all well gentlemen, you did al well,
contend no more:


1. Come you rooms fittest:


Ho. True it is next the door?

Exit.
Enter Wit-g: Curt: and Host. Dra. Your very welcome, please you to walk up
stai^s cloths laid sir.


Curt. Up stairs! troth I am weary Master Wit-good


Wit. Rest your self here a while widdowe, we will have a cup of Muscadine in
this little Room.


Dra A cup of Muscadine, you shall have the best sir.


Wit. But do you hear sirrah.


Dra. Do you call, anon sir.


Wit. What is there provided for dinner


Dra. I cannot readily tell you sir, if you please, you may go into the
kitchen and see your self sir, many Gentlemen of worship do use to do it, I
assure you sir?


Host. A pretty familiar Priggin rascal, he has his part without book?


Wit. Against you are ready to drinck to me, widow, i will be present to pledge
you.


Curt. Nay I commend your care, it is done well of you? ass what have I forgot.


Host. What Mistres?


Curt. I slipped my wedding Ring off when I washed, and left it at my lodging,
prithee run, I shall be sad without it, so, he is gone! -- boy?


Boy. Anon forsooth?


Cur. Come hither sirrah, learn secretly if one Master Hoord an ancient
Gentleman be about house?


Boy. I heard such a one named.


Cur. Commend me to him.


Enter Hoord with Gentlemen. Hoo. I be do thy commendations?


Cur. Oh you come well: away, to boat, be gone.


Hoo. Thus wisemen are revenged give two for one.

Exeunt.
Enter Wit-good and Vintner. Wit. I must request you sir, to show extraordinary
care, my Uncle comes with Gentlemen his friends, and it is upon a making?


Vin. Is it so?
I Will give a spetiall charge good Master Wit-good, may I be bold to see her?

Wit. Who he widow?
Withal my heart ifayth, i will bring you to her?

Vin. If she be a Staffordsheere Gentlewoman, it is much if I know her not, --


Wit. How now, boy, drawer.


Vin. Hie?


Boy. Do you ca^l sir?


Wit. Went the Gentlewoman up that was here?


Boy. Up sir? she went out sir.


Wit. Out sir?


Boy. Out sir: one Master Hoord with a guard of Gentlemen carried her out at
backdoore, a pretty while since sir.


Wit. Hoord, death and darkness, Hoord.

Enter Host.
Host. The devil of ring I can find?


Wit. How now, what news, where is the widow?


Host. My Mistress? is she not here sir?


Wit. More madness yet.


Host. She sent me for a Ring.


Wit. A plot, a plot: to Boat she is stole away.


Host. What?

Enter Lucre with Gentlemen.
Wit. Follow, enquire, old Hoord my Uncles Adversary --


Lucr. Nephew, what is that?


Wit. Thrice miserable wretch.


Lucr. Why what is the matter?


Vint. The widdow's borne away sir?


Lucr. Ha, passion of me, a heavy welcome Gentlemen.


1. The widow gone?


Luc. Who durst attempt it?


Wit. Who but old Hoord, my Uncles adversary?


Luc. How?


Wit. With his confederates.


Luc. Hoord, my deadly enemy, Gentlemen stand to me,
I will not bear it, it is in hate of me,
That villain seeks my shame, nay thrifts my blood, he owes me mortal
malice,
I Will spend my wealth on this despitefull plot,
Ere he shall cross me and my Nephew thus.

Wit. So malitiouslie.

Enter Host.
Luc. How now you treacherous Rascal?


Host. That Is none of my name sir.


Wit. Poor soul he knew not on it.


Luc. I Am sorry, I see then 'twas a mere plot.


Host. I trac'de them nearly. --


Luc. Well.


Host. And hear for certain, they have took Cole-harbor.


Luc. The Diuils Sanctuary,
They shall not rest, I Will pluck her from his arms,
Kind and dear Gentlemen, if ever I had seat within your breasts --

1. No more good sir, it is a wrong to us,
To see you injured in a cause so just:
We Will spend our lives, but we will right our friends,

Lu. Honest, and kind, come, we have delayed to long,
Nephew take comfort; a Just cause is strong.
Exeunt.
Wit. That's all my comfort Uncle, ha, ha, ha.
Now may events fall luckily, and well,
He that nere strives, says wit shall nere excel.
Eixt.
Enter Dampit, the Usurer drunk* Dam. When did I say my prayers? In Anno 88.
when the great Armado was coming, and In Anno. 99. when the great Thundering
and Lighting was I prayed heartily then in faith, to overthrow Poouyes new
buildings, I kneeld by my great iron chest I remember.


Au. Master Dampit, one may hear you, before they see you, you keep sweet
hours Master Dampit, we were all a bed 3 hours ago.


Dam. Audry.


Au. Oh yare a fine Gentleman.


Dam. So I am in faith, and a fine Scholar, do you use to go to bed Bed, so
early Audry?


Au. Call you this early Master Dampit.


Dam. Why is it not one of Clock ith morning is not that early enough? fetch me
a glass of fresh-Beere.


Au. Here, I have warmd your Nightcap for you master Dampit.


Dam. Draw it on then -- I am very weak truly, I have not eaten so much as
the bulk of an Egg these 3. days.


Au. You have drunk the more Master Dampit,


Dam. What Is that?


Au. You might, and you would Master Dampit.


Dam. I answer you I cannot, hold your prating, you prat too much, and
understand too little, are you answered, -- give me a glass of bear.


Au. May I ask you how you do Master Dampit?


Dam. How do I? in faith naught.


Au. I nere knenw you do otherwise,


Dam. I eat not one pennort of bread these 2. years, give me a glass of
fresh beer, -- I am not sick, nor I am not well. --


Au. Take ths warm Napken about your neck sir, whilst I help to make you
unready.


Damp. How now Audrie-prater, with your skiruy devices, what say you now?


And. What say I Master Dampit? I say nothing but that you are very weak,


Dam. Faith thou have more cunny catching devices then all London?


And. Why Master Dampit I never deceiu*d you in all my life?


Dam. Why was that? because I never did trust thee.


And. I care not what you say Master Dampit?


Dam. Hold thy prating, I answer thee, thou art a beggar, a queen, and a
bawd: are you answered.


And. Fie Master Dampit, a Gentleman and have such words.


Dam. Why thou base drudge of infortunity, thou kitchin-stuffe drab of
Beggary, Roguery and cockscombre, thou Cauernesed queen of foolery, knavery
and baudreaminy, i will tell thee what, I will not give a lowse for thy fortunes:


And. No, master Dampit, and there is a Gentleman comes a wooing to me, and he
doubts nothing but that you will get me from him:


Dam: I, if I would either have thee or lie with thee for two thousand pound,
would I might be dambd, why thou base impudent queen of foolery, flattery,
and cockscombry, are you answered?


And. Come will you rise and go to bed sir?


Dam. Rise, and go to bed too Audry? how does Misters Proserpine?


And: Fooh --


Dam: She Is as fine a Philosipher of a stinkards wife, as any within the
liberties, -- fah, fah Audry:


And: How now Master Dampit?


Dam. Fie upon it, what a choice of stinckes here is, what have thou don Audry
fie vppon't, here is a choice of stinckes indeed; give me a glass of fresh
Beer, and then I will to bed:


And: It waits for you above sir?


Dam: Foh, I think they burn horns in Barnards Inn, if ever I smelt such an
abominable stinck, usury forsake me:


And. They be the stinking nails of his trampling feet, and he talks of
burning of horns:

Exit.
Incipit ACT. 4.
Enter at Cole-harbour, Hoord, the Widow and Gentlemen, he married now. 1.
Join hearts, join hands, In wedlocks bands,
Never to part, till death cleave your heart,
You shall forsake all other women,
You Lords, Knights, Gentlemen, and Yeomen.
What my tongue slips, make up with your lips.

Hoor. Give you joy Mistress Hoord, let the kiss come about,
Who knocks? convey my little Pig-eater out.

Luc. Hoord?


Hoor, Upon my life, my adversary, Gentlemen.


Luc. Hoord, open the door, or we will force it open,
Give us the widow.

Hoor. Gentlemen keepe'm out.


Lamp. He comes upon his death that enters here.


Luc. My friends assist me.


Hoor. He has assistants, Gentlemen.


Lamp. Tut, nor him, nor them, we in this action fear.


Luc. Shall I in peace, speak one word with the widow?


Curt. Husband and Gentlemen, hear me but a word.


Hoor. Freely sweet wife.


Curt. Let him in peaceably, you know we are sure, from any act of his.


Hoor. Most true,


Lu. You may stand by and smile at his old weakness, let me alone to answer
him.


Hoo. Content,
Twill be good mirth in faith, how think you Gentlemen?

Lamp. Good gullery?


Hoo. Upon calm conditions let him in.


Luc. All spite and malice --


Lamp. Hear me Master Lucre, so you will vow a peaceful entrance with those
your friends and only exercize
Calm conference with the widow, without fury,
The passage shall receive you.
Enter Lucre.
Lu. I do vow it.


Lamp. Then enter and talk freely, here she stands.


Lu. Oh Master Hoord, your spite has wacht the hour, your excellent at
vengeance Master Hoord.


Hoor Ha, ha, ha.


Luc. I am the fool you laugh at, you are wise sir and know the seasons,
well, come hither widow, why is it thus!
Oh you have done me infinite disgrace,
And your own credit no small Injury,
Suffer mine enemy so dispitefully
To bear you from my Nephewe, oh,
I had rather half my substance had been forfet, and begd by some staru*d
Rascal.

Curti. Why what would you wish me do sir?
I must not overthrow my state for love,
We have too many presidents for that,
From thousands of our welthie undone widows
One may derive some wit; I do confess,
I lou*d your Nephew, nay I did affect him,
Against the mind and liking of my friend:
Believed his promises, lay here in hope,
Of fla^terd living and the boast of lands,
Coming to touch his wealth and state indeed,
It appears dross, I find him not the man,
Imperfect, mean, scarce furnished of his needs:
In words, fair Lordships, in performance Houills,
Can any woman love the thing that is not?

Luc. Broke you for this?


Curt. Was it not cause too much?
Send to enquire his state, most part of it,
Lay two years morgag'd in his Uncles hands:

Luc: Why say it did, you might have known my mind; I could have soon
restorde it.


Cur. I had I but seen any such thing performed why twould have tied my
affection and contaynd me in my first desires, do you think ifayth, that I
could twine such a dry, oak as this, had promise in your Nephew took effect:


Luc: Why and there is no time past, and rather then my adversary should thus
thw'art my hopes, I would --


Curt. ^ut you have been ever full of golden ^peech,
If words were lands, your Nephew would be rich.

Lu. Widow, believe it I vow by my best bliss,
Before these Gentlemen I will give in
The morgage to my Nephew instantly,
Before I sleep or eat.

1. We Will pawn our credits widow, what he speaks shall be performde in
fulness.


Luc: Nay more I will estate him
In farther blessings, he shall be my heir*
I have no Son,
I Will bind my self to that condition.

Cur. When I shall hear this done, I shall soon yield, to reasonable terms.


Lu. In the mean season,
Will you protest before these Gentlemen,
To keep your self, as you are, now at this present.

Curt. I do protest before these Gentlemen,
I will be as clear then, as I am now.

Lu: I do believe you, here is your own honest servant,
I Will take him along wi^h me.

Cur. I, with all my heart.


Luc: He shall see all performde and bring you word.


Cur. That's all I wait for.


Hoo. What have you finished Master Lucre? ha, ha, ha, ha!


Lucre. So, laugh Hoord, laugh at your poor enemy, do, the wind may turn you
may be laughed at too, yes marry may you sir -- ha, ha, ha?

Exeunt.
Hoo. Ha, ha ha, if every man that swells in malice,
Could be reuengd as happily as I:
He would choose hate, and forswear amity.
What did he say wife, prithee?

Cur. Faith spoke to ease his mind, --


Hoo. Oh -- o -- o --


Cur. You know now, little to any purpose.


Hoo. True, true, true.


Cur. He would do mountains now.


Hoo. I, I, I, I.


Lamp. You Have struck him dead Master Hoord.


Spich. I and his Nephew desperate:


Hoo. I knowte sirs I,
Never did man so crush his enemy?
Exeunt.
Enter Lucre with Gentlemen meeting Sam Free-dome. Lu. My son in law,
Sam Freedom? where is my Nephew?

Sam. O man in lamentation father?


Lu. How!


Sa. He thumpes his breast like a gallant Dicer that has lost his doublet, and
stands in's shirt to do penance:


Lu. Alas poor gentleman.


Sam. I warrant, you may hear him sigh in a still evening to your house at
Hyegate.


Lu. I prithee send him in.


Sam. Were it to do a greater matter, I will not stick with you sir, in regard
you married my Mother?


Lu: Sweet Gentlemen cheer him up, I will but fetch the morgage, and return
to you instantly.

Exit.
1. We Will do our best sir? -- see where he comes,
Even ioylesse and regardlesse of all form.

2. Why how Master Wit-good, fie, you a firm scholar, and an understanding
Gentleman, and give your best parts to passion.


1. Come fie?


Wit: Oh Gentlemen! --


1: Sorrow of me what a sigh was there sir, nine such widows are not worth
it.


Wit. To be borne from me by that lecher Hoord.


1. That vengeance is your Uncles, being done
More in despite to him, then wrong to you,
But we bring comfort now, --

Wit. I beseech you Gentlemen.


2. Cheer thy self man, there is hope of her ifayth?


Wit. To gladsome, to be true.

Enter Lucre.
Luc: Nephew what cheer? alas poor Gentleman how art thou changd? call thy
fresh blood into thy cheeks again, she comes --


Wit. Nothing afflicts me so much,
But that it is your Adversary, Uncle,
And merely plotted in despite of you.

Luc. I that's it mads me, spites me? i will spend my wealth, e're he shall carry
her so, because I know it is only to spite me, I this is it, -- here Nephew,
before these kind Gentlemen I deliver in your morgage, my promise to the
widow, see it is done, be wise your once more Master of your own, the widow
shall perceive now, you are not altogether such a beggar as the world reputes
you, you can make shift to bring her to 300. a year sir.


1. Berlady and that's no toye sir:


Lu: A word Nephew?


1. Now you may certifye the widow?


Luc: You must conceive it a right Nephewe now, to do you good, I am content
to do this.


Wit. I know it sir?


Luc. But your own conscience can tell I had it dearly enough of you?


Wit. I that's most certain.


Luc. Much money laid out, beside maney a journey to fetch the rent, I hope
you will think on it Nephew.


Wit. I were worse then a beast else ifayth.


Luc. Although to blind the widow and the world I out of policy doote, yet
there is a conscience Nephew.


Wit. Heaven forbid else.


Luc. When you are full possessed,
It Is nothing to return it:

Wit. Alas a thing quickly done Uncle.


Lu. Well said, -- you know I give it you but in trust.


Wit. Pray let me understand you rightly, Uncle,
You give it me but in trust.

Lu. No.


Wit. That is, you trust me with it.


Lu. True, true:


Wit. But if ever I trust you with it again, would I might be trust up for my
labor.


Lu. You can all witness Gentlemen, and you sir yeoman?


Host. My life for yours sir now, I know my Mistrisses mind to well toward
your Nephew, let things be in preparation, and i will train her hither in most
excellent fashion:

Exit.
Lu: A good old boy, -- wife Girnne?

Enter Wife:
Wife, What Is the news sir?


Lu: The wedding days at hand, prithee sweet wife, express thy houswifery,
you are a fine Cook I knowte, thy first husband married thee out of an
Aldermans kitchen, go too, he raisde thee for raising of paste, what, here is
none but friends, most of our beginnings must be winckt at, Gentlemen I enuite
you all to my Nephews wedding against Thursday morning:


1. Withal our hearts, and we shall joy to see your enemy so mocked:


Lu: He laughed at me, gentlemen, ha, ha, ha:

Exeunt:
Wit. He has no conscience, faith would laugh at them, they laugh at one
another?
Who then can be so cruel, troth, not I,
I rather pity now, then ought envy,
I do conceive such joy in mine own happiness, I have no leisure yet, to
laugh at their follies.
Thou soul of my estate I kiss thee,
I miss life's Comfort when I miss thee.
Oh never will we part again,
Until I leave the Sight of men,
We Will nere trust conscience of our kin,
Since Coosenage brings that title in.

Enter three Creditors. 1. I Will wait these 7. hours but I Will see him caught,


2. Faith so will I.


3. Hang him prodigal, he is stripped of the Widow.


1. A my Troth she is the wiser, she has made the happier choice, and I wonder
of what Stuff those widows hearts are made of, that will marry vnfledgd
Boys, before comely thrumbchind Gentlemen.

Enter a Boy.
Boy. News, news news,


1. What boy?


Boy. The Rioter is caught.


1. So, so, so, so, it warmes me at the heart, I love a life to see Dogs upon
men; oh here he comes.


Enter Wit-good with Seriants. Wit. My last joy was so great it took away the
sense of all future afflictions, what a day is here orecast? how soon a black
tempest rises?


1. Oh we may speak with you now sir, what is become of your rich widow, I
think you may cast your cap at the widow, may you not sir.


2. He a rich widow? who a prodigal, a daily Rioter, and a nightly vomiter,
he a widow of account? he a hole ith counter.


Wit. You do well my masters, to tiranize over misery to afflect the
affl^cted, it is a custom you have here amongst you, I would wish you never
leave it and I hope you will do as I bid you


1. Come, come sir, what say you extempore now to your bill of a hundred pound:
a sweet debt, for froating your doublets.


2. Here Is mine of forty,


3. Here Is mine of fifty.


Wit. Pray sirs* you will give me Breath.


1. No sir, wel'e keep you out of breath still, then we shall be sure you will
not run away from us.


Wit. Will you but here me speak?


2. You shall pardon us for that sir, we know you have too fair a tongue of your
own, you ouer-came us to lately, a shame take you, we are like to loose all
that for want of witnesses, we dealt in policy then, always when we strive to
be most politic we prove most cocskcombs, Non plus vltra. I perceive by us,
were not ordaynde to thrive by wisdom, and therefore we must be content to be
Tradesmen.


Wit. Give me but reasonable time, and I protest I Will make you ample
Satisfaction.


1. Do you talk of Reasonable time to us?


Wit. It Is true, beasts know no reasonable time,


2. We must have either money or carcass.


Wit. Alas what good will my carcass do you?


3. Oh it is a Secret delight we have amongst us, we that are used to keep birds
in cages, have the heart to keep men in prison, I warrant you.


Wit. I perceive I must crave a little more Aid from my wits, do but make shift
for me this once, and I Will forswear ever to trouble you in the like fashion
hereafter, I Will have better employment for you, and I live. You Will give me leave
my masters to make Trial of my friends and raise all means I can.


1. That's our desires sir.

Enter Host.
Host. Master Wit-good.


Wit. Oh art thou come!


Host May I speak one word with you in private sir?


Wit. No by my faith can thou. I am in hell here and the Devils will not let
me Come to thee.


Cit. Do you call us diuuills, you shall find us Puritanes bear him away, let
em talk as they go, we will not stand to hear 'em, ah sir, am I a deuile, I
shall think the better of my self as long as I live, a Devil in faith.

Exeunt.
Enter Hoord. Hoo. What a Sweet blessing have thou Master Hoord above a
multitude, will thou never be thankeful? how do thou think to be blessed
another time? or do thou count this the full measure of thy hapines by my
troth I think thou do* not only a wife large in possessions, but spacious
in content, she is rich, she is young, she is fair, she is wife, when I wake I
think of her lands that reuiues me, when I go to bed, I dream of her beauty,
and that's enough for me, she is worth 4. hundred a year in her very smock, if a
man knew how to use it, but the journey will be all in troth into the Country,
to ride to her Lands in state and order following my Brother and other
worshipful Gentlemen whose companies I ha sent down for already, to ride
along with us, in their goodly Decorum beards, their broad Velvet chashocks,
and chains of gold twice or thrice double; against which time, i will entertain
some ten men of mine own, into Liueries, all of occupations or qualities, I
will not keep an idle man about me, the sight of which will so vex my
Adversary Lucre, for we will pass by his door of purpose, make a little stand
for nonce, and have our horses Curuet before the window, certainly he will
never endure it, but run up and hang himself presently? how now sir? what
news? any that offer their service to me yet.


Ser. Yes sir, there are some ith hall, that wait for your worships liking,
and desire to be entertainde.


Hoo. Are they of occupation?


Ser. They are men fit for your worship sir.


Hoor Say so? send them all in! -- to see ten men ride after me in watchet
liueries with Orenge-tawny capes, twill cut his comb ifayth, how now? of what
occupation are you sir.


Tail. A Tailor, an't please your worship.

Enter All.
Hoor. A tailor, oh very good, you shall serve to make all the Liueries -- what
are you sir?


Bar. A Barber sir.


Hoor. A Barber very needful, you shall shave all the house, and if need
require stand for a Reaper ith Summer time, -- You sir?


Per. A Perfumer?


Hoo. I smelt you before, Persumers of all men had need carry themselves
uprightly, for if they were once knaves they would be smelt out quickly, -- to
you sir?


Fawl. A Fawlkner an't please your worship --


Hoor. Sa ho, sa ho, sa ho -- and you sir?


Hun. A Huntsman sir.


Hoor. There boy, there boy, there boy? I am not so old but I have pleasant
days to come, I promise you my Masters I take such a good liking to you, that
I entertain you all, I put you already into my countenance, and you shall be
shortly in my liuerie? but especially you two my ^olly Fawlkner, and my bonny
huntsman, we shall have most need of you at my wifes Mannor-houses ith
Country, there is goodly parkes and Champion-grounds for you, we shall have all
our sports within our selves, all the Gentlemen ath Country shall be beholding
to us and our pastimes:


Faul: And we will make you worship admire sir:


Hoo. Say thou ^o do but make me admire, and thou shall want for nothing, --
my Tailor?


Tail. Anon sir.


Hoo. Go presently in hand with the liueries.


Tay. I will sir.


Hoo My Barber.


Bar. Here sir.


Hoo: Make them all trim fellows, lowse them well, especially my huntsman, and
cut all their beards of the Polonian fashion: my perfumer:


Per: Under your nose sir:


Hoo. Cast a better savor upon the knaves, to take away the sent of my Tailors
feet, and my Barbers Lotium-water:


P^r: It shall be carefully performde sir.


Hoo. But you my Faulkner and Huntsman, the welcomst men alive ifayth:


Hun: And we will show you that sir, shall deserve your worshippes favor?


Hoo. I prithee show me that: go you knaves all, and wash your lungs ith
Buttery, go -- byth mass, and well remembered, i will ask my wife that question,
wife, Mistrs Jane Hoord!


Enter Curtizan alterd in Apparel. Curt: Sir? would you with me.


Hoo. I would but know sweet wife, which might stand best to thy liking, to
have the wedding dinner kept here or ith Country?


Curt. Hum? faith sir twould like me better here, here you were married, here
let all rites be ended.


Hoo. Could a Marquess give a better answer? Hoord bear thy head aloft,
thou'st a wife will advance it, what haste comes here now? ye a letter: some
dregge of my Adversaries malice: come hither, what is the news!


Host. A thing that concerns my Mistress sir.


Hoo. Why then it concerns me knave?


Host. I and you knave too, (cry your worship mercy) you are both like to
come into trouble I promise you sir, a praecontract


Hoo. How a praecontract say thou?


Host. I fear they have too much proof on it sir, old Lucre he runs mad up and
down and will to law as fast as he can, young Wit-good laid hold on by his
creditors, he exclaymes upon you a the other side, says you have wrought his
undoing, by the injurious detayning of his contract.


Hoor. Body a me?


Host. He will have utmost satisfaction.
The law shall give him recompense he says.

Curt. Alas his creditors so merciless, my state being yet uncertain, I
deem it not unconscionable to further him.


Host. True sir --


Hoo. Wife, what says that letter let me construe it.


Curt. Cursed be my rash and unadvised words,
I Will set my foot upon my tongue,
And tread my inconsiderate grant to dust.

Hoo. Wife --


Host. A pretty shift in faith, I commend a woman when she can make away a letter
from her husband handsomely, and this was cleanely done by my troth.


Cur. I did sir?
Some foolish words I must confess did pass,
Which, now letigiously he fastens on me.

Hoo. Of what force? let me ezamine them.


Cur. Too strong I fear, would I were well freed of him.


Hoo, Shall I compound?


Curt. No sir, i would have it done some Nobler way
Of your side; i would have you come off with honor,
Let baseness keep with them: why have you not the means sir, the occasions
offered you.

Hoo. Where? how? dear wife.


Cur. He is now caught by his creditors, the slaue's needy, his debts petty,
he will rather bind himself, to all inconveniences then rot in prison, by this
only means you may get a release from him, it is not yet come to his Uncles
hearing, send speedily for the creditors, by this time he is disperate, he will
set his hand to any thing, take order for his debts, or discharge them quite, a
pax on him, lets be rid of a rascal.


Hoo. Excellent, thou do astonish me, go, run, make have, bring both the
creditors and Wit-good hither.


Host. This will be some revenge yet.


Hoo. In the mean space I Will have a release drawne-within there.


1. Sir.


Hoo. Sirrah, come take derictions, go to my Scriuener.


Cur. I Am yet like those, whose riches lie in dreams,
If I be wakte the're false, such is my fate,
Who ventures deeper then the desperate state.
Though I have find yet could I become new,
For where I once vow, I am ever true.

Hoo. Away, Dispatch, on my Displeasure, quickly, happy occasion, pray heaven
he be in the right Vain now to set his hand toot, that nothing alter him;
grant that al his follyes may meet in him at once, to besot him enough.
I pray for him in faith, and here he comes;

Wit. What would you with me now, my Uncles spiteful adversary.


Hoo. Nay I am friends,


Wit. I when your mischeifes spent.


Hoo. I heard you were arrested.


Wit. Well, what then? you will pay none of my debts I am sure.


Hoo A wiseman cannot tell,
There may be those Conditions greed upon,
May move me to do much,

Wit. I when It Is thou perjured Woman, O no name
Is vild enough to match thy treachery,
That art the cause of my confusion.

Cur. Out you penurious slave.


Hoo. Nay wife you are too froward,
Let him alone, give loosers leave to talk.

Wit. Shall I remember thee of an other promise far stronger then the first.


Cur. I Would feign know that.


Wit. Twould call shame to thy cheeks.


Cur. Shame.


Wit. Hark in your ear. -- will he come of think thou, and pay my Debts
roundly.


Cur. Doubt nothing, there is a Release a drawing and all to which you must set
your hand.


Wit. Excellent.


Cur. But me thinks in faith you might have made some shift to discharge this
your self, having in the morgage, and never have burdned my conscience with it.


Wit. A my troth I could not, for my creditors cruelties extend to the present.


Curt. No more, -- why do your worst for that, I defy you.


Wit. You Are impudent, i will call up witnesses.


Curt. Call up thy wits for thou have been devoted to follies a long time.


Hoor. Wife, you are too bitter? Master Wit-good, and you my Masters, you shall
hear a mild speech come from me now, and this it is, tas been my fortune,
Gentlemen, to have an extraordinary blessing powered upon me alate, and here she
stands, I have wedded her and bedded her, and yet she is little the worse, some
foolish words she has past to you in the Country, and some peevish debts you
owe here in the City, set the Hares head to the Goose -- giblet, release you
her of her words, and i will release you of your debts sir:


Wit. Would you so, I thank you for that sir, I cannot blame you ifayth.


Hoo. Why are not debts better then words sir?


Wit. Are not words promises, and are not promises debts sir.


Hoo. He plays at back-Racket with me.


1. Come hither Master Wit-good come hither, be ruled by fools once:


2. We are Citizens and know what belong toote.


1. Take hold of his offer pax on her, let her go, if your debts were once
discharged, I would help you to a widow my self worth ten of her.


3. Mass partner and now you remember me on it, there is Master Muligrubs
sister newly fallen a widow.


1. Cuds me, as pat as can be, there is a widow left for you, ten thousand in
money, beside Plate, Jewels et caetera I warrant it a match, we can do all in
all with her, prithee dispatch we will carry thee to her presently.


Wit. My Uncle will nere endure me, when he shall hear I set my hand to a
release:


2. Hark, i will tell thee a Trick for that, I have spent five hundred pound in
suites in my time, I should be wise, thou it now a prisoner, make a release,
takte of my word, whatsoever a man makes as long as he is in durance, it is
nothing in law, not thus much.


Wit. Say you so sir?


3. I have paid for it I know it.


Wit. Proceed then, I consent.


3. Why well said:


Hoo. How now my Masters, what have you done with him?


1. With much a do sir, we have got him to consent.


Hoo. Ah -- a -- a, -- and what came his debts to now?


1. Some eight score od pounds sir.


Hoo. Nau, nau, nau, nau, naw, tell me the second time, give me a lighter
sum, they are but desperate debts you know, near called in but upon such an
accident, a poor needy knave he would starve and rot in prison, come, come,
you shall have ten shillings in the pound and the sum down roundly --


1. You must make it a mark sir, --


Hoo: Go too then, tell your money in the mean time, you shall find little
less there, -- come Master Wit-good you are so unwilling to do your self
good now, welcome honest Scriuener, now you shall hear the release read, --


Scri. Be it known, to al men by these presents, that I Theodorus Wit-good,
Gentleman, sole Nephew to Pecunious Lucre, having unjustly made title and
claim, to one Jane Medler, late widow of Anthory Medler, and now wife to
Walkadine Hoord, in consideration of a competent some of money to discharge my
debts, do for ever hereafter disclaim any title, right, estate, or interest in
or to the said widow late in the occupation of the said Anthony Medler, and
now in the occupation of Walkadine Hoord, as also neither to lay claim, by
virtue of any former contract, grant, promise or demise, to any of her Manor,
Mannorhouses, Parkes, Groves, Meadow-grounds, arrable lands, Barnes, stacks,
Stables, Doue-holes, and Cunny-borrowes, together with all her cattle, money,
plate, jewels, borders, chains, bracelets, furnitures, hangings, moueables,
or immouerables in witness whereof I the said Theodorus Wit-good, have
enterchangeably set to my hand and seal before these presents, the day, and
date above written.


Wit. What a precious fortune have thou slipped here like a beast as thou art?


Hoo. Come, unwilling heart come.


Wit. well Master Hoord, give me the pen, I see
It Is vain to quarrel with our destiny.

Hoo. Oh as vain a thing as can be, you cannot commit a greater absurdity
sir, -- so, so, give me that hand now, before al these presents I am friends
for ever with thee.


Wit. Troth, and it were pit^y of my heart now, if I should bear you any
grudge in faith.


Hoo. Content, i will send for thy Uncle against the wedding dinner, we will be
friends once again.


Wit. I hope to bring it to pass my self sir?


Hoo. How now? is it right my masters?


1. It Is something wanting sir, yet it shall be sufficient.


Hoo. Why well said, a good conscience makes a fine show now a days, come my
Masters you shall all -- taste of my wine ere you depart.


All. We follow you sir?


Wit. I Will try these fellows now, -- a word sir, what will you carry me to that
widow now?


1. Why do you think we were in earnest in faith? carry you to a rich widow,
we should get much credit by that; a noted Rioter a contemptible prodigal,
it was a Trick we have amongst us, to get in our money, fare you well sir.

Exeunt.
Wit. Farewell and be hanged, you short-pig-hayrde Ram-headed raskalls, he that
believes in you, shall nere be saved I warrant him, by this new league, I shall
have some access unto my love --

She is above.
Niece. Master Wit-good?


Wit My life.


Neec. Meet me presently, that note directs you, I would not be suspected our
happiness attends us, farewell?

Exeunt.
Wit. A words enough.


Dampit the Usurer in his bed, Audry spinning by. Song. Let the Usurer cram
him, in interest that excel,
There Is pits enough to dam him, before he comes to hell.
In Holborne, some: in Fleete-street some,
Where ere he come, there is some there is some.

Dam. Trahe, traheto, draw the Curtain, give me a sippe of Sack more.

Enter Gentlemen.
Lamp. Look you, did not I tell you he lay like the devil in chains, when he
was bound for a thousand year.


Spich. But I think the devil had no steel Bedstaffes, he goes beyond him
for that.


Lamp. Nay do but mark the conceit of his drincking, one must wipe his mouth
for him with a muckinder, do you see sir.


Spich. Is this the sick trampler, why he is only bed-red with drincking.


Lamp. True sir, he spies us.


Dam: What? sir Tristram? you come and see a weak man here, a very weak man,
--


Lamp. If you be weak in body, you should be strong in prayer sir.


Dam: Oh, I have prayed too much poor man.


Lamp. There Is a taste of his soul for you.


Spich. Fah, loathsome?


Lamp. I come to borrow a hundred pound of you sir.


Dam: Alas you come at an ill time, I cannot spare it ifayth,
I ha but two thousand ith house.

And. Ha, ha, ha.


Damp: Out you gernatiue queen, the mullipood of villainy, the Spinner of
concupiscency.

Enter other Gentleman.
Lan. Ye gentlemen are you here before us? how is he now?


Lamp. Faith the same man still, the Tavern bitch has bit him ith head.


Lan: We shall have the better sport with him, peace, and how cheeres Master
Dampit now?


Dam: Oh, my bosom sir Lancelot, how cheer I? thy presence is restoratiue:


Lan: But I hear a great complaint of you Master Dampit, among gallants.


Dam: I am glad of that ifayth; -- prithee what?


Lan: They say you are waxte proud alate, and if a friend visit you in the
afternoon, you will scarce know him.


Dam. Fie, fie, proud? I cannot remember any such thing, sure I was drunck then.


Lan: Think you so sir?


Dam: There it was ifayth, nothing but the pride of the Sack and so certify them,
fetch Sack sirrah.


Boy. A vengeance Sack you once.


And. Why Master Dampit if you hold on as you begin, and lie a little longer,
you need not take care how to dispose your wealth, you will make the Vintner
your heir.


Damp: Out you babliaminy, you vnfetherd cremitoryed queen, you cullisance of
scabiofity.


And. Good words Master Dampit, to speak before a maid and a virgin.


Dam: Hang thy virginity, upon the pole of carnality.


And. Sweet terms, my Mistress shall know them.


Lam: Note but the misery of this usuring slave, here he lies like a noisome
dunghill, full of the poison of his drunken blasphemies, and they to whom he
bequeathes all, grudge him the very meat that feeds him, the very pillow that
eases him, here may a usurer behold his end, what profits it to be a slave in
this world, and a devil ith next.


Damp: Sir Lancelot? let me busse thee sir Lancelot, thou art the only friend
that I honor and respect.


Lan. I thank you for that Master Dampit.


Dam. Farewell my bosom sir Lancelot.


Lan. Gentlemen, and you love me, let me step behind you, and one of you
fall a talking of me to him.


Lamp. Content -- Master Dampit.


Dam. So sir.


Lamp. Here came sir Lancelot to see you even now.


Dam. Hang him rascal.


Lam. Who sir Lancelot.


Dam. Pythagoricall rascal.


Lam. Pythagoricall?


Dam. I he changes his cloak when he meets a Sergiant.


Lan. What a rogues this?


Lam. I wonder you can rail at him sir, he comes in love to see you.


Dam. A louse for his love, his father was a Combe-maker, I have no need of
his crawling love, he comes to have longer day, the superlatiue rascal:


Lan: Sfoote I can no longer endure the rogue, Master Dampit, I come to take
my leave once again sir?


Dam. Who? my dear and kind Sir Lancelot? the only Gentleman of England, let
me hug thee, farewell and a thousand.


Lam. Composde of wrongs and slavish flatteries.


Lan. Nay Gentlemen, he shall show you more Tricks yet, i will give you another
taste of him:


Lam. Is It possible?


Lan. His memory is upon departing.


Dam. Another cup of Sack.


Lan. Mass then twill be quite gone: before he drink that, tell him there is a
cuntry client come up, and here attends for his Learned advice,


Lam. Enough.


Dam. One Cup more, and then let the Bell toale, I hope I shall be weak enough
by that time.


Lam. Master Dampit.


Dam. Is the Sack spouting.


Lam. It Is coming forward sir, -- here is a countryman a client of yours, waytes
for your deep and profound advice sir.


Dam. A cockscombry? where is he? let him approach, set me up a pegge higher.


Lam. You must draw nere sir.


Dam. Now good man fooleaminy, what say you to me now


Lan. Please your good worship, I am a poor man sir. --


Dam. What make you in my Chamber then?


Lan. I would entreat your worships device in a just and honest cause sir. --


Dam. I meddle with no such matters, I refer them, to Master No-mans Office.


Lan. I had but one house left me in all the world sir which was my fathers, my
Grandfathers, my great Grandfathers, and now a Villain has unjustly wrung me
out, and took possession out.


Dam. Has he such feats? thy best course is to bring thy eiectione firm, and
in Seven year thou may shoue him out by the Law.


Lan. Alas, ant please your worship, I have small friends and less money.


Dam. Hoyda, this geere will fadge well, have no money, why then my advice is
thou must set fire ath house and so get him out.


Lam That will break strife indeed,


Lan. I thank your worship for your hot Counsel sir. -- altring but my voice
alitle, you see he knew me not, you may observe by this that a drunkards
memory, holds longer in the voice then in the person, but Gentlemen shall I
show you a sight, behold the little diue-dapper of Damnation, Gulf the usurer,
for his time worse then the other.


Enter Hoord with Gulf. Lam. What Is he comes with him?


Lan. Why Hoord, that married lately the widdowe medler.


Lam. Oh, I cry you mercy sir.


Hoo. Now gentlemen visitants? how dos master Dampit?


Lan. faith here he lies e'n drawing -- in sir, good canary as fast as he can
sir, a very weak creature truly, he is almost past memory.


Hoo. Fie Master Dampit: you lie lazing a bed here, and I come to enuite you
to my wedding dinner, up, up, up.


Dam. Whose this master Hoord! who have thou married in the name of foolery.


Hoo. A rich widow.


Dam. A Duch widow.


Hoo, A rich widow, -- one widow medler.


Dam. Medler she keeps open house.


Hoo. She did I can tell you in her the other husbands days, open house for all
comers, horse and man was welcome, and Room enough for em all.


Dam. There Is to much for thee then, thou may let out some to thy Neighbors.


Gul. What? hung a live in chains O Spectacle, bed staffs of steel, O
monstrum, horrendum, Inform, Ingens cui Lumen ademptum, O Dampit, Dampit,
here is a Just judgment, shown upon usury, extortion, and trampling Villainy.


Lan. This exlent, thief rayles upon the Thief.


Gul. Is this the end of cut throat Usury, Brothell, and blasphemy? now may
thou see what Race a Usurer runs.


Dam. Why thou Rogue of universality, do not I know thee? thy Sound is like the
cuckowe, the welsh Ambassador, thou cowardly slave that offers to fight with a
sick man when his weapons down: rail upon me in my naked bed? why thou great
Lucifers little vicar, I am not so weak but I know a knave at first sight, thou
Inconscionable Rascal, thou that go upon middlesex Iuryes, and will make
have to give up thy verdit, because thou will not loose thy dinner, are you
answered?


Gul. Ant twere not for shame. --

draws his dagger.
Dam. Thou would be hanged then.


Lam. Nay you must exercize patience Master Gulf, always in a sick-mans
Chamber.


Lan. 'Heele quarrel with none I warrant you, but those that are bedred.


Dam. Let him come Gentlemen, I am armed, reach my closse stool hither.


Lan. Here will be a sweet fraie anon, I Will leave you gentlemen.


Lam. Nay wel'e a long with you, Master Gulf.


Gul. Hang him usuring rascal.


Lan, Push, set your Strenght to his, your wit to his.


And. Pray Gentlemen depart, his hours come upon him, sleep in my bosom,
sleep.


Lan: Nay we have enough of him in faith, keep him for the house. -- Now* make
your best.
For thrice his wealth, I would not have his breast.

Gul. A little thing would make me beat him, now he is asleep.


Lan Mass then twilbe a pitiful day when he wakes.
I would be loath to see that day, come.

Lul: You overrule me gentlemen in faith.

Exeunt.
ACTVS. 5.
Enter Lucre and Wit-good. Wit. Nay uncle, let me prevail with you so much,
In Faith go, now he has enuited you,

Luc: I shall have great joy there, when he has borne away the widow.


Wit. Why la, I thought where I should find you presently;
Uncle, a my troth, it is nothing so.

Luc. What Is nothing so sir, is not he married to the widow.


Wit. No by my troth is he not Uncle.


Luc. How?


Wit. Will you have the truth out, he is married to a whore in faith.


Luc. I should laugh at that.


Wit. Uncle, let me perish in your favor if you find it not so and that it is I
that have married the honest woman.


Luc. Ha? I Would walk ten mile a foot to see that in faith.


Wit. And see'te you shall, or I Will nere see you again.


Luc. A Queen in faith? ha, ha, ha.

Exeunt.
Enter Hoord tasting wine the Host following in a Livery cloak. Hoo. Pup, pup,
pup, pup, I like not this wine, is there never a better Teirs in the house.


Host. Yes sir, there are as good Teirs in the house, as any are in England.


Hoo: Desire your mistress you knave, to taste them all over, she^ has better
Skill.


Host. Has she so, the better for her* and the worse for you.

Exit.
Ho. Arthur, is the cupbard of plate set out,


Ar. All Is inorder sir.


Hoo. I am in love with my Liueryes every time I think on them, they make a
gallant show by my troth. -- Niece.


Nee. Do you call sir?


Hoo. Prithee show a little diligence, and ouer-looke the knaves a little, they will
filtch and steal to day and send whole pasties home to their wives, and thou
be a good Niece, do not see me purloynd.


Nee. Fear it not sir, I have cause, tho the feast be prepared for you, yet
it serves fit for my wedding dinner too.


Enter two gentlemen. Hoo. Master Lamprey, and Master Spichcocke two the most
welcome gentlemen alive, your fathers and mine were all free a^h Fishmongers.


Lam. They were indeed sir, you see bold guestes sir, soon entreated


Hoo. And that's best sir -- how now sirrah?


Ser. There Is a coach come to the door sir.


Hoo. My Lady Foxestone a my life. Mistress Jane Hoord, wife, mass it is her
Ladyship indeed, Madame you are welcome to an unfurnished house, dearth of
cheer, scarcsity of attendance.


Lad. You are pleased to make the worst sir.


Hoo. Wife.


Lad. Is this your Bride.


Hoo. Yes Maddam salute my Lady Foxtone.


Cur. Please you Madam a while to taste the air in the garden?


Lad. Twill please us well.

Exeunt.
Hoo. Who would not wed the most delitious life,
No Joys are like the comforts of a wife.

Lam. So we bachilers think that are not troubled with them


Ser. Your worships brother with an other ancient Gentleman, are newly
allighted Sir.


Hoo: Master Onesiphorus Hoord, why now our company begins to come in: my
dear and kind brother welcome in faith.


Any: You see we are men at an hour brother.


Hoo. I, I Will say that for you brother you keep as good an hour to come to a
feast, as any Gentleman in the Sheere* what old Master Limber and Master
Kicks, do we meet in faith Jolly Gentlemen?


Limb. We hope you lack guess sir?


Hoor. Oh welcome, welcome, we lack still such guess as your worships.


Any. Ah sirrah brother, have you caught up widow Medler.


Hoor From them all brother, and I may tell you, I had mighty enemies, those
that stuck sore, old Lucre is a sore fox I can tell you brother.


On. Where is she, i will go seek her out, I long to have a smack at her lips.


Hoo. And most wishfully brother see where she comes, give her a smerck now we
may hear it all the house over.


Cur. Oh heaven, I am betrayde, I know that face.

Both turn back.
Hoo. Ha, ha, ha, why how now? are you both a shamde? come Gentlemen, we will
look another way --


Any. Nay Brother, hark you, come you are disposde to be merry?


Hoor. Why do we meet else man?


Any. That Is another matter, I was nere so fread in my life but that you had
been in earnest.


Hoo. How mean you brother?


On. You said she was your wife?


Hoo. Did I so? by my troth and so she is.


On. By your troth Brother?


Hoo. What reason have I to dissemble with my friends, brother, if marriage can
make her mine, she is mine? why?


On. Troth I am not well of a sudden? I must crave pardon brother, I came to
see you, but I cannot stay dinner in faith.


Hoo. I hope you will not serve me so brother.


Lim. By your leave Master Hoord.


Hoo. What now? what now? pray Gentlemen, you were wont to show your selves
wisemen.


Lim, But you have shown your folly too much here.


Hoo. How?


Kix. Fie, fie, a man of your repute and name,
You Will feast your friends but cloye them first with shame.

Hoo. This grows too deep pray let us reach the sense.


Lim. In your old age doat on a Curtizan --


Hoo: Ha?


Kixe. Marry a Srumpet?


Hoo: Gentlemen!


Any: And Wit-goods queen:


Hoo: Oh, nor Lands, nor living?


Any. Living?


Hor. Speak?


Cur. Alas you know at first sir,
I told you I had nothing:

Hoo. Out, out, I am cheated, infinitely couzned.


Lim. Nay Master Hoord:

Enter Wit-good and Lucre.
Hoo. A dutch widow, a dutch widow, a dutch widow:


Luc: Why Nephew shall I trace thee still a lier? wilt make me mad is not yon
thing the widow.


Wit: Why la, you are so hard a belief Uncle, by my troth she is a whore.


Lu: Then you are a knave:


Wit: Negatur Argumentum Uncle.


Luc: Probo tibi, Nephew: He that knows a woman to be a queen must needs
be a knave, thou say thou know her to be one, ergo if she be a queen
you are a knave:


Wit. Negatur, sequela maioris, Uncle, he that knows a woman to be a queen,
must needs be a knave, I deny that.


Hoo. Lucre, and Wit-good, you are both villains, get you out of my house:


Lu. Why did not inuit me to thy wedding dinner?


Wit. And are not you and I sworn perpetual friends before witness sir, and
were both drunck upon it.


Hoo. Daintily abusde you have put a Iunt upon me:


Lu. Ha, ha, ha:


Hoo. A common strumpet?


Wit. Nay now you wrong her sir* if I were she i would have the law on you for
that, I durst depose for her, she nere had common use, nor common thought.


Curt. Despise me, publish me I am your wife,
What shame can I have now but you will have part,
If in disgrace you share, I sought not you:
You pursued me, nay forc'st me,
Had I friends would follow it,
Less then your action has been proved a rape.

Any. Brother?


Curt. Nor did I ever boast of lands unto you,
Money or goods: I took a playner course:
And told you true i would nothing,
If error were committed it was by you.
thank your own folly, nor has my sin been so odious but worse has bin for
given, nor am I so deformd but I may challing the utmost power of any old man's
love, she that tastes not sin before, twenty to one but she will taste it after:
most of you old men are content to mary young Virgins and take that which
follows, where marrying one of us, you both save a sinner, and are quit from a
cuckold for ever,
"And more in breife let this your best thoughts win,
"She that knows sin, knows best how to hate sin.

Hoo. Cursed be all Malice, black are the fruits of spite,
And poison first their owners: O my friends,
I must embrace shame, to be rid of shame,
Conceald disgrace preuents a public name.
Ah Wit-good ah Theodorus,

Wit. Alas sir, I was prick tin conscience to see her well bestowd* and where
could I bestow her beter then upon your pitiful worship: excepting but my
self, I dare swear she is a Virgin, and now by marrying your Niece I have
banished my self for ever from her, she is mine Aunt now by my faith, and there is
no Meddling with mine Aunt you know, a sin against my Nuncle.


Cur. Lo, Gentlemen, before you all.
In true reclaymed form I fall,
Henceforth for ever I defy,
The Glances of a sinful eye,
Wauing of Fans, which some suppose,
Tricks of Fancy, Treading of Toes,
Wringing of Fingers, biting the Lip,
The wanton gate the alluring Trip,
All secret friends and private meetings,
Close borne letters, and Baudes greetings,
Fayning excuse to weomens Labors,
When we are sent for to the next Neighbors,
Taking false Physic, and nere start,
To be let blood, tho sign be at heart,
Removing chambers, shifting beds,
To welcome Friends in husbands steads,
Them to enjoy, and you to marry,
They first serud, while you must tarry,
They to spend and you to gather,
They to get and you to father,
These and thousand thousand more,
New reclaymed I now abhore.

Lu: A, here is a lesson Rioter for you.


Wit. I must confess my follyes, I Will down to
And Here for ever I disclaim,
The cause of youths undoing. Game:
Chiefly dice, those true outlanders,
That shake out Beggars, Thieves and Panders,
Soul wasting Surfets, sinful Riotts,
Queanes Evils, Doctors diets.
Pothecaries Drugs, Surgeons Glisters,
Stabbing of arms for a common Mistress,
Riband favors* Ribauld Speeches,
Dear perfumde Iacketts, pennylesse breeches,
Dutch Flapdragons, healths in Urine,
Drabs that keep a man to sure in:
I do defy you all.
Lend me each honest hand, for here I rise,
A reclaymde man loathing the general vice.

Hoor. So, so, all friends, the wedding dinner cooles,
Who seem most crafty prove often times most fools.

FINIS.

