THE MIRROVR of Madness, or a Paradoxe maintayning Madness to be most excellent:
done out of French into English, by Ia. San. Gent.

Imprinted at London in Fleetestreate, near to S. Dunstones Church by Thomas
Marshe. Anno 1576.

To the right woshipful Sir Arthur Champernon Knighte, long health with
increase of all prosperity.
GReat is the force of fortune (Right worshipful (on either side, to welfare
or evil fare, as Cicero the most abundant fountain of Eloquence confesses,
but far greater is that of nature, which, as Seneca says, is a reason divine,
sown in the world and the parts thereof. From whence all honest actions are
derived as from there foundresse, and by whom all things are may tayned, as by
their Preseruresse. Greatly it is to be wished, that nature, mistress and lady
of living things, as a divine power, which to all men works all things for
the best, were followed, not neglected: were embraced. not despised: and as
every particular parson respects chiefly himself, and prefers his profit
before the commodity of the multitude, so has she a special regard of al, not
of some, of many not of a few, for then her force should fail, and living
things should cease to live, men should become no men, the world no world, all
things should be reduced to that Chaos and confuse mixture, which (as the
Poets faigne) was in the beginning before beawtie was given to the world. Some
there be which endeavor to excel others or to be equal with others in
learning, actiuity, and qualities commendable, as it weere enuyinge at their
knowledges, because they do not cou^teruaile and surpass them, doubtless that
emulation is good and proceeds from nature: for it strives for excellency,
and seeks to aspire to perfection, if we followed nature as she does us, that
is to say as she does advise us, we should never tread besides the pathe, that
golden age that was shortly after the beginning should eftesones have recourse,
commonweals should be well ordered, and ma^s life well framed. Nature is now
perverted by the corrupt customs of men, and an other Golden world far
unlike to the other is crept in, whereof Tibullus the Poet makes mention in
these Verses.

Aurea nunc vere sunt saecula, plurimus Auro
Venit honos, Auro conciliatur Amor.
Now golden are the times, and high renovvn
For gold is sold, for gold eke love is vvon.
This corrupt time has continued many hundredth years, and nature is changed
into a naughty nature, which does well near infect the minds of all men,
eatinge out that pure nature which is almost consumed, and few sparkles thereof
remain: The chiefeste cause and original hereof is a certain detestable desire
engraffed in all men's minds of soueraigntye, authority, honor and gold which
one healpeth to the rest: for all things obey money and she alone bears the
sway. Love is little regarded and esteemed, and friendship in most men waxes
cold, which two, nature has principally brought forth for the comfort and
commodity of man: for man unto man is most comfortable and profitable,
therefore the Greek Proverb says (...) man is to man a God, your friendship
and courtesy which Nature has wrought in you (Right worshipful) moved me to
address the few^ leaves folowinge unto you bearing witness of my good will and
affection. Wherefore if you take it in good part, I shall not think my labor
misspent, but requited: thus unwilling to trouble your worship with many words,
I cease, wishing that fortune would favor and aduau^ce you, and Nature grant
you long life.

Your woorshippes during life. I. S.

To the reader.
FRom foraine Realm, this treatise small,
transported came
To English coaste, in French attire,
still flitting Fame
Does blow abroad things once disclosde,
in every land,
In written words, which aie in Books
shall firmelye stand.
Reprove me not, though fame by me
enlargement take
This trifling toy, this merry ieste,
for solace sake,
Compiled was in foraine speech,
I pardon crave,
If any be, whom I herein
offended have.
For Cynicke like the Authoure here,
with skoffes does bark
At men's mad deeds, which vainly bent
no reason mark.
Wherefore in earnest some will take,
that which in ieste
Is meant of me, in doing so,
they do not best.
Receive and read with merry cheer,
(good Reader) this
With reasons rule, amend if ought
be done amiss.
Tutto per il Meglio.
The Mirroure of Madness.
AS every thing shoteth to his end and scope, and according to the end is
worthy or unworthy, praised or dispraysed, vile, or excellent, base or
commendable singular or vulgar, so when ye thing obtayneth his perfect end, it
is most set by, but when the perfectest of ends is compassed and atcheiued
the^ is it an honor to have won ye goal. Certes the Philosophers have made an
endless disputation about ends: the Platonickes one way: the Stoics an other,
the Peripateticks the third way, the Epicures the fourth, and all these
contrary one to an other, full of diuersitye and disagreement, so that it
should be no maruayle for a blind man to groape sithence be that sees
cannot find the way, now if I show a chief end easier to be found out
then al these, unto the which all these shoot and have their recourse and in
the which they are contained, will there not a new Sect of Philosophers arise
up eue^ of themselves and say with me that Madness is best: Verily this were
no hard matter to be proved for even upon madness have they invented new ways,
strange devises, and forged innouations of ends, every man to eat out vain
glory from an other. Now sithence the original of vain glory is Madness, and
as the Latin Poet rudelye sings Insania, gloria Vana: Vain glory is Madness.
Which eating the heart, says Plato, eue^ as a continual Worm, and as the
Gripe does he liver of Titius as our Poets feign, ends al in it self where
it first had his beginning: so then, Propter quod vnumquodque tale and illud
facit magis tale. Whatsoever thing makes the thing such, the thing whereby it
is made, is of necessity more such. But by the reason of Madness, that is to
say, the matter, Philosophers books are esteemed, and accounted most
excellent, therefore of Consequence Madness it self is without comparison. Now
let us see which of them will prove best, the Mad man, that is as I have
proved the notablest Philosopher. And first to begin with Zeno the Stoicke who
said, That the chiefest end of man's life was virtue which he calls (...),
that is to say, The chiefeste and perfectest Good, the way whereunto to aspire
passes all man's reason as he has framed and invented it. For this granted,
that all men be without perturbations which will reach this end, what is yt
else to say, but that all men are worse by his sentence definitive, then
Bedlems.

The king commands me to serve in his Wars, if I slay him that came to
shay me, or if I revenge my dead Fryende upon the body of my yet living
enemy, it was but for good will, and not for anger: Why so I pray you? Forsooth
Zeno says so. If I take a malefactor, which has either despoiled me of my
goods, or good name, peradventure some other of my leeges subjects, and arrayn
the^ at the bar and sue him to death therefore: I did it not for anger, but
for good will to the party: why so I pray you? Forsoothe Zeno says so. If I
see my wife violated before mine eyes and I come to her succoures, and endamage
the Traitor of my body, and the Adultecesse a like, I did it for
friendship, and not for malice: Why so I pray you sir? Forsooth Zeno says
so. Al these things ought to move a wise man, and yet this man is so
Choleric, that he graspeth nature fast by ye bosom, we must not weep for our
fryendes, our parents, or country no more then I must rejoice over them for
their welthe: Yea although it touch my self to: the one, for that it is
vnseeminge for a wise man, to conceive any grief, which he callethe (...):
ye other, for that neither barrel is better hearing, and that he calls (...)
that is to say, surplusage of boasting. But here comes in Aristotle and
says, A wise man's part is to measure his anger: and that he teaches in
his Ethics, and him takes up Tullie, in his Tusculanes, with this fryendly
taunt: Modu^ tu adhibes vitio? what (faith he) put thou a measure in a
fault? Nothing against stomach (good Master Cicero) but if a man should
ask you with out al choler I know you are a Stoicke, you ca^nnot be angry and
that made you so stoicklike, in the face of the whole Court, to cry against
Marcus Antonius, for very love I am sore, Sedens pro tribunali vino inebriatus
and cructa^s frustis esculentis etiam iudex and gremium suum and totu^ tribunal
impleuit: Sitti^g upon the Be^ch, being Chief judge, dru^ke with wine, and
bealchi^g in the faces of the people he filled with greasy gobbets his own
lap, and the whole Judgment Seat together. But to ask you in conclusion,
what think you all anger, a Vice? what a little anger? what the least? why, I
perceive there is no mean, for all stands in extremityes: First Anger is a
fault, and a vice most horrible, then Leuitie must needs be a vice, and as
horrible as it: for all virtues, stand between two extremes, that is to say,
Vices, as Aristotle well defines, saying: Virtus est habitus in mediocritate
positus rationi consentaneus: Virtue is an habit, consisting in mediocritie,
to Reason agreeable. If all anger be naught, then all the contrary is naught:
so by consequence, Virtue is jack out of office: and Virtue banished, Reason
may go shake his ears, Reason exiled, what follows but Madness? Therefore all
turned to Vice, all is stark staring Madness. So is your master Zenoes great
end come to nothing. Ah sir, I am glad I have met with you, taise vous
(says Zeno) no more of that gear: I am sure there are as mad as my self.
Whom think you? Forsooth Aristotle: yea sir, come forth and answer to your
complaynte, Zeno says, you are as mad as he: let me hear what can you say
for your self: what purpose you, the chiefesse end of man's life? Forsooth
I think felicitee: Ah do you so sir? In deed sir, I do well remember, that in
your Schole there are two kinds of felicitye, the one consisting in Action,
the other in Contemplation, and the first, you define after this sort, to be
an Action perfect, in a perfect life: now Aristotle, I pray you, tell me
where is a perfect life to be found? Sir, my works speak for me. Ah sir, I
remember well in deed I read thus, There is (say you) a simple felicity, and
there is a felicity Aggregate: The simple Felicity, consists of Virtue, and
they are not able to stand in Zenoes Schole, who magnifyeth them a yard above
you: Simple felicitee (quoth you) alas poor shoten hearing, this will not serve
the turn: but let us vewe a little further, you say, that: Felix semper agit:
The happy man is always occupied: tell me Aristotle I pray you, how,
sleapynge or waking? Both: well bowld Aristotle, has your head been occupied
whyleste you weere a sleep? why not? well aunsweared Aristotle, I believe you
well for not so little as the bridle wherewith you weere snaffled like a pack
horse, (you know what I mean) and I think your head as greatly occupied
in sleep, to contriue an Alisander root, in steed of natures Alisander
buddes, why, good Master Aristotle, do not you confess that dreams come of
humors, in your books, De somno and vigilia? if then humors woork in
sleep, wha^ has virtue to do, let her go tell chearye stones, and then God
give you good night, thus is your Simple felicitee simplye proved. Now let us
come to your Aggregate felicity, but what are the goods of fortune and body
who so of any of these is destitute leseth name of happy: and what be the
goods of Fortune? not as uncertain as her self, ebbing and flowing like the
Sea, waxinge and waninge like the Moon, florishinge and fading like the
flowers, posts of lusts, slaves of time, and altogether unstable? as for the
Body either disease withers all calamity changes, or death destroys and
admit both were present, the goods of Fortune, and Body, let reason
surcease in mind, which cannot be, but where virtue is, which is not to be
found as I have proved, and al is turned topsituruye from discretion to
madness, Ah sir, how do you by this time? let me feel your Pulses, me
thincketh the fever is sore upon you, oh Gods Lord I am deceived, but I
perceive, where the shoe wryngeth you, you seek your refuge, on Gods name
as Felicitye Contemplative, and therein you are altogether wrapped in the
skies: your mind is altogether upon ye Church, Forsooth of men, we must
become Gods: of Terrestrial, Celestial: of bodies, minds: and to conclude,
of men, mad men: We must not hincke on the kitchen, because of the parlour*
nor of the parloure, because of the chamber: nor of the chaumber, because of
the garret: nor of the garret, because of the air: we must live far above
the nature of Crows. Thus must men diet themselves with contemplation: thus
lay ye bolsters under men's elbowes, teaching them, to be secure, and idle,
and to grow to the stole with contemplatyon. Is not this of al Madness the most
extreme? Come hither, come hither Tullie, let me hear thy judgment, thou
sometimes made a book, as concerning an Oratoure, tell me when thinckeste
thou such a one will be? surely when the Alps and Appenine hills, stand bare
without snow. Come hither Plato, thou made as great a work as he, of the
Common Wealth, when thynkest thou that such a one will ever arise as thou
speakeste of? Surely not as long as my works be extante: doubtless then are
ye both stark staringe mad now. Set the ones Common Weal, the others
Orator, the third Felicity, together in equal balance, and thereto of our time
(if ye please) the Courtier of Count Baldesser Castilio, to healpe ye scale as
likely to be as any of these, and the excellencye of all these things, is
altogether Madness. Now to the Platonicke, methink I here Aristotle accuse
him hither, I warrant you a good scholar that can speak so well of his master,
and yet I think in this place not without some good reason. Plato putteh his
chiefest end in a certain thing which he calls Idea, which is nothing
else, but a conceit of mind in Imagination, whereby in the same we gather some
thing: as for example, in Imagination, I conceive the nature of a Serpente,
and by conceit I frame unto my self an Image: this Image so framed in
Imagination, is called Idea. Now Plato how can Idea be Summum bonum, The
sovereign good, Aristotle says it cannot be: the greateste reason is,
because it is in every predicament to be found, to use that reason only if
it be in every predicament, as it must needs be granted, for all
Vniuersalles (as the Logitioners well say) are nothing else, but Conceptus
animi, things conceived in mind, gathered and collected together, by a
numbers of singulars, as well in Accidences as in Substaunces, as by this man,
and that man, and so forth, from one to an other: I gather a whole nature,
which is a man: so likewise, saying a man tidinge with his hawke on his fist,
I gather a whole universal nature which is a living creature: Now Plato, if
every universal be a Sovereign good, then every particular is a less good,
but as the one is false, so is the other peradventure you will say, In suo
genere: why then, where is the chiefeste? Go further, every form conceived,
is Idea, many of these be conceived in sleep, (...), that is by mean of
fantasy which is ever occupied, now if these Ideas bear the soueraintee,
surely it is a fantastical soueraintee so as yet find you not that which
you sought for. The Philosophers say, that (...) sounds Idea and that all
forms, so resembled, be called by that name, and hereunto liken they the
Soul, and doubt not to call Celestial natures (...) which the Latin
Philosophers interpret Actus puri, pure Actions, segregate from all concretion
mortal. Now certaynelye the Soul is not that, which Plato means for it has
need of it, Celestyal Spyrites are not it, for the Soul is of equal nature
with them: Then is it some greater matter that we look, for perchance Plato
mente that, which Aristotle could not perceive, for he has always recourse
Ad Opificem Formarum: To the shaper of forms, and to the principal form it
self, the participation of which, we cannot enjoy, so long as in this life
we remain: so then death is the end of this life, and the fruityon of that
form, the beginning of an other Moreover, Virtues excluded, as ye se, how
shall the participation of that form be obtained and Plato himself confesses,
that the same is, Bonum inaccessibile, a Soueraygne good, which cannot be
attained: what then is this life but mere Madness? and why may I not conclude
with Solon, Ante obitu^ faelix nemo, Happy grave, happy man. The last
Gentleman, me thinks is fast a sleep in deed, I wear very loath to
disquiet him, for the man has a Bordeaux hammer working in his head, how say
you Epicure, are ye awake? Ah well said, we may then talk with you by
leisure, what is the chiefeste good epicure? pleasure. How many branches be
there of it? Four: which be they? rehearse the Articles of your belefe.

First I believe a cup of Wine is wonderful good, then I believe that
Custarde, Tarte and Marche^^ne, that minsed Pyes of the best sort, that
Venerie and Venison, that Quail, Fesaunte, Patriche and Plouer with other
such dainty wild foul, that Orenges in Sirupe, and Sirupes of all sorts,
that Comfittes, Biskets, and Carawayes, that Ielies of all color, that
Succettes, Marmalades, and green ginger, and brieflye what soever delights
mouth and throat, especially is to be regarded: mary sir here is an Article
with all my heart, and of a substancial length, proceed: Thyrdly, I believe
that fine apparel, upon the which most cost may be bestowed, even to the
higheste bravery to glitter in Silks, and Veluets and to smell sweet of the
Donge of a muskecat, to have the ca^pe full of Agglets and the bush of Feathers
in the top brave and Bullaine like the Chain of Gold five times double
about the neck, and thereat a pendant ^ablet, and every finger besette with
three or four rings, beside the great sygnet upon the thombe, and a pair of
Gorgious and perfumed gloves thereupon, lastly a great trowpe and train of men,
and my Horse trymly trapped, with Velvet imbrodred, set with golden Studdes,
and whatsoever appertains or makes to pompous state and princely port yt
singularly is to be holden precious. Now doubtless you believe well, go further:
Fourthlye, I believe that to have my house richelye dyght and hanged according
to my state and condition, and in all parts furnished after the best manner,
my chaumbers I say, Parloures and other such romes hanged with Clothe of
Tyssue, Arrace, and Goolde, my Cupbordes heads set out and adorned after the
richest, costlieste, and most Glorious manner, with one cup cock height upon
an other, beside the great basen and ewer both of Silver and Gold, filled at
convenient times with sweet and pleasant waters wherewith my dilicate hands
may be washed, my head recreated and my nose refreshe, provided always that
there be of all sorts to content and please the eyes of the beholder, I
perceive ye know how to spend monye, if you knew as well how to come by it,
proceed: Fyftlie, I believe that to have my chamber well perfumed, my bed
softly made, my Cortaynes finely drawn, and my pretye Pigsnie gingerly in mine
arms, or else my wantone Ganimede is a thing eue^ alone for my tooth: now
doubtless you show bushe natural Epicure, yet notwithstanding bold one as you
have begone. Lastly, I believe to sleep even til noone, and then to arise to
dinner, and then to borow an vndermeale of sleep again and then to walk a
little be fore supper, to get a stomach, and at every meal to have my trull
tricksie, and merye minion by my white side, and to make the square boones, or
Gromeporters dance between two candelstickes, paraduenture a whole night
together: this with the residue of the Articles above mentioned, I take to be
the chiefeste, perfectest, and most absolute end of man's life. Now surely
properly and deftly done Epicure, have you al said? You told me there weere
four branches of pleasure, which be they? Eatinge, Drinkinge Slepynge, and
Mutinge: how are you able to aspyre to all this? this doctrine is so sweet, and
so many resort to hear it, that it never, shameth his master: Of this Sect
has been a great number, as well Greeks as Romans. Truth we will remember, first
Sardanapalus is to well known, whose death I am sure, the preaty pewlinge
dames so much bewailed, that the tears fell down from their eyes, as huge
as milstones: to let the residue pass and to come to Alexander, the great,
who knows not that as upon a Madness he would needs subdue the whole
world, even so, given to pleasure, he became of a Soldier a sawyer, of a
captayn, Captive, and of a noble Conqueroure, a notable Haukeroure: the first
original of this began in the wars pretended between him and the Amazones,
whom when the Queen had seen, and he well fixed his Eyes on her, with wanton
regardes and countenaunces every sparkle kyndled a brande, and every brande
raised a flame, and so the flame seeking his issue took truce for affections
sake, and raged upon the bodies of them both, thus was the battle of manhood
turned to the batterye of Cupide, whereof the end was this that ye fortes of
both their honors rased, and pleasure taking such deep root in the
haughtye heart of the Prince after many worthyes slain by him in dronkenes, and
Royaultee transported to Tirannye, Poison became ye end of pleasure. As for
Heliogabalus, his Tower garnished with glisteringe stones, polished and set
with gold, to flinge himself down, if need we are: his Halters set with
Pearl, and curiouslye wroughte, to hang himself if need weere: his sword
so rich and costly gilte, engraued and set with Margaritee, to slay himself
if need were, saved him not from the violent swoorde of his enemies. To speak
nothing of Nero, whose end was most miserable and tyranny most insatiable,
and pleasure in ost abominable. The like of Periander we read, and he a wise
Philosopher, but a wild and savage Tyraunte, whom pleasure in the end
brought to end and destruction. If emperoures, if the Conquerours of all the
world, if many more beside Tyrauntes, if Philosophers, if high, if low, if
one, if other, search out pleasure so diligently, follow it so inordinatlye,
wallowe in it so shamefullye, end with it so desperately, what shall I think,
but that sithence all our life, is set on pleasure and pleasure altogether
Madness, that all our life is Madness. Now exceptynge the vile and beastly
pleasures, which are the causes, of these shameful ends, no man will say,
but that all pleasures may be allowed, for all pleasures, moderatly taken, are
profitable, are honest, are necessary, profitable for that they prolong life,
honest for that they be decently used, necessary, for without some pleasure,
our life is nothing.

And for this cause, nature invented them, but pleasure, as pleasure is of
necessitye Madness, yet honest, profitable, and necessary, as before is proved,
Ergo. Madness is both honest, profitable, and necessary. But what if I make for
Epicure, and prove, that all pleasures are good, and excellent, then I trust,
I shall enforce the like consequence of Madness, my chief reason shall be a
subiecto, for every accidente, has his excellency of his subject: now, if
pleasure be in the most excellent subject: and the same Madness: then Madness
for the excellency of the subject, must needs be most excellent: in the most
excellent subject it is, as it may be with a weat finger showed: for what
subject can be more excellent in Heaven, Earth, Purgatory and Hell, next
to God, or the Devil, then the most Holy, Reverend, and Renowned Father, the
Vicar of Christ, the Successoure of Peter, the Lieutenaunte of Saynct Pawle,
and our Ladies chief Chau^celloure and Chamberlayne, who has all knowledge in
the deapthe of his breaste, all mysteries within the ambrie, and gross prease
of his understanding, who can do as much as Christ can, by the virtue of
Saynct Peter, and more then Christ by the auctoritye received from him, wherein
he has bound himself to his Holiness, in somuche that he is able to dispense
with the New and old Testamente, and to call things which are not, even as
though they weere, and of nothing to make something, and to create his crea,
toure, whereby he gives the same auctoritee to Pryestes, and ghostly Fathers,
likewise to judge all men without controlmente, or check, or judgment of any
other man, although he drew infinite heaps of souls to Hell after him,
likewise in his mouth is every word established, and the least word
thereof stands to as great effect as the Bible, thus may Nouatus rejoice,
for his Heresies become Scripture, and above it, which was that for those that
once fell, there remained afterward no repentance: thus may John the.xxii.
triumph, who denied the immortallitee or euerlastingnes of the soul,
affirminge that there was neither Heaven nor Hell after death, and now his
opinion is above Scripture, and Leo decimus has no cause to complain, who
said, he would have Wild foul in despyte of Gods teeth, and maugre the
Bible, this is above Scripture. O holy gouernoures of Peter's ship O blessed
Porters that carye the keys both of Heaven and Hell, of the one to shut
other men from thence, and of the other for surety of repairau^ce, but he is
Lord of all. Nec Deus es, nec homo sed neuter and inter vtru^ que
Te deus elegit socium socialiter egit
Tecum, na^que tenet Caelum dedit and tibi terras.
Ne God, ne man but middle plain thou art,
God has thee choose his fellovv meat to be,
And with thee played a right good fellows part.
Reserving Heaven himself, and Earth for thee.
And yet his grosers and glosers worthiness stick not to call his Holiness Regem
Regum and Dominum dominantium, King of Kings and Lord of Lords, of whose
curse all the whoole world stands in awe, and trembles as greatelye as
does the Catte by the Kytchin fire or else in the milk pan over head and
ears. But to reckon up all his gross opynions, especially of
Transubstantiation, will not every man confess the same to be a solemn
Madness? mark how soberlye it is proved (...) which is as much to say, as-giue
us this day our daily bread, which they interpret give us this day our
supertransubstantiated bread, fie, fie, Super sub, and trans, this is able to
bring a man into a trance, they must have the Calfe with the white face,
they must have they know not what, and yet is their Transubstanciation as
good as before, if a man ask them what the Accidents be, they say visible,
if ye ask whereof, they say of Bread, likewise of the tangible Accidents,
and the gustable being demanded, they answer as much. Yet must we believe
under pain of damnation, that every lousy dolte and bussardlye Sacrificer,
may fetch down Christ from Heaven into the Pixe at a sudden, yet say they not
to Crucify him, although that they grant him to be passible, otherwise he is
not flesh, blood, and bone, borne of the virgin Mary, I will make but this
reason, he said when he was living in humain flesh in this world, hoc est
corpus meum: This is my body, which verilye was then living when it was
spoken, otherwise surely would he have said Hoc est cadauer meum: This is my
carcass Now how the Bread may be the incorruptible body considering the
nature thereof, is object to our senses, I see not, I am sure the dead body
they eat not, then be like they eat the living as it was before it was
crucified, that were most absurd to grant. For the words of John are, Ci
bus, quem ego dabo, ca^o mea est: The meat which I will give, is my flesh. And
this Sinaxis was instituted before his death, to be retained and used after his
death, admit the Pryeste should loose one Host emonge a number as we read
that once he did, going to visit a sick man, there is no other way to find
the same again, but by vewing all the beasts that kneel about it, to mark
whether there be ever a black Cow among the company that kneleth on one knee,
and then he shall know it is not for gracing, but for worship, or else if we
cannot find him in deed, to do as I hard a merry Priest did ones coming to
an old woman and having lost his Host, he began to Coin an other of his
glove, and approchynge near to the beds side, willed the good old mother to
gape and receive her maker, she greedlye opened her mouth, and he thrust in his
white letheren God, which being somewhat touth and she toothelesse made a
foul agreement, at length having long chawed it, and unable to digest, she
began to cry, is it he, Master Parson? it is he? I ipse he qui the which,
mother quoth he, thus the poor woman endeuouringe to swallowe it was for her
great devotion deuoutlye chooked, if the Priest had benne as graciously hanged
al men wooulde have said, there had been but one Knave out of the way, and
peradventure repentance might have overtaken him at the Ghostly Gallows,
which never did in quiet bed, for as the fame goes he died desperately,
but to make conclusion we say not that Christ was ever such a fool, to
think to eat himself, or that his Mother was ever so unkind to eat her
son or his Disciples their master, and that raw fleashe without bread too,
at the least for fear of surfeyte, for I think they knew not how to make Aqua
vitae in those days: We then confess with Augustine and say: vnicum habemus
Domini corpus semel reuera in Cruce oblatum semper aute^ ipsius Fidei dentibus
attritum: We have one Body of the Lord offered in deed ones upon the Cross,
but always broken by the teeth of faith. We confess with Ambrose, Caro
Domini in Caelis caro est, in terris Fides est: The flesh of the Lord in
Heaven is flesh, in Earth faith. And with Tertullia^, Corpus Christi manducare
nihil aliud est qua^ in Christu^ credere: To eat the Body of Christ is nothing
else but to believe in Christ. Thus speaking one thing and meaning an other like
Madmen we dispraise, yet praise we right Madmen, whose holy opinions and
clerkely conclusions enforce us to think still that Madness excels. Ye have
hard before little trifles, now behold and vewe at large the great and
notable stage and tryumphe of Madness, now behold her in all her pomp, ruff,
and iolitye, ridinge into the Capitol through the Roman gates and City most
victoriously, with a thousand Captives and Pezauntes at her Chariot, she I
say who before triumphed in Carthage over the puissaunce and power of Romans,
under the most worthy and valiant Hanniball, now does the like over whole
Affricke, Judea, Assiria, Egipte, Greece, Germany, Spain France, Britain,
and a number more under the most renowned and courageous Fabius Cunctator,
Scipio Affricanus, Lucius Scaeuola, Lucius Torquatus, Julius Caeser, and po^pei
ye great: and before their time Caius Marius, whose soundinge fame throw
deadlye dynte of sword, has won such glory immortal and atchiued such
praise, that neither the envious rage of greedye death, neither the churlishe
chappes of deuouringe time, neither the hurlinge payse of inconstant Fortunes
whele shall ever be able to empayre, or remove the same from the seege of
memory, and how came they to such high advancement? not by the prerogative of
Nobilitye, nor by the statelye stem of Parentage nor by the sundry blastes of
the light and vulgar sort, but by feats and deeds in Arms by Martial
prowess, and hardy attemptes, the parent whereof is War, Battle, and
Fight, wherein, what may thou else perceive but very Madness, the crashing
Canon with rumblinge, ratlinge and roaryng thu^derclappes, the Captains
swellinge, freating and fominge at mouth, and settinge up their bristles, the
headdes and quarters of men flyinge in the air, the hydeous gronynges and
Cries of the wounded, here a whole rank cut of with a chain, there a whole
number murdered by the sword, here the grayslye bodies of ye slain, there the
merciles stroke of the murderour, here the rage of ye swoorde, Cuius imbuti
semel vecors libido est, says Seneca, Who ones embrued with blood still
thirsts after more, there the streams of blood, most pitiful to behold
and shed withoutt all mercy in most abundance and sl^^ghter on every
side: where is that noble Hector, which at one time slew so many thousand
Grecians, burninge and spoylinge their ships most rufully and doing so
valiauntly that both sea and land, and al Greece quaked to hear his name?
where is Achilles, the stout and valiant, of whom the River Xanthus,, will
tell maruailous things namely that he filled the same with dead bodies, in
somuche that the stream was unable to bear them? these things are not
without cause left to memory, and committed to the Regyster of eternal fame,
which Fame they obtained not but by Martyall feattes, wherein consists the
praise and proof of fortitude, wherein we well perceive nothing but plain
Maddenes, which notwithstanding brings with yt most notable ends, for
therefore we take war in hand to live in peace, and in war we show
manhood to win Renown: propose therefore which of these two ends ye will,
it shall not be amiss, for what can be moore d^sired then peace in common
wealth, and what is more to be embraced then renown? the^ make I this reason,
what soever is good, and to be embraced, the same is so to be embraced, for
the end, but the ends of War wherein fortitude exercises herself, are
most excellent as before is proved, and war it self nothing else but Madness,
as before is showed, therefore Madness is most soueraygne and excellent. The
like reason may be made Ab efficienti causa, for who sees not that Wars are
taken in hand for two causes, either to defend the Common weal or to revenge
our injuries, that therefore whereby these things are wrought is most
excellent, by war they are wrought, Ergo, it is most excellent, but war
before is proved Madness, therefore Madness is most excellent. Do not all the
four virtues concur together, lincked as it weere in one Chain, whersoeuer
therefore thou find Fortitude, think also that there concurreth with it
Justice, Temperaunce, and Prudence, now if war lead all these virtues as it
weere by a stringe, as certainly it does, for every man will confess that it
is but Justice to revenge Injuries, fortitude then executes revenge, wisdom
subministreth policy to revenge, temperaunce appoynteth measure how far to
revenge, then followethe consequentlye that Madness must needs be good, who
has for his aid so many virtues, wherewith it is guarded? but here some
curyous head will obiecte, and say, Sir can a man be mad and modest, I
answer yea, as well as warrelyke and valiaunte for where one virtue takes
place there the residewe ensue, thus may you perceive that nothing lets
Madness more to be modesty, then valiauncie in battle to be fortitude, but
every virtue is in his own nature singularly good, ioygned to an other more
good, co^curring altogether most good, and so make the thing to be wherein they
be in madness they be as I have proved, therefore Madness is most good. All
things in nature are grounded upon these two, Love, and Hate, and of (love
to let Hate pass) there be many kinds, the Love of God, of our Parents, of
our fryendes, of our Country, of our Wives and Children, and of our selves,
and all these loves nature infers, whereby we be combined and lincked one
to an other in full and perfect league and amitye, now is there one love
which bears the stroke, the Love of procreation naturallye incidente to
every one of us, guyded as the Poets faygne, by the pearcing shote and
amorous arrows of that little wanton boy Cupido, whose Golden arrowe works
Love, and leaded darte engenders hatred, and alas what is Love, but a sweet
hate of our selves and a pleasant Madness, as Angelus Politianus notably
records in that book, which is entitled Stanze di Messer Angelo Politiano
where he brings in Iuliane Medices speakinge to young Lovers, part of whose
words in that place be these.

Costui ch' el vulgo errante chiamo Amore
E dolce ynsania
A Madness svveete is he whom erring Love
The common sort do call.
And Fraunciscus Petrarcha, bereft, I suppose of his wits for the Love of his
Lady Laura in his Songs and Sonettes sings thus: Veggio senz'occhi, e non
ho linqua egrido
E bramo di perir, e geggio aita
E ho in odio me stesso, and amo altrui
Pascomi di dolor, piangendo, rido
Egualmente mi spiace morte and vita
In questo stato son Donna per vui.
With eyes I nothing se, my tongue is lost:
Yet do I cry and languishe to my cost.
Desirous life to end, yet healpe require,
Self hate me burns while love stirs up the fire.
With dole I feed my self, in tears I laughe
At life and death a like I fling the staff.
In this estate I rest Madame for you.
How say you by this gear, is Love now madness or not and yet as Count
Baldessar Castilio says, in his book of the Courtier, if an host of Lovers
were in the field, and should hire every man but the cohortation of a weak
woman to battle there would be in such bickeringe and such murder, and
smiting down to please their Ladies, that after great hewinge and flashinge,
they would lay their carckasses and ma^ly corpses before their eyes in the open
field, or else obtain such a precious and tryumphaunt victory, that both
sea and land should wholye be astonished, to hear the great renown and
glory thereof, Although Mantuan we know being a lusty Freer, and restrained
from his manelye appetites, and from the amorous girls, which peradventure be
more desired then deserved, cries out upon Love in this wise: Ludit amor
sensus, oculos perstringit and aufert
Libertatem animi and mira nos fascinat art.
Credo aliquis daemo^ subiens praecordia, fla^mam
Concitat and raptam tollit de cardine mentem
Nec Deus vt perhibent amor est sed amaeror and error.
Love all the senses does beguile
and bleareth al our eyes.
It cuttes of freedom of the mind
and makes us gape for flies.
I think some furious fend of Hell
the heart does this inflame,
And brings quite the same a down
from lofty reasons frame:
Ne is this Love a God in deed
but lies and bitter bane.
Be it what it will be, it is certaynely a burninge fire consuminge the
sinews, and percinge through the boanes, and eating out the peaseable
quietness of the mind, even as a mothe a garmente, as a Grasshopper a greane
Herb, as a rust and cankar al kind of Metal, in fire we see nothing but
madness, for it burns and wastes all things most vehemently, in Love of
every sort we perceive nothing but fire and zeal, for it freateth the heart,
and burns it up most fearcely, either because of the thing that it loves,
already, obtained, or for the thing that it loves to obtain yt, which is the
cause that Poets in comedies, and Tragedies, have set forth Ad viuum, the
sundry loves of sundry parsonnes, as of Ariadne, and Theseus, Medea and Jason,
Deianira and Hercules, Clytemnestra and Hyppolitus, Paris and Helena, and that
which Ouide sings most for a wonder, the love of Narcissus and Echo:
Pygmalion, and his Image: these are all set forth to show the nature of love
most igniferous and fyery, which never is stanched but by death or desire
whereupon this little reason may serve for proof, all fire is madness in his
operation, every Love is a fire, therefore every Love is madness.

But here by and by comes Mounsieur Beaumains, and shakes me by the fiste,
and says sir. Where is your fisher town of Caletum, whoose chief
Marchaundise weere Sprats and pilchardes, which made all our Country men sick
of the yallowe Iandise, and of the white Leprosy: be shrewe my head Thurlpole
and Gardener, the one with his white rod, the other with his Perselye
mattocke, well rescued the Town, when the plum boats of France came in, to
offer a poudred bullies, in the woorshippe of Sayncte Nicolas to his Church
and Temple there, I cannot tell, quoth I, where our frynde Thurlepole was at
that time I know where he was at ane other time, videlicet at Rome with a
certain noble man of England, who for honors sake shall be namelesse, for
that he went more modestlye to work then the other, as ye shall well hear,
marcke the Comedye I pray you, it chanced that these aforesaid entringe into
Room with solemn Procession, with Streamers and Banners, with bagpipes,
Bellles and Basens, and all manner of solemnitye, the Popes holiness and
mighty fatherhode in worship of Saint Bancke the bawdye sent unto their
lodginges two Lemons to season their wine with all for the great joy that he
conceived of that little Kirk of England, that was latly skipte into sayncte
Peeters faith again and had put of the greasy buskines of that Heretic
Luther, as he termed it, the temporal pear made answer thanking his
holiness, that he had at, home an Orange that better contented him then his
Leman.

Nay quothe the other prelate (and put on stump Legs face on the matter I
will never refuse our holy fathers gentleness Et sic fuerunt duo in carne vna.
As for Gardener what should I speak of him, for I know he was aright gubbing
monger of our Holy fathers Fisheborde, and dyed accordingelye but I am sure
that these louinge worms with their cowplices, gave the Town for Love,
because they would not have their Country men dye of the laske, by mean of
white heringes: yette I am sure, that their Love was plain Madness: yet all the
Catholics from the most to the least commended it, therefore such Catholic
Madness ought not to be spoken against. Now of virtues, let us surcease our
communication, for as it has been uttered, pleasures altogether Madness, yet
nature has invented them: but Omne simile generat simile, so by consequente,
nature is Madness, yet what is better then nature? Natural quippe sequentes
ducem nunquam aberrauibus: says Tullie. vsi^g nature for our guide we shall
never go amiss. And yet do we not see that many are born blind by nature,
dumb by nature, fools by nature, made men by nature, ah goodlye nature: but
here they come with a goodlye Wype, and say, that particular natures may be
hindered, but the universal nature it self cannot, as who should say, that
particular natures proceed not from the universal: but admit we grant it
true, what say they to these things that come? Preter naturam and Contra
naturam: Monsters of nature, can nature do any thing against it self. For
there is in these things, Motus and quies, there is matter and torme, and to
conclude what is there not? yet are they borne contrary to the Laws of nature,
and to natural things compared are monsters in nature, if so be that
perticulare nature erred, in that it should bring forth, then was the
perticulare nature so deceived mad, for nothing strives against it self but
madness: but being Contra naturam, in deed against all nature, as by common
experience is proved (for monsters are in every place) if a man would but
descrybe the monsters of India and Arabia, where monsters be most common, and
of every sort infinite, this shyfte of Descante may go sleep in the benche
hole, and so nature erreth universally, or does not at al, for monsters be in
those places naturally borne, Thus would they make nature tear her own coat
and so by a Consequente nature is Madness: but peradventure they mean in these
parts, and so the reason may stand: for as it is in these parts most
unnatural, to have a monster brought forth, even so for the most part
whatsoever is there brought forth, is monstrous: but to leave this curious
question which notwythstandynge might be well prosecuted, for the question is
of Madness, whatsoever is eternal, is nature and Virtue, Aristotle in his
books, De Caelo et Mundo says, that the World is eternal, and the reason is
because it is a globe: and has his circumference, and perpetual motion, now
of all eternalles, the most eternal is surely Virtue, which being proved
before to accompany Madness: makes the thing it self, whereunto it is ioygned
of like nature, Bonum quo durantius eo melius A good the more of continuance
the better. But nothing can be of moore continuance then Virtue which as
has been already proved is turned into Madness, Ergo, nothing is better then
Madness. All the whole head of man (as the wise affirm) is divided into three
parts, the place of fantasy, the place of common distinction and the place of
memory, fantasy conceiueth and offers the forms of conceptes to common
distinction to decerne, common distinction to memory to retain, now
manifest it is that the fantasy is deceived, and that it makes man to
offend especially when commen destinction gives consent thereto, as well in
forms in reasons which it conceiueth, for example informs may appear by the
strange devises now a days, great, big and boisterous, bumbarreld burste
belled and burden buttocke Breeches, the wearers where of sithence such gear
was invented become square bounce buttockes whereof they need not greatly to
be ashamed, for I believe no one thing has so many qualityes, first in war
for want they may serve for great Drums, and if the King have need the
worste breeche in the company is able to command ten, twentye thousand at a
clappe in less then half an hours warning, as for the time of peace in it
they serve to many purposes, first when he rydeth they may serve very well
for a pair of pulterers paniers, secondly when he goes they may serve for
Colliers sackes, and lastly when he sits they may serve for fattes to keep
plate from rain and snow, and yet I had al most forgotten one thing that
they may serve for countynge howses for Rattes to keep their reckeninges in,
and for liuerye stables to keep quick cattle to rack and manger, and had not
these profitable propertyes come to memory, I would paraduenture have said
that these inventions came from Bedlem in Judah, but now knowinge what they be
inded I can sing of them as the Poet sometimes did of the Harpies, which,
defiled the meat of Eneas complyces.

Tristius haud illis monstrum nec saeuior vlla
Pestis, and ira Deum Stigijs sese extulit vndit
There never rose more monster fell,
or plague more dire and black:
Or ire of gods or fendes of hell,
from gulf of Stygian lack
As for strange devises of fantasy in Apparel, whereof common distinction
misled, not so vprightlye decerneth as they have taken effect in hic passer: so
have they wroughte the same in haec aquila, both he and she, and so
respectinge the parsons in whom this excess rages, we may say Nominatiuo hic
and hec both naught: and respectinge the monstrousnes of the thing, every man
will say: Nominatiuo hic, hec and hoc, stark naught, Genitiuo huius, never
worse, Datiuo huic, never better, Accusatiuo hunc, hanc, and hoc, out nettle in
dock, one mischief in an others neck Vocatiuo O Lord amend it, Ablatiuo ab
hoc, ab hac, and ab hoc, beware the plage, the pile, the pestilence, and the
pocke, these be the mischiefs that follow pride who leads no where else, but to
ye sign of the shepeshead in Winchester to eat a goose.

Now see how preatelye the change one with an other, he has borrowed of
she, the measure of she is great berdingale to make he is great hoose, and she
has borrowed of he, the last vice she saw his coat to make she a coat by
God, send them cappes fit for the proporcion, but this much may I say
without treason to my Lord Majors Mule, that their womanheade is never the
moore to wear it, nevertheless to leave beetyme: good Lord what have I done?
I cry them mercy, I am sure I shall never come in their books again, I am
wyped out of their Memento, I shall not have a drop of the milk of their
breasts if I would kneel down, and ask beawtye their puppye forgiveness,
yea, and much less stand by when with preatie shril voices the cry, fie have
away with this dog, when they have made a fault, but in hope they will be
reclamed and pardon my rudenes I will singe them a Greek Fpi gramme which is
this: (...),
(...).
All women are indeed misledde
Yet chieflye two good hours have,
The one in chamber when they vvedde,
the other when they go to grave.
Whereof spring all these things verelye upon this that fantasy, has
persuaded common distinction, who once being overthrown takes every thing
that foolish pha^tasie upon head persuades to be very singular, and uses the
same for head strong reason, and this aryseth by the perturbations of the
mind, which once disquieted, alters the head and dryueth it into strange
quandares, estraunginge it often times from the Law of nature and procuryng
wtin the same a mortal combat by restraynte of understanding, while
phantasye fights with distinction, and enfeebleth memory in such sort that
uneath it is able to entertayne enye wholesome lesson, or instruction if there
be such a continual battle inwardlye in every of us, and yet the same
necessary for the exercise of our Virtues (for Vices are the matters against
the which they work) and Virtues before proved Madness, seeing the strange
effects of fantasy we must conclude, that neither outwardlye nor inwardly
there is ought else but Madness, but fantasy (says some) is natural: truth:
neither can be without perturbations: truth: ney-worketh any thing but after
a perturbated manner fondlye: truth: yet it is natural, that is granted
before, I perceive this man is my friend, go too, go on, Natura agit propter
finem, truth, Nature does al for some end. And so does fantasy likewise, for
it is a singular good and a part of us without the which we cannot be, yet we
esteem not fantasy otherwise then Madness but whatsoever woorketh to end, is
reason, then fantasy is reason, for it works for end, but fantasy is
Madness as is before said, therefore reason is Madness, and what is more worthy
then reason, and what is moore praise worthy then Madness, which thing
Democritus considering, plucked out his eyes as I think and all to study the
better, and truth it is that study is Madness, for many have been known to
run Mad of study, Qualis causa, talis effectus: Such as the cause is such
is the effect. Thus Ab effectibus study is proved Madness: moreover where
can be found more anger then in heaven, the first moveable burleth so
swiftly about from the Weast to the East, that if the other circles striued
not with contrary motion from the East to the Weste, he would inflame the
whole world and set all a fire, does, not Sol and Jupiter in conjunction and
canckered sly Saturn, or Venus, or Mars, and some such Planettes in Domo
2.7. or 9. or such like conspyre the destruction of Man and Beast, of herbs,
and trees, of all things upon the earth, and of the earth it self: Read the
Prognosticatoures, and yet I read of three great Eclipses that are like to be
this year there is the Eclipse of Faith, and the fear of god, and that is to
common and to be lamented and deplored with tears, marrye the two others
Eclipses are not so soore, albeit somewhat grievous, and they be the Eclipse
of the pot when good Ale is out of town, and the Eclips of the purse when
Master Usurer and Cuthrote live by the bargain, but to make return, if
anger be so great, in Celestial bodies and planettes, and that naturallye
incidente and allowed shall we not think well of Madness if the less be
reputed, be esteemed of, shall not the greater? the Philosopher could say to
his servant, if I were not throughlye angrye how would I tormente thee, thus
anger you see works patience and forbearaunce, which is a rare gift in a
wise man, much more then Madness, which is the very extremity of anger, so
then to be a Mad man is to be a wise man, and I think the philosopher was
then Mad when he so said to his servant, for he himself confesses himself
to be throughlye angered. Cicero has a Paradoxe well known (...) That all wise
men only be free men, and all fools Bondslaues and demaundinge of himself,
what liberty is, he says, it is nothing else, but Potestas viuendi vt velis:
A power to live as ye list. And who lives as he list? does the poor man who
always co^playneth himself of his grievous miserye, and bewayleth to himself
his most unfortunate calamities? does the rich man who the more he has the
more desires, and yet fears every hour to leese that he has? does the
Ideote who knows not how to order his life? does the learned, who repyneth
always at an others knowledge? if no man therefore live as he list, then is no
man free, if no man be free, then is no man wise, for if this be true all wise
men are only free, then is this as true al free me^ are only wise, but
freedom and wisdom booth excluded the rest is nothing but only folly, so
then all men are fools even next door to Madness. The wise man speaks
very notable, Stultitiam simulare loco prude^tia summa est. To counterfaite
folly in place is the higheste wisdom, the sentence is most wise but
Aristotle's as good (...), it is better to be, the^ to seem to be, said
notably, as booth thought wyselye, now in my mind the greateste follye that
may be is Madness, which sithence it is ye very end that all things shoot
at, must needs be accounted the parfectest of al: and I doubt not but
sithence the wise men have said their minds, the one it is wisdom to
counterfayte folly in place, the other better to be then seem, but at the
lest, if the one have any defendauntes, the other shall have al folowers, and
thus we shall al be extreme fools, that is to say, Madmenne, that is to say
Wysemen, we shall have Genus and species, toste in the schools emonge the
Logitioners, Ad nauseam like a Tenise Bale, we shall have sometimes Boares
flesh and Bulbeife like a royster, sometimes cage ware, and cuckingstole
herb grass, like a Scolde, some time Marie Mawdlines beads, and Mereticular
tears and treable tonged language emonge the Rhetoritians, to say nothing of
heaven gasers, Clock keepers, air meaters, and of a number such like whose
end of study, every manne knows to be but Madness, yet are they
wonderfully praised and extolled, and I am one of them my self, which so do
praise them, because I know they are fools in most extreamitie, and will
take pains, I trust to defend this little treatise from the hands and teethe
of nippers, as proceeding from a sincere mind and made of good will in the
behalf of them all, wherein if I have taken such pains, as I would have
wished then nature and art, then reason and virtue, then wise me^ and
wisdom, the^ foles and of al sorts, will give their dew praise and honor
to Madness.

FINIS

