portrait of Samuel Pepys SAM PEPYS CAR ET IAC ANGL REGIB A SECRETIS ADMIRALIAE
Men's cujusque is est Quisque


The help and grace of almighty god through the besechinge of his blessed
mo(...) saint mary be with us at our beginning / help us and speed us here in
our living / and bring us unto the bliss yt neuir shall have ending. Amen.
Mine own simple understanding I feel well how it fares by other that been in
the same degree. and have charge of souls. and holden to teache their
parisshyns of all the principal festys that come in the year. showing unto
them what the holy saints suffered and did for gods sake and for his love.
So that they should have the more devotion in good saints. and with the bettre
will come unto the church* to serve god and pray his holy saints of their
help But for many excuse the^ for defaute of books and also by symplenesse of
conning Therefore in help of such this tretyse is drawn out of Legenda
aurea: that he that list to study therein. he shall find ready therein of all the
principal festes of the year. of echone a short sermon needful for hi^ to
teache. and for other to serve And for this treatise speaks of all the high
festys of the year I woll and pray that it be called festival the which
begins at the first sunday of the Aduent in worship of god and all his
saints that been wretyn therein.

Incipit liber qui vocatur festialis..
Good men and women this day is called the first sunday in aduent. wherefore
holy church makes mention of the coming of criste. gods sone into this
world(...) ma^kinde out of the deuylles bondage* and to bring all well doers
into the bliss that euir shall last. And also of his other coming that shall
be at the day of dome when he shall come to deem. all wacked doers into the
pain of hell for euir. But the first coming of ^hu^ Criste into this world
brought joy and bliss with him. Therefore holy church used songs of mirth as
alleluya and other And for the second coming of criste shall be so cruel yt
no tongue may tell Therefore holy church seyth down songs of melodye as Te
deum. Gloria in excelsis* and weddinge For after that day shall (...) be
weddinge more in to(...)ynge of ve^geaunce that comes after Then after the
the first coming of crist into this world saint Austyn says there been
there things ryf in this world that been (...) the trauayll. and death This is
the testamente that Adam our form fadre made to all his ofsprynge. after him
that is to be borne in sickness. and for to live in trauayll. and for to dye
in dread. But criste he came to be our socoure. of this testamente: and was
borne and trauayled and deyed he was borne to bring men out of sickness into
euirlastinge health. he trauayled to bring man to euir lasting rest: he deyed
to bring man to euirlastinge life. This was the cause of the first coming of
criste into this world. wherefore h(...) will escape the dome that he shall
come to in the secounde coming he must ley down all manner of pride of heart
and know him selue a wreche of earth and hold meknesse in his heart. he must
travail his body in good works and get truly his lyuelode with trauayll. of
his body and put away all ydelnesse For he that woll not trauayl his body in
good works* as saint being. says he shall trauayll euir with fendes in hell.
and for dread of does he must make him euir ready to god when he woll fend for
him that is to say. shryue (...) ^ene of all his sins and not (...) year to
year but as soon as he (...) rise up. and mekely tak^ (...) fadre. then shall
(...) come have great worship (...) a knight she with his wou^^ (...) had in
battle in much (...) to him Right so the sins (...) has done and is
shreuyn of (...) his penance shall be much w^^ship to him and great confusion
to (...) And that he has not shryu^ (...) ^halbe showed openly to all the
world in great sham^ to him This is said for the first coming of crist in
to this world Vnde. Dn^s veniet ad iudicium^ The coming of criste is to the
dome. Tunc videbunt filium hominis venientem in nubibus cum potestate magna et
maiestate. And these co^mynges shall be so cruel. that fyftene days before shall
come tokens of great dread So that thereby the people may know that sone after
co^myth the dome Secundum Ieronimu^ As Ierom says The first day the water
shall rise upon the sea and it shall be higher than any hill by xl. cubytes The
secounde day the sea shall fall down so low that uneath it may be se^^ The
thridde day all the fysshe and bestes in the sea shall make such a cry: and
a rorynge that no tongue may tell it but god him selue The fourth day the sea
and waters shall brenne^ The v day all trees* and herbs. shall sweet blood and
al manner of fowls shall come to gidder. and another ete nor drynk for dread of
the dome that is coming The vi: day all great bildinges castle sys toures
steples and houses shall fall down and brenne till the son rise again The vii.
day all stones and rocks shall beat to gydre that each shall break other with
an horrible noise which shall be herd into heuyn The eyghte day the earth shall
quake so that there may no man stand thereon: but shall fall down The ix day
the people shall goo out of their dennys and goo as they were myndlesse. and
noone speak to other The tenth day hills and earth shall be even and plain The
xi. day al graves and tombs shall open and the bodies shall stand upon them
The tuelthe day sterres shall fall from heuyn. shotynge out brennynge bemys a
dredefull sign to see. The xiii. day they shall deye that beren life The xiiii
day heuyn and earth shall brenne The xv. day heuyn and earth shall be made new
and all people shall arise in the age af xxx. winter and come to the dome.
Dominus veniet ad iudicium cum multitudine angelorum. Then shall come to the
dome our lord Ihesu Criste very god and man with his angelis And show his
wou^dis fresshe bledyng as tha^ day he deyed on the cross with all the
instruments of his passion. The spear croune scourges nails hamer pynsones.
and the garland of thorns to show what he suffered in his passion for mankind
Then may they be sorry and ferde yt have sworn by his passion or wou^dis. or
by any membre of his body yt shall be a great repress to them. But they
amend them in this world or they deye. Then will our lord gretely thank
them that have do mercy in this world for his sake to their even christian.
And will say thus to them. Venite benedicti patris mei / Come ye my faderis
blissed children and receive ye the kingdom of heaven that is ordained to you:
and so rehearse to them the vii. works of mercy. when I was hungry ye gaaf me
mete. Sitiui et dedistis michi bibere when I was thursty ye gave me drink. and
when I was herberles ye herbered. and so forth all the works off mercy For
when ye gaf any thing in my name it was to me. Then shall our lord rebuke
the rich people that would not do for his love: nor forgive no trespass for
his sake. And say to them. Discedite a me maledicti in ignem eternum: Goo ye
cursed people in to everlasting pain of hell. For when I was a hungered ye
gave me no mete etc. Tha^ may they be full sorry and woo that ever our lord
Ihesu Criste shall thus rebuke them. For there shall noman of law to plete nor
for gold nor silver nor other yeftes to help: For than shall another master
nor lordeshyp help but all be set beside. but right as a man has done so
shall he have. And there shall be diverse accusers both above him and benethe
him. and on every side above him shall be our lord Ihesu Criste his domes man.
Iratus est furor domini in populo suo / without mercy to them that deed no
mercy. and so accuse them of the ^^st thought that ever was amys. On the right
side his angel telly^^ (...) where when and how often he ^yde amys. On that
other side fendes chalengynge him theyres as by right for his wicked deeds.
Under him ^elle ready if he be found in sin that day they shall be peyned
and in peyn without end. That day pour people shall ^^^te with christ at the
dome. And done the rich people for the great wrong^s that they did to them
and they might get none amends till the day off dome. Then they shall
have they^ will of the rich people. For when the rich done the pore wrong
they can do no more But pray to god to quyte them at the day of dome. And
so he will for god says thus. Michi vindict^m et ego retribuam /

Put all to me* and I yield every man after his deseruynge. Therefore while ye
ben here. make ye amends for your wickedness. And ma^e them your friends
that shall be your domes men at the day of dome And trust not to them that
shall come after you lest ye be begyled. And dread the pain of hell that
neuir shall have end.

Narracio.
Saint Bede tellith how there was an husbond man in England that fyl seek and
ley deed from the even till on the morrow Then he rose and departed his gods
in four parties. and all his own part he gave to pore me^ and went and was
a monk in an Abbey that was nigh the water side into the which water he went
every night w^^^n neuir so cold. and stood therein long and suffered great
penance And when he was asked why he did so to suffer that great penance. he
said to (...) we a greter pain that he had seen and he would e^e but barley
bread and drink water all his life after. and told ii. religiouse men the
peynes yt he had seen And they were so great that he could not tell them
openly. He said that an angel ladde him into a place there. yt oon side was
so cold that no tongue might tell the pain thereof And the other was so hoote
that no man might tell the pain thereof. And souls were cast out of that
one into that other. and that was a great pain to them And the angel showed
him the fire yt came out of hell that was so hoote and so far as him thought
he might se it he thought it burnt him. and in the lea^^e thereof he saw
souls boil up and down cryenge and waylinge for wo^ Also he herd fendes
cry: cast out hot ^ede and brymstone to make their peines greter. and so
they tormentyd the souls in pain Now lord for thy great mercy have mercy on
us and keep us fro tho peines and bring us to the blis of heuyn that neuir
shall have endyng Amen.

Dominica in septuagesima.
GOod men and wymen this day is called in holy church the so^day in
septuagesme for cause that holy church is modre of all christian people. she
takes good head to the children as a good modre owes to do. and forasmoche
as she sees him full sorry sek in sin and many of them wounded to the death
with the sword of sin. the which sin has caughte all this year to fore.
and namely this criste^^asse time that was ordained in holy church for great
solempnyte For every man should be besy to serve god with all his power because
that criste him self showed that day swetnesse of love to al christian people
For man he was that time and in the same flesh and blood as one of us and
laid in a cradyl more pourely than any of us and was cristenyd in water as one
of us And also he came to a wedding for to cleanse it from sin. and to make
us holy and brethren to him and heirs to the kingdom of heueyn. For these
causes all christian people owen to be full glad in their souls as in ye time
making solempnite and myrthe and making them both clean in body and soul
from all manner of sins And gro^dynge them in great sadness of love to god
and to all christian people / doing great alms to them yt have need:

But now the more harm is for that high and solemn feste is turned into
fylthe sin and great sickness to the soul. as pride by diverse wise. in
clothing and in many diverse guyse^ using. into great couetyse and into
lechery. that suythe always glotony. in slewth in gods service. as ^apes and
vanyte singing rebaudrye speaking For vanyte causes much slouthe. for emonge
such people: he is most worthy that most of harlatry can speak. Thus these
solemn and high festys that were ordained to great worship of god and of
our lady and all the saints in ^^uyn. now been turned into great offense to
god: wherefore our m^dre holy church seeing her children in such despair as
a moodre full of compassion sorry in he^^^ her for them This day leyeth down
alleluya and other songs of mirth and melody. and takes Tractus. yt been
songs of morning Also for this holy sacrament of wedding is much defoyled
by vanyte of sin Therefore it is leyd down. these days and in aduente For
many yt been now wedded. yeuyth them all to lust and liking of the bodies
of. flesshely lust of this world. And thinks full little of the death that
is full greuouse that comes so sone after but as it is read by great
clerks It is more spedefull to (...) soul to (...) an house there as is a
(...) and wepinge thanne to go to an^^^se there as is great reuyll and much
^yrthe For such things make a man to fo^yete his god and him selue both But
there as is a sight of a corse. makes a man to think on his death That is the
spe^yall thing to p^tte away sin and vanite of the world For Salamon
says thus to his sone. Fili memorare nouissima. et ineternum non peccabis.
Sone have in thy mind ^^at thou shall dye and thou shall neuir sin dedely.
Thus holy church having great compassion of her children. ordeyneth three
manner of salues to help her ch^ldren. That been to think on death inwardely*
to labor besily. and to chastise the body reasonably The first^ is to thy
(...) on death inwardly Holy church (...) ensample this day in the office of
the m^ss^ w^^che begins thus. Circumdederunt ^e. et cetera. The sickness of
death has biclepyd me Thus says he ^^^hing every good child to have in mind
how hard he is be stadde with death on each side In somoche that he may not
escape no way but euir death sueth him with a bow drawn and an arowe euir
therein redye to shote him he wot neuir what time. This is a principal salve
to every man that takes it to he^e to pu^t away all manner of vanyte. and vain
myrthe: But for to understand this the bettre. I show this by ensample.

Narracio.
I read of a ^ing that euir was in heavy sorrow and he would neuir laughe ne
make merry but euir was in morninge and in heaviness. Therefore his menye and al
other men were greuyd there with they yede to the kings brother praynge him to
speak to the king and said he greuyd all tho that were about him with his heavy
^here and cou^seyled him to leave it and make light chere in time coming
Then was this king wise and thought to chastise his brother by a wyle and
wrouthly badde him goo home and do that he had to do Then was the manner of
the country yt when a man should be done to death should come ^^umpettes and
tru^pe before his gate Then said the king byddyng the^ goo trumpe before his
broders gate and men go with them to arreste him and brin^^ (...) before there
king. and in the me (...) while the king called to him seuyn m^n that he trust
on and badde them that when his brother was come to draw their swerdes and
set them at his breast before his heart So when his brother was come they did
as the king badde them Then the king commanded all men to dance and to
make revel all that they could and so they did. Then said the king to his
brother. why art thou so heavy of chere Heue up thy head and be merry for all
this myrthe is made for the Then answered he and said How should I be merry
of chere and see here seuyn swerdes set to my heart and wot not who shall be my
death first Then said the king putt up your swerdes and spoke to his brother
thus It fa^^th by (...) the seuyn ^ede^^^ sins be euir ready to reave me of my
soul to the heart and this makes me yt I may neuir be merry and make glade
chere but euyr am aferde of death. for my soul that is the life of my body.
Then said the brother I cry the mercy for I knew neuir this till now and I
shall be the wyser euir after: This I say boldly he that will take to heart he
shall have better will to loure than to laughe to sigh than to be glad to
weep thanne to sing so that he shall find that mind of death. the principal
salve of all manner of sin Also principally we must have in mind the
paynfull death of our save our that he suffered for us all Of the which is made
mention in the first chapitre of trenys. Attendite et videte si est dolor
similis sicut dolor meus That other salve is to labor besilye in this world
Of this labor speaks saint poule in the epistyll of this day and says
thus. Sic currite vt comprehendatis Run ye so that ye may have the game By
this rennynge ye shall understand that he that renneth for the game enforcyth
him self with all his might to run fast and so must every servant of god
enforce him to labor besily in that degree that god ha^^ set him in and men of
holy church must labor in studynge and praynge and to teache the people the
law of god Lords and rentyd men must labor. ^^

keep holy church in rest and pece^ and other common people must labor to
get lyuinge to thise other degrees. and for hem self both to the soul and
body And for no man should excuse him from this labor. Christ in the gospel
yeueth an ensample saing thus Primo mane conducere ^perarios. And husbond men
went in to his gardeyn or vineyard at prime and again at vndren or myddaye.
and at euynso^ge time. and he hired people to labor by all the tides of the
day. this is to understand all the grees of the world For as Job says a man
is borne to labor and traueyle in this world as a byrd to flee And saint
bernard says he that will not labor here in this world. he shall labor
with fendys in hell for that is the testament of Adam that he left to all his
ofsprynge. labor and traueyle. To this labor he yeueth ensample and
reherseth how god made adam and eve to labor to keep paradyse: and bad them
ete of all the fruits that was in paradise. except one tree that he kept for
him self. so as often as they saw the tree. they should think on him that made
them. and know him for their god. And for they should not ete thereof in pain
off death and of dampnacion. Then the fend saw them in so much joy yt
they were in and him self in so much peyn and woo that he had great envy to
them. and went to Eve and asked why they e^e not of the fruit off that tree.
And she said. god has forbede us that tree in peyn of death. Then said the
fend. he wot full well that and ye ete thereof. ye should (...) ^nowyng both
good and ^^^lle. A^^^ if ye will pr^^e that I say soche. Ete thereof and
ass^ye. Then to^e eve of the fruit and gaf adam and bad him ete thereof and
assaye. And adam loue^ ^er well and would not wrath her. took an appell and
(...). And anon therwyth either of them ^awe others shappe. and were ashamed.
And took leaves of a fygge tree and so ^yuered her members. Than came our lord
to adam and said.

Quare fecisti hoc. why have thou do so. and he said.

Mulier quam dedisti nuch^. The woman bad me. then said our lord to eve. why
dydest thou thus. Serpens decepit me. The Serpente begyled me. Then for they
might not deye in paradyse ne suffer no penance there fore he d^of hem naked
out in to this world that is full wretched weeping and waylynge full sore
syghynge to goo get her mete with (...) labor and trauaylle and deye at the
last Than p^aid adam our lord sore weeping be should not take great vengeance
upon them but have merry on them and py^e for they were begyled by envy and
malice of the fend. and by Innocensie off them self that they wyste not what
they did. Then had our lord ^u^^e on them. and for they were both naked he
clothede them in p^^^he^. and badde them goo labor and traueyle for their
living. And said to Eve In dolor paries filios. In sorrow and woo thou shall
bear thy children And took adam instruments to labor with and left them
there. By this ye shall understand and take ensample to labor besely. For
and Adam and eve had labored besely. the fend had never overcome them For the
fend desires no more when he would tempte a man. but for to find him idle:
And therefore know ye well that it is a rich salve against sin for to
labor besyly. The third is to chastyse the body discretely Vnde paulus
Castigo corpus meum et in seruitutem redigo. I shall castyse my body. and
dress it in service of soul. for mannys flessh is so wild and so lusty to
sin that it will not with no way leave his lust to serve god but if it be
chastysed with penance. For it must be chastysed sometime with pain Thus did
Adam and Eve in ensample that all other yt shall come after hem should do the
same for many years before her death either off them stood in water a nyghtes
up to the chyn one far from another to suffer penance till her flesh was
as grene as grass for cold. Then com the fend to eve also bryghte as an
angel and said that god has sent him from heaven and bad her goo to Adam and
say that god had sent him from heuyn and badde her go to Adam and say to him
that god badde him leave his penance for his trespass was for^yue. and Eve
did so but Adam wist well that it come from the fend and not from god He
said to eve wha^ god drove us out of paradyse for our sin and had
compassion on us for we wept sore on him. and prayed him mekely of mercy he
setted us here to penance to our lives end and therefore goo again for the
more penance that we do the more shall be our mede. And therefore goo again and
do penance in goddis name. yet the fend come again the second time and said to
eve. god of his grace has take reward to your penance that ye suffer and has
forgive you. Then went eve to adam and told him so. Then said Adam I wot
well that he that has said so to the is our enmye. for our penance greueth
more him than us. and he would have us to leave of and so to lose our mede.
But do we forth our penance to our lives end. For god takes none head to
the beginning of a thing. but to the endyng. yet the fend came again the third
time to Eve and said Goo thou to adam and say to him that he began foul and
well fouler will end. for first he trespassed by innocence and disceyte of
the fend And now he synneth by good delyberacion and will Not do as god
byddeth him. wherefore your trespass is worthy dampnacion. Then was eve a
ferde and told adam so. Then Adam siked sore and wept. and said to her
unadvised won in god made the of one of my rybbes for to help me and comfort
me^ And now by tycinge of the fend thou art besy to combre me again. But
think how our first sin stanke in the

sight off god that all our ofspryng shall be enfect and have repreef thereof in
to the worldis end. wherefore though we might do also much penance as all
our offspring might doo^ yet it were to lytill to quyte our lord god for our
trespass But god of his special grace aloweth a good will Then went eve again
to her penance as Adam bad and than said adam god will send us the oil of
mercy wha^ time of mercy is And so adam and eve did their penance to their
lives end

And wha^ Adam had lived ix. hundred years And xxx. and had xxx. sons and
xxx. daughters they deyde and were both buried togydere adam and eve. Thus ye
may see well that adam and eve were full hoolyor they deyed and thought on
death full inwardly and labored full besely and chastysed her flesh full
resonably. and so must we do that come of them that will come to the joy
of paradyse in tokenyng here of this sunday is called the sunday in
septuagesme a no^bre of lxx. The which nombre begins this day and ends
on ester even so holy church is morning from this day till ester even. than
she takes comfort again in party of one alleluya. with a tracte. for it is
not yet in fulle might till saturday in ester weke. the which is called.
Dominica in albis Than she leyeth down the tracte and grayell and syngeth
double alleluya techyng all christian men to labor and do penance truly till
the saterdaye that is to a mannys lives end. that is till the soul goo to
rest. yet is not the soul in full rest till the s^terdaye in albis. that is
till the day of (...). when the body and the soul shall come together. and be
clothed in albis yt is in white seven times whetter than the son and than
they shall sing double alleluya that is to say lord make us saaf in
everlasting bliss. To the which bring us he that for us al deyed on the rode
tree Amen.

Dominica ly.
^Ood men and wymmen th^s day is called the sunday in se^agesme. that is the
nombre of^ lx: the which nombre holy church techeth every man and woman to
think how short our life is now in our days. for sometime people ^u^^d^y
^^yeres and more. And now iii. score o^ iiii. score is a long lyff^ But the
grace off god and his mercy and goodness is so much that if we will do our
besynes and dyligence to serve god and plese him. he will give us asmoche joy
and bliss in heyen as he gaf to adam and eve that lived so long. But he that
will have joy and bliss must do three things One is he must ^^te sin
namely and suffer tribula^io^ mekely And do almys deeds wylfully Than for our
days ben sho^^ we must the more trybulacion suffer mekely. And with paciente
heart an not gr^^chynge and disease comes of special grace. For it is remedy
for sins he^

re in this world for penance o^ else for great increasing to his Joy in a
another world wherefore goddis appostell poull will that al christian people shall
take ensample of him. For he suffered much trybulacion patiently yt he
reherceth in the pistell of this day And said thus. In laboribus plurimis.
Poull says I have be in many great traueyles and often times in prison sore
bounden with cheynes of iron. Quinque virgis cesus / Five times beton with
rodis and scourgis on my bare body with paynemes Semel lapidatus / And ones
beten with stones and three times in ship brekyng. Nocte ac die in profundum
maris fui / And I was in the ground of the sea a night and a day. Sepe in
periculis fluuium / Many times in peril of flodes. Periculis latronum / In
peril of thieves and in perrell off brethren that showed true love to me and
were false and cou^seyled other to dome disease and troble. In fame et siti /
In hongre and in thirst. In ieiuniis multis / In much fasting. In multis
vigiliis / In long waking. In frigore / In cold and in many other mischeues
and peril that were to long to tell. and all he suffered with good will. and
ever thanked god of his sweet sonde. For well he wist yt al these tribulacio^s
and disease was for sin yt he had do^^ to fore. and to encrece his merit and
joy yt should come after. wherefore al criste people yt will please god what manner
disease or tribulacio^ yt come to hem be it s^kenes loss of catel or other
goods or death of frendis take it pacietly and mekely. and think it comes for
sin yt thou have do tofore or else for great increace of joy and bliss yt
thou shall have after for it comes of specyal grace there as god visits and
comyth there as god sends. but there as he suffers al their will is no good
sign yt he loves. and therefore thank god ever of his visitacion and beseech
him ever of his mercy. God knows our intent and therefore he foryeueth sone to
al yt asks mercy with a meke heart. Thus must a man suffer tribulacio^
pacie^tly. he must also do alms discretly which be figured by thy se lx.
days. for lx. is six ^ithes.x. so yt by vi. ye shall understood the vii.
works of mercy. yt comen out of the x. commandments the which ben thise to
give mete and drink cloth herborow visit prisoners comfort the sike blind
lame and to berye them yt ben ded these ben the vii: works of mercy. the
which al christian people must do ye will be saved and have mercy of god. wherefore
sexagesme begins this day and ends the wednesday in ester weke. the
which holy church speaks of thus. Venite bendicti patris me^ etc. Come ye my
faders blyssed children and take the kingdom of heaven yt is ordained for you
These same words god shall say to you at the day of dome. and to all that
has done alms deeds discretly. And fulfilled the works off mercy if they
were of power. and that tho that been not of power must do they good will and yt
shall fulfill the deed this must be do discretely. And how god teache this day
in the gospel by ensample and says thus Exiit qui seminat seminare se men
suum. A man went to sow his seeds. and as he sew. some fell by the way and
fowls come and ete it. and some fell emonge thorns and was lost. and some fell
in good earth and brought forth an C. fold encreace. to this christ says.
thus him self. Ego sum via veritas et vita I am the very right true lyffe and
way to heaven. Then falls his sede beside the way that yeueth not his
alms for cristys sake dyscretly. But for pride pomp and vayn glory off the
world. and so leseth his mede. and that I preue by ensample.

Narracio.
There was in Irlond a wonder rich man and deed much alms in his life. in so
much that the people wend he had be a saint. But when he was deed he appeared
to one yt he loved well in his life as black as any pytche with an horrible
stynke. and said. ye wene that I be a saint. but now I am such as thou see.
then said he where be thy alms deeds. and he said the wind of vayn glory
has blown them away. For he that does his alms for vayn glory of the world
leseth his mede. and the fe^des of the cyre destroys it. Also he leseth his
mede that yeueth his alms to such as he know yt ben in dedely sin And so
to mayntene them in there sin. his s^de falls among stones and weyeth
d^ye. And so lesyth his mede. his sede falls among thorns that yeueth his
good to rich people that has no need thereto and so lesyth their mede. But
his sede falls in good earth. yt yeueth his alms to good true people. for
they be goddis earth* and that sede shall give an hundred fold encreace in
everlasting joy and bliss. and shall be everlasting fode to them that don
thus her alms dyscretly. ye must also hate sin namely and flee it in all that
ye may. for he that hates and flees sin. loves god and god loves him. For
god hates sin in so much yt he took vengeance on all the world fo sin
of lechery. and in special for the sin against kind For when god saw this
sin rennynge in all the world so unworthily he said thus. Me forthynketh
that ever I made man and said to noe. Fac tibi archam. Make the a shype of
planed boordes. as I shall teache the. and make chambres therein. and take of al
clean bestes the couple by him self. and mete and drink with them. Than made
noe this ship as god taught him square in the botom and iii C. cubytes of
l^^ghthe. and l. cubits in bread and xxx cubytes of heyght: and this sheep was
in making a C. years to show how merciable god is in taryeng to look if the
people would amend hem and how loathe he was to do vengeance: But the people
was ever longer the wors. then by help of angels all manner birds and
bestis were brought to noe And when al were brought to the ship our lord bad
noe and his wife and his iii. sons goo in to the ship by hem self And noes
wife and her soones wyfes by hem self for the men should not comen with the
wymmen. so when they were all ynne. god closed the door to hem without forth.
Quadraginta diebus and quadraginta noctibus. aperti sunt celi. Then it rayned
xl. days and xl. nyghtes that the water bare the shype higher than any hill by
xl. cubytes. and stood still an C. days and xl. And drowned all the world
both people and bestes save those that were in the shype yet josephus said in
armany there is an hylle. and that is called Barus yt was higher than the water
was. and therefore diverse people have opinion there was much people saved. So
noe was in the ship al a year. And then he put out a raven for to bring word
to know if the reyne water seaced or no. and he come not again. Then he sent
out a douue and she come again and brought a branch of olyue in her bylle.
And thereby noe knew well that the water was seaced in some place: Then as
god bad noe went out and took the unclean bestis from the clean and burnt the
unclean bestis in sacryfice to god. and that plysed god so well that he gaaff
hem and all that come of hem after leave to ete flesh of all clean bestes. and
for to drink wine there as before the flode. the people ete and drank nothing
but water. for therthe was so fertyll in it self to fore. that the people
neded none other fode. but such as come of the earth: Thus may ye see and
understand how great vengeance god took on all the world for sin. and now
there is asmoche sin as euere there was in thoo days and much more in many
degres, where I dread lest god will take vengeance on us. and would or this
time were not the prayers of holy church and good saints* and in especyall by
the prayers of our Lady and that ye shall here by ensample of saint domynyk as
he was in his prayers he saw our lord Ihesu Crist holding three speres in his
hand ready to shote hem in to this world for vengeance. and all for sin.
Then com our lady knelyng before our lord. and said my dear sone what will ye
do. and he said my dear mother the world is so full of sin. of pride
couetyse lechery and other sins that I will shote these iii. speres of
vengeance on the people. Then said our lady. my dear sone hauer mercy on
hem. and abide a while for I have some true servants the which shall preche
and teache the people to turn hem from sin. and thus by prayer of our lady
god spared to take vengeance. But now the world is so full of sin and cursed
living of false extorcion and oppression of the pour people. that they cry to
god for socoure and help. wherefore it is full like yt we shall be smytten full
soon with some grievous vengeance. other with derth^ other with death of
pestilence. wherefore it is needful for us to pray besely to our lady that she
may pray for us to her dear sone Our lord Ihesu Criste to spare us in our
days that we mow have grace and mercy now and ever Anen.

Do^ (...)
GOod men and wymen ^^^daye is cal^ (...) in quiquagesme. This word
quinquagesme (...) a nombre of.^. which nombre betokens remission and joy*
For in the old law every.l. winter o^ manner of people that were ouirsette
with service of bondage when they come to ye age they were made free in great
joy and myrthe to them. wherefore this nombre begi^neth this day and ends on
Esterday showing that all christian people that be oppressed with any tribulacion
or disease here in this wo^^de shall be made fre and have remission at the day of
dome and be heirs in the kingdom of heuyn And yet in confortynge of al
christian people every. ^. winter the pope of Rome grants full remission of
all sins to all christian people that comes to Rome that year And for all
that may not come thydre to have this pardon. The pope of heuyn jesus crist of
his special grace grants to all christian people full pardon. of all sins
in their last end So that they will ^epe three things here in this world
Confession contricion and satisfaction Holy shrif^ of mouth with contricion of
heart and satisfaction in deed doing Also he must have charity without
faynynge. and stable feyth without flaterynge And without these thermay no
man have par^^^^e at Rome nor else where And therefore he that will be assoiled
of the pope of heuin and have clean remission ne must be contri^e. sorye for
his sins. and shryue him clean. and be in purpose neuir to sin more And
they that (...) all the peyne^ that (...) were ordained* for for him Take an
ensample by p^^ye that forso^^ criste (...) great oaths but he was after (...)
and sorry. Et (...). And wept full b^tterly. and god that is full of mercy for
yaue him his trespass. and made better there to him after than he did to fore.
For he should be in no dispayr and deed.

Narracio.
we find of a great rich man yt was so wicked in his life that much people
demyd him dampened to hell So he fell seek and felyd him selue yt he should be
deed. and he ^^thoughte him how wicked he had be in his leuyng and took such
a contricion to him and so great sorrow that he wept night ^ day euir when his
sin came to his mind And so ley vii. days and v^: nygh^^^ and shroue him
clean and took great repentance to him. and euir cried god mercy So that all
the people had great pity on him and than deyed* Then it happened that there
was a mon^e ^^ an abbey that dyed the same time. and wa^ made by his abbot to
come ^yen to tell him how he faryd* and so he did and said to the abbot when he
was come Sir I am come to keep my promise I pray you give me leave to go again
for I goo to joy Then said the abbo^ was there any moo that dyed when
thou dydyst that went to joy but thou And he said ye forsooth one and no mo^.
(...) was (...) so^le^ of such a man (...) name Then said thabbot* Now I
know well thou art not my monk but so^^e send is come to te^pte me. For we
know well if any soul be in pain he is one of tho Then said the monk full
unworthy is any man for to know the preuyte of gods dome For that man had
so great contricion and repentance and wept so bytterly for his sins that
the water of his eyes percyd through all his clothes to the ground wherefore go
thydre to morrow and when thou fyndest it true that I say than believe me: For I
goo now to euirlastinge joy. and bliss Then went thabbot thither and found
as it was true as the monk had said. and there knelyd thabbot down and
thankyd god and bad all the people to be glad that god is so merciful and
that he had ye knowledge. Here ye may se that the great contricioun yt this man
had quenchyd the great pain yt was ordained for him Thus ye may se hou great
help it is to a mannys soul to be contrite and sorry for his sins. and to
draw a man to the more contricioun* those L. days the psalm in the psaulter
Miserere mei deus. is more rehercid these days: than any other time of the
year the which is thus much to say. God for thy great mercy have mercy on
me And when a man is sorry for his sins and says thus with a soroful heart.
god heryth his prayer and foryeueth his trespaces. so that he be neuir in full
purpose to sin more. butt to amend him and be in parfyt love and charity
without any feynynge. And but he have charity without feynyng (...) sample.

Narracio.
There wa^ a man th^^ had (...) and had found (...) long to ^^le and cost
him much good So on ^ day he called his v sons ^ifore him* and said
Children I have found you long to scole and have spent much good upon you
and I se no great profyt thereof. wherefore but ye woll among you all assoyll me
a question I woll do no more cost on you ne find no lengre to scole And they
asked of their fadre what the question was and it should be assoyled And he
said I am old and feeble and may not live long and therefore I would wit of
you what thing would bring a man's soul sonest to heuyn And anoon the eldest
sone answered and said. Forsothe fadre prechynge and techynge will bring a
soul sonest to heuyn of any thing. well quod the fadre what says^ thou to the
secounde sone. And he answered and said Feyth and true believe brings a soul
asso^e to heuyn. what say thou to the question my third sone. And he said
good prayers and alms deeds brings a soul sone to heuyn. what say thou to
the matter my fourth sone And he said pilgramage going and great penance
suffrynge brings a soul sooner to heuyn than any of these. what say thou my
fyfte sone And he said forsothe fadre there is an other thing that brings a
soul sooner to heuyn than all these. what is that said the fadre Forsooth fadre
said he charity For (...) not to (...) ward For though a man pray and do ^^mes
deeds. goo on pylgramage. have full feyth and believe teache and preche fast and
suffer penance neuir so much: try and weep neuir so ^o^de and ^e out of
charity god heryth him natt And herto accords saint poule: in his epistyll
and says thus. Si linguis hominum loquar. Though I were so eloque^t as any man
or any angel. Et si habuero propheciam and omnem scienciam And though I had
all the conning in the world and knew the prophecy and the preuyte of god.
Omnem fidem vt montes tra^sferam. And though I had so much feyth yt I might
meue hills Et si distribuere^ in cibos pauperum. And though I dealyd all my
good to pore people for gods sake. Corpus meum vt ardeam. And my body to
brenne in hot fire. Caritatem autem non habeam nichill michi prodest. If I
have not charity all this profyteth not to heuyn wards. Wherefore it is needful
and most necessary to every soul that will be sauyd to have charity But though
a man say that he loves god and loves not. his eyn christian he is deceived.
For he yt loves god loves his nyghboure in good entente Thus must a man be
full of charity that will be sauyd. Caritas cooperit multitudine^ peccatorum
For charity couerith the multitude of (...) deyeth in (...) and (...) of
charity shall be (...) And therefore of all (...) ^oost virtuous and most
^^^ssarye to a manny^ soul: yet we must ^aue a stable feyth without
flaterynge and to believe sadly a^ holy church techeth and to bileue faithfully
in the fadre sone and holy ghost. the fadre full god. the sone full god. and
the holy ghost full god And thies three persons been but oon god that made al
thing of noghte This feyth was ^^ste showed to the holy patriark Abraham in
the va^e of mambre There he saw three fair me^ coming toward him. but he
worshyped but one yeuynge ensample to all christian people to se in the spirit
the fadre the sone and the holy ghost three persons and oon in godhede and
worship them as one god. Also ye must believe the incarnacion of our lord jesus
criste that our lady conceived in the holy ghost without w^^me of her body
in flesh and blood as one of us and very god and man. and was deed and beried
Tercia die resurr^^n a mortius. And on the thridde day he rose from death to
live Ascend^ ad ^e^os And ^^yed up to heuyn on holy thoursdaye. Jude venturus
est iudicare v^^os ^ mor^^os And shall come again at the day of dome and deem
the quycke and the deed This is figured by Isaac. the sone of Abraham that he
gate on his wife Sara through the holy ghost when they were both passed age to
bring for the any fruit For god said to Abraham he should have fruit as great
(...) multitude as were st^rres in the (...). Then when this child was borne
he was called Isaac. and when he was five and twenty year of age god said to
Abraham in this wise take thy sone Isaac and go to such an hill as he showed
to him and offer him in sacrifice. that was to sle him as the manner was sometime
Then abraham had by heste of god to have great issue. and though he louyd
his sone neuir somoch yet he took him anon without gruchinge. and went to the
hill and made his sone Isaac to bear wood to brenne him self with And when
they came to the hill top Abraham made an auster. of wode and set it on
fire. and then he took his sone Isaac and would have slain him and offeryd to
god Then anon spoke an aungel to abraham and badde him leave of and take the
sheep that stood thereby and offer him instead of thy sone Isaac. By abraham ye
may understand the fadre of heuyn and by Isaac. his sone jesus criste yt spared
not for no love that he had to him But suffered the ^ewys to ley wode upon his
back that was the croce that he should be done on him selue and ladde him to
the hill of caluarye and there did him upon the altre of wood that was the
croce that was made of four diverse manner of wode That was cedre. cypress
olyue and palm: and thereon he dyed for all mankind Thus may criste well be
called Isaac that is to understand laughter for many a soul he brought out
of hell laughing yt went thidre sore weeping Then like as this was a figure
of cristes passion long or he was borne. Right so this day ^^iste him self in
the gospel said (...) to his disciples that he should be betrayed Vnde.
Tradetur enim gentibus et illudetur et flagellabitur et conspuetur / et
postquam flagellauerunt eum die tercia resurge. And how he should be taken and
be^en with scourges. spytte upon. and after his scourgynge done upon the croce.
and so sle him the thridde day shall rise again to life and for they should have
the bettre believe thereto and to his words anoon to fore them he made a blind
man to se that cried and said: Jesus fili david miserere mei Jesus the sone of
dauyd have mercy of me Then said our lord to him what would thou that I
should do to the. and he said Domine vt videam. Lord give me sight Then
said our lord. thy feyth has sauyd the And anon he had his sight and
thanked god So must every christian man that will have pardone of god he must
have contricion full of heart with shrift of mouth and satisfaction in deed.
being in hole charity without feynyng and in stable feyth without flaterynge.
And to fiere you more to the faith I will tell you this ensample following.

Narracio.
There was somtym a bishop in England that highte by name grosthede. and was
busshoppe of Lincoln and was holden the greteste clerk in England. or in the
world. And whom he le^ his death he^ there came to him a great multitude of
fendes and disputed with him of the feythe Insomoche that they had nygh tornyd
him out of the believe and put him into despair Then was our lady ready
and said to him. My servant bileuest thou not in holy church as it techith
And anon he cried and said yes gracious lady I believe as holy church techith
me And anon went the fendes away and he gave up the ghost to euirlasting
(...). To the which bliss bring us (...) that boughte us with his precious
blood Amen

Dominica prima quadragesime
Good men and wymen this day is called in holy church the first sunday in
quadragesme. A nombre of.xl. for from this day unto Esterdaye been xl. days
And for because that every man synneth more or less for to make satisfaction
for trespase all christian people ben bound by the law of god and holy church
to fast thies xl. days save tho that law dispe^seth with for reasonable
cause Children that been within age. wymmen that be with child. Old people
that been myghtlesse to fast labourynge people as pilgrames and seek people.
Those the law^ dispenses with upon their conscience Then for cause that
sunday is no day of penance. therefore ye shall begin your fast on
asshewednesday That day ye must come to holy church and take ashes of the
prestes hondes and think on the words well that he says over your hedes*
(...). Memento homo quod c^tis e^ et in cinerem reuerteris. Have mind man of
ashes that thou art come of. and to ashes thou shall turn again. Then
been there diverse s^ylles why ye shall fast these forty days One is as the
gospel tellythe this day thus Ductus est jesus in desertu^ vt temptaretur a
dyabolo. How the holy ghost bad our jesus christ goo into deserte bitwene
jerusalem and ^herico to be tempted* of the fe^de* and was there xl. days
fasting and xl. nyghtes for your sake shewy^ge* to all christian people the
virtue and the mede that comes of fasting. the w^iche been expressyd in the
preface of the mass that is said in holy church the xl. days that is thus.
Qui corporali ie^unio vici^ co^prinus mentem eleuas virtute^ largiris. That
holy fasting thrust^th down vices and lyfteth up the thought of a man to
virtues and to largeness of all godenesse. and geuyth great mede in ^euen that
shall last euir* and get gra^^ ^^re in earth For as clerks tell the ^py^e^
of a fasting man shall slay an ^dd^r. bodily Then much more it ^^eeth the
might of the old adder that is the fend of hell that come to eve in paradise
in likeness of an addre and tempted ^et to glotony vain glory. and couetyse.
Right so the fend came to criste in sy^nesse of a man left he had be known
and tempted criste as says the gospel Cum ieiunasset quadragi^ta diebus et
quadraginta noctibus postea esuriit. when criste had fasted forty days and
and forty nyghtes. Then. by kind of manhood he hungered Then came the
fend to him and showed him stones and said thus: Si filius dei es / dic vt
lapides isti panes fiant. If thou be gods sone of heuyn make these stones
bread For right as eve was rauysshed when she saw the apell by temptation of
the fend to ete thereof. The same wise he went to have made criste to ete of
the bread. For glotony is not only in ma^nys mete but in the foul lust and
appetite of a man Then said criste anoon to him in this wise. Non ex solo
pane viuit homo / sed de omni verbo quod procedit de ore dei. (...) lives not
only by bread but by (...) word that co^myth fro the mouth of god Then the
fend took him and set him upon the high pynacle of the temple and said If
thou be gods son. ^^nge thy selue down without mannys help or harm. that
I may know the for gods sone Then said our lord Non temptabis dn^m deu^ tuu^.
Thou shall not tempte thy lord god. yet he came again the thridde time.
Assumpsit euz diabolus in mo^tem excelsum et ostendit ei omnia regna mundi. He
took him and set him on a high hill and showed him all the kingdoms and
the richesse of the world and said to him on this wise. Hec omnia tibi dabo /
si caden^ adoraueris me. All this I shall give the if thou will fall down and
worship me. Than said our lord god unto him thus. Vade sathanas scriptu^
est eniz dominum deum tuum adorabis et ei soli seruies. Goo sathanas it is
wreten thou shall worship thy lord god and only him serve The^^^ he left him.
and went his way (...). Angeli accesserunt ad jesus and ministrabant ei. Than
angellys came and brought him fode For the fend is most besy these xl. days
to tempte people to three sins to pride couetyse and gloteny. It is needful to
have three remedies against them That is against glotony abstinence. against pride
meekness. and against couetyse largenes. Against glotony we must fast that is
not to ete before time and at mete ete not gredely no more tha^ a another time
and to fast both day and night as criste did But there is much people will
sytt and drink both day and night and fill their bodies with foul lust of
gloteny Also ye must fast from all manner of flesh mete and white mete For
Ierom says eggs is almoost flesh and milk blod And when ye go to your
mete take ensample by holy church. when the priest goth to mass that is
gods word: how he at his beginning boweth down his knees and byddeth all
other do the same. in the mids of the mass and at thend of the mass bow
down your hedes to god And therefore when ye go to your mete so worship god with
a pater noster and an Aue. that sent you ye fode. and make a crose upon your
mete. and after mete an other. and thank god highly that sent you that fode at
your need to your bodily sustenaunce. Thus ^urste ye fast against glotony:
Against pride that is but a vain glory of the world ye must put away all
such thoughts of pride and highness in heart and be me^e and louly in heart
and think how a man is borne feeble. seek and full pour. and how he goes
every day a iournay toward his death while he lives in this world. and at
last comes death and castith him down in his bed and lies there sighinge
and gronynge and changes both hyde and hew Then stynketh his breath and
his lyppes wexen black. his face pale and his eyes yelowe. his tongue englymed.
and his nose black. his teeth fallen away. his flesh wydereth and turns to
earth And then at the last with great sighinge yeueth up the gooste and then
lies there as earth and put into the earth Lito obliuisceris And so shall thou be
sone forgoten. Therefore take this sadly in mind and I hope ye shall putt away
pride Then against couetyse ye must have abstinence that is for to say. ye
absteyn your self from worldely couetyse and vanyties. And they that have been
hard in keeping of goods and euir has gadred to aydre and fast has kept it
But now should ye be as ready to pay and content yt ye be in debt unto both
to god and to the world And also to restore again that ye have taken wrongfully
And give to p^re people mete and drink and clothes. and other things such as
is needful to them And the fete yt has goon all the year besily to get
gods of the world. now must ye be also besy to go and give the pore people
to them that have need as we have in the gospel. Da^e et dabitur vobis. give
and god will give you For the hondes that will not give alms. they be full
unworthy to be acceptable unto god Also ye must goo full besily unto gods
service and in pilgramage going and to all manner good deeds of alms. And he
that has be besy to gadre goods now should he spare from his own mouth for
to give the pore nedy that is gods people for that pleasith god full much
and greatly helpyth the soul. El^mos^a a morte liberat. Alms delyuerethe the
soul from deth^ Sicut aqua e^tinguit ignem ita elimosina exti^guit peccatu^
For right as water quenchy^^ fy^e Right so alms deed que^chith sin wherefore
the prophet says thus. Date et dabitur vobis. give ye and god will give to
you. Dimittite et dimittittum Forgive and god will forgive you^ But now all is
little enoughe to feed your bodies. that no thing ye may give to pore bodies
for gods sake

Narracio.
we read there was a worthy knight a rich man of godis and a mighty man of his
h^ndes. but he cherisshed much his body with delicate metes and deynties. But
at the last he died and was buried in a tomb of stone Than had he a sone that
was a worthy man and used every day in custom to say Deprofundis for his
faders ^soull. by his tomb So on a day he made a great feste to all the worthy
estates in the country about him. when they should wash and go to mete this
man bithought him how he had not said Deprofu^dis* and prayed the people to
abide till he said his deuociones. and they said they would goo with him and
did so. Then there fill such a lust in this mannys heart that he must
needs se his faders tomb oyned or else him thought he should dye. and so made
the people to eyes the tomb Then anoon he was ^^are of a great black tode
also black (...) any pytche with ^yn brennyng like ^y^e that had b^^epyd his
faders heart with her four claws and gnewe fast He said O fadre much good
mete has goon in thy throat and now art stra^gled with a foul hell hounde
and an horrible foul best And anon he let go close the tomb again and so
yede to mete. And when he had served all the people pryuely he went forth and
left child and lordship and all his gods and went to Jerusalem and lived
there emonge beggars with other pore people in great pouerte all his life and so
deyed when god would and went to euirlastinge joy as I hope To the which
joy god bring us all. Amen:

Dominica secu^da quadrageste
Good men and wymen this is the secounde sunday in clean lent wherefore like
as ye have made all this year before you honest and well be seen in good array
to your body Now should ye be as soon besy to make you a clean soul. wherefore
this time of lent is ordained to cleanse your canscience. from al manner of
ruste and fylth of si^ne So that ye may on Esterdaye with clean conscience
receive the body of our lorde^esu criste. wherefore saint Poule in the epistyll
of this day says thus. He est voluntas dei. This is gods will that ye
should be besy and holy to keep your bodies in clenesse for to please god much
and to pray to him to make his vessel clean against the coming of our lord
jesus criste. Thanne shall ye understand that this vessel is mannys conscience
and that is a good vessel that kepyth all good things that is put therein till
the day of dome. For that day every mannys vessel that is to say every
mannis conscience shall be opened. and the world shall se what has been kept
therein be it bettre or worse fair or foull Than he that brings a clean
vessel. before the high judge shall be well allowed. Then how a man shall keep
his vesell clean holy church techith by ensample of a holy patriarch Jacob
that is read in song all this weke Jacob had a fadre that was called Isaac and
his modre Rebecca and she had two children at one birth. and that was first
borne highte Esau and the other jacob But for the story is long we shall ta^e
at this time that is most needful and leave that other Then had god give
his patriarch Isaac such grace that what blessinge he gave his blessed children
they should have it Than for Isaac was old and blind and nyghe his death he
said to his sone Esau. Aufer michi de venacione tua. Goo and hunte and get me
some mete that I might ete of.

Vt benedicam tibi priusquam moriar. et cetera. That I may give the my
blessinge or I deye But when Esau was gone jacob the yongre by techynge of his
modre gate his faders blessinge And his fadre said to him in this wise. Esto
dominus fratrum tuorum Be thou lord of all thy brethern and so made him his
air and blessed all ye blessed him Then when esau was come home and wist
this he hatyd Jacob his brother and thought to sle him Then jacob by
counseyll of his modre went out of the contre unto an uncle that he had that
hight Laban and as he went by the way in a country of evil people living he
durst not long with them abide but leye all a night in the feld by the way
and leyd a stone under his head and slepte. Viditque in sompnis scalam sta^tem
super terram. And in this sleep he thought he saw a ledder that stood of
therth and ^aught up to heuyn and god joined to the ledder. Vnde. Angelos
quoque dei ascende^tes. et descendentes And aungellys of god going up and down
Then god spoke to him and said I am god of Abraham and Isaac and I will give
the this land and be thy kepar in thy way Then awoke Jacob and said in this
wise Vere dominus est in loco isto. et ego nesciebam. Forsothe god is in this
place and I wyste not and so went forth to his uncle and was with him xx.
winter and more his servant and wedded his ii. daughters that one hight
rachell and ye other Lya And when he had be there so long he desired to goo
home ageyn into his own country And took with him his wife and his children.
and all his catell and went forth Then came there to him a multitude of
aungellys to help him Then when Jacob came to a forde he made all his meyne
to goo before with his cattle and him selue abode bihinde in his prayers and
as he prayed there ca^me an angel to him in lyknesse of a man and wra^^^ed
with him all the night till on the morn and took him by the great senowe of
the thighe and made him to ha^^e euy^ after Then said the angel to Jacob what
is thy name. He said Jacob nay said he thou shall no longer hight jacob but
israel shall be thy name. And blessed him and left him there hastynge. and thus
he went home to his ow^ country with great prosperyte. This story is red in
holy church in this ensample to all good servants that desire to get the
blissyng of the fadre of heuyn and to have the heritage: that is there He must
be jacob and after israel For jacob is to understand a wrasteler. and Israel
a man yt sees god. for he that will see god. he must wrastell here in earth
with the bad angel That is the fend* and with his own flesh. as thus when he
has done a great horrible sin than the fend puts to him a great shame in
heart. so that he dare not tell it out. then he must wrastele with the
fend and the flesh and overcome hem. And tell out his sin openly* with
all the circu^staunce of his sin. than will his flesh be aferde and
ashamed theroff but than he must wrastel with his flesh strongly and make it
to tell his since and to do^ penance after the counsel of his gostely
fader. taking then (...) woman of fer country that came to crist as the
gospel says Ecce mulier cananea a finibus (...) egressa clamauit dicens How
the woman of Canen^e came ^ Criste to get hele for her daughter. (...) was
trobled with a fend and said Ihesu fili david miserere mei. Ihesu the sone of
david have mercy on me Then our lord answered: Non e^ bonum sumere panem
filiorum et dare canibus. It is not good to take bread of children. and give it
to hounds Nam et catelli edent de mensa dominorum snorum. Ies lord for why
welpes eten of the cromes that fallen fro her lords board Then said our lord.
Mulier magna est fides tua. fiat tibi sicut vis. O woman thou have a great
feyth wherefore as thou will thy daughter be saved. and so was her daughter
hole. This woman and her daughter betokens a man that his conscience
traueyleth with a fend of dedely sin that may not be helped but he goo to
god. And there he shryue him to the preeste. sparynge for no rebuke noor shame
ne for dread but mekely suffer all that the confessor says to him. And take
his penance mekely with a contryte heart. and do it with good devotion and
so he shall be delivered of the fend. that has traueyleth his conscience
for a man that has done an horrible sin. and shall be saved he shall never
have rest in his conscience. till he be shryuen thereof. For right as an hounde
gnaweth on a bone that is hard right so his sin gnaweth his conscience.
Showing by experience how hounds of hell shall gnawe his soul ever more
without rest that deyth wyttingly in dely sin that he might have be shryuen
of* and would not. Ensample of a woman.

Narracio.
There was a woman that had don an horrible sin. and would fayn have be
shryuen there of and durst not. Then came our lord to her bodily and said. my
daughter why shr^^est the not of thy sin. lord I may not for shame then
said our lord take met^^ hand. and put her ho^de in to his side euin to his
heart and said woman what felest thou and she quaked for fere and said lord I
feel (...) heart Then said our lord be thou no more asshamed to show me thyn
heart than I to let the feel mine Then this woman rose and with light saw
her hand al blody and would have wasshe it of but it would natte till on the
morrow that she was shryuen and then was her hand clean as it was to fore
and she was clean of all her sins and thus she was made clean both of body
and soul.

Dn^ica tercia quadragesime.
Good men and wymen this is the thridde sunday in clean lent wherefore we read
in the gospel of this day and says thus Erat Jesus eiciens demonium How our
lord cast out a fend of a dombe man and when the fend was loppen out.
Locutus est mutus. Then the dombe man spoke By this dombe man ye shall
understand al tho that have no might to shryue them. with their tongues to
tell their sin: but tarry as long as they may for shame of the people. and it
were not for shame of the world in lenten nor out of le^ten they would neuir
came to shrifte. and that makes that fend for he is in that man or woman
whedyr it be that is so disposed Therefore ye that be behind. come and shryue
you and make you cleue and have this do^be man out of your mind and cast
away the fend. But there be many that be not yet shreuyn what shall I do
there they woll say they can not shryue them they wo^e not whereof But I may
say to you of many an ydell word and many ^n evil thought. and many a
cursed deed. many great oaths. many an evil word that ye have spoke I wot
well ye can not tell all for ye have been so long fro confession But I say to
you that vnknewyngnesse shall not excuse you at the day of dome. For when ye
have offendyd god in many trespaces that hurts the soul. anon ye should make
you clean and keep it in your mind But ye woll not come till it be forgoten.
And so yet when ye come to shrifte ye be dombe for the fend is within you For
ye wene many times that it be no sin to speak an ydell word* to make the
people to laugh nor to swear a great oath it does no harm Bu^^e saint Poule
in his pystell forbedyth every man to speak any (...) says in this manner.
Dico autem vobis quod omne verbum ociosuz quod locuti fuerunt omnes reddent
^acionem in die iudicu. Forsothe I say to you that ye shall give a reknynge for
every ydyll word yt ye speak And none shall pass vn^unysshed at the day of
dome And therefore that all ydell words and harlotry and rebaudry be And if ye
do yt is worship to god and profyt to the speke^ for there as harlotry is much
spoken it is in mi^de For the tongue she with thabundau^ce of the heart so
first in thought after ^n speking it causes much sin in deed Vnusque
temptatur a concupiscencia. First every man is tempted to sin by lust of
thought thereon. Concupiscencia generat peccatum^ And the lust engendereth
sin. Peccatum cum consu^matum fuerit generit mortem. And when the sin is
done it causes damnacion. ever lasting death yt is in speaking rybawdry and
harlatry for the lust that a man has in speaking is great sin.

Narracio.
we find of an abbess: that was a clean woman* as for any deed of syn^e. But
she had great lust to speak t^erof So when she was deed and beryed in the
church. the night after ^ame fendes and took up the body. and all to beat it
with brennynge scourges from the navel upward that it (...) black as any
pytc^e. But from the navel down ward it shone as bryghte as the son. and
the fendes ^yghte it do no harm. And ever as the fendes beat her she cried
pytously. that two of her susters that were sexs^ens were sore aferd. But
either comforted other. so that they went nere til they wist how it was.
Then spoke the spyrite to her susteren and said. ye know well that I was a
clean maiden as for any deed but I had great lust to speak of sin. that
party has great pain as ye may see. wherefore I pray you systerne pray for
me For by your prayers I may be helped and beware by me in time coming Here
by ye may see what perell it is to speak idle words and harlatry speech.
wherefore this same pystle says thus. Abstinetis vos a fornicatione. Absteyne
you from Fornycacion and all sins. and walk with Christ in love and peace. as
Christ deed. that suffered for us many scorns rebukes and dyspytes. and all he
took mekely pacyently and in charity yeuynge ensample to all christian people to
do the same: But he that will live in rest and peace shall have great
persecucion off evil people. But and he suffer it mekely. he is a martyr
before god and in confermynge of this holy church makes mind and mention as
thus. we read of an holy man that was called Joseph that suffered great
persecucion. but he suffered it mekely. therefore god brought him to great
worship and prosperyte as ye shall here. But for this story is long therefore
we shall take that is most needful at this time. This Joseph had a fader that
hight Jacob. and had xi: sons. brethren to Joseph. But his fader loved him
most specially of all the other And therefore his brethren hated him the more.
and in especial for a dreme that he dremed. whereby they supposed all. that he
should be lord of them all and all they should hem do worship And anon they
took their cou^seyl to gyder and said: Venite itaque occidamus illum. Let us
goo therefore and slay him But yet they durst not for dred of god and anon.
Vendiderunt cum in egypto. They sold him in to Egipte to a man for xxx. pene as
god was sold. And therefore god was with him. so a man yt was styward to the
king bought him ye hight putefar. but the fe^de had great envy to Joseph and
tempted the Lady sore on him. Post multos itaque dies iniecit dn^a oculos in
Joseph et ait veni dormi mecum. So on a day the lady looked on joseph and took
him by the mantel and said come and sleep with me. And as soon as Joseph
understood her meaning. anon he yede and fled his way and left his
mantell there. then this woman cried and told her husbonde how Joseph would
have leyen by her. And for he should not say nay she kept his mantell Therefore
the lord made to cast Joseph in prison. there as Pharao had put his butteler
and his baker As they fell a sleep they dremed. the which dreme they told
joseph And he said that the king would restore his botteler to his office
again within three days and the baker should be hanged within three days and as
he said it was Then happed so that the king dremed him self* but there
cowde noman tell what should fall there of. but by counseyll of the butteler
the king sent after Joseph. And wha^ the king had told him his dreme Joseph
said that god has sent him a fair warnyng to puruey him to fore that should
come after. And he said there should come vii. plentuous years off come. and of
all manner fruits and vitayles. and after should come seven years in the which
people should spend^ all that was gotten to fore. Then the king said. I know
no man that could purueye so well for such a thing as thou cowdest wherefore.
I make the gretest under me. off all my ^eame. And they shall do to the as to
me at thy commandment

Then anon Joseph let make the gretest bernes that ever was seen and
gadered corn fast seven years. And soon after came seven years that all
thing was scarce and dear Then Jacob Joseph's fader herd that there was
corn to selle in Egypt. And he sent thither his ten sons for to bye corn.
And when they came thither. and saw Joseph* al fill down on her knees and did
him worship like as his dreme was for they knew not him. But wend that he
had be lord of the country but he knew them well ynowhe: Then he ^^^ke to
them in latyne. Surge. And said they were s^^^es that were come to know of
the land And they said nay they were all Brethren and all one man's sons
and another brother they had that was ^^me home with her fader and there was a
another and they wyste not whether he were a live or no And that they met by
Joseph and for to preue the trow the he made to bind one of them that hyghte
Symeon. And said that he should abide with him till they had fette him that was
at home. And so he let fylle her sackes with corn and preuyly put her money
in to her sackis vnwetynge to hem. And so when they came home to her fader. and
put out her corn. they fond her money: And they told her fader. but then
he was sorry for Symeon his sone. that was left behind in prison. And more
over that he must nedys. send for Him which he loneth most and that was
Beniamyn. Joseph. hole brother For these other were but half brederne to
Joseph. but when Jacob failed corn he must nedis send for more. And he sent
forth Beniamyn. And when Joseph saw his brother Beniamyn he might not forbere
weeping And anon delivered him his brother symeon: and set hem all to mete.
and filled her sackes with corn. and pryuely put the cup that they drank of
in Beniamyns sack. and badde hem go her way But anon after Joseph sent
after them. and said they were to ^lame while they had so good chire (...)
bear away a cup that they dra^ke of. Then they were heavy and sad and
said it was not so. and he ra^ ^aked hem by and by. And then they found it
in Be^iamyns sack. then came they again to Joseph sore weeping. And when
Joseph saw hem all weep and his own brother Beniamyn made most sorrow. For it
was found with him. Then Joseph bad hem all be of good chere. For I am
Joseph your brother. And be no thing adred. For god has me sent heder for
your profit and anon sent after his fader: and so dwelled all to gyder a
great while in ye land with much prosperyte. This story is red this weke in
holy church. For goddis children should take ensample off old faders. to
suffer tribulacion and persecucion mekely in parfyte charity. for goddis sake.
As he suffered for us. For who that grucheth ayenste trybulacion and persecucion
that god sends. must shryue him and take his penance. For there is some
people will say why does god thus by me what have I trespassed again him.
they be in great peril for her penance: For truly words may let much
grace.

Narracio.
we find in miracles of wenefrede the virgyn that a man came to her on a
night upon two crotches full off many manner syknes and so by the help of god
and this holy virgyne. This man was hole and so went where he would an hole
day in the abbey. and thanked hyghly god and this holy virgyne of his hele.
So at night he went to his bed in good hele. And on the morrow his sykenes
took him again sorer than it did before. and so leye cryynge. yt it was great
pity to here. Then came a monk to him and asked him what he had done that
his syknes was come again. and he said nothing Then said the monk: were thou
shriuen since thou were hole. and he said nay. I had no need. For I stale
another ox nor cow. nor did no gryuous sin Then the monk thought.
though a man do no dedely sin. he may do so many venyall. that they may
make a dedely sin. for right as a man may with many small corns charge a
strong horse. so may he lade his soul with so many small sins that he
may fall in the pytte off hell. Then anon this man went to a preeste and
shroue him. and so was hole both in body and soul ever after by confession
and preyers of this holy virgyne Amen.

Dominica iiii. quadragesi^e.
^Ood men and wymmen this is the fourth sunday in lenton the which holy
church makes mention of an holy prophet that was called moses. the which
was a figure of our lord Ihesu Criste many years or our Lord was borne.
Then as we read in holy church. as Moses was in the deserte of Synay. God
spoke to him and said. Vidi afflictione^ populi mei qui est in egipto clamorem
eius audiui etc. Pharao the king of egypt oppresses so the people of Israel
with bondage and unreasonable works. And they for woo cryde to me for socoure
and help. wherefore goo thou thither. and bring hem out of her bondage. and I
shall be with the. then bring hem and offer hem to me. I will bring hem in
to a land of plentuousnes off all goodis. So when he had taught Moses how he
should do. Moses went thither and gadered all tholde people to gyder that knew
the prophecye how they should be ladde out of that land. and said to hem. as
god bad him. then were they full glade and went with him old and young till
they came to the read see. and god was euyr before hem in the day in a pyler
as a cloud to refresshe hem fro the hete of the son. And in the night in a
pyler off fire to light hem fro harm of venym beestis: But when that pharao
herd that moses had forth this people. he took three hundred Char^ottis of
his own and three hundred of the land. and xl. thousand horsemen. and three
hundred thousand footmen and went after. And when Moses saw this people
come. he prayed to god for help And god him self bad him smite the sea with
his yerde. Et percussit mari rubro And when he had smytten the sea* he had way
for him and his people. The sea cloue in two parties. So that the water stood
stylle on every side as an hill and the ground was d^eye sonde Then Moses
yede forth and all the people after him. Then wend pharao to have passed
also. and sewed after with all his often but wha^ he had his oste within the sea
the water went to gyder and drowned him and all his oste And when moses saw
yt he and his people were peryshed thus he thanked god and was there vii. days
after. and every day they yede to the sea thankinge god of her passage making
great melodye that our lord had done so to them And yet in mind hereof. all
ester weke we make solemn procession to the font that is the read see.
Then went moses forth with his people in to deserte tylle he came to the
hylle of Synay. and there he left the people benethe.

Stabat moses super monte^. And moses stood upon the hill there as god was
and there he was xl. days and xl. nyghtes without mete and drink. Then god
gave him two tables of stone. in the which god wrote with his own fyngres the
ten. commandments and took them Moses. And bad him teache hem to his
people. And when Moses came down to the people his face was all bryghte as the
son. and two spites stondyng on his head. like two horns. so that the
people might not speak with him for clerenes.

Abscondit moses faciem sua^. Then moses hyde his face with a kerchiff.
then in that one leef were written the three. commandments that longen to
god and those ben these. The first thou shall worship thy god and love him
above all thing. For thou shall direct all manner thing to goddis will before
thine own. And sue his and not thyn own will. The second commandment is
this Thou shall not take his name in vein. that is for to say thou shall not
be called goddis child as christian man. And s^ fend. For then that name is
to the but vayn. Also thou shall not swear by god. Nor by no part off his
body. not by no thing that he made. but in forderynge of the truth. And yet
when thou art constreyned thereto. The third commandment is. thou shall
keep thine holy day: that is for to say thou shall be erly up and late down
to serve god on the holy day as thou art on the werkedaye to thine own
work: as besy shall thou be on the holy day to serve god.

The fourth commandment is thou shall worship thy fader and thy mother yt
brought the in to this world. Also thy godfader and thy godmoder. yt made the
a christian man And thy fader under god that has cure and charge of thy soul.
The fyfthe is. thou shall sle no man another with tongue nor with thy hand nor
with evil ensample. The sixte thou shall stele no man's gods The vii. is
thou shall do no lechery The viii: is thou shall bear no false witness The
nynthe thou shall not coueyte thy nyghboures gods. ne no thing that longs to
him that is his against his will The tenthe thou shall not desire thy
neighbors wife ne counsel her in no way to do evil that should be harm
or vilonye to her husbonge Thies been the x: co^maundmentes the which every
christian man and woman is bond to keep Thus was moses a figure and a token of
criste Moses camme before and yaue the law. and Criste came after and gaaf
grace and mercy For in that same manner as moses fette the people out off
Egypt thrughe the read see forth to the hylle of Sinay. in the same wise Crist
when he came by his prechynge and miracles doing. He fette the people out of
dernesse of sin and of all evil living thorugh the water of baptysme to the
hylle of virtuous living

And therefore he that will shryue him clean. And leave his foul living. and
keep the commaundementis of god that he made couenaunte to keep in his
cristning then shall he be increased higher tha^ any hyl in earth. yt is in
heaven: But he that will do thus he must be fed with five loves. and two
fysshes we read this day in holy church in the gospel. How Criste fed five
thousand people with five looues and two fysshes The first loff of the five.
is contricion for sin The second is shryfte of mouth. The third is
satisfaction for the trespass. The fourth is not to turn again to his sin.
For he that is often aferde shall do well The fyfthe is perseueraunce in good
living. And the two fysshes ben good orysons. and almesdedes. For these be
norysshed in waters that is weeping teres in devotion. these two fysshes geten
of god what they will.

Narracio.
It is wreten. that sometime was a man that was called pyers and was a rich
man. But he was so hard that there was no beggar that might get (...) of
him. Then on ^ time it happed so that many beggars satte to gyder in a place.
and spoke off this Pyers how they might get no good of him. Then spoke one
off them as a master. and said. what will ye ley with me that I shall not
get no good of him So they made a wager. then went this man forth and
came to Pyers place. and set him down in the porche at the halle door. and
there abode till pyers came: and anon as he saw Pyers. he spoke so horrible
to pyers. that for great anger. as his servants came by him with a basket of
bread. he took a loof. And with all his might he cast it at the beggars
head. and smote him on the breast. and said stop thy mouth there with. that
the deuylle stop the. And anon the beggar caught the loofe and ran his
way to his fellows and showed his loof. And so he gate his wager. Then the
next night after it happed so that this Pyers was shryuen and brought to his
bed* and so deyed. And anon fendes came to take his soul. But then was
our lady ready. and bad them bring the soul to her. And so they did. then
was there no thing to help the soul. But only that lof that he cast to the
beggar then said the fendys. he gaaf that ayenste his will. therefore by
right it should not help him. Then went our Lady to her sone. prayenge him
to grant the soul to goo to the body ayent to look if he

would amend (...). Then our lord badde vere the soul again to the body And
when the soul was with the body anon he satte up. and gaaf a great syghynge.
and called to him all his servants. and told hem at how hard a dome he was
at. And he had be dampened had not that lof be that he cast at the beggar.
Therefore anon he made to selle his good: and deled it to pour people fore
goddis sake. And when he had done so he made him self an heremyte. and
after was an holy man. Here by ye may well wit how great is almesdede and
preyers. that made a man so preuy with god. and so syker against the dome For
all that have done almysdede for goddis sake shall be saved. if they be out
of dedely sin. we find that a vowtry. that is for a man to take another
mannys wife. or a woman another man than her husbonde. it is a grievous sin.
And that ye shall here by ensample.

Narracio.
There was sometime a man that made charcoles in a wode and when he had made a
great fire he leye down thereby all night. and so about mydnyght. there came a
woman rennynge before a man on a black horse. as fast as he might ride. and
hunted her abowte with a naked sword. all about the fire And so at last this
man slew this woman. and hew her all to pieces and cast her in to the fire. and
rode again with all his might. So when this man saw this done many nyghtes.
then he went to his lord and told him all this matter. Then was the lord a
bold knight. and sai^ I will wit what all this mente: and (...) thither the
night after and fond it as the man had told. Then the knight asked the
spirit why he did so then said he was such a man and told his name. that
was his servant a little to sore. and that woman was and there knights wif and
he haddeley by her husbondes life. therefore they were both put to that
penance. and said the horse that I ride on is the fend yt brenneth me a C.
fold worse than any other fire might that is in earth. And that pain they
must so suffer till they had help of good preyers masses and alms deeds. and
told him many other things. Than this knight did all things that he said
should be her help and so delivered hem out of this pain to everlasting
bliss. the which god bring us all to Amen.

Dominica in passione dni^.
GOod men and wymmen this day is called the sunday In passion weke. this day
Our lord Ihesu Criste began his passion. For this (...) the jews had such an
envy ^o^ by cause he told her defautes and ^^ces of mysliuyng. And so for
this cause they repreued him. So this day they were full assented to do him
to death. and so they were about often before. But they were let by some
thing and most for fere of the comen people. For they held him a prophet.
But this day they ^uytte hem togider and fully accorded (...) they would spa^^
for no thing. but he should be deed. wherefore as the gospel tellith as
criste preached in the temple the iewys rebuked him spytously and said. Nunc
cognouimus quia demonium habes. Now know we that thou haste a fend with the
And all was to tempte him to have made him speak some evil word by the which
they might have putt him to some repreefe And for he told them that he was
gods sone they were ready to have stoned him to death. But he knew well there
malice. Jesus autem abscondit se et exiuit de templo. Jesus hyd him selue and
went out of the temple Thus our lord this day began his passion. wherefore
holy church redeth this weke in the book of Ierom the prophet that first
prophyced of cristes passion and told how and what manner the iewys should do
him to death Then ye shall understand. well that in the same wise that the
Iewys pursuyd criste to the death. In the same wise I fere greatly lest there
been much false people that be cristned that pursuen criste in heuyn now.
Saint Austyn says that they sin more grievously. that pursue him in heuyn
that the iewys did that pursued him in earth Then if ye wol wete which be
those Take heed how criste marked them and said thus. Oui ex deo est verba dei
audit He that is of god. heryth the word of god For he heryth not the word of
god that sweryth many great oaths full falsely Thi^^ been tho that (...) in
heuyn that been glade in their (...) when they have a foul deed done and be
grounded in foul cursed living. of sin and w^ll not amend them for
prechinge nor techynge. but euir do foull deeds and anon been ready to fight
and chyde with them that tell h^^ their defautes As it is showed by crist For
the more harm is. the condiciones of the people been such now a days. that
he shall have many enmyes. that will say truth And that I may preue by
ensample.

Narracio.
There was sometime a mawmente. in a cite that would tell where any thing was
that was stole or myssed and who had it So it hpped on a time yt a young man
had stole a thing and was aferde of this mawmente. and anon he went to this
mawme^t and fayde thus. well I wot thou may de^me a great shame and velonye
But by god that I believe upon and thou discover me I will break thy bid And
so went forth his way Then soon after ca^me they that missed this good
praynge the mawmente to tell them who had it And when they had long prayed
at the last the mawment spoke and said Times be changed the people been worse
than they were who says the truth his head shall be broken: So he that will
say truth he shall be sh^^e. and so the true man shall be d^^^ted and so plucked
that he shall not wytt to whom he shall speak nor to wh^^ he may tell his
counseyll in trust. (...) that woll sonest descryue him sometime speak most
fareste It is wretyn in the book of kings ha^ there were two knights great
enmyes one to ye other That one hight Ioab. and that other amasa and this ioab
said to amasa as they met Hayle brother and kyssed him. and with his other
hand behind him he slew him with his knyffe and smote him to the heart Thus
it fares now a days by much people. they freke full fair before the people
And behind them they will sle them wit a shrewyd knyf. that is with the evil
and cursed tongue These been they. yt pursuyth him into heuyn and set naught
(...) gods wo^de. For though they here it with their cries it synketh not in
their hertes where god playneth him greuou^ly by his prophet Iheremye and
says this. what gift found your fad^rs (...) If I have trespassed to you in
a (...) manerthinge tell me Allas for sha^ of your obstinat pride for god is
(...) the right and so he tretythe with us. tha^ ben in the wrong He proferith
mer^^o^ we ask it He makes him merciful to them that displeasyth him. and
shewyth love there non is worthy Thus been their hertes harder than any stoon
And thus ben we worse than jews for we be unkind to him that shewyth to us
all kyndenesse And euir he cries to us and says I have left on earth for ye
should here my scripture Torn again to me and I woll resceyue the Lo mine arms
ben al ready spredde to clyppe the to me And mine head is ready bowed to kiss the
My side is all ready opnyd to show the mine heart. my hondes my fete ^leden. to
show the what I suffryd for the and thou tornest away from me and thou be in
parfyt life I will give the treasoure without nombre I sal auaunce the without
comparison and give the rest without end So that all the fault shall be found
in the and natt in me Thus our lord proferith and techyth us. and there been
full few that will here him but ^et all these words pass out of their
hertes. And takethe noon head but all their mind is in richesse and in this
worlds prosperyte in this present life and take full little head of the life
that is coming And how our lord jesus criste suffryd death to bri^ge us to
euirlastinge bliss Therefore in cristes passion. makes the prophet a great
lamentacion for the get unkindness that he sees in mankind and says thus.
Thou man for vanyte thou stynkest for thy rustye sin And therefore I cry and
weep for thou haste on thy head a garlond of flores and I for the have oon of
thorns.

Thou haste on thy hondes a peyrof white gloves. And I for the have my blody
wounds. Thou have thy arms spradde to lead karolles and dances And mine arms
been nailed on a tree with sharp nails Thou haste thy clothes pynched full
small. And my body for the is full of great whelys. And oon thing greuyth me
most of all thou settyst not by my passion yt I suffered full sore for thy sake
But with thyn horrible swerynge. thou up broydest me with many great oaths by
my head. eyes. arms. nails. sides. wou^des. feet. bones. by mine heart. and by
my passion that thou sholdest do worship to thou dooste great dispyte and
repreef.

Narracio
we read in the gestes of Romans yt an emperor sent a great man to a lord
to be a Judge And or he came there no man in the country could swear an oath but
ye and nay But when this Justice came among them he made the people to swear on
books in sessiones. and gave them charges and so the people took ensample of
this Justice to swear as he and his men did. By our lords passion. sides.
arms. nails. face. wounds. blood. heart. and so forth and took it so in use
that the common people swoore as they did Then on a day as the justice sat in
his office and chargyd the people. there ca^me to fore him a fair woman clothed
all in grene and brought a fair child in her lap all blody al to martred
his head all to prycked his face disfigured. his eyes out. his arms broken.
his hondes smite through his nails cut and his fete cut from his legs.
his sides all to rent his bowelles and heart drawn onte of his body Then
said this woman to the justice what are they worthy to have yt have thus do to
my child And he said they were worthy to have death Than said she thou and
thy men with their horrible oaths have thus dismembered my sweet sone Jesus
crist that I am modre unto. and thus ye have taught al your country. wherefore
thou shall have thyn own dome And so in sight of all the people the earth
(...) and the Justice fill down to hell. and than the people were sore a^ast.
and they left all such oaths and did amend there lives. And so let us leave al
our oaths and live as christian people should do. and reverence the passion of
our lord jesus criste that was cause of our ^^^e^pcion by the which we shall
co^m^^^ euirlastinge blysshe that neuir shall have end.

Dominica palmarum
Good friends as ye know well that this day is called palm sunday But for
because that the seruyse of this day is long I will tell you why it is called
Palmesonday as saint Johan says. Our lord Ihesu criste came to Betany where
he says: Venit Jesus bethaniam vbi lazarus fuit mortuus. quem resuscitauit
And there ^e raised Lazar from death to live that had ley iiii. days deed and
this Lazar was brother to Mary magdaleyne and to Martha that was a another
sustre Then jesus wy^t that his passion was nygh. and took Lazar w^ the him
and rydinge on an ass ca^me toward Jerusalem And whenne the people herd
thereof. the people went against him. Non propter Iesum tautum sed vt Lazarum
viderent quem resuscitauit a mortuis. Not only for Jesus but for to se Lazar
that was rys^n from death to live and also for to see criste and do him
worship Acceperunt ramos palmarum. et sternebant in via. They took branches
of palm and other flowers and strewyd in the way ayenste his coming And some
spradde their clothes in the way and song Benedictus quivenit in nomine
domini. Blessed be he that comes in the name of our lord king of Israel
wherefore holy church makes this day solemn procession in mind of the
procession that was made against criste and also joy and myrthe of our
rysynge. from death to life that has ley all this year in dedely sin. Now I
trust to god that we be raised to good lyui^ge And for aungellys of heuyn
make. ^oche joy of our resynge out of syn^ And thus we take palm and flou^
(...) procession as they did and go in ^ssion knelynge to the cross in wor^
and mind of him that was done (...) cross. worshipynge and welco^mynge him
with song into the church (...) the people did our lord into the cytee of
Jerusalem. Than John Byllet asks a question and says. yt our lord had
the gretyst worship riding on the ass. that euir he had in this world
Then why worship we the cross and not the ass To this question he aunsweryth
him selue and says that the worship of this world as salamon said all is
but a vanyte naught. and makes a man to forgete his god and him selue There
as is great tribulation disease and heaviness it causes a man to think of god.
and cry to him for socoure and help and to know him selue. And therefore all
christian people should putt away all worldly vanyties that brings much
people to great myscheif. and many to euirlastynge pain. we worship the
cross for it was cause of our redemption and salvation. to bring us to
euirlastinge joy and bliss that we hope all to come to. Then anoon when
criste was come to the cite of Jerusalem he went to the temple and drove out
all buyers. and sel^ers that he found therein and said Domus mea domus oraco^nis
vocabitur My house is a house of prayers and ye make it a den of theuys Thus
our lord yaue all christian people ensample to leave byenge and selling on the
holy day and in especial in the church. Another is is why it is called Palm
sunday For because that palm betoknyth victory wherefore all christian people
should bear palm in processioun in tokenynge that he had foughten with the
fend and has the victory on him. by shryfte of mouth. satisfaction with
deed. mekely done his penance with great co^tricion in heart And in this wise
ouirco^me the goostly enmye the fend.

Narracio.
we read in the gestys of Romans. that it was the manner sometime that if there
were any land that were rebel ayenste the Emperor Anoon the Emperor would
send some worthy knight with great puyssaunce to that lord and put them
down and man them subgettes to the Empepoure of Rome And when this knight
had done so than should he be set in a chayr arrayed with clothes of gold in
the best wise and a branch of palm in his hand in tokenynge that he had
the victory and with great worship brought into Rome But when he ca^me into
any worthy cite. then there should stand one by him and be^e him in the
mouth with a ^nche of olyue saying thus Know thy selue. That is to
understand. the ^u be great now. and have the ^y make not to much of thy
selue For ^ay fortune a another time he ra^ (...) ^hou may have the worse and
(...) much velonye more thanne now to worship. wherefore be natt now to proud
of thy self Thus should ye beat your selue. in the mouth of your soul wite
the branch of olyue. that is with the virtue of meekness And so hold you in
love. and meke in heart. and euirmore dredynge and fearing lest ye fall again
to sin And so to leave the worship that ye have now For trust this truly.
meekness is that virtue that most and sonest ouircommeth your gostly enmye
the fend and sonest gadreth a man to virtuous living That we may have this
virtue of meekness patience and charity to ouyrco^me our gostly ennymye. now
and euir Amen.

gOod friends ye shall understand that holy church vsyth these three days and
says service in the even tide that i^ meekness. wherefore we call it tenebres
But holy church calls it tenebris Then why this service is thus done in
me^enes holy faders tell for three causes One is the night before that our
lord Jesus criste was take he went into the mount of olyuete and prayed thus
Pater mi si possibile est transeat a me calix iste. My fadre if it be possible
that this byttre passion may pass fro me if it were the faders will and else
not And for dread and fere of that byttre passioun. that he fylte in spyryte he
swet both blood and water And another cause is this that anon after mydnyghte
ca^me Judas Scarioth with fifty knights and much other people to take criste.
And for it was derke and they could not well know him fro saint James he was
so like to criste wherefore Judas said Quem osculatus fuero cum tenete. Forsooth
quod he him that I shall kys it is Take ye him for saint James was so like that
mooche people called him cristes brother And thus Judas betrayed his master. and
thus was christ take in meekness with all the spy^^ that they could do to him
berynge him and spyttynge in his face. The th^^d cause is when criste was naked
on the cross fete and hands hangyng three ours from vndryn till none Then
the son with drew her light* and was derke through all the world. showing
that the maker of light was at that time p^^ed to the death. For thies three.
causes the service in the night is done in derkenesse. The which service
makes mind How Judas betrayed christ. and how the iewys ca^me as pryuely as
they coud. for dread of the common people wherefore to the service is no bell
ronge. but a sound made of tree whereby all christian people may have knowelege to
come to that service pryu^ly without making of any noise And all that the
people should speak of coming and going should sound of tree. that is the
cross that our lord god was done upon and of his passion. and of the words
that our lord spoke hangyng on the cross and how he said to his modre.
Mulier ecce filius tuus. woman se thy sone And how he co^me^ did his modre to
saint John the eua^g^lyste in keeping. and what said the (...) that henge by
him and said thus ^omine qua^do veneris in regnum tuum memento mei. Lord
when thou co^myst to thy king^ome have mind on me. And anoon (...) lord
said to him. Hodie mecum eris in paradiso. This day thou shall be with me in
paradise. And how he betoke his spirit into his faders hondes and said In
manus tuas co^mendo spiritum meum. And so he yield up the gooste Thus coming
and going to the church al christian people shalde comen. and leave vanyte and
ydell talking and speak only of the cross that is our redemption A another
cause is when that Judas. had betrayed criste and saw by his treson that
he should be deed. anon he fill in despair and honge him self on a tree And
than he displeased more criste for that deed than for all the trespass that he
had done to fore For criste is so merciful that and he had asked mercy he
should have had mercy and foryeuenes Also at this service be set certain
candilles in the quere. after the use in some place more than in some other as
the use is. the which been quenchyd one after a another In toknynge. of cristes
disciples how they went away e^he after other But when all these ca^d^llys been
taken away and the light goon. yet one abides still a while till clerks have
song Ky^^es and thies verses the which betokenyth the wymme^. that made
lamentation at cristes sepulcre Thanne that candell is brought again and other
lighted there. and that betokenyth our lady. For all the feythe was lost save
only our lady and of al other were enfourmyd and taught. Also it betokneth
criste him self yt was in his manhood deed and leyde in sepulcre And the
thridde day arose from death to live again and yaue light by love to all that
were deed and queynt by despair The strokes that the priest geuyth on the book
betokneth the clappes of thundre when crist brast hell yates and dispoyled them
and set out Adam and Eve and all them that he had boughte with his byttre
passion.

Now have ye herd somewhat what this service betokneth and thynk theruppon and
be not unkind to your god that suffered all this for you. For unkindness is a
sin that stynketh in the sight of god A^ Saint ambrose says that there may
no man find a pain great enough to punysshe unkindness And that ye shall
here by an ensample as thus.

Narracio
I find that. Alisaundre Necham tellyth how that there was sometime a knight
that went out of his own country far in to a strange land. to seek
auentures And it happened that he came into a great forest and there he herd a
great noise of a best that semyd in despair And then he would wit what it
mente and went nere and saw how that a great horrible adder and of great
lengith. biclepyd A lion and bound him to a tree as he ley and slepte And
when the Lion woke and fond him selue bound and might not help him self
he made a great horrible noise desiryng help of the knight Then had this
knight compassion of this Lion. and would feign have helped him but he dradde
when he was louse lest he would have fallen to him. But because he was a
knight. and the Lion was king of all bestes in that distress he took his
sword and smote the adder asonder. Then the Lion anon felt him self louse
and fill down to the knights feet. and euir after night and day in every
place he followed the knight.

And every night. this lion leye at this knights beds feet. and in every
battle this Lion was ready for to help his master In somoch that the people
spoke to the knight of the Lion. yet by counseyll of the people. he had the
Lion in suspecte. wherefore when he went into his own country again Privily
while the Lion slept he took the water and went to the ship and sailed forth
And when this Lion a wooke and myssed his master a noon he yaue a great rorynge
and wet after him into the sea and swame after him as long as he might. and
when his might failed him than was he drowned. By this knight ye may
understand gods sone of heuyn yt came out of far country. that was out
of heuyn into this world and was bound for mankind weth this old addre the
fend to a tree of inobedience wherefore with the sharp sword that was his
passion he loused mankind out of his bonds and made him free to goo where he
would. And therefore all christian people been bound to worship him and thank
him for his lo^synge and to be buxum to him all the time that they have life and
follow and sewe the lore of holy church and he shall pass through the water
that is to lay through the peyn of death. and he s^al come to the joy that
euir shall last. without end the which god bring us all to Amen.

Diverse questiones
mAny will ask diverse questiones of the service of these days of such
prestes as they suppose can not make no ready answer But putt him to shame and
do him velony and repreef. wherefore I have tylled. which be needful for every
priest to know. and if he will look on it and keep them redely in heart he may
make ready answer. and so shall it be to him both worship and profyt. First
if a man ask why Sherethursdaye is called so ye may say that in holy church
it is called thus. Cena domini. Our lords souper day For that day he souped
with his discyples openly. And after souper he yaue them his flesh and his
blood to ete and to drink and said thus. Accipite and manducate Hoc est corpus
meum. Take ye this and ete it for it is mine. own body. and anoon after he
wissh his disciples feet. showing what meekness that was in him. And for the
great love that he had to them It is ^o in english called sherethursdaye
For in old faders days the people would that day shere their hedes and clyppe
there berdes and poll their hedes and so make them honest against esterday For
on good friday they do their bodies noon ^ase but suffer penance in mind of
him. that that day suffryd his passion for all mankind. On ester even it is
time to here their service and after service make holy day It is wretyn in the
life of a saint that he that was so besy on the saturday before noon that he
made a man to shaaue him at after none Then was the fe^de ready and gadred up
the herys. then this holy man saw that and commanded him to tell why he did
so Then said the fend. thou do no reverence to thy holy day Therefore I
will keep thies herys till the day of dome in great repreef to the. Then anon
he left of shauynge and took thies here is from the fend and made to brenne
them in his own hand to suffer penance. and so abode vnshauyn till monday
after This is said to al tho in repreef that worship not the Saturday at after
none Then as John bylet says on shuthurday a man should do poll his here and
clyppe his berde and a priest should shave his crown So that there should no
thing be bitwene god and him For herys come of super fluyte of veins and
humors of the stomach. and they should pare her nails of hondes and feet
that come of superfluyte of fylthe without forth and shryue them and make them
clean within the soull as without. And thus make them clean both within and
without The veil that all this lent has be drawn bitwene us and the quere
betoknyth the passion that was hid and unknown till the days ca^me the
which these days be done away and the auter openly showed to all the people
For these days criste suffered his passion openly that he had hanging upon
the croce saying. Consummatum est. It is endyd yt is to say Now the prophecy
of my passion has an end wherefore the clothes of mine autre ben take away For
cristes clothes were take fro him and so was done naked on the croce save our
lady his modre wound a kirchef about him to cover his me^bres The auter stone
betokens crystis body that was drawn on the cross as a skyn of parchement
on a harowe. so that all his bonys might be told

The besomes that the altar is wasshen with. betokens the scourges that they
beat our lords body with. and the thorns that he was crowned with. The water
and the wine that it is wasshen with. betokens the blood and the water that
run down from his woundis that was in his side perished with a spear. The
wine that is poored upon the altar on the five crosses betokens the blood
that ran down from his pryncypall wounds of his body. Also this day is no
pax given at the mass. for Judas betrayed Christ this night with a cosse.
Thus was the prophecye of his passion this day ended: wherefore this night
when he had souped^ he made the sacrame^te of his own body. and gave it to
his discyples to ete and drink and began the sacrament of the mass and of
the new law And after souper he wysshe his discyples fete that was a manner of
the new law full out. For as he said to peter he that is wesshen and is
clean of dedely sin: has no need to be wasshen. It betokens thafflyction
of dedely sins. Then if people ask why priests do not mass after souper
as Christ did It was turned in to more honest and more salvation to mannys
soul. For as haymo tells upon the pystle of saint Poule. That many in the
beginning of the feyth come to church on she^thursdaye. And those that were
rich brought mete and drink with hem. and eten and drank ner belyes full and
then at night to ^en her housell and said that criste gave hem ensample But
when the rich ete and drank to much. the pour people abeydeth without.
till after the rich has done sore an hungered: And then ete of the releef
that they left. And so after the people took their housell: where as the
pystell of this day tells. Saint Poule rebukes hem thereof and tourneth that
foul use in to more honest clennes and holiness. that is for to say at mass
fasting all the people to take her housell fasting. on ester even the pascall
is made the cheef tapre in the church. So is Crist cheef above all the
saints in heuene. The. pascall alsoo betokens the pylar of light fire. that
went before moses and the children of Israhell. when moses ladde them out
of egypt in to the land of byheft. that is Iherusalem. and so they passed
sauf and found. And so vii. days after they come all unto the sea: and
thanked god for her passage. and in mind hereof holy church uses all the
Ester weke to goo a procession to the fo^^e. that is now the read see to all
christian people that been crystened in the font. For the water in the font
betokenethe the read see. for blood and water is the wound that were in
cristis side in the which the power of pharao the sede of hell is drowned and
al his might lost and christian people saved. and for the fo^te is hallowed on
Ester even and on wytson even. for in the beginning al children abode to be
cristened unto these two days. and to be crystened at the font halowynge.
But now for by cause that many in so long abydyng were deed without
crystendome therefore holy church ordained now to christian all times of the
year. save viii. days before thise euyns. the child shall abide to the font
halowyng if it may for perryll of death: and else not. Thus is the pascall
hallowed by light with the new fire. and of it al other tapres and candellis
ben light for all holiness and good techynge. and good living comes of
crist and teching of holy church and lights hem in crist^s passion with
brennynge love and charity. Pieces of enfence ben stycked in the pascall in the
manner of a cross those betoke^ the five wounds of our lord. As bede says
that he suffered in his body. that shall be fresshe and swe^^ as any ensence
till the day of dom to great repreef to all that shall be dampened that
belyue not in Crystis passion. and will not ask mercy and fo^yeuenesse of her
sins. In the font halowyng the pressed casted water in four parties of the
font for Christ had his disciples going prechynge and techyng in four
parties of cristendom in the name of the fader and the sone and the holy ghost.
And after the pressed bretheth on the water. for the holy gooste in making of
the world was borne upon waters. For when god for Adamis sin cursed therthe
and the land. he cursed not the water wherefore it is lawful to a man to ete in
lenton that that comes of the water. After he droppeth the wex in to the water
off a candell brennynge the which betokens the manhood of crist that was
fullyd in water. and puts oil and creme in the water. For by the virtue of
the sacrament those that been in heaven and in earth ben Joined to gyder. and
that was preued by crystis baptism. For there the fader of heaven spoke and
said. Hic est filius meus dilectus in quo michi been complacui. This is my
well beloved sone yt will pleyse me and the holy ghost was seen Sicut columba
As a white dove. thus was the font hallowed two times in the year. At
wythsontyde. and at Ester. when all the people is brought out of thraldom by
Crystis passion fro the dangeour of the fend. and at wytsontide. For then is
the holy ghost yeuen in remyssion of all sins: Then from the font the
people goon to the quere syngyng the letanye prayenge all the saints in heuene
to pray to god to give to all that been Christian to keep that sacrament to
goddis pleysaunce. And the covenant yt they have made in her crystenyng then
the priest goth to mass. for Christ that is head off all holy church is not
risen. Kyrieleyson is said for in every prayer. in especyall in the mass. it
is great need to ask help and socoure of god to keep us from all manner off
temptacion that the fend puts in us and namely in goddis service. Gloria in
excelsis. Is said for the fader of heaven has great joy to be hold the people
that his sone has boughte with his passion. and to see hem in rest peace and
charity. echone with other. The greyle is not said For those that been new
cristened been not yet parfyte to walk in grace of virtues Alleluya is said.
For it is gre joy to angellis to see by crystenynge the nombre of hem restored
again. After alleluya a tracte is said. high songen for though by crystenynge
they be wasshe from sin. yet must they traueyle besely to keep hem from
comberaunce of the fend. that they fall not in dedely sin. The offertorye
is said for the wymmen that comen with oynementis to offer to crystis body.
They fond him not in his tomb. Agnus dei. Is said no pax is given. For
christ that is head of peace is not risen. The postcomyn is not said. for those
that been new crystened should not be housled this day but on the morrow. for
in old time there come to crystenynge people of great age. Then a short
euynsonge is done. for the children that were not cristned whereof greatly they
were noyed with seknesse of cold of long service then is ended under a
short colet. all the sacrament of cristenyng is ended in the passion of
Crist. by the which all christian people were restored tor everlasting bliss to
the which god bring us all to Amen.

In die paraceues.
GOod frendis this day is called good frydaye for all that Our Lord Ihesu
christ suffered this day turned us to great joy For this day he suffered
passion under pounce pylate for our sake. It is an old saw yt a foul
begnnnynge has a foul endyng. Now see how this pylate began cursedly and
ended full wretchedly. For as saint austyn says cursed living first asks a
cursyd end: after he that forgeteth him self here in his living is full like
to forgete him self in his last end. This pylate was a knights sone that was
called Tyrus that he gate him on a woman that hyghte Pyle: And this womannys
fader hyghte At. So when this child was borne: they set the moders name
and the grande fader after. and so by both names called him pylat Then
after when he was three years of age. his mother brought him in to the kings
court. then had the knight another sone nygh like to pylates age. But for
this knights sone was in all his rule more gentyler more manfully more goodly
more beloved that this pylate. so for hate and for envy thereof. This pylate
on a d^y slew this knights sone. then was the knight wonder sorry But yet
he would not slay Pylate and sent him to Rome to be there in hostage: for a
trybut that the knight should pay to The Emperor. Then it happed that the
king of France had sent his sone theder for the same cause. Then for by
cause

when Pylate saw that he was more beloved and chereshed. Therefore this pylate
slew him. Then for he was so cursed. themperoure by counseyll of the
romans. sent pylate in to a contree yt was called pounce. where the people of
that country where so cursed that they slew any that come to be thyr master
over hem. So when this pylate come thither. he applied him to her manners. so
what with whiles and sotyltye he overcome hem. and had the maystrye and gate
his name. and was called pylate of po^^ce^ and had great domynacion and power.
Then the king of Iherusalem sent after him. and made him lyeuftenaunt under
him of the land of Jury. And for pylate lyked well ^^office preuely he sent
to the emperor and had his office confermed of him vnwetynge to the king
herod. King that time. wherefore when king herod herd what he had done.
he was so wroth that they were enmyes unto the time that our Lord Ihesu
crist was take. and then they become frendis again and fylle both in to one
ase^t of Cristis death. Then it happed afterward that the emperor fylle syke
and sent after criste for to hele him. For it was told him that christ heled
all tho that ever would come to him of all manner of sykenesse what so ever
sykenesse it had so be. But then had pylate done him to death or the
messager come. Then when themperoure understood that. he sent for pylate and
made him come to him. And when pylate herd this he was sore aferd and take on
Cristis cote. And so when he come to rome to the emperor all those that were in
presence made pilate good chere all the while that he had on cristis ^^te: And
the emperor swore before that he should be ded. Then took of the cote. and
anon as the cote was off The Emperor was sore wroth with Pylate that he put
him in to a pryso^ till he had take counseyll what death he should deye on.
Then as soon as pylate wist and understood that he should be deed. he took
his own knyfe and slew him self with all. And when the Emperor herd thereof
and understood that he had sleyn him self. And then anon he made to bind a
great stone about pylats neck. and to cast him in a water that is called
Tyber. Then when he was cast therein. the fendes made such a noise there
about that all the Cite of Rome was sore afreyd. Then when Emperor saw
this. he made to take him up again. and then was he cast in to a water that
was betwyx two hie hills and so long time after there was in the water many
horrible syghtes seen about that cursed man. Thus Our Lord Ihesu Christ
suffered passion and death for all mankind. and first when he was take they
did buffete him. and stryped him naked and beat him with scourgis.

A vertice capitis vsque ad plantas pedumnon fuit in eo sanitas. That from the
highest place of his head to the sole of the fete was no thing left hole on
him but all raw.

And after made a crown off thorns and set it on his head and beat it down
with stauis of reed. that it perisshed his brain: And when they had peyned
him so they lad him fo^h all blody. Ad montem caluarie. To the monte of
caluary to the end off death yet wymmen of the Cite. when they see him so foul
fair with: and all to lougged and all to draw. for very pity they wept upon
him. Then said our lord to hem. Nolite flere super me sed super vos et
filios vestros. ye wymmen of Iherusalem. weep ye not for me but upon you and
your children^ For there shall days come in the which ye shall bliss the
wombes that were bareyne. and the pappes that never gave souke. Thus our Lord
preched before the vengeance that fille after upon Iherusalem. The which
prophecye Iheremye the prophet spak of. that is read in holy church these
three days at tenebras. the which was so horrible of many diverse myscheues
and in especial off hongre deyde in the streets. Then was there a woman was
come of great birthe.

Tthat for houngre took her own child that was fed with her pappes and slew
it and part it in two parties. and than roasted half. And the other half she
kept till on the morrow.

Then as the people come by the street they had savor of the roste. and
anon they come in to have had part thereof. and when they saw the mother
roste her own child and sone. they were heavy and foul dissmayed and would not
ete thereof. But went their way forth again: Then took the mother of that
child and ete theroff and said in this manner wise: This is mine own sone and
mine own child that I bare of my body. and fed it with my pappes. but I will
rather ete hit than deye for houngre. Therefore I tell you this to show you
somewhat of the vengeance that fill on Iherusalem after the death of our Lord
Ihesu Criste. Then they ladde him to the mou^te of Caluarye. And there they
streyned him so on the Cross: that every bone of his body might be known one
from another And nailed him hand and foot to the cross and they lift up the
Cross. and the body to gyder. And with a great peyce they le^e the cross and
the body fall down to gyder in to the mortesse. that all the body dasshed.
and his bonys craked. and his joints brast and veins and al wou^des brake out
of blood. Sides arms legs fete and hondes so that there was no blood in him
and yet they took a clothe while the blod was hot: and wound it a bout his
body till the blood was cold. and then they drew away the cloth and pulled
away the flesh fro the bonis this was a great pity. And so when he should
deye. he began as Ioha^ bellet says. Deus meus respice in me. And so said all the verses si^^ng till he ca^me unto ye verse. In te dne^ spaui And so at
this verse. In manus tuas domine co^mando spiritum meum redemisti me domine
deus veritatis^ There he gave up the spirit This is a great ensample that our
lord Ihesu Crist gave to al christian that every man should have in mind thise
verses. And he that can hem. say and if he say hem every day. he shall not
deye no manner myscheuous nor vengeable death. Then after this passion we say
orysons and knelyng at every oryson save at that oryson. that is said for the
Jews at that oryson holy church kneleth not for by cause jews in scorn
knelynge three times to crist when they scourged him. Then these orysons holy
church prays for all manner of people. For Jews sarasyns cysmati^s
heretykis. But not for christian people. for while any man or woman stondeth a
cursed ^he is damned before god. And dampened shall be at his death. But he
repent him. and amend him while he lives in this present world: Si scirem
pro certo quod pater meus esset i^ inferno no^ ora^e^ pro illo nisi vt pro
diabolo. If I wist for troth that my fader were dampened in to hell. I would
never pray for him. but as for the devil of hell for there is no prayer of
holy church that helps a dampened man. then after these orysons the cross
is brought forth to the which all criste^ people should worship this day in
worship of him that this day deyed on the cross And pray our lord to forgive
us our trespace as Criste prayde to his fader of heaven to foryeue hem yt did
him on the cross.

Narracio.
There was a knight sometime and that was a great lord. and he had a worthy
man unto his sone. And so it happ^^ that another knight and his man fell at
debate. and so this knight ^lewe him. wherefore the fader off this man that was
deed gadered a great multitude of people. and pursued that othere knight.
where someuer he went to have slain him night and day. so that he might
have no rest but ever he did flee for fere of his life Then it happed on a
good friday this knight saw all christian people go to the church And he
bethoughte him that Christ deyed that day on the cross for all mankind. and
put him only on the mercy of almighty god and went to the church with other
people to serve god and when he was in the church anon this other knight
had word and come with much people in to the church and his sword drawn
in his hand for to sle him. and when this other knighte saw that and wiste
well that had trespaced to him and fill down to the ground with his arms
sprad abroad as our lord Ihesu Crist spradde his arms on the cross. and said
For his love that this day spradde his arms on the Cross and suffered passion
and deyed for the and me and all mankind have thou mercy on me. And forgive me
thy sons death. Then this knight thought it had be to horrible a thing
to smite him

while that he leye so. and cried him mercy so me^ely. and anon he put up
his sword and said to him Now for his love that this day deyed on the cross
for the and ^ne and all mankind I foryeue the and to ve him up and kys^^ him
and anon went to do worship to the Cross knelyng. And when this knighte
would have kyssed the fete of the cross. the image loses his arms fro the
cross And beclpped the knighte about the neck and kyssed him and spoke thus
that all the people herd. I foryeue the as thou have foryeuen for the love off
me. And thus all christian people should do. and then they should have mercy
and grace of god and bliss everlasting Amen.

In die pa^he.
Good frendis ye shall know well that this day is called in many places
goddis sondai ye know well that it is the manner in every place of worship at
this day to do the fire out of the all: and the black winter brondis and all
thing that is foul with smoke shall be done away and there the fire was
shall be gayly arrayed with fair flowers and strewed with grene risshes all
about showing a great ensample to all cryste^ people. Like as they make clean
her houses to the syghte of the people in the same wise ye should cleanse your
souls d^yng away the foul brennyng sin of lechery. put all these away and
cast out all thy smoke dust. and strewe in your souls flowers of feyth and
charity and thus make your souls (...) to receive your lord god at the fest
of ester. Deponentes omne^ malicia^ And put away all maly^e and all sorrow for
right as ye will suff^e no thing in your house that stynketh and sauoureth
evil wherwyth ye may be deceived. Right so Christ when he comes in to your
house of your souls. and he find there any stynke of wrath envy or any other
dedely sin* he will not abide there. But anon he goth his way and then
comes the fend in and bydeth there. then may that soul be sorry that is so
forsaken of god and betaken to the fend. thus it is with those that been in
wrath and envy or in any dedely sin and will not forgive to hem yt has
trespassed to hem for no prayer he shall no forgyuenesse have: for our lord
says thus Dimittite et dinuttemi^. Forgive ye and ye shall have forgyuenesse
And therefore every Christian man and woman should search well her conscience. and
make hem able to receive her sauyor Ihesu crist very god and man

Narracio
There was sometime an holy bishop that prayed often besely to god yt he might
have grace to see and know which were worthy to receive that holy sacrament.
and come to goddis board then on a time as he should housel the people. He
saw some come with her faces as read as blood. and blood drop out of her
mouth^^. And some her faces were as black as any pit^he and some were fair
and read and lusty to be hold. and some as brighte as any snow. Then
among all other. he saw two common wymmen came. and their faces shone and
bright as the son than had the bishop great merueyll of that sight. and
p^eyed to god to give him reuelacion. to wy^e what all this betokened: then
there came to him an angel and said those that have blody faces and blood
dropp^th out of her mouthis be enuyous people and wrathful. and will not amend
hem thereof. and ever they been bacbytyng and slaundrynge her neighbors. And
ben ever ready to swear oaths. therefore her mouths shall drop black blood till
they come to amendment And those that haven black faces as pytche. ben
lecherous and will not leave her sin. and ben grete^ sinners in many degrees
and will not amend hem. They that have their faces white as any snow. those
be they that have done great sin and ben shryuen thereof. And ben sorry for
her sins. for the weping of her eyes had washed her souls and made hem
clean. and so they ben in clean life. and truly labor for her living. And
those two common wymmen that shine so bright passing al other they were great
sinners: and were sore aferde when they came to church. and took a great
repentance in her hertes that they made a vow to god. preyeng him hertely to
take no vengeance on hem And they would forsake her sin. and never do
amysse more. wherefore god of his great grace and (...) ^o^g^^ue them her
trespass and all her sins. and the sorrow of her hertes has so wasshen her
souls that they shine bryghter than all other and then the angel wen^^ his
way and the bishop kneled down and thanked god for his reuelacion. and
therefore take ensample by these two comen wymmen and be sorry for your sins
and repent you in your hertes: and purpose neuyr to turn again to sin and
then trust vereyly ye shall have grace mercy. and socour to everlasting joy
and bliss. wherefore think for certain though ye make it glosyng with words.
for to disceyue your goostly fader. and say that ye be in charity and be not
ye begyle your self. and trust truly: ye shall not begyle god. that sees
every corner af your hertes. And therefore dysceyue not yo^^e own souls for
the love of god. And be also besy and ready to make your souls clean to the
syghte of god as ye ben to make your houses to the sight of man. and as ye
would array you in your best clothes that ye have against the coming of your
best frendis. so should ye array you now to receive your best friend. that is
your maker our Lord Ihesu Criste. that this time suffered passion and death. to
bring us to euerlasti^ge life. This day is called also a passing day. and in
especial for two causes: One is for this day all christian people in reverence
of god should forgive all them that have trespaced to hem. and be in par^^^e
love and charity to all (...) should be amendyd with the sal^^ that ^^^eth al
so^^ that is cha^^e. C^ritus cooperit multitudine^ peccatorum Charity coueryth
the multitude of sins It is also a passinge day For this day should al gods
ch^ldren pass out of evil living into good living. out of vices into
virtues out of pride into meekness. out of couetyse. in largeness out of
slouthe into holiness out of envy into love and charity ou^e of wrath into
mercy. out of glotony into abstinence. out of lechery in to chastity. out of
the fendes claws into gods arms. and of his great enmye make his dear
friend And he yt passes thus is worthy to come to a good feste the which
our lord Jesus. makes this day to all the people It is called also gods
sunday For this day goddys sone rose from death to live and so gladdeth all his
servants. with his up rysinge wherefore all holy church makes myrthe and
melody. this day and sings thus. Hec est dies quam fecit dominus exultemus
et letemur i^ ea This is the day that our lord made. joy we and glad we
in that with all our bertes for the fadre of heuyn with all his aungelly^
makes so great melody of the vprysynge of his sone that he man to day a
passinge great fest and by^^^th all christian people thert^. as well those that been in heuyn. as th^se that been in earth. and they shall be full welcome that
come to this feeste. (...) that is a g^de clothing that is in love and
charity And also evil shall those be that shall come in the fendes leuerye.
clothed in wrath^ and envy. For as the gospel tells these shall be cast in
prison of hell. And then while other laughe and ma^e merry they shall weep and
be sorry. and wh^le some ete and dryn^ at gods board they shall grynne with
their teeth and say. Ve / ve / ve / quante su^t tenebre woe. woe. woe. many
derknesse been here For they shall thynk that they may feel the derknesse it is
so derke and the peynes of hell shall be so hard. for worms shall gnawe them for
they ete her eyes christian here in this lif in earth with false ba^bytynge. and
s^laundrynge.

wherefore I charge you in gods name that noon of you come thus to gods
board but if ye be in parfyte love and charity and be clean shreuyn. and in
full purpose to leave your sins For and I wist in certain which were out of
charity and in dedely sin I must by the law of holy church with a loud
voice say thus to them. in audience of all the people I gyf the not thy
housyll to thy salvation b^^^e to thy dampnacion till thou come to amendmente
And therefore every christian man and woman should search well his conscience and
make him able to re^^^ue his savior Jesus criste to the he^^^e of his soul yt
she may come after this fynall life to euirlustinge joy Amen.

Good friends the^e three days that is to say Monday. Tuysday and and
wenesdaye: ye shall fast and go in procession man woman and servants for all
we be sinners and have need to pray to god for help grace and mercy. for they
may not excuse therein fro the procession that may la^fully be there Than he
that withdraws him self fro the co^maundment of holy church wylfully he
synneth full greuouslye. First he synneth in pride for he is vnbu^um. Also he
synneth in slouthe. yt knows him selue in sin and will not do his diligence
to come out thereof and right as he withdrawyth him fro people yt be gadred to
serve god Right so will god putt him from all the company of heuyn and from all
the prayers that be done in holy church till he come to amendment Therefore
all christian people come only to gidder and pray these three days to all the
saints in heuyn to pray to god for us For we have sinned many times in the
year aye^ste the co^maundment of god And therefore these three days we shall
fast and pray to god of mercy and remission of our sins. and put away all the power of the fend. and keep us from al myscheuous peril and dredys that
fall this time of the year more than any other time For in this time many great
thundres and lightnynge. and as Lyncolnyence says There were fendes that
fleteryn in the air for fere of the blast of thundrynge. when that criste come
to hell gates when he dispoyled hell. And so yet when they here the thunder
in the air they been so aghast thereof that they fallen down. and then go they
not up again till they have don some cursed deeds For than they (...) tempests
in the sea and draw down ships and make debate emonge the people. and make
one to slay a another. and tend fire. and brenne houses. and draw down
steples and trees. and cause wymmen to ouirlye their children. and make people
to hang them selue. and drown them self in wanhope and in despair and do
many cursed dedys And for to put away all such myscheuys and the power of
the fend Holy church has ordained that al christian people shall fast and goo
in processioun these three days: and pray to god and to our lady and to all
the saints of heuyn. of help and socoure. wherefore in these processiones
belles be ronge baners be spleyed. the cross co^myth after. and the people
suyth after. For right as a king when he goth to a battayl his tro^pettes
goon to fore Then the baners and then comes the king and his often
following So in this processioun the bellys been gods trompettes. the baners
come after Then comes the croce in cristes lyknesse as king of christian
people and all sewe him. and with her good prayers chase away the fendys that
they have no power. And like a cursed tyrant will be sore aferd and a dradde
when he herd the trompettes of a king that were his enmy and saw his baners
splayde in the field with his oste coming toward him. In the same wise the
fend the tyrant of hell is aferd and dredith him sore For wha^ne the bellys
ring and the baners ben bore. and the cross with all the people come praynge.
Then he flees and dare not abide and (...) power that process^^^.

Narracio.
we read at the cytee of Constantyne as the people went in procession for a
disease that the people had as they song Letany Suddenly a child was plucked
up into the air and borne into heuyn and the aungellys taught him to sing
this song* Sancte d^ sancte fortis sancte et ^mo^^ miserere nobis And anoon he
was let down again to the earth And then he song that same song and anoon
they were delivered of their diseases This is to say in english Holy god.
holy strong god holy and neuir shall dye. have mercy on us God that is holy
and neuir shall dye have mercy on us God wylleth and and will that we be strong
for to fight with the fend. with the world. and with the flesh. And thanne
will he have mercy on us. and bring us to ye place then there as aungellys
sing. Sancte deus / sancte fortis. Holy god holy strong god have mercy on us
and bring us to his bliss.

Ascensio domini.
gOod friends such a day ye shall have an high and a solemn feste in holy
church that is called thascension of our lord Jesus christ For that day as
the feyth and believe techyth how god is very god and man and flyed up in to
heuyn. wherefore in ^oknyng of this the paschall that is the chief light in holy
^h^rche that has stand openly in the qui^e from Ester unto this day Now it
is remeuyd away in tokenynge yt christ is chief light in holy church And so
our lord diverse times openly appieryd to his disciples. and taught the^ the
feyth and the believe. and this day be styed up into heuyn and there will abide
till the day of dome But now ye shall here the manner of that ascension from
Ester day till this day. he was not with his disciples always but diverse
times apperyd unto them. And he apperyd to them as they fa^^e at there mete and
ete with them to show them that he was very god and man. in flesh and blood
as they were For some of them were in doubt left he had be a spirit that had
another flesh ^e blood And therefore to preue the troth he ete with them in
their sight and bad them goo to the hill of olyuete ^ there in sight of all
his disciples be blessed them and flyed up into heuyn And left the steps of
his feet th^eft down into the hard marbyll stone. for a token of his
ascension Then ye shall understand that the hill of Olyuete. betokneth mercy
wherefore christ ^^yed up at the hill of olyuet shew^nge well that he is head of
mercy And he is euir ready to show mercy to all that ask mercy with meke heart
Then in his up flyenge as we call ascension angellys made so much melody.
that no tongue may tell it so feign they were of his coming. Ascendit velociter
she styed up swyftly For as it were a mommente he was from earth to heaven A
great clerk a philosopher that is called Rabymoyses he says that it is as
far fro heuyn to earth. as a holy man might live a thousand year and every
day go a thousand mile. But he that met this way knows best And this way
shall be met of a rightful and a good man. Then in his asce^sion he had a
great multitude of soul^s. the which he set out of hell fro the fendes
bonds He s^yed also with his wounds read fresshe and blody. And as bede says
for five causes First for to verifye the feythe of his resurrection For he
rose in very flesh and blood that dyed on the cross for all mankind The
secounde to show his wou^d^s to his fader in great help and socoure to all
mankind The thridde is to show how rightful they be dampened that will not
believe in his passion and in his resurrection The fourth to show how merciful
he is to them that will believe and ask mercy The fyfte is that he bare with
him a sign. of victory For a sikernesse of all mankind For like as a lord is
syker that has a true advocate before a Judge. to answer for him So in like
wise to all mankind we find him our advocate euirmore ready to answer for
us at need that the fend our goostlye enmy makes against us. wherefore says
the holy scriptur A sykerer attournay may no man be thanne god. Vbi matter
oste^dit filio pectus et vbera. wherefore the modre shewyth the soon (...) and
her papes. Fil^^s patri latus et vulnera. The sone shewith to the fader his
sides all to beten and his wounds bleding

How should any thing be putt away or denied there as such tokenes of love
be showed He may not fare amysse that has such ii. friends in the country of
heuyn Also by the styenge up into heuyn of our lord jesus Christ man has gotten
a great dignyte For a man to se his own kind and his own flesh and his
blo^ ^^tting on the right side of the fad^ ^euyn in his trone. wherefore
aun^^^lys considering the dignyte of man. they would not suffer no man to do
them worship as they did before the incarnacion of crist But they worship man
for god him selue has take mankind on him. and is now in heuyn bodily Hereby
may ye see how much biholde is he to his god. what we that were bou^^^ before
and thrall to the fend of hell and no ^we ben made free of all that and our
lord jesus criste. have give to man a fredome above any aungellys and therefore
we be bound unto him. to do him service reverence and worshhip And there as
aungellys kept sometime the gates of paradise with brennynge. swerdes that no
soul might come in. Now by feyth our lord Jesus criste. to mankind he has
cast up the gates and warns no man to ^rin. yt is of stedefaste believe (...)
^aint austyn says. Aperuisti credentibus regna celorum^ Thou haste opnyd the
gates of heuyn to them that believe Also ye shall believe right as a king of
this world has officers of diverse degrees some (...) and some lower And some
more ^^^u^er than some So our lord ^g up at this time the lawer angellys for
great wounder that they had in cristes ascension when they saw him in flesh
and blood styenge up to heaven with so great multitude of souls with him And
also for the great woundre yt they had when they saw the fendis of the air
flee away. for dread and fere of his strong coming. that before were wounte
sparynge no thing assayl the souls that ca^me by them And then they flewe
away for great fere of his coming Also the good aungellys ca^me in all the
haste that they might to do to our lord Jesus criste service reverence and
worship Thus for great woundre that the lower aungelles had of his styenge up
They asked the higher aungellys and said. Quis est iste qui venit de edoz what
is this now that co^myth out of the world with blody clothes as he were a
king of joy This is he that with death sufferynge read in his scourgynge seek
and ded in the cross strong in hell bodily in doing ferfull in risynge and
thus has ouirco^me all his enmyes. and now is king of glory in heuyn. Then
our lord Jesus criste was styed up into heuyn and then his disciples.
stondynge with his modre for great wo^dre of that sight and also of the melody
that they herd in the air. they looked up into heuyn and suddenly ii. au^gelles
clothed al in white stood by them and said to them in this wise. Viri galilei
quid statis aspicie^tes in celum hic jesus qui assu^ptus est a vobis etc. Men
of galile what stand ye bihold^^ge into heuyn It is Jesus that is styed up
from you And so he shall come at the day of dome again and deem al quycke and
deed And therefore all christian people left up your hertes to our lord Jesus
criste that now is styed up into heuyn and sits at his faders right. hand
and is ready to give mercy to al them that will ask mercy with a meke heart And
therefore there is no manner of man that may excuse him selue nor have no manner
excusacion. but if that he will him selue. and ask mercy to his lord god with
a meke heart and he shall have mercy and shall be sauyd. For though a man be
neuir so synful and he will ask mercy with a meke heart he will give him
mercy. Cor contritum et humiliatum deus non despicies. A meke and a contrite
heart god shall neuir dispyse For and he will ask mercy and be sorry for his
sins our lord will take him to his mercy Then for to show his great
goodness and compassion that our lord has on mankind I shall tell you this
ensample

Narracio.
we read in the life of saint Carpe. how a man of mysbyleue turned a christian
man out of his feyth and forsook his bileue and his cristendome wherefore this
holy man carpe was sore wroth that he fill in great sickness An^ when he
should have prayed god for amendment He prayed god night and day yt they
might have a bodily vengeance Then it happed at mydnight as he prayed thus
suddenly the house yt he ley in cleuyd in four parties And he looked up and saw
one hangyd so pytously that it was great pity to see. And then he looked up to
heuyn and there he saw our lord jesus crist with a great multitude of
aungellys sittinge in his trone And he looked up again. and then he saw th^se
ii. men stondenge before an hot oven and tryml^ge for dread of fendes like
adders and wo^mes coming out of the ouyn. to d^awe these men into the ouyn.
with them And so many other fendes com in diverse likeness to help yt they
were in to the ouyn Then was this holy man Carpe feign to se these two have
that vengeance and was wonder gla^ thereof that he lost the sight of our ^^de
Jesus and his holy aungyllys for the heart was on these two me^nys vengeance.
and was sorry that it was so long or they were put unto their pain And then
he rose and went to him self and halpe all that euir he might and when they
were into the ouyn then was he very glade thereof And then he looked up into
heuyn and there he saw our lord jesus and he saw him rise. from his trone for
great pity and compassion that he had on the ii. men. and ^a^me down to
them and took them out of their pain and said thus. Carpe extend manus
tuas co^trame. Stre^he forth thy hondes ayenste m^ and said thus I am ready and
need were to dye again for mankind rather tha^ to lose them By this ensample ye
may see how ^^y that our lord jesus crist is to all that will ask mercy and
foryenesse and deserve mercy. that is that every man amend and leave his sins
and be in full will and purpose to s^ne no more And thus he shall come to the
grace and mercy of our lord Jesus criste that suffered for us and all mankind
on good Friday passion. and this day styed up to heuyn. the which he will
grant us and bring us al thereto Amen.

Sequitur vigilia penticostes.
Good friends as ye know well a saturday next coming Is wytsondaye even And
that day ye shall fast and come to the church to here your service and make
you cleene to resceyue the holy gooste that the fader of heuyn sendith among
mankind wherefore I counseyll you and charge you if there be any of you that
fall to any syn that he come and amend him: thereof and I will be ready to do
all yt longs to me For take this in certain. In the same wise as a man will
not goo to a place there as a stynkyng carreyn is but if he stop his nose and
hye him thens Right so the holy ghost flees from the soul that is combred
with dedely sin. and aungellys will stop their noses. For much more fowler
stinketh dedly sin in the sight of god thanne does any carreyne to smell to
people And as the holy gooste flees to them that bideth in good life and clen^
and in parfyt love and charity And has pity and compassion of al those that
been in disease or tribulation* to such the holy gooste visyteth a^^ comes
to And with such as him lists to come to abide and conforteth and techith
them in all need But as the service of this feste is more praised then any
other time For at this feste holy church calls to them and says. Veni
sancte spiritus Come holy ghost specially to have help socoure and grace. and
to have part of the dole that he makes at this time to all christian people.
that been able to resceyue his yestes But ye shall understand that the holy
gooste makes his dole in other wise thanne other people. For they dele as it
lyketh them Butte the holy gooste delyth to all christian people that is
needful. and spedefull to them that yefte and some more and some less one
yefte. and some another some he yeueth wisdom in holy scripture to understand
holy scripture. he yeuyth grace to have great lust and liking therein That is
for to say. they be lusty to preche and teache virtue and godenesse. and
enfourme the people to the health of their souls unto them yt here it and
bears it away. But many had leueyr to here a song of Robyn hode or a tale
of Rebawdrye wherefore gods word shall not be preached to such And some he
yeueth grace so in understanding of diverse langage as english. frensshe
wall she Irisshe without great trauayll. in learning It is a great yefte and
a (...) and a special grace of almighthy god that any man can understood or
inspeking There ben v. lettres yt make all the words of all the world and of
all langages that been under heuyn And without one of these lettrys noon may
make no word. And those been these A. E: I. O. and V. And also some he yeueth
grace of counseyl for to do after good counseyll And some he enspireth w^thin.
for they that he shewyth them and makes to know to fore what will come after
and fall And gives grace to deem the bettre fro the worse wherefore they do so
wisely and discretely that all the people be glad to here them speak and to do
after their counseyll And some he pruc^ grace also to do after counseyl. As
our lord Jesus christ gave him self counseylynge a man that will live a parfyte
life to leave that he has and go into religion and be there governed by his
wardeyns counseyl and by his own This counseyll co^myth of god And some he
gyuethe grace of sufferynge. much bodily sickness. great w^o^ges and much
disease both in body and in soul Loss of catell lorshippes mastershippes
frendeshippes and all yt ye suffers with a meke heart thanking almighty god
of his sond that comes of the grace of the holy gooste Also he gives some
grace of lerning in diverse sciences Some to learn oon craft and some another
so by the which he may get his living with truth So that a man will putt
to his good ^yll ^ and his diligence and truly to labor and not to slomb^e
and sleep slew^^ly and so vnthrifthly. but in dew time to labor besely the
holy ghost has given every man some knowing to get his living with troth.
Also some he gives grace of pity and fylleth there hertis so full of pite and
compassion of her even christian that been in desease and aduersyte* that they
give them of their goods to help and socour them at her need: and to
comfort them in all that they may for cristis sake. And also mercyable that
they forgive all that they trespassed to hem in any wise. Some he gives also
to dread god* in so much that they ben ever a ferde to dyspleyse almighty
god. And ever think of great vengeance that god will take for sin at the
day of dome.

Timor domini expellit peccatum. The dread of god and the horrible pains of
hell puts away sin. And thus night and day. Some be ever aferde to
offend god. And ever be besy to do well in preuyte as in open syghte of
people. He that has this gift: he has a special grace off the holy ghost.
Hec sunt septem dona spiritus sancti. These ben the seven gifts that the holy
ghost departed among al mankind. and gives to some more than some. But
there may no man excuse him. but that the holy ghost assygneth to him some
what of these in time of his cristenyng: where the bishop (...) confirmacio^
reherseth these w^ (...) of the sacrament. I will tell you (...) ensample to
fere you the more to the sacrament of Cristenynge. that is founden by the (...)
of saint James.

Narracio.
There was an holy bishop that turned Lowys the King of France to christian
feyth. And so when the king come to the cristening at the halowynge of the
font there was great prese of people. that the clerk that bare the bishops
crysmatory: might not bring ^t to the bishop. And so when the font was
hallowed and come to the anoyntynge. he might not come to his Crysmatory. Then
the bishop lift up his eyes to good. preyenge god devoutly for help. And
anon there with. there come a dove as white as any milk. that was the holy
ghost. berynge in her bylle a vyoll with oil and creme to the bishop. And
when he opened the vyoll there come out thereof so sweet savor that all the
people had wondre thereof. and were greatly comforted there by. and that
continued till the service was done. Here loo ye may well see though the priest
say the words: the holy ghost worcheth the sacrament and does virtue of the
words. Now that the holy ghost may descend and lyghten us that we may come
to receive him to our salvation Amen.

In die penticostes^
gOod men and wymen this (...) is called ^^sondaye* (...) the holy ghost
brought wit (...) ^isdome in to cristes disciples And ^o by there prechynge
after (...) cristendome Then may ye understand yt many has wytt but not
wisdom. For there been money that has wit to preche well but there be few
yt have wisdom to do well There be many wise prechoures and techers but their
living is no manner thing after their prechinge Also there be many yt labor
to have wit and conning. but there been few that trauayleth to come to good
living For who so has wit and conning to get gods with fair subtell
words be they neuir so falls he is wise but wit of holiness is not set by
For he yt can get goods with knackes and mowes he is a wise man but he that
forsakes the wit of this world is a fool But look what holy scripture
says Dominus recitauit nome^ pauperis quia ipsum approbauit. et nome^ eius in
libro vite scriptum fuit. Our lord has resceyued the name of the poor man for
he has proved him in his pouert and took his name in the book of life. Sed
nomen diuitis tacuit qui a non approbauit. But he left the rich man. for he
has not preuyd him But though a man be neuir so rich at the last he shall be
pore For though he bring with him but his good dedys and his badde. he that
lives well and techith well For a god^ ^sample in living is good doct^^ne
This grace at this day was given to cristes disciples for they taught well.
and lived well for they gave good enfourmacion in techynge of good ensample in
living for their techinge. And their living is spradde through out all the
world Then how they come to this grace ye shall here. Post ascensionem
domini. After when that our lord jesus christ. was styed up to heuyn his
d^sciples. were in great heaviness and morning for they had lost their
master yt they loved full well and for hem had lost all their goods for his
love and forsake all their friendship. And served him full pore in hope that
should be greatly helped by him And thus they were all heavy and greatly astonyed
and sore aferde to be taken of the Iewys and cast into prison. and after to be
putt to death. This made them sorry y^ that they durst not goo. among the
people for to get them mete and drynk But yet as criste badde the^^ in his
ascension they went into the ^yte of Jerusalem and there they were in ^ hall
of stage and there they satte to gyddre praynge unto god with hole heart and
one spirit of help and socour and so^me comfort in their disese Then as
they were thus praynge to gydder Suddenly there was a great cloud made in the
air like a blaste of thu^dre* and even therewith the holy ghost come emonge
them all. Et apparuerunt illis dispertite lingue tanqua^ ignis. And light
come down among hem in likeness of tongues brennynge and not smertynge warmyng
and not harmyng. lyghtenyng. and not flyterynge Et repleti sunt omnes spiritu
sancto. And filled hem full of gostely wit For as they were to fore but lewd
me^ of syghte. and unlettered and very ydeottes. as of connyng and no thing
cowde of clergy. Suddenly they were the wyseste men in the world. And anon
they spoke all manner langages under the son. And there as before her hertes
weren cold for dread and fere of death. Then were they so comforted of the
holy ghost. in brennyng love. That they went and preched and taught the
word of god. Sparynge for no dread. but ready to take the death for Cristis
sake Then at that time there were in Iherusalem people of all nations. and
drew in to the temple for great fere of the blaste. of thondre that was in the
cyre. And stodyed what it might be. Then come the apostles in to the temple
and preched. And all manner of nations understood hem And they understood all
manner nations: and so they preched the word of god. Then were the people
astoned wha^ they herd the posteles speak all manner of langage. Then said
some. these have dronken so much: yt they wot not what they do say. Another
what they mean. for they ben al dronken. Then answerde Peter and said we be
not dronk but this was the prophecye of Iohell the prophet. How the holy
ghost should be yeuen plentuously to the people. so that they should speak with
all tongues. that is to preche to all the world the laws of Ihesu criste
Then the people turned fast. And so within few years the feyth was in all
the world. Now it is to wit why the holy ghost more apered in to likeness
of tongis rather than in other party of mannis body why he come to hem syttyng
rather then stondyng. As to the first this is the cause a tongue is the best
membre of mannys body: when it is in good rule. and well disposed But when it
is out of good rule it is the worste. Venenum aspidum sub labiis eorum. Bitter
venym is under the tongue that speaks evil says david in the psalter. And as
saint James says. A cursed tongue is fyred with the fire of hell. and may not
be chastysed while the fire brenneth it. And also for tongues must speak words
of fire. that is sharp and sperkelyng to say troth. not spare in prechenge.
And techyng to repreue misdeeds for as holy men in old time overcome and drove
away the fire of lyghtenyng with holy words and good prayers. with the
brennynge love to god. Right for the fire of the holy ghost should drive away
and overcome the fire off hell. that envy has and evil living that reygneth
now in the tongis of much people. and in hertes. For the appostles and other
prechers.

That comes after them should speak brennyng words. that is neither to sharp.
another for d^ede ne for love to say the troth. and to (...) the people her
defautes: and to repre^e the sin that regneth in hem. in many diverse wise
and so to do. and say the word of god and to repreue sin. And but they
will leave sin they shall without remedy be dampened in to the fire of hell.
For though thou sholdest dey. spar not to preche the words of god. and tell
the truth Item deus est misericors penitentibus peccata sua. Also god is
merciful to hem that be sorry for her sins and will leave them Cum vero
confessus fueritet reliquerit ea misericordia consequatur. For though a man
have done never so much sin and he will shryue him and forsake his sin.
mercy shall follow him. And he shall have foryeuenesse. and so come to the
bryghte fire everlasting bliss. That is the precious love of god yt brenneth
emonge the angelis and saintis in the kingdom of heaven: Also he comyth in
likeness of tongues of fire for it is the kind of fire to make low that is
high. And to wanne that is cold to make soft that is hard And make hard
that is soft And also the holy ghost makes hertes that been high of pride
and envy. he makes them low and warm in love and charity And also hard
hertes that have be gaderynge and holding of worldly goods The holy ghost
makes them soft. and lyberall to give and dele almes^^ deeds for the love of
almighty god: And makes them hard also in suffrynge of hard and streyte
living. and in dooyng of great penance for their sins Thus the holy ghost is
ever ready to make salve for to hele all manner of sins That other skylle is
why the holy ghost come to the appostles rather syttyng than stondyng. For
syt^ynge betokens meekness in heart. wit^ ^^ste peace and unity The which
any manner of man must needs have that will receive the holy ghost For ryg^^ ^s
the dry wode will bre^ne clearly with out ^^^ryng. So should every cryst^n
man love other with brennyng love and charity clearly without (...) of wrath
or envy. or any manner off malice each with other. And every man should be feyne
of otheris wes^^r And this makes to have a good ^onge But as sone a^ the
brondes ben ^aste a twynny by dyscencion off man and envy Anon the fire of
the holy gos^e quenches. And then (...) up smoke of great wrath and envy
between party and party. And also great greuaunce and heaviness for the soul
and causes it to fail gr^^^. that it may have no consydera^yon to reason.
Then anon the wyckid spyrytes ben ready and ^^^se up smoke in the same mannis
heart: That is to say great wrath and envy. and evil will that it may have
no manner of rest. But ever stody^ng and thinking also how he may ^ue^ge him.
and do vengeance unto: ^is enemies. And so is a man ever troubled and besy
ever in cursed deeds and lykely to be dampened body and soul in hell to
euyrlastynge pain but if he have socour and help of the holy ghost and all
such things that may come of cursed and wyked tongues. Therefore the holy
ghost comes in the lyckenesse of tongues of brennynge fire. to brenne out the
malice and envy and to anoynte hem with swetnes off grace. love and charity.
And therefore we shall pray to the holy ghost to give us grace so to tempre
our tongues that we may evermore speak. good. and that our hertes may be fed
with meekness. that we may be able to be fed with the holy ghost. as saint
Gregory was when he expowned the prophecye. he took to him his deken saint
Peter to write as he expowned and made draw between hem For saint Peter should
not see how he did in his stodyeng Then as saint Gregory satt in his chayer
Holdyng up his hondys and his eyes to heaven ward The holy ghost came like a
white dove with foot and bylle brennyng gold and satte on Gregory right
sholdre. and put her bylle in Gregoryes mouth. And when he wythdrewe it
then he bad Peter write and so continued till he had made an end. But he
expowned the gospel so boldly that Peter had merueylle thereof and preuely
made a hole in the cloth that was between gregory and him and saw how the holy
ghost fed him And anon the holy ghost showed Gregory how Peter had done
then Gregory blamed Peter. And charged him that he should never say no
thing while he lived: But when gregory was deed. an herety^^ would have
^renned his bokys. That this holy man (...) And then Peter wythstode him: and
said nay and told all how the holy ghost had done to him while he expowned
the prophecy And so saved his books vnbrenned that he had made by the grace of
god and yefte of the holy ghost the which give us grace to be fed of him
here in our living that we may have the bliss that never shall have end ame^

In die sancte trinitatis.
GOod men and wymmen this day is an high and a sole^pne feste in holy
church. For it is of the holy trynyte. For as holy church at wytsontyde
makes mention how the holy ghost come to crystis dysciples Now at this time is
made mention of all three persons yt is for to say Pater filius et spiritus
sanctus. Fader sone and holy ghost three persons and one god wherefore we ben
bound to do all the reverence and worship that we can or may to this holy
trynyte. Also ye shall understand why how And what the cause is. that this
feste was ordained. This holy fest was worshyped for the trynyte. first
fyndyng. for heretykis confoundyng. and for the Trynyte worshypynge. First it
was ordained for the form of the trynyte fyndyng. And a great clerk Johan
belleth tells yt form. trinite was in the first man adam our so^^ fader
that comes of the^^he one person. and eve of adam the second person of them
both comes the third person as her child. Thus the trynyte was found in
man wherefore man should have mind to do worshype to the holy trynyte For holy
church ordained that in wedding of a man and woman to gyder. so that the
mass of the Trynyte is songen. And at his death one bell shall be ronge in
worship of the trynyte wherefore all criste^ people ben bound greatly to worship
the holy trynyte. The second cause is ye feste is ordained in confundynge of
heretykes and of lollers for to dystroye them and her false opynyons yt they
had against the holy trynyte. For right as heretykis in the beginning of the
feyth with her sweet words and falls opynyons were about to distroye the feyth
of the holy trynyte. In the same wise lollers now a days with her false spyce
of gyle be about also to wythdrawe the people from the true believe and feyth
of the holy trynyte. and the believe and feyth of the holy church Popes martirs
and confessors to the death Right so now these lollers pursuen men of holy
church and ben about in all manner ways that they can and may find to
distroye and undo him so. that they might have their purpose: And thus they
show openly that they be not goddis servants. For they ben out of charity.
and he yt is out of charity: is far from god. But he that suffers
trybulacyon persecucion and disease. for the love of al mighty god. And preyeth
for his ^es and mysdoers. And will do no vengeance: but put all in god
almighty. and quyte hem full well in everlasting bliss. For our Lord says
thus. Michi vindictam et ego retribuam. Put all thing to me. and I shall quyte
every man after his deseruynge. for though god suffer holy church to be
pursued by such mysse and proud he uerys. at the last he ordeyneth such a
remedy that holy church is helped and her enmyes confounded and shamed. Thus
it happed on a time with the emperor of rome that hight Attylya* and he was made
by heretics as Johan bellet tells. the which emperor pursued christian people
sore and hated hem and holy church greatly. wherefore he made to brenne all the
books that might be found of christian feyth. But as almighty god would* there
was a good holy man. and that was a great clerk and the clerk was called
Alpunous that in mayntenynge of the feyth off holy church he made the story of
the trinyte* and the story all so of saint steven. and brought it unto the
pope for to have hem songen and read in holy church. But by counseyll of that
gre^ clerk. they took the story of saint steven. and left the story of the
holy trynyte till the time that saint Gregory was pope then for to preue hem
and do hem shame that been such mysbyleuyng people. and would not believe in the
trynyte but made after her reason many heretykes and in consyderacion

of hem Saint Gregory the pope ordained this feste to be hallowed. and this
story to be song and read in holy church in worship of the Trynite with all
christian people. The third cause is for the high trynyte worshypynge and for
all christian men should know how and in what manner they should believe in the
trynyte. for as holy church techeth. he that byleueth in the trynyte shall be
saved and they that done not shall be dampened. Then it is full expedyent and
needful to all christian people to know how they should live. ye shall
understand that parfyt love to god is the believe. For he that byleueth
parfitly makes no questions. Fides non habet meritum vbi humana racio p^ebet
experimentum. Feyth has no mede ne merit where mannys wit yeueth
experience: Then it is good for all christian people to make love to be
medyatoure to the holy ghost prayng him to lyghten us within our souls that
we may have grace to come to his parfyte believe. Therefore this day was set
next wytsondaye. hoping that the holy ghost will be ready to all Christian
people yt will call him. And specially in lernyng of the feyth. but yet for
mannys wits be dulle to learn. then they may not se nor here* but they be
brought in by great ensample. But that people is not most comendable if we may
by ensample come the sooner to the believe. in the fader and the sone and the
holy ghost. three persons and all one god take heed of this ensample* Of* yse.
snow. and water. how y^ these three ben diverse each in substance. and yet is
all but water ye may understand by the water the fader. by the yse. the sone:
and by the snow. the holy ghost. water is an element that has great might
and strenthe: and as the master Alisaunder says. It is above heaven in the
manner of yse side a castall and does worship to heaven and anon it is under
earth And therthe is grounded upon water And david says in the psalter it is
al about the world. and in all thing. for in hard stones and iron sometime is
sweet water for this water is so full of might yt is to understand. the
fader that his power is so much that he governs all the world and knows
all thing. and all thing is at his will and commandment. By the sone Ihesu
crist ye shall understand. yse that is water congeled hard and bretyll. that
is ihesu christ very god and man. that took the substance and freilte of
mankind when he was conceived of the holy ghost in the virgyn Mary and borne
of her body. god that suffered passion under ponce pylate done upon the cross
deyed. and was buried and the third day rose from death to lif. and after on
holy thursday styed up in to heaven and shall come again at the day off dome.
and deem the quycke and the deed. By the snow ye shall understand the holy
ghost. for right as snow is but water and yse. and light in thayre but how
no man can tell. So comyth the holy ghost from the fader and the sone.
Spiritus sanctus a patre et filio no^ factus nec creatus nec genitus sed
procedens. But how it is for no man to study. for it excedith all mennys wytt
to stody thereupon. but sadly believe. the fader is full god almighty and of him
come the sone full god and of hem both comyth the holy ghost full god. This
trynyte was known in the fullyng of christ as the gospel telleth^ In baptismo
cristi tota trnitas se manifestauit scilicet pater in voce filius in carne
spiritus sanctus in colu^ba et totu^ celum apertum erat. Then our lord Ihesu
christ was baptized in the water of flom Jordan And all the people nigh of the
country there about were baptized there with him and as they were in her
prayers. Et aperti sunt celi et spiritus sanctus descendit sicut colu^ba The
holy ghost come down in liknesse of a white dove. And lyghted on crystis head:
Et vox de celo dicens / Hic est filius meus dilectus in quo michi been
complacui. And the fader spoke in heaven and said Thou art my well-beloved sone
that pleases me well that was the holy trinyte. that spoke in his person. and
the sone was bodily there in his person. Than Johan baptist said to the people
Ecce agnus dei. See the lamb of god. And the holy ghost was seen in his
person. Sicut columba^ descendente^. ^s a (...) done come down and thise three
ben but one god in trinite. wherefore it were full needful to all christian
people to pray besely: so yt we may have grace to have the parfight love to
believe in the fader the sone and holy ghost three persons and one god in
Trinyte.

Narracio.
we find that the mother of Saint Edmunde of pountney as he stodyed of this
holy trynyte she appeared unto him. and leyed in his hand three ringes each with
in other And in the first was written: Pater. The fader: In the secound. Filius.
The sone. In the third Spiritus sanctus. The holy gooste. and said. My dear
sone. To such fygures take heed. and learn what thou may. And take good head
to this ensample. For right as a ring is round without any beginning and
ending. right so ben three persons in one god But for to stody how it might
be. it is but folly. for it excedeth any mannys wytt to muse there upon. but
sadly believe there upon.

Narracio.
we read of a clerk that was greatly learned in dyuinyte. the which stodyeth
besely to have brought this in a book why god would be byleued one god ^ three
persons ^ so as he walked on a day stodyeng on this matter by the sea sonde.
he was ware of a fair child sittyng on the sea sonde and had a lytyl shelle in
his hand and therwyth he took water out of the sea and cast it in to al^tyl
pytte fast by. Then said this master to this child: Sone ^^at do thou and
he said. Sire I am abowte to have all this water y^ is in the sea in to this
little pytte. Then said the master. that shall thou never do it passes any
mannys power. Sire said he. as soon shall I do this as thou shall do that
thou art about to do. And anon the child vanysshed away. Then this
master thought it was not goddis will. and left his stodyenge in that matter.
and thanked god hyghely. By this ensample ye may see that it is not goddis will
that we should muse in that matter. But steadfastly belyue in the fader. the sone.
and the holy ghost. Veni per fidem trinitatis. Come by feyth and love of this
perfyght feyth of the trynite. Veni per opera misericordie. Come by the werkys
of mercy doing. Veni per opera iusticie. Come to this belyue by doing of werkis
of rightwysnesse and thus ye shall come to this parfyte believe. fader sone and
holy ghost. Et tunc conoraberis corona glory eterne. And then thou shat be
crowned with a crown of everlasting Joy and bliss. to the which bring us
to the holy Trinyte

De corpore cristi.
GOod frendis ye shall understand. that this day is an hye And a solemn
feste in holy church the feste of Corpus cristi. it is the feste of our
lordis own body. the which is offered to the hye fa^er of heaven at the auter
in remyssion of our sins for all Christian people that live here in parfyte
life and charity and great socour and help in releuyng hem that been in peynes of
purgatory. there abydyng the mercy of god. ye shall understand that this feste
was found by a pope that was called Urban the v: the which had great grace and
devotion in the sacrament of the altar consyderyng the great mede help and
socour to mannys soul And to the forderynge of living to all christian people
here in this present world Therefore he ordained this present feste to be hallowed
in the next thursdaye after the feste of the holy Trynyte: for all christian
people that will be sauyd must have sad believe in the holy sacrament that is
goddis own body in form of bread made by the virtue of crystis words that
the pressed says. and by workyng of the holy ghost. Then for this holy pope
thought to draw people to more devotion and better will to this holy
sacrament. and to do service this day. he grants to all that been worthy.
that be they that be verey contryte and shreuen of her sins. and be in the
church at both euynsonges at matyns and at mass. For each a ^ days of
pardon. and for each hour off the day xl. days of pardon ^ for every day of
the vtas a C. days of pardon in remission of all her sins. for evermore
enduryng then ye shall understand that Our lord Ihesu christ on
sherethursdaye at night when he had souper and wist well in the morowe^ that he
should suffer his passion and death and pass out of this world unto his fadre
in heuyn He ordained a perpetual memory of his passion to abide for euir with
all christian people in earth He took bread and wine and made his own flesh and
blood and gave it to his disciples to ete and to drink and said Accipite. et
manducate. hoc est corpus meum Take ye this and ete it for it is mine oune
flesh and blood And this he did. for they should have mind of him. and so he
yaue other prestys power to make his body of bread and wine Thus every preeste
has power to make the sacrament be he good or badde. For the sacrament may no
man amend. nor pair but he that is a good man and a holy liver helpyth
greatly them that he prays fore And he that does the office of the priest
worthily and truly. shall be glad and joyful that euir he was borne. For ^^re
lord has yeuyn a priest a (...) power here in earth that he gave neuir to
angel in heaven that is to make his own body in form of breed Therefore ye
shall have worship more in heuyn thanne any tongue can tell or heart think. And
he that is an evil liver and knows him self in dedely sin and presumes
to mynistre that worthy sacrament and will not amend him. he may be sure of
perpetuel dampnacion with fendys of hell in euirlastinge pain Then shall ye
understand that he grants this sacrament to be used for euirmore in holy
church For four causes that be needful to all christian people The first is
for mannys great helping The secounde for cristes passion minding. The
thridde for great love showing And the fourth for great mede getting Nota
quod propter nouem raciones prodest homini audire. missa^ secundu^ augustinum.
Saint Austyn says it profytteth greatly all christian people to here mass and in
especial for ix: causes ^ says thus. Quia illo die qua audieret missa^
necessaria cibaria co^cedu^tur For that day that he heryth a mass. he shall
not fayll of no bodily fode nor no necessary thing that shall be longing to.
nor no let shall have in his iournaye where that he trauayleth. The secounde
is all venyall sins: shall be forgive him and ydel words The thridde is that
if aman dye it shall stand for his housell. The fourth he shall not that day
lose his sight The fyfte all ydell oaths that day shall be foryeuyn The vi.
that day he shall (...) no soden death The vii. aslonge as he heryth the mass
he shall not w^^ old The viii. all all his steps toward. and from ward the
church h^^ good aungyll reknyth to his salvation. The nynthe all the while
that he beholds the holy sacrament. all wicked spirits flee from him and
have no power ouir him be he neuir so great a sinner This help and socour we
have of the holy ghost and of the sacrament here in earth. and at our last
end al christian people woll send after the p^^este to come to him with gods
body* and to resceyue it knowing well that he beleuyth steadfastly that it is
the same flesh and blood that criste took of our lady saint mary and was
born of her body very god and man. and after suffered passion and death on the
cross for mankind. and leyde in tomb and rose from death to live. and now
syttethe on his faders right hond in heuyn. and shall come again at the day of
dome. and deem the quycke and the deed every man after his deseruynge So with
this parfite believe al christian people shall be armed and made strong to
wythstonde the fendes that will come and assail at the departing. bitwene
the body and the soull for then fendes. come besily to bring him out of the
believe Then shall the sacrament that a man has resc^yued in his life make him
mighty and strong. that he shall set all the fendes at naught and so
ouirco^me th^ym A another skyll. yt the sacrament is brought to a man to ask
mercy of criste and remission of his sins. having full trust and believe
that criste is euir ready to forgive al them that will ask mercy with a meke
heart as david says. Cor contritum et humiliatum deus non despicies. A
contrite heart and a meke our lord shall neuir dispyse. and that we may se by
ensample when he hang upon the cross bitwene ii. theuys that were men of
cursed living And therefore they were ordained to be deed and that one asked
mercy with a meke heart and said in this wise Domine duz veneris in regnu^ tuum
memento mei. Lord quod he when thou co^myste. to thy kingdom have mind of
me. and anoon at his first asking he gave him mercy and more ouir he said to
him thus Hodie mecum eris in paradiso This day thou shalt be with me in
paradise And that other thief would ask no mercy in no wise for pride he had
in his heart and therefore he was dampened to hell Thus our lord Jesus christ
shed his blood on the cross in health of all mankind So in the mass he
shewyth his blood in great socoure help and salvation to all mankind and the
same flesh and blood is showed every day in the mass for we should believe
steadfastly thereon And he that beleuyth not thereon verily that it is so shall
not be sauyd at the day of dome

Narracio.
Therefore I tell you this ensample. that is in the life of Odo the Busshop. of
Caunterbury this busshop had with him clerks that bele^yd not parfytely in
the sacrament of the auter and said they could not believe yt the body and
blood of crist might be mynistred in the mass Then was this busshop sorry and
prayed to god besily for her amendment And so on a day when he was at the
mass and had made the fraction he saw the blood drop fro the oste in the
chalyce Then he made a sign unto them that believed natt. to come nere him
and to see And when they saw his fyngers blody and the blood ran from the oste
into the chalyce anoon for great fere they cried and said. O thou blessed man
yt have this grace to hold cristes body in thy hondes that droppeth blood in
the chalice. we believe verily thereupon and we beseech the verily to pray to him
for us: that thou haste in thy hondes that he take no vengeance on us for our
misbileue and we cry mekely mercy And anon the ost turnyd into the form of
bread. as it was before And then they were parfyte men of bileue euir after A
another skyll is that the sacrament is made in the altar to make a man by often
sight thereof. the sooner have mind on cristes passion. and to have it in mind.
for it is the best defense against the te^ptacion of the fend For saint
Austyne says the mind of cristes passion puts away all temptaciones and
the power of all wicked spirits And for this cause rodes and images been set
on hye in the churches for as soon as a man comes into the church. he should
se it and have it in his mind and think on cristes passion. wherefore croces.
and other images be full necessary and needful. what someuir these lollers
say. For and it had not be full profitable. holy faders would have distroyed
them many years a goon For right as the people do worship to the kings
seall. not for love of the seal but for reverence of the king that it comes
fro So rodes and images be set for the kings seal of heuyn and other
saints in the same wise For images been lewed people books And as John Bellet
says there been many thousands of peo- yt can not ymagine in their hertes
how criste was don on the cross but as they se by images in the churches and
in other places there as they been. And for to have the bettre mind of cristes
passion I shall tell you this ensample.

Narracio.
There was a christian man of England that went into the holy land and (...)red
an hethen man to be his guide and as he ca^me unto a fair forest and saw many
fair things* but this cristened man maruayled greatly yt herd no noys of
birds and thereof he had great meruayll and said to this hethen man. I meruayll
much that there is no song of birds in this wode Then said this hethen man
This is the weke yt ye call passion weke that your great prophet dyed in.
wherefore on sunday yt ^a^te was that ye call palm sunday all the fowls of
this wode dyed for sorrow and all this weke shall lie as deed But on sunday
next coming that ye call esterday they quycken again and all the year after
they make melody. whrefore (...) up in to the trees and see and then he saw
every bow of the trees lie full of birds as flat as they had be sprede on
the cross Then sith birds have mind of cristes passion and make such
morning and sorrow Much more cause has mankind. that was brought from
euirlastinge dampnacion to euirlasting salvation by his passion The thridde
cause is why the sacrament is used in the alter For a man should by the sight
thereof think on our lord Jesus criste fader of heuyn yt has but one sone
that he louyth passing all thing but he spared not to send him down into
this world. to suffrer passion and death and to shede his precious blood for
mankind to bye him out of the fendes bonds and to write a charter with his
own preciouse blood of fredome for euirmore to all mankind So that a man
forfayte not his charter by dedely sin But he that louyth god will keep his
charter. for god asks a man but love where he says thus Da michi cor tuu^ et
sufficit michi: et cetera. Sone give me thy heart and it is enoughe for me
Then take heed of this ensample.

Narracio.
There was an earl of venys yt was called sir Ambright that louyd the sacrament
in the Auter passinge well. and did it all the worship and reverence that he
could and might. So when he leye seek and should be deed he might not resceyue
the sacrament for castinge. then was he sorry and made dole and then he
let make clean his right side and to cover it with a fair clothe of fendyll
and leyde gods body theren and said thus to the oste. Lord thou know that
I love the with all my heart and would fayn resceyue the with my mouth and I
durst. And for I may not I lay the on that place that is next to mine heart and
so I show the all the love of mine heart. that I can or may. wherefore I beseech
the good lord have mercy on me and even therewith in sight of all the people
that were about him his side opened and the oste went in there to his side
and then it closed again. and so anoon after he dyed and departed out of this
world. So let us love the sacrament in our life and do it reverence* and
worship and then at our last end when we shall dye. and pass out of
this world. it woll socour us and bring us to euirlastinge bliss Thus the
sacrament is used for great mede getting to all that believe therein. For
though it have the likeness of bread and the taste. it is flesh and semyth
bread. it is quycke and semyth deed. ye must believe verily that it is gods
blessed body that took flesh and blood of the virgyn mary and after died on
the cross and rose fro death to live and styed up into heuyn. and now sytteth
on his faders right hand and shall come again at the day of dome to deem the
quycke and the deed And he yt resceyueth it here and beleuyth verilye theruppon
shall have euirlastinge life in the kingdom of heuyn as the gospel says. Qui
manducat hunc pane^ viuet in eternum. who so etyth of this bread shall live
euyr and neuir be deed And he that resceyueth it and believes not thus Reus
erit in iudicio At the day of dome he shall be dampened into euirlastinge
pain. Augustinus i^ persona cristi. Manducas me / non mutabis me inte sed tu
mutaberis in me Saint Austyn says in the person of criste Ete me but I shall
not turn and change into the but thou shall turn and change into me

we read that there was a jew that went with a christian man. a fellow of his
into a church of christian people and herd mass. Et post missam dixit Iudeus
And after mass said the Jew thus. Si ego tantum edissem qua^tu^ comedisti
non esuriem vt puto in tribus diebus

If I had eten asmoche as thou haste eten I should not be a hungered. as I
trow in three days And then said the christian man to the jew. Vere nichil
comedi. Forsothe said the christian man to the jew I ete no manner mete this
day Then said the jew. Ego vidi te comedere puerum pulcerimum / qualem
sacerdos eleuauit ad altar. I saw the ete a child the which the priest held
up at the altar Et tunc venit pulcerimus homo habe^s multos pueros i^ gremio
suo. Then ca^me there a fair man yt had many children in his lap Et dedit
vnicuique vestru^ vnn^ puerum tale^ qualem sacerdos. comedit And he gave each
christian man a child. such as the priest ete. yet to sharp your bileue the
more to this holy sacrament I show you this ensample. we read in saint
Gregoryes time. There was a woman that hight Lacyna and she made bread for the
pope and other prestes to singe with. and for to housell with the people Also
the pope ca^me to this woman with her housel and said take here gods body
Then this woman smyled and laughed Then the pope withdrewe his hand and
laid the oste upon the Altar and turned to this woman Lacyua and said to her.
why smylest thou when thou sholdest resceiue cristes body And she said why
call thou that cristes body that I made with mine own hondes Then was
gregory the pope sorry for her misbeleue and bad all the people pray to god to
show some miracle for this womannys help And when they had prayed long.
Gregory went to the autre again and found thoste turnyd into read flesh and
blood bledynge and he showed it to this woman Then she cried and said Now
lord I cry the mercy I believe that thou art very god and man and gods sone
of heuyn in form of bread Then badde Gregory the people to pray again that
it should turn again to bredes likeness and it did and with the same often he
housled this woman Lacyua. And therefore let us do all the worship yt we may
to the sacrame^te and be not in mysbeleue Also we find that in Deuonshyre.
beside exbridge was a woman ley seek and was nygh deed and sent after a holy
person about mydnyght to have her rightes Then this man in all haste that
he might arose and went to the church and took gods body in a box of yuery
and put it into his bosom and went forth toward this woman And as he went
through a foreste in a fair mede that was his next way It happed that his
box. fell out of his bosom to the ground. And he went forth and wist it
not and ca^me to this woman and herd her confession And then he asked her if
she would be housted and she said ye sire. then he put his ho^de in his bosom
and sought the box and wha^ he found it not. he was full sorry and sad and
said dame I will goo after goddis body and come anon again to you and so went
forth sore weeping for his symplenesse and so as he com to a welow tree he
made there of a rode and stryped him self naked. and beat him self that the
blood ran down by his sides and said thus to him self. O thou simple man.
why have thou lost thy lord god. thy maker thy saucour and creature. And when
he had thus beten him self he did on his clothes and went forth And then he
was ware of a py^ar of fire: that lasted from earth to ^^uen and he was all
astonyed thereof y^^he blessed him and went thereto: and there lay the sacrament
fallen out off the box to the grass and the pylour shone as bright as any
son and lasted from goddis body to heaven. And all the ^estis of the foreste
were come about goddis body and stood in compass round about it: and all
kneled on iiii. knees: save on black horse that kneled but on that one knee.
then said he. if thou be any best that may speak. I charge the in goddis
name here present in form of bread. tell me why thou knelest but on thy one
knee Then said he. I am a fend of hell. and will not knele and I might.
but I am made against my will. For it is writon that every knelyng of heaven and
of earth shall be to the worship to the lord god. why art thou like an horse
and he said to make the people to stele me. and at such a town was on hanged
for me and at such a town a another Then said this holy person. I command
the by goddis flesh and his blood yt thou goo in to wilderness. and be there
as thou shall never disease christian people more. And anon he went his way.
he might no longer abide. And then this man went forth to this woman and
did her ryghtes. By the which she was saved. and went to everlasting
salvation. To the which bring us to. he that for us shed his blood upon the
rode tree Amen.

De festo sci^ Andree appostoli.
GOod men and wymmen such a day ye shall have saint andrewis day and ye
shall fast the even and come to god and to al holy church and worship this
holy saint that day for iii special virtues. One is for his great holiness
in his doing. The second for his good living The third for his great
passion suffryng. He was a man of holy living. for when he understood and herd
of saint Johan the Baptist that he was preching in deserte. Anon he left all
his worldly occupacion. and went to him and was his diciple and so after on a
day as christ come walking. by the way and saint ioha^ baptist saw him
walking he said to his disciyples.

Ecce agnus dei qui tollit peccata mundi. See the lamb of god that shall do
away the sin of all the world. And when Saint Andrewe herd that. anon he
leete saint Johan baptiste and sewed Criste. And when he herd criste preche.
It pleased him so well that anon he went and fett Petyr his brother to here
christ preche. Then they cast great love to god and sone after as they were
in the sea of galile fisshinge. criste ca^me and called them. and anon they
left fysshi^ge ship and net and all that they had and sued crist euir
after. and were with him till he styed up to heuyn.

Narracio.
Then after that saint Andrewe preached among the people. then on a day as he
preached It happed so there was a man among the people that was called nycoll
that had lived many wynters in lechery but yet by the grace of god he
thought to amend his live And when he herd that the word of god was of so
great virtue. that it should put away all temptaciones. of sin he let
write a gospel and bare with him whersoeuir he went and with the virtue thereof
he absteyned him selue fro sin But yet on a day by te^ptacion of the fend
he forgate him self and went again to a brodellys house. as he was used to do
before And wha^ he ca^me thidre and the wymen lokyd upon him they cried out on
him and said O thou old sely man what do thou here. go home again For we se
so many maruayles on the that we may not have to do with the. Then this
nycoll bethought him that he had the gospel upon him and anoon he went to
saint Andrewe and told him all the caas and prayed saint Andrewe to pray for
him that his soul might be sauyd Then saint Andrewe would neuir ete nor
drink till he wyste whether nicoll should be sauyd or no Then saint Andrewe
fastyd five days bread and water and prayed besily night and day Then ca^me
a voice and said As thou haste fastyd and prayed make Nycol to do the same and
then he shall be saved Then saint Andrewe bad nycol fast five days bread
and water and pray besily unto god. and so he did And then come a voice to
saint Andrewe again and said. Thy prayers and thy fasting has made Nycoll yt
was lost found again and he shall be saved

Narracio.
Also a another miracle that (...) young man come to saint Andrewe in a time
and said privily to him Sir my modre has be long about me ^ I should lie
with her. and for I would not do her will she has accused me to the busshop
and say^^ that I would have done that sinful deed with her. wherefore I wot
well that I shall be deed. and yet I had leuyt dye ^e sclaundre my modre so
foul. therefore I beseke you pray for me that I may take my death pacie^tly to
the salvation of my soul Then said saint Andrewe go forth to thy dome and I
shall go with the. and so therewith the people come and fe^e him before the
busshoppe And when his modre accused him He said no thing but held his
peace* Then said saint Andrewe. Innoce^s sa^guis enis sure causa dampnabitur.
This cursed woman for lust of her body wrongfully is about to dampne her own
child to death vengeance will come to the: then said she. loo sire justice
ever sith that he might not have his will he has drawn to this man for
counseyll ^ socour. Then the Justice commanded to cast this young man in to
the water to drown him and to put saint andrewe in prison. till he were
aduysed what death he should deye. Then saint andrew prayed besely unto god
for help and socour. And then anon come a great thondre. and made all the
people so aferde that they were feyne to fette saint andrewe out of the
prison. And even therwyth come a lyghtenyng of fire and brenned the mother of
the young man in sight of all the people. And thus was this man saved and the
justice by this great miracle turned to the christian feyth. and much people
with him and ever after belyued in god and saint andrewe. Thereby ye may see
that he was holy in living. Also he was great in miracles wyrchyng. for oon day
as he went by the sea side. he saw a drowned man cast out of the water then
andrewe prayed to god to rere him again to life: and anon this man rose then
andrew asked him where that he was drowned. and he said. we were x. men to
gyder: and herd of an holy man that hight andrew and we were coming to here
his preching. And as we were in the sea there come a great tempest and drowned
us all to gyder. But would god that we had be cast to land together. that we
might have be raised to life to gyder again. Then saint andrewe prayed god
that all the bodies might come together. and so they did. and were cast up in
diverse contreys. Then saint Andrewe made and ordained to gader them all to
gyder. Then he kneled down and prayed god long. for them till they were
raised all to life. Then saint andrewe made them all to knele down. and
thanked god: and preched them and taught them the christian feyth. and crystened
them all. And when they were steadfast in the feith. he sent them home to her
own country. with much joy to them And many other miracles he did. that
were to long to tell thus ye may see that he was mighty in miracles werkynge.
that raised so many men to life. Also he suffered great passion for cristis
sake. For when he was in the cite of pateas. there he turned to the feyth the
wife of egeas And this egeas was a great man. and made much people to do
sacrifyce and offryng to mawmentis. But for saint andrewe repreued him thereof.
Anon he made to take him and would have made him to do sacryfyce but he would
not and stedfastely bode ayenste him and preued by many ensamples by cause that
he and all the people should worship god and not the fendes of hell. Then
was Egeas wode for wroth And made men to take Andrewe and strype him naked.
and beat him with scourges. yt al his body ran on blood

And then made to bind him hand and foot. and made to do him

on a Cross. For he should pain thereon long or he deyed. But when andrewe
come to the place there the cross was he kneled down and said thus. Salve crux
qui in corpore cristi dedicata es. Holy be thou cross that art hallowed and
made holy by the precious body of our lord Ihesu criste. I desire to clyppe the
to me wherefore take me to the. For I yield me to my master ihesu criste that
dyed on the cross. And then Andrewe stood up and did off his clothes. and
gave them to the tourmentours. and bad them do as they were charged to do of
the Justice. Then they bound him to the cross hand and foot and his head
downewardis. And streyned him. So that the blood brast out at every knot of
the ropes. and so he henge there three days alive prechyng to the people. and
so there come to the prechynge many thousands of people^ and for pity yt they
had of him they bad Egeas take him down or they would sle him. Then for
fere of the people Egeas come to take him down Then saint andrew against
stood him and said. Quid tu venisti ad me egeas. what come thou to me Egeas.
wit thou well that thou shall have no might to take me down: For on this
cross will I deye. and even therewith Hiis enim dictis splendour niuis circuiens
eum quasi per mediam horam / A great light come about him that there no man
might see him in space of half an hour and more. Then said saint andrewe.
Obsecro te dn^e miserere mei. I beseke the lord have mercy on me. ^ so in that
light he gaaf up the ghost. And then when Egeas saw and knew this that he
was deed. he went homward. Then after that deed. he wexed wode and deyed
among all the people: And when maximilia his wif herd hereof anon she took
andrewe (...) body. and beryed it in a tomb. and out of the tomb welleth
manna and oil to gyder. and by that people of the co^^tre know when it should
be dear. and when great plente: For when it shall be plente it welleth
plentyfully and wha^ it shall be derth s^arsly

Narracio.
It fell so there was a bishop y^ loved well saint andrew: and for the fend
might in no wise bring him out of (...) purpose. he come to the bishop in
likeness of a fair woman praynge him yt she might speak with him in counseyl
of confession and he granted her thereto. sire she said. I am a knights
daughter. and have be much cherisshed and norisshed in great tenderness and for
I se it is world is but a vanyte to trust upon. I have auowed chas^^e and now
my fader would mary me to a worthy prince and I would not break my vow I am come
preuely away in pour array and thus I herd of your great holiness* and am
^o^he to have your cou^seyl socour and help of you* wherefore I pray you
ordeyne for me. that the fend have no power to let me of my purpose.

Then the bishop comforted her. and bad that she should thank god that had
set her in such purpose. And that he would send her grace therwyth to
continue. and said to her Esto secura filia* Be thou seker daughter this day
thou shall dyne with me. and then we shall by good advise when we have dyned
ordeyne so for you: that ye shall do right well Nay sire said she. lest the
people would have any susspection off bad rule ye said the bishop. there off
no charge. Plurima erimus et non soli. For there shall be so many in company.
that there shall be no susspectio^ Then she thanked him fair. and she was
set to fore the Bishop in a chair at mete And ever when the bishop looked
on her. he seemed her so fair that he was greatly tempted on her so that he had
almost forgete him self. And then anon there come a pilgrim to the gate.
And beat fast on the gate that all that were with in the hall were sore astoned
of the noise* so he cried. let in let in. Then said the bishop. shall
this man come in then said she let him answer to some questyon first
whether he be worthy or none to come so nyghe in your presence. Then said
the bishop. I pray you make the question. for I am not aduysed at this time:
Then said she to the messenger. Interroga quod est magis miraculum quod deus
vnquam i^ parua re fecit. Ask him what was the gretest miracle that ever god
made in a foot broad of earth. Then when the pilgrym was asked this he
answered. and said a manny^ (...) the which is but a fot and but a mannis own
face. For though all the men and wymmen y^ our were borne stood afor me. yet
should I know one from another. by some degree. when he gave this answer. He was
greatly commended therefore. Then said she. I see that he is wise. bid him give
another answer to another question Ask him. wheder earth is higer tha^ heaven.
Then he answered and said thus. There as Cristis body is there is earth. for
cristis body is of our kind. and our kind is earth. therefore there is cristis
body is earth. Is higher than heaven when he had given that answer. he was well
allowed. and was bid come in. Nay said she. let him a soil the third
question. Ask him how far it is from heaven to hell. Then when he was
opposed of this he answerde the messenger. Go ageyn to her that sytteth in the
chayer before the bishop. and bid her give this answer For she can better
tell it than I. Qua^do de celo i^ abissu^ cecidit For she is a fend that has
moten it and so did I never. she fill down with lucyfer And when the
messenger herd this he was all heavy But he gave this answer that all might
here. Then this fend vanysshed away with an horrible stynke. Then the
bishop bethoughte him off this temtacion. and was sorry in his heart. And anon
he made to send after this pilgrim. But or that the messenger come again to
the gate he was gone^ Then the bishop made all men to pray to god. (...)
wyttyng what the pylgrim was that so goodly halpe him at his need Then come a
voice to him and said it was Saint andrewe that come to socour him. for (...)
and service yt he did to him: And bad him preche this miracle to the people to
see and know how graciously he helps all that will pray him. and therefore
let us worship and to pray him to be our socour and our help against the
fend now and ever.

Festum sancti Nicolai.
GOod men and wymen such a day ye shall have saint nycolas day. the which is
preysed in holy church. and specially for three causes The first for his meke
living The second for his heavenly techynge. The third for his great
compassyon. having. First he was made lowly. Pater eius epiphanus^ matter eius
iohanna dicta est It is said that his fader hight Epyphanus and his mother
iohanne the which in her yough got saint Nycolas. And when he was borne they
made her vows both to keep and to live in chastyte: and no more come to gyder:
but hold hem plesed of this one child that god had sent hem the which they
made him christian and called him Nycolas. that is a mannis name But he keeps
the name of the child. For he chose to keep virtues meekness and symplenesse
and without malice Also we read while he lay in his cradell he fasted wenesday
and friday These days he would s^e but (...) of the day. and therwyth he held
him pleysed: thus he lived al his life in virtues. with this childs name. And
therefore children done him worship before all other saints for he was ever
meke without any malice. so yt all the people preysed him for his meke living
here. Also he was made bishop of the Cite of Myrre by a voys which come from
heaven. For when the bishop was deed. all the bishops of the country come to
gyder. to ch^se another. then come a voys to one off them. and bad him rise
erly on the morrow and goo to the church door. and make him bishop that ye
find there that is called Nycolas. And so on the morrow he come to the church
door and there he fond Nycolas. and then he said thus to him.

Quale nomen habes tu. what is thy name. and lowtynge with his head answerde
mekely and said Nycolas then said the bishop. Fili veni mecum. Sone come
with me. I have to speak with the in counseyll. and so lad him to the other
bishops. and said lo fires here is he that god has ordained to be bishop and
so they made him bishop off myrre by heavenly chesing He had also a great
compassyon of them that were in dysese and peril for when his fader and his
mother deyed they left him wordly good enough the which yt be spent^ on them
that were pour and nedy.

Narracio.
It fell so that there was a rich man yt had three fair daughters young
wymmen. But by myscheue he fylle in to pouerte. so that for greate^ need. he
ordained his eldeste daughter for to be a comen woman. and so after the two
other daughters: for he might not find hem. And so by this mean he ^h to
get his living and hers both. For he wist not how to live for great pouerte
that he stood in. And when Nycolas herd thereof he had great compassion of hem
all and come preuely in a night to this mannis house. and at a wyndowe he cast
a bag of gold in this mannys chamber and on the morrow when this man rose and
fond this gold. anon therewith he married his eldest daughter. Then come
Nycolas and brought another soon after. And therwyth he married the second
daughter. Then this man had great merueyle how this gold come thither. and
walked pryuely to know thereof. And the third time come Nycolas. And when this
man herd the gold fall. anon he went out and ouertoke Nycolas and when he
knew that it was he that had helped him so in his need: he kneled down and
would have kyssed his fete but he would not suffer it but prayed him to keep
counseyll while he lived:

Narracio.
Also another time men were in the se lykly for to be drowned in a great
tempest. They cried to god and saint Nycolas. seeing thus. Domine rex eterne
succurre nobis miseris. (...) king euyrlastyng sorrow (...) wretch^ and anon
Nycolas ^on^ fayde. Vocastis m^ adsu^ present Lo I am present at your (...).
And so brought hem forth sauf^ sound the land.

Narracio.
Also there was in the country in a time great derth of corn. Fames valida.
And great houngre in so much that the people were almost lost for the fawte
of mete Then it happened there come ships of themperours frayghte in to a
haven with whete in that country Then went saint Nycolas to them and prayed
them yt he might have of every ship C. busshelles of her whete for to releue
the people with and he would undertake that they should lack none of her met
when they come home. then he had al his askyng And when the ships come to
the emperor. they had her full mesure. And lacked no thing of her corn yt
saint Nycolas had through his holy prayer.

O quam probat sanctum dei faris augmentacio O how meruelously by the grace of
god and prayere off this holy man this whete was multyplyed and encresed. for
of that whete was so great plente. that it found all the people to ete and
drink. and to sow enough for three years after.

Narracio.
A another miracle there were ii. knights that were accused of treason. to
themperoure of a false matter and were co^maundyd to prison for to have be put
to death sone after Then they cried to god and saint Nicholas for help and
socoure so that the night before they should be deed Saint Nicholas come to the
Emperor as he lay in his bed and said thus to him. why have thou
wrongfully dampened these knights to death. Arise up anoon and deliver them
out of prison Or else I will pray to god to reyse battle up on the in the
which thou shall dye and wild bestes shall ete the Then said the Emperor
to him what art thou. that so boldly spekest and so thretyste me Then said
he I am Nycolas the busshop of myrre Then the Emperor anoon sent after the
knights and said to them. what wytchecrafte can ye that thus has trauayled
me to night know ye any man that hight Nycholas busshop of myrre Then
as soon as they herd this name they fell down to the ground and held up their
ho^des thankinge god and saint nycholas when they had told the Emperor of
his life and how holy he was the emperor badde them goo to him and thank him
of their lives and so they did. And he prayed the knights to pray nicholas to
threten him no more but pray to god for him and for his realm. Thus ye may se
that he has great compassion of them that were in disease. Then after when
saint Nicholas. should dye he prayed to god to send him an angel to set his
soul And wha^ he saw this angel saint nicolas lo^^ed and said In manus
tuas domine co^me^do spiritum meu^. redemisti me domine deus verit(...)is. And
so he yield up t(...)oste: And when he was buried at the head of his tomb
sprange a well of oil that did medicynes to all sores Then it happed many
years after. that turks distroied the cite of myrre there as saint nycolas
lay And when the people of the cite of Barus herd that the cite of myrre was
distroyed xlvii. knights were ordained to goo thydre. Then they arrayed
ships and went thydre and by telling of iiii. monks that were there. they
knew saint nycholas to^be and vndyd it anoon and there they found saint
nycholas bones swymmynge in oil Then they took them up and brought them to
the cite of barus with great solempnite Then for miracles that were wroughte
there in the cite of myrre increased again And so after that saint nycholas was
deed* they chose an other busshop in his stead And anoon after by enuyte of the
people was put down from his busshopriche and then anoon the oil seized and
ran no more Then was the busshop called again to his cite* then the oil
sprange out again as it did before and did many miracles

Narracio.
There was a christian man borrowed a certain su^me of money of a jew. and the
jew said he would leave noon butt if he had a borowe. and this christian man
said he had none but saint nycolas and he granted to take saint Nicholas to
borowe Then this christian man swore upon the alter that he should well and truly
pay his money again and so departed and went their way till the day of payment
ca^me And when this day of payemente was passed then the jew asked his
money. And this christian man said that he paid him and the jew said nay he
had not. and ye other said he had and that he would do his law and swear
upon a book And so when the day ca^me that they should goo to law the christian
man made him on holowe staff. and put the golden (...) and so come to the
law. And w^^n (...) swear while he went to the b^cke ^^toke the^ we his s^af
there the g^ld was in to hold And by (...) me^ne swo^e he had paid the jew
and when he had swore he took his staff of the jew again and went
homwardes And as he went by the way he was passing slepy and he ley to sheep
in the way Then happened yt there come a carte rennynge and went ouir this man
and slew him and brake his staff that the gold was in and the gold fill
out Then people saw yt this ca^me of great ve^geaunce for the falsehode
that he had done And they set the jew and bad him take up his money Then
was the jew sorye and said he would not but if they would pray saint
nycholas to reyse him again and then he would be cristned. Releuauit a
defuntis defu^ctu^. Then this deed man was reryd from death to live by the
prayer of saint Nycholas that holy man. Baptizatur auri viso iudeus iudicio
Then the jew that was out of the believe by the sight of this miracle. was
cristened.

Narracio
Also there was a another jew that saw the great might of saint Nicholas in
miracles wyrkynge And he let make an image of saint nicholas and set in his
ship to keep his good and charged the image to keep well his good. while he
was abse^t And when this man was gone there ca^me theuys of the sea. and robbed
this man and bare away his goods And when this jew come home again and saw
all good gone he was full wroth with saint nycolas and took a staaff and all
to beat the image and said. Ecce omnia bona mea posui i^ vestra custodia. Lo
quod he I took al my good to your kepinge for great trust And it is stolen
away. ye have disceyued me and therefore thou shall abye every day till I have
my good again Then as these theuys parted the good saint nycolas come to
them and said. Cur ta^ indirecte fecistis me flagellari. why have ye made me
be beat thus so sore. then they said Quis es tu what art thou that spekest
thus to us Then he said. Ego sum nicolaus seruus dei. I am nicholas the
servant of god. that ye have made thus sore to be beten and showed them how
sore yt he was beten for the good that they had borne away that was taken
him to keep. And he badde them goo and bear this good again anoon. or else
gods ve^geaunce should fall upon you* and ye shall be hanged in hell euirechoon
Then they were sore a ferde and bare again the good that same night And on
the morrow when the jew ca^me and saw his good brought again Anoon he was
cristned and after that he was an holy man And every year on saint nycholas
day for the great love that he had to saint nycholas. and also of a sone that
he had that was a clerk he made a great feste on saint Nicholas day Thenn^
it happed on a tym upon saint nicholas day he badde many clerks to his fest
Then com the fend to the gate in lykenes of a pilgrame and asked some good for
gods sake Then the good man that made the feste took his sone alms to
here the pilgrame So the child went ^o the gate. then was the pilgrame goon
and the child followed after the fend. and when he was a good way from his
faders place the fend caughte the child and slew it. And when the fader
herd thereof he was full sorry and took the child and laid it in his chamber
and cried for sorrow and said A saint Nicholas this is the reward and mede
that I shall have for the great worship that I do to the And anoon the child
rose from death to live Then this man was full glade and thanked god and saint
nicholas.

Narracio.
A another miracle: there was a man that prayed to god and to saint nicholas
that he might have a child And if he had a child he would led it to the
church of saint nicholas And there he would offer a cup of (...)* and
then sone after he had a ^de And wha^ne this child was of reasonable age his
fader did do make a cup of gold. And when it was made it lyked him so well
that he let make another and then he went toward saint Nicholas church
and he must pass ouir the sea So when they were in the se the fadre bad the
sone Take up sone water with the cup. and then the child would have
caughte water. the cup fill out of his hand into the sea. and then the
child would have caught the ^uppe again and fill after into the sea and there
was drowned. Then the fader made much sorrow. but yet he went forth with
ye other cup to do his pylgramage And when he ca^me to saint nicolas church
and offered up his cup and set it on the aultre. anoon it was cast from the
altar. and he far it again. and it was cast further. and ye^e the thridde
time he set it again. and then it was cast much fe^^her Then come the
child with that other cup in his hand. and said to all the people that
saint nycholas took him up by the ho^de when he fill into the se and ladde
him sauf out Then was the fader glade and offered up there both the cups
and went home again with great joy and myrthe.

Narracio.
There was a another rich man that by prayer of saint nycholas had a child and
he made a fair chapel in the worship of god and of saint nycholas So it
happened on a day this child was taken with enmyes and ladde into another
strange country and there he was in service at the kings court And as it
happed on saint nycholas day he bethoughte him of the great myrthe and
solempnite that was made that day in his faders chapel at home and he was heavy
and sighed full sore Then the king herd thereof Then said the king
Nicholas what menyst thou to sigh so sore Be merry for thou must needs abide
here with us. and anon there ca^me a great wind and smote the house and
braste it And the child was ^aughte up with the cup that he bare (...) his
hand and was set before the ga^^ of the chapel there as his fader made his
fest Then was there made great joy and mirthe of this miracle Lo thus ye
may see how great compassion that saint Nicholas had of them that were in
mischeef and disease. some books say this child was of Normandye and was taken
with a sowda^ beyond the sea and often he was beten. And ones wha^ne he was
beten on saint nicholas day and put into prison then he wept sore And
with that he fill aslepe. and when he awoke he was in his faders church

De concepcione beat marie virginis.
Good men and wymen such a day ye shall have the Concepcion of our lady.
the which day and feste holy church makes mind and mention of the
conception of our lady for three special causes The first is for her fader
holiness The secounde for her moders godnesse And the third for her meekness
She had a fader that was called Ioachim that was so holy a man that when he
was but xv year of age he departed all his gods in to three parts And one
part he dealed to wydowes and to faderlesse children The secounde part he
gave to pore. and nedy The thridde part he kept to him selue and to his
householde And when he was xxxii. year of age for the great godenesse of anne
he weddyd her And when they were wedded they were to gydder xxii. year In the
which time. anne neuir displeased him with no manner thing another night nor
day For she was so gentle to him and they were both good and holy. yet god
sent them no fruit of their bodies but were barr^yn. wherefore they made a
vow to god that if he would send them a child they would offer it unto him
up to the temple for to serve god both night and day Then on a day as
Ioachim went with his nyghboures to the temple to do his offrynges The
busshop that highte Isachar rebuked him openly before all the people and said
Ioachym it falls not for the that art barrayne and have no fruit to do
offri^ges with other people that god has se^te fruit in Jerusalem Then was
ioachim sore dismayde and astonyed with this rebuke Then he went hoome
weeping and took his shepeherd preuely with his sheep and went forth in to a
far country among monteyns and hills and purposed to have been there all
his life and neuir more to come home to Anne his wife. Than when Ioachim was
gone Anne was sorry and prayed to god and said Lord that me is woo I am barreyne
and I may have no fruit And now more ouir my husbonde is gone away from me.
and I know not whether he is gone Lord have mercy on me Then as she prayed
thus an angel come down and comforted her and said Anne be of good
comfort for thou shall have a child in thyn old age. there was neuir noon
such ne neuir shall be Then was Anne aferd of this angellys words and of the
sight of him and lay always in her prayers as she had be deed: Then went
the same angel to Ioachim and said these words and badde Ioachim take a
lamb and offer it in sacrifice to god and so he did and when he had don so
fro mydday to euensong time he ley on the gro^de in his prayers thanking god
with all his heart Then on the morrow as the angel badde he went homwarde to
anne his wife with his sheep. and when he ca^me nygh home the angel ca^me to
anne and badde her goo to the yate. that was called the golden yate and abide
her husbonde there till he come. Then was she glad and took (...) maydynes
with her and went to the gate. and there she met with Ioachim and said Lord I
thank for I was a wedowe and now I am a wife I was barrayn and now I shall
bear a child I was woe and wepinge. and now I shall be in joy likynge And
soon after anne conceived our lady. and when she was borne she was called
Mary as the angel badde before Thanne after yt she was wenyd she was brought
to the temple and left there among other virgynes to serve god both night and
day Then was she so meke emonge all other virgynes in all her living that
all virgynes called her queen of virgynes So she is mekest of all the saints
that be in heuyn. and most redyest to help all them that call to her in any
need

Narracio.
we read in holy writ a miracle of our lady There was a lords man. yt had
gadred much good of his lords. for he was his (...) gadred and went to bear
it to his loathe Then was there theuys that set for to rob him* by the way
in the wode there as he must needs goo through So when be come into the
wode he bethoughte him yt he had not said our lady saulter as he was wont
to do and he knelyd down and began to say. Then come our lady like a fair
maiden and set a garlonde on his head. and at each Aue maria. she set a rose
in the garlond that was so brighte. that all the wood. shone thereof and when
he had done he kyssed the earth and went his way. Then come the thieves and
took him and ladde him to her master the which had seen all these doings.
Then said to him. what woman was yt that set the garlonde on the head. and he
said sire for sothe I see ne woman ne garlonde then said the master thief.
I wot well thou art a lordys man and have much good with the: But I would
fayn wit what woman that it was that come to the. and why thou knelest down.
And he said wha^ I see you I was aferde. And also I bethoughte me that I had
not said our lady faulter. and kneled down to say it prayng our lady to
help me at my need. Then said he. for her love goo thy way and pray to her
for us And so he went his way sauf. and found by help and socour of our
dear lady. But now ye shall here how this fest was first found: There was a
king in England. that hight wyllyam conqueror. he sent thabbot off Ramsey
to the king of denmark on his message. And when he come in to the sea there
come a tempest and a derkenesse that he and all that were with him wend to
have be drowned. And every man prayed besely unto god and to our lady for
socour and help. And other diverse saints. and this abbot pr^yed to god and
to our lady full devoutly. Then come to them a fair woman and said to them.
if ye will have the concepcio^ of our lady in worship: that is ii. day after
saint nycolas day. she will be ready to help ^ socour you at this time. And
then this abbot said ye with good will. and I wist what should be the service
off of the fest. Then said she the same that is in my Natiuyte. ^au^ torn
the natyuite in to my concepcion and thabbot said it should be done with full
good will. Then anon the te^peste ceased. and all was well. And they sailed
forth. and thabbot did his message and come again sauf and sou^de. and spedde
well in every degree. and when he come home. he told the king this vision the
king made him preche it in all the reame about. And thus it was allowed in all
holy church.

Narracio.
Also we find that there was a seculer chanon. that on a time went over a
water to have do avowtry with a woman. And as he was about to begin to say
our lady ma^yns. and as he was at the Inuytatory. that is Aue maria. There with
the fend cast him down. and drowned him and would have had him to hell.
Then come our lady and said. why have thou take this man: the fend said.
for we find him in our service going to do avowtry. Then said our lady he
was in my service. and anon restored him to life again: And bad him do no more
sin and bad him halow her concepcion. so he did and was a good man ever
after all his life.

Narracio.
Also there was a clerk that every day used to say the service of our lady
Then it happened by counseyll of his friends he should have a wife. and when he
should ben weddyd. he bethoughte him that he had not said our lady service
Then he made all the people to go out of the church while he said his
service And then he knelyd a down and said his service. till he ca^me to an
antem of our lady. Quam pulcra es amica mea Then our lady apperyd unto him
and said. why sayste thou that I am fair and honest why will thou than leave
me and take a another Then said he unto our lady what will thou that I
shall do Then said our lady If thou wylt leave thy flesshly wife and serve my
sone and me I shall be thy spouse and thou shalt have with me a crown of
euirlastinge life in the kingdom of heuyn. the which god and his blessed modre
saint mary and all holy saints of heuyn bring us all the dre now and euir
Amen.

Sequitur sermo breuis. de sancto thoma
Good men and wymen such a day ye shall have saint thomas day he was cristes
appostel and ye shall fast the even and do him worship specially for three
causes The first is for the preuynge of our believe and and for great woundres
in his way. and great miracles in his day This holy appostyll preuyd so our
faith yt he left no trouble For when the discyples said yt our lord was
risen fro death to live And they have seen him and spoke with him Thomas said
he would not believe it till he had pull his hand into his side into the
wound that the spear had made Then viii days after when all the disciples
were to giddre and thomas with them then our lord jesus criste come bodily
to them and said Pay vobis. Peace be with you. and thanne our lord said to
thomas of ynde. Mitte manu^ tua^ in latus men^ Put thy hand into my side in
to the wound that was made with the spear that smote me to the heart. Et noli
esse meredulus And be no lengre out of believe but be steadfast in the faith
Then when Thomas had done so anon he cried and said for great wondre
Dominus meus et deus meus My lord and my god I believe yt thou art very god
and man Then our lord said to him thus. Bti^ qui credideru^t and no^ videru^t
Blessed be they that believe and se not For thou that haste seen thou byleueste
But yet the taryenge of thomas brought us to fadder believe and to the blessinge
of our jesus criste. Of this speaks saint Gregory and says Thomas of ynde
thou haste help more to the faith that would not believe till thou had
felyd his wounds then mary mawdeleyn that did believe. at the first sight.
Minus est enim in maria magdalena que cicius credidit qua^ thomas qui diu
dubitauit. Thus Thomas preuyd our feyth. and believe. that we need neuir to
varye ne to be in doubt. Also thomas did from death to life. and told to the
king. y^ he had seen his pal^yse in paradyse many merueylles and great
wondres. that were in his days.

Narracio.
Hit happed that a king of ynde send his messenger Abbanus indie require^s
artifice^ To seek some crafty men in to the country of caesar to seek a
carpe^ter yt could make him a palace to his plesaunce Then our lord Ihu^
criste met with this Abbanus. and sent with him thomas in to ynde. Also when
thomas and abbanus were passed the sea. they com to a cite there as the kyngis
daughter was wedded the same day. wherefore all manner of people were commanded
to mete. So among al other people. thomas and abbanus come in And were set to
mete. But thomas ete not for his thought was euere off god and had no lust to
ete Then come a boteler to thomas and smote thomas on the cheke. and badde
him ete then said thomas to him: Non hunc surgam donec manus que me percussit
a canibus aufertur. I shall not rise from this place till ye hand yt smote me
be brought with a dog. Then anon after the boteler went after water: and a
lion met with him and slew him and drank his blood and ete of his body. and
then come a black dog and caught that hand that smote thomas. and brought
it in to the hall in the syghte of all the people. and laid it down before
thomas. Then was there a woman that understood thomas words. and anon
^neled dow^ne to thomas: and cried and said tho^ art god. or else one of his
disciples. For right as thou wylt so it is. Then the king prayed to thomas
to bless his daughter and her husband. then thomas was glad thereof. Cepit
ergo predicare beatus Thomas. Therefore the blessed thomas began to preche. and
told them of our lord ihesu crist yt he turned the man that was wedded the
same day from his wyff a none. and made him bishop of the same Cite and his
wyff anon and they were martirs after for crystis sake.

Then went thomas forth in to ynde. to the king to make him a paleys to his
plesaunce. So when Thomas was come to the king. he was glad.

And delivered thomas a great so^me of gold to make a palace with Then rode
the king forth in the mean time. And when thomas should have made this
paleyse. him thought it was better to make a paleyse in heaven than in earth.
and deled his gold among pour people and converted them to the feyth. Then
come the king home and went that his paleyse had be ready And when he herd how
Thomas and abbanus had done. he would have put them to death. But it happed that
his own brother was deed the same time. And therefore he put them both in
to prison in to the time that he had buried his brother. Then as god would
when his brother had lay long deed. he rose that Thomas had made for him and
prayed the king that he might have it. and he would give him as much gold as
he took thomas Then the king took his cou^seyl and said nay I will have it my
self. Let him make the another for his brother had seen the paleyce in paradyse
made with gold and arrayed with precious stones. and clothe of gold. Then the
king took crystendome and many a thousand with him. and when the bishop saw
that the king and so much other people forsook her laws. and turned to
Cristendome they were sore wroth with thomas the one of them said he would
venge his god. and with a spear smote thomas thorugh the body and slew him.
Then Christian people buried him in a tomb of Crystal. And there god wrought
many miracles for him For the hand that was in Crystis side would never come in
to the tomb. but ever lay without: Also in his prechyng and techyng he taught
Duodecim gradus virtutum assignare. Primus est vt in deum crederent qui est
vnus in essencia et trinus in personis Dedit eis triplex exemplum sensibile
quomodo sint in diuidenci a vna tres person. Primum e^ quia vnum est in homine
sapiencia et de vna procedit intellectus. Memoria et in genium memoria est vt
non obliuiscaris intellectum. vt intelligas que ostendi possunt veldoceri.
ingenium e^ vt quod didiceris inuenias. Secundum est quia in vna vinea tria
sunt lignum folium et fructus. Et hec omnia tria sunt vinea. Tercium e^ quia
capud nostrum e^ quatuor sensibus constat. In vno autem capite sunt. Visus.
auditus. Adoratus. et gustus.

Et hec plura sunt et tamen vnum capud.

Secundus gradus est vt baptismum suscipiat.

Tercius gradus est. vt a fornicatione abstineat.

Quartus vt se ab auaricia te^peret.

Quintus vt gula^ distringeret Sextus vt penitencia^ teneret Septius vt in hiis
perseuerare^t. Octauus vt hospitalitatem a marent. Nonus vt voluntate^ dei
requirant: Decimus est vt facienda quererent. Vndecimus vt caritatem amicis et
mimicis impenderent. Duodecimus est vt custodiant ^iis vigilem curam
exhiberent. Item appostolus Omnes qui oderant deu^ de tribus breuiter instruxit
scilicet vt ecclesia^ diligerent. Sacerdotes honorare^t Er assidue ad verbu^
dei co^uenirent.

Also there ben many merueyles and wonderful things done on this day for on
that day all the country comes theder to take pardonoff that hond. that lies

out of the Tomb in their use* the bishop of the cite that goth to mass.
And when he has said Confiteor. then he takes a braunce of vine and puts
it in to thomas hand that is out of the tomb. and then he gooth forth to
mass. and the brenche burgeneth out grapes. and by that time that the gospel
be said the grapes ben ripe. then the bishop takes the grapes and wryngeth
the wine in the chaly^e. and so sings with the same wine and houseleth the
people. And wha^ any man or woman comes that is not worthy to receive this
housell. anon the hand closes to gyder and will not open till he be shryuen:
and then it will open Also if any people be in debate they shall be brought
to thomas tomb. and there the cause shall be rehearsed. then will the hand
torn to him that is in the right. and so they be made at one. Thus thomas
preueth our believe. and did many wo^dres in his days.. Also Johan
gris^stomus says. that Thomas come in to the country there as the three kings
of coleyn were: and thomas cristened them. For they had worship god in his
birth. And therefore Thomas come to them: And taught them the feyth and the
believe of criste. to that believe that we may be saved god bring us all.

De Natiuitate dn^i nostri Ihesu cristi
GOod men and wymmen as ye here and see all holy church makes mind and
mencio^ of the great myrthe and melodye of the blessed birth of our lord
Ihesu criste. very god and man. that was this day borne of his mother mary in
socour off all mankind. but in especyall form causes. First to give peace to
man off good will and to light hem that were derke in sin. And for to draw
v^ with love to him. Then as to the first cause. he was borne to give men
peace of good will I may well preue this for when he was borne angels song
thus. Gloria in excelsis deo. Joy be to god in heaven and peace in earth to
mankind of good will. At mydnyghte our lord was borne. for by kind al thing
was in peace and rest. in showing that he was. and is Princeps pacis. Prince of
peace: and come to make peace bytwyx god and man. and between the angel and man.
and betwyx man and man. And for to be true medyatour bytwyx god and man He
took nature and kind of both. And was both very god and man and by his
mediacion. he knytte the love of god to man. So sadly that the fader of heaven
spared not him that is his own sone. But send him in to this world. to bye
mankind with his precious blood through his great meekness to joy of paradyse.
that man had lost by couetyse of vnbuxsumnesse. Thus he made peace bytwyx god
and man: and man and man. For when angell^s saw her master wroth with man for
his vnbuxsumnesse. For it is a sin that angellis haten greatly Therefore they
kept the gates of paradyse. and would let no soul come in. till they saw
her lord borne of mankind. Then anon for love of our lord thangellis did
mankind worship and spoke goodly to mankind. as to the shepherdes that kepten
her sheep in the country by They badde hem go to the cite of Bethlem. and there
they should find a child borne and laid in a ^ratche. and bad hem do him
worship and so they dyden. and ever syn angellis have been frendely to man and
lowly. and have done reverence to mankind. for thyncarnacion of our lord Ihesu
crist Thus he made peace bitwene angellis and man. Also he made peace between man
and man for against the time that our lord would be borne. he made so great
peace. that in all the world there as kingdoms and countrees were in debate.
and werred each with other. Unto the time of our lordis birth. Then there
was so great peace. that a man that was called Octauian Emperor of Rome and he
had the governance of the world. For all the world was subget to Rome. and it
dured xxx. year in so much that there was a maundement sent out from Rome in
to all the world commaundynge yt all manner of people should goo to the Cite that
he drew lygnage of. and lay a penny upon his head. and so offer it up in
knowleching. that he was subget^^ to the emperor of Rome. Then must Joseph
our ladies husbounde nedis goo to the Cite of bethlem for to offer with other
people. But for he had no money to offer: he took an ox with him to selle at
the Cite to make money to do his dewte with But for he durst not leave our lady
behynd him for she was nigh her time: and therefore he set her upon an ass and
took her with him. And so when they come to the Cite of Bethlem. it was so
full of people. so that Joseph and our lady might have no lodgyng. but turned
in to a cabon that was made bytwyxt two houses. there as the people of the
country set her horses and their asses. and other bestis when they come in
to the town to the marked. and so there they fond a cratche with hey. And
there set thoy and thasse thereto. and so there they tarried all that night And
when it was a lytill before mydnyght. our lady bad Joseph goo in to the town.
and look for her a mydwyf For the time was come she should be delivered. and so
while Joseph was in the town for the mydwyf our lady was delivered. and she
lapped her sone in clothes and laid it in the crache before the axe and thasse.
and anon they knew her lord and fylle down on her knees and worshypped him.
and ete no more of the hey: Then anon after come Joseph with two mydwyfes
zebell and salome: and zebel fond that our lady was clean maiden. and cried
and said. Virgo peperit filium A maiden has borne a child* then salome would
not believe it. But anon went to our Lady and bustously handled our lady.
Probare vellet. And would preue hit and even therwyth her hands dried up.

Then come an angel to her and bad her yt she should goo and touch the
child. and so she did. and anon she was hole. Then went Joseph and did
his offringe with other people and kept our lady in the same cabon while she
was in child bed. Thus ye may understand that criste yeueth peace to all
people that be of good will. and calls them his children. And in verefyeng
of this. the first mass that is song that day. Is song soon after
mydnyghte and begins thus. Dominus dixit ad me filius meus est tu ego hodie
genuite. Our lord says to me thou art my sone Our Lord called him his sone
and his child. that loves him in res^^ and in peace: And when he departs
out of this world he will bring him to everlasting rest and peace And he that
will not have here no rest nor peace. shall goo to everlasting pain* there as
is never rest nor peace. nor never shall be. but everlasting woo. Thus he
gives peace to men of good will. He lyghteneth them that lyketh him. here by
good men. ye shall understand. that christ heled not oonly them that were
blind in the soul and cumbred with derkenesse of sinful living. For as saint
Austyn says. when our lord should be borne the world was full of derkenesse
and specially of sin of lechery. and off the sin against kind. In so much
that he had almost left to have be borne of mankind. wherefore all those
that dyden sin ayenste kind that time they deyed suddenly through out all
the world. in shewinge. how horrible and abhomynable that sin is in the
syghte of almighty god. Then looked they full derke in sin that had their
thoughts all way in sy^^^ and evil living. and had full great need for to be
lyghtened. wherefore crist was borne at mydnighte And turned the derkenesse of
the night in to the day light. and lyghtened all them that ever were
covered. and combred with derkenesse of sin: Also the same time that our
lord was borne as many doctors sayen. Crist apered in a bright ster. to the
kyngis of theft. and bad them goo to bethleem. and worship a little child
that should be king of jews that was there newborn. and so they did. And
ever the sterre showing before them till they come thither. Thus he lyghteneth
them that before were full derke in sin: For these kings were paynyms
before and believed in mawmetry and in falls goddis. And after they byleued in
christ and were holy liuers^ and now ben at Coleyne. Thus the birth of Our
Lord Ihesu christ. made many a man look full bryghte. that to fore were full
derke in sin. For he is full derke in his soul: that ever sets his heart.
mind and thought in the prosperyte worship and welfare of this world. and
that makes them blind that they have no grace of ghostely sight. but be
made blind with wordely couetyse. And so get their good. and have no desire
to the richesse of heaven. ne to see the light that is there. For such things
as mannys heart is most on. that he makes his god. For to distroye all such
mawmetry of sin. Our lord was borne. Then king herod pursued our lord:
and would have slain him Then his (...) in to (...) Joseph and ^^^de thus.
Accipe p^^ium et matrem eius e^ f^^ge in egiptum. Take the child and his modre
and flee into egipte And as soon as he ca^me thydre all the mawme^tes that were
in the land fell down to the ground doing to understand that he was come
in to the world that should cast down. the mawmentry of all manner synn^^ and
evil leuynge Pride couetyse and all manner falsehode that is used now a days
And therefore take heed how ye lord that made all thing of naught and is
lord of al lords where he was borne in a pore place and in a pore arraye and
of a pore maiden gyuyng ensample to all christian people to set naught by the
worship richesse and vanyte of this world* For have a man neuir so great
worship, and neuir so much richesse yet he leuyth it here And shall ber no
more with him but his good dedys Thus our lord showed many things in his
birth And lightnyd many one that here before were full bli^de In tokenyng hereof
the second mass this day is said in the dawning. when the night and the
day departs the which begins thus. Lux fulgebit. That is thus mooche to
say Light shall shine to day upon us For the fadre of heuyn sendythe the
grace of the goostlye light to all christian people that believe truly that o^re
lord was borne very god and man* of his modre mary very modre and may^en Thus
they that believe truly in o^^e lord jesus criste and in his modre mary se^^
f^^^ little by the vanyte of this world. but (...) all their hope and tr^ste in
criste (...) of our lord jesus criste lightnyd many one* that before ^^^^ed
full if Also he drew us to him with love. For children draw to them that
make much on them and play with them Thus our lord Jesus criste was borne a
child the fairest that euir was borne. to draw ma^nys love to him For while a
child is young and without sin he is more amyable and more loving then
whenne he is at mannys age and is paste innocencye with doing Sithen the love
is not only for his beauty but for the clenesse of his soul and also for the
godenesse Each man is bound. for to draw to him and to do him worship as did
Delauyan the Emperor of Rome that pleased somoche his people of his empire of
Rome that they would have worshipped him as for their god But the Emporoure was
wise and wist well yt he was but a man as a another was. and durst not take
that upon him but anoon he sent after Sybyll the sage. and asked her whedyr
should after hi^ any be borne that should be greter tha^ne he Then at mydday
Sybyll looked on the son and there she saw a cyrcle of gold about the sone.
Et in medio circu^^ virgo pulcerima. And in the mids of the circle a fair
maiden and a child in her a^^e with a crown of gold. And when Syble had
showed this to the Emperor she said (...) him* This child shall be greter
than thou art or euir were or euir shall be And therefore do him worship and
reverence Then anoon the emperor took ensence and did worship to him.
and charged all the people to do the same and to call the child their god and
him but a man as other were Thus all christian people may learn to do worship
and ^^ruy^e to this child this day And therefore the thridde mass this day is
said at myddaye in tokenyng that christian people should come and offer in the
worship of this child and his modre and show him servant and subget to him
and knowledge this child for their lord and god And each man should come to
him for love and not for dread And therefore the office of the mass this day
begins thus Puer natus est nobis. A child is borne to us he says and not a
man for all christian people should be bold and not aferde to come to him to have
grace for he is full of grace and ready to give mercy to them that asks it
mekely with due reverence he is euyr ready to give mercy and grace In tokenynge
that same day that criste was borne in Bethlem a well of water in Rome turned
and ran oil all that day showing that the well of grace and mercy was
borne that day yt should give mercy and grace to all them that would come to
him and ask mercy and grace and that ye shall here by ensample.

Narracio.
we read of a woman yt was defoile^ in lechery and almooste fill in despair or
dread for when she bethought hereof the streitnesse of cristes dome and great
peynes of hell that were ordained for such sinners as she. was sore aferde. and
bethoughte her of cristes passion* what love he showed to all christian people she
thought she was unkind to hi^ and he suffered so sore for her And then she
bethoughte her how children be they neuir so wroth and show neuyr so great
vengeance how lightly they will sease and forgive wherefore this woman cried
to criste prayng him for his childehode to forgive her and to have mercy on
her. and anoon she herd a voice on high in the air and said. thy trespass
is forgyuen the

Sequitur breuis sermo / de sancto stephano.
Good men and wymen such a day ye shall have a hye and a holy feast in the
church. of saint stevyn the marter that suffered for gods sake after cristes
ascension Then for to stir your devotion the more to this holy martyr I
will tell you somewhat what that he suffered for cristes sake as the book of
appostels tellith. Post ascensionem domini. etc. After the ascension of our
lord. that he was styed up into heuyn. the appostels labor was all to preche
and to teache the word of god to christian people And for because they were to
few. to serve the people that come. there come so many to torn to the feyth
Therefore they chose vi. holy men and good lyuers. for to help them in gods
service of the which saint Stevyn was one of them And the first and the
wysest. And was so full of grace and might of the holy ghost that he did many
miracles and marvelous among the people But though a man be neuir so holy yet
he shall have enmyes. wherefore of diverse countrees that had en^te to Stevyn
and come ayenste him and disputed with him for to have ouirco^me him with
disputacion And for they might not they brought false wytnes against him and
put him to death But when saint stevyn saw. and knew their malice anon he
thought to sease them by one of these three ways Other by shamynge in
disputacion. or by dread of reuelacion. or by prayer of holy orysones But
first he said by shami^ge in disputacion For when they began to dispute with
him he was full of the holy gooste that they had no power. ne no might for to
gain say him. and so he ouircome them in all their matters. and preuyd all
their matter false that they said ayenste And therefore he said he was ready to
take the death in verifyenge of all that he said And so put them that were great
clerks and knew the law and the prophecy to shame. and velonye But yet they
would not believe but always ayenstode him. But he was so full of the holy
ghooste. that he preuyd that he said by great reason and truth. yet would
they not believe it. for all that the holy gooste spoke in him And yet for all
that would they not believe in their conscience that they did amysse And there
as they saw the co^myte turn to the feithe for words and miracles that god
showed in their syghte. yet they ayenstode him and set gods mir^^^es at
naught by malice and enuyte of their cursed hertes and by none other reason of
scriptur And so they fretyd their hertes within them selue. and gruched with
their teeth for anger and thought how they might ouirco^me him with
disputacion Then they sought if they might have take him. with some word of
cristes death where by they might have made them a cause to have put him to
death Then saint Stevyn knew their malice and lift up his eyn unto heuyn. Et
vidit celos apertos. And saw heuyn opyn. and our lord Jesus criste sittyng on
his faders right hand ready to help him And therewith his face shone as bright
as it had be an angel of heuyn But when they herd him speak then were
they fayn and stopped their cries as though they had herd him speak false
sclaundri^ge words of god And so anoon drew him out of the cite to stone
him to death* as for a disclaundre^ Then they took two young men that could best
cast stones And took of his clothes and laid him at the feet of a yongeman
yt hight saul and after was saint poule when saint. Steuyn saw that he
might not sease their malice by reuelacion showing he turned to devout
orisones praynge. and yet it would not be And then they cast stones at him
and smote out his brain And then he cried to god and said. Domine jesus
suscipe spm^ meu^. O thou lord take my spirit. For he would pray more
devoutly for his ennymes than for him selue. He knelyd down to the ground and
s^yd. Pater ignosce illis quia nesciunt quid faciunt. Fader forgive them for
they wot not what they do. and anoon he slepte in god. Now take heed what
bre^nynge love he had in his heart to god that prayed more devoutly for his
enmyes than for him selue. In this he gave ensample to all christian people. to
be in charity each one with other. and to pray for his enmyes and them yt
pursued him and did him disease. Vi^uersa delca^ cooperit caritas Charity
hydeth every trespass. For he that prays for his enmyes that marries him
with any disease and suffrethe patiently is a martyr before god For there is
three manner of martirdomes The first is by passion and will thereto. by will
without passion. by passion without will. The first is showed by saint
Steuyn. that is set next the birthe of Criste. for he suffered passion and
had will thereto Saint John euangeliste he had will but no passion The
innocents they sufred passion but no will thereto but ayenste will. Thus may a
man. be a martyr though he shed natt his blood. that is when he suffers
great wrong of cursed people and thanketh god thereof. and takes it with good
will and prays for his enemies devoutly in clean charity Now take heed and
ye shall see how thies. three were in parfyte love and charitee. Saint steuyn
when he should dye. he knelyd down and prayed for his enemies Saint Johan
when he went toward his end he said often to them that ladde him. Children
love to gyddre for charity is enough to your salvation The Innocents for they
were so young that they could not speak. yet they showed love by sign For they
did laughe and play with their hondes. when they saw the knights come with
their bright swerdes: to slay them: Then for saint stevyn was so gloriouse
a martyr. god showed many fair miracles for him.

Narracio.
There was an honest man that had seuyn sons and three daughters. But in mysse
hap upon a day. all they wratched the modre at onys And in anger she cursed
them al at ones and anon there fill great vengeance upon them For there
ca^me such a seknesse upon their preuy me^bres that they were so sore gnawen
that they might no where abide for woo. But walked up and down in the
country like mased bestes that all the people that saw them had great pity
on them. Then it hapnyd so. that oone of the bredern that hight poule and a
suster that hight pallida ca^me into the church of saint Steuyn and there they
herd Perle tell how devoutly saint steuyn prayed for his enemies that
martred him anoon they knelyd down and prayed to saint Steuyn to pray to god
for them and they would be his true servants and knelyd down in the church
and prayed saint Steven hertly of his help And anoon they fill a sleep. in
sight of all the people and so were hole. And anon went after all the other
brethren and susterne and they were helped all in the same wise.

Narracio.
A another miracle saint austyne tellith how there was a senatoure of Rome that
went to Jerusalem. and there he made a fair chapel of saint Steuyn and
there he dyed and was buried in the same chapel Then long after. his wife
would home into her country and would feign have had her husbondes bones
with her* into her own country. and prayed the busshop that she might have
them Then the bishop brought saint steuyns bonys. and her husbondes bones to
her and said I know not thy husbondes fro saint steuynes. Then she said I
know my husbo^des bones well enough. and took saint Steuyns bones instead of
her husbondes Then when she come fer in the sea. aungellys song with
great melody in the air and there was a passing sweet sauoure that ca^me out
fro the bones that passed any spicery in the world. And anoon they herd
fendes cry in the air and said. woo. woe. is us for steuyn betyth us and
brennethe us bytterly and therewith raised a great tempest that the shipmen went
for to have be drowned for great fere cried to saint Stephen and anon the
tepeste seized Then the people herd the fendys cry thus Thou cursed prince
or master thou nor we may do no thing for this ship. For steuyn our
adversary is therein Then the prince of fendys send five fendes for to brenne
the ship But then gods angel was ready and drove the fendys in to the
ground of the sea And when they come to the land with the ship fendes
cried and said Gods servant comes that was stonyd to death with Iewys And
then in worship of saint steuyn the people made a church and leyde his
bones therein where god wroghte many a fair miracle for him.

De sco^ Iohanne euangelista.
Good friends such a day ye shall have an hye feste in holy church the
feste of saint John eua^geliste the which was gods own derlynge. Wherefore
all holy church makes mind and mention of the specialtie that our lord gave
to him before any other of his disciples our lord gave him grace to keep his
virginite and of kepinge of his modre. and our lord. showed him his preuyte
He gave him grace to keep his virginite that is maydenhode For this story
tellith and the people have opinyon. When John should wedde Mary mawdeleyn.
crist called him and he come and showed him and John left the worlds vanite
and sued our lord and so kept him self clean maiden till he passed out off
this world. In prayng of this. when dou^ycian the emperor of Rome herd the
people tell that Johan preched in a conteey that was called Asia. And there
Johan made to bylde many chirches. and when the emperor herd yt he sent
after Johan and made him be put in a brazen tonne full of sethinge oil. And
when Johan had long sod^n therein that all the people went that he had be all
to soden and deed. Then the emperor bad open the ton^^ and when the tonne was
open Io^^n come ^ute of the tonne. and as he was clean of all sin. So was he
^le^e of all brennyng or harm in all ^^aityes of his body. Another hard
^^urmente he had on a day. Johan sa^^ a Temple of jews. and was full of
mawmetry And then he prayed ^^ god to dystroye it. and anon therwyth it
fell down to the ground. al to powder. wherefore Aristodimus the bishop of the
temple was so wroth that he put Johan in to prison. Then said johan yet
wylt thou that I shall make the believe in Ihesu crist: Then said Aristodimus.
I will make venim and make two men to drink it before the. And when thou see
hem deed. drink thou there of without harm and than will I believe on thy god
then said johan goo and do as thou say Then ordained the bishop poison.
and set two men out of prison. that were damned. to drink of the poison and
anon they were deed then said johan. if thou gyf me venim to drink I shall
call to my god. And then johan took the poison and blessed it. and drank
there of. And he was never the worse but rather seemed the better and the
fayrrer. For as he was clean from sin. so was he clean from al greuaunce of
the poysou^. yet said the bishop he would not believe unto the time he see
these two men arered from death to lif that were deed Then Johan cast of his
cote and said. Vade et mitte hanc tunica^ super corpora defunctorum. Goo and
lay this cote upon the deed bodies. and say thus. The appostle of Ihesu criste
sent me to you. and bad that ye should arise up in goddis name. And anon they
rose to life again. Then the bishop with many other turned and believe in
ihesu criste. and johan cristened them. And after the bishop was a full holy
man Thus Johan had grace to keep him clean both in body and in soul. And thus
he was a marter to fore god: In wythsto^dyng of sin And also he was the keeper
of the mother of god. For our lord Ihesu saw the great clennes that was in
Johan before all other. when Our Lord should deye: he said to johan. Ecce matter
tua. See thy mother. and betoke johan the keeping of his mother. And our Lord
said to his mother. Ecce filius tuus. See thy sone. And so by took either
other: And when our lord was deed and laid in his tomb. Johan took our lady
home with him in to his house. and kept her till our lord Isu^ christ was risen
from death to lif again And when our lord was styed up into heuyn he kept
our lady in the same chamber while she lived. Thus he had geace of keeping of
gods modre Also he had grace of knowing of cristes preuyte. For this was
first. when our lord satte at his souper. on sherethursday for great love
yt John had unto our lord jesus crist. he leyde his head to cristes breast
And in the same wise as a man leyeth his body down to a well and dryngeth his
body full of water Right so John drank his soul full of gostly wisdom at
cristes breast. and at the same time our lord showed him all his preuyte before
all other And for he was old and would not leave to preche the word of god.
The emperor exiled John him self alone into the isle of Patchemose And there
god showed him the apocalipes of the world and of the day of dome. And as he
saw it he wrote it in great infourmacion of holy church But after when the
Emperor was deed. John was called again to the cite of Ephesee for there he
was busshop and he come thider And there was a wedow that hight Drusiana was
deed and laid on a bear Then John saw much people weep for her and then he
said Drusiana arise up and make me some mete and anon she rose and went forth
as she had risen fro sleep

Narracio.
It happed on a time* there were ii. yongemen by prechinge of John. they sold
all the good that they had and went forth with John For they were rich men
Then on a day as they come to the cite of pargame they that were their
servants a little to fore were well arrayed and were rich men and they were
pore men Then by temptacion of the fend. they forthoughte all their purpose
and were so^ye that they had lost their goods So anoon by reuelacion of god
John knew her purpose and their hertes And said he saw that the fend tempted
you and makes you to forthynke all your purpose* yt ye were in to serve god
But goo ye to the wode and bring either of you a burden of small yerdes: and so
they dy^*

Then through the prayer of I^^n god turnyd the yerdes into gold And then
said John to them thus Now take ye this gold and be as rich as ye were to
fore. and know well that ye have lost the kingdom of heuyn. Then happed it
that there was a man deed the same. time and his modre saw John and anon fyl
down on her knees and prayed him that he would reyse her sone to life as he did
the wedowe. Druciana Then prayed John to god and this deed man rose again to
live. Then said he to him I bydde the tell thies two men what thou haste see^
and what joy was ordained for them* and how they have lost it And then
the man told of the joy of paradise. and of the peynes of purgatory and of
hell how strong. and how horrible. they were. And how glorious the place
was ordained for them And

how sorry their good angels were. for they had lost ye glorious bliss of
heaven: and how much joy the fendes made of the tournynge of them. And then
the same men were sorry and cried to Johan. and prayed him to pray to god for
hem. and wept sore. and Johan saw hem weep he praid to god for hem. And gave
hem penance. And when he had done so. anon the gold turned in to yerdis
again. and after they were holy men.

Narracio.
Another holy reuelacion Johan had showed by the preuyte of god. It happed on a
day he saw a child. that was ^^ke to have be a man: wherefore Ioha^ brought him
to a bishop. and bad him keep the child and teache him. For in time ^^^yng. he
shall be a man. and so this ^^sshop kept him. And when he come (...) mannis
state he gave him al to fo^^ and fell in company of thieves. And in a while
after. he was a master thef and the leder of them. Then by reuelacion of
god. Johan knew all this well enough. and come to the bishop. and asks him
where this child was. and the bishop told him. than Ioha^ blamed him and said
that he had mysgouerned the child. then Johan was old and might not well goo.
he took an horse and rode the^e as the thieves were. and when the thief saw
Johan. Anon he fled a way. then Johan rode after hym^ and cried and said.
Quid fugis o fili mi / My sone why fleest thou thy fader. abide my dear sone
and speak with me thy fader that is old. and may not well goo and then at
the last this man abode. then Johan preched so that he left his folly. and
after was so holy a man that he was a bishop Thus had Johan reuelacion of
goddis preuyte.

Narracio.
It is wreten in the life of saint Edward the confessor that lies at west
mynster. ye saint Johan the euaagelist appeared to saint Edward as he went a
procession at the halowyng of a church. saint Johan appeared to him in lykenes
of a palmer. and prayed the king of good for saint ioha^nis love the
evangelist. for the king loved saint Johan well. but it happed that the king
had no thing ready there. but as he took a ring of his finger and gave him.
and so saint Johan had the ryng vii. years after and then saint johan
appeared to two knights yt were beyond the sea toward Iherusalem and asked
them how the king fared. and bad great him well on this token. and took him the
ring and ask the king for whose love he gave the ryng a way: and bid him
make him ready. For he shall deye soon and so he did.

Narracio.
A another fair reuelacion. he had when he was cx. winter old and vii then
our lord come to him with his disciples and said thus. Veni dilecte mi quia
tempus e^ vt in mea mensa cum fratribus tuis epularis. Come well-beloved derlinge
for now is it time yt thou come and ete with thy bredern at my board or in my
feste: Then Johan rose up anon and would have gone forth with him. then
said our lord to him up on so^day Thou shall be with me. then by so^day he
was passing feeble. Die dominica conuenit ad iohannem vniuersa multitudo populi.
So on the sunday. there come to Johan a great multitude of people. and then
Johan made hem to lead him to the church. and as he might speak he said to hem
yt led hem thus. In fide sitis stabiles et in man datis dei feruentes Be ye
stable and sad in the feyth. and fervent in the commaundementis off god.
Then said one of them why say ye thus often to us. Then said he. if ye
love to gyder. and be in parfyghte charity. and sted fast in the feythe it is
ynought. to salvation. and therefore be ye stable in the feyth and fervent in
the commandments of god. And then he commanded to make him a grave be
fore the altar. And when it was made he went in to it. and then come such
a light about him a great while. that no man might see him: And when this
light was gone. the grave was full of manna. and welled up. as does sonde in
the water And thus he departed out of this world in to the bliss of heaven.
that never shall have end. To that bliss bring us all to he that deyed on
the rode tree for all mankind. Amen.

Sanctorum Innocencium.
GOod frendis such a day is called Innocents day some people call it
childermas day for children were slain that day for cristis sake. they be
called innocents that is to say without sin. for they did no sin. for
god is ever gretely grieved with sin. and in especyal with proud people.
against her neyghbour^ doing hem wrong: These innocents did never sin ne
consentyng to sin: wherefore I may well say that they lived here without
shame. and deyed without blame. and were crystened in her own blood at home
and some in her moders arms Holy church as this day sings and redeth in
the worship of these innocents for they were with in two year of age. And
therefore they were not ashamed of her own sha^^ For they were not defowled
with no manner spotte of sin but the sin that they had of the drawte of kind
of our fader adam and eve. For adam ^ eve ware in the same wise in paradyse in
the state of innocen^y. For they were naked. but they were not a shamed of her
shappe all the while they were without sin but when they had sinned they saw
her own shappe and were a shamed thereof. and covered her shap with leuys of
fygge tree: Right so when sin begins to take ^o^e in a child. then
innocence goth away fro him. for he knows good from ^^le. and ylle from good.
and leueth the good and does the evil. Then he synneth and then he is not
innocente no longer. For then greueth he god. But these children lived not
so long to know that one from that other but were sleyne within age of
innocence. wherefore they lived her life without shame and blame. For king
herod the king of jews made to slay hem without gift. For wha^ the three
kings come to king herod and said to him. Vbi e^ qui natus e^ rex iudeorum
where is he that is borne king of jews. and bad him tell them. for they were
come to worship him far out the est. Then was king herod foul astonyed
of her wordis. and asked his clerkis where this child should be borne. and
they said in bethelem jude. And then king herod told hem so and bad hem
goo thider and worship him: and come again by me that I may goo and worship him
also. and so the kyngis went thither and worshypped christ. and when they had
done her offryngis to christ: Per aliam viam reuersi sunt i^ regionem suam. By
another way they turned home again. For the angel bad hem do so in her sleep.
Then was king herod wonder wroth. And anon ordained to sle crist. and
when he had made all ready thereto. it happed so that the Emperor of rome sent
after him for to come to him in all the have that he might. For two of his
own sons had accused him to the emperor of treson

Then herod left all his purpose of crist. as at that time. and rode to
rome. and had the better of his sons. And come home again with more worship
than he had tofore But yet always he thought to sle Criste. lest crist had come
to mannis estate. and would have put him out of his kingdom: Then sent he
anon and bad hem slay of the children that were in bethelem and in all the
country about. that were with in two years of age. and that were born the
same day and so they did. For king herod was going and coming. and so
taryeng two years. and therefore he made sle all that ever were within two year
of age: And for he was so vengable. in party it fell on him self. For a child
of his own was slain among other the same time. But there come an angel to
Joseph. and said to him. Accipe puerum et matrem eius et fuge in egiptum. Take
the child and his mother and flee in to egypt. and be there and so he did.
Thus innocents were slain without blame. and they were not shamed off their
own shappe. and they were cristened at home in their own blood. and not in no
font. Therefore ye shall understand that there is three manner off crystenyng.
One is in water. as we be cristened in the font. A another is as these children
were cristened in her own blod. and a thousand marters moo that shed her blood
for crystis sake. The third crystenynge is in the feyth In the which all
patriarchs and prophets and other holy faders. that were before the
Incarnacion of our lord Ihesu Christ that byleued verily in the coming of
cryst^ they were crystened in the feyth. Thus ye may see what enmyte the
tyrant king herod had to shede so many childerns blood for cristis sake.
that trespassed not to him nor to none other. There wept many a mode^ for
their he had to Thomas And also to se^ the arraye and also the Reuy^^ yt was
in Thomas householde* for there spoke so much people worship by Thomas And
for more truer and also bettre love that then was bitwene the king and
Thomas. while it last. was neuir bitwene two men wherefore I put this
ensample It happened that it fill in a cold winter as the king and Thomas come
ryding to gydder in chepe side at London The king was ware of a pour man that
was well nere naked and had no clothes and was sore a cold. Then said the
king to Thomas It were a great alms deed. to give to this poor man better
clothes Sir said Thomas of such ye should take heed Then had thomas a
cloak of good scarlett. and well furred with rich furre Then the king laid
hand on his cloak And would have pulled it from Thomas for to have give to this
poor man But Thomas held it fast And thus they wrastled long In somoche that
they were like. to fall to the ground But at the last by favor thomas suffered
the king. to take his cloak of. And then the king cast it. to the poor man
And badde him run away fast and sell it and bye him other And if thou
besette it well. thou maiste fare the bettre. euir while thou leuyst Then
Thomas faynyd him selue wroth. But in his heart he was well pleased that his
robe was so well besette Then the people marueiled gretely first what was
bitwene the king thomas. when they saw what it menyd the people were glade and
had great spotte thereof. This I say to show you ensample how well they louyd
to giddre Thus thomas served the king manfully Also we must learn of our old
patron saint Thomas to serve god devoutly. For he served god full deuotly. for
as soon as he was made Arshcbisshop of counterbury anon he turnyd his living
into bettre living. and thought to serve the king of heuyn as well os he had
the king of this world before Then anon he laid away scarlet and rich
furs And weryd clothe of myddell price and cast away silk and sandyll and
weryd ^ere next his body that was right hard and a breche of the same in
which was so much vermyn that it was an horrible sight to see. but this knew
but few people Also every wenesday and friday he made his confessoure to beat
him with a rod upon the ba^e body like as a child is beat in the scole Also
he wassed every day three pore mennys feet knelinge on the ground And then he
gave each of them four pen^ And also much more penance he used in prayenge
and waking that were to much to tell at this time Then when thomas was in
the Abbey of Pountnaye upon a day when he had said mass he knelyd down before
the altar in his prayers Then the abot of the same place. had to speak
with him And stood under a pylar and abode Thomas. and he saw how our lord
Jesus crist appeared to thomas and told him how he should be slain in
Counterbury in his own church for his sake And bad him be steadfast and hold
as he began Then come thomas out of his chapel. and anon the abbot fy^^ down
to the ground and said. S^re ye may bless the time and the our that euir ye
were borne. and also blessed might she be that euir did bear you for to have
such a visitacion as I have herd you have. Then said Thomas I charge the
that thou neuir tell it to no man while I am a live. no more he did. But w^^^ne
thomas was deed he told it openly to all the people

Thus I may well say that thomas served god devoutly. Also he dyed for the law
of holy church mekly. For when he saw the king ^gyn to make laws to
^uirsette holy church and such laws as would have distroyed the land Then
thomas put him selue forth. And repreuyd the king of his misdedys Then was
the king wroth and made a parlemente at northampton And for he would not set
his scall to the cursed laws that the king and his sorry counseyll had
ordained and made Anon they called him a traitoure to the king and exiled him
out of the land: Then thomas went the to king of France for socour and
help. and full goodly and mekely he received him and all his clerks. and
f^nde them almost seuyn years. all that they bihouyd Then great disease and
greuaunce Thomas had of the king of England and al he suffered mekely.
Then by treatise: and counseyll of the Pope. and of the king of France.
there was maade a faynte love day bitwene the king and thomas. But when the
king should have kyssed thomas. he would not For he said he had made his
oath he would neuir kiss him. But badde him go home to his church boldly
Then by counseyll of the king of France. and bidding of the pope Thomas
come home to Caunterbury. Then were there four cursed knights of living
that thought to have a great thank of the king and made their avowe to gyddre
to slay thomas And so on childermasse day almooste all the night they went
to come to Caunterbury And come in to thomas hall. Sire Raynolde Beriston Sir
William Tracy Sir Richard Breton. and sir Hugh morley Tthenne Sir Raynolde
Beriston for he was best of kind anon he said to thomas The king that is
beyond the sea sent us to the. and badde that thou should assoyle the
busshoppe. that thou cursedyste Then said thomas They be not accursed by me
but by the pope. and I may not assoyle yt. he has accursed. well said
Raynolde. then we se thou wylt not do the kings byddinge and swore a great
oath By the eyn of god thou shall be deed Then cried the other knights Slay.
slay. And they went down to the court and armyd them tThen prestes and
clerks drew them to the church to thomas and spared the doors to them But
when thomas herd the knights armed. and would come into the church and
might not he went to the door and vnbaryd it and took one of the knights by
the hand and said It besemeth not to make a castle of holy church and took
them by the hondes and said. Come in my children in gods name Then for it
was derke that they might not se nor know Thomas they said. where is the
tratoure Nay said thomas. no traitoure but arsshebissop. Then one said
Flee for thou art deed Then said Thomas I come not to flee butt to abide
Ego pro deo mori paratus su^. et pro defensione iusticie / et ecclesie
liberate. I am ready to dye for the love of god and for the right of holy
church Then Raynolde with his sword point put of thomas cappe and smote at
his head and cut of his crown that it henge bye like a disshe Then smote
another at him and smote it all of. then fill he down to the ground on his
knees. and elbowes and said God in to thy hondes I put my cause and the
right of holy church and so dyed. the^the thridde knight smote and half his
stroke fill upon his clerks arm that held thomas cross before him and so
the sword fill down to the ground. and brake of the point and he said go we
hens he is deed And whenne they were at the door going out. Roberte Broke
went again and set his foot to Thomas neck and thruste out the brain upon
the pauemente Thus for the right of holy church and the law of the land
thomas took his death.

Then how this martyrdom: was known in Jerusalem* ye shall here There was
an abbey of Monks in the which that same day and (...) me time that thomas
dyed. A monk lay at the death Then for he was a good holy man of living
his abbote badde him If it were not to gods displeasure when he were deed
he should come again and tell him how he ferde. and so when he was deed he
ca^me again and told his abbot wha^ he dyed an angel brought him before god.
and as he stood there* he saw a bisshoppe come with a great come any of
aungellys and other saints. And he stood before god at his judgment and his
head dropped down of blood of wounds that he had Then said our lord to
him* thus it besemy^h a man to come to his lords court. And anon our lord
set a crown on his head and said thus to him Asmoche as I have give to
Petyr and Poule so much joy I grant the. and the monk said Hereby I know
well. yt this is the gretest busshop in England* and is slain for gods sake
And we^e ^e well that I goo to euirlastinge bl^s^e This told the Patryarke of
Jerusalem sone after that thomas dyede* there ca^me into England after people
to fight again the hethen men.

Narracio.
Also there was a bird yt was taught to speak and could say saint thomas as
she herd other pilgrymes speak much of saint thomas And it hapnyd on a time
this bird satt without his cage and there ca^me a sparhawke. and would have
slain him. and anon the bird cried on saint Thomas help. anoon the sparhauke
fell down deed Then saint thomas of his great gra^e and godenesse herd the
bird and wist not what she meant Much more he would have herd a christian man
or a christian woman yt cried hertly to him for help and socoure.

Narracio.
Also we read. there was a man that thomas loved passinge well in his live And
it fill so that this man fell* seek on a tym and come to saint thomas ^ombe
praynge him of socoure and help. and anon he was hole But after. ^e
bethoughte him yt his sickness was encreasinge to his souls health and so
went again prayenge thomas that if it were more mede to his soul to be seek
than hole that he might be seek again so he was and thanked god and seint thomas
Then when the king herd how god wroughte so many miracles for saint Thomas he
went to Caunterbury barefote and wolwarde and almoost naked save a feeble cote
to bind his body in going in the fe^ne and in the lake as he had been a poor man in this land prayenge to saint Thomas of forgyuenesse of his trespass.
and at the tomb he made all the couente to give disciplyne by and by on his
bare body with a rod. And there he dampened all sorry customs and false laws
yt was cause of the debate bitwene Thomas and the king before and granted the
church her fredome again and went his way

Then these four knyghte^ when they herd how god had wroughte for Thomas
they were full sorry. of their cursed deeds. and cursed the tym that euir it
hapnyd so with them and left all their lands and went to Jerusalem into the
holy land to were on gods enemies But william Tracy was let by the way
and fill seek and roted all his body In somoche that him selue with his own
hondes. cast away his own flesh lomp mele and so died an horrible death And
the other three also dyed a pytous death sone after And thus within three years
after Thomas death they dyed all four But as long as they lived they cried
euir mercy to god and to saint thomas and so I hope they had.

De circumcisione domini.
Good friends such a day is called neweyeres day and is the first day of
the beginning of the new year that is cu^myng and is the last day of the
year that is gone And therefore this day ye shall come to god and holy church
to here your divine. service for this year For like as a god^ servant yt
has a good master mak^th his couenaunte but ones but holds forth from yer
to year having full trust in his master. that he woll for his good service gyf
him agode reward in his great need at his last end In the same wise gods
servants maken couenaunte with him but ones. that is at the cristenynge at
the font and there he makes couenaunte to be gods servant having full
trust in god. yt at his great need that is at the day of dome will quyte him
for his service. in euirlastinge bliss of heuyn And so will he do to all that
be good true servants Thus this day is called new years day Also it is
called. Circumcisio domini. The circumcision of our lord Alsoo this day is
called Neweyeres day for this day is the first day of the Cale^der and the
year gooth much by the calender. therefore it is called neweyeres day Saint
Austyn says this day. and this night hethen people use many false opyniones
and witch craft and false believe the which been not to tell emo^ge christian
people lest they turn to that use. wherefore ye that been christian people. be well
ware lest ye be disceyued by any false sorcery as by taking cou^: seyll of a
man a fore a another In byenge or sellinge or lenynge In the which have some
diverse opyniones And if they be well shreuyn they be worthy for to have great
penance for their mysbeleue for that comes of the fend and not of god This
day is called the circumcision of our lord For as holy church tellith this
day he was circumcised and bledde his blood for our sake For when the flesh
was cut he bledde fast and was full sore. for he was but young and tender and
but viii days old and therefore he bled the more Then ye shall understand
that he bledde v: times for us. Quinque enim vicibus sanguinem suum pro nobis
effudit. The first time that he shed his blood was as this day when he was
circumcised A another was for fere of his passion For right as a child wepyth
for fere when he sees the rod and has no harm So the flesh of our
lord sweet blood for dread of astro^ger passion that was coming The thryd
time was in his flagellacion when he was beten with scourges* so that all
his body ran on read blood The iiii. time was when he was nailed ho^de and
foot on the crose The v. time was when that longius perryd his heart with a
spear. the water and the blood come out of his wounds. and then they took up
the cross with the body and lift it up on hye and suddenly they let the
cross fall down in the mortar se that all the senouse veins and io(...)tes
brake. and blood. and water. come out of every wound. this he suffered for us
Then sith criste was circumcised and shed his blood for us that was
without sin and circumcision is for sin remedy and help why would he be
circumcysed that did no sin. Sanctus augustinud dicit propteer quatuor causas
Saint Austyn says it was for four causes The first was for to make a sethe
with the iewys For else they would and might have said that he had natt been
of their law. wherefore they would not resceyue him nor consent to his techinge
this was to desceyue the fend For right as the fend disceyued Adam and eve and
so all mankind was dampened. so it fell to crist to desceyue the fend where
through all mankind might. be sauyd Than when the fend saw yt he was
circumcised as an other child, child. for if he had know him verily that he
had come to have boughte man kind. he would never have tysed the jews to have
put him to death. And this was the cause that our lady was wedded to Joseph for
to dysceyue the fend. for the fend should wene yt Joseph had been his fader.
and not conceived of the holy ghost. The third cause why he was circumcysed.
that was in confermynge of the old law in great comfort to the old faders
that were of the old testament. For and if he had be cristened and not
circumcysed it had be a great discomforte to all that were before th^^carnaciou^
of our lord Ihesu criste: The fourth cause of his circumcysion was for our
lord wyste well that there would come heretykes after. that would have said
that Criste ^ad a body of the erthly fantasye. and not of flesh and blood as
one of us have for a body of thayre may not blede And therefore to put away all
such errors. Crist was circuncysed and bled in his cuttynge of his flesh
the which flesh was cut from his membre. And an angel after broghte it to
king Charles for the most precious relyke in the world And for the gretteste
worship that he could do thereto brought it to rome. to a church that is
called: Sancta sanctorum. For these iiii. causes Crist was cercu^cysed. This
day also it is called the vtas of the natiuyte. yt is the viii day of our
lordis birthe in great tokenynge to all us that be goddis servants to think
on thise viii. days that folowe^ the birth. The first day is to thynk
inwardely on the sede that we were conceived of that is foul and abomynable in
it self* that a man or a woman be they never so fair that. and they saw the
matter. they would be ashamed of hem self to think that ever he were conceived
of that soul thing. The second. day is to think how grievous he peyneth his
mother in his birth in so much that it is a great miracle of god that she may
have her life. The third day is to think how feeble and how wretched he is
borne for all the bestes of kind. some what they ca^ help them self save
oonly mankind he another may ne can help him selff in no degree. but deye
anon. But he had not help and socour of other. The iiii. day is to b^thynk
how much parell and dread he lives here fore in every place death folowth
hymand is ever ready to fall on him. what time ne where no man knows. But
oonly god him self.

Incertus e^ locus in quo mors te expectat. It is incerteyn the place there as
death abides the. The v day. is for to think. how horrible death is: when he
comes for in short space and time he makes a man to stynke. that all the
best friends that he has: ben auysed to put him in earth And hyde him there:
The vi day is to think how rue full is the departing of the body and the
soul that may not be departed till the heart in the body break for dread off
the syghtes yt the saul shall see that for great fere the heart breketh O mors
quam amara est memoria tua O thou death how byttre is it to think upon. when
thou art coming to any man The vii. is to think how dredefull. is the dome
that he shall go to anoon. and how straight his judgment shall be Then he
that will think on these vii. days besily on the viii. day I hope he shall be
circumcised. that is he shall be cut away fro the lust of his flesh and of
sin. and so do depart from this worldis likynge And thus comes the viii.
day that is the vtas of christ. that is the joy of bliss that neuir shall
have end To the which god bring. us all.

In die Epiphanie.
Good friends this day is called the xii. day. but it is xiii. day of
cristes birth the which day holy church calls it Epiphania domini that is to
say the showing of our lord Jesus criste very god and man For this day he was
showed very god and man by three offringes. by his cristnyng and also by
tornynge of the water into wine The xiii. day of his birthe by offringe of the
three kings. and that same day xxx. winter and xiii. days after his birth He
was cristned in the water of flome Iordane. And that same day xii. monthe he
turned water into wine at the weddinge at Chane galilee But the feste makes
most mind and mention of the iii. kings offryng and therefore let us follow
the form. of holy church. and ye shall here how it fill of their offringe
to our lord jesus criste very god and man Thus iii. kings were of the lignage
that prophesied how a sterre should shine of Jacob But they were no jews
kind. but they had herd by prophecy of this. wherefore they had great
desire and lust to see it And so often times wha^ne they might come to giddre
upon certain high hills then they would dispute emonge them of this
sterre. So it happened upon cristemasse night the same time as our lord was
borne they were to gyddre and were disputyng of this sterre. Super montem. Upon
the hill Dominus enim erat natus Our lord was borne E^ apperuit illis And
apperyd to them in the sterre as a fair child. and under his head a br^k^^^*
cross of gold. and said thus to them Goo ye anoon in all the haste that ye
may into the land of Jury and take with you gold myrre and ensence and offer
these three things to him yt ye shall find there now borne king of jews. very
god and man And I shall be your gyde and led you to the way: Then anoon for
great haste they took best^^. that been called Dromedaries that been of such
kind. they be so swyfte. that they will ten further in one day tha^ne any
other be will ten or go in three days And so they ca^me to Jerusalem that
was the chief cite of all Jury hoping that they should here there some
tydinges where that this child was borne But as soon as they turnyd into the
cite of Jerusalem then they lost the sight of the sterre that lad the^^

euyr the way till that they come thither bryghter than the son then when
they com to the cite of iherus^le^ they rode to king Herod. for he was there
the same time: and said to he^ Vbi e^ qui natus e^ rex iudeoru^

where is he that is borne that is king of jews. Vidimus enim stellam eius in
orient. we saw his sterre in the Este. Venimus adorare eum. we be come to
worship him. Then king herod was troubled. and all the cite with him but
more for flaterynge of him. then for any love that they had to him Then
king Herod asked his clerkis where this child should be borne. and they said
in bethelem ^nde then king herod asked the kingis preuely of the sterre. and
bad hem goo in Bethelem. and worship the child* and come again by him. and
tell him where he might find the child that he might goo worship him.
Then when the kyngis were passed toward Bethelem. anon the sterre apered
to them And when they saw the sterre was come again they were glad in their
hertes. and as it is in many place painted. the king that is in the myddel for
great joy of the sterre. he looked bacwarde to his fellow behind him. and with
his finger showed him the sterre and yt is the cause yt the middel king looked
bacward And thus the sterre brought them to bethelem. and when the sterre come
over the house there as Our Lord was in it stood still. Then the kings
lighted down. and went in to the house. and with all the reverence that they
could. knelynge ^ down and offird each of the^ thise iii. things: Aurum thus
et mirram. Gold cence and my^^e. knowlechyng by the gold. that he was king
of all kings. And by the (...) that he was very god and by the myrre yt he wa^
very man. and should be deed and laid in grave without rotynge. For gold is
cheef of al mettallis. Encence is bre^te in holy church. in worship to god.
Myrre is an oyneme^te. that keeps the bodies from rotynge. Thus when the
kyngis had done their offrynge by techinge of the angel. Per aliam viam
reuersi sunt i^ regionem suam. By another way they went toward their own
londis. And left king he rode. and the sterre vanysshed away fro them.
Then as syant Bernard says. Joseph kept of this gold as much as him neded
to his tribute that he should pay to the emperor. And also more to keep our
lady with. while she lay in child bed^ And the remenaunt he deled to pour
people such as had great need thereto. The cence he burnt to put away the
stenche of the stable there as she lay in. and with the myrre. Our lady
anointed her child to keep him from worms and disease. But what befell of the
kyngis after. I find no thing in certain but some people have an oppynyon. how
ye saint thomas of Inde cristened them when he come in to that country of
Inde. And then as the sterre lyghtened them to crystis birth. So the holy

ghost lyghtened them in their soul and ^aught them the parfyghte way of the
believe. And also of parfyghte. and gracious lyuinge. In so much that they
left all their kingedom and went forth on pylgr^mages. that is to say. to
Iherusal^m. and to many other places. And so they come forth to Myllayne. and
there they deyed all three. And so after that they were translated to Coleyne.
and there they ben. yet now have ye herd by these three kings. How Our Lord
Ihesu Criste was this day showed verey god and man. wherefore like as they
offered with devotion. So should ye do your offrynges when ye come to holy
church. knelynge down with all reverence that ye can or may not on your one
knee. as to a temporal lord. but on both your knees. And do worship him with
good prayers. Then offer ye precious gold. For there is no gold so
precious. as is the good prayer devout. And then hold up your hondes to him
with all the reverence that ye can and with a devout heart pray to him. and
show him all the love of your hertes. And then offer ye to him ensence. For
there is no ensence savor yt is so sweet brennyng in the fire. as does good
prayers that is deuoutely said^ with a brennyng love in clean charity. And if
thou do thus. then thou offrest knelyng on thy knees. Make a cross on
therthe and kiss it and think well thou art but etthe. then must ye offer
myrre. For right as myrre keeps a body from rotyng. so the mind of death
keeps a mannis soul from dedely sin in this wise do ye your off^n^^e And
then shall ye have as much mede as had these three kings Also he was showed
both god and man at his cristenyng. For he come to the water of flom Jordan.
he went in to the water and hallowed it: for right as he was circumcised to
conferme the new law: and for no need that he had thereto. For he was clean
without sin but for to make the sacrament. that sho^^^ wasshe them. to^^
crystenynge in his name fro all sins. Then was Johan ^aptist ready and much
people with him that come to the cristnynge. Then said Johan to our lord all
quakyng and trembling blessed lord thou art goddis lamb without sin: thou
have no need to be cristened of me. But that I am a man gotten and bourne in
sin have need to come and be cristened of the in remissyon of sins. Then
said our lord Ihesu. Johan suffer at this time. For thus we must fulfill all
rightwysnesse. and Johan cristened our lord (...) Criste and as it is credyble.
our Lady was cristened after with other of cristis diciples and all the people
that were come thither: Then when all were cristened our lord went out of
the water. And as he went out of the brinke of the water and all the people
with him. Aperti sunt celi. Heaven opened and a great light ^^^lipped him in
sight of all the people. The holy ghost come down in liknesse of a white dove.
and lighted on cristis head. And the fader spoke and said thu^ in herynge of
all the people: Hic est filius meus dilectus in quo michi been complacui. This
is my well-beloved sone the which pleyseth me. This was to teache al christian
people the feyth of the believe of holy church. for all christian people be bound
to believe stedfastli. in the fader and the sone and the holy gooste. In
baptismo cristi tota trinitas se mai^festauit. scilicz pater in voce filius in
carne spiritus sa^ctus in columba et totum celu^ apertum est. In crystis
baptism. all the holy trinite was showed for the fader spak in voice. when ^e
said.

Hic est filius meus dilectus. This is my well-beloved sone: and was there
bodily. when Johan baptist said Ecce agnus dei. And the holy ghost was seen.
Sicut columba. As a white dove. These ben iii. persons in one godhede. For the
fader spoke above. and the sone was there bodily. and the holy gooste in
liknesse of a dove. ye shall believe that these three persons be but one god in
trinyte. This believe ye shall know on the water brinke. that is in your
crystenyng at the fo^te. wherefore he that byleueth thus. and does werkis of
believe shall be saved. Qui crediderit et baptisatus fuerit saluus erit. He that
byleueth. and is cristened shall be saved and follows the werkis of believe Qui
vero non crediderit condempnabitur. And he that byleueth not nor does not the
works of believe shall be dampened The works of believe ben meekness and
charity. for with out these ii. shall no man be saved. And he that has these
ii. he is wrete^ in the gen^logye of our lord Ihesu crist. the which i^ red in
cristmasse. that begins above with abraham. and so comes dounwardes to
Joseph and to our lady: In showing that he that is most mekest in heart is
most next our lord Ihesu christ. and such he auaunseth in everlasting
bliss. And therefore the genelogye this night begins at Ihesu christ. and
goth vpwardes to abraham and so to god. Also he was showed very god in
trynite. when he turned water into wine at the wedding It happed so the
people lacked wine at the mete. Then bad our lord that they should take vi.
stenes or pottes that were empty and bad fylle them with water. and they did
so Then our lord blessed them. and bad that they should bear them to hi^ yt
began the table. and let him begin. and then he began and said it was the
best wine that ever he drank. Thus our lord showed him self both god and man
God that he turned water in to wine. and man in that he ete and drank with
them. This miracle he showed at the weddyng. in tokenynge that he blessed all
weddyngis: that be done after the law of holy church. and therefore keep your
wedloke. and be in full feythe and believe of holy church. as holy church
techeth. And so ye shall come to everlasting bliss Amen. De conuerco^e sci^
Pauli. ^^tte a may^e (...) sone (...) the may^e anoon by kind. he will ^all
down and lay his he^^ in her lap and then all his might and strenghte is
gone And then they come and take him. Thus he says saint poule was first
so fers in him self that they durst not preche there as he was ne speak to hi^
for dread* when our lord jesus criste showed him sweetness of his grace, and
this fair maiden that is the law of holy church. a none Poule fell down to
the ground and was subgett to all christian people. Herfore holy church was glad
of his defending He is set also in high ensample of high mendinge for our
lord is so gracious that all christian proplee. may be sauyd. that will forsake
his mysse living and he converted. Multo magis gaudiuz erit in celo de vno
peccatore penitenciam agente quam de nonaginta nouem qui non indigent
penitencia et cetera. There is more joy in heuyn upon one sinner doing
penance then upon xcix that did neuir sin. and therefore our lord would
that all were con^^^ted and saved wherefore in high ensample and comfort to all
sinful people. he s^tte saint poule to look upon. For though a man had do
neuir so much sin and he would forsake his sin and sin no more. Then
all the company of heuyn makes myrthe and melodye of his conversion. as we do
here in earth of the conversion of saint Poule But there is much people that
love more sin with lust and (...) in this world than they do god: For
there be many that will neuir leave syn another for love of god nor for the
desire of the bless of heuyn nor for fere of the fend nor for deed of the
peynes of hell But some say that god will never lose that he has boughte so
dear. with his passion But they that say so ben not wise. god will that noon
were lost. but be ware thou lose not thy selue For all the while thou love
more sin than god and had leuy^ to serve the fend than god thou art
cause of thyn own dampnacion For while thou haste more will to serve the fe^de
and be his child than gods child thou lesest ^hy self and god has ordained
fendes to turment them in euirlastinge pain But saint Gregory says they that
shall be dampened begin her penance here in this world in party and after
their death contynueth for euir more. wherefore I tell you this ensample.

Narracio.
There was a man that was an officer with a lord and stood a cursed And on a
time as he rode toward a manner of his lords he fell out of his mind and
vnbrid^led his horse. and led him in to a manner of his lords. and then
anoon the bailyf perceived how it was with this man that he was distraughte
out of his mind And anoon made the people to bind him* to a post in a berne
So when the baylyf and his servants had souped he had one of his
servants go love how that this man did. And he wen^^ to this man. and when
he come there he saw three great black dogs pluckynge away this mannys
flesh fro the bones Then was this servant so aferde that uneath he had
his mind but went to his bed and lay seek there long after. And on the
morrow when the people come thidre as this man was bound they found no more
of this man but his bare bones and all his flesh was clean away Thus ye may
see he that contynually lives. in sin may be full sure of a foull end And
though his end seem fair in the sight of a man. yet it is right foull in the
sight of almighty god. and all his aungellys: wherefore it is nedful to every
christian man and woman to amend him while he is here. into this life and has
time and space to amendmente And he that does so shall come to saint Poule
and be there with him in euirlasting bliss. to the which god bring us that
dyed for us and all mankind. Amen

Sequitur de purificatione beat marie virginis.
Good freundes such a day ye shall have candelmasse day. that day makes
mind and mention of our lady and of her sone. and specially in three things
of our ladies purification In simeones metynge And in candelles offering This
day is called the Purification of our lady In english it is the clensynge of
our lady. but for no need that she had thereto For she was enclensed with the
wirkinge of the bodily gooste. in conceyuyng of her sone. But there was in her
no^ manner spotte of fylthe But for ye day was the xl day from the birth of
her sone and was called in the jews law the day of the Purificacion. not only*
for our lady but for all other wym^^ wherefore we call it the purification of
our lady The law of the jews was such that wha^ne that a woman was
delivered of a man child she was h^^den unclean vii: days after Then the
law gave her leave to go to her husbo^de But yet she was unclean xxxiii days.
but till xliiii. days were fulfilled she should hold her without the church
with her offrynge And the offrynge in those days was of a rich man a la^be.
and for a poor man was a pair of tu^tyll doves or else other doves and so
offered our lady with her son. and if a woman be deliueryd of a maiden child
she should double all those same days aforseyd. that is for to say. the
coming to her husbonde. and also the coming to the temple. and so this is
the reason thereof For it is so that all great clerks say that it is vii.
days after when a woman has conceived a manchylde or that the same sede
turn into blood And it is also xxxiii. days after or it turn to any shap of
men And then god sendith life into it and if it be a maiden child it doubleth
all the days both in tournynge into blood and also in shappe of body and this
is the cause Eve that was the first four myd woman that euir wrathed our
lord more than the man Adam Therefore she is the longer in fourmynge. Thus for
flesshely complexion of a man and woman she is unclean in her selue Therefore
this Purification is ordained But understand well yt our lady had no nedde
to this clensynge For ^he conceived not with complexio^ of man but only of the
holy ghost. so that she was clean of all manner of filthe touching consent of
man But yet she went to the temple as other wyme^ did specially for foute
causes The first was to fulfill scripture that says thus Guanto mayor es
tanto te humiles The higher that thou art in degree: the mekar thou sholdest
make the Thus did our lady. for she wist well that she was modre to gods
son of heuyn and had so great worship passinge all other wymen. yet she
made. her as the pourest woman that was in the company The secounde cause was
as she fulfilled the law of circumcision of her sone In the same wise she
fulfilled the Purification and in offri^ge of her sone in the temple doing for
him as other pore wymen did for their children The thridde cause was. for to
stop the jews mouths lest they had said that she had not done the law.
and so cast a great sclaunder against her in time coming The fourth cause was
to give ensample to all other wymen: that they should come to church. after
the birthe of their children. and thank god that he had sauyd them from
death in their trauaylinge. for in ye tym a woman is in great peril of death
for there is no sickness in the world. that gooth so nygh death For th^se
causes holy church makes mind of our ladies purification It makes mind
also of the coming of Symeon and Anne Simeon ille senex dum vixerat etas
comperatur anne. This Symeon was a passing old man but he had prayed to god
bes^ly all his life that he should neuir dye. till ^e had seen criste bodily
in this world* and so he did. and this anne prayed ye same Also ye shall
understand yt this anne was not our ladies modre but a another anne that had
a husbond vii. years. and when her husbonde was deed she would not be weddyd
no more but lived till she was lxxx. year old and served god in the temple
night and day and prayed that she might se god or she dyed and our lord
granted her Then when our lady came into the temple with her sone. the holy
ghost warned symeon and anne And (...). they with much joy went against him
and brought him into the temple. Et simeon accepit eu^ in vlnas suas et dixit.
And simeon took him in his arms with all the reverence that he could and
might and said. Nunc dimittis seruum tuu^ domine secundum verbum tuum in pace
^ et cetera. O thou lord now suffer thy seruau^te after thy word in peace And
so with all the worship and reverence yt he could he louyd and thanked him yt
he would let him live so long to see him bodilye with his eyes where in mind
of this. when a woman comes to church. of a child she abides at the
church door till the priest come and cast holy water on her and takes her in
by the hond into the church gyuyng her leave after to come to church and to go
to her husbo^d For and if they have comenyd to gyddre before they must both
shryue hem thereof and take their penance Also holy church makes mind of
candelles offrynge And as ye see it is a comen use for all christian people that
be of convenient age to come that day to church and bear a candell brennyng
in procession as though they went bodily with our lady But now ye shall here
^owe this worshipful feste was first found. Sometime when the Romans by
great might and royal power conqueryd all the world. for they had great
dominacion they were so proud that they forgate their god. and made them
diverse gods after their own lust And so among oll they had a god that
they called. Mars yt had be to fore a notable knight in battle And so they
prayed to him for help And for they would speed the better of this knight the
people prayed and did great worship. to his modre that was called Februa. after
the which woman much people have opunyon that this month is called february.
wherefore the secounde day of this month is Candelmasse day The Romans this
night would go about the cite of Rome with torches and candelles brennynge in
worship of this wom^n Februa for hope to have the more help and socour of her
sone mara Then was there a pope that was called Sergius and when he saw
criste^ people draw to this false mawmetry. and vnt^ue bileue He thought to
vnoo this foul use and custom and turn it into gods worship and our
ladies And gave commandment that all christian people should come to church
and offer up a candell brennynge. in worship that they did to this woman
februa and do worship to our lady and to her son our lord jesus criste So
that now this feast is solempnely hallowed through all cristendome. And each
christian man and woman of couenable age to come to church and offer up their
candell. as though they were bodily with our lady hopyng for this reverence
and worship that they do to our lady. to have a great reward in heuyn. and
of her sone our lord Jesus criste and so they may be sure. and it be done in
clean life and with good devotion A candell is made of weke and wexe So was
cristes soul. hyd within the manhood Also the fire. betokens the godhode
Also it betokens our lady: moderhode and maydenhode. light with the fire
of love Also it betokenyth. every christian man and woman that does good dedys
with good intent and parfyte love and charity to god and to all christian people.
wherefore if there be any of you that his ca^dell of charity be que^chyd. goo
anoon and be accorded. with his neighbors and light his candel. And then
offer it up for that is gods will And if ye do not thus ye shall lose all your
mede and your merit in heaven.

Narracio.
we read in the life of saint Dunstone how that his modre. when she was with
child with him: She come to the church upon candelmasse day And when all
the people had goon on pro^ession with their candelles brenninge and come
into the church every man and woman with his light in his hand Suddenly all
the ca^dellys in the church went out And a great derkenesse come therewith
that uneath one might see another And when they had stand so long full
sore agaste There come a fair light from heuyn And lighted the candell that
saint Dunstones. modre had in her hondes and then of her all other took
light In tokninge that he was in her body that should tempte many mennys
charity that before were queynte.

Narracio.
Also there was a woman that was devout in our ladies service and many times
for our ladies sake and love that she had to her she gave awey all her best
clothes and went into the worste her selue. So it hapnyd on a candelmasse
day she would feign have gone to church but for she was not honestly arrayed
she durst not for shame. for she had done away all her best clothing
Then was she sorry yt she should be without mass that day wherefore she went
into a chamber that was nygh her place and there she was in her prayers and as
she prayed she fell a sleep and then she thought she was in a fair church
and saw a great company of maidens coming to the church. And one was
passing al other much fair and went to fore with a crown on her head and she
knelyd down and all the other by her Then come there one with a great
burden of candellys and first he gave the maiden a candel that had the
crown on her head and so after all the other maidens yt were in the church
and then he came to th^s woman and gave her a candell Then was she glade and
then she saw a priest and ii. dekynes with ii. serges b^^menge in their hondes
going toward the altar ready to goo to mass. and as she thought criste was
the priest. and the ii. dekyns was Laurence and (...) that bare the serges. and
ii. young men began the mass with a solemn note Then when the gospel was
red the queen of heuyn offered her candell first of all to the priest and then
al other after her. and when all had offered the preeste abode after this woman
to come and offer her candell Then the queen sent after her and badde she
should come. the priest abides her and the messanger bad^ her come and she
said nay she would not leave her ca^del but keep it for a great devotion Then
sent the queen a another messangre and bad him say to her that she was
vncurt^ys for to tarry the priest so long and said. but she come with good will
and offer it take it fro her. and she said nay Then would the messenger have
take it fro her but she held it fast and so bitwixt them two the serge brake
in the mids. and the oon half the messanger had and the other half the
woman had with her. and in this wras^ling the woman awak of her sleep and
had half the serge in her hond And then she thanked god and our lady hertly
that she was not without a gospel that day and offered that candell to holy
church. Et pro maximus reliquiis reseruatur / And for a great relyke it was
kept euyr after.

Narracio
Also there was a woman of evil living and she did neuir good deed in her life
but only found a candel bre^nynge before our lady So it happened when she was
deed. fendes come to her and took her soul. and when they were going there
ca^me ii. angels. and rebuked the fendes why they were so bold for to take
the soul without the dome Then said they there nedith noon she did neuir
good Then said they take and bring the soull before our lady and so they
did But wha^ it was found that she did neuir good deed she must needs go to
hell Then said our lady she fond a candell bre^nyng before me. and was euir
her will while she lived. and therefore I will be as kind ^o her as she was to
me and bad an angel take a great serge and ligh it and set it before her in
hell. and our lady charged and commanded yt there should no fend come there
nygh Butt let it stand brennynge for euirmore to comfort all that been in
hell Then said the fende^ they had leuyr le^e. the soul than do so Then
bad our lady take the soul and bear it to the body again. so they did And when
she was alive she bethought her on her strayte dome there as she was at. and
went and shroue her to a priest and lived long after and she amendyd her live
and was euir after a good woman and a holy Amen.

De sancto mathia apostolo.
Good friends such a day. ye shall have saint Mathies day that is gods
appostyll which has noon even in certain. But as clerks say all christian
people owe to fast the even though it be not set vigell in the Calendre. ye
shall understand when our lord was in earth he chose xii. appostels to here
and to see all that he did here in earth For jews were so hard to him and
against him that they would believe no thing that he did And also for they should
bear witness after his asce^sion of that he did in earth For the Jews would
bileue no manner thing but that might be preuyd by wytnes The^ was judas scariot
one of the xii. that crist had chosen to him Judas had a little tofore
slain his own fader. and lay by his modre. and then come to criste to be his
disciple. But he was euir wont tofore to stele and could not leave it and he was
weary anon of crist. of his holy living. and for great couetyse of money he
sold his lord unto the Jews for xxx. plates. and when he had so done and
saw that criste was take and demyd to death anoon he fell in to despair. and
went and henge him self with a rope for the throat that spoke the words of
treason and gyle. the same throat was strangled For he that did so soul by his
lords life would have said many an evil word after his lords death by him
that did so foull by his life And for the fend might not draw out his soul
by his mouth for he had late kyssed the mouth of christ Therefore the fend
brake his womb and shed out his guts and then they took his soul and
bare it to hell But our lord is so rightful and gracious that he will every
good deed reward and every sin punysshe. and that ye shall here by this
ensample:

Narracio.
we find that saint Brandan as he sailed in the sea he saw this Judas sit
upon a stone and a clothe hangyng before him that lay in the water and often
beat him in the face Then Bra^dan we nyd it had be some holy man yt had
suffered that for great penance and asked in the name of god what he was. Then
aunsweryd he and said I am Judas gods traytoure that haf this place of gods
great grace and curteysye for it refressheth me of the great hete that I suffer
within me and for no merit that euir I did deserve For me thinks that I am
in paradise while that I am here Then said brendan. why haste thou that
stone under the. and why does that beat the in the face The^ said he I laid
this stone. in a high way there as the common people should go and they were
efyd thereby. and yt is the cause;e yt I am eased thereby now This clothe was not
mine own yt does me this refresshing now but and it had be my o^ne it should
have refresshed more for I gave it to a poor man Then said branda^ how long
have thou this refresshing then said he every saturday fro euynso^ge till
euynsong on the morrow yt euynsong be done and fro cristmas day till xii day and
fro Ester day till wytsondaye and in thassu^pcion of our lady and ca^delmas day
Then bra^dan thanked god yt he is so merciful. and anon he bad sail fo^^^e
fast yt they were gone for they should here tydinges sone after. and even
therw^the come out of an hill many fe^des and casted many bre^nyng glemes of
fire in to the sea after them yt the se bret on every side. but god kept them
so yt they had no harm Then for this Judas was one of the xii. appostels the
no^b^e of the^ must be fulfilled then was criste ^^yed up to heuyn and the xi.
appostels were to gider with many other people in a place Then said petyr. Now
al good man ^ brethern it is well know to you yt judas was one of the xii. and
because the no^bre may not be i^parfite it is need. to chose one of thies ii:
men yt has be with our lord Jesus criste fro the time yt he was baptized unto
his ascension to bear witness with us of his doing Then they set thies ii. men
Joseph barsabas and mathy and cast lot on them and said praynge our lord O
lord thou know the hertes of all men show to us which thou chosest of
thies ii. and the lot fill on mathy and so he was in nombre with the other xi.
Then mathy w^t into myrre to preche the word of god: and for he had the
grace of the holy ghost he did miracles and turnyd much people to the feith of
criste Then was the fend sorry and appeared to the busshop of the jews law. in
likeness of a young child with long here is and hoar and bad him take mathy and
do him to the death or else he will turn all the people to the christian faith.
Then the busshop wexed nygh wode for wrake and sent forth people to seek mathy
and wha^ they had him they bond his hondes behind him and cast a rope about
his neck and lad him to prison and there bond him fast with chy^nes of iron
Then the night after our lord jesus criste come to (...) with a great light
and losed his bo^^^ and when he had well co^for^yd him ^pned the prison door
and bad him pre^^e the faith and spare for no man The^ (...) as he preached
were some yt with^^te him* and let other yt would have ^yd to the faith.
then said mathy to (...) I tell you before he shall fall down to hel^y^ and so
anoon in sight of al men ther^^ ^opned and he sanke down. into hell body and
soul and was neuir seen more of him Then was the people fore aghast of that sight
and turned to the feith a great nombre of them Then when the bishop herd
thereof they took him and bond him and set men to throw stones. at him And
when he was nygh deed he bad christian people to bear the stones yt he was stonyd
with into the grave with him in witness of his martyrdom and held up his
hondes to god and said O lord I beseech the take my spirit and gave up the
ghost. Raynolde of chestre in his chronicles tellith another miracle like this
and says. when saint wolstone visited his busshopriche. the people brought a
man before him that did his neighbors much disease and would neuyr be in peace
praynge the busshop. to chastise him. and when the busshop hade preached. to
this man he was euir le^gre the worse Then the busshop and all the people prayed
to saint mathye to show some miracle by this man what he was worthy to have
Then anoon in sight of all the people there came out of the earth ii. fendes
with brennynge hokes and plucked this quycke man down to hell And when he was
gone the people were releuyd and had rest and peace euyr after Amen

De annunciacione beat marie virginis.
Good friends such a day ye shall have an high and a solemn feste in holy
church thannu^ciacion of our lady and he yt has auowed or joined in penance
must fast the even ye shall understand yt it is called thannu^ciacion for
this cause For the fad of heuyn sent his angel gabriel Missus est angelus
gabriel / a deo in ciuitate^ cui nomen Nazaret. In the cite that was called
Nazareth to our lady that was new weded by the bidding of god. and
reuelacion of the holy ghooste to a man called Iosephe And as she was in her
chamber. in her prayers the angel gabriell come to her and said Our lord is
with the Then was she greatly astonyed of this gretynge For there was in ye
country a man yt coud much wichcraft and so with help of fendes he made him
self ly^ an angel. and came to diverse maidens. and said he was sent from god
to them on his message and so often times lay by hem and did hem great
vylonye. then wha^ our lady herd tell of that man she was a drad lest it
had be he For she had spoke with no angel before. nor there were no such
words ne such gretinges made never none to her before Then gabriell the
angel comforted her and said. Ne timeas maria inuenisti graciam apud dn^m.
Dread not mary forsooth thou have found grace at our lord For among all the
wymen our lord has chosen the for to be mother of his sone. And him thou shall
co^ceyue by feyth. and by love of the holy ghost. without any deed of man yt
shall shadow the. and quench al flesshely lust. and tend the light of goostely
love that thou shall co^ceyue the sone of the high god. And thus thou shall be
mother and maid. and so was never none before. Then anon our lady herd
thise words. and anon therwyth come a spirituel sweetness and joy in her
heart that anon or any erthely man cowde tell it. and so with all the
reverence of meekness that she cowde. She answerde thus again and said. Ecce
ancilla domini fiat michi secundum verbum tuum Lo here goddis own maid ready to
goddis will prayng it may be to me right as thou say. Thus yt blissed body
conceived our lord Ihesu christ in everlasting joy to all the world. Thus I ma
eye lyke^ our lady to a precious stone called onyx. and it is as clear as any
cristall and shall of kind when the son shyneth hot on him. he opens and
receives a drop of the dew of heaven in to him. and closed again till ix.
months after. and then it opens and falls out a stone of the same
kind. and so closes again as ever it was* and never opens after. Thus our
lady was as clean as any cristal for the hot love of the holy ghost: at the ix
monethis end she was delivered of her sone our lord Ihesu criste: and was
after as clean maiden. as she was to fore. Then when the angel had done h^s
message. he went his way to heaven* And our lady went to her cosyn elysabeth
that was great with ch^ld with Saint Johan baptist. And when she come to
Elysabeth. she great her m^kely. And as soon as our lady spoke to Elysabeth. the
child in elysabethis womb pleyde and made great joy. For he saw that our
lord had take mankind and was come to save hem yt was lorn Then our lady
dwelled there with Elysabeth her cosyn till the time that saint Johan was
borne. and was mydwyfe to Elysabeth and took saint Johan from therthe. and there
she learned all that her neded for to know against the time that her sone should
be borne. And was parfyte enough thereof. Then mekely she took her leave and
went home again to Nazareth Then thought Joseph he would go look how his wife
did. and went toward her And when our Lady herd of his coming she went
against him and great him full mekely. But wha^ Joseph saw her great with
child. he merueyled gretely. how that might be For well he wyste it was not
his. for he had never part of her body in that degree. For he knew well that
she had made a vow before that she would never have part of mannys body. And
thought how that he was made to wedde her by the bidding of the holy gooste
and great miracle showing and thought right in his heart he was not worthy to
dwell in her company: and thought in his heart to have gone home again and to
leave her there Then come an angel to him and said. be not aferde to take
mary thy wife to thy keeping. for it is of the holy gooste that is quycke in her
body. For thou shall be kepar and norissher to her child and wha^ it is borne.
call it Ihesus. For he shall be savior to all the world. Then ye shall
understand that for iiii. causes. As saint Ambrosius says. Our lady was
wedded to this old man Joseph. The first was if she had conceived without
wedlock. the jews would have said. that she had be an evil woman of her
body: and so have stoned her to death. The second cause was for she was so
shame fast. that and she had herd any have put any defam to her. she would
have deyed for sorrow The third cause was. for Joseph should bear witness of
her maydenhode The fourth cause. for Joseph should help her at her birth. and
bring her to Bethelem. and after in to Egypt and so again in to her own
country. For thise four causes she was wedded to this old man Joseph. and
also to begyle the fend that he should not know him fro another child. Now
have ye herd of the Annunciacio^. There be some people that ask a question
why there stondeth a wine pot with lilyes between our Lady and gabriell the
angel at her salutacion. This is the cause. For our Lady at her salutacion
conceived by feyth.

Narracio.
It befell thus upon a cristmas day that a Christian man and a Jew satte to
gyder. and spoke of the Concepcion of our lady. and as they were there stood a
wine pot to fore them with a lilie therein. Then said the christian man. we
believe that our lady conceived like as this lylye conceived color of grene.
and after brengeth forth a white flower without craft of man or any peyryng to
the stalk. Right so our lady conceived of the holy gooste. and after brought
her sone our lord Ihesu Christ without any wemme of her body. That is flour
and cheef of all wymmen. Then said the jew. wha^ I see a lylye spring out
of the deed stalk that stands in this pot. then will I believe that thou
say to be true. And anon there with sprange a white lyly out of the deed
stock. that stood in that same wine pot And wha^ the jew saw that. anon he
fell down to the ground upon his knees and said thus. Lady now I see well
that thou conceived with the holy ghost our lord Ihesu criste goddis sone of
heaven And thou were clean maiden both before the birth. and so anon he was
cristened. and so after he was a full holy man: And this is the cause wherefore
yt the pot with the lily is set between our lady and the angel. For right as
the jew disputed with the Christian man of the manner of the Concepcion. So our
lady disputed with the angel of the manner how she should conceive. and be both
mother and maid or she consented thereto Then ye that will fast the v. euens
of our lady. in the worship of the v. joys that she had of her sone. The first
when she conceived of the holy gooste and knew that she was mother to goddis
sone of heaven. The ii. was on cristmasse day. when she was delivered of her
sone without any pain of her body. For as she conceived without lust of her
body also she was delivered without pain of her body. The iii. joy was on
ester day when her sone rose from death to life. and come to her and kyssed her
and made her more ioyefull of his vprysing. than she was sorry off his death The
iiii. joy when he styed up to heu^n on holy thursday in the same flesh and
blood that he took in her body. The v. joy was in her assumpcio^ wha^ she saw
her sone come with great multitude of angelis and saints to fette her to
heaven. and to crown her queen of heaven and emperes of hell and lady of the
world and so all that ben in heaven. shall do her reverence and worship. And all that ben in earth shall do her service. These ben the v. joys yt our lady had
of her sone and ye shall understand yt he yt will great our lady with v. Aues
shall never come in to the peynes of hell.

Narracio.
we find wreten of an holy mayde^ that was denoute in our ladies service. and
every day greted her with v. joys: Then it happed so on a day. that she
fell seek. and felt her self well that she should be deed. and for fere she
sighed wonder sore. and made great moan. for by cause she wyft not wheder she
should goo after her death. Then come our lady to her and said why art thou
so sorry that have made me so glad gretynge me with joys yt I had of my sone
therefore be not sorry but know mell that thou shall go with me in to everlasting
bliss. and joy with out end Amen.

Narracio.
we find of saint Gylberte that on a time he was nigh deed of the quyn^^ and
when his throat was so great and well nigh deed that he might not take breath our
lady come to him and said to him Gylbert my servant it were evil do that thy
throat should suffer penance. that has so often time gladed me with joys. and
anon she took her fair pappe and mylked on his throat and went her way. and
anon therewith he was hole and thanked our lady ever after.

De sancto Georgeo martire
^Ood friends such a day ye shall have saint Georges day The holy marter. It
is wreten in (...) ^^fe that there was an horrible dragon beside a cite that
was called C^^^e. of the which dragon men of the Cite were sore aferde. in so
much that by counseyll of the king every day they gave him a child and a
sheep to ete. For fere lest he would have come in to the Cite. Then when all
the children and the sheep were nigh ete. for by cause yt the king him self gave
the^ the counseyll. they constreyned him that he had but a daughter to give her
to the dragon. Then the king for fere of the people with weeping and great
sorrow making. delivered hem his child. and sent her forth to the place.
^^ere as they were wont to set her own children. and a sheep with her to abide
till the dragon come: But than by the ordinance of god. saint George come
tydyng that way. And when he saw this damoysell in her array him thought she
was a woman of great birth. and asked her why she stood therre with ye sheep
in such array so morning. Then answered she and said gentle knight well
may I morn and make sorrow for I am a kings daughter of this Cite and now I
am set here to be devoured of a dragon that has ete all the children of this
Cite and be now dystroyed. and now he must have me. For my fader gaf hem
counseyll thereto. and therefore gentle knight ride hense fast and save thy
self leest the dragon sle both the and me. Then said George. damoysell that
were great shame and vylonye to me. that am a knight well arrayed: And should
fle. and thou a woman and sholdest abide. Then with yt the dragon put out
his head at an hole and spytted fire. and proferd battle to george. and he
made a sign of the cross before him and set the spear in the rest. and with
great might bare down the dragon to the grounde^ And then he bad the
damoysell bind this dragon with her gyrdell about the neck. And led it with
her in to the Cite. and so the dragon followed after her as it had be a hand
maid to bow paciently^ But when the people of the Cite saw the dragon come.
they fled for fere away Then George called the people again and said to
them. be not aferde. For and ye will belyue in Criste and take criste^dom I
will save and sle this dragon and deliver you of your enemy then were they so
glad that anon xx. thousand men without wymen and children were cristened.
And the king and the queen were first of all with al his household. And then
George slew the dragon. and bad the people tie oxen to him and draw it out of
the Cite that the favor of it did the people no harm. Then George bad the
king edefye chirches in every corner of his land and be lusty to goddis
service. and to honor and worship all the people of holy church. and ever have
co^passyon and be sorry for them that be pour or in any disease. Then when
George had done thus and had turned all the land to christian feyth he herd of
an Emperor that hight Dyoclesian. how he did many craste^ men to death then
he went to him and rebuked him of his cursed (...)

Then the emperor commanded to put George anon in to prison. and to lay
him vpryght. and to lay a mylstone upon his breest to press him to death.
Then George prayed to god for help. and Our lady kept him yt he had no
harm in no part of his body* and when the Emperor herd thereof. he did make
two wheles. and put hem full of hokes. and George was set in the mids
between them And then the wheles were turned and so to raze his flesh fro
the bones. And when George was in this tou^ment. anon he prayed to god off
socour and help anon he was help And then they put him in to a hot
limekylle and closed him there in. For he should have be burnt. but our lord
turned it to cold and there he was iii days. And then they went to have
found him burnt. and he was sauff fro all manner harms and was merry Then he
was brought forth and set before the Emperor. and George repre^ed him of his false goddis. and said to him. they were but fendes without might and power.
Then the Emperor made to beat his mouth with stones till he was to powned.
and made to beat his bare body with dry besomes till the flesh fill from the
bones. and the people might see his guts. yet after they made him drink
venym that was made strong for the nones. for to have payned him to death. And
when George had made a sign of the cross he drank the poison without greeff.
In so much that the man that made the poison turned to christian feyth and
anon he was done to death. Then the night after as George was in prison. god
come to him and said. George be of good comfort. to morrow thou shall make an
end and come to everlasting joy and bliss. And set a crown on his head*
and gaff him his blessing. Then on the morrow for he would not do worship
to the false goddis. The emperor made to smite of his head. And then as the
emperor would have gone to his ^^lays. there come a fire lyghtenyng. and burnt
him and all his people. we find in a story of Antioche written* yt beside
^herusalem a fair young knight appeared to a pressed. and said. I ^m saint
George. and a leder of Crys^en people. and commanded the pressed that he should
bear with him his relykes* and come with him to the sege of Iherusalem. But
when they come to the walls* the hethen people therein were so strong. that the
christian durst not come to the walls* then come saint george clothed in
white and made a cross on his breast. and went up the ladder and bad the
christian people come after him. And so with the help of saint george they gate
the cite of Iherusalem: And slew all the hethen people that were found there.
And therefore let us pray to saint George to help us against our gostly enmy.
now and ever Amen.

De sa^cto marco eua^gelista.
GOod friends such a day ye shall have saint ^arke^ day that was one of the
four euangelistis that wrote cristis gospel and preched them to the people.
Then mark was first an hethen man. And after he was crystened of saint peter
and he made him to go and preche to the people goddis word. And then for he
was so holy a man. the people would have had him to be a priest. But he was so
meke in him self. that he made one of his thombes to be cut of For he thought
he was not worthy to be a priest. but for god would have it foo. Saint peter
with great instaunce made him take thordre of presthode upon him. Then was he
besy both day and night to preche the word of god And all that he said with
word. He confermed it with good ensample. and with doing of great miracle.
Thus by the inspiracion of the holy ghost. he went in to the cite of
Alisaunder. for to torn the people to the feyth Then wha^ he come to the
cite uneath that he was entered in the Cite his shoo brast and thereby he wyft
well that he should be deed. Then he saw a man sytte and clout shone to pour
people. and mark prayed him to mende his shoo. Then for this man was pour.
him thought it was alms to help him at yt time. And took his shoo and
began to sewe. and anon with his nalle he hurt his hand and what for ache
and for great pain he said god help and wha^ mark herd that he called to
god anon mark prayed to god for him. And then mark spytted on the earth and
blyssed it and anointed his ho^de therwyth and said. In nomine patris Ihesu
cristi filii dei viui sanctur manus tu^* In the name of the fader Ihesu christ
the sone of the quycke god thy hand be hol. Vocabatur autem homo ille ananias.
Forsooth that man was called ananya And when ananya saw such virtue in mark.
he prayed him to dwell still with him. Comoratusque ibidem duobus annis. And
there he dwelled two years. and cristened him and al his household. and
afterward for great holiness that mark saw in this man he made him
arshebysshop: Then the people saw how mark preched in the cite. they took
him and teyed a rope about his neck And drew him among stones: till the
flesh fell to the earth and said. draw we the bugull to the bugull place.
So when he was draw nigh to the death. then they put him in to prison till
on the morrow. Then the same night Christ come to him in to prison and
said. Pea^ be to the mark mine euangelyste. be not aghast for I am with the.
Then on the morrow they come and fett him out of prison. And drew him till
he was deed. And when he should dye he said. In manus tuas. And so gave up
the gooste. And afterward they would bre^^e his body. And then there came
such an earth quake with a lightening and thonderyng yt there durst no man
abide Then in the night christian people come and took markis body and beryed
it. Then fell it so that every christian lord hallowed saint markis day save
one country that is called appolonya the which country was so grieved with
hete and droughte that all the countrei failed them of fruit. so that they
were well nigh famysshed. And there come a voys from heaven. and bad them halowe
saint markis day. and then they should be comforted. and they deed so. and
anon god sent hem plente of all manner of fruits enough. Now it is to wit why
we should fast this day. and goo in procession. we read in the cite of rome
on this day fell such a qualme and a soden death that when a man yaned or
gaped or f^esed anon he deyed. and there deyed many suddenly. Then was there
a pope that was called pellagius that commanded all christian people that when he
yaned every man should make a Cross over his mouth. And when any man herd
another f^ese. he should say crist help the. and so many were saned and there
he made the people goo a procession and so prayed to all the saints of heaven
to pray to god for them. and so they did. Then come after saint gregori
and made them do the same on saint markis day to halowe and fast and goo in
procession. and canonysed it to be done for ever more. Then come there a pope
that was called Liberius. in his time all manner fruits in time of the year of
great tenderness of it self. took great harm. so what by thonder lightenyng
and unkind hetes. by storms myldewes. by worms. and by long taylde flies.
for great vengeance yt anon after ester day. the people iourned again to her
old sin having no reward of the sacrament which they have received.
thrfore god sent more vengeance this time tha^ in any other time of the year.
wherefore this holy pope to put away all these things. and in especyall goddis
wreche fro the people he commanded to all christian people to halowe and to fast
and goo in procession. and he that said yt it is made by a constytucion is
acursed till he come to amendment. And therefore I charge you and counseyll you
all that think to be saved keep this day after the rule of the holy church.

In die Philippi et Iacobi.
^Ood friends such a day ye shall have the fest of Philip and Jacob the
which were holy appostles. But for this f^st comes wythen the fest of ester
ye shall not fast the (...) But ye shall come to the church and worship god
and the holy appostles. Then ye shall know well that philippe was ordained
by all other appostles to go in to the country that was called Sytha to preche
to the vnbyleued people. But when he came theder. and preched ayenste the
ma^^mentes. that they were fendes and no goddis and so they took him and
ladde him to her temple and would have co^streyned him to do sacrefyce. Then
as they

were besy to do him disease. suddenly a great dragon come out of the earth.
and slew three of these mysbyleued people and venemed the people so with his
brethyng. that there fell on hem such a sykenesse. that the woo and the
sorrow yt they had. they cried after help. Then said philipe to hem. if ye
would be helped and heled of your sickness. and also these men rered from death
to life. first cast down the mametes. and set in their stead crosses there as
our lord deyed upon. And do it worship. then they did so for they were glad
to be helped off her sikenesse. and as soon as they had do so they were
helped. And then philyppe prayed to god for these three men to reyse from death
to life. Tunc precepit philippus dracom vt in locum suum redescenderet Then
phylyppe commanded the dragon to goo down to his place aye^ and never disease
man more.

Then the cursed people of the cite saw that phylyp would have turned all
the people took him. and did him upon a cross. And so on a cross he deyed.
and went to everlasting bliss.

Now shall ye here of Jacob that was called among the appostles Iacobus minor.
The less James. for to knew from Iacobus mayor. James the more was saint
Johan evangelist brother. But when Iacobus or James that is all one name. This
was called cristis own brother. for he was so much like to crist. then
when the jews would have take criste. they co^de not know (...) another: But as
judas betrayed (...) with kissing of him. and by ye kissing

Christ was known and taken. This James was so holy fro the time that he was
borne. that aslonge as he lived he never drank wine ale ne syder. nor no
manner of drink that might make a man drunk ne never ete flesh ne his head
was never shaven. ne used never to be baumed with oil. as the manner is of the
country for hete of the son Nor he ware never lynen clothe. And he lay upon
his knees prayeng for the people. that his knees were so thyk yt they were
bollen out like a camel. This was the first man that ever song mass in
vestymentis as prestes do now Then it fell so that time in the Cite of
Iherusalem by the deed off cristis death. that it must nedis be distroyed.
wherefore this holy man James was made bishop of the Cite of Iherusalem and
there he was left to preche and to turn the people to better living but for
they were so combred with sin. that they had none other grace of amendment
but nedys for the prophecye of Crist must be fulfilled and the Cite distroyed.
wherefore these men took saint James and set him to preche the feyth of Christ.
For much of the people were turned to christ. And he stood up and preched by
good reyson: how all that byleued not in criste should be damned at the day off
dome in to hell pytte. Then the master of the (...) cast him down from
the (...) yt he stood in and with stones they beat him down till he was deed
Then he ^nelyd on his knees prayenge to god to forgive. him his death. and
therewith a cursed. man with a staff smote him on the hed^ that the brain fill
out and so in this wise he gave up the gooste. Then after for vengeance of
cristes death. and for this holy mannys death the cite of jerusalem. that was yt
time the gretyst cite of the world and neuir like for to have be won sone
after was distroyed unto the vttermoost In somoche yt the stones of all the
walls of the cite was turned up side down. as our lord Jesus criste said xl:
winter before. yt it should be so and it was and the jews were driven out
into diverse contrees In somoche that all the kingdoms were distroyed and yet
been under othere kings and euir shall be subgettes and no possessioners yet ye
shall here more of the destruction of this cite of Jerusalem to show how
vengeable god is to them that be glad to shed christian mennys blood as they
were. when god would have take vengeance of the cytee It hapnyd so that a man
of pylates the which did crist to death came fro Jerusalem toward Rome. but
the tempest in the sea took him and drove him upon a land by a temple with
great te^peste and there duelled a great lord yt was called Vaspasian. And for
this cause he was called so. for he had a malady in his nose threlles there
dropped out of his nose worms like waspes Then said vaspasian to this man
Fro what country co^mest thou. and he answered him and said. fro Jerusalem
and would toward Rome The^ said Vaspasian I am glad thereof. for I have herd
say that there be many great leches in that country. wherefore I would well that
thou coudest hele me and if thou do not hele me thou shall be deed Then
aunsweryd he and said I am no leche my selue. but he that he lyth all seek and
reyseth the deed to live he may hele the and if it be his will. who is that
said Vaspasian Sir said he jesus of Nazereth that the Jews slew And if thou
will believe in him thou shalt have all that thou will desire: and be hole Then
said vaspasian I believe verily as thou saifte that he may hele me that reyseth
men from death to life. and anon with that word he was hole. then was he
glad. that he was hole Then anoon he sent a man to the Emperor of Rome and
gate licen^e. and leave to distroye the cite of Jerusalem And he gadred a great
multitude of people. and Tytus that was his oune sone with him and went to
Jerusalem Then in the mean while that he besegyd the cite: the emperor dyed
and then he was chosen Emperor and turned again to Rome and left Tytus his
sone there to distroye the cite Then tytus lay so sore to the cite that he
(...) famysshed them In somoche that they ete their shone and their botes and
the fader took mete fro the sone. and the sone from the fader. and either took
it from others mouth. the husbond fro the wife the wife fro the husbonde The^
emonge all other there was a woman of great birthe. and was come of gentle
bloodde and haddde a young child and for hungre she said My dear child I have
suffered more pain for the tha^ than euyr thou dedyste for me. wherefore it is
more reason that I ease my hungre on the thanne though I dyed and thou also.
and so took her child and slew it and rosiyd halue of it and kept half till
on the morrow And so as the flesh rosiyd the savor went into the cytee* And
when the people felt the sauoure they wened there had be ple^tye of mete
and come to have had part And then this woman would have hid it. but they
said they would see whatt mete she had. and then she brought it forth and
showed it and said. Loo here I have rosiyd mine own child and here is the
other half against to morrow Then the people were agreuyd thereof and all
amassed of that sight and went sorth leuynge the woman etyng of her child Then
hungre increased so gretely that there dyed within the cytee. so thick that
they cast the bodies ouir the walls out of the cite into dyches and so
filled the dyches full of deed bodies and the stynche smote forth into the
country and enfectyd the people greatly

Then so at the last great ^ede made them to yield up the cytee: Then
Tytus went in with his oste. and right as the jews sold criste. for xxx. pens
So in like wise he sold xxx. jews for one penny. and turned the cite up side
down In somoche that they left not a stone stondyng upon an other But
distroied it to the uttermost part Lo thus may ye see though god almyghtye
abide and suffer. long he smyteth sore at the last and takes great
vengeance on them that be lusty to shed christian men's blood wherefore every
christian man and woman amend him selue praynge to this holy appostyll to be
mediatoure bitwene god and them that they may have very repentance in their
hertes here. with shryfte of mouth and satisfactyon in deed doing that we may
come to the bliss that neuir shall have ending Amen.

De inuencione sancte crucis
Good friends such a day ye shall have the Inuencion. of the holy cross But
ye shall not fast the even but come to god and to holy church as christian
people should do in worship of him yt dyed on the cross. Then ye shall
understand why it is called thus. Inuencio sancte crucis. The fyndyng of the
holy crose the which was found in this wise as I shall tell you. when Adam
our first fad. was seek for age and would feign haf be out of this world
Adam sent Sees his sone to the angel of paradise praynge the angel to
send him the oyll of mercy to anoynte his body therewith when he were deed
Then went Sees to paradise and said his message to the angel Then
answered the angel and said that he might not have it till the years be
fulfilled But have this branche of the tree that thy fader sinned in and set
it on his grave. and when it berythe fruit then shall he have mercy and not
erst. Then took sech this branch and come home and found his fader deed
Then he set this branch on his faders grave. as the angel. badde him
do the which branche growyd there till Salamon was king. and he made to fell
it down for it was fair to the work of the temple: butt it would not accord
with the werk of his temple Salamon made to cast it down to the earth And was
hid there

Unto the time. that the busshoppe. of the temple let make a wayre in the same
place there as the tree lay to wasshe in sheep that were offered to the temple
Then when this wayre was made they called it in their langage. Probatica
piscina. To the water come an angel certain times fro heuyn and did warshippe
to the tree that lay in the ground of the wayre. and meuyd the water And what
man or woman yt com to the water next after the aungel was made hole of what
sickness that euir they had by virtue of the tree and so endured many
wynters to the tym that criste was taken and should be done on the cross
Then this tree by the ordenance of god swa^me upon the water And when the
jews haddde none other tree ready to make the cross of. for great haste that
they had they took the same tree and made thereof a crose and so did our lord
thereon And the^ the tree bare the blessed fruit cristes body of ye which
welleth the oyll of mercy to Adam and eve and all other of there ofsprynge But
when criste was deed and was take down of the cross for e^^ye that the jews
had to him they took the cross and two other croces y^ the theuys were
hanged in either side of criste and buried them deep in there the. for christian
people should not wit where they were d^d^ for to do it worship And there
^ lay a year and more unto the time that Elyn the Emp^ce. modre of Constantyne
gadred great people to fight with Maxencius ^^te a great water. ouir the
which water lay a great bridge for desceyte of co^stantyne Maxencius let
make a tray. hoping for to have disceyued constantyne that he should have
fallen into the water And as constantyne lay in his bed sore aferde of
maxencius. for he was much byger of people thanne he was. then came to him
an angel. with a sign of the cross shynynge as gold and said to him To
morrow when thou go to the battle Take this ^yne in thyn hand and by the
virtue th^^ of thou shall have victory. Then was constantyne wounder glad and
anon let make a cross of tree: to bear it. to fore him to the battle But
when maxencius saw him nygh the bridge he was so fyers of him selue yt he
had forgete the trappe the which he had made him selue and so came on the
bridge and fill down to the water by the trape and was drowned Then was al
his aste wondre feign to yield them to Constantyne with good will. Then for
constantyne was not yet crystned. And also he was helyd of a Leperhode that he
had Then anoon by counsel of the pope he sent his modre queen Elene that
was queen of Jerusalem. and prayed her to go and seek the crose that criste
dyed on This Elene was a kings daughter of England. and the emperor of Rome
wedded her for her beauty and so she was made empress of Rome But after her
husbondes death she had the kingdom of Jerusalem to dowry where she made
gadre all the jews that might be found and said But if they would show her
the cross they should all be brent The^ was there one of them that hight
Judas. and all said that he knew best where the croce was Then said Elene
to him Si vis viuere oste^de michi lignum crucis. If thou wylt live show me
the cross that god dyed upon or else thou shalt be burnt. and so put him to
great distress Then he saw he must needs tell or dye and said to them. I
biseche you led me to the mount of Caluary there as I shall bydde you and I
shall show you the cross of Criste for he was blind and might not se And so
when he was brought to the mo^te of Caluary he knelyd down and prayed long.
and when he had prayed the place where the cross was meuyd and the earth
quoke. and there came a sweet sauoure fro that place that the cross lay that
was as sweet as any spycery in the world. and then they dygged there long and
at the last they found three crosses But then wist they not which was cristes
cross fro the other ^weyn. And then took they a deed. body and laid now on
that one crose and then on that other. And when it come to cristes cross anon
the body rose to life and than^ed god Thynne said Judas thou art criste truly
and sauyoure of the world. and after that Judas was cristned and was an holy
man after Then took Elyne a part of that cross and sent it to her sone
Constantyne And the Remenaunte thereof. she made to shryne it in silver and
gold and left it in Jerusalem with all the worship that she could: Thus
holy church makes mention this day that the holy cross was found Then as
we read we find in a city that was called Birectus A christian man hired a
house of a Jew to dwell in Then had this man a rode which Nicodemus had
made in mind. of criste Then took he this rode and set it in a preuy
place of his house for sight of the Jews and did it worship after his
coming Then after it fell so yt this man went into a another house and hapnyd
to leave this rode behind him vnwetynge Then come a jew. and duelt in the
house there this christian man had been in. Then for to make him good chere his
neighbors come on a night and souped with him And as they sat at souper and
spoke of this christian man that duelled there before. this jew looked beside him
and in a corner he saw this rode And when he saw that anon he began to grynde
with his teeth and to chide with this other jew his neighbor and said thou
art turned to christian feyth and haste a rode and dooste it worship pryuely
Then this other jew swore nay as deep as he could that it was not so ne neuir
saw it before that thyme. yet not withstandyng that other jew went and told
his neighbors and said that this man was a preuy christian man and had a
rode privily in his house Then anon come all his neighbors wode for wrath and
al to beat this man and drew him and tugged him in the worste manner that they
could and so at the last they said all. this is the image that thou beleuest
upon And they took the image and beat it and scourged it and crowned it with
thorns. and at the last they made the strengest of them to take a spear and
with all his might he smote it to the heart And anoon therewith blood and water
ran out by the sides Then were the^fore aferd thereof and said. Take we pottes
and fill them with this blood and let us bear it into the temple there as the
seek people is of diverse maladies and anoynte them therewith. and if they be
hole with the blood than cry we god mercy and anon let us be cristned man and
woman Then they anoyntyd the seek people with this blood and anoon they were
hole Then went these jews. to the busshop of the cite and told him all the
caas and anon he knelyd down. on his knees and thanked god of this fair
miracle And when he cristned the Jews he took vyolles of glass cristall and
ambre and put of this blood in them and sent about in diverse churches. and of
this blood as many men understand come to the blood of hayles. Mylites:
tellith in his Crouyeles that many years after that Jerusalem was d^stroyed the
jews would have bylded it aye^ Then as they went thiderwardes erly in a
morning they found many croces by the way ^they were aferd thereof and turned
homwarde again. yet on the morrow they went again then were the crosses full of
blood: and then they fled homwardes again echone yet would they not leave
thereby. but went again the thridde day. then fire rose out of the earth and
brent them euirechone to ashes.

De sco^ iohe^ ante portam lati.
Good friends such a day ye shall have saint John's day. at the port latin.
why is it called so It happened as this day this holy saint preached the word
of god in a cite that was called Ephesie* the justice of the cite saw that he
turned much people to the believe of Criste and would have had him to do
sacrifice to false gods. and for he would not but rather lose his life Then
the justice let take him and commanded him to be set in person while he
sent to the Emperor of Rome to know what he should do w^ the him And so
^re^s came to them^eroure. in the which he called John all ^e worste yt he
could and said he was a false disceiuour of the people Then wrote the emperor
again to the Justice and bad yt he should send John to him to come and so he
did And the emperor apposed him of his dedys and John stood stedefast in the
feyth. and for great scorn the emperor made to clyppe some of John's here of
his head. for he had a fair head of here And wha^ be was so clipyd all the
people lough him to scorn and so did him great disease. and they led him to
a gate of the town of Rome which is called port latyne and there they put him
in a tonne of hot fervent oyll and closed him therein and put under fire to
have burnt him therein but he was gods own derlynge He kept him so that he
had no harm in no part of his body Then whanche people we nyd that he had be
deed they unclosed the tonne and found him as hole and as found in all parties
of his body. and clothes as no thing had touched him. Therefore christian
people let make a church there in the worship of god and of his martyrdom
that he suffered there Then for the Emperor might not ouirco^me him by no way
of martyrdom and penance he exiled him into an isle that is called Pathmos
Then herd saint John's modre that her sone was sent to Rome for to be deed For
great sorrow and compassion of him she went after to Rome But when she herd that
he was exiled she turned again and went homwarde And so when she came to a cite
that was called vetulam and there she fill seek and dyed and there she was
buried beside the cite in a roche. And when she had layne there many years
saint James her other son came thydre and took up his moders body. and it
smelled as sweet as any spycerye and brought it into the cite and buried it.
there with great worship and honor.

De sancto Iohe^ baptista.
Good friends such a day ye shall have an high feste. and an holy that is
called saint John's day the Baptiste. and it is called so for he baptized Criste
in the water of flaine Jordan wherefore ye shall fast theuyn And ye shall
understand and know how the euyn^ were first found in old time In the
beginning of holy ^hu^che It was so that the people came to church with
candellys brennyng and would wake and come with light toward night to the
church in their deuociones and after they fell to lechery songs. daunses.
harpyng. pipynge and also to glotony and sin and so turned the holiness to
cursednesse. wherefore holy faders ordained the people to leave the waking and
to fast theuyn. and thus turned the wakinge into fasting But it is called
vigilia. that is wakinge in englissh and it is called the even for at even they
were wont to come to the church But in worship of saint John the people
waked at home and made three manner of fyres. Oone. was clean bones and no wode.
and yt is called a bone fire A another is clean wode and no bones and that is
called a wode fire for people to sytte and wake thereby The thridde is made of
wode and bones and yt is called saint Iohnes fire The first fire as a great
clerk. John Byllet tellith he was in a certain country So in the country
there was so great hete the which causes the dragones to go to gydder in
toknyng that John dyed in brennynge love to god and man And they that dye in
charity shall have part of all good prayers. and they that do not shall neuir
be sauyd: Then as this dragon flees in the air. they shed down to the
water^. frothe of their kind and so enuenemed the waters and causes much
people to t^ their death thereby and many diverse ^esse Then on a time there
were many great clerks and radde of king Alisaundre how on a time as he
should have a batyll with the king of ynde And this king of ynde brought with
him many oliphantes berynge castelles of tree on there backs as the kind of
them is to have armed knights in the castle for the battle Then knew
alisaundre the kind of the Olipha^tes that they dradde no thing more. than
the iarrynge of swyne. wherefore he made to gadre to gydder all the swyne. yt
might be gotten and caused them to be dreuyn as nygh the oliphantes as they
might well here the ia^ryng of the swyne And then they made a pygge to cry and
when the swyne herd the pyg cry anoon they made a great iarryng and as soon as
the oliphantes herd that they began to flee echone and cast down the castelles
and sleew the knights yt were in them. and by this mean Alisander: had the
victory Also these wise clerks know well that dragones hate nothing more than
the stynche of bre^ning bones Therefore they gadred as many as they might find
and brent them. And so with the stynche thereof they drove away the dragones
and so they were brought out of great disease The ii. fire was made of wode
for that woll brenne light and woll be seen far for it is the chief of fyres
to be seen ferrre. and tokenynge that saint John. was a lantern of light to
the people Alsoo. the people made blases of fire for they should be seen far
and specially in the night. Saint Ierom the prophet many a year or god was
borne he prophesied and spoke thus with go^^es mo^the and said.

Priusquam te formaui in vtero noui te. Before or thou were fourmed in thy
modres womb I knew the.

Et a^tequam exires de vulua. sanctificauite. And before or thou yedest out of
thy modres womb I hallowed the Et propha^m i^ ge^tibus dedi te. And I gave the
a prophet to the people Then for saint John should be holy or he were borne
god sent his angel gabriell to zacary saint Iohnes fad as he did sacryfice
in s^^de of ab^a the busshop in the temple and prayed to god to have a child
For both he and his wife were barrayne and old Then said the angel to
zacary. Ne t^neas zacaria Dread not zacary. god has ^e^d thy prayer. Elizabeth
vxor tua par^et filium et vocabitur nomen eius. Johannes. Elizabeth thy wife
shall have a child and his name shall be called John. He shall be fulfilled with
the holy ghooste Et multi in natiuitate eius gaudebu^t And many shall joy. in
the birth of him Then for zacary was old he prayed the angel to have a
token. of his biheste Then said the angel to him he should be dombe till the
child were borne and so he was Then conceived elyzabet And when she was quyck
with child our lady come with child also: to speak with Elizabeth: and
anoone* as she spoke to elysabeth saint Johan played in his moders womb. for
joy of crystis presence that he saw and our lady was with elysabeth unto the
time that Johan was borne. and was mydwyf to elysabeth. and took saint johan
from the earth and when neighbors herd that elysabeth had a sone they were
full glad and come thither as the manner was that time. to give the child a name.
and called it zacary after the fader. But elysabeth bad call him John. But for
there was none of the kynne of that name they asked zacary by synes what the
child should hight. Then he wrote to them. and bad call him Johan. And
therwyth god losed zacaryas tongue. and spoke redely and thanked god hyghly.
Thus was Ioha^ holy or he was borne. And for he would give every man syghte of
grace and of good living. he gave hem ensample for as soon as he was of
couenable age he went in to deserte and was there till our lord come to be
cristened of him Johannes habuit vestimenta de pilis camelorum. Johan had his
cloth made of the here of the camel: and a gyrdel about him of the same
skin. Esca autem eius erat locusta et mel siluestre. Forsothe his mete was
leaves and honysocles yt has a white flower yt growethe in trees and he ete al
manner of worms yt were noryshed in that deserte among herbs and the worms
be as great as a mannis finger and sucked honey off flowers. that be called
hanysocles. tha^ pour people gadren. and fry he^ oil to her mete. Also Johan
ete (...) round leaves. that grown in trees in that deserte. And when they be
bro^en between a manni^ hondis they be sweet as honey: and he drank water of
the well that was in ye deserte. there was Iohnes life in that deserte. till
that our lord was xxx. winter of age. And then our lord and Johan met at the
water of flain Jordan. And then johan told the people of crist. and said.
Ecce agnus dei. See the lamb of god that I have told you of yt shall fulfill
you in the holy ghost Then went John in to the water. and there he baptized
crist and when he was baptized Ecce aperti sunt celi. Heaven opened. Et vidit
spiritum dei descente^ sicut columba. And he saw the holy ghost come down as
a dove. Et vox de celo dicens. And a voys from heaven spoke thus. Ecce filius
meus dilectus. in quo michi been complacui / This is my well-beloved sone that
pleseth me. Here learned johan first to know three persons in trynyte and all
this betokens two fyres. The third fire of bones betokens Iohnes marterdo^
for his bones were brent and how ye shall here. we read ye king herod had a
brother that highte Phylippe and he had a fair woman to his wife and herod
louyd. her (...) And held her under his wife. where Ihon repreuyd him and said
Non licet tibi habere vxorem fratris. tui It is not laufull to the to have thy
broders wife And therefore he putt him in prison and ordained bitwene him and his
wife how John might be deed with out troublyng of the people for the comen
people loved John well Then herod ordained to make a great feste. to all the
states of the country for they should hold with him if the people had risen And
so when the day was com that the feste should be hold and all the people were
served at the mete herodes wife as covenant was bitwene them tho sent her
daughter into the hall for to dance and to tomble before the gestes And that
pleased her fader so well that he swore a great oath and said Pete a me quod
vis and dabo tibi Ask of me what thou wylt and I shall give it the. Then as
her modre bad her say she said Caput Iohannis baptiste. The head of John
Baptyst Then herod feigned him wroth and sorry that he had made such an oath
But he was glad in his heart and then sent into prison to smite of Iohnes head
without any other dome and was brought to the damoysell Then the modre let
bury it in a pryuy place far from the body Then the next night after Iohnes
disciples came and took his body and buried it And there it lay till Iulyan.
the appostita the emperor come that way Then he made take up. Iohnes bones
and to brenne them. and to wyndow them in the wind hoping yt he should never
rise again to life Thus ye may understand how holy yt this man was Then an
angel come fro heuyn and told zacary of his conceyuig and was hallowed in his
moders womb and our lady took him from therth in his birth. and an angel
brought his name fro heuyn. and after he criste nyd our lord jesus criste:
this was an holy man ye shall understand tha^ saint John the euangelyst dyed
the same day. but holy church makes no mention thereof. For his day is hold
in cristmas weke Then for these ii. John's beholden the worthiest saints in
heuyn Then there were two scolars of dyuynite the one louyd. John Baptyst and
the other John eua^gelyst And on a day they purposed to dispute in this matter
and the day was assigned but then the night before. either Iohnes appeared to
their lovers and bad them leave there disputacion for they were well accorded in
heuyn and made no stryf And then on the morrow before all the people either
told his vision that were come to here them dispute. And then all the
people thanked god almighty and both saint John's of this fair miracle. Alsoo
there were two meselles that louyd well thies two Iohnes And so as they were in
coming they spoke of these two. saints which were the gretest in heaven

And so that one said that the one was greter thanne that other. and so they
begannne to fight. Then there come a voys fro heaven and said. we fight not
in heaven. and therefore fight not ye in earth for us. for we ben in peace and so
be ye. And therwyth they were both hole of their sykenesse. and thanked god
and both saint Iohannis and afterward they were holy men. And therefore let
us worship these holy sayntes^ yt they may pray for us that we may come to
everlasting bliss.

Scto^rum Petri and Pauli.
GOod friends such a day ye shall have the feste of saint Peter and Poule.
and ye shall fast the even. and on the morrow come unto the church. And
worship god and pray to these two saints yt were holy appostles to pray for
us. Our lord has peter on the one side and poule on ye other side. And he
has his wounds open and fresshe bledyng. showing to all manner of christian
people that he suffered those wounds for us. that be the v. wells of mercy.
that he suffered for us. ye shall understand yt these two appostles were first
great sinners But for they left her sin: and were sorry and contryte. and
sinned no more our lord took hem in ensample to all other that will leave her
sin they shall be saved. For he that is shreuen and forsakes his sin mercy
follows yt and do his penance. He shall have meercy and grace: For as glad
as the fader is to see the son rise from death to life. also glad is our lord
and much gladder to see a man rise out of dedely sin. and never to do it
more and therefore showing by ensample. Poule bears a sword to all christian
people to cut away the cheynes of sin with his sharp sword of confession
for dedely sin byndeth a man sore to the fend. and therefore cut away the
cheyne Peter is also ready to open the gates of heaven to all christian people and
to take them in that will forsake her sin. ye shall understand ye poule was
first so hye and so feerse against al goddis servants yt there durst no
precher deal with him. but after he left great malice. and there as he was
ferse. after he was gracious. And there as he was before hye and proud of
heart. he was meke and lowly to all goddis servants. Peter also held him self
most perfyte and steadfast of all cristis dyscyples wherefore he made bost by a
vayn glory that he was ready to goo to death with christ. and said thus. It
behooves me to deye with the^ And when christ sey that all his discyples should
forsake him. Peter for the great bost said. though all men forsake him. he would
not. And yet more over when criste was take. Peter drew out his swerd and
smote of a servants ere that hyghte malcus.

But soon after when he saw that crist was take. and should be put to death
then he swered and stared. yt he never knew him. and forsook crist. But when
he herd the kocke crow. then he remembered of that our lord said to him.
that or the kocke crewe iii. thou shalt forsake me Then Peter went forth. Et
fleuit amare. And wept bytterly and hyd him in a cave durst not come among his
bredren for shame till our lord sent to him by name. Then was peter ever
after ashamed and sorry for his trespass and there as he was a boster and
unstable of his words. afterward he was true and stable and grounded in
stablenesse of parfyght living. In so much yt crist called him peter. yt is a
stone in Englisshe. For there as thou layest a stone. there thou shall find
it. So was peter so steadfast after that nether for well nor for woo he never
flitered. But ever stood steadfast in cristis law. And had ever his sin in
mind and to amend that he had don amysse. And was afterward of great
abstynence that he ete but bread and oil: wortes. and full seldom flesh. and
wered but a syngyll kertyll with a mantell. And ever as often as he herd any
man mind Ihesus. anon he began to weep full sore. and when he herd any kocke
crow. anon he would rise up and goo and pray and suffer penance: And he
wept many times so bytterly that the teeres of his eyes burnt his face in so
much that where he was he had a clothe in his bosom always to wype away the
teeres. Then so following he was so holy that where that ever he went. and
he might shadow any syke body. anon they were hole.

So on a time he sent two of his disciples in to a far country to preche.
And when they were goone two days journey. one of them deyed and that other
turned again and told Peter. Then peter took him his stafe. and bad him goo
and lay the stafe on his fellow. and bad him arise in the name of god. and he
rose anon. and went forth to gyder and preched: Then were many wroth that
Peter turned so much people to the ferth And put him in to prison. and bond
him fast with great cheynes of iron till he was nigh deed lest he soold be
stolen away. wherefore the knights woke it that he should not escape. And thus
the common people took Ensample of hem and make fyres in worship of saint
Peter and watch. Then Criste come to peter in pryso^ And then come an
angel to Peter with great light as our lord badde. And anon the cheynes
break and fill fro his hondes and fete. And so went he to Rome and was there
pope xxxv years. and turned much people to cristis feythe. But soon after
came the fendes lymme. that was called Symo^ magus. yt cowde much of the
fendes craft and made much people like in diverse sykenesse^ Some blind some
lame. some deff so that the people what for fere and for wonder byleued in him.
Then peter heled all those that Simon magus had buried. And bad they should
not believe in him. Then was this Simon magus wroth with Peter that he might
not have his will and in especyall he might not reyse a deed body to life that
Peter raised. Then this simon teyed a fend in likeness of a great dog
there as peter should come to sle peter but

Peter ^^sed him. and let this dog lose and then he lepte to simon and
pulled him down under his fete and then peter bad leave and do him no harm
of his body. but all to rent his clothes So that simon went almost naked
away. Then simon ordained all the ways that he cowde to have Peter deed
then our lord appeared to Peter and said. Simon et nero contra te cogitant.
Symonde nero and other have ordained thy death to morrow. I will send to the
poule my servant in comfort to the and ye shall suffer marterdom to gyder for
my sake and so come to me to everlasting bliss. Then peter told his
brethren his vysion that he had in the night. and so took Clemente by the
hand and set him in his chayer. and made him. pope and successor after him:
Then on the morrow come Poule and preched the people then this Simon had so
charmed the Emperor in such a folishnesse. that he wend that he had be
goddis sone. So this symonde magus come to the Emperor and said There be two
men of Galyle come in this cite. that one hight peter and that other poule.
that do me so much disease that I may no longer abide here in earth.
wherefore command such a day al manner of people to come to capytole. and
there in syghte of all the people I will fly op to my fader in heaven. And when
all the people were come to gyder Simon went up in to a tower of the capytoll
Then come two fendes like ii. angellis. and set on his head a garlonde off
laurel. and bare him up in to the air. like as he had flowen Then said peter
to poule brother look up and see. then said poule. It falls for me to pray
and the to command: and anon peter said. I command you angelis of
sathanas. yt ye let that man goo down. that all the people may see whom they
have worshyped. Then symond fell down and all to brast then was
the emperor wroth and made to lead peter and poul forth. And did peter on a
cross and his head downwarde. and so put him to death. and poule for he was a
gentylman born For the more worship. they smote off his head. Then the people
saw angellis stondyng on the cross there as peter henge with crowns. And
when poules head was smytte of there come out fair plente of milk and after
blood Then in the night after come criste^ people and laid her bodies to
gyder in a graue^ and there they lay till criste^ feyth was more open in rome.
Then would they have bore either body to his church. but they cowde not
know either bones fro other. Then come there a vois fro heaven and said. the
more bones be of the precher and the less of the fyssher. So after when the
christian feyth come in to this land king ethelbert let make a great church
at westmynstre in worship of Saint Peter. and another in london of saint poule.
And so on a day when the church of saint Peter should be hallowed. in the
night before was a man fysshyng

in the tamyse under westmyn^ And (...) ^em reuesshed had up the (...) great
dred and quakyng. and there they fond a lityll writing here lies and restech
Thomas archebysshop of caunterbury Primat of England. and the popes legate
sleyn for the right of holy church the fyfthe day of cristmasse. Then for
great deuo^ion that they had of that syght^ all cried saint Thomas. And then
they took the head to the Archebysshop to kiss. and so they kyssed it all And
then they beheld his wounds and said they were ungracious that wounded the
thus. And so laid him in shryne. and covered it with cloth of gold and set
torches about it brennyng. and the people to wake it al night. Then on the
morrow come all the states of this land: And bare the shryne to the place
there as it is now with all the reverence and worship that they cowde. And
there it is with worship Amen.

De sancta maria magdalena.
GOod friends such a day ye shall have the feste of Mary magdaleyn. that was
so holy that our lord Ihesu crist loved her best of all wymmen next his own
mother wherefore ye shall come to god and to holy church. and pray to that holy
woman that she will pray to our lord for us. that we may have grace. for she
was the first in time of grace that did penance. for she had lost grace by
fleshly lust. so she is made a myrrour to all other sinners that will forsake
sin. and do penance they shall have grace. the which was lost by sin. She
had a fader that was a great lord. and nigh of the kings blood and had a great
lordshyp in Iherusale^. the which he gave to lazarus his son. and he gave
mary the castelle of mawdeleyne. with all the lordshyp longyng thereto. of the
which castle she had her name. and was called mary mawdeleyn for she was lady
there of. Then as many books sayen. Saint Johan euangeliste wedded her. And
our lord bad him goo with him and kep^ his virgynyte. and so he did. and was
clean virgyn. And mawdelayne w^^t forth and gave her all to sin In so much
she lost the name of mawdele^n and was called the sinful woman* But it was
often seen yt our lord made of the grettest sinner the hol^^st afterward: And
so wha^ our lord saw time he gave this woman grace to ^^owe her self. and to
have repentance for her sins: Then when mary herd ye crist was at a
mannis house yt was called Simon the pharise. she took a box with oyntement
such as the people used ye time for hete of the son and went thither. but she
durst not for shame go tofore him. and herd him speak. and then she took a
great sorrow in her heart. and wept tenderly. and with the teres of her eye^
she washed cristis fe^e And with the here is of her head she weped hem and with
all the love of her heart she ^ysshed hem and anointed hem but no word she
spoke that any man might here. but softely in her heart she cried mercy. and
made a vow to him that she would never trespass more. Then our lord had
pity on her and cast out of her vii. fendes and forgave her all her sins in
heryng of all that there were. then she took such a love to crist. that she
left all her lordshyp^ of mawdeleyn with all other goods. and sued him forth
with great love. that in his passion there as his disciples fled from him. she
left him never till she with help of other had laid him in his tomb. and
when no man durst goo thither for fere of the knights that keeps him. she
spared not. Cum tenebre essent. It was derke in the dawynge. she took with her
sweet bawmes. to anoynte Crystis body: with this she showed love both in will
and in deed wherefore christ in his life for her love heled Martha her suster of
the read flyxe yt she had vii. year to fore and payned her full sore. Et
resuscitauit Lazarum a mortuis. And raised Lazar her brother from death to life.
that had lain iiii. days stynkynge in his grave. and when our lord rose from
death to life. he appeared to her. and suffered her to touch him. and kyssed his
fete. Then when it was known to the jews. that christ showed her so many
tokenes of love before all other. Then when criste was styed up to heuen^ the
jews took Mary and Martha her suster lazarus maxencius and many other. and put
them in a ship that was old (...) ^a^e drowned them. but g^ (...) so for all
thing at his will and brought them sauf to a land* called Marcyle And there
they rested under a ba^^e. that was nigh the temple. Then mary saw much
people coming toward the temple to do sacryfice to her mawmettes. And the lord
of the country come with hem But mawdeleyn was gracious and with her gracious
words turned him again Then this lord had great lust to here her speak and
said thus to her. that if god that thou spekest of be so gracious and so great
of power as thou sayste. pray to him that I may have a child by my wyff that
is bareyne. and then will I believe in him. Then mary said she would: and
within short time after the lady conceived and was with child Then this lord
anon after ordained to goo to Iherusalem to Peter to wit of him wheder
mawdeleyns prechinge were true or no. and vytayled his ship and made him ready.
Then come his lady. prayenge him that she might goo with him. So with great
prayer the lord granted her. then by assent of hem both. they made mary
mawdeleyn to keep her lordshippes and goods that they had and mary set a
cross on either of their sholders. and bad hem goo in the name off god. when
they had seyled a day and a night a great tempest arose. in so much that
they wend all to have be drowned. Then was this lady sore aferde. And
therwyth she began to traueyle. And so was delivered of a (...) the birthe
fell down deed Then this lord made great sorrow and lamentacion and said
Alas alas I wreche what shall I do with this child Now is the modre deed and
nedys must the child dye also. for here is no womannys help to keep it.
Then he cried to mawdeleyn and said Allas marye why dooste thou thus to me
thou behete me a child And now is the modre deed and the child must needs dye
for fault of womannys help. and I my selue look euir when I shall be drowned
Help mary and have compassion on me and of my child. Then said the shipman
Cast this deed body in the sea for we shall neuir have rest while it is in the
ship Then said. the lord she is natt deed: but lies in a swowne for fere
But I pray you let us have the ship to yonder roche. for I had leuyr grave
her yonder then to cast her into water And for there was noon earth to make
her a grave he left her hanging on a roche of stone and the child by the
modre and covered them with his mantell And betoke them to god and mary
mawdelayn to keep and went his way So when he come to Jerusalem he spoke
with Petyr and he had him be of good comfort: though his wife were deed for
god might restore her to life again Then ^r showed him the places there as
our lord was quycke and deed: And told him of his birthe and of his passion
of his resurrection and his ascension and enfourmed him of the feyth. and made
him steadfast to criste And when he had be there two year Petyr sent. him
home again and bad him great well mawdeleyn and her felaushyp. Then when the
lord came far in the sea and saw the place there his wife lay. he longed
sore in his heart to go thydre. and then he prayed the shypman* to set him
there Then he saw a little child sitting on the sea sonde playng with small
stones But as soon as the child saw him it ran forth to the roche and he
folowyd till he come there he left his wife And he took up the man tell and
found the child soukyng on his moders papes. Then thanked he god and mary
mawdeleyn Then he said Mary thou art great with god that haste kept a young
child soukynge upon a deed body in great comfort and joy to me But and thou
wylt pray to thy lord that my wife might rise to life then were I euir bounden
to be thy servant and woll w^^ll I live Then with that word she spak^: said
Blessed more thou be Mary that were medewyf to me and nor^^ to me child whil I
have be in my pelgramage Then said this man wife art thou alive* and she said
ye sir now I come fro my pylgremage as ye do ^ told him of every place that he
had be al Then he knelyd down and thanked god and mary mawdeleyn And when
they come home they found Mary prechinge and techynge the people* and anoon
they knelyd down and thanked her and told her what Petyr said and prayed her
to tell what they should do and they would do it with good will Then mary bad
they should distroye the temples of mawmentrye and byld churches and make fontes
and christian. the people: and so within short time all the land was cristned
Then for mary gave her al to co^templacion she went far into a wilderness.
and was there xxx. wynters unknown to any man or woman. Descendebant angeli et
eam i^ ethera leuabant.. An^ aungellys come vii. times a day and bare her up
into the air and there she was fed with heuynly f^de. but when god would that
she should pass out of this world he made an holy priest to see how
aungellys bare her up. in the air Then went he nere the place and asked in the
name of god who was there. If it were a christian man he should speak and tell
what he was. Then aunsweryd mary mawdelen. I am the sinful woman that the
gospel speaks of that wysshe cristes feet And she badde the priest goo to
maxencius the busshop. and bid him on Ester day in the morning to be in the
church and there I will mete him and when he came to the church. he saw
how mary was borne up two cubytes froo the ground with aungelles that he was
sore agaste Then mary called to him and badde him come nere and goo say a
mass that she might be houseled Then in sight of all the people wha^ mass
was done she was houseled. and resceyued gods body in form of bread. and
anon therewith she gave up the gooste Then took the busshoppe the holy body
and laid it in a tomb of stone And wrote all her life in the worship of god that
did so graciously by her. and all sinful people yt will leave her sin. Thus
ye may come to everlasting bliss. To the which god bring us all to Amen

De festo sancti iacobi appostoli
GOod friends such a day ye shall have saint James day thappostle. and ye
shall fast the even in the worship of god and this holy appostle. This James
was a holy man for he come of an holy kind. he was our ladies susters sone.
And brother to saint John euangeliste and by thassent of all thappostlis he was
sent in to spayn to preche the word of god. for the people were so combred
with the sin of mawmentry. that he might not turn but ix. persons of the
which he left there two to preche and vii. he took with him in to Jury For he
herd that there was one called hermogynes. And he had a discyple that hyghte
phylyp they two begyled so the people that James had turned again to
mawmetry. Then James blamed hem to torn fro everlasting salvation to
everlasting dampnacion Then hermogynes herd thereof and came and disputed
with ^mes of the feyth. hopyng with the ^dis craft to have over come him.
Then James did so many miracles that Phylyp forsook hermogynes his master
then was hermogynes wroth. and sent a company of fendes said go^ ye and
bring James. and phylip to me bound Then when the fe^des come to James the
angel of god was ready and bond the fendes that they cried James the appostyll
have mercy on us for we be bound so sore with brennynge cheynes that woe is us
on every side Then said James wherefore he ye come hyder. and they said
Hermogynes sent us hyder for to bring the and philyp bound to him and now
gods angels have bound us. yt woe is us to suffer this pain Then said
James I will louse you so that ye go to hermogines and bring him hyder bound
to me and do him no more harm. Then said they to hermogines thou haste
sent us where we have be bound with iron cheynes. but now we will bind the
and bring the before James Then said they to James. this false. Hermogynes
has do to the and us much tribulacion and disease. now give us leave to
venge both the and us Then said James nay* My master Jesus badde me do
good against evil Then Iamas bad Philyp vnbynd Ermogines. Then said
Hermogynes now I know there malice of the fe^des I pray the James. give me some
of thy power. or else these fendes will slay. me. Then James took him his own
staf and then he went boldly to his own house and took his books and cast
them into the sea and come to James and fell down on his knees and cried him
mercy and prayed him to christian him Then was James glad. and cristned him
and taught him the faith and afterward he was an holy man and god wroght many
mira^^^^ for him Then herd the iewys thereof and took James and bound a
roope about his neck and ladde him to king herod and prayed him to do James
to death or else he would torn al her nation to cristes feyth and d^stroye her
law Than herod commanded to frayte of his head. And when he was deed.
Hermogines and philip with many other of his disciples took James body and for
they durst not for the jews very it they took it with them into a sh^^ and
went into these prayng god to b^^ge them there as he would that the body were
buried Then god gouernyd the ship so that they londed in spar^

There was a queen called lupa yt is a she wolf and she was of cursed living
Then the^ took the body and laid it upon a stoone and that wexed so soft
that the body sanke down in to the stonelike as it had been ^ tomb made
therefore Then some of them kept the corfe while the other were to the queen
Lupa and said. For she would not resceyue James in his ly^e. god sent her the
body to be buried. wherefore we pray you of a place to bery his body in to his
worship for such an holy man Then this queen did her wolfes kind and wist
well yt the king of Spain was a cursed man of manners and would do them some
harm and sent to the king prayenge him to ordeyne a place where this body
might be buried: And he did as a cursed man should do he took them and put
them into prison and bound them fast hand and foot with great ^^on cheynes.
and while he satt at his mete an angel come and let hem out of prison and
badde them goo their way and so they did And when the king herd that he
send ii. knights. with much people to bring them again And when the
knights came to a bridge that they were goon ouyr. the knights would have go
after. but the bridge brake and all the people were drowned Then was the
king aferde of vengeance and sent after them peasibly and prayed them to
come again and they should have all their desire And when they come again the
king co^mawnded all the cite to be cristened Then when the queen herd yt she
was wroth and thought to do hem all the harm and dispyte that she coud and
sent after them praynge them to come to her ^ she would ordeyne for them in the
best wise. and when they were. come she said So to such an hill. and there I
have oxen and bulls. take of them and yoke them in a wayne and lay the corse
therein and let them chese their way: and thydre as they led the wayn I
grant you the place to bury the corse in Thus she did for great malice
hoping yt the wild bestes would have distroyed them all. But when they made a
croce to fore them the bestes stood still whyll they were yoked into the
wayne. and so let them goo and in sight of all the people they ladde the wayne
into the queen's palys and then she repentyd her and cried mercy: to god and
saint James. and anon she was cristned and gave the palys with good will to
saint James and that ye longyd thereto and made thereof a worthy church and laid
saint James therein. and there did him all the reverence that she might or
could. and there god shewyth unto this day many fair miracles.

Narracio
There was a man yt hight barnard and happed to be take with enemies and put
into prison in the ground. in a deep dungeon and was bound with as many
great cheynes of iron as he might bear Then he cried hertly to god and saint
James for help and socour Then came saint James to him and conforted him and
anoon the cheynes. brake and James hong hem about his neck and said Veni
sequere me. Come and follow me and ladde him to a toure that was xl cubytes of
hyghte. and badde him lepe down and bear his cheynes into spain and offer
them at saint James and so he did.

Narracio.
Also there was a man yt yede to seinte James in the company of other pilgrames
and helpyd a pour woman yt was seek to bear her scrippe and anon after met
with a seek man and for he might not goo he set him on his horse to ride and
went him selue a foot beryng the pore womannys scrippe. and the seek mannys
staf So for great hete and traueyll when he came to saint James he fell seek
and lay three days and might not speak And then he gave up great sighynge
and spoke and said I thank god and saint James by his prayer I am deliueryd of
a great multitude of fendes For right now come saint James to me with the
pore woma^nes scripe and the seek mannys staf and has drove away the fendes
fro me Butte get me a priest anoon for I shall not live but a while: and he
said to one. of his felawes Good friend. goo fro thy lord that thou seruest
for he is sothly dampened and shall dye within a short time a foul death And
when they come home they told the lord and he set naught thereby But within
short time he was deed as the man said.

Narracio.
A another miracle. there were threty. men in a company yt plyght there truth
each to other to be true to go to seint James to gydder save one that would.
not plight his truth. and in short time one of them fill seek and lay three
days and spoke not and for he lay so long all his felawes went their way:
save he that would not plight his troth he abode with him. and within a while
he spoke and mended and his felaw carried him forth. but he might natt
traueyll but soft and it hapnyd that they abode all night under a hill. and
were full fore aferde what for cursed people and wild bestes. there that man
dyed Then about mydnyght come saint James riding and said Give me the deed
body thy fellow before. me and come thou up behind me and by the morrow they
had ryden xv days iournaye and come to the mount joy half a mile from saint
James and there he let hem down and badde this man goo fette the chanones of
saint James to bury his felaw and say to his fellows there pilgramage stand in
no stead For they were false to their other felawe. And therefore let eueryman
and woman be true to other and we shall at the last come to the bliss of
heuyn.

De sancta Anna.
Good friends such a day ye shall have saint Annes day that was our ladies
modre that day ye shall come to god and holy church and pray to this holy
woman to pray for us we read of v. holy wymen that hight Anna I will tell you
of the se v. wymen The first Anna was modre to the prophet Samuel that
governed the people of israel Anna had a husbonde that hight El^ana. and he
had no children by Anna long butt by great prayer to god at the last he had
a sone that was called Samuel Then was there a another anna that was wife to
a man called raguell. and they had a daughter that hight Sare the which
had seuyn husbondes. and euyr the first night the fend strangled them when
they would have comuned with her only for lust of flesh and not to bring
forth fruit to gods plesau^ce and for no children But sone after come young
tobye. and by techynge of the angel Toby wedded this Sare and three nyghtes
and three days he forbear his wife and was in his prayers. and so after he
had children The iii anna was the elder tobyes wife. This elder tobye was an
old man and did the works of mercy full besily and to preue his meekness and
suffraunce. god made him blind For on a day as he buried many deed bodies that
were slain he was weary and lay down in his house by the walls and as he looked
up the dunge of the swalous fell in his eyn and so he was blind But for he
took it patiently and thanked god. of his visitacion god restored him his sight
again The iiii. anna was in the temple of Jerusalem when joseph and our lady
bare criste to the temple on candelmasse day For she prophesied of criste ^owe
it should fall of him This a^na was so holy that when she had been wedded vii.
year her husbonde dyed and then went she into the temple and was there night
and day till she was lxxx year old then had she grace of god to see him
bodily or she deyed and had him in her arms The v. anna is our ladies modre
So when our lady was of age and brought into the temple. and left there with
other virgynes of her age to learn moses law and to serve god night and day
This anna had a husbonde that was called Ioachim our ladies fader and was come
of the kindred of dauyd For the prophets had told. long to fore how the
kynred of Dauyd should discende down to crist and had wreten it in books
that were kept in the tresory in the temple Then king herod of Jerusalem
thought to torn the life of god to him and to his ey^^^ and took the books
out of the tresorye. and made to brene them for the mind of criste should be
forgete and by this mean to have turned the lynage of dauyd to him wherefore
there be no books that tellit^ how Ioachim descendyd fro dauyd But wha^ herod
had do this foul deed yet were there some good wise me^ that had copies of
thies books within them at home that told how Ioachim come of the kingdom of
dauyd For dauyd had many children and oone of them was called natan. of the
which come Leuy. and there was a another called panther and of him come barba^
that was Ioachymes fader yt married our ladies modre. Pater eius Ioachim matter
vero anna ^ocati. This Ioachym that was our ladies. fadre and her mother anna
when they. had this child she was give after in marriage to Joseph Then dyed
Ioachi^ and anna took a another husbonde that was called Cleophas she had by him
a another daughter that was called mary cleophe and then he dyed and she took
a another husbonde that hight salome and by him she had a another doghter that
was called mary salome And when she had these iii. daughters in worship of
the trynite. Then would she no moo husbondes but live in chastity and
holiness. Then was this mary cleophe wedded to a man yt was called alpheus
and had iiii. sons James the less Joseph yt was barsabas simon and Judah.
The thridde mary was wedded to a man that was called zebedeus and she had by
him two sons James the more and John. euangeliste Then as god says that of
a good tree co^myth good fruit. so of this good woman come an holy ofspri^g So
let us serve this holy woman: that she may pray for us now. and euyr Amen.

De sancto Laurencio martire.
Good friends such a day ye shall have saint Laurence day gods own holy
martyr His martyrdom as maximys says shyneth to all holy church. and
lightneth all the world. wherefore ye shall come to god and holy church and
fast theuyn This saint was holy in living and great in compassion of
ferynge. Saint Austyn says that ensampl^ ^nge is more comendable than is
preching and techynge Therefore saint Laurence gave all christian people to show
against malice meekness. and against couetyse largeness. against persecucion and
trybulacion. love and sweetness. when sixtus the pope had be in spain he
broghte Laurence with him to Rome and made him archdeken to serve holy chur and
pore people Then had the Emperor envy to him and purposed to do him to
death Then Laure^ce to show meekness. ayenste malice. enqu^red fast after
pore people and went to them and gave them mete and drink and clothes and so
he come to a wedowes house there as many pore people were logyd the which wedowe
had been long seek of the head ache Then laurence had compassion on her
and made her hole and mekely washed all the pore peoples feet and seruy^^ them
at mete and drink And for he herd that there was a poor man beside in a place
that was blind he went thither and helyd him So euir the more themperoure
showed malice to him the more he gave him to meekness and holy devotion He
showed also ayenste couetise largeness For when pope Sixtus had take to
laurence the tresoure of holy church to keep and to give to them yt had need
Then blessed Laurence followed his master and said Sancte pater noli me
derelinquere. Holy fader forsake not me. for I have dealyd all the tresoure
that thou tookest to me. wherefore go not thou to thy passion as soon but let me
goo with the as we have served god to gydder So let us suffer death to gyddre
Then said the pope I will goo to fore and thou shall come after and suffer more
penance then I may For I am old and thou art young and may suffer more
tha^ I. and therefore make the ready. for there is great turment ordained for the
The^ were there some that herd Laure^ce speak of treasoure Then the Emperou^
sent after Laurence and said Ostende michi thesauros eccle^ Show me the
tresoure of the church or else thou shalt be putt to such a torment that thou
shall be feign to deliver it Then how pope Sixtus and saint Laurence come to
this treasour ye shall here we read that there was a holy man that hight
origines that converted Philyp the Emperor Then the Realm of France was
rebel ayenste the emperor of Rome Then the emperor sent a knight of his
into France with much people to ouircome france This knight was called
decyus and in short time he made france subgettes to the Emperor as they
were before Then when this emperor phylip herd that Decyus had done so
well to great worship to Decius and to thank him for his journey The emperor
took with him a few. men and rode out of Rome against decius to welcome him
home Then decius saw that the Emperor did him so great worship he
thought it had be for dread and not for love and thought to be emperor him
selue And so in ye night next after as the Emperor. lay in his bed
slepynge Decius slew him and took all his people to Rome. with him Then
when the Romans and the senatoures herd thereof what for dread and what for
love they made Decius Emperor Then when Philippes sone herd tell that his
fader was deed in this wise he was aferde yt decius would have slain him and
took all his faders tresoure to holy church and bare it to pope Sixtus and to

Laurence praynge hem if so were that Decius slew him they should dele this
treasoure to holy church and ^o pore people that had need Then decius made
to slay philyps sone for fere left he would avenge his faders death when he
had come to mannys state And this was the tresoure that pope Sixtus and
Laurence had. and for this tresoure they put Laure^ce into prison Then was
there a man that hight Lucellus in prison that by great weping had lost his
sight. then Laurence made him to se again and cristned him. wherefore many
blind men and wymen come to Laurence and had there sight Then the Emperor
sent to Laure^ce to deliver the treasoure Then he prayed him of three days
respyte and then he would show him the treasoure So thies three days
Laurence was let out of prison and went and gadred all the pore people to
gyder that he could find blind lame or crooked and the thridde day he brought
them before the Emperor to his palys and said Lo here is euirlastinge
tresoure. this will neuir fayll for it will endure for ever in heuyn So showed
Laurence ayenste couetise largeness for he delyd for gods sake all that he
had and might have spent it invanyte and he had would Also in turme^t of his
passion he showed love and swetnesse Then themperoure commanded to bring
forth. all manner of turmentry scourges nails. stones. salt pyche brymstone
bre^nyng coals. iron shaftes. bars of iron gredirens and commanded al should
be spent upon Laurence but if he would show the treasoure and forsake his god
And to do sacrifice to mawmentes

Then said Laurence thou unblessed man these metes and drynkes have I euir
desired For right as sweet metes and drynkes please thy body So these
turmentes please my soul. and maken me strong and mighty to suffer passion.
for my lords sake. Then was the emperor ^^^th and commanded to beat him with
scourges full of knottis. and leave not till the blood ran down on every
side. and then they laid cheynes off iron brennynge to his sides: that
brenned the flesh fro the bones. and ever laurence thanked god hertely.
Then was decius wode for woo and said though thou with thy wytche craft
scornest my tourmentis. yet thou sholdest not scorn me. And then he
commanded again to beat him with whippes and knottes of led till the bones
were bare. Then laurence held up his head and prayed to god then came a
voice fro heaven and said. thou must suffer moo tourmentis and passion for love
of me This decius herd it him self. and thou shall come in to great joy and
bliss. Then said decius to the people ye may here all how the fendes come
and comfort him. goo and beat him again with scourges Then was there a
knight of the emperors that hight Romanus. that saw an angel with a shete
of sylke come and wype laurence sides. Then he forsook the emperor. and
become the dysciple of saint Laure^ce And laurence anon crystened him. Then
decius made to smite of Romanus head. then decius did make a great fire and
set a gred-yren thereon to roast laurence. and thrested him down with fire
forkes Then laurence looked upon the emperor and said. thou wretch that side
that is ^osted enough. ete thereof while that other side rosteth. I dread not
thy torments and cast his eyes up to god and said. Lord Ihesu criste take my
spyrite. and so he yield up the go^^ Then the tourmentours went her way and
left the body lyeng there. Then come christian people and took the body. and
beryed it with great lamentacion. Thus Laurence showed meekness against malice
and largenes against couetyse. against passion. love and sweetness for the great
love that he had to god* made him set naught by all his tourmentis that were
do to his body. Saint gregory tells how there was a priest that hyghte
staculus and was besy to amend a church of saint Laurence that was dystroyed
with lo^bardes but he wanted bread to his work men and made much sorrow
therfore^ and he prayed to god and to saint Laurence besely of help. And
then he looked in to an oven and foude it full of new white bread. But he went
it would have served hem for a weke. and it fond hem enough all the time that
his work was a making. We find that there was an emperor that w^^ a cursed
man of living. And when he was deed. there come a legion of fe^des to fetch
him. and as they come by an holy hermites celle they made a great noise.
thermyte had great merueyll thereof and opened a wyndowe and spoke to one of hem
yt come behind. and asked in the name of god what they were And he said fendes
that were sent to the emperor that was deed to luke if they might have him
for her reward then the armyte commanded them to come again by him to know
how. they sped. and he did so. and said wha^ his sins were laid in the
balaunce and was nigh overcome. Then come the brennyng deken laurence: and
laid a great pot on the balaunce and it drew up altogyder. this pot was a
great chalyce yt the emperor made to worship saint laure^nce. Thus ye may learn
to suffer a yenst enuyous people. also what mede is in largnesse. to give them
that have need. and what joy and merit it is to suffer trybulacion and
persecucion and disease patiently learn of the holy marter saint laurence. and
let us take him for a myrrour. and pray to him that he will be medyatour to
god for us yt we may come to everlasting bliss.

De assumpcione beat Marie virginis.
GOod friends such a day ye shall have the Assumpcion of our lady. and it is
called so. for ye day her sone took her up in to heaven body and soul. and
crowned her queen of heaven. for thaungelis of heaven come to fett her up.
Angellis syngyng come with procession against her with roses and lylyes of
paradyse. in token that she is rose lylye and flower of all wymmen. and they
did homage to her for all angellis and saints in heaven made joy and melodye in
worship and honor of her: and so holy church makes mind of her assumpcion.
And yet the gospel of that day makes no mention but of two susters. that was
Martha and Mary mawdalene and said thus. In^rauit ihesus in quodd^^ castellum
et mulier queda^ etc. Ihesus entered in to a castle: and a woman that was
called Martha took him in to her house. And she had a suster that was called
mary. that sat at Cristis feet. and herd him speak. Then was martha besy
to serve christ and she said to him. Sire bid my suster arise and help me.
then answered Criste. Maria meliorem partem elegit que non auferetur ab ea
Mary has chose the better part the which shall not be tak away from her
These ben the words of the gospel of that day. And here be no words of our
lady as be semyng. But he that redeth what saint ancelme says. there he may
see that the gospel perteyneth all to our lady and to the living of her For
she was the castle yt Ihesus entered in to. for right as a castle has diverse
properteis that longen to a castle. that it should be mighty and strong right
so was our lady before all other wymmen. For there as wymmen be freyle and
feeble. and easy to overcome. our lady was strong as a castle. and ayenstode
the cawtelis of the fendes engynis. and put them beside at all times. For
right as a castle has first a deep dyke. right so had our lady a deep
meekness. in strength off the castle. in so much she passed other in virtue
of meekness. wherefore god chose her to be mother to his son before all other
wi^men and thereto christ bears witness thus.

Quia respexit humilitatem ancille sue / For god beheld the meekness of his
hondmayden all generation shall bliss me This dyke if it be full of water it is
the more strenger to the castle this water is compassion that a man should have
for his sins. and for other peoples disease. This water had our lady On this
dyke lies a draw brygge yt shall be draw up against crunyes and let down
against friends. By this brygge ye shall understand discrete obedience. for
right as a man shall not let down the brigge to his enmy though he bid him.
so man shall not let the fend come to his soul though he tempte him. But
anon as he is bode^ any thing. that is help and socour to his saul then
shall he let down the brygge of obedience and the sooner the better. this
did our lady when thangell gabryell told her of her concepcion of her son.
she let not down the brygge anon till she knew wheder he was a friend or an
enmye. and said she should conceive and be a maid. and kept the vow of
chastity that she had made to fore. and as she herd yt. she let down the
brygge of obedience and said. Ecce ancilla domini. Lo here goddis own hand
maiden. be it done to me after thy word. this castle is treble walled. The
first wall betokens wedlock. for first she was wife to Joseph. or else the
jews would have stoned her as for a lechour yff she had conceived without
wedlock and so the ferther wall betokens patience and thynner virginyte yt
is maydenhede but that is little worth but it be strengthed with the wall of
pa^ience. and little help is for maydenhede it is little worth that can no
thing suffer of persecucion not dysese: but ever pleynyng and grutchynge. and
to be a claterer a iangeler a curser. and a waryer and a scolde of her tongue
these defend not maydenhede. but rather cast it down. for maydenhede shode be
of few words. and that she speaks should be honest and worship both to her
own person. and to all them that been in her presence For it is an old
english. a maiden should be seen. and not herd. this virtue had our lady. For
saint Bernard says. read all the gospel over. and thou shall not find that
our lady in all her life spoke but iiii. times. The first to gabryell the ii. to
Elizabeth. the iii. to her own son in the temple. and the iiii. at the
weddyng in the cave of galyle. Thus must the wall of patience defend the
wall of maydenhede. This wall of maydenhede and it be well kept. it is
passing all other. As bede says. wedlock is ^ye* there as it is well kept
but yet wedow hode is higher. but virgynyte pass^th al and has worship in
heaven passing al other. This wall kept our lady for she was clean both by fre
will and by vow and she had a degree passing al other maidens that ever were or
ever shall be for she was both maid and mother. And in this castle is a gate.
that betokens feyth. for right as it is impossible for a man to goo through a
wall of stele. right so it is inpossyble to a man to pleyse god without
feyth. Thus feith had our lady passing ol other.

For as it seems impossible for a woman to conceive without ^arnal
concupyscence of man for it was never seen before. But by techyng of an angel.
she byleued. And so came christ. and entered by the gate of believe in to the
castle. yt is in to the body of our lady. This gate had a tour above which
betokens charity For that is above all thing and that virtue had our lady well
may she be called a castle. For right as al manner of people fle in to a
castle both old and young for dread of enmyes In so much that the lest
child that can cry or speak that is aferde of any thing. anon cries lady
lady. for socour and help: For she is socour and help both to young and to
old. less and more. in sikenesse and in health. The holy ghost is capiteyn of
this castle. and his knights ben holy angellis yt goon with our lady both
night and day. In this castelle ben two susters. Martha and mary mawdeleyne

Martha recepit illum i^ domum suam. Martha received him in to her house and was
besy to serve him and the other sat still and had great lust to here him speak:
By these two susters. I understand two manner of living of the people. that one
is actyff. and that other contemplatyff. Martha betokens actyff that is
business in the world. But that should be for cristis sake that is to take
pour people in to his house and to give hem mete and drink. cloth herborugh
vysite them that be in prison comfort the syke. blind and lame and to berye
the deed By that other I ^nderstonde the contemplatyf life ^ is to the people of
holy church that should void in all that they may This worldis besynessee.
and give him to all spirituell occupacion. and though they do thus. yet there
be covetous people of this world that say that it is al lost that men of holy
church have for it seems to them they do no good. but ever complayn on hem
and say. they do no good. Saint austyn says yt all the world is holy
church. and these worldly people hates men of holy church. But yet god
answers for them and is her aduocat and so will at all time while they live in
rest and peace within hem self. But now see how our Lady satysfyeth both these
lives. she was first martha. for there as martha was besy to receive christ in
her house. Our lady received him in to her body. and therein he was ix.
months. and she fed him. and after come pour and naked in to this world.
and she gave him mete and drink of her pappes. and so fed him. and when he
was naked she clothed him and noryshed him. and when he was syke by kind of
youth she heled him. And when he was bound hand and foot in his cradell as in
prison she come to him and knbounde him and took him and heled his sores with
the milk of her pappes. And when he was deed. she help to bery him in his
tomb and thus she fulfilled the office of Martha. Perfourmynge the vii. werkys
of mercy. And yet she was many times troubled in her heart wha^ she must bear
hi^ fro country to country that was full of ma^mentes and there as she knew
no man And when yt she saw him taken and stryped naked beten with scourges that
all his body ran with stremys of blood. nailed. on the cross and so done
to death that was a great trouble Thus was our lady actyf For as the gospel
tells. she gave so great delit to her sons words that she bare in her heart
all the life and techynge of criste In somoche that she taught the iiii.
evangelists Marcke. mathewe Luke and John. much of ye that they wrote. And
nameley saint. Luke For he wrote much of the manhood of criste and so
fulfilled thoffice of mary for it was for the best when her sone ascendyd into
heuyn. she left al her besines and gave her to co^te^placion til her sone fet
her out of this world Thus every man that can understand may see that this
gospel is convenient to be red for it touches the life off our lady. Then
for this day is the end of her life in this world. therefore holy church redeth
this gospel in ensample to all christian people to perform the same living in
as much as they may and as god will give hem grace to serve our lady I shall
show you an ensample.

Narracio.
we find of a clerk that loved our lady well. for he rad of her bewte. he had
great lust to se her and prayed besely yt he might ones see her or that he
deyed. Then at the last come there an angel and said to him. for thou
fer^^^te our lady so well thou shall have thy prayer. but one thing I tell
the. if thou see her in this world thou shall lose thy sight for the great
clerenesse of her. I will well so that I may see her. then said the angel.
come to such a place. and thou shall see her.

Then he was glad and thought yt he would hyde his one eye. and look with
that other. So when he come to the place: he laid h^s hand over that one eye
and saw her with that other eye. and so come our lady and he saw her. and she
went away anon. and he was blind on ye one eye and saw with that other.
Then the sight lyked him so well that he would feyne see her again. and prayed
night and day that he might see her again. then said thangell if thou see
her again. thou shall life thy syghte of that other eye. and he said I will
well though I had a thousand eyes. then come to such place and thou shall
see her. so when he came he saw her. Then said our lady my good servant
wha^ thou saw me first thou lost one of the eyes. how wylt thou do now when
thou have lost the other eye Then said our lady. for thou haste so great
lykyng to me thou shall have thy sight with both thyn eyes again as well as thou
ever had before* and beter. and so he had. Then he served our lady
ever afther to his lives end. and went to everlasting bliss. To which god
bring us all Amen.

De sancto Bartholomeo.
^Ood friends such a day ye shall have the feste of saint Barthylmew goddis
own appostle. and ye shall fast the even. and come to church and here your
service in the worship of god and saint barthylmewe. ye shall understand. ye
barthylmewe is as much to say. as. Filius suspendentis nie. That is to say
the sone hangyng upon me or upon waters. Ten ye shall understand that god is
he that hangyth upon the waters in two ways The first is when he hangyth upon
the clouds in the firmament. till he sees time to let hem down. Another
way he hangs upon the water when a man or a woman is sorry for his sins.
and weeping sore fore his trespass bytterly. Then god takes his teres. and
hangs them on the hye hylle off heaven. where all the saints in heaven may
have them in syghte in great joy to all saints and to all the angelys that been in heaven. when they may see man or woman that has do amysse in many
trespasses to forsake her sin and do no more: therefore the teeres of a man or
a woman that is sorry for his sin in this manner quenchen the fire of hell: Of
these teeres speaks John grisostome and says. O thou teere that art mekely
let in oryson and prayer with good devotion. thy might is so great that thou
go to heaven and take the word of the Jews mouth making him to torn the
to salvation. that before were in weye off dampnacion. Also thou make thy a^
cusare dombe the fendes^ and so thou quenchest the fire of hell that fendes
made ready against thy coming. and thus god hangs upon waters. Then for saint
Barthylmewe was goddys sone. as all ben that seruyth him. he was hangyng up in
four ways in devotion. of holy orysons prayeng. and in feythful monicion. and
in suffryng off passion he was hangyng to godward in devout orysons. for that
he said with his mouth. he thought in his heart. So that his heart was
always hangyng up toward god both in word and in deed. as the priest sayhe in
the mass. Sursum corda. Hold up your hertes to god. Thus this holy man saint
barthylmew had ever his heart to god for great devotion We find wreten of him
thus. that he kneled a C. times on the day. and C. times on the night. for a
great deuoucion that he had to god^ But for he should not be weary of the
traueyle. God sent an angel ever more to show him. and kept him thus hanged
he up in holy orysons prayeng. He was also hanged up by the feythfull monycion
in this wise. For god gave him so great power over all fendes yt by his holy
monycion he suspended hem. whether they were in man or woman. And also in other
mawmentis we find wreten of saint Barthylmewe. how he come into ynd^ in the
temple In the which temple was a^ image. and there in was a fend a mawment
that was called a^tar^th. and this image was made of gold then the fend that
was therein and spoke to him and did him worship. And by such words as he
spoke he made the people believe that he was god. and yet to make hem the more
to believe he heled many syke men and wymmen both blind and lame. and of many
diverse sykenesse that he had cast upon hem to fore him self. And so semynge
to them that they were heled by him but such sikenesse as god sent upon hem
he cowde not hele: Then was the temple full of syke people that were brought
to this mawment to be hole. but as soon as Barthylmewe come to the temple he
suspended the fendes power. that he might hele no man. Now there was another
god called baruth. and they asked him why her god gave hem none answer. He
said barthylmew the appostle of god has bound him so sore that he dare not
ones speak nor ^rake. Then he told him the fetures of Barthylmew and said he
knows every word that we spek now for he has an angel of god with him and
tells him all things that ever was said or done by him. And moreover though
ye seek him ye shall not find him. but if he will himself Then went they
home again and sought Barthylmew and might not find him. Then as barthylmewe
walked among the people. a mad man that had a fend within him: anon cried
barthylmewe goddis own appostle. thy prayers bind me so sore. and bren me also
Then said barthylmewe hold thy peace thou fend and go out of and with ye
word the fend went his way and left the man and anon he was hole Then it
hapnyd that the king of that cite had a daughter that was mad. and sore
bound with cheynes.

For harm that she did emonge the people And when the king herd how this man
was helyd he sent to Bar(...)mew^ prayeng him that he would heal his daughter
and so he did Then Barthelmewe preached so to the king that he turnyd the
king to be crist^ed And then anon he commanded to draw down the mawmentes
that were in the temple. Then the people tied ropes about the images necks
and would have drawn down the mawmentes. but they might not for the fendes
ware strong in them Then Barthelmewe commanded the fendes to come out of
images and to pull them to powder. and so they did for they had no power to
withstand his co^maundmente And so they al to brake them. and for the temples
were so full of seek people. Barthelmewe prayed god that they might be hole.
and anoon they were.

Then the knig^* his wife his daughter and all his menye and much other people
turned to the feyth of crist and then Bherthelmewe cristenyd* them all. Thus
Barthelmewe hangith by fe^thfull monycion For he suspendyd the fendes power
that they might do no thing. He was also ha^gyd up by suffering of passion.
For when the Busshop. of the temple saw that the people were almooste turned
to the christian feyth. ^ ^ft^ the fendes mawmentry. he went unto the Cite there
as a king was called Astrages. and brother to the king Polunyes. and compleined
to him sore. And said there was a man come to hem that was called Barthylmew.
yt had turned his brother and all the people to the feyth. that they set not by
her goddis: but had draw hem down and all to broke hem. and hallowed the temple
oonly to criste. for this cause he preyed him of help. Then sent the king a
thousand men after Barthylmewe Then when barthylmewe was come he asked him
why he had turned his brother. and made him believe on a deed man yt was hanged
on the Cross. Then said Barthylmewe. I have bound that god that thy brother
byleued on and showed that fend: And if thou or he may do so to my god
then will I believe os thou dooste. Then the king commanded to hang
barthylmew on a cross and long to torment him thereon and after took him down
and fleye him quycke and then to smite of his head. Then come christian
people and buried him with great reverence and worship And thus he was hanged
up by great compassion suffryng. we read in gestis romanorum. That when
frederycke the emperor had destroyed a great Cite. And therein was a fair church
of saint Barthylmew and other moo of diverse saints. And as a good holy man
come by the cite. and he saw a great company of men stondyng to gyder. Then
had this man great merueyle of hem. and asked what they were. and what was
their counseyll: Then said they that i^ was say^^ Barthylmew and other
saints. that had chirches in that cite. that were dystroyed and there they
took her counseil what they might do with the empeperour. And they were in
full purpose that he should come before god and answer for his deeds. And so
the Emperor deyed a foul death. and was damned. And also it is wreten in the
life of saint goodlake. that first inhabyted crowland in the fennys. And the
first day that he come thither was on saint Barthylmewis daye^ Then he prayed
to this holy appostle to be his patron against the wicked spirytes that were
in that place. For it was called thinhabytacion of fendes for there durst no
man dwell there for fendes then wha^ this holy man was come thider almost
lost his wits for fere. But then by great grace he had mind of saint
Barthylmew. And prayed him with all his heart of help and socour. Then anon
come saint Barthylmew and commanded the fendes to goo from that place Then
the fendes made a great horrible noise and went her way and said. Alas alas.
for now have we lost our might and our habytacion. and now shall we goo to
hell for evermore and so sorowynge and waylinge they went their way. Then
this holy man thanked god and saint Barthylmew for the great help and socour
that he had done to him. Hereby ye may see and understand yt this holy
appostle is ever ready to all that will call to him with good devotion. he will
help them at their need.

De ^tate ^eate ma^^^.
gOod^ friends such a day ye shall have the Natiuyte of our lady that is
when she was borne. and ye shall fast the even: And come to god and holy
church in the worship of our lady saint mary^ Ioachym was her fader and saint
anne her madre There can no man tell. the joy that Ioachym and Anne had in
their hertes when our lady was borne For they had prayed xxx. year to god
night and day and dealyd much alms And for the good dedys yt they did they
had reuelacion of god that they should be holy and please god and also by the
birth of our lady. the repreue that they had before of their bareynesse
should be put away And so Anne went out emonge other wymen So the birth of
our lady gladed the fader and the mother. wherefore god sent them fruit of their
bodies more by grace than by kind Then all the neighbors come and
conforted anne. and called her daughter mary as the angel badde or she were
borne or begoten. ye shall understand that holy church. worshippeth three
byrthes One of our lord jesus criste That other of our lady. The thridde of
saint John baptyst showing openly that every man and wom^n that woll be sauyd
must be thryes borne. First of his modre in to this world The secounde from
sin. by water washing And the thridde. out of this world to joy passinge
The first betokenethe by our lady the second by saint John Baptyst. and the
thridde by our lord (...) c^iste For (...) three byrthes i^ great joy ^^yn and
(...) Though a woman have great p^yne in the birth of her child I may (...)
believe saint Anne then our la^y^^ modre had not so in her birth of her
child our lady For ^he was hallowed in her mother: womb holy borne and ^oly
euir after So when she was born and wanyd and was three year of age. Ioachym
and anne and other friends. brought mary into the cite of Jerusalem to fore the
temple as they had made their auowe to fore Then the temple stood on an hill
and was xv f^eyres up to the door and so they left mary at the nethermooste
stey^e while they made them ready to do their offrynge Then went mary to the
vpperm^ste greece her self knelynge down and made her prayers to god as she
had been of great age For the holy gooste was euir with her and gave her
grace. Also god sent her an angel to keep. her and to teache her And when
her fader and her modre had offered ^^y w^nte home and left her there. and
she changed no ^here b^^ gave her selue. all to spirituell occupa^ion And
every day fro morrow to vndren she w^^ in her prayers. and from vndren to no^^
she occupied her craft of wenynge of clothes in the temple. And anon the mete
and the drynk that was set to her she gave to the pore people and was in her
devotion till an angel brought her mete. Then she l^^ed so clean and so
honestly that all her fel^wes called her q^^ne of mayd^^^^. And wha^ any man
spoke to he^ mekely she lou^ed with her head and said. Deo gracias. For that
word was common in her mouth. and therefore she is lykned to a spicers shop for
she smells sweet for the presence of the holy ghost was with her and
habundaunce of virtues. that she should bear the king of virtues And thus her
birth daily is joy to all christian people. How this day was first found a
great clerk John Byllet tellith There was an holy man that prayed to god often
by night time And so on a night as he was in his deuociones he herd a song
of an angel. in heuyn that our lady was borne. of her modre and no more of
all the year after So on a night he herd this melody in the air. wherefore this
holy man prayed to god that he might have wittynge what was the cause that he
herd that melody that certain night and no more of all the year after. Then
came an angel to him and said That night our lady was borne of her modre
and therefore the melody was made in heuyn at that time Then went he to the
pope and told him how the angel said Then the pope commanded that day
should be hallowed for euirmore. Thus come this feste first into holy church.
And so our lady is borne by water washing. that is by cristnynge For when
our lord Jesus criste was baptized in the water of flome iordane. Then our
lady and the xii. appostelles. in that time were cristned Therefore right as
our lord. followed the old law and the new. law both and all that fill to
a man of right and so our lady fulfilled both the laws and all that fill to a
woman at that cristnynge For there her sone took his right name and she both
And as the gospel tells when our lord Jesus was cristned the fader of
heaven spoke and said: Hic est filius meus dilectus etc. Here is my welbelouyd
sone: but after he was called gods sone* and before ye time our lady was
called the wife. of Joseph and after that she was called the modre of jesus to
much worship to her. The thridde time our lady was borne to joy passinge. For
when she should pass out of this world her son come with a great multitude
of aungelles and brought her to heuyn with much joy and there crowned her
queen of heuyn Empress of hell and lady of all the world. so she is. in
euirlastinge bliss.

Narraico
we find of our lady how there was a jew that was borne in France. and come
into England. for diverse matters that he had to do with other. people And
come to gloucestre. and to Bristowe and so would goo into wyllshyre but he was
take by the wey with theuys and ladde into an old house and bound to a post
and his hondes behind him and so left him there all night and at the last he
fill a sleep. and saw a fair woman clothed in white he neuir saw noon such
and even therewith he awoke and felt him selue loose. Then he saw our lady so
bright that he thought she passed the son and said what art thou and she
said I am mary that thou and thy nation despisen and say that I bare neuir
gods son. But now I am come to bring the out of thy error and out of
prison. yt thou art in. and therefore come thou with me and stand yonder at
the stone and look downewarde and so he did. and there he saw the horrible
peynes of hell that he was nygh out of his mind: Then said our lady to
him: These be the peynes that be ordained to al tho that will not believe in my
sons passion and in the feyth of holy church. yet come forth and se more and
she set him on a hye hill: and showed a place of great joy and myrthe. in
somoche yt he was rauysshed with that sight. Then said our lady Lo these been
ordained to al tho that believe in the incarnacion of god and that he was borne
of me and I clean maid before and after And yt my son shed his blood for
all mankind. Now haste thou seen both joy and pain. chose which thou haste
leuyr Then he went much of the night he wist not what way but walked
forth And on the morrow he come to Bathe there he was cristned and named John
and after was a holy man Then to come again to our purpose of our lady what
time that Ioachi^ had offered our lady into the temple to the bishop to keep
her save in ward till she were xii. year of age and more Then must the
busshop ordeyne her an husbonde. and then they let cry al about in the
country that kings. lords and other gentylles that were with out wives should
come at a certain day for to know who were best worthy to wedde that fair
maid that was flower of all maidens For right as the lily is white and fair
emonge briers and other flowers. Right so was our lady emonge other maydenes
So when they come to Jerusalem to see the maiden that was of the best blood
of the world The busshop ordained an old staff of asshe. that had been
kept in the temple many years and was al worm etyn and he said He that
handeleth that staff and burgenyd and bear flowers he should have the maiden.
and she was brought forth into the temple. y^ all the people might see her
Then ^ad the busshop bring forth the staf. and when any man handled it he bad
him hold it up on hye that the people might se if it burgened Then went it to
kings princes lords knights and sauyers and other gentylmen but it would.
not be the first day ne the second day so the thridde day they should make an
end Then came there an old man. into the temple and had herd of this but
he saw it not and thought to goo se how the people did and come thither and
stood a far in a corner. and looked on this maiden Then he thought in him
selue he would not handell the staf for this maid is not for me that is so
passing fair and I so passinge old. Then come there a white dove and fall
upon his head with a golden byll and her feet shone as it had be bright
burnysshed gold that all the people saw her and some would have caughte her.
but they might not Then was the busshop ware and badde Joseph come up to him
anon and Joseph said nay she is not for me. she is to young and I am to old
to govern her estate Then said the busshop handell this staf and he did. and
anon it was grene and began to burgyn and bare leuys and blosomed and bare
fruit. Then was the busshop glad and Joseph sorry for to have her for he was
full purposed neuir to have wife Then the busshoppe weddyd them worshipfully
and bad Joseph take her home with him and so he did Then sone after the holy
ghost lighted in her with gretynge of the angel gabriell And so began to
weye great with child Then Joseph looked on her and thought to have gone
away pryuely fro her and leave her allone Then come an angel to Joseph. and
badde he should take mary to his keeping and study no more thereupon. and leave
all such thoughts for it was gods will and god him self will that it be so.
Then he left all such fantasies and kept her well as a man should do his
wife:

De exaltacione sancte crucis.
Good friends such a day ye shall have holy rode day. in the which ye
shall come to the church in worship of him. yt was done on the cross: that
day is called Exaltatio sancte crucis The exaltacion of the crose. when saint
Elyn had set the crose in Jerusalem christian people did it great reverence But
then come the king of Perce that was called Cosdre and he took the cross
with him and made the cite bare. and bare awey. all yt he might and went into
the temple and took all the treasoure iewelles and precious stones and bare
them away Thus this cursed man did distroy many kingdoms and so bare the holy
cross into his own country Then the Emperor Eraclius herd hereof. and was
full wroth and sorry And sent to this king cosdre to trete with him For
eraclius was a christian man. Then cosdre aunsweryd cursedly and said he would not
trete till he had all his people to forsake cristendome and to do sacrifice
to his mawmentes Then this Emperor eraclius betook all to god. and gadred
him an ooste of people to fight with this cursed king cosdre. hoping in god to
get the holy cross again. But when this cursed king Cosdre. come he fill in
such a fantasy and madness that he took his sone all the governance of his
realm And let make an house for him selue. in manner of an altar like unto
heuyn and made it all shynynge gold and precious stones And set him selue in
the mids in a chair of gold. and commanded yt all the people should call
him god and so satte and the holy cross in his right ho^de instead of his
son. and on the left hand a tame cock instead of the holy gooste and him
selue in the mids. instead of the trynyte And thus he sat like a mad man
Then when his sone herd that Eraclius was coming. he went ayenste him and
met him at a great water over the which water. was a bridge Then by the
assent of both their often the ii. chief capitaynes a mids the bridge should
fight for hem all and both the ends of the bridge. should be drawn up And
which of them that had the victory should have both the kingdoms Then
was eraclius so full in feyth of the cross and trustyd in the prayer of the
people that he ouircome his enmy Then cosdres people by strengith of the holy
gooste. turned to the feyth by free will of hem selue And when they were all
criste nyd then went Eraclius with both the ostes to the old king cosdre as
he satt in his trone and said to him thus For by cause thou haste do worship
to the holy cross thou shall chose if thou will be crystned and have thy
kingdom again for a little trybute in rest and peace. or else to be deed.. and
he forsook to be cristned Then anoon Eraclius. smote of his head and made a
cry that his treasoure should be dealyd among his men and precious stones and
other Iewelles should be kept to restore the churches that were distroyed and
bare the cross to Jerusalem. And when he came to the mount of olyuete toward
the cite of Jerusalem riding on a traped horse he would have ryden into the
cite of Jerusalem but suddenly the gates fell to gydder and was a plain wall.
Then he was gretely astonyed and marueyled greatly of that vengeance and made
a great moan Then come an angel and stood upon the gates and said. Quando
rex noster. when the king of heuyn come this way through this gates toward his
passion he rode on no trapped horse nor in no clothe of gold but mekely on a
simple ^s^e gyuynge ensample of meekness to al people Then the angel went
his way then the king with all the devotion. yt he could or might do. anoon
did of his clothes to his sherte and went bare foot and bare legged Then the
gate opnyd and he went in to the cite and so to the temple and offered the
cross again as it was to fore Then for the great joy. that the people had
of that cross and for the great miracles that god showed it was more
worshypped after thanne it was to fore: and the worship of the croce yt was
cast down after was lift up. wherefore this day is called they altacion of the
cross For as saint Austyn says the cross was first of great spyte and
vilany. now it is of so great worship that emperoures kings worship it

Narracio.
we read in legenda aurea that a jew come to a church and for defaute that no
man was in the church he went to the rode and for great envy yt he had to
criste he cut the rodes throat and anon the blood stert out on his clothes
and so his clothes were all read blood and then he hyd the rode in a p^^uye
place And as he went home a christian man met him and said to him. Thou haste
slain some man where have thou done him. and he said nay. and the christian man
said thy clothes been all blody of him Then this jew kneled down and said
Forsooth the god that these christian people believe upon. is of great virtue and
told him how he had done and cried mercy with all his heart and so he was
cristenyd and a holy man after. and so went to euirlastynge joy and bliss to
the which god bring us all Amen.

De quatuor temporum.
Good friends this weke ye shall have ymbre days that is wednesday fridaye and
saturday. the which C^l^xt the pope ordained iiii. times in the year to all that be of couenable age to fast. For certain causes as ye shall here Our
old faders fastyd four times in the year ayenste four. hye and solemn
festes. and if we wol show us good children we must fast and follow the same
rule that they used and therefore we fast iiii. times First in march The
second at wytsontyde The thridde bitwene heruest and seed time and the iiii.
before cristmasse. March is a time that it dries up the moistre that is in
the earth. wherefore we fast that time to dry the earth of our body of the
humors that be needful to the body and to the soul for that time the
humors of lechery temteth a man most of any time of the. year Also we fast
at wytsontide for to get grace of the the holy ghost that we may be in love
and charity to god and to all the world. Caritas cooperit. multitudinem
pec^atorum. Charity covers the multitude of sins Also we fast for to have
meekness. in our hertes and to put away all pride yt reyneth within us Also
we fast bitwene heruest and sedetyme for to have grace to gader fruits of good
wer^is into the house of our conscience: and so by ensample of good living
among the people that we be comen with both rich and pore Also we fast in
winter for to slay all stynkynge wedes of sin. and of foul earth of
flesshely lusts: that make good aungelles and good people to withdraw them
fro us. For right as the nettyll brenneth roses and other flowers that grow
nigh him

In the same wise a vicious man or woman stereth and sets on fire them that
be in their company And for these causes we fast four times in the year and
every time three days that betoken three special virtues that help a man to
grace that is fasting devout prayenge and almessededys doing And by opunion
of much people these days. be called ymbre days because yt our elder faders
would on these days ete no bread but cakes made under ashes so by the etyng of
that they reduced into their mind that they were but ashes: and so should
turn again and wist natt how sone and by that they turned away from all
delyciouse metes and drynkes and took non head. but that they had easy
sustenaunce This caused them to think on death and yt will cause a man to
desire no more than he needs. and absteyne him selue fro all manner. of bodily
lusts And to encrese in virtues by the which we may come to euirlastynge
bliss. Amen.

De sancto Matheo.
Good friends such a day ye shall have saint Mathewes. day which was
cristes appostyl and ye shall fast the even and come to god and holy church in
the worship of god and saint mathewe He is gretely come^ded in holy church for
certain. holy virtues that he had He was obedient to criste at the first
calling the gospel he preched without faynynge and he suffered passion without
any denyenge. First he was obedient to criste. at the first calling for he
satte at a certain place besy to get good and crist come that way and looked
on him and bad him come and goo with him. Then he cast so great love to
criste that he left all his gods that he had. and sued criste forth full
simple and full pore Also he fed criste gladly. for on a day he prayed criste
to ete with him. and made criste a great fest. not in delicate metes and
drynkes But in fedynge criste and all his company. for he fed all that would
come for crystes sake for much people sued Criste where soeuir he went. Secute
sunt cu^turbe multe For diverse causes many followed him Some to be heled of her
sores and of diverse sekenes And some to see miracles that criste did show.
Some to ete and to drink with him. and some that were his enemies that were
learned in the law. if they might have taken him with any word whereby they
might have accused him. and some to be reformed in virtues and to here his
doctrine and techynge as the appostylles and many other. Vnde v^^^^s Morbus
signa cibus blasphemia doctrina fuere.

Cause cur dominum turba secuta fuit



And wahnne mathewe had fed criste thus. and all that come with him criste
made him oone of his descyciples and gave him knowlegynge. to preche the bileue
and gods word. so boldly euir after that he spared another for love ne for
dread So this matthew thappostell come on a time into (...) and preached that was
called ^^dabar and there he found much people taught by the fendes craft in
^^grama^^y and taught so many things and so merueylous that it was great
wondre to here many mennys wits and all for the people should believe in hem
and do worship to them Then mathewe delivered their nygraman^y so that all
the people knew openly that it was the fendes craft. wherefore these people
that byleuyd on this nygramancy made dragones. by the fendes craft to spytte
fire out of their mouths and brenne so that the stynche of them slew much
people And they brought this dragon to have devoured saint matthew And when
matthew herd hereof he made a cross before hem and went ayenste them: and anon
the dragones fell down deed before him

Then said matthew to the people If ye have any might raise them again to life
but they had no power Thennne said mathewe if I were not gods servant. I
would make were there two roches of stone on either side. that the work might
not up. Then saint mychael apered to a man that hight Haymo. and badde him
goo and put away the roche and dread no thing. So this man went thither and
set to his sholders. and bad the roche goo utter in the name of god and saint
Mychaell and so the hyllis went utter as much as needs to the work.

Narracio.
we read also in the life of saint Gregory, how there was a great multitude of
people in rome. And they saw arrows of fire come (...) of the air and slew
much people Then saint Gregory prayed to god to ^ease that pestylence.
Then he saw an angel stondynge upon a castle wall. wypyng his blody
sword. But that angel he said was saint mychaell that was sent thither to
punysshe the people for sin. thus mychaell was marvelous in miracles werkyng:
Also he was vyctoryous in fyghtyng. For when the cytezens of sepotine were
oppressed with paynymes and should give hem battle. they prayed often to saint
Mychaell of help Then the night before as the battle should be. mychaell
appeared to the bishop and said to him have no dread. but goo to the battle
boldly. and he would help him. and so on the morrow when the battle should be
the hyl of garganus was over covered with a great myste. and arrows come out
of the mist fleenge off fire. and boltes of thonder. And h^tre^ much people of
the paynyme in so much that they slew that night many. And so many were
sleyne. and they that were a live saw the great miracle of god and were
crystened. Saint John the euangeliste seyth in his apocalypse. how mychaell and
his angellis fought with lucyfer in heaven. that is called the dragon and his
angellis. and with help of god mychaell had the better. and drove out the
dragon and all his felisship in to the air between heaven and earth. and so
they be there yet as thick as motes in the son And for christ come to heaven
in a blast of thonder. And therefore yet when they here thonder. they fall down
to the earth for fere. and then they goo not up again till they have done so^me
harm For then they make ^ates stryues and manslaughter and make great
wyndes. both in land and in water. and do much harm. and yet they would
do much more than they do nere saint mychaell. For all their sorrow is to see
souls. angellis in heaven in the place there they were in to fore. Also there
were other spyrites. that stood not steadfast toward god. But flaterynge. the
which saint mychaell drove out of heaven all in to an isle off of the sea as ye
shall here. As saint Brandon seyled in the sea. he come to an isle and saw a
tree that was right great both in heyght and in bread: that was wonder to tell
on the which tree satte many birds. thycker than the bows. And were as white
as snow Then he prayed to god to know what they were. Then come one off
them and satte on the sh^ppis ^^^de and batered with his wings* and made a
sown like an organ ^^^me said bra^don* if thou become like a messenger speak.
and tell what ye been. Then he said we were angellis yt stood not steadfast
in the believe as mychael was and therefore we were dreuen out. when mychaell
drove out lucyfer and his angellis. But yet we have every day a remedy to
worship god then was mychaell wonderful in appering merueylous in miracles
doing. wherefore let us worship this holy angel that he may be our sheelde in
fighting against our goostly enemy the fend. so that we may have the victory of
him now and ever Amen.

De festo sancti Luce.
^Ood friends such a day ye shall have saint Lukes day the euangelyst^ ye
shall understand ye christ had four euangelistis. yt is mark matthew luke and
Iohn-thyse wrote the gospel. the gospel is no more to say but goddis word.
Thise holy euangelistis wrote not oonly that god spoke. but also what he did
and what he suffered for mankind. for it should be known to all mankind for
ever more. to think on goddis word and to do thereafter. Thise four be
lykened to four diverse beestes and so they ben portured in four parties off
the cross on every side of christ. For mark a lion. for matthew a man. for
Luke an ox. and for John an Egle. But let noman suppose that they were such
beestes. but lykened to such beestes. for diverse causes. For by cause that
Matthew wrote most of cristis man head. therefore he is likened to a man and
luke wrote most of crystis sacrefyce and his death ^herfore he is lykened to an
ox for an ox was offered in sacrifice of the old law. in tokeni^g yt christ
should be offered for sin of the people in sacryfice in the altar of the
cross. And mark wrote much of the resurreccion and therefore he is lykened to
a lion. For as the books say and tellen when a lion has young welpes they
shall lie as deed iii. days after they ben whelped. Then comes the lion and
sees his whelps deed. Anon he makes such a ^^^yng and a cryenge that the
deed whelps wake therwyth* and quyken and take life. So when criste had lay
three days in his tomb then the fader spoke to him and badde him rise. and
so rered him from death to life Also John is lykened to the Egle. For by kind
^e flees highest in to thayre. and next to the sonne^ so John wrote most of
the godhede. and but lityll of the manhede: these ben the causes that they be
likened to four deuerse beestes. But now ye shall understand that luke was
lykened to an ox th^e manner of wise that is in thought word and deed he
offered his thought to god For there as he was first besy to get goods of
the world with his craft. For as books tell he was first a leche. and for
couetyse of godde he slew many a man bodily then had he offended god so
grievously. yt anon he offered his thought in sacr^fice For as bo^es teache. god
is hyghly pleised with thought. that is when a man is sorry for his sins in
his heart. and thinks verily to forsake them and amend him. Also he offered
his word to god in sacrifice. for as he was wont to spend his speech in many
idle words: or he come to the appostle after he turned his speech to the
profit of all christian people. wherefore he went to our lady. and she taught
him the gospel that he wrote. And for he was a clean maiden our Lady
cherysshed him the more. And so taught him full goodly how the angel come to
her in message. And what he said. and what answer she gave again. and so all
thing that she did with her son. And of all her doing till our lord was
styed up in to heaven. And when Luke had learned this perfyghtly then he looked
what Mark had wreten and mathewe. and so took at them. And there as they
wrote derkely. he wrote openly all thing Thus in prechyng and techynge he
offered his words to god in sacrefyce. For he peyned his body with diverse
penance of fasting and of hard living in keeping and praynge. Also he wrote
all the persecucion that the postles suffered of the jews in Iherusalem. when
they had great pursuit and tourmentes for goddis sake. And he wrote all the
perscucion of saint Steven. how he was stoned to death. Then went saint Luke
to saint poule. and showed him how many myscheues and diseases that he had And
in great dread and never dep^rted from him. till poule was deed. Then went
Lu^^ to a country that was called betany and there he preched the word of god.
And was there till he was lxi. winter of age. then he deyed full fair full
of the holy gooste. For he lived in holy virtues. And after his death God showed
for him many fair miracles. and so ended in criste. And went to everlasting
bliss. To the which god bring us all.

De Simone et Judah.
GOod frendis such a day ye shall have the feste of Symo^ and Jude. And ye
shall fast the even and on the morrow come to church. and worship god and
these holy appostles ye shall understand that either of these has two names.
that one was called Simon zelotes. and that other Judas Iacola. and Judas
thadeus. showing by these: how the name that a man has in this world deyeth
and passes out of mind when he is deed wherefore every Christian man should be
besy to take him a name that should be wreten in the book of lyff. that should
last ever. And therefore these two appostles suffered great penance. traueyle
trybulacion and disease. and at the last pain of death for crystis sake with
hertes meke and clean consience. Simon is as much to say as obedience that
makes a man meke in heart. Judas is as much to say as confession. that
cleanses a mannis concience of all manner off sin. And thus before or they
deyed they gave to every man ensample how they took their death mekely for
crystis sake and deyed with clean concyence. And then they shall be wreten in
the book of life with great worship in the fraternity of heaven But they that
grutchen in their hertes of disease and persecusion. and ever pleynyngt they
have need to pray to god to be heled off that sykenesse. that they have in her
spirytis.

Narracio.
we find in the life of the appostle. how a king that was called Abagarus^ and
was a leper and herd how yt our lord Ihesu criste did many miracles. and heled
all that were syke: Then he wrote a lettre in this wise king Abagarus
greteth Ihesus Savior well. that precheth in the country off Iherusalem. And I
have herd of thy miracles that thou do and so thou helest all manner of
sikenesse without any herbs or salues. blind. crooked and the lame. And that
is more merueyle yt thou reysest deed bodies to life wherefore I think in my
heart and in my believe that thou art very goddis sone and come down from heaven
to earth. and lyueste here among the people as one of hem. wherefore I write to
the yt thou will come to me and hele me of my leprehede. that greueth me full
sore. And so I understand that the jews have ordained to do the to death.
And I have a little cite that is good and honest. and plentuous. and it is
suffysaunt ynought for us both to live by. and there shall we both live in
rest and peace then christ wrote again and said. thou art blyssed that
byleueste on me. and have not seen me and for thou would that I should come to
the. I say to the I must d^^ that I come fore. and then (...) send some of
my disciples to (...) that shall hele the of thy leprehede. Then for this
that christ might not come to him. For great desire that he had to see him

He sent to him a paynter that was a master of that craft. to paynte crystis
vysage as he cowde. but when this paynter come to criste and looked on his
vysage* it (...) so bright that he might not look t^^^ on. Then he made
great sorrow and mourning. that he was come so f^^re: and might not speed of
his purpose. Then criste took a clothe of the peynter and wyped his face
therwyth and then was the form of his face thereon. and then the peynter
bare it to the king. Then was the king wonder glad and did it great
reverence with all his heart. Then after cristis ascension Thomas of ynde. by
the assente of the appostles was sent to this king Abagarus. And when he saw
thomas he saw such a shyning in his face that he went it had be crist. Then
said thomas to the king. Believe in Crist. and thou shall be hole. And he said
I believe hole in him. and feyne I would be wroke on them that haven do him to
death and anon he was hole. Then Judas went to simon and went both to
gyder in to persy to preche. And there they did many miracles. so that they
turned the king. and xlii. thousand to christian feyth.

And so the christian peaple increased strongely. So the king and all his meny
were crystened. and wythdrewe their offrynges from the mawmentes. that was the
bisshops living. wherefore they were so wroth that they gadred hem too gydre
and took these appostles. and lad them in to their temples. to do sacryfyce to
their mawmentis. or else they should be deed. Then come an angel. and asked
hem if they would have her enmyes deed or no. And they said they desired to
have her enmies turned to the feith

And the angel asked if they would suffer marterdom for crystis sake. and they
said they would suffer death. Then they commanded and turned to the
mawmentes in the temple. and commanded the fendes in them to come out. and to
pulle the images all to pieces. and so they did. Then was the bishop wroth.
that her goddis fell so too pieces. And anon there come a thondryng and a
lightening and cloue the temple in iii. parties down to the ground. and
these bisshoppes suddenly slew these appostles. Then the king took their
bodies. and beryed hem ryally. And made ther^ (...) fair church in worship of
god: and th^se holy appostles. Amen.

De fest^ olm sanctorum.
GOod frend^^ such a day ye shall have all halowen day and ye shall fast
the even: and on the morrow come to the church and worship god and our lady.
and all halowyn. Friends ye shall understand that this feste was ordained for
three special causes. and those ben these First for the temple halowyng. for
omyssion fulfyllyng. and also for neclygent living. First for the temple
halowyng for when the Romany were lords of all the world. they made a temple
in Rome like a doffehous and named it pantheon and set in the mids of the
temple an image that was the cheef mawmente of Rome. and of every land in the
world another image all about the walls. and the name of the land that the
image was off wreten under the foot of the image. And all was made by
nygrymancy. if that any land turned from the emperor. Anon the image of the
land would turn his ba^ke to the image of rome. and his face to the wall.
So when the bishop come to the temple and found any image turned. anon
they would goo to the emperor and tell him. Then would they ordeyne an oste
of people and send in to that land. and set them at rest and peace. And so
this temple endured thus unto the time that pope Boneface the fourth came
Then he went to the emperor that was called foca. and prayed that he would
give him that temple. that he might put out the multitude of mawmentis. And
to halowe it in the worship of god and our lady and all h^lowen. and so he
gave the pope the temple. Then come there another pope that was called
Gregory. and commanded all holy church to halowe the fest. like as it was
begone. Also this feste was ordained by the same pope to fulfylle our omyssions.
For many saints days in the year we leven unserved. for there be so many
that we may not serve echeone by him self. For as Iherom says. that there ben
for each day in the year x. thousand marters. out take the first day of
January. wherefore holy church ordained that this day we should fulfylle. that
we have left behind all the year. And thus every saints even has his
worship to god and our lady and all halowen. Also this feste is ordained to be
hallowed to cleanse us of our necligence and vncu^nynge. and also by wordely
occupacions doing. we be full recheles in keeping our holy days. and therefore
this feste is ordained for we shall make amends asmoche as we maye^ of yt we
have trespassed in other festes And therefore understand ye that they been in
great perell that break this feste. or any other in wordely ocupacyons werkyng.
or in any sin doing. in byeng or in sellyng. or in any other falshede
contryuyng. Also ye shall understand that this day our prayers shall be
sooner herd than any other day. For this day all the saints in heaven come
to gyder to pray to god for us: and therefore ye may know well that all coming
to gyder shall be sooner herd than one or two by hem self. The saints that been in heaven were some time as we ben now. both in flesh b^ode body. and
bone. And were our elder faders. and they ben full glad and make much joy
when they may get any preyers or almesdedes of us. with the which they may
present god and our lady* prayng for us. and to show you by ensample. how
that all saints come to gyder: as this day ye shall here.

Narracio.
we find wreten in legenda aurea. that in the same year this fest was ordained
to be hallowed there was a keeper of saint P^ters church in Rome yt this day
after matens at mydnyght. when all the people were gone from matens. for great
devotion that he had* he went to every altar in the church and said his
deuocions. And when he had gone all about. then went he to the hye altar:
and there fell a sleep. and his spyrite was rauysshed. and saw the fader of
heaven syttyng in his mayeste. and a great multitude of angellis abowte him. And
then come a fair queen with a crown on her head rychely arrayed and a great
company of vyrgins and maidens s^ynge her ^^enne the king arose against her
and ^adde to fetch a chare of gold and set h^ ^in. Then come (...) clothed
(...) ^nels skinnis and him sued a great company of good men. Then come
another ly^e a bishop. and after him many other bishops And then come a
great multitude as it had been knights. and after him much other people and
all they come before the king and did him worship Then the bishop began to
say^^mate^s. then spak this man to the angel that lad him. and asked what
all these people were in that array. Then said the angel the king is god
him self. And the Queen is our Lady. and he that was clothed in camels skynnis
was Johan Baptiste. and other patryarkis and prophets with him. The bishop
was saint peter and other apostles and confessors with him The knight was
saint George with other marters comyners that were good true lyuers and
servants to god here upon earth. And they come all to thank god for the
great worship that they had here in earth and prayed besely to god for them on
earth. that he should have mercy on hem. This is the cause that this feste was
first found and therefore let us come to church and worship god and all
halowen. that they may pray for us that we may at our last end be af the
nombre yt shall worship god. that the book speaks of. and says thus. Vidi
turbam magnam qu^m nemo dinumerare poterat. For they ben so many that no man
can nombre hem. And all they pray for us evermore that we may (...) to that
bliss that they ben in A^

In die Anin^aru^^.
GOod frendis such a day ye shall have all souls day the day of the souls
in purgatory there abydyng the mercy of god and have much need to help. And
right as holy church worshyppeth all saints to be helped by the prayers of
hem right so holy church ordeynyth this day to sing and read. And to do
almysdedes. having full believe to relese them that been in purgatori of their
peines. wherefore god will that christian people to their power this day releue
hem. For the lest prayer or almysdede that is done greatly releueth them. ye
shall vnderstnnde that there ben four things that greatly helpen souls yt ben
in purgatory and yt ben these. Fideliun amicorum oraco^ el^ mosinarum largicio.
salutaris hostia ieiuniorum obseruacio. That is prayers of friends devoutly
said and almysdede doing. And masses syngyng. and abstynence in fasting.
prayers helpen much a soul. For like as a lord that has a man in prison or
in any dystresse and at the prayers of him that he loves. he releseth in
party or all. And that is showed by ensample.

Narracio.
we find wreten in legenda aurea. how that there was a man yt had his house
fast by a chircheya^^e side And that his door opened to the church and he used
by custom as often as he come or went to ^ay^ every time Deprof^dis. for all
christian souls. Then it happed so on a time yt he was pursued with enemies.
as he went homewardes: But when he come in to the church yard. he kneled
down. and thoug^ (...) say. Deprofundis. And this en^^^es come after. Anon
the deed bodies rose euerychone with such Instrumentis as they wroughte with
by her lives and anon they drove away his enemies. But when they saw that
they cried god mercy and this man. and ever after prayed. and deed almesdedes
for them that were in peine. Thus ye may well prove that devout prayers
helpen may a soul yt ben in purgatory. Also almesdedes helpen many a soul.
Sicut aqua extinguit ignem ita elemosina extinguit pctm^. Right as water
quenches fire so almesdede quenches the sin yt brenneth them in purgatory.
if they ben in good lyff and in parfyghte charity that done it. And if alms
deed be done for them that been in joy. and have no need thereto. It is put to
the tresour off holy church. And as gods will is so it is deled and
releueth them that have most need thereto. and so god assygneth it to them: And
then the souls that been helped therwyth. thank the soul that this was done
for. Thus ye may know well that almesdedes helpen greatly souls. that is done
fore. and ben in purgatory. For often holy men have herd fendes cry* and make
great sorrow. For with almesdedes souls were taken from them.

Narracio.
we read in old time good people would on all halowyn day bake bread and dele
it for all christian souls. And yet there ben some that vsen it. but all to
few. we find in legenda aurea. of a knight that should goo to a battle and
had a cosyn that he loved passing well. And said to him thus. if he were sleyn
in the battle. he should selle his horse. and deal the valor to pour people
in alms to pray for all christian souls. So it happed that he was slain.
and his cosyn loved well the horse: and took him to his own use* Then soon
after this knight appeared to his cosyn and said thus to him these viii. days
for my horse thou haste made me to brenne in purgatory. And therefore god will
take vengeance on the. Forsothe quod he this day thy soul shall be in hell
with the fend. Et ego purgatus vado i^ regnu^ dei And I am purged and shall go
to the kingedom of heaven. and anon an horrible noise was herd in thayre of
fendes. and caught this man and bare him away. The third that helps is the
mass for when any soul appears to any man to have any help. he desires
masses and prays to have masses songe^ for him Right as mete and drink
comfort a man when he is feeble. so the sacrament of the awter comfort
the souls that the masses ben done for. It is wreten in legenda aurea how a
bishop suspended a priest. for he cowde say none other mass but of requiem
but he song every day devoutly after his connyng. Then on a day as the
bishop went toward matens. it seemed to him that deed bodies rosen and rome a
bowte him. And said thou have said no mass for us. and more over thou have
taken our priest away from vs^ Look that this be amended* or else god will in
short time take vengeance on the for our sake. Then was the bishop gretely
a ferd and anon he bad the pressed sing mass off requyem* as he did to fore.
and so he did os often as he might.

Narracio.
Also we find that fisshers set her nets in heruest to fysshe. and they
took up a great pese of yse. and yt it was the coldest yse that ever they
felt. And it would not melte for the son. Then brought they that yse to
the bishop For he had a great brennyg hete in his foot. and it was the coldest
that ever he felt then spoke there a voys to him out of the yse. and said. I
am a soul that suffer my penance here in this yse for I have no friends that
will do masses for me. I shall be delivered out of my penance. and thou shall
be hole of thy sykenesse. if thou wylt say mass for me. And he said he would
singe for him. and bad tell him his name. and ever while he was at mass. he
laid the yse under his fet. and ever as he said mass the yse melte away: And
so within a while the yse was molten and the soul from peyn. And the bishop
was hole of his sykenesse. Then the soul appeared to him with much joy* and
said. with thy masses syngyng I am helped out off pain in to everlasting
bliss And he told the bishop that he should deye soon after and come to
everlasting joy without end. to the which god bring us all Amen.

De festo scti^ Ma^^^i^.
GOod frendis such a day ye shall have saint Martens day. when marten was
xv. year of age he cut his mantell in two pieces. as he rode among other
knights. and was yet not crystened. and gave half his mantell to a pour man
for goddis sake that asked alms. then the night after god had the same
clothe and said to his angel. Marten that yet is not crystened has clothed me
in this clothe. and marten herd this word out of heaven. and anon he was
cristened. And then anon he left this worlds occupacion. And gave him all
to holiness. So as he rode on a time by the way. the fend come in likeness
of a man and met him and asked wheder he would. and he said thither as god will
then said the fe^de I will be thy ennemy in all that I can: then said
marten. god is my help. and therefore I dread the not Then Marten wexed so
holy that he rered deed bodies to lyff. and so for his great holiness he was
chosen bishop off turon. So on a time as men were in great perel and like to
be spilte one of he^ knew the holiness of marten. and said marten help and
anon they were helped Also he rode on a time in visytacion a hou^d ran at a
hare under his horse fete then had he pity of this best. and bad the hou^de
stand still and let the best go and anon the hou^de stood still as he had be
put in to the earth. Also he saw an adder swi^myng in the water. and he said
to thadder. In nomine dni^ uibeo te redire. In the name of god I command the
to goo again where thou come fro and anon she turned again. Then marten
sighed wonder sore. and said I am sorry that serpents heren me: and men will
not here me. A another time he come by the gates of the cite that hight Paris.
and there he kyssed an horrible mesel and anon he was hole with the same kiss
Also he was so pacient that many times his own clerks mocked him. and yet he
suffered it patiently and was not wroth. So on a time as he rode by the way in
his visytacion: for yt was his manner. he had a roughe mantell of black. and
came a carte by the way with caryage and the bestes in the carte saw the
black waueryng with the wind they fled away and all to brake her gere.
Then the carter with his whyppe al to beat marten and gave him many sore
strokes. and all he suffered mekely and said no thing. The^ would they have
gone her way. But they might not stere fro the place till they know yt it was
marten. and then they ^ryed him mercy. and then anon he forgave them. and
the bestes passed fai^^ forth: and all the harneis was sauf enough Also on a
time as marten satt in his set. the fend come to him in likeness of a king
with a shynynge crown and said I am come fro heaven to speak with the believe on
me. Cristus ego sum* for I am christ And marten looked on him and said my lord
Ihesu christ will not come in such array and thou be crist show me thy wou^des
And anon the fend went his wai And left an horrible stenche behind him. yet
another time he come to marten. and repreued him that he took people to him
that had sinned and were shreuen and turned again to the sin that they had
done to fore.

And said though thou take them to they grace god will not Then said marten
wretch and thou will leave the pursuit off christian people and ask mercy with a
meke heart I trust to god he is so merciful that he will give the mercy and
when marten should pass out of this world. and lay in his deed bed* the fend
come and satte by him dysputynge with him if he might have caughte him in any
word of mysse believe in his end: marten said to him. Goo hens thou cruel
beeste. for thou shall no thing find amysse with me. But god shall receive
me. And then he made to lay him in ashes and heir. And then he said the
seven spsalmes and the letany and gave up the ghost. and was beryed in his own
church with much honor Then liiii. wynters after there come a bishop. and
translated him. And when he made all thing ready he laid hand on Martens body
to have borne it forth but he might not. Then thought the bishop it is not
martens will to be remeued. and left of. Then come a fair old man and bad
him go to again. and he would help him. and then they bare the body in to the
to^be without lettyng. And so when the service was done. this old man vanished
away. And there by they knew well that it was saint marten. and then god
showed many fair miracles for hym^

Narracio.
It happed on a time. that there were two beggars. that one was lame and might
not goo and that other was blind and might not see. And so to make the people
to have the more compassyon of them. the blind bare the lame. and the lame
taught the blind where he should goo. and thus they gate much good and had an
esy life. But they were ever aferde to mete with the shryne of saint marten.
leest he would have heled hem of their sykenesse. And so on a time at a streets
end. at a tournynge sodeynli at a corner they met with the shryne of saint
marten. and anon they were both hole. And the blind might see. and the lame
might goo: And then they cried to saint martyn. and said. Marten we thank
the for the good yt we have had for thy sake here to fore. but we thank the
not for our hele. For now we must goo labor and traueyle. and so get our
living. For the people will give us no more alms. and here to fore we lived
full easily with lytyl traueyle. and fared well. Alas alas that we come here this
day. For now our myrthe and welfare is gone Thus this holy man did many
miracles. wherefore ye may see that he may do much with god. therefore let us
pray to him that he may pray to god for us.

De scta^ Katherina virginie
GOod frendis such a day ye shall have saint Katherins day the holy marter she
was a kingis daughter. and come of great birth. But she set all her mind to
god. and set naught by the pride vainglory and richesses of this world. For it
is but a vanyte. but she set her al oonly on ihu^ So wha^ she had been at scole
and learned a while anon she would dispute with any clerk that would come. For
she was enspyred with the holy ghost. But when she herd on a time yt
maxencius was come to the town of alisau^dre with so much people and so
ryally. that the cite dommed of them. For he come to make a solemn sacrefyce
to his goddis that were of gold and silver. in likeness of bullis and calves
and other bestes. Then saint Katheryne saw that. and blyssed her: and went
in to the temple. and rebuked the emperor boldly and said that he did soul
amysse. for to do that worship to fe^des. and leave the worship of god in heaven
that made all thing of naught. and sent man life wit and hele. and preued
(...) great reason how christ was ^oth (...) and man. And how he bou^ (...)
kind with his passion on the cross^ with his death. And taught how every man
should honor god. and leave false mawmentes. Then was the Emperor wroth And
bad take her to ward till he might be at leyfer. So in the mean time: he
sent after the grettest masters and the wyseste clerks that were in many
countries far about him. And when they were comen he bad them goo and
dyspute with Katheryne. and overcome her. and they should have right well for
their labor. Then were they wroth to come so far to dyspute with a woman.
And said the left scoler in the scole had be enough to overcome her. But when
Katheryne had dysputed with them with the help of the holy ghost she converted
them euerychone to the feyth off our lord Ihesu criste. In so much that they
were ready to suffer death for cristis sake. Then anon maxencius. commanded
to make a great fire. and bren^e them in the fire. But by the help of the holy
ghost the fire brenned no party of their bodies another the leest clothe of
them. and yet lay fair deed as they had be a sleep. Then the emperor made
do Katherine to be naked and to beat her with sharp scourges. that she was all
blody. and full of wou^des. And then he put her in to prison seven days:
without any manner mete or drink. Then had the queen great lust to speak with
Katheryne and took a knight with her yt hyghte porphyri^s. and went to
katheryne. and then they saw an angel set a crown of shynnynge gold on
the queen's head. and another on porphiryus head. and bad hem be steadfast. For
within three days they should come to heaven. by suffrynge of marterdom. Then
sent the emperor after Katheryne. and went to have found her nygh deed. but
all that time god sent her mete from heaven. And when the emperor saw her a
live. he was wode for wroth and made her to be set between ii. wheles. and
turned one upward and another downewarde. full of hokes and sword points for
all to raze Katheryne. the^ come an angel as it had be a wind. and all to
brake them. and slew four thousand of the tyrauntes. Then saw the queen
that miracle. and come before the king her husbonde. and rebuked him that he
saw the might of god so openly. and would not believe thereon. Then bad the
king led forth the queen. and cut of her pappes from the body with hokes and
then to smite of her head. Then for porphpryus beryed her and lxxx. of her
knights were martered with her and porphyrius be heded also: Then spoke the
Emperor to Katheryne. and said: that he would wedde her. and she would forsake
christ and believe in his goddis. and she said she set naught by him nor by
his goddis. And when he saw that he made to smite of her head. Then anon instead of blood come out fair milk. And then came an angel and bare the
soul in to heaven. And then angellis come and bare the body in to the air.
and so to the mount of Synay. and there beryed it with worship And there god
werketh many fair miracles to this day. At the foot of the mount there is an
abbey of monks that lyuen in great abstynence. and this abbey is strong and
hye walled. and barred abowte with yren for wild bestes And in that abbey
lies saint Katheryne in a fair tomb of albester. for her bones were fetched
thither for the more worship. and above the church is the busshe there god stood
in when he spoke to moses. and wrote the law in two tables of stone and the
busshe is as grene and fair. as it was the same day. Also in that abbey is a
great merueyle: and is this every monk has a lamp with oil br^nnyng. and
when he shall deye they shall know by his lamp. For as he draws to death so
derketh his lamp And when the abbot deyeth his brederen shall sing a mass of
the holy ghost and bery him solempny. and when mass is done. they shall find a
bylle wreten on the auter who shall be abbot. and so they chose her abbot. Also
on saint Katherins night all the birds in the country comen thither. and each
off the^ bring a branche of olyue in her byllys to the place. and as pylgrimes
sainthe monks make oil of the branches to her lamps for all the year. we
find and read of a man yt served Katherine and fasted her even bread and
water. and on a time he come in felyshyp of recheles people and by comfort of
the^ he left his fast and ete with hem. and so in the night after he saw a
great company of maidens coming by him. and among them there was one passing
all other. and each of hem had a crown but one had a passing fair crown and
that was saint Katheryne. So wha^ she come by this man she hyd her face from
him. and would not look on him. then he asked one of them what they were and
she said we ben virgyns. and the pryncipall that thou see is saint

Katheryne: that hyd her face from the. by cause thou have left thy deuoucion
fro her even of fasting. Then this man repented him sore that he had do
this deed. and turned again to his deuoucion and fasted. and after was a holy
man and therefore let us worship this holy virgin. yt she may pray for us all
Amen.

De dedicacione ecclesie.
^Ood fre^des such a day ye shall have your dedycacyon day. that is your
church holy day. ye shall come to church and here your deuyne service in the
worship of god. And for iii causes the which the church is hallowed for. that
is for the church clensynge. for devout praynge. and for the deed bodies
berynge. the first is for the church clensyng the church is ordained for all
the people that come thider should be in parfyte charity. and there mete with
god. for god is ever there present. and when all the people come^ so to gyder at
this assignement. it pleyseth god to here hem and her good words in that
place. But when the fend seth any man besy thereto he is full sorry. and seeks
all the ways yt he can or may to let him from the church for they should not
come to the presence of god Then when holy faders knew the malice of the
fend. they ordained the church to be hallowed. And so by good preyers the
fend is ^reuen out: But if any cursed liver bring him in again that is out
of charity. or in dedely sin is with the fend. and the fend with him. But
how the fend is dreuen away by halowyng. I will tell you by ensample. that
is wreten in legenda aurea: Saint Gregory says in a book yt is called
dyalogus. on a time as a ch^rche was on halowyng. a swyne ran among the
people to and fro. and so ran out of the church door. and that was a fend
yt ran away. but yet the next night after he come again and made such
anoyse as though all the church should have fall down. and then come never
again more But there be many lewd people that say her prayers. they were as
good at home as at church: For if there be any man or woman. that has a
matter to speak with his good friend. and would feyne have his ^nte^te. he will
go home to his house goodly and lowely in hope to speed the better. Right so if
any man would pray to god deuoutli he should come to church. there is god. for
he that is in clean life and prays to god speaks with him for many of you
wot not how ye should pray. The setting of the church gives you knowleche.
for the church is set in the este. And so when ye pray. set your hertes in
the est prayng hertely for mercy with perfyte charity. For though it be put
out of your heritage by malice of the fend* that is enmye to your souls. For
we should not have the joy of paradyse that he was in. and lost it by his
pride Also we lost it by our fadres trespase adam. let us think that crist
deyed in the est. And therefore let us pray besely in to the est that we may
be of the nombre that he deyed fore.

Also let us think that he shall come out of the este to the dome. wherefore
let us pray hertely to him and besely that we may have grace of contrycyon
(...) our hertes of our misdeeds with shryft and satisfaction. that we may
stand that day on the right ho^de of our lord Ihesu crist. and so be off the
nombre that shall be saved and come to everlasting bliss and joy and yt we
may escape that horrible rebuke yt shall be given to all them yt shall be
dampened and goo to everlasting pain that will not be sorry and repent them and
ask mercy in this world. And thus for devout prayers. holy church was
ordained to be hallowed. For god says thus. Domus mea damus oracionis
vocabitur. My house is called an house of prayers But it is now made an house of
rownynge. whysperynge. cryeng clatering scornyng. tales and simple speaking.
mowyng of vanyte and many simple words and lewd.

Narraico
we read how saint Gregory was at mass on a tywe. and saint Austyn was his
deken and bad the people turn to the popes blessyng. Then he saw two
wymmen rowne to gyder in the popes chapel. and the fend sat in her ne^ke
writing a great roll. and it lacked parchemente and he drew it out with his
teeth and so it fell out of his claws and saint Austyn saw it and went and
took it up. Then the pope was wroth and asked him. why that he loughe him
to scorn.

And he showed him what the fend had wreten of the wymen and then he come to
the wymen and asked them what they had said. all this mass time. and they
said our Pater noster Then the pope badde read the roll to them that the
fend had written And saint Gregory read it. and there was neuir a good word
therein Then they knelyd down and asked mercy and besoughte the pope to pray
for them and so he did amd broghte them out of the fendes books Alsoo. for
long resting to holy church for when a man is deed he is brought to the
church to his rest Sometime the people were buried at home as pore people and
the rich were buried in the hill tops. and some at the foot of the hill in
tombs made of rocks. But for the sauoure was so great and grievous holy faders
ordained church yerdes to bury the people. for ii. causes One is to be prayed
for as holy church uses And another is for the body shall lie there without
trauayll For the fe^des has no manner of power. to any thing within christian
buryelles But if so be that the deed body be not worthy to be buried in such
holy ground For as John Byllet tells that there should noon other body be
buried in the church but if it be the patron that defends it fro bodily
enmyes: or the parson. vicary. priest or clerk that defend the church fro
gostly enneuyes with (...). For so^ (...) buried the^^ and cast out (...) on
the morrow and (...) in the grave. (...) come on a time to a wardeyn of a
church and badde him go to the bishop. and bid him cast out the body that he
had buried therr or else he shall be deed within threty days. and so he was for
he would not do as he was bydde.

Narracio.
Also we read in gestis of Rome that an angel told an holy Busshoppe. that
hight Encres how that charles. the king of France. was dampened for he took
away holy church right. yt good people had given tofore and bad him go and
open his tomb: and see it Then the busshop went with other people and opned
the tomb and there came out a great dragon and sleep forth. and left the
tomb brennynge within as it had be an ouyn mouth

And thus to bury in holy place is but little avayll to them that be damned
Also there be many that walk on nyghtes when they be buried in holy place but
that is not long of the fe^de but of the grace of almighty god. which grace.
he grant us all that for us shed his blood on the rode tree Amen:

Per me Ricardum Pynson.
T^ (...) se (...) and the first destinc^ion says. that the sovereign cause
why god made all creatures in heuyn earth or water (...) his oune godenes by the
which he would that some of them should have part and be communers of his
euirlastinge blis But for asmoche as no creature might come to that bliss
without knoulege of him* Therefore he made reasonable creatures as angels and
mankind of wit and wisdom. whereby they should know him and so through that
knowledge come to the bliss that they were made to This manner of knowledge had
our forne fader Adam and eve in the state of their innocencye without any
trauayll. The which we should haf had also if they had not sinned But that
knowledge that we have now is of herynge learning and teching of other that can
the law and the faith of holy church The which we that have the cure of
souls be bound to teache or to do teache our parisshynes on pain of
dampnacion of our souls And for asmoche as my will is not to offend god
neither to lose mine own soul ne youres I purpose by his leave homly thus to
show it and read it. to you in the book For to your lerning it is as good as
without And thus did Esdras moses and Baruke. in the old law. and so did
criste alsoo in the new law* And right as I am thus bound to tell and to
teache it you so be ye bound to learn it and to conne it and so to teache it to
other folk. the which be under you to your power. And how ye shall come to
this knowledge of god these th^nges following. shall show you. This is the
first peticion of the Pater noster The first is the Pater noster the which
our lord made and taught his disciples. which conteyneth seuyn short
peticiones. The first is Fader our that art in heaviness hallowed be thy name
By this ye be behold to love each other as sustre and brother And also to yield
him worship and d^ede for the great worthynes riches and farrnesse that he has
here yeuyn and lent to you For more worthynesse may not be than to be called
the sone of god ne riches greter thanne to be air of the blys of heuyn. ne more
fayrnesse then to be like to such a fader for we be all* brethren and
susterne of one fader. and modre that is god and holy church In tokenynge that
noon of us should. scorn other as the proud does the pore. (...) He is also
in heuyn not withstondynge that he is in every place. but yet most propyrly
he is in heuyn Therefore halowe we so his naname in us here that we defoule natt
his holiness by sin: But that by the yefte of wisdom we may so here be
cleansed fro all fylthe of sin and so fulfilled of his love that all other
louys contrary to his will be byttre to us. The secounde. is thy gyngdome come
to us (...) is to say that he and his holiness so reyne and govern all our
life here. that we may after reign with him in blys that euyr shall last. and
by very charity thou shall distroye the for sin of envy. The thridde is. thy
will be done in earth as it is in heuyn and tho that grudge in sickness. loss
of gods or other diseases ayenste god do against this peticion and greatly
displease god Therefore pray we that as all aungelles and holy souls. please
god in heuyn so must we here in earth no thing asking ayenste his will And
thus by love thou shall distroye. the foul sin of wrath. The fourth is
Our every days bread give us to day. that is to say our full sustenaunce of
body and soul Thus prayed the wise man that said Lord neither richesse ne
pouerte give me But that that is necessary to my lyuelode. By this is couetyse
distroyed and the gift of compassion and pity brought in. The fyft is and
forgive us our trespasses as we forgive them that trespass against us This
is ayenste the that beryst great rancor and malice against thy neighbor Or
art to gredy of thy dettes to the pore and will. not forgive him a little
debt or trespass. there as god forgyueth the many grievous offenses. for the
which ne were his great mercy thou sholdeste be dampened. To this therefore is
knyt the spyrite of conn^nge* that shewith that what thou art. and what parell
thou stondest in and what our lord suffered for the. The syxte is And led us
not in te^ptacion It is not to pray here that no temptacion assayll us in
that. the devil has license to tempte man as he did* Christ and his appostels
and us aldaye does. so that his power may not be put away without the
help and merry of god Therefore holy fader by the help and grace of the
spyrite of pity keep our hertes in temptacyon that we consent not ne be
ouircome with sin

The vii is But deliver us from all evil of sin amen. And this is the last
peticion to the which is yeuen the spyrite of dread that makes a man to
withdraw him from all evil of sin for the beginning of wysdom is to dread
god and his right wysnes. These seuyn peticiones thus with a clean heart asked
remeueth and puts away the seuyn dedely synnnes. and endueth thy soul with
many holy. virtues. Aue maria. Furthermore as for the salutacion of our lady
pope Urban and pope John to al being in clean life. that in the end of the Aue
maria say these words Jesus amen. as often as they say it they have granted of
pardon lxxx: and four days. And so as often as thou sayste our ladies
sauter. so often thou haste of pardon xxxiiii. year and xxx wekes. These be the
xii. articles of the faith The first is Credo in deum patrem omnipotentem
creatorem celi and terre. et cetera. The second thing that thou should know
god by be the articles of the feythe By the which grace and mercy be purchased
of god and each virtuous deed strengthed. what this faith is thies articles
suynge shall show you. The first is I believe in god fader almighty maker of
heuyn and of earth To believe to god is one and to believe in god is another The
devil believes to god that is to say that he and his. words ben true. yet
many one fails herin For and they did believe that the words of god were true
that is to say that for their good dedys they should have euirlastinge life. and
for their evil dedys the peynes of hell they would either for dread or for love
amend them

To believe in god says saint austyn is to cleue to god by love fulfyllynge his
will. this is very believe Thus and if thou sin ayenste god it is for lack of
believe. yet in that. he is of power to plenysshe the. If thou wylt not leave it
The secounde is Et in iesum cristum filium eius vnicum dominum nostrum. I
believe in jesus criste his only sone our lord Understand here that jesus
christ the sone is in heuyn with the fader. without beginning. and that the
fader does nothing without the son ne the son without the fader. And
thus both they be almighty The third article is. Qui conceptus e^ de spiritu
sco^natus ex maria vigrine I believe that he was conceived of the holy gooste
and borne of the virgyne mary Here Criste the second person. of the holy
trynite took flesh and blood of our lady by the ^oly ghost with out
medlynge of man She being a maid after as she was to fore For as she
conceived him with out sin. and bodily pain. She childed him very god and
man The fourth is. Passus sub poncio pilato crucifixus mortuus et sepultus I
believe that he suffered pain under. pounce pylate done on the cross deed. and
buried Here Criste the son of god suffered mekely and threspaced neuir. for we
should mekely suffer. that much have trespaced He was also crucified for we
should chastise our flesh by penance in withstondyng syn and he was beried in
token that we should hyde our good dedys fro preysynge. and vaynglorye of the
world and to have mi^de that earth is our heritage by kind of our bodily
flesh The v. is Descendit ad inferna tercia die resurrexit a mortuis. I
believe that he went down to hell: and the thridde day arose from death to live
Christ thus bodily deed lay in the sepulcre without the soul till the iii.
day that he arose the godhode not partyd fro the body He went down to hell
and delivered the holy souls yt were there through virtue of the godhode and
the thridde day arose fro death to life in tokenynge that the light of his death
has distroyed our double death. and yt we shall arise fro goostly death by
iii. manner of medi^^^es. contricion confession. and satisfaction The vi. is
Ascendi^ ad erlos seder ad dexteram dei patris omnipote^tis. I believe that he
styed up into heuyn and set him there on his faders right hand Thus Criste
appering to his disciples after his resurrection (...) with them in tokenynge
that he was very. man as he was to fore And so to stye. into heuyn and highed
mankind above all aungelles openyng heuyn gate to show man the way and to pray
for mankind The seuynth is. In de ventu^us est iudicare viuos et mortuos. I
believe that he is to come to deem the quycke and the deed This criste jesus very
god and man shall come to the dome and deem all mankind quycke and deed good
and evil after their deeds There shall some come to the dome and not be demyd
as hethen men For they sin without law And therefore without law they
must perysshe Sum also shall be demyd and damned as false christian men that
believe in Jesus criste without love and good works There shall subgettes
accuse their evil curates that would not repreue. them of their sins ne
teache them the commaundmentes of god Also children vnchastised shall there
repreue there faders and moders that would not chastise them of their wantonness
There shall the pore accuse the rich yt would not help them in their
myschief Amend all this therefore whiles thou art here and have mind how
suddenly his ve^geaunce falls and as how he finds the he shall deem the The
viii. is: Credo in spiritum sanctum I believe in the holy gooste the thrydde
person of the trinyte The holy gooste also without beginning or endyng and
even in wit might and godenes with the fader and the son and al iii be oon
god almighty The lx. is Sanctam ecclesiam catholica^ sanctorum communionem I
believe in holy church and in comunyon of saints holy church throghe out the
world is holy and one to all christian men that in in the sacraments of the
church dele and co^moneth to giddre Therefore it is forboden that in the church
ne in the church yerde be neither rumoure ne stryf daunsyng drynkynges ne non
inhonest myrthes ne occasion of sin should not be give there where as
forgiveness should be asked Holy church is parted in three One is in this
world of them that should be sauyd by the mercy of god* and this is euyr
fighting against these three. enemies the world the flesh. and the devil
And a another is in purgatory of souls that abide there the great mercy of god
The thridde is criste of heaven head of all other with his saints which is
free fro all manner descensiones These three shall be one after the day of dome
ioynynge with Jesus their head in the bliss that neuyr shall have end
Comonynge saints when each of these three parties helpen other They in heuyn
helpen the other two with prayer And they in earth helpen them in purgatory with
their prayer and alms And these two help hem in heuyn when their joy and
bliss is increased. And thus each co^muneth with other. The x. is Remissionem
peccatorum. I believe forgyuenesse of sins. they that amend their life here
and do very penance. wyllyng to leave their sins and end in charity. shall
haf forgyuenesse of all their sins. For criste by his death and passion of his
fader gate us forgyuenes and he him selue by his godhede also forgyueth all
original and actuell sin of our baptym The xi. article. Carnis
resurrectionem. I believe rysynge of body All mankind at the day of dome
shall rise. from death to life in body and soul to gydder and after that neuyr
be departed And then they that have endyd. in dedely sin should goo in body
and soul to the euirlastynge pain of hell without mercy And they that have
well lived. and endyd in charity and out of dedely sin shall we^de in body
and soul to gyddre to blys for euirmore. Of this. bliss speaks saint
Mathewe. in the last article The xii. is Et vitam eternam Amen. I believe in
euirlastynge life. Thies been the articles of the feythe the which but every
man truly and sadly believe may not be sauyd For without feyth it is impossible
to plese god December precepta domini: The thridde thing that thou should know
god by be his x. commandments which he wrote in the ii. tables of stoon.
and took them to moses. to teache his people promising to hem that would
keep them his blessing. welthe and welfare And to them yt would not his curse
great sorrow and myscheif. A man asked of Criste what he might do to have
euirlastynge life And he aunsweryd and said if thou will enter euirlastynge.
life keep the commandments This preuyth if thou keep his co^maundmentes thou
fulfyllest the law of god. and shalt have euirlastinge life. The first is he
commands yt thou have no god but him Ne yt thou worship serve ne give thy
trust to none other creature image ne thing graven but only to him In this is
forboden* mawmetry false enchaunteme^tes wychecraftes false charms and dremys*
and mysbeleuys that any man or woman hopyth help in. without almyghtye god In
this ye sin dedely that for sickness or loss of gods put your faith or
believe that ye should have in your lord god by the deuylles mynystres false
wytches. the which bring many a soull to the devil. For they believe more in
the wyches words tha^ in the words of scripture yt the priest techyth them.
Al such* have gods curse at the leest iiii. times a year in the great
sentence And every day in our pryme As for images

Also ye shall vndyrstonde yt as clerks see in her books how they should live
and do so should lewd men learn by images whom they should worship and
follow in living. to do gods worship to images every man is forboden Therefore
first whenne thou co^myst to the church behold gods body under form of
bread in the auter And thank him that he vouchesauf every day to come fro the
holy heuyn above for the health of thy soul Look thou on the cross. and thereby
have mind in the passion that he thereon suffered for the. then the images of
the holy saints. not beleuynge on them but that by the sight of hem thou may
have mind of them. that been in heuyn. an^ so to follow their life asmoche
as thou may. If thou thus worship love and serve god then shall all
thing worship love and serve the and so thou shall fulfill the first and
most commandment.

The secounde is that thou take not in vayn the holy names of god Thou take
the name of god in vayn when thou turnest again to thy syn after thy baptym.
Thou takeste it in vein also when thou sweryst and fo^sweryst the and
reckeste not how

Before all thing says saint Iame swear ye not left ye fall under the come of
god. It is only reseruyd to god says saint John that thou swear by him and his
truth and his rightwysnesse Therefore or thou swear see yt thou be compellyd
by dome. and that it be right not for envy love ne dread. but only for
rightwysnes in declaring of truth And if any man of these fayl it is perjury
Beware therefore ye that use questes or consistorye. and here what perell ye
stand in that wyttyngly be forswore on the book. The book betokens all
holy scripture and the suffrage of the church the which there thou forsakest
when thou forsweryst the All the good works. that euir thou dydeste. the
which thou forsakest when thou withdrawest it

Thou forsakest also god almighty our lady saint mary and all the saints of
heuyn and the merytes of the holy sacraments. and holy betakest thy selue to
the devil of hell but if thou amend the or thou go hen^

If they then shall thus be punysshed for swerynge how shall they be that
blaspheme and dismembre him swerynge by his heart nails. wounds. and such
other Some when they be repreuyd hereof say it is good to have god in mi^de.
and with such leudnes they keep still their oaths And if thy servant did
against thy bidding sayng that he did it to have the in mind would thou not
be wrath with him Much more must god: then with the when thou dooste
against his bidding And some say I may well swear for I swear soothe This is
a false excusacion For and if thou sholdest always swear when thou say
sothe Then would not criste have forbeden sweryng But in much swerynge is
often forsweryng. Therefore he says that he that mooche sweryth shall be replete
with wyckydnesse and sorrow ne vengeance shall not depart from his house Some
say also that no man will believe them but if they swear This is a subtell
excusacion For thereby a false man may swear as well as a true man and so should
he be as well believed as the true man For the falser that he is. the more he
swereth and forswerythe. and so begyleth Therefore if thou will be believed
without swerynge be true of thy word and left it be ye ye. and nay nay In
token that thou say with thy mouth thou sholdest say it with thyn heart and
not say one and ^yn^e a another. The thridde is. have in mind to halowe thyn
holydaies that is to say Sondayes and other that been commanded Almighty god.
in vi days made heuyn earth and see. and all that in them is. And the vii.
day he restyd Therefore he blessed it. and made it holy But instead thereof we
christian men halowe the sunday which was the first day of the world. wherein
god made light. and that day god gave to moses the law That day he arose from
death to live. That day the holy gooste gave wisdom. to the appostellys to
preche the truth of cristes law And that day as clerks say shall also be
domes day

Therefore shall every man in that day besy him to here gods service learn his
law and fle sin and fleshely lusts tauernes and such chafferynges that
lettith them to rest in our lord. yet many there be that such days be more
besy in wordely works and sins thanne all the weke after. and neuir woll
rest for no techynge ne louene dread of god

These be most like to them in hell that neuyr rest but euyr labor in
pain They break also their holy day they spend their time in ydelnes. and in
vain plays ydell speaking and bacbytynge of their even christian

why says our lord have mind to halowe thyn holy day But for thou sholdest
put out of thine heart all worldly thoughts and occupye it with heuynly
desires As to think what god has done for the (...) he made the of naught
and like to him in soull How he (...) so^ed the out of the pytte of hell
with his own precious blood How also of his goodness he kepyth the night
and day in thy right wits and fro all bodily myscheuys that many one aldaye
falls in. And how against all this thou yeuest him a drink of gall of
byttre sin and brekest his commandments both in word thought and deed.
Thus to have mind in all this He asked rest of body and soull* on the holy
day. and thus rest signifies the rest in blys. that we shall have after this
if we rest in him. On the holy day here gods seuyre and fle sin.

The iiii. commaundmnet is worship thy fader and mother Three manner of faders
there be yt thou must worship. The first is thy fader of heuyn yt made the of
naught and norissheth thy body with erthly fode Conforteth thy soull with
heuynly desire. Defends it fro the devil and makes it heyr of the blys of
uyn. Thus may noon do but he our fader our lord and our god

The second fader is he yt gate the and thy modre that bare the. to whom thou
shall be subget and seruysable For they be the secounde cause of thy being in
this present life. Then thou shall also worship them and give them of thy
gods freely if they have need and if thou have more. then they Comfort
counseyl and teache them after thy conning: folowen vsurye. when thou lenest
money to hem that have need for a certain wynnyg all the times end. And for the
loone outher thou takyst service. presentis or yeftis. Another when thou lenest
it. for the half wynnyng. he to pay the hooll. yt thou lenest it to. though
all be lost Another when thou byest a thing: for much less then it is
worth. Another when thou sellest thy chaffare the derer for the lone. Another
when thou have a thing to fore the time. as corn or it be ripe. Another when
thou take the beeste of a pour man with this condition. yt if it deye* it
shall deye to the pour man and not to the. So says paryfyens: therefore use
leeffull chaffare and wyn without subtylte or sleyght not as much as thou
may. But that. that is reasonable to thy sustenaunce. after thyn estat is
dew. This desired this wise man of our lord when he said. neither riches
neither pouerte lord give me. but oonly lord that is necessary to my lyuelod.

The viii. thou shall not bear falls witness. In this is forboden all manner of
lefynges: conspyracy. and forsweryng. whereby that thy neighbor leseth his
catel. frenshyp. or good all such ben called the children of the devil. For
they put out truth. and bring ynne falsehed. Put out christ and bring ynne
the devil. lesynge stondyth not oonly in falls words. But also in falls werkys
and if thou be a christian man live there after. or ellis thou lie. There be
three manner of lesynges. one is when thou lie with full purpose to hurt thy
neighbor. And then it is dedely sin. Another is when thou lie to further
thy neighbor in a truth and then it is not so much evil. The third is
when thou lie for the dysporte of them that be about the. not wyllyng to
hyndre any person.

These two be venyall. but thou have them in custume therforr beware of all
manner lesynge. and neither for love ne hate ne for mede. bear no falls wytnes.
The ix. is thou shall not desire thy neybours wife. In the seventh commandment
god forbedeth the deed of lechery and their desire. In tokyn that they be both
dedely sin: yet sum wene but they do the deed it is no sin Christ
therefore wyllyng all such to be clean within. and without both in body and in
soul says this. All that sewe a woman to the couetyse of their lust. they do
lechery with her in their heart. And thus by shrewd thoughtis. man is often time
departed from god. yet says saint Byrgit in her vysions. But if ylle thoughtis
were sometime to man. He should wene him selff rather angel then man. And so
all evil thing comes off him self. and none of god. Therefore that man should
understand the infirmyte that he has off him self and the strenthe yt he has
off god: it is necessary says she. that he be suffered sometime of the great
mercy of god. to be temptyd with evil thoughts. To the which if he consent
not. they be but a purgacion to his soul and a kepar of his vert^^s. Therefore
when shrewd thoughtis come to the wythstonde the first suggestyon. and let thy
soul alweye so labor. that he consent not to delight in them And then
have in mind the bitter paynis that Crist for the suffered. And the endeles
bliss of the joys of heaven that thou must lose if thou consent to them and
the bitter paynis of hell also that thou shall have if thou deye in them. and
if thou thus do then shall thou have in mind thy last end. and never do
sin

The x. commandment and the last is. thou shall not desire thy neghbours
thing house land ox ass. neither no thing that is his. For such desires
of couetyse. as scripture makes mention. Balaam Nacor. Anani Gyesy. Achab
Iesebel and many. other fill to great myschyeff. both off body: and of soul.
Therefore be ye well war als of all such falls desire. And take no mannis good
ayenste his will. lest it fall to you. as it did to them. And think also that
without satysfaccion. or having will to amend the thereof. The pope ne none by
him may dispense with the. and yet thou stondyst acursyd of all holy church in
the great sentence. four times in the year what shall all such false desire
the^ profit the. when the curse of god shall thus abide on the. there is no
man yt bredith the curse of god now. But when christ at the dome shall say
that scripture makyth mention of. Goo ye cursed in the everlasting fire of
hell. Then shall they both dread it. and feel it. For this word goo ye
cursed. shall be more peynfull as doctors sayn. then the paynis off a
thousand hellys: though they were all gadred in to one. All these ten b^hestis
ben brought in two: of the gospel that is love god above all thing And thy
neighbor as thy selff. First thou shall love god with all thy heart that no
thing be nerer thy heart then god In all thy soul that thou suffer no sin
abide within thy soul for the love of god. And with all thy m^^de that thou
spare not. for myschy^ff to please god. Thy neighbor also as thy selff in good
and not evil as much as thy self in health in seekenes in welthe and in woo.
Thus for love thou shall keep goddis commaundementis and not oonly for dread of
peyn Thise commaundementis should e^^e man tell and teache his children. And
thus bad our Lord to moses. these words said he* the which I take here this
day shall be in thy heart. Thou shall tell them to thy sonnys* and think on
hem slepyng wakyng syttyng. and going Thou shall bind them as a sign to thy
hand^ and write them on the doorys and lynter^^s of thy house And shall rewle
all thy thoughtis words and deeds preuy and apert in each place. by these
commaundementis off god Foryete not these words says he ne fall they not from
thy heart all the days of thy life. Thus govern ye your meyny says saint
Austyn. For as we thus speak to you. here in the church. so should ye to yours
at home. that ye may give tree. we rekenyng to god of them. that be subgettis
to you. and tell them. says he the love and the sweetness of heavenly
things and the great bytternes of hell. for ye shall answer for them at the
strey^ day of dome. and counseyll them all yt they be not neglyent in no wise
to learn these commaundeme^tis for dread of this sentence that folowyth if thou
wolt not here the voys of thy lord god seyth he. That thou keep his
commaundementis all these curses shull come to the and take the thou shall be
cursed in cytee. in field. cursed shall be thy relyques. the fruit of thy
body. thy fruit of thy lord. The drouys of thyn oxyn and the flocks of thy
sheep. thou shall be cursed in the going ynne. and going out Thou shall be
smite with hunger seekenesse and pestylence. with adders. with fire. with hete.
with cold. and with corrupt air. All these shall pursewe the. and thou shall
perysshe. And if thou wolt here the voice of our Lord. that thou learn and
keep his commaundementis He shall make the higher then all that dwells in
earth And all these blyssynges. shall come to the and take the: Thou shall be
bsissed in cytee and in field in the fruit of thy body. and fruit of thy
land. in flockys of thy sheep. and drouys off thy bestys. in thy bernys and in
thy celers. in thy going in* in thy going out and in all thy werkis of thy
handys. So that every man shall see that the name of god is called upon the.
and they shull dread the. I shall give rain in time says he. the earth shall
bring forth his sede. And trees shall be replete with fruit thou shall have
peace in thy cuntree. and thou shall sleep: And no man shall fere the. All
these blyssynges shull take the. if thou learn and keep his commaundementis.
Therefore have mind in the preceptys of god. and in his byddynges be ye most
besy: For if thou keep them. they shull keep the and bring the to bliss. that
never shall have end. which he us grant that with his blood bought us Ihesus
Christ Amen.

De septem sacramentis.
THe fourth thing that thou sholdest know god by: is the seven sacramentis of
holy church which be mynystred to the people of persons and prestis that
have power thereto. of the which. five the first that is baptesme confirmacion
shryft howsyll and anoyntyng. Are every man and woman hold to do. in pein of
cursyng. incerteyn time as the law. yeueth. The other two may no man take. as
order and wedlock but at his own will. These sacrame^tis took their begynni^g
off the gracious well^. of the side off our lord Ihesu criste in his passion.
For right as out of adamys side. while he slepte was takyn out a rybbe that eve
was made of: right so at the death of our lord there ran out of his side
both blood and water. by the virtue of which passion the sacramentis of holy
church took first their strentgh and their beginning. The first sacrament is
baptime. in which oryginall sin that we be born in and all other sins that
we be defowled with they be wasshen a way through the passion of crist. and
therwyth is be taken us the feyth and believe of holy church. without which.
there may no man be saned. Therefore it is commanded that every christian woman
that felyth her quyck with child^ to keep her fro heuyng and shouyng. great
traueyle and falling and all other mischeuys that should myschyeue the chyldys
lyff. and so be lost body and soul And that each woman byfor her traueyle of
child. come to church and take shryft and housyl. for peril of death that
might fall in the birth. Also the mydwyf and tho that be about the child. if
it be in parel of death. should christian it on this wise I christian the in the
name of the fader. and the son and the holy gooste. And then spring the
child with water. and yt thou foryete not these words. I christian the. and if
it be crystened in the manner at home It shall not be crystened eftsone at
church. For that were a great peril. as to nail god eftsoon on the rood.
And if it live after this crystenynge at home bring it to the church. and
there it shall have all the hooll seruyse that it lackyth. In time of peril of
death fader and mother may Christian their own children without harmyng of their
spousehode. Godfaders and godmoders ben borowys to fore god. for their
godchildren And therefore they ben bound to teache hem to love ryghtwysnes.
charity and chastyte. to keep them from dedely sin and specially to teache
them the co^maundementis: and belyue. A man and his wyff. should not fonge at
ones to a child at the font stone Ne they that fongith it there shall not
fonge. it at the confermynge but at need

Fader ne mother notyse ne none other should suffer no young child by them a
bed whiles they sleep. ne press them to fast in cradell ne suffer them
lie slepyng: ne waking. with out a keeper. There is goostely kynrede through
fongyng of chyldre at the fountf^on on ix. wise.

One is betwyne the child and the godfaders. Another betwyxt the children of
the godfaders another b^wyxt the child and the wyff of the godfaders flesshely
known tofore. Another betwyxt the godfader and the fader. of him that is
cristened.

Another betwyxt (...) him pardone (...) ^re. And with this accord^th saint
gregore where he says thus ^e says thou make never satysfac^ion for thy
sin. But if thou fere of thy sin. every body woll desire pardon. but few
or none woll do yt they should have pardon for but through trust and color of
that pardon. They do many a cursed sin and do sin upon trust thereof.
other any good deed. it is a great sin of pride. For be thou never so full
of good virtues: unkindness to thy god may dystroye all tho virtues. More
unkindness thou may not show. Then for to displease god wylfully. Therefore
fle such unkindness. And think yt the more acceptable thou art to god
through thy good living. the more culpable thou shall be: if thou return again
to sin. It is aslyder hoope says saint Austyn when a man synneth upon trust
to be saved. He that so does. he neither dredeth ne loves god So that it is
more proffytable to hold thy selff feeble and low: Then to be hold strong.
and for feebleness fall and be lost. Therefore take heed what goodness god puteth
in the. and thank him. and pray him of contynaunce. And do no synnne upon
trust off pardon or of any other good dedys. The fourth is the holy sacrament
of the auter. The which is cristis own body: his flesh and blood in form
of bread. The same that was born off the virgyn marye. and done on the rode.
This is made through virtue of goddis word of preestis that have power which
(...) neither angel ne a^chaungell h^dde. But oonly man (...) mind of him
self. this sacrament is every man and woman bound by the law onc^ a year as
a^^e e^ter. y^ he be fourtene year of age. And have discrecion to receive it
when they be with shryfte and penance made clean of their sins. And else to
be put out of the church and of christian beryellys. But if it be for sykenesse.
or for some other reasonable cause which cause he must certyfye his curate of.
For he that unworthily receives this sacrament he receives his dampnacio^
Also as often as any man sees that body at mass. or borne about to the seek.
he shall devoutly knele down and say his pater noster or sum other good prayer
in worship of his souereyn lord. Also ye shall understand that the drink
that ye receive in the chalyce after your howsell is no sacrament. But wine or
water to bring the sacrament the lyghtlyer in to thy body. But in form of
bread it is hole goddis body in flesh and in blood. Therefore thou shall take
it in. as holy as thou may left any part abide in thy teeth. For in the
left part is hole goddis body. that day thou herest thy mass god grants
the needful and lawful things. that day ydell othis and forgetyn sins be
forgeuen. That day thou shall not lose thyn eye sight ne deye in sodeyn death
ne the time of the mass thou shall not wexe agyd Every step thyderward and
homward an angel shall rekene Lewd men and women to despute of this sacrament
a^t utterly for^^dden For it is enough to them to believe as holy church
techeth ^m The fyft sacrame^tis anointing of seek men the which is oil hallowed
of a busshop and minystred by prestes. to them that been of laufull age. in
great peril of death. in lightness and abatyng of their sickness. if god will
yt they live And in forgeuynge of their venyall sins and relesyng of their
pain if they shall dye So that this sacrament may be yeuen as often as nedyth to
every man and woman yt be in point of death. The syxte is holy ordres which no
man may take but at their own will. This yeueth power to them that takes it to
serve in holy church after their estate is As to him that takes the order. of
preesthode for to make the sacrament of cristes flesh and his blood. and for
to mynistre other sacraments to the people These must have their crown
shaven their head tonsured. and their clothes honestly shapen. as falls to
her estate and namely in holy church. They must also in the quere sing. and
read with clenes of conscience. and great devotion of soull not ouyrhyppyng ne
momblynge. ne musing of vanytees. not medlynge with lewd ne shrewyd tidings
ne inhonest co^munycacion. ne coming to late to gods service: ne going
out before the end. without a reasonable cause. not gronynge ne slumbrynge.
ne sparyng her voice. but showing out the voice of the holy gooste with sown
and hooll speech And thus says saint Bernard They must also dispose them
self if they may to sing mass. and thereto they be bound For saint Bernarde
says. in the person of our lord to every man thus. Have I not made the and
give the power to make. me and to make my son incarnat tofore the fader of
salvation of the world if thou haf power to sing. and syngest not says he
Thou benymmest the aungelles of heuyn their joy. thou benymmyst mankind
trauelynge in earth their help. and grace. and thou benymest the souls that
are in great peynes in purgatory their rest and their forgyuenes. These be
heavy words and little thought on with many of us Saint Austyn says how
worshypful is the dignyte of preesthode says he. betwyxte. whose hands the
son of god as in his moders womb was i^carnate. hou blessed be the pr^ests
says he if yt they prestly live. How heuynly a mynistre is that says he that
by the wyckynge of the fader and the son and the holy gooste the same god
that is in heuyn. the same and self is in your hands* in the sacrament
Therefore says once lord be ye holy for I am holy. A rightful life to you is
necessary. says saint Austyn Therefore ye must so live so that your life
accord with your name. so that if your order be holy. let your conversation
be the same And if men say well of you says he. see that your works. bear
witness to the same And this is for us prestes.

The seuynthe sacrament is wedlock before the which the bany^ must be asked
thryes in holy church This is a lauful knytiyng to gydder of man and woman in
form of holy church by assent of them both. for to be to gyddre in the law
of god and neuyr. to be departed whiles their life lastith in remission of syn
and getyng of grace. when it is taken to a true intent For though there be no
truth plighte ne flessh^y deed done. if they be of full age and accord in
heart to gydder. to fore god they be wife and husbonde al preuy couenauntes in
truth plightynge and forward making without assent of friends or knowledge are
forboden. All that such make or been thereat ben in great peril of soull Also
it is forboden that no wedded man ne woman one without that others assente
make vow of chastity. pylgremage. ne fasting For if the wife avowe the
husbonde at the first we^yng may fordo it but if he consent and suffer it
wetyngly after the first knowing The man synneth not. for the wife has no
power of her own body but the husbond And if the man absteyne him fro his wife
by such wife without the will of his wife and she give him no leave. he is
cause of her sin And the wife is in the same case if she do the same to her
husbonde. Septem opera misericordie. The fyft thing that thou shall know god
by are the seuyn dedye of mercy which every man is bound by the bidding of
god to fulfill and to do to his power That is to say. Feed the hungry* give
drynk to the thristy cloth the nakyd. herborowe the houseles vysite the seek.
deliver the prisoners. and burye the pore when they be deed These been
needful to us plesyng to god and helping to body and soull of all them that
done them Therefore says Criste give and it shall be yeuyn to you. Alms says
Austyn is an holy thing For it euerlasyth the yt thou haste Lessith thy
sins. It multiplyeth thy years. and nobleth thy mind It lengtyth thy terms.
and cleanses al. thing It delivers the fro death And joins the to
aungelles and departs the from deuylles And is a wall inexpugnable about thy
soull. Therefore give alms and all things shall be clean to you Three things
he must considre that shall give alms. First who asks it. what he asks.
and wherefore First I say that god asks it. for he loves so much pore men.
yt what ye do to them in his name he holds it done to him self He asks his
and not ours David says al things be thyn lord. and that we have take of
thyn hands we have give the He asks us not for to give it him but for to
leave it him. wherefore he woll yield an hundredth fold: and the blys of heuyn
Therefore says saint Gregore pore men shall not be despyced but prayed as
faders. And he that yeueth the pore shall not be pore says Salamon And he that
stops his ere fro the cry of the pour. shall cry and not be herd

Therefore to all that ask these he that asks unrightfully. give it not. that
he asks but that that b^tt^^ i^ And that is correction Ierom says give the
pore to sustain their riches There may no man excuse him of alms gyuynge For
an halpeny of the pore sum time more pleases god thanne an hundredth shyli^ges
of the rich If thou may not give him that give him words of comfort And what
thou yeuyst give it gladly For the glad gyuer god louyth. There be also seuyn
other gostly dedys of mercy The first is teache the vnco^nynge. that he sauoure
rightfully A another is give counceyl to him that asks it. that he work and
do truly The thridde chastise him that trespassith. that is to say repreue. or
beat. or do other due correction. The fourth comfort the sorry as with gifts
words of comfort or such other Thr v. forgive them that trespase to the For
if thou forgive hem not god will not forgive the the rancor and the offense.
thou must needs forgive. The accion and the amends be at thy own will The
vi. yt thou suffer mekely when men trespass to the that they be not the more
prompte to sin. but that they be the more fervent to do penance and good
works and be more ready to suffer disease. than to do it If any man chyde the.
blame the. repreue the or do the wrong. keep silence and set before a sharp
word the child of sufferaunce. and think that our lord Jesus was bobbyd and
buffetyd. spy^ upon and scorned. and euirmore he held his peace Therefore what
disease: fall to the believe it co^myth the for thy sin. and so thou shall
suffer it the lightlyer if thou take heed wherefore it comes The seuynth is
pray. yt is to say for thyn enemy and all tho that been sinful And if thou
may help them with noon of these seuyn a fore. pray to god to help them.
Criste says love your enemies and do well to them that hate you And pray
for them that do you persecucion that ye may be the children of heuyn. And
thus may ye fulfill the dedys. of mercy both bodily and gostly. Sequntur
septem virtutes. The sixth thing that thou sholdest know god by be the seuyn
principal virtues that every man and woman* should use The first is faith
which is ground and beginning of our salvation And it stondeth in three
things In the unite of the godhede in three persons In the manhood of Crist
and in the sacraments of the church This virtue is needful to all christian
folk. For it is the beginning of all good works So that feyth without good
works Ne good works without true faith may no man please god almighty. The
secounde is hope this is a trust by the mercy of god to be sauyd And it
sto^deth in the grace of god and good works Not only to hope in our good
dedys but in hem both to gyddre For we shall not hope so little that is called
wanhope yt we shull hope to have bliss if we well done not so much trust in
the mercy of god for to hope to be sauyd without good deeds The third is
charity yt is the end and perfection of all the comma^dementes of god And
understand in this that thou love god above al thing And thy neighbor as thy
selue So that. that one may not be louyd without that other And thus says
saint John That he that loves god. he louyth his brother. and he that loves
natt his brother which he may se how should he love god which he may not see.

The fourth virtue is rightwisnesse This is not else but a payng of duitye to
each thing that it duly longith to. as to god preysynge and than king. for
the gods of kind fortune and grace that he has yeuen the and lent the. and
thereof to give him his part. And many other benefettes as in preserving the
fro many myscheuys. and vengeance that thou had fall in. and alday see
many one fall in and sholdest happily thy self have fall in had not his
gracious. keeping have been. To thy neighbor also thou must yield love and
charity that is to say. that thou do right and reason to him in all thing as
thou would he did to the. and if thou would he should be true to the and pay
his dettes and begyle the not with subteltyes and sleyghte^ in byenge and
selling. do the same thy selue to him If thou would also he were not proud.
enuyous wrathful. covetous glotonous slothful ne lycherous. be thou the same
And thus in all other tynges as thou would thy neighbor do to the do thou
to him And then thou kepyst rightwysnesse to thy self Also thou must needs
have business to learn and fulfylle the co^maundme^tes of god and to
withstonde sin. and shrewyd living

The fyfte virtue is wisdom This virtue departs good from evil. and techyth
us to be ware of sleyghtes. of the world of the flesh and of the devil And
to dyspys^ all that we may and of ii. good to chese the better But saint Austyn
says as many one does. that thou must despise. the world and hate thy
flesh for me where be the lovers of the world that little while a goo were
here with us. There is nothing left of them butt powder and worms. take heed what they be now And what they were tha^ they were men as thou art says
he they ete they drank they laughed and led their life in earth in mirth and
io lyte: and in a point they descended in to hell. what prouffyteth them now
their vaynglory: their short joy pomp of the world. lust of the flessh
falls riches. great menye and evil couetyse. where is their laughter. their
play their pride. their booste. after all this lust how great pain and
sorrow. All that fill to them may fall to the says he For thou art a man of
earth as they were. and of the earth thou lyuest And to the earth thou shall
turn again These been the words of that holy doctoure saint Austyn. This
remembrance shall make you wise and hardy to despise your enemies the world
the flesh. and the devil Saint ysoder says yt there is no thing bettre
thanne wisdom. ne no thing thing swetter ne lustier then knowledge. no
thing werse thanne lewdnes Therefore know thou what thou shall flee and whyther
thou shall goo love. wisdom and it shall be showed to the and it shall come to
the. Be besy there about and it shall learn the The syxte virtue is strengith
This makes a man mighty and hardy to withstonde many great myscheues for the
love of god For it stands in suffrynge patiently aduersite. and mekely to
take prosperyte. and to suffer euynly both well and woo that our heart be not
to high for no welfare ne to much under for no evil fare. butt to be strong
against our foon both of body and soull. that no temptacion make us fall ne
fayll in our faith against god almighty The seventh virtue is measure which is
a mean bitwene to much. and to little. and it stondyth in taking sufficiently
that needs and refusyng utterly that is to much or to little Septem peccata
mortalia. The seuynthe thing and the last yt thou should know god by is
the seuyn dedely sins that all men should refuse. for each of hem is an even
way to hell Therefore says the wise man as fro the face of the adder fo^de to
fle sin For as the venym of the addre. sleeth mannys body. so the venym of
the sin sleeth mannys soul. The first sin is pride. which is a lykyng or
an highness of man's heart of his hye estate or noblesse. yt he has by
fortune kind or by grace Or that he can passing a another. or has more thanne
a another Of this co^myth many shrewed spices. as boste bacbyting despyte of thy
neighbor vnbuxumnesse and ypocrysye* proud beryng displesyng scornynge and
inobedience high heart good arraye. pride of great kynne and of vaynglorye
boldenes of sin boostyng of good deeds and auauntynge of evil dedys
indignacyon Shameleshede presumpcion. and sturdynesse that is worst of all
other. and so says saint Austyn yt none is worse ne more dampnable sin
then is the sin of pride In this been they gylty that list not to be
repreuyd of her sins ne to here of their defautes But anoon with a great
sturdynes as a galled horse that is touched on the sore wyncheth and wryeth.
And seke^ how they might mayntene such lewdenesse of sin. Thus did (...)
king Dauyd when Nathan the prophet of god came to him and told him his
sin. and the vengeance that he should have therefore. he showed no
sturdynesse to the prophet ne rebuked him. ne chydde him but mekely said. Our
lord I have sinned: as whoo says I am sorry for my sin I will amend it And
therefore god took away much of the vengeance that he should have had for his
sin. Right thus should ye that here be repreuyd* of your sines mekely come
to your curate as to the minystre of god that occupyeth his stead for the time.
and say Sir I knowledge my defaute and wot well that I did amysse. my will. is
to amend it. And so putt away. sturdynesse and the vengeance yt thou
deseruyst therefore This sin of pride says saint Gregore is rote of all evil
For right as ne were the rote of a tree. hyd in the earth there should no
branch spring out thereof Right so ne were pride first rotyd in thine
heart. there should no branch of sin brek out thereof For thus was Lucifer
that was the fairest angel in heuyn made the foulest devil in hell. Also
Chore Datan and Abyron and other felaushyp they rose against moises and aron of
great pride. and therefore the earth opnyd and swalowed hem all quycke down
into hell Also the people of Nynyue for the great boldness of pride that they
had to turn again to their sin. there were an hundred score thousand people
as the bible re^e^^yth destroyed by bodily enemies.

Therefore every man beware of this syn and wisely look in the myrrour of
meekness. for that techyth him what he was is and shall be First considre that
thou were made of foul stynkynge slyme and fylth of the sin of lecherye borne
of thy modre with great sorrow and pain. norisshed with great labor and
anger. and kept with great dread And now thou art but a lak of foul dunge
that no swetnesse. ne fruit co^myth of Of trees leuys comes flowers and fruit
and of the Lyce. nyttes and fleen Of herbs also co^methe sweet smelles. and of
the above. benethe and all other parties. but stynkynge. fylthe and after thyn
end thou shall be but worms mete and turn again to earth till the day of
dome. that thy body and soul shall rise again. to gyddre That day says
malachy shall brenne as hot as a furneys fire And all proud men shall be as
stoble which shall be there so bre^t that there shall another be rote ne r^nd
Therefore says Isodre by mekenes make thy selue leest and lowest of all other
Stretche not forth thy wings of pride by boost and enhansyng thy self For the
less thou settyst by thy selue. says he the more god settyth by the Be
shamefaste in chere and dismayde to look proudely for shame of the syn. walk
with allow chere. a meke mode and sad vysage In high worship have great
meekness. and the higher yt thou art the meker thou sholdest make thy self
And think how our sovereign lord jesus mekyd him self to the death for thy
sake Thus is meekness an utter remedy against pride and a sauatyf salve for
all manner myscheuys of sin. for it makes the to have mind of thy short
abiding here. of the strayte dome that thou shalt come to after for thy
mekenes that thou sholdest have had here. The second sin is envy. and
this is when thou art sorry of thy neighbors welfare. and ioyest of his evil
fare Of this wicked sin co^myth many branches One is hateryd. and that is
when thou art loathe to speak. or here spoken any thing. which that might
turn thy neighbor to good A another is false demynge of his deeds The thridde
is bacbytynge and that is to speak evil behind him which thou may not ne
will not anome a fore him. or though thou spekest not evil thy self. thou
have liking to here evil speaking of him and so thou synnest dedely For not
only he that speaks evil. but also he that woll gladly here evil spoken are
in defaute of sin So that if there were no herer there were no bacbytynge ne
bacbyter Therefore says Isodre Be not glad of the fall or evil fare of thy
neighbor. lest god turn his wrath fro him to the And so thou sholdest fall
in the same or worse. but be glade to sorrow for him that is deseased. and
euirmore morn for his mischeyf as thou would thyn own. Love peace outward and
inward peace with all men. and make peace there hate is Flee chiding. be ware
and do away the occasion of strife. and live always in peace Let nothing pass
thy lyppes that may defoul the cries of the herers. For a vayn word is take of
a vain conscience and such as the word is. such is the soull Therefore besy
the not to speak that lyketh but that. yt nedyth. take heed what thou spekest.
and what thou spekyst not: and both in speaking and not speaking be right well
ware. for thou may not call again that thou haste said. put fro thy tung the
sin of bacbytynge. and defoull not thy mouth with a another man's sin but
that thou bacbytest in a another. dread in thy self when thou blamest a
another. Think on thine own sin and look not on other mennys. For thou shall
neuyr bacbyte. if thou wylt behold thy selue Therefore here. ne lysten to no
such tytulers For they be like gyltye the herer. and the bakbyter Desire not
to wit ye parteynethe not to the Ask neuir what any man does speaks or says
leave ye. perteynethe not to the: and by as great business. amend thyn own
sin by asmoche as thou beholdest other mennys For noman knows whether he be
worthy hate or mede. that is for to say pain. or joy. For there is many that
seems to us right good and yet against god happily are right naught. And many
one also that seem to us right naught and yet be to him right dear. Therefore
noman deem other but put all his judgment in god. Thus with charity that is
knotte of all virtues thou must distroye the foull sin of envy. Thus charity
stondeth in the love of god and in the love of thy neighbor. in which ii.
all the law of god abides so that one may not be louyd without ye other For
if thou love god thou wy^te noon other have but him ne thou wylt not take his
name in vain ne brecke thyn holy days If thou love thy neighbor thou wylt
do no manslaughter. ne thyfte ne false wytnes bear. ne lichery ne desire thy
neighbors wife. ne his gods Thus is charity the fulfyllyng of gods love
and the ending of all good werkys Charity is pacient and benign he has noon
envy He worcheth no shrewedenesse He loves not to be with pride He couetyth
no worldly worshippes He secheth no propre gods He is not wroth He thinks
noon evil He ioyeth not of wyckydnesse but of truth. He takes all thing
mekely. He byleuyth all that god says* and hopyth of blys He suffers all
harms and neuir is dis^onforted through gods help to abide long. He
falls neuyr down in this world ne in that other. He kepyth man in believe
and makes him stable under him waxith obedyence And by him patience ouircomyth
all wrongs without him no man plesyth god and with him no man peryssheth.
Therefore ayenste envy sekythe charity with great study that thou may have it
in thy living and dwell perfitely therein to thyn endyng.

The third is the sin of wrath the which is the wicked sterynge of a man's
heart whereby he will aue^ge him selue upon his even christian Of this comes many
shreude spices as fighting chiding hurtyng betynge grudchyng wa^ieng and
cursynge cruelnes and man slaughter and desiryng of vengeance. There be also
other four. in special One when thou art sone meuyd and sone swaged. and that
is easy A another when thou art not sone swagyd and that is shrewyd The
thridde when thou art sone meuyd and not sone swagyd and that is perilous
The fourth is long or thou be meuyd and sone swagyd and this is most easy
Therefore against thies branches thou must arm the with the virtue of patience.
and think what peyn and sorrow might fall to the of thy words and dedys
Then put cristes passion and peynes bitwene the and such peynes as he might
suffer And so shall thy wrath sone slake In four things spirytually it is
necessary to have patience One is against thyn enemy for the nodre cruel he
is the more thou nedyst of patience and soft speech for that slaketh wrach
Therefore if any aduersite fall to the suffer it patiently whether thou have
deseruyd it or not If thou have deseruyd it. thou art worthy that or more If
thou have not thou haste thy reward of Christ. when he says Blessed be they
that be pacient. for they shall be called the children of god A another when
thy sovereign correctith thy defautes. Thou must be pacient and draw in thy
horns of pride as a snayll when he is touched And so did Adam at the voice
of our lord Tie thridde is in loss of thy good as Ioob when all his good
was gone mekely he said. Our lord gave it Our lord has take it And as it
lyketh him so be it do. His name be blessed Amen The fourth is in sickness
For our lord says Tho that I love I chastise. as the dear modre chastises
her child for taking of harm when it nygheth fire or water. Right so the
fad of heaven chastises the to be ware of fleing away So our lord puts away
fro the richesse and strength One by pouerte. another by sickness that thou
sholdest not fle fro him Therefore be pacient and grudche not against the scourge
of god For the more that thou grugest the more thou steryst god agenst the.
says Isodre.

The fourth sin is Couetyse. the which is a wrong desire yt man has to
have any thing. but if he have right thereto.

This stondith in two thyngys pryncipally. One is when thou wrongfully
purchasist or getyst any manner thing by sacrylege. symony: stelthe. usury. or
by any other falsehede or gyle. that worldy men use. which cast all their
business so to couetyse. that they ne recke: how they come to good. so they
have it: In this sin be they gylty. yt for money or other wordely wynningis
use to play at dycis or tablis which is utterly forbode by holy church. For
many sins that come thereof The first is for the couetyse that thou have to win. and to dispoyle thy fellow. Another is for the great vserye as ix. for
xii. or double or quyt. The third is for encrese of othis. lesynges. and many
other veyn words that there ben used. in great dyspyte of god and his feith.
The fourth is. evil ensample that thou yeuest to other that beholds the The
v. is lesyng of time in which thou myghtest have wroughte many good werkys.
The syxte is despyte and dysobedyence yt thou do to thy mother holy church.
that forbedeth the such play. The vii. is fraud and desceyte that thou do
also to thy fellow in that play: The viii. is cursed wreth and stryf that
comes thereof. whereby often thou reynest god and lesyst thy kyndely wit. The
ix. is brekyng of thy holy day. for in tho days is it^ most used. The x. is
manslaughter that often fallyth in that game. The xi. is ydolatry. that thou
do. for thou makyst it against the dyce that is a token above thy god. These
myscheue^ and many moo. comyth of this sorry play.

All that that thou wynnest at this play. for all thy besines that thou have
therewith. thou may not rejoice but nedys thou must give it to your. And if
thou have it of him. that thou makyst so play by strentgh or against his will
thou art bound to restore it to him ageyn. which has loost h^^ with this
play. And also thou brekest all the commaundementis of god And whether thou
win or lose it is all thyn harm. for and thou lose thou lesest god and
heaven. And if thou win thou wynnest the devil and hell

The law off Canon says that a Bishop preeste or deken that (...) them to
dyces or to drounkenes but if he leave it he is certeynly dampened. Subdeken
Clerk* or lewd man that does the same He must other leave it or lack his
how^yll. Therefore every man beware of this play. and that he suffer it in no
wise be done where he may let it For they that consent thereto* or favor it.
in any wise. be in as great peril as the doers. The second point is wrong
wythholdyng* in which thou fallest as often as thou do not to god almighty
to thy neighbor and to holy church thy dewtees. that thou owe to do by
dewte and by goddis law wylfully wythholdest them. For not only he that
wrongfuly geteth. But also he that wronfully wythholdeth. are in dedely sin.
out of this sin also spryngyth many shrewd branches: As mawmetrye. Ambycio^
Nygardshyp treson. usury. symonye Raueyn. theft. sacrylege and such other.
These sins be so cursyd as I said to fore. yt in all thing. it contraryeth
the will and the commandment of god The first commandment. it contraryeth.
when thou wythdrawest fro god any thing that thou sholdest worship him with The
second also when for a lytyl winnyng thou take his name in veyn. The third
when by wordly besines of getyng of money. thou brekeste thyn holy dare. The
fourth when for couetyse thou wythdrawyst fro fader and mother bodily and
goostely their sustenaunce or lyuelood.

The v. when thou sleest a man to have his good. The vi. when thou doyst
lechery more for good then for true matremony. The vii. when for couetyse
thou stelyste thy neighbors good: The viii when in questis and consistories
thou forswerest the. and be rest falls wytnes. The ix. and the x. when thou
desyrest falsely thy neighbors wyff or any of his good. Thus falls couetyse
contraryeth all the commaundementis and will of god. Therefore fle it and think
that for all such falls getyn goods but thou make restytucion and amend the
here. or thou go hens.

Thou shall be hangyd in hell with out end. mammona. which is the devil of
couetyse. he yeueth four commaundedementis to his seruauntis. One is that thou
keep well thyn own another that thou give not. Ne do no alms. the third that
thou leave not to the pour for dread of lesing. the fourth is that thou
wythdrawe the. and thy meyne fro mete and drink. to spare thy good. Of these
four shrewd commaundementis each man beware. and fle such couetyse. and desire
of good as salamon did. for he desired neither riches ne pouerte. but that is
needful to his lyuelood. and according to his estate. and think though thou
have never so much. thou shall leave it here. for nakyd thou came in to this
world. And again nakyd save a ragge thou shall goo out thereof. And thus all the
care that thou have here. is but for an old shete at thy going hens.

The fyfte sin is glotonye the which is an unskillful lykyng or love that a
man has in taste or taking of mete or dr^nke to erly or tolate. but if sykenes
or other great need excuse it. Out of this sin spryngeth. four braunchis.
One is when thou etyst or drynkest to gredely. In this fall tho. yt on the
fasting days will not abide the hour of noon. and sytte the longer at mete.
and ete more at that time. then another time And often time que^che their hunger
with bread spyces or over much drink for dread of hunger And thus they break
vygylls ymber days frydayes lenten and such other Another is when thou castis
the to live in delytes passing thyn estate.

And have no Joy but when thou may speak of such welfare. thinking all
best besette that thou spen-

dyst thereon thou may well use such deynty metis and drinkys. and not sin.
says saint Gregore. For the syn is nether in mete ne drink: but it be
appetyte and talent of the. that delytist so much therein. The third is
surfete and that is when thou pomperist thy body with so much mete and drink
that thou may not brouke it. but lesyst thy sight. speech and wit.
iangelyng and bostyng and wenyng to say well. and all is against reason In this
fall they that make riot in rere sopers and destroy vyteyle yt many a pour
man might be releuyd by. The fourth is curyosite and that is wha^ thou can
not hold the paid with easy fare but gadriste many curyous metys. more to
encreace thyn appetyte then to quench thyn hungre. In this fall they that
waste goods in etyng and drynkyng and great festys making Against all these
cursyd brau^chis thou must keep abstynence in metis and drynkys. For no thing
more dryueth away sekenes ne destroys lust of flesh. then does mesurable
taking of mete and drink. Five manner of folk ben excused fro fasting wymmen
with child. laborers pylgrymis. children. old folk and seek. All these sin
not to ete twys on the day that is mesurable to sustain nature and not their
appetyte: There is diverse abstynence also in diverse personys. The seek
absteyneth him for he may not ete. and for medycyne. The nedy where he has not
whereof. the covetous for he would not spend. The gloton to ete the more after.
the ypocryte to be hold holy: and the virtuous man to deserve mede abstenneth
him. both for excess of mete and lust of sin. This should each man keep to
his power. This same techeth saint Poule when he says. I pray you as
strangers and pylgrymis that ye absteyne you from flesshely desires that fight
ayenste the soul. And also destroy the body. These myscheues common of
glotonye It ingendryth sorys b^y^gyth in sekenes^ destroys virtues. dulleth
the wit* it hastyth the to death. and that. that worse is. for it makes the
like a best. for the fuller thy body is the e^^tyer is thy soul of virtue
Therefore use abstynence says saint Aust^n and these virtues shall follow.
abstynen^^ sauyth thy mind. it sharpeth thy wit it clensyth thy soul.
dressyth thy ^yght. makes holy thy fame swagy^^ thy sin. makyth strong thy
blood and norysheth thy mary destroys lechery renewyth thy blood and
le^g^^yth thyn age.

The syxte sin is slowth And that is a greuaunce or an^ye of goostly dedys.
out of this spryngeth many shrewd branches. O^^ is to draw long and tarry the
good deeds that thou sholdest do the which might turn to the health of thy
soul. and of many other: Another is a dullness or heaviness of heart: that
lets the to love god. And makes the. that thou haste no lykyng in goddys
service. For though thou pray. thyn heart is not thereon. The third is.
ydelnesse the which is to much used. and that lettyth us to begin any good
werkys. and lightly makyth us to leave when we begin. and where we were made
of kind to traueyle. the sin of flowth holdith us in ydelnesse. and ^as^
ayenste kind. Therefore and thou wolt be sauyd. thou must flee ydelnesse. for
it is enemy of christian sowlis. stepmoder to goodness and all virtues. and the
key of all vices. Always do sum good werkis says saint Jerome that the
devil find the occupied. for he is not lightly taken with temptacion. that
besyeth him about good labor And Salamon says that he is most fooll that
follows ydelnes. for in heuyn he shall not be received For it is ordained
oonly for them that have besyed them here in virtue. In erthely paradyse they
shall never be. for they were not in mannys labor here. ne in purgatory they
shall not be scourgyd with men. But in hell with deuyls where never they shall
have rest. therefore be besy here in virtue and always thynk that no thing
makyth a man so heavy. ne so soon to Inclyne to sin as ydelnes. The seventh
sin is lecherye. And that is a flesshely sin that comes of lust and lykyng
off the flesh. Out of this spryngeth many braunchis. One is fornycacion. yt
is dedely sin done flesshely between syngell man and syngell woman. against
the law of god and the techyng of holy church. Therefore holy church
forbedyth that no man child. ne woman child that pass vii. year of age. lie
to gyder in bed. for dread of fornicacion ne sister ne brother for dread off
Incest. Another is called aduoultrys. and that is spouse brethe. whether it be
do bodily or goostely. it is gretter sin and more myscheuous then that
other. For therein thou do sacrylege. yt is to say. thou brekest the
sacrament of wedlok whereof there comes often unrightful heyris and falls
maryagis This sin dowblyth often time when it is done by man married and woman
married. For one of these four myscheuys follow them that customably use this
sin One is pouerte. another is lesyng of some membre. The third is
perpetual prison. And the fourth sodeyn death. And this fails not hardely.
and it be custumably vsyd ^as I said before. another is incest and that is with
thy kynne or thyn affynyte. Another is when thou mysuseste thyn own wife. and
do against kind or order of marriage. for ^s thou may slay thy self. with
thin own sword So thou may with thyn own wife For this sin was oname
Iacobys cousin smyten to death. And seven husboundis of sara also. This sacrament
and all other should be done and used honestely and with great reverence.
Another is when a man synneth with the kynne of his wife: and the contrary.
this is right perylous For he may not after wedde. noon off her kynne. And if
he do the marriage is naught. and that worse is. He may know his wyff no more
afterward in form of wedlock without dedely sin. But he be required of her:
Another there is that is fowlest and most stynkyng of all which is the sin
against kind. That the devil techyth both man and woman. The dyuersytes of
this sin be so abhomynable that they may not be nempnyd. But oonely in
shryfte of them that been fallen therein for the great and the more horrible thy
sin is. the more auaylyth the shryfte. so that the shame off the tellyng is
a great part of thy penaunce^ This sin was so displeysynge to god. That he
made to reyne brymstone and fire that dystroyed five cytes of Sodom and gomer.
The devil him selff that causyth this sin. has shame of the deed.

These and many other flesshely sins which ben dedely. And euerychewers
then other. common out of this foul sin of lechery. the which been well
known to them yt lyuen in lustis of their flesh: Therefore fle the occasions
says saint poule that is to say sight of wymmen. kyssyng touching And such
other. Thuswyse scapyd Joseph the sin of his lady. when he left his paul or
mantell with hur and ran away. Think also on the end and how nygh it is of
the streyt doom also that thou shall come to. and off the horyble peynes and
turmentis that are in hell for such sin. and presume not of thy self. For
dauyd salamo^ and sampson were over come with ye sin. Also here ne speak any
lecherous words but love holy scripture. For that drawyth a man much therfro
use also prayer: fasting. good and lawful occupacions and wythdrawe the fro
superfluytees and excess of hot metys and drynkes.

For if thou live after thy flesh thou shall be deed says scripture. yt is
to say dampened unto everlasting pain of hell Therefore shette the yates of thy
body and thy soul from all these myscheues of sin. yt is to say thy five
wits bodily and goostely yt they consent not with him. First thyn eyes from
shrewd and lewd things bacbytyng and evil words and counseylles. Thy mouth
from unlawful tas^^ off glotenye. lewd kyssynges. and r^^aw dry words. Thy
handys fro lewd touching of thy self and of other And from (...) and unlawful
taking of other mennys goods agenst their will. Thy feet also from the pathis
of sin and all other wretched ways that thou might draw to. These be thy
bodily wyttys. Then take thy ghoostely wits as mind. understanding: will.
reason and immagynacion that is to say have mind of the kyndenesse of god.
and of thy last end. And thou shall never sin. understand also Crystis
loore and his techynges. and let ever thy will be ready to worship god in
thought. word and deed without any werynes let ^^aso^ also rewle all thy dedys
ynward and outward by crystis lore and his techyng without any blyndenesse. And
alwey have ymagynacio^ of virtues living of nedeful werkis and of dredeful
dedis of joy and bliss. that is ordeynyd in heaven to them that leave their
sin and shall be sauyd. And of the horrible paynys and sorowys. yt they shull
suffer endelesly which for their synnys shall be dampened in to the doungeon of
hell. In which be specially. ix. manner of horrible and hydous paineys. that
ix. manner of people shul be tourmentyd with as clerkys sayn. The first is fire
that ever brennyth and never gives light. In which though all the water in
the sea were cast in it should not quench it^ For as our fire passyth a fire
payntid so does that ourys. In this fire shall they ever brenne. yt here alwey
burnyd in the fire of falls couetyse the second is so passing cold. that if a
great hylle of fire. were cast therein. It should turn to yse with this shall
they be tormentyd there. yt be cold in love by malice and envy of the fend.
The third pain is wormis and horrible serpents and dragons. that never shall
deye. but live in fire. as fysshes in water. with these they shall be gnawen
there that here gnawyn them selff with the venomous hate of their even christian.
The fourth is: abhomynable stynke wherein they shall be lappyd there that here
delyten them in to foull stynke of the sin of lechery. The v. shall be
betynge of mighty fendys as it were with hamers on iron. wherwyth they shull be
peyned and beat without ceassyng. yt would not here be chastysed by the techyng
of goddis wordis. The syxte pain is derkene. the wh^che is so thick. yt as it
were. it might be felt with hond. In these horrible derkenes shulle they be
bound there. That lives in earth in derkenes of this foresaid sin. And would
not ^ome to crist. yt is very light: by holy living and leuing of sin whiles
they might

The seventh pain is. open shendship or sha^e for sin. which shall be known
and not hyd in peinfull repreef of sinful folk. and specially to them that
would not knowledge their sin here to god in dew manner. Ne were not ashamed of
him. This shall be a full hard tormente. The eyghte is. The horrible sight off
deuyllys roryng and cryeng with fereful and sorrowful voyse. wherwyth thus shall
they be peyned there. That here took no head of holy ensamplys and good dedys.
ne of techyng ne prechyng of goddis words and byddynges. The ix is fyrye
bondis wherwyth their shulll be bound there hond and foot and other menbrys
that here spendyn their menbris and lymmys in the deuyllis service after the
lust and lykyng of their body. These ix. pains shall these sinful suffer
there. that here forsook and left unwisely the felysshyp of the ix ordres of
Aungellis by their sinful living. but they amend hem or they go hens.
Therefore be sorry for thy sin. and amend the whiles thou art here. yt thou
may escape all these horrible paynis And reygne with our lord Ihesu Crist in
his high bliss of heaven where is ever myrthe after traueyle. fredom after
bondage. health after long sekenes life after death. perfyt love without dread.
and ever day without night. therefore thou shall have seven Joys in thy body.
and seven in thy soul: In thy body fayrnes. swetenes. strength. fredom. lust.
health. and Inmor^alite And in thy soul wysdom frendshyp. accord. power.
worship surete. And joy without end. to the which he us bring* that for us
dyed on the rood Ihesus goddis son.

On sunday that last was. I Informyd you. in homely wise of the worthynes of
mannis soul. what it is. when it is out of sin. what sin is And how it
defowlyth thy soul. Of the sacrament of penance also. how it is. a salve
sanatyf. for all manner sores of sin. when it is discretely vsyd. Now by the
love of god: I shall declare you. the three parties of penance. Contrycion.
confession and satysfaccyon. how by the fulfyllyng of them. your sowlys that
thus have been woundyd with sin mow be reformyd and brought again to grace.
First as for contrycion. It is said but your hertes and not your clothys: For
confession also shewyth out your hertys before the pressed by open speech of
mouth. And for satysfaccion. Do ye worthy frutys of penance. Thus by these
three things. this holy sacrament of penance is preuyd.

For contrycion also it is said in the sawter. I have traueylyd in my sorowys.
I shall make moist my bed every nyght^ with my tearys. As who says I have
traueylyd to make satisfaccion for my sins. with sorrow of mine heart. having
in mind how long. I have lived. how I have spente my time. what goodness I
have lest un do* how much evil I have do. and how by my sin I have lost
the felyship of heaven. and Joined me to the felawshyp of the fend that I am so
here in the vale of tearys. full off wretchydnes. And my birth brought forth
unto mannys sins and sorrows and shall come to the dredefull dome and give a
rekenyng for the left and the most sin: that ever I did in word in deed or
though^ not knowing whether I shall be worthy hate or mede that I would also be
in bliss. which I may not come to without great torment and sorrow. This
consyderyng thyn ^arys and werkis. thou shall well know. yt thou art cause of
thyn own sorrow. and so for shame thou shall fall to contricio^ And win the
grace of god. it is a right hard heart says saint bernard. that neither the
benefettis of god may grynde ne the pains of hell may fere Ne the joys of
heaven may sustain ne ye temporal tormentis ne sorrow may chastise many one
there is that can not be contryte in that they know not what contricion is
Therefore ye shall understand. that contrycion is a sorrow off thy soul formyd
by grace which comyth of forthynkyng of sin and dread of the high doom with
a steadfast purpoos to be confessyd and to do satisfacion after the precepte of
the chirch. (...) is also a conversion of thyn heart from evil to good from
the devil to god and from vices to virtue. There be many that have contrycyon
but not perfyte. as when the heart is touchyd with the handys of god. By
inspyracion to make the perfyte sorrowful for thy sin. yet for hardness off
thyn heart hapely thou yeldeste the not fully But somewhat art less in as much
as thou begynnest to turn. This is called attricion

But when will and desire off sin in every part is fully forsaken with full
sorrow of heart Then it is contrycion. And so verry contrycion is the search
of si^ne ^rigeen says also that very contricion is to abhor gay arraye and
to desire the higher weeping And fle laughter. to spek few And to work
ryghtfully and ever to have dread and sorrow in thyn heart for thy sin: for
the more that thou love a thing. the more is the sorrow when thou lesyst it
Above all creatures is god to be beloved. Then it is more sorrow of his
loss. then of all other creatures. when thou do dedely sin: the^ lefest
thou thy god. therefore by great co^tricio^ thou must get him ageyn For look how
much thou have of grace as says saint Gregore. so much thou must have of
sorrow for thy sin. The sowlis that are in bless. they mow no contricion
have. By cause their Joys be plentuous. They that be in hell sorowen. but
that sorrow is not formyd with grace. The sowlis in purgatory have sorrow
formyd with grace. yet it is not merytory in as much as it should have be had
here Thus in this (...) mercy oonly helpyth. (...) after not. it is blamefully
^erd. (...) saint Iero^^ that can weep ^he (...) of his friend o^ (...). of
t^mporall loss. and can not weep and be sorry for sin. Thy contrycyon
therefore must be sharp in that. that thou have offended thyn heavenly fader.
that bodily and gostely fedeth the in many wise. and yet must thou be sharp in
that that thou have offended thy lord Ihesu goddis son of heaven. that with
his precious blood and by his mercy. delyueryd the fro the bondys of sin.
cruelte of fendes. and bytternes of the peynes of hell. And though our lord
say to the. Not every man that says lord lord. shall enter the kingdom of
heaven. yet leave him not. but have him to the tavern of contrycion: and say to
him as dauyd did. The meke and the contryte heart lord thou shall not despise.
And then he shall give the grace here. and Joy when thou go hens. The
fawcon when he has take his pray. he desires no more thereof but the heart.
And there with he is content so our lord when he had rau^sond us out of hell.
he desired no more but a meke and a contryte heart of us Therefore as the
fawconer or he woll give the heart unto his fawcon. first he will kytte it. and
then take out the blood and wasshe it. So must thou give thyn heart to our
lord. first kyt it with the knyff of contrycion. and then take out the blood
of sin by confession. And after wasshe it with satisfaccyo^ and so with the
knyff of his passion but your hertes and not your clothis. having in mind that
the blade of this ^nyf was made of the spear head and naylys that his precious
body and heart were thryllyd with all The haste was made of the holy tree of the
cross. and the virell was made of the crwone of thorn that was about his
hed-whet this knyf on his blyssed body yt so hard and cruelly was tormentid on
the Cross. that there left noon hool joint with other. make also the shethe of
thy knyf of the whyt skin of our lord Ihesu. That was payntyd with reed blody
woundys. so many that fro the top of the heed^ unto the sole of the foot.
there was noon hoole plott left of him vnscourgyd. Then with the cordis yt
he was bound with to the pyler Now bind this knyff to the gurdell of thy
heart. And I doubt not. be thy heart never so hard. and thou this feythfully
prynte in thy mind his passion with thin hard heart. Hit woll begin to break.
Thus may thou le^ne to suffer repreuys For our lord Ihesu which for the
suffered these and many moo. There ben syx thingys that should stere the to great
sorrow for thy sins. The first is that some time of the day or night as I said
before. Bethynke the how thou have lyuyd. And when thy sins come to thy mind.
have an Inward sorrow that thou have so grievously offendyd thy god. The second
that thou be ashamed of thy sin. and else at the day off dome they shall be
showed to the and to all the world openly. unto thy great shame and confusyon.
The third that thou have great abhominacion of the fylthe of sin that thou
have thus done both in the sight of god and man. Seneca says though I wist
that my syn should be unknown both to god and man. yet would I abhor and
loathe the fylthe of my sin. The fourth is that thou have dread of the day of
dome and of the peynes of hell. Of this day spekyth saint Peter thus uneath
the right wise man that day shall be saved says he whereshall then the
sinful apere. As often as I behold that day says saint Iherom. I quake in all
my heart. And whether I ete or drink. or any other thing do ever me thinks
that the tru^pe of god sow^^th in mine errs And byddeth me sinful wretch
arise. and come to the dome. The fyfte is. that thou have sorrow for the loss
of heaven. And the great of fence done to thy maker. The syxte that thou have a
th^^fold hope. first of foryeuenes that thy ^ynnes be clean foryeuen the. hope
also off grace to do good werkis after and in hem alweye to encreace. and then
hope of bliss wherewith thou may afterward be rewarded for thy good werkys.
he prophet said before that I should wesshe every night my bed with my
teerys. By this it seems that contrycion after forgeuenes should be contynuall
To know this it is hard yet in thy will thou may have contynuell contrycio^
ever in full purpoos to leave and loath thy sin. and thus it is needful. For
and a confessor knew such oon that comes so contynually being sorry inward
and outward. Him nedyth neuir to give him but little penance For though he
had done great and horrible sins. he might so venge. and bewayll his sins
here that after his death he should no pains suffer in purgatory yet this
sorrow must be mesurable with a trusty hope that thowe fall not into heaviness
of despair It must also be general and hole for all sins. yet more sharp
for oone. then for a another after that the gretenesse is And it must be done
for the offense done to god. and not only for dread of euirlasting pain. This
manner of contricion brekyth the s^ares and the cheynes of the devil and
relisseth the bonds. and obligationes. of euirlastynge pain And delyuereth
the from the seruage and horrible company of deuylles and makes the child of
god. and heir of the bliss of heuyn that to fore were the child of the
devil. and a brennynge bronde of the pytt of hell Only contricion also
auayl^th not but there as confession and satisfact^on may be had For as we
offend god in three manner of wise. in heart speech and deed. So it nedith that
we do our satisfaction in iii. manners and else the sins is not foryeuen Oonly
contricion may auayl also when thou art very contryte and purposest
afterward to absteyne the fro all manner of sin. as soon as thou may and
do Also due satisfaccion after the dome of the church and this is the most
sure way. The secounde washing is confession don of thy mouth right as thy
soul is now wasshe and made white with sokynge sorrow and salt fretyng
tears of thyn eyn So by louly confession of thy mouth. thou must rub of the
foull spots of sin that are rustyd in thy soull Of this manner of weshyng
spekith the prophet David saying thus Thu shall spring me lord with ysope
and I shall be cleansed. Thou shall wasshe me and I shall be made clean. and
white as snow. Right thus loulye confession. done of thy mouth to thine own
curate purges and makes more white thy soull then is any snow in this
world Se therefore what confession is Confession after doctoures sayng is A
laufull declaracion of sin to fore done. and a thing whereby a preuy goostly
sore or sickness is opened with hope of foryeue^^sse. Tree manner of
Confessiones there be Oone is inward in the soull For or thou made it. it was
known to god The secounde tofore a judge in hope of forgyuenesse of god And the
thridde tofore gods vycare where as preuy sin is preuely opened Of these
speaks scripture and says Tell out if any thing thou have to say or show that
thou may be instifyed The passion of our lord jesus is a great remedy against
sin be it origynall or actual The virtue whereof is expressyd in the
sacrament of holy church without which there may no man be hole Therefore that
Confession is needful. preuyth scripture saying thus. He that is proud and
woll not obey the precept of the priest. he shall be deed we have it also of
our lord fader of heuyn. yt every man and woman having years of discrecion is
bound by his own person to make confession onys a year. of all his sins to
his own Curate. That it is also needful reason preueth in this wise. and thou
had trespassed to thy neighbor it were not ryghtfull that thou sholdest
set thyn oune pain at thy lust. ne he that has wrong neither But a mean
that coud and might set it resonably. after the wrong were declared The
priest is ordained to be a mean and to set thy peynes for the wrong that
thou haste done to thy god by sin. It nedyth then that thou show truly thy
trespass unto him. that he may set the such penance whereby thou maiste be
able to come to the presence of thy lord. god Also in every dome that is
reasonable there must be a judge and a person that is gyltye And the priest
must either be by preuys or else by witness against thy will or by wylful
knoulege. sithen the dome of penance is free and not against thy will. because
yt thou ghost thereto wilfully: then shall not the process of this dome be in
promys. ne in witness. but freely in thy propre confession: And he must be
judge that may both forgive and condemn. and that is god For he only releseth
sins And so till he took mankind confession of heart suffised But after he
required and asked confession vocal. which is made of man to man.

And for asmoche as he is not here in form of man Therefore he ordeyneth men to
be his vycaries yt thou sholdest confess the to. to whom he gave power to
bind and to unbind. And thus is confession needful by reason promise and
scripture Our lord gave power only to the priest to bynd and to unbind when
he said: whose sins ye forgive they been for give. and whose sins ye
witholde* they be witholde. yet as by power and virtue god losith For there is
no power but of god Christ. says saint Austyn for us was crucified. by which
and noon other. sins are forgeuyn

Therefore our lord yaue openly the holy ghost to men yeuynge vndstondynge that
sins are not foryeue through merits of men. but through the godenes of the
holy ghost. For when he arose from death he said to his disciples Takes the
holy ghost and whose sins ye forgive they are fory^uen as who says the
spirit that is go^ forgyueth and not ye And so he that may forgive by man may
forgive without man. The sacrament of grace says saint Austyn god forgyueth
sometime by evil men But grace alone he yeueth but by him selue. yet remission
of sins he wo^cheth both by him selue and by the holy ghost And thus noman
does away sin but Criste alone.

Saint Ambrose and other doctoures sayn. that the word of god foryeueth sins
The priest is the judge and yet of him selue he has no power. but of him
allone that died for our sins. Saint Ierom says that the same power that
Criste yaue to his appostelles after his resurrection The same has al holy
chirch in busshopes and prestes. But specially petyr and his successoures that
all should understand that who parts him fro unity of the faith may neuyr be
losed from sin. ne enter into the bliss of heuyn The priest loses noon
verily. but god tho that turnyth to penance Then he ministers rightfully that
ministers of the virtue of god. what had it profyted to Lazar yt he went
out of his tomb. but it had be said Loses him and let him go Criste by
voys raised him for his sepulcre And so he went forth that was bound not (...)
might of his feet but by virtue of (...) yt raised him This same is now (...)
done in the heart of a repentant m^n. when thou heryst a man repe^t^^^ for
his sin then he begins. (...) live again. whenne he confessyth. (...)
then he is brought out of his se^^^^re. but yet he is not losed Se ther^^^^
of whom. and when he is losed Criste says Tho that ye have losed in earth
shall be losed in heuyn Here take heed how he said tho. that is to say. no man
except but who so be repe^taunt and ask foryeuenesse by the church he shall
have foryeuenesse. yet though by the church sin may worthily be forgive.
the deed may not rise but our lord cry within forth For that is done within us
may natt be done of us but of him. The discyples losyd him living whom the
master raised fro death For and they should have reased him deed they should
have showed more strength then virtue.

Thus holy church has auctorite of her spouse to lose from al manner of sin
Saint Austyn says that seventy times and seuyn. we be charged to forgive
that is to say to every man that is repentaunt and asks foryeuenesse. yet may
not every priest generally do this. but in time of need. or by auctorite of the
pope or of his busshop For right as a man has power to ete and has not whereof
So it is of prestes power. all they have power. yet it must be given them of
their soueraynes. when where. and how much they shall execute There may no
man chese him a confessoure. but the pope above. without auctorite of him or
else of them that have power under him. but needs he must be shreuyn to his
own curate. yet in certain causes by leave of his curat he may As when the
Curate lacks discrecion A another when thou chaungest thyn householde. and
art a vagabond. or in peril of death or when thou entryst into the sea. in so
great peril. thou may also by that confess the to a lay man and have
foryeuenes And they that thus here the if thou escape must charge the that
thou show the same to thine own curate. Also pilgrames merchants and other
goers about. in diverse countrees in the same wise.

Other causes there be. that thy Curate must send the to fore the busshop
whereto thou must needs obey And be sorye that thou haste more horribly
offendyd god then other have: The tokenes of very confession are these. The
first to shame. when thou shriuest the says saint Ierom. wexe a shamyd of all
the ways that thou haste goon in syn. not for thy confession but for the fylth
of sin that thou shewyst there. For not only our lord sees it but also the
holy company of heuyn Therefore be ashamed for that makes the sooner to have
mercy of our lord Mary mawdeleyn shamed not to confess all her sins in
presence of all that were a^t the feste Her confession and tearis therefore
brought her to bliss The second is meekness in word lokynge and chere.
without any sturdynesse. as the publycan that thought him self unworthy to
lift up his eyn to heuyn And as poul also obeyed to the calling of our lord
So sholdest thou to the bidding of thy goostly fader. and in no wise tarry thy
shryfte for these parelles suyng

ye that be yet vnshreuyn takes good head unto this lesson. and se what parell
ye stand in The first is for the vncertaynte of the life Scriptur says that
man knows not his end. ne the time ne place. ne how ne what manner he shall
dye. and all is for thou sholdest in every time and place be ready to thy death A
another is for encreasyng of thy sin. For sin that is not anon done away by
shryfte: he draws another to him. as says saint Austyne. And so as thou
encresist thy syn. right so thou encresist thy pain Another is. for dread of
turnynge again For the ferther that thou ghost fro god by thy long abydyng in
syn. the harder it is to the after to turn again to thy good life. And also in
great sickness thy peyn is sometime so great that thou must natt be very
repentaunt. It must also be hole. not some to one and some to a another This is
a great spyce of ypocresye. and thus use much people And all for they would be
hold holy and bettre thanne they be. Saint bernard says that there is no
confessioun but it be in truth of thy mouth profitable. and clenes of thy
heart if thou be seek and sweet in all parts of thy body it is a token of life.
and if it be particular it is a token of death: Right so and thou tell all thy
sins it is token of salvation. as when criste helyd the man that the gospel
speaks of He made him not half hole but all hole So whenne he foryeueth he
foryeueth all or neuir a dele Therefore. heeld out thine heart to fore thy
lord. god as water not as oyll. left the fa^nes abide Or as milk lest the
whytnesse appear. ne as wine left the ^auoure abide Thou heldest out thy heart
as oil. that shryuest the of thy small sins. and leuyst the great and the
far within the. Thou heldest out as m^l^ that by color of excusacion
makeste thy sins white. As adam did by the woman. and the woman by the
serpent. Thou beldest it out also as wine. yt after the leuynge of thy sin
thou kepyst the sauoure. within the thereof. as when thou delytest the in
lycherouse words. or have joy to se vanyties. or auantyste the of lewdness
done to fore. and that is a sin that most greuyth god: Therefore held out
thyn heart as water that neither fatnes color ne savor abide after with all
the circumstances As in what manner. what place. what cause what time. what age.
what state. how much how long. why and where. and all such that agree.

Thy sin also it must be naked. not made by a messangere. ne lettre. but with
thine own mouth. ne in gay termys. but in such wise. be it neuir so foull.
that thy confessoure may know thy menyng: and do it wylfully as the thief
that hynge on the cross. And not as achor. it must also be feythfull that
thou have full hope of foryeuenes of thy sin. by the mercy of god or thou goo
thens. accusynge thy self and noon other. saying with Iosue and Dauyd I am he
that sinned I am he that did amys. not excusing the by custom. felaushyp or
frailtye. as some done Do it also in good intent for no vaynglory. ne dread of
pain. But specially for the offense done without any faynynge. For diverse
causes is confession profitable First for the peril of sin that thy
confessoure there shewyth the. Also for the shame that thou have there in thy
confession which is a great relece. of thy pain A another for it shows in
thy conscience a sikernesse of foryeuenes. By confession also god is glorified
and the devil confounded For who so uses often time to be confessed in what
temptacion he be. He shall not be ouir come with the devil. Saint Austyn
says that the oftener that thou art confessed of thy sin in hope of
foryeuenesse. the lightliar says he thou shall have grace and foryeuenes of
thy sins Onys a year it ^^ spedefull. to the. to make thy confession general
and specially in the point of death. and the shame thereof shall be there to the a
great part of thy satisfaccion.

De satisfaccione The thridde part of penance. as I said to fore is
satisfaccion This is grounded in the words of the prophet. that where he said
to Naman. Go and wasshe the seuyn times in jordan. and thou shall be cleansed. of
that thou haste be defaced with spots of sin Though it be sokyd with bitter
sorrow of thyn heart and clerly rubbed with confession. yet must it have many
diverse rensynges after with satisfaccion.. till* it be so clerly purgyd here
or in purgatory that it may clearly appear after in the sight of our lord.
If thy contricion be great here thy penance may be the less there And if it
be little thy peynes must needs be the greter And so great it may be here
that it suffiseth to thy salvation Satisfaccion after diverse doctoures. is a
puttyng away of the cause of syn not taking head of their suggestiones It is
also an obligacion done of god^ works to god with meekness and lowenes of
heart after the qualyte and quantyte of thy sin. This satisfaccion must be
do wylfully without grudgyng And it must be plener and general for every
sin reasonably.

As pryuy penance for pryuy sin open penance for opyn sin. Three
principal werkys there be of satisfacion. alms prayer and fasting. These three
our lord fulfilled in his passion for redemption of our sin. Therefore what
alms is and how it should be done I shall tell. Alms is a lowynge of thyn
heart with a wylfull compassion to them that be in need. and it is a deed of
mercy by compassion of neighbors myscheyf. There be three manner of alms. One
is in the contricion of thyn heart. for the sin that thou offeryst thy selue
with to god A another by geuyng of bodilye treasoure with thyn hand The third
in pity and compassion having of thy neighbors myscheyf Temporal alms thou
may sometime give of gods untruly gotten That is to say when thou know not
to whom thou shall restore it. and yet it must be done by counceyll of thy
goostly fader. and tithe not of that thou getyst by thyft for some time it is
chalengyd. and then he that delivered it shall ask it again And sometime it is
changed and shall. not be asked again as when it turns not to the taker
because they come by theft or robbrye. raueyn. symonye or vsu^ye And so of
them shall no alms be given For they must be restored again But when the
having is changed and shall not be asked again as gifts of comen wymen and
Iogelers or such other.. Then shall they be given in alms Also if thou find
a thing of any value. after time thou haste done thy besynes to wy^e duly who
owyd it Thou shall spend it in alms by counceyll of thy gostlye fader to all
that have need. Also thou shall give thyn alms to good and badde. friend and
enemy. if thou be of power Our lord says give to every man that asks the
and turn not away thy face from any pore man says Toby. yet it is said give
the good man and resceyue not the sinner. yt is to say Give that nature be
sustained and not the sin norisshed Thou norysshest the sin that yeuest thy
good to iougelers and iapers and such yt love to be ydell and suffrest the
pour man to have hungre and myscheyf such manner of geuynge is forboden. If
pity says saint Ambrose shall not be sweet to all. Much more plentouous must
it then be to the good and virtuous in living Thou shall rather give to thy
kynne or neighbor. in their need and they be virtuous. then to other Thou
shall also give to old. men and wymen with child. if they have need rather
then to other And to them that be fall in great pouerte. when such pouert
falls not through riot array or pomp of this world yet rather give. then
the pore be vnseruyd. Opyn thyn heart to all them that ask the for the love of
good without difficultye and give it with charity and with good will. Or else
thou make not due satisfactyon for thy sin. Also with a glade chere and a
meke spyryte So that thou do it for no vayn glory. Ne d^spyse natt the pour
for he is a man as thou art And give it hastily. and tarry not fro him yt
suffers a^guysshe says salamo^ give it also with discrescion. and if thou
have much. give much. if thou have little. give little. gladly says Thoby
Thus bodily and goostly every body may give alms Furthermore against
concupiscence. of thy flesh. thou haste fasting hard going: and living. and
bitter weeping. knockyng on thy breest. of knelynge and sharp disciplyne with
rods of thyn own hondes. trauayll in pylgramage. tribulaciones. anguyssh
sickness and such other bodily diseases patiently suffered of the scourge of
god All such penance wylfully taken a discrete confessoure will put to the in
part of thy satisfaction and penance Fasting is a wylfull abstinence fro
mete and drink whereby thy sin is wasshen and thy flessh made low. for
desire of euirlastynge bliss gostly fasting is fro bodily syn and temporal
joy. Saint Iherom says that it profyteth natt to feeble thy body with
fasting. when thy heart swells with pride: Sum fast for sickness or
for they may not ete. sum for pouerte. some for ypocrysye. and sum to the
worship of god. and thou must modre thy fasting that thy stomach be not greuyd
with to much excess. for little mete mesurably tempreth and proufytteth both
body and soul and disposes the to goostly trauayll. There be some that ete moo
delicate metes and more. whenne they fast then they do at ii melys when
they fast not. and in manner they break their fast There is also prayer against
pride two manner One is inward in thy soull without showing of voice A another
also ordained for the three parties of satisfaction against pride Prayer is a
loving desire of thy soull to god with speech of mouth or gaderyng of words
to ask good of god with uttering of thy voice. Of four fruitful prayers
saint Poul speaks whenne he says I pray you first of all thing that there be
obsecraciones. orisones. postulaciones and yeldyng of thankynges. Obsecraciones
are whenne thou see in thy soul the multitude of sin and little of thy
merytes: and see the horrible peynes of hell which thou may not void by
thyn own virtue. Ne dare not for thyn own unworthiness make thy prayer thy
selue. but make supplicaco^ns by other menys as when^ thou say. Sancta
maria ora pro nobis Our lord by thy passion deliver us. Orison is when thou
have forsaken thy sin and ask foryeuenes by open speche^ Postulacion is
when after thy penance done thou haste a sad hope of foryeuenes if thou pray
also any thing against thyn own speed As poull that prayed that his temptacion
might be put away then our lord will not grant it the. Some things thou
may pray with condition And some things without condition. to have grace and
blys with our lord thou may ask without condition. Saint Bernard says
that thou may ask of our lord grace in all godenesse. to please him. live in
him. see his bliss and to able thy self to virtues to do him worship and to be
with him withouten end yet before this prayer thou must make ready thy soull in
diverse wise. First thou must withdraw thyn heart fro outward business
being in will to keep thy thoughts after thy first intent. Thou must considre
also how unworthy thou art. that prayest and how worthy he is thou prayest
unto and how great thy sins be that thou prayest for Thou must also be
clean in soull. and if thy prayer be short let it be done with steadfast hope.
for a short prayer with a sad hope feithfully done is more acceptable to god
then a long prayer fayntly done without hope. yet to them that been occupied
in dyuyne service Long prayer is spedefull To pray also with voys is more
spedefull thanne to think or whysper Grisostum says thus. thou that with
loud voice prayest and whysperyst thou suffryst noon other to pray about the
And therefore thy sin and thy pain are increased if it be do wyttyngly. and
thy self not herd of god. It must also be done without interupcion. not to say
now a verse or a Pater noster. and bitwene iangle. and tell a tale without
great need. ne to haste it to much. Thou must also make it common to place
time and persons Paull says I will that men pray in every place. yet in the
church principally For our lord says my house shall be called the house of
prayer All times are times of prayer yet in holy church been seven ours
ordained for time of prayer which most specialy longs to religiouse men.
Our lord before his passion traueyled all night in prayer Our lady and Joseph
also rose every night at mydnyght and said the psalms of commendacion. And
the same did David and his householde Though all may not do thus yet a^^yse
them that be bound and have no lettynge. It must also be made w^ith other
and not always allone. In that it is more acceptable to god. more pleasant to
aungelles. and more confusion to the devil. And the same that thou make for
a another is bettre then that thou make for thy selue. And though our lord
here not anon thy prayer at thy will. yet he heryth it and grants the
happily that that is more spedefull. A thing that is long desired at the last
it co^myth. and that is the more deynte. It must also be done with devotion.
Devotion as clerks sayn is a tenderness of heart whereby thou breakyst lightly
into tearys Also a will of love lift up to god or to his heuynly creatures
m^uynge. the inward and outewarde to the service of god. Such devotion
purges both body and soull. And thus devotion may be known by two pryncipall
tokens One by gretenesse of the voice outward as a great fire is known by the
flame A another by terys For right as a fire dryueth out moisture fro wete
wode So devotion brings out tearys of thyn eyn in prayer. well is him that
has such plentye. of tearys. for he is disposed to grace. But there be sum
that have great plentye of tearys. fro day to day in prayer devoutly redynge
or speaking: And yet will not leave their sin. ne trauayll to withstonde their
temptacions. ne know ne keep the precepts of our lord. Such tears be not
accept for due sacrifyce before our lord If thou be full contryte says
aldrede and trusteste in the mercy of god confessed and in will to do thy
penance. and not in will to turn ageyn to thy sin Then says he such
tears please god and wasshe away thy sins. and more turment the devil as
says saint Bernarde. then all other kinds of turmentes may do. Sithen
devotion must be in every prayer yet the time thereof should be principally
used. in the time of the mass and for four causes. Oone is for the presence
of our lord god that is there. not only by his godhode but also by his
manhood. that he took for the love of mannys. soull The secounde is for the
multitude of aungelles that there been evermore present to yield worship to
almighty god. The thrydde is for great profyt and speed that the body and soull
have by virtue of the sacrament both to them that been present. and specially
to them that worthily receive him The fourth is for the wonderful worship
that is there yeuen to man. that through the virtue of words said of man. the
presence of our lord is had. and the innumerable nombre of aungelles so
many that no tongue can tell. ne heart think. Devotion also should be used in
time of service that thou art bound to say But so^me for uncunning say their
service the more hastily for their pryuy prayer yt they have devotion to and
the devotion is little or naught w^rth Se now therefore how thy soull may be
refourmyd and brought again to god Thy soul has mind reason. and will mind
for it should rest in god. reason for thou should know god and will. for thou
should love god But by sin thy mind is unstable. thy reason blind. and thy
will crooked. and all is for thou forsakest thy god.

The reformacion therefore of thy mind is to bring again thy heart that was
trauayled with veyn thoughts by prayer. redynge and often thinking of god As
of his incarnacion. passion. innumerable benefetys and gracious yeftes. Having
great sorrow for thy great unkindness. yt thou always shewedyst him The
reformacion of thy reason is to believe sadly in the faith of holy church Our
lord for our great comfort has yeuen us knowledge in scripture: where we
may find all that is necessary. and spedefull to our soull hele not to follow
therein our natural will But to submytte our wit to the rules of feyth
after the understanding of holy doctoures And so gostly to be cleansed by the
sacrament of penance The reformacion of thy will also is to withsto^de vices
and with a good will truly. and feythfully encreace and abide in virtues For
god without any curiosite of will that there be no double desire ne none
affeccion plesynge to the Butt such as is according with the will of god.
Thus than co^sidred the worthynesse of thy soull. the horroure of thy sin
wherewith thy soul is thus wounded. Take this salve. of penance with these three
plasters. Contricion confession and satisfaccion And bind them sadly to thy
sore with the bonds of hope. and dread: hope to have foryeuenes of thy sin.
hope of grace to live well after. And hope of glory without end to reign
perpetually in heuyns bliss. Dread also of the peynes of hell. if thou
despair of his mercy For to him it is propre to have mercy and to spare So
that for every sin as says saint Austyn there is an absolucion be it neuir so
great.

For what might be greter or worse then to sle our lord Jesus Crist right as
the jews did. yet there were sum of them after that believed ^ now be sauyd
Petyr and mary mawdleyn and many other also after they had sinned they were
with the salve of co^tricion ma^^ hole and now be in blys Therefore be thy
sins neuir so many ne so great. dispeyre the not but say alwey with David
Have mercy on me lord after thy great mercy Do away lord my wyckydnesse Man
has sinned says saint Austyn And crist has redemyd And so at our lord as
says the prophet is mercy and plentuous redemption And he shall redeem
israel from all his wickedness Israel is asmoche to say as he that sees god

He sees god then that l^thyth (...) sin And by contrico^n and by
confession and penance doing is converted to him That ye may then thus be
converted and ^o penance for your sins grant he you and me that d^ed for
us on the rode tree: Amen:

The general sentence.
Good men and wymen I do you to understand that we yt have cure of your
souls be commanded of our ordynaries and by the constituciones and the law
of holy church to show to you four times by the year in each a quarter of
the year onys. when the people is most plenary ^^ holy church. the articles
of the sentence of cursynge So that naught for our defaut no man ne woman fall
therein: And if any be therein fallen he may be through the help of god
almyghtye. and all holy church with shryfte and penance. making good for his
syn: up rise and him amend. wherefore I do you to understand that cursyng is
such a vengeance taking that it departs a man fro the bliss of heuyn. fro
housell shryfte and all the sacraments of holy church and bet^keth him to the
devil and to the peynes of hell. without end. but if he have grace of him to
amend But therefore see yt no man nor woman say that I curse hem for it longith
not to me but to show the points and the articles of the sentence of cursynge
For I do you well to wy^

who so does against any of (...) points that I shall you show. he is
accursed in the deed doing of the day archebusshoppe and busshop. and of a^^
holy church. And that god almyghtye give you grace. for to keep you out of
cursynge Lysten and here and I shall through the help of god fader almighty to
you then tell and show By the auctoryte of god the son and the holy ghost
and his glorious modre and maiden. our lady saint Mary. and the blessed
appostelles Petyr and Poule. and all the apposteles marters confessoures and
virgynes. and all the halowes of god I ^^nounce and show for accursed al tho
that fraunchyse of holy church break or distrouble. or are against the peace or
the state of holy chirch or thereto asse^t with deed or counseill And also al
tho that pryue holy church of any right. (...) make of holy church. any lay
fee (...) is hallowed or sanctified And al tho yt withold the rightes of any
church that is to say Offrynges tithes re^tes. or fredome of holy church
l^te. or distrouble or break. that is to say If any man flee to church or
churchyerd who so him out draws and al tho that procure or assent And all
tho that purchase lettres of any lords Court. wherefore lettynge is maade in
christian. court that process of right may natt be determined or endyd And all
tho* that the peace of the land destrouble And all tho that blood draw of man
or of woman in vyolence or in vylony make to be drawn in chirch or in
churcheyerde. wherefore the church or the churcheyerd is enterdited or suspe^^^^

And all tho that been against the right of our lord the king. and also^
thein that sustain war against the king wrongfully And all tho yt are
comune robbers and re^e^s or mansleers but if it be hem self defending. and
tho that be against the great char^^e of the king that is co^fermyd of the
court of Rome And al tho that falls wytnes bear wrongely namely in cause of
matrymonye in what court so it be or out of court And all tho that any false
wytnes bring forth in right of matrymony for to destrouble man or woman. or
for to disherite any man of land or tenement or any other catel And all false
advocates that for mede put forth any falls excepciones or querels. through the
which the right of matrymonye is fordoon. or any other manner of right instead
of judgment And all tho that for mede or favor or for any other encheson
malicyously. man or woman bring out of their good fame into wicked. or make
them for to lose their worldly gods or honor or put them wrongfully to
their purgacio^. of the which was (...) ^ame before And all tho that
maliciously distroble or let the right presentment of any church. there the
very patron. should present. and all that thereto procoure with word or deed
or with false enqueste or with other power. And all tho that maliciously
despysen the maundme^t of the king to take a cursed man fro the time yt he
has leyn in cursyng xl. days and no remedy will seek And all tho that
capcions distrouble with false judgment or false enqueste. And all tho that
their lyueraunce purcha^e against the right of holy church and all tho that me^e
take for to distroble peace ther^ love should be or charity Or stryf mayntene
with word or deed. and till they have yelden again the mede. that they took of
them. they may neuyr be assoyled And all tho that hold houses manners graunges
of persons vycares or of any other man of holy church. against their will or
their attourneys will. And all tho that any manner gods meuable or vnmeuable.
away bear with strength. or wrongefully away draw or wasten. of the which
^synge they may not be assoiled till they have made satisfaccion. to whom the
wrong is done And all tho that an^ manner of gods with violence or ma^^^e
bear out of holy church stedde or ^bbey. or house of religyon which that
therein is leyde or done. for warandise or socour or for to keep and all that
thereto procour or (...). and all tho that them mayntene or sustain And al tho
that have leyde hond on priest or clerk with malice. butt it be him selue
defending And all tho that (...) counceyll or help against cristendome And all
that her children wrongfully fader wyttyngly or there children wyten on any
other man with malice And all tho that werye or sle their generaciones. or
their children distroye with drynkes. or with any other craft And all tho that
false money make and thereto assent And all tho that good money clyppe or shere.
them to auantage to disceyue any man with. and al tho yt false the popes bulls
or (...) the kings sea^^ And all tho that bye or sell with falls mesures or
false weyghtes. that is to say to bye with one and sell with a another And all
tho that false the kings standarde them self wyttynge And all tho that any
testament distrouble or thereto procoure with word or with deed wherefore the
dedys will is not fulfilled

And all tho that forswere hem self upon the holydome willing and wetyngly for
mede or for hate. for to to do any man or woman to lose there worldly gods and
honor And all rubbers and reuers openly or preuely. by day or by night. or
any mannys goods stele. wherefore they were worthy to have judgment And all tho
that witholde any mannys good. that has been spyred thryse in holy church
them selue wyttyng And all tho that distrouble the peace of holy church. or of
the land. And all the kings felones. and all tho yt them mayntene And all
false conspiratoures and all false forswerers in assy^es or any other court
And all tho that any falls pleyntes put forth. against the fraunchise of
holychurche or of the king of the royalme And all tho that offrynges that are
offered in holy. church or in churcheyerde or in chapel or in oratory or in any
other stead with in the prouynce of Caunterbury with holden or put away in
any other place against the will of the parson or vycary. or their attorney in
the parysshe that it is offeryd in. And all tho that their goods. away give
for dread of death in fraud of holy church or to forbarre their dettes pay^^ge
And all tho that such gifts take. or thereto help or counceyll And al tho
that let prelates or ordynaries. for to hold consistory session or chapiters.
for to en^^ere of sins and of exces in good amendment of mannys soul And all
wyches and all that on them leave. and all heretykes that leave not in the
sacrament of the auter. that is gods own body in flesh and blood in form
of bread. and other sacraments that touches help of mannys soul And all
iogelers usurers that is to say If any man or woman. leave their catell to man
or woman for any auaunt^ge to take by couenante more or less (...) their own.
and if their be any such in town or cite. the Cite or the. town should be
enterdyte. by the old law. and neither done therein mass ne ^a^rament vsyd
till that he were out thereof And all that witholde tithes or withdraw their
tithes wyttynglye. o^ maliciously to the harm of holy ^^che. or tithes let to
be given of (...) goods which be commanded or ordained to be given by the
law of holy. church that is to say. of al fruits of yerdes corns herbs
that wax. fruits of trees. of all manner bestes. that are newynge: Of woll lamb
and chese. in time of year. Of swannes gees douys duckes. of bees honey wax. Of
hay olso often as it news. of flax of hemp. of wyndemylles. of all manner
mylles. of all manner marchaundise. of chafferynge men* and of men of craft And
all tho that any of these things maliciously or wittingly or any other things
witholde ^che ought to be yeuyn to holy (...) by gods law to harm of hol^
^che And tho that thereto procour (...) ^de or in deed. Modus fulminandi (...)^
prelatus alba indutus cum (...) ^acerdotibus in ecclesia existen^^^^ auce
erecta. candelis accensi^ (...) ^pulpito pronuncient verba que sequiltu^* ex
auctoritate dei patri^ o^^i^ potentis et beat marie virginis et (...)
sanctorum excomunicamus anathe^atizamus. et dyabolo co^mendamus ^^^es
supradict^s malefactores excomunicati sit ^ematizati et diabolo co^mendati sint
in villis in campis. in viis semitis. in domibus. extra domos et in o^^^bus
alus locis. stando. sedendo. iacendo. surge^do ambulando. currendo. vigilando.
dormiendo. comedendo ^^^^^do. et ali (...) faciendo. and illos a luminibus et
o^^^bus bonis ecclesie sequestramus et diabolo dampnamus: et in penis in ferni
extinguimus. sicut extinguitur ista candela. nisi recipiscant and ad
satisfactione^ veniant. Finita sentencia ex^ lumen. ad terrorem. pulsatis
campanis.

The bedes on sunday
yE shall knele down on your knees and lift up your hertes making your prayers
unto almighty god for the good state and peace of al holy church that god
mayntene. (...) keep it For our holy fader (...) and all his true college of
car^ (...) that god for his mercy them ^^yntene and keep in the right believe
and it hold and increase. and all mysbyleue and herisye he less and distroye
Also ye shall pray for the holy land and for the holy cross that Jesus christ
dyed on for the redemption of mannys soul that it may come in^o the power of
christian men. the more to be honored for our prayers. Also ye shall pray for
all archebusshoppes and busshoppes. and in especyall for the archebusshop. of
Ca^^terbury our metropolytayn and for the busshop of N. our dyocysan that god
of his mercy give to hem grace so to rewle holy church. that it may be to the
honor and worship of him and salvation of our souls.

Also ye shall pray for all abbottes pryoures monks chanons frerys and for
all men and wymen of religion in what order estate or degree they stand. in.
from the highest estate to the loweste degree. ye shall also pray for all. them
that have charge and cure of christian menn^ souls as curates. persons
vicaries. prestes and clerks. and in especial for the person and curate of
this church: and for all the prestes and mynistres that serve therein or haf
served. and for all them that have. taken any order. that god give them grace
well to keep and observe it to the honor and health of their souls ye shall
also pray for the unity and peace of all christian realms. and in especial for
the good state peace and tra^quylite of this royalme of England. For our (...)
for his great mercy send (...) grace* so to govern and rule (...) that god
^e pleased and (...) and profyt and sauacion o^ this land Also ye shall pray
for our st^ge lady the queen. my lord the prince and all the noble progenye
of them For all Dukes Earls Barons knights and Squyers. and all other lords
of the kings counseyll which have any rule and governance in this land yt
god give them grace so to counceyll rule and govern that god be pleased the
land defended to the profyt and sauacion of all the realm. Also ye shall
pray for the peace both on the land and on the water that god grant love
and charity. among all christian people. ye shall pray for all our parisshenys
whether they be on land or on water that god save them from all manner of
perellys. and for all the good men. of this parisshe. for their wives children
and menye. that god them mayntene save and keep. ye shall also pray for all
true tithers that god multiply her gods and increase For all true telers. that
labor for our sustenaunce that teyle the earth. and also for all the greynes
and fruits that be sown set or done on the earth. or shall be done that god
send such wederynge that they may grow and multiplye to the help and
profyt of all mankind. ye shall pray for all true shypmen. and marchantes
where that they be on the land or on the water that god keep hem fro all
perils: and bring them. ^^me in sauetye with their gods Ships and
marchandyses to the comfort and prouffyt of this Realm. ye sha^^ also pray
for th^^ yt find any light in the church or give or byqueth book bell chalyce
or westmente. lands rentes lamp or light. whereby gods service is the
bettre served. and maynteyned ye god reward it them at their most need Also
ye shall pray for all true pilgrames that have take their way to Rome Jerusalem
saint Katheryn or saint James. or to any other holy place that god of his
grace. give them time and space: well for to goo and come to the proffyt of
their lives and souls Also ye shall pray for all them that be dyseased in
this parysshe that god send them health. the rather for our prayers For all
wymen that been in our lady bonds. in this parisshe or in any other. that god
lend the children cristendome and the moders purificacion And for all them
that would be here and may not for sickness trauayll or other lefull
occupacion that they may have part of all the good dedys. that shall be done
in this place or any other Also ye shall pray for all them that be in good lif
that god hold them long therein. and for them that be in dett or in dedely
sin that jesus crist bring them out thereof Also ye shall pray for him. or
her that this day gave the holy bread and for him that first began and
le^gest holds thereon. Furthermore ye shall pray for your faders souls. and
your moders souls. your godfaders souls your godmoders souls your
sustern and brethern souls. and sa^ (...) friends souls. and all the saules
(...) be dounde to pray fore. and for (...) ^sten souls that god would have
prayed fore ye shall say a Pater noster. and an Aue maria. Deus misereatur.
Gloria patri Kyrie leyson. Pater noster. Et ne nos. Oste^de nobis domine:
Domine exaudi oro^nem meam. Dominus vobiscum Et. Ecclesie tue. Deus in euius
manu. Vel aliter. De profundis.

Absolne quesumus domtue animas famulorum tuorum pontificum regu^ sacerdotum
parentum parochianoru^. amicorum benefactorum nostrorum and omnium fidelium
defunctorum ab oi^ vinculo delictorum: vt in resurrectionis gloria inter
sanctos et electos tuos resuscitati respirent. Per cristum dominum nostrum Amen.

Emprentyd by me Richard Pinson.

printer's or publisher's device


