THE SVNNE in Aries. A NOBLE SOLEMNITY PERformed through the City, at the sole
cost and charges of the Honorable and ancient Fraternity of DRAPERS, at the
confirmation and establishment of their most Worthy Brother the Right
Honorable, EDWARD BARKHAM, in the high Office of his Majesty's Lieutenant,
the Lord Mayor of the famous City of LONDON. Taking beginning at his Lordships
going, and perfecting it self after his return from receiving the Oath of
Maioralty at WESTMINSTER, on the morrow after SIMON IVDES day, being the 29. of
October. 1621. By THO. MIDDLETON. Gent.

AT LONDON: Printed by Ed. All-de, for H. G. 1621.

TO THE HONOR OF HIM, TO WHOM THE NOBLE FRATERNITY of Drapers, his worthy
Brothers have dedicated their loves in costly Triumphs, the Right Honorable,
EDWARD BARKHAM, Lord Mayor of this renowned CITY.
YOur Honor being the Center, where the Lines
Of this Days glorious circle meets and ioynes;
Love, Joy, Cost, Triumph, all by You made blessed;
There does my Service too, desire to rest:
At your Lordships command, THO. MIDDLETON.

THE SVNNE IN ARJES.
PIsces, being the last of the Signs, and the Wayne of the Suns Glory; how
fitly and desiredly now the Sun enters into Aries, for the comfort and
refreshing of the Creatures, and may be properly called the Spring time of
Right and Justice; observed by the Shepherds Calendar in the Mountain, to
prove a happy Year for poor men's causes, Widows, and Orphans Comforts; so
much to make good the Suns Entrance into that noble Sign; I doubt not but
the Beams of his Justice will make good themselves.

And first, to begin with the Worthy love of his Honorable Society to his
Lordship, after his Honors return from Westminster, having received some
service upon the water: the first Triumph by land attends his Lordships most
wished arrival, in Paul's Churchyard, which is a Chariot most Artfully framed
and adorned, bearing the Title of the Chariot of Honor: In which Chariot many
Worthies are placed, that have got Trophies of Honor by their Labors and
Deserts, such as Jason, whose Illustration of Honor is the Golden Fleece,
Hercules with his Ne plus vltra, upon Pilasters of Silver, a fair Globe, for
conquering Alexander; a Gilt Laurel for triumphant Caesar, etc. Jason at the
approach of his Lordship, being the Personage most proper (by his
Manifestation) for the Societies Honor, lends a voice to these following words.

The Speech presented by Jason.
BE favorable Fates! and a fair Sky
Smile on this Expedition, Phoebus Eye
Look cheerfully, -- the Bark is under Sail
For a Years voyage, and a blessed Gale
Be ever with it; It Is for Justice bound,
A Coast, that is not by every Compass found;
And goes for Honor, Life's most precious Trading,
May it return with most Illustrious Lading;
A thing both wished and hop'te for; -- I am He
To all Aduenturous Voyages, a free
And bountiful well-wisher, by my Name
High Jason, first Aduenturer for Fame,
which now rewards my danger, and o're-tops
The Memory of all Peril, or her stops;
Assisted by the noble Hopes of Greece,
'Twas I from Colchis fetched the Golden Fleece;
Am One of the first Brothers (on Record)
Of Honor got by Danger: So, great Lord!
There is no Voyage set forth to Renown,
That does not sometimes meet with Skies that frown,
With Gusts of Envy, Billows of despite,
Which makes the Purchase once atchieu'd, more bright:
"State is a Sea; he must be wise indeed
"That sounds It Is Depth, or can the Quick sands heed,
And Honor is so nice and rare a Prize,
It Is watched by Dragons, Venamous Enemies;
Then no small care belongs to it, -- but as I
With my assisting Argonautes, did try
The Utmost of Adventure, and with bold
And constant Courage, brought the Fleece of Gold;
Whose Illustration decks my Memory
Through all Posterities, naming but Me:
So, Man of Merit, never faint or fear,
Thou have the Assistance of Grave Senators, here,
Thy Worthy Brethren; some of which have past
All dangerous Gulfes, and in their bright Fames placed,
They can Instruct and guide thee; and each one
That must adventure, and are coming on
To this great Expedition, They will be
Cheerful and forward to Encourage Thee;
And Blessings fall in a most infinite Sum
Both on those past, Thy Self, and those to come.
Passing from this, and more to encourage the labor of the Magistrate, he is
now conducted to the Master-Triumph called the Tower of Virtue, which for the
strength, safety and perpetuity, bears the Name of the Brazen Tower; of which,
Integrety keeps the Keys, Virtue being indeed as a Brazen wall to a City or
Commonwealth, and to Illustrate the prosperity it brings to a Kingdom, the
Top-Turrets or Pinacles of this Brazen Tower shine bright like Gold, and upon
the Gilded Battlements thereof, stand 6. Knights, 3. in Siluered, and 3. in
Gilt Armor, as Virtues Standerbearers or Champions, holding 6. little
Streamers, or silver Bannerets, in each of which are displayed the Arms of a
Noble Brother and Benefactor, Fa^^e sounding forth their praises to the world,
for the Encouragement of after Ages, and Antiquity the Register of Fame
containing in her Golden Legend, their Names and Titles; as that of Sir Henry
Fitz-Aiwin Draper, L. Mayor four and Twenty years together; Sir John Norman,
the first that was rowed in Barge to Westminster with Silver Oars, at his own
cost and charges; Sir Francis Drake, the Son of Fame, who in two Years and
ten Months, did cast a Girdle about the world: The unparalleled, Sir Simon
Air, who built Leaden Hall (at his own cost a Storehouse for the Poor both
in the upper Lofts and lower; the Generous and memorable Sir Richard Champion,
and Sir John Milborne, two bountiful Benefactors; Sir Richard Hardell in the
Seat of Magistracy 6. years together, Sir John Poultney, 4. years, which Sir
John founded a College in the Parish of St. Lawrence Poultney, by Candlewicke
street, John Hind, a Reedifier of the Parish Church of St. Swithin by London
Stone. Sir Richard Pipe, who being Free of the Leather sellers, was also from
them translated to the Ancient and Honorable Society of Drapers; and many whose
names for breuities cause I must omit, and hasten to the Honor and Service of
the Time present: From the Tower, Fame a personage properly adorned, thus
salutes the Great Mr. of the Day and Triumph.

The Salutation of Fame.
VVElcome to Virtues Fortress, strong, and clear,
Thou art not only safe, but glorious, here;
It is a Tower of Brightness; such his Truth,
Whose Strength and Grace feels a perpetual Youth;
The walls are Brass, the Pyramid's fine Gold;
Which shows, it is Safeties and Prosperities Hold;
Clear Conscience, is Lieutenant; Providence, there,
Watchfulnes, Wisdom, Constancy, Zeal, Care,
Are the six Warders; keep the Watchtower sure,
That nothing enters but what is just and pure,
For which effect, both to affright and shame
All slothful Bloods, that blush to look on Fame,
An Ensign of good Actions Each displayes,
That worthy Works may justly own their Praise;
And which is cleareliest to be understood,
Thine, shines amidst thy Glorious Brotherhood,
Circled with Arms of Honor, by those, past,
As now with Loves Arms, by the Present, graced,
And how thy Word does thy true Worth display;
Fortunae Matter, Diligentia,
Fair Fortunes Mother (all may read, and see)
Is Diligence, endeavoring Industry:
See here the Glory of Illustrious Acts
All of thy own Fraternity, whose Tracts
It Is comely to pursue all Thy Life's Race,
Taking their Virtues, as thou hold'st their place:
Some, College Founders, Temple-Beautifiers,
Whose blessed Souls sing now in caelestiall Quires;
Erecters some, of Granaries for the Poor,
Though now converted to some Rich men's Store
(The more the Ages misery) some so rare
For this Famed Cities Government, and Care,
They kept the Seat four Years, with a fair name,
Some six; but One, (the Miracle of Fame)
Which no Society, or Time can match,
Twenty four Years complete, he was Truths watch,
He went so right and Even; and the Hand
Of that fair Motion, Bribe could never make stand.
And as Men se their Watches by the Sun,
Set Iusti^e but by that which He h^s done,
And keep it Even, so, from Men to Men,
No Magistrate need stir the work again:
It lights into a Noble hand to Day,
And has past many; Many more, it may.
By this Tower of Virtue, his Lordship being gracefully conducted toward the
new Standard, one in a cloudy Ruinous Habit Leaning upon the Turret, at a
Trumpets sounding, suddenly starts and wakes, and in Amazement throws off his
unseemly Garments.

What Noise is this? Makes me from Ruins Womb,
Hah? bless me, ( Time) how brave am I become?
Fame fixed upon my Head? beneath me, round,
The Figures of Illustrious Princes, crownde
As well for Goodness, as for State by Birth,
Which makes them true Heirs both to Heaven and Earth?
Just 6 in Number; and all blessed Names,
Two Henryes, Edward, Mary, Eliza, James,
(That Joy of honest Hearts;) and there behold
His honored Substitute, whom Worth makes bold
To undergo the Weight of this Degree;
Virtues fair Aedifice raised up like me:
Why here is the Cities Goodness; showen in either,
To raise two worthy Buildings both together;
For when they made that Lords Election free
I guess, that Time their charge did perfect Me:
Nay note the Cities Bounty in both, still,
When they restore a Ruin, it is their Will
To be so Noble in their Cost and Care
All blemish is forgot, when they repair:
For what has been Reedified alate
But lifts it is Head up, in more glorious State:
"'It Is Grown a Principle; Ruins, built again,
"Come betterd both in Monuments and Men:
The Instance is apparent; On then, Lord,
Even at thy Entraence thou would a Great man's Word;
The noblest Testimony of fair Worth
That ever Lord had, when he first stood forth
Presented by the City: Loose not then
A Praise so dear, bestowde not on all Men;
Strive to preserve this Famous Cities pea^e
Begun by yon' first King, which does increase
Now by the last; from Henry that ioynde Roses
To James that Unites Kingdoms, who encloses
All in the Arms of Love, Malic't of None,
Our Hearts find that, when Neighboring Kingdoms groan;
Which in the Magistrates Duty, may well move
A Zealous Care, in all, a Thankful Love.
After this, for the full close of the Fore-noones Triumph; near S. Lawrence
Lane, stands a Mountain Artfully raysde and replenisht with fine woolly
Creatures; Phoebus on the Top shining in a full Glory, being circled with the
12. Caelestiall Signs, Aries placed near the principal Rays, the proper
Sign for Illustration; thus greetes his Lordship.

Bright Thoughts, Joy and Alacrity of Heart
Bless thy great Undertakings, it is the part
And property of Phoebus, with his Rays,
To cheer and to Illumine Good-mens Ways;
Eagle-Eyde Actions, that dare behold
His Sparkling Globe, depart, tried all like Gold;
It Is Bribery and Injustice, Deeds of Night
That fly the Sunne-beame, which makes good Works bright
Thine look vppon't, Vndazled, as one Beam
Faces another, as we match a Iem
With her Refulgent fellow; from Thy Worth
Example Sparkles, as a Star shootes forth:
This Mount, the Type of Eminence and place,
Resembles Magistracies Seat, and Grace;
The Sun, the Magistrate himself, Implies;
These woolly Creatures, all that Part which Lies
Under His charge and office, (not unfit)
Since Kings and Rulers are (in holy Writ)
With Shepherds paraleld, nay from Shepherds Reared,
And People and the Flock as often cohaerd;
Now, as it is the Bounty of the Sun
To spread his Splendors, and make Gladness run
Over the drooping Creatures; it ought so
To be His proper Virtue, that does owe
To Justice his life's Flame, (shot from Above)
To cheer oppressed Right with looks of Love,
Which nothing doubted; Truths reward light on you,
The Beams of all clear Comforts shine upon You.
The Great Feast ended, the whole state of the Triumph attends upon his
Lordship both to Paul's, and homeward; and near the Entrance of his Lordships
House, two Parts of the Triumph stand ready planted, viz. The Brazen Tower,
and the Triple-Crowned Fountain of Justice; this Fountain being adorned with
the lively Figures of all those Graces and Virtues which belong to the
faithful discharging of so high an Office; as Justice, Sincerity, Meeknes,
Wisdom, Providence, Aequality, Industry, Truth, Peace, Patience, Hope,
Harmony; all Illustrated by proper Emblems and expressions; as Justice, by a
Sword; Sincerity, by a Lamb; Meeknes, by a Dove; Wisd^me by a Serpent;
Providence, by an Aegle; Aequality, by a siluerd Balance: Industry, by a
golden Ball, on which stands a Cupid; intimating, that Industry brings both
Wealth and Love; Truth with a ^anae of Stars, with which she chases away
Error; Peace, with a Branch of Laurel; Patience, a Sprig of Palm; Hope, by a
siluer'd Anchor; Harmony, by a Swan; Each at Night holding a bright burning
Tapor in her hand, as a Manifestation of Purity: His Lordship being in sight,
and drawing near to his Entrance; Fame, from the Brazen Tower closes up the
Triumph, his Lordships honorable welcome, with the noble Demonstration of his
worthy Fraternities Affection; in this concluding Speech.

Fame. I Cannot better the Comparison
Of thy fair Brotherhoods Love, then to the Sun
After a great Eclipse; for as the Sphaere
Of that Caelestiall Motion, shines more cheer
After the Interposing Part is spent,
Then to the Eye before the Darkness went
Over the bright Orb; so Their Love is shown
With a Content past Expectation*
A Care that has been comely, and a Cost
That has been Decent; cheerful, which is most;
Fit for the Service of so great a State,
So famed a City, and a Magistrate.
So worthy of it all, has been bestowde
Upon thy Triumph, which has clearly shorrde
The Loves of thy Fraternity, as great;
For thy first Welcome to thy honored Seat:
And happily is Cost requited then,
"When Men Grace Triumphs, more then Triumphs, Men;
"Diamonds will shine though set in Lead, True worth
"Stands always in least need of setting forth:
What makes Less Noise then Merit? or Less Show
Then Virtue? it is the Vndeseruers, owe
All to Vainglory, and to Rumor, still;
Building their Praises on the Vulgar Will;
All their Good, is without them, not their own,
When wise men to their Virtues are best Known:
Behold you' Fountain with the Tripled Crown,
And through a Cloud the Sunne-beame piercing down,
So is the worthy Magistrate made up;
The Triple Crown, is Charity, Faith, and Hope,
Those three Caelestiall Sisters, the Cloud too
That Is Care, and yet you see the Beam strikes through;
A Care discharged with Honor, it presages,
And may it so continue, to all Ages;
It is thy Brotherhoods Arms, how well it fits
Both Thee, and All, that for Truths Honor sits:
The Time of Rest draws near; Triumph must cease
Joy to thy Heart, to all a Blessed peace.

FINIS.
FOr the Frame-Worke of the whole Triumph; with all the proper Beauties of
Workmanship, the Credit of that, justly appertains to the deserts of Master
Garret Crismas, a Man excellent in his Art, and faithful in his Performances.


