THE GHOST of Lucrece

By T. M. Gent.

AT LONDON Printed by Valentine Simmes. 1600.

TO THE RIGHT HONOrable, and my very bountiful good Lord, my Lord Compton, T.
M. wishes the fruit of eternal fruition.
Comptus honos, honor est Comptono, and Compton honor.
THou, that rock'st comely honor in thine arms,
Thou patr^^ to the child-house of my vain,
Thou hiue unto the Museshony swarms,
And Godfather to the issue of my brain,
To thee, Baptizer of mine infant lines,
With golden water in a silver Font:
Thy bounty, gold* thy finger^ silver twines,
Siluering my papers ink, as they were wont.
To thee (the bloody Crystal of a Ghost,
Wrapped in a fiery web) I spin to thee.
To thee, (the thawer of Dianaes frost:
Tarquin the hot in Lucrece Tragedy.)
To thee I consecrate these ashie fires,
She quenched in blood, he burnt in his desires.
Bound by your Ho. bounty, T. M.

Castissimo, purissimoque Lucretiae Spiritui; Thomas Medius and Grauis Tonus
primum Surge vociferat.
-- Tu castitatis imago,
Surgito! Tarquinium Phlegetontis imagine notu^,
Noscito! Tu caeptis (nam te mutauit and illum,)
Adspirato meis! postremo tempore mundi,
Ad su a perpetuum deducito crimina carmen.
Castissimo Spiritui tuo addictissimus. T. M.

The Prologue.
REach me a quill from the white Angels wings,
My paper from the Via Lactea,
My inck from Ioues-high- Nectar-flowing-springs,
My Muse from Vesta: Awake Rhamnusia;
Call up the Ghost of gor'de Lucretia:
Thrice has the trumpet of my pens round stage
Sounded a Surge to her bloody age.
Sad spirits, soft hearts, sick thoughts, souls sod in tears,
Well humored eyes, quick ears, teare-wounded faces,
Enrouled-Vestals, Dians Hemispheres,
Rape-slaughtered Lucreces, all martyrde Graces,
Be ye the audience, take your tragic places:
Here shall be plaide the miseries that immures
Pure Diamond hearts, in Crystal couertures.
Black spirits, hard hearts, thick thoughts, souls boild in lust,
Dry fiery eyes, dull ears, high bloody looks
Made of hot earth, molded in fire and dust,
Desires true Graduates, read in Tarquins books:
Be ye our stages Actors; play the Cooks:
Carue out the daintiest morsel, that's your part,
With lust-keene Faulchon even in Lucrace heart.
Now weepeth Lucrece with a trine of eyes,
Quenching the fire of Lust with tears and blood,
Changing those eie-lampes (which were wont to rise
Like beams of morning) to a mourning cloud,
Her heart (the purest eye) to a redde-sea-floude:
Her ghost the Idea of her soul resumes,
Which Phoenix-wise burns in her own perfumes.
THE GHOST of Lucrece
MEdeas Magic, and Calipsoes drugges,
Circes enchauntments, Hecates triforme
Weanes my soul sucking at Reuenges dugges,
To feed upon the air. What wind? what storm
Blew my disseuered limbs into this form?
And from the Virgin-Paradise of death,
Coniures my Ghost with poetizing breath?
The candle of my shame burns in the sky,
Set on the crosse-Poles of the firmament,
To fear away divine Virginity,
And light this world below, that being bent
To follow me, they go not as I went:
But when I hope to see the candle waine,
Then Tarquins spirit falls on the snuff again.
So that the snuff, (the savor of my shame,
That stinckes before the throne of chastity)
Is still rekindled with veneriall flame,
To show that Tarquins planet plants in me,
The root of fiery blood, and luxury:
First forcing with his breath, one flames retire,
Then takes my blood for oil, his lust, for fire.
Now burns the beacon of my soul, indeed,
Too high for fame, but low enough for fume:
Saints, keep your cloister-house, Vesta make speed,
Take in thy flowers, for fear the fire consume
Thy eternall-sweete-Virginitie-perfume:
For Lust, and Blood are mingled in one lamp,
To seal my soul with Rape and Murders stamp.
Before my shame, yon candle had no fire,
Vestals nil feared me, the world saw me not,
Shame was the tinder, and the flint desire
That struck in Tarquins bosom, and begot
A child of fire, a firebrand, and so hot,
That it consumde my chastity to dust,
And on my heart painted the mouth of lust.
Was I the cradle? O my chastity,
To rock and lull this bastard firebrand,
N^rst with my blood, we and with my tragedy,
Fed at my knives sharp point upon my hand,
Borne and reborne, where ere my spirits stand?
I was the cradle^ see the fie^e dart,
That burns Dianaes temples in my heart.
Behold this blade varnisht with blood and tears,
Blood from my heart, tears from my stilling eyes,
Behold (I say) this knife, whereon appears
Vestaes Vermision melting from her skies,
And tears of pearls in bloody mysteries;
This is the Tragic knife, here you may see,
Tears strive for fame, and blood for chastity.
Right hand, thou act'st Reuenges hand aright:
This knife and thou have sworn to kiss my breast,
Thou art my Vestaes antidote, to fright
Lust from the bed of Colatinus rest:
Performer of thy vow (hand) be thou blessed.
For thou in this have shown me what thou art,
Driving the foe from scaling of my heart.
Come spirit of fire, bred in a womb of blood,
Forgd in a furnace by the Smith of hell,
Begot and formed in that burning flood,
Where Plutoes Phlegetonticke tennants dwell:
And scalded spirits in their fiery cell,
Breathes from their soul the flame of luxury.
From that luxurious clime I conjure thee.
Now is my tide of blood: Come, quench thy soul,
The sluices of my spirit now runs again:
Come, I have made my breast an luorie bowl,
To hold the blood that streameth from my vein,
Drink to my chastity which thou have slain:
" But (woe the while) that labor is in vain.
" To drink to that which cannot pledge again
Quaffe thine own fill, and let that lustful flame:
(That circuits in the circle of thy spirit
Pledge thy desire, carowsing off my shame,
Which swimmes amidst my blood, and does inherit
The portion of my soul without a merit:
And if this spring of blood cannot suffize,
I Will rain down tears from my Elementall eyes.
Thou art my nurse-child, Tarquin: thou art he,
In steed of milk, suck blood, and tears, and all,
In liew of teats: Lucrece, thy nurse, even she,
By tragic art seen through a Crystal wall,
Has carved with her knife thy festival:
Here Is blood for milk, suck till thy veins run over,
And such a teat, which scarce thy mouth can cover.
Tarquin the rauisher oh at that name
See how mine eyes dissolueth into tears.
Tarquin the Roman: I describe my shame,
Frorm Rome it came, a Roman name it bears.
Tarquin my guest: lo, here began my fears:
Tarquin from Ardea posts, hence sprang the fire,
" For Ardeas name sounds ardent hot desire.
Tarquin my kinsman: O Divinity,
Where art thou fled? have thou for sooke thy sphaere?
Where Is Virtue, Knighthood, and Nobility?
Faith? Honor? Piety? they should be near,
For kinsman sounds all these they are not here.
Tarquin my kinsman: was it thou did come,
To sack my Colatines Collatium?
Tarquin my kinsman, too unkindly done,
And by a kinsman too: my Ghost auers it,
Does theresore that same name of kindred run,
To see their kin-redde, and with blood prefers it?
" O enemy to faith, that still defers it.
Had Tarquin never lustful Tarquin been,
Lucrece the chaste should have chaste Lucrece seen.
Tarquin the Prince: had Rome no better heirs,
Thou mistress of the world no better men,
Thou Prodigality of Natures faires,
Are Tigers kings? make thou thy throne a den?
Thy siluer-glittering streams, black Lernaes fen?
Thy seven hills that should over look thy euilles.
Like seven helles to nurse up Roman diuelles.
To thee, (that makst the Moon thy looking glass,
To view thy triple crown, and seauen-fold head)
To thee, I say, (the Ghost of what I was)
Plains me and it, since thou so long have fed
The rauisher, and starude the ravished.
" If Vestaes lines were ever writ in thee,
" Then weigh the blotting of those lines in me.
Tarquin the Prince: sham'st thou to hear thy name?
Rome, it is thy heir, sham'st thou to call him son?
Tarquin the Prince, lo I Will repeat thy shame,
A Roman heir, from him to thee I run,
I Will shame you both before my shame be done:
Tarquin the Prince, Tarquin the Roman heir,
Thus will I haunt, and hunt you to despair.
Tarquin the traitor: bid my spirit rise,
And call up all the senses of my soul,
" For treason should be guarded with more eyes,
Then was Jove's lo under his control,
" For treasons guile does win the traitors gole:
Tarquin the traitor: watch when time's in season,
" For treason does betray all things to treason.
Tarquin the lecher: virgin chastity,
Melts at the heat of that luxurious word,
(Like maiden snow upon a promontorie,
Kissing the un her heavenly lovely Lord,
Then dies, and melts into a watery ford:)
So did my chastities-white-snow attire,
Dissolve in blood, at Tarquins lustful fire.
Tarquin the night-owle: Chastity beware,
Thou art beset with millions of deceits,
Thy eyes have leaden liddes, they take no care,
Thy senses rockt asleep, and thy conceits
Tempred with silence, fear nor snares, nor baits:
Only the vestall pureness of thy soul,
Bade me beware that Night-obseruing owl.
Tarquin the Night-owle: in whose flaming eyes,
Lust and Desire banded their balls of blood,
Chasing my spirit with fiery mysteries,
Unto the hazard where destruction stood,
Ready to strike my soul into a cloud:
So when the Sun had seen my vapor rise,
Then with his beams to dash me from the skies.
Tarquin the Night-owle: watch destruction,
What? has the eyes of Lust no Iiddes at all?
Or do they houer for confusion,
Answering in silence when affections call?
" When lust awakes, the eye liddes never fall:
" But like a courser holding reasons rain,
" Does shut the eyes, and opens them again.
Tarquin the Night-owle Vesta, look about,
The fourth allarum of my fears now rings,
And yet the hour of dread is scarce run out,
For midnights face more force of terror brings,
To think on that, my sinews shake like strings:
And chastity which yet had spirit and breath,
Lay quauering at my heart to tune her death.
Tarquin the Night-owle: turn the glass again,
Five times my tongue, the hammer of my soul,
(That beats upon my breath, and strikes a strain,
" Sounding all quauers, that's the song of dole:)
Five times my tongue did even my tongue control,
" For fear is such a slave, and coward elfe,
" That fearing others, runs and fears himself.
Tarquin the Night-owle: Enter treachery,
Sextus Tarquinius, this sixth hour is thine,
Farewell my life, farewell my chastity,
Farewell (though not mine now) that which was mine,
Thy grapes are now devoured, alas poor vine:
The Tyr-ant with his force of luxury,
Tires mean Ant, through imbecillitie.
Now enters on the stage of Lucrece heart,
Black appe^ites in flamde habiliments:
When they have acted all, then they depart.
Rape entering next, armed in murders tents,
Wrackes Vestaes tennants, and takes all her rents:
" This shows that Vestaes Deity is poor,
" She has the stalk, but Ve^^ has the store.
This is the tragic scene: bleed hearts, weep eyes,
Fly soul from body, spirit from my veins,
Follow my chastity where ere it lies,
Which my unhallowed body now refraines,
Look to the lamp of chastity, it waines:
The star which guided all my elements,
Pulls in her head, and leaves the firmaments.
Rape in his paws of blood, and fangs of Lust,
Has stainde th'immaculate lilly of my field,
And has sepulchred in the shade of dust
Dianaes milken robe, and Vestaes shield,
" When Tigers prey, the seely lambs must yield:
When Tarquin posts from Ardea, by and by
Lucrece must loose her life and chastity.
O Colatine, where sleeps thy troubled spirit?
What new come Morpheus has arrested thee?
Does thy heart soundly sleep? does nothingstirre it?
Dear Colatine, awake, were thou with me
The arches of mine eyes would waken thee
For tears like waves rush at my eye liddes door,
Striving together who should go before.
Come Colatine the foe has sacked thy city,
Collatium goes to wrack: come Colatine,
Come Colatine, all piety and pity
Is turnde to petty treason: what is thine
Is ceazde upon long since: and what is mine
" Carried away: true man thou sleepst at Rome,
" Even while a Roman thief robs thee at home.
Come Colatine, it is Lucrece bids thee come,
Or shall I send my purseuant of groans
Unto proud Rome from poor Collatium,
To make all private means by public mones,
Discoursing my black story to the stones?
Come Colatine, it is Tarquins dreadful drum,
That coniures me to call, and thee to come.
Thy Lucrece bed, which had fair canopies
Spangled with stars like to the firmament,
And curtains wrought with many deities,
Resembling Jove's white lacteall element,
Are stained now by lust and reuishment,
The stars out starde, the deities defied,
These I had storde, the other deified.
The night before Tarquin and Lust came hither,
(Ill token for a chaste memorial,)
My maids and I poor maid, did spin together,
Like the three sisters, which the Fates we call,
" And Fortune lent us wheels to turn withal;
Round goes our wheels like worlds, on mine alone
Stood fortune reeling on a rolling stone.
Yet was my heart so light, that still I said,
Sing merrily my maids, our wheels go round,
(Who would not sing and spin, and be a maid,
To serve so sweet a Goddess, and be bound
Apprentise, where such mistresses abound?)
Sing merrily my maids (again she says,)
For Vesta is the Goddess of our lays.
Maidens, quoth I, but think what maidens be,
" They are the very string that ties their hearts,
" The pillars of their souls pure purity,
" The distillations of th'essentiall parts,
" Both good deseruers, and the good deserts:
Then seeing Vesta has so many trades,
Go round our wheels, sing merrily my maids.
What nimble fingers has Virginity,
To twist the thread, and turn the wheel about?
O Virgins, that same pearl of chastity
Shines like the Moon, to light your thoughts throughout,
" Pure cogitations never harbors doubt,
But like the fairest-purest chrisolite,
Admits no bruise without a crack with it.
Spin merrily my maiden-paradise,
Thus with a merry cheer I whirld their wheels,
And made them rid at once more then at twice,
" Such pretty pleasure true affection feels,
" That times old head runs swifter then his heels:
" For mirths fledged wings, are of so quick a flight,
" I hat maks the morn seem noon, the noon seem night
My maids, those ayrie sinews in your hands,
Were of a finer thread then that you spinne,
It was a merry age in golden bands,
When Saturn sowed the earth, and did begin
To teach bad husbands a new way to win:
" Then was true labor exercisde and done,
" When gods did reele, what Goddesses had sponne.
Those times are waxen balde, a prowder air
Blows in the heaven, and breathes upon the earth,
That age is out of date, another heir
Claims his possession by an iron birth,
And in an iron throne of death and dearth
Rules this young age, sucking until it whine,
Even at the dugges of Plutoes proserpine.
Thus like Diana by a lilly fount,
Sat I amidst my vestall elements,
Thus did my self still with my self account,
To free my thoughts from chained discontents
And stir up mirth, the nurse of nourishments:
Thus with a lightsome spirit and souls carouse,
I like a huswife cherisht up my house.
When Roman dames tickled with pride and lust,
Ravished with amorous Philosophy,
Printed the measures of their feet in dust,
Tempring their blood with Musickes harmony,
" (The very Synode-house of Venerie)
Then I at home insteade of melody,
Grated my wheel upon the axeltree.
How like Arachne turned I my wheel?
Each of my maids how like a shepherdess?
Had Colatine my shepherd held the reele,
We four might well have made a country mess,
" But one abroad, makes one at home the less:
My Colatine my shepherd was at Rome,
And left poor me to feed his flock at home.
Is Venus made a Laundresse to the Court?
Cupid her son elected for a page?
No marvel if Dianaes stars do sport
With Venus planets upon Cupids stage:
" Iron must have fire, this is an iron age:
" Our souls like smithes with anuills of desire,
" Beat on our flesh, and still we sparkle fire.
The Princes Court is even a firmament,
All wrought with beams by day, and stars by night,
The Prince himself the sunnie element,
From whence all beams and stars do borow light,
To paint their faces with a red and white:
Those beams ambassadors of his bright array,
Those stars his counselors by night and day.
How comes it then? speak, speak, Iniquity,
Thou blur of kingdoms, and thou blot of Kings,
Thou Metamorphosis of purity,
That shap'st the greater things to lesser things,
How comes it then, that Cupids bow-string swings
About the heels of time? Iniquity,
It is the halter of thy luxury.
Thou have burnt out the humor of thy bones,
And made them powders of impiety,
To strew about the earth as thick as stones,
Like wombes of lust, in toombes of lechery,
And all thy sinews, O Iniquity,
Are so dried up, and now so slender sponne,
" That Venus makes them bow-strings for her son.
Where is the spring of bloods virginity,
That wont to serve thy veins like conduit heads,
And cleanse thy cesterne of iniquity,
With maiden-humours from chaste Floraes meads?
Then slepst thou like a Lord, in Honors beds:
Then Virtue was thy bedfellow, now know,
" As great an ebb follows as great a flow.
Lo, under that base tipe of Tarquins name,
I cipher figures of iniquity,
He writes himself the shamer, I the shame,
The Actor he, and I the tragedy,
The stage am I, and he the history:
The subject I, and he the rauisher,
He murdring me, made me my murderer.
O Lust, this pen of mine that writes thee lust,
Lies blasted at the sulphur of thy fire,
The quill and feathers burnt to ashie dust,
Like dust and ashes flies before Desire,
Unable to endure thy flamd attire:
" For in the sky of contrariety,
" The winners life is, when the loosers die.
If l proceed: O fiery Incolants,
Of that vast hell, which Pluto terms his haule,
Tarquins companions, ye I say that haunts
The banks of burning baths, to you I call,
Send me Prometheus heart t'endite withal:
And from his vultures wings a pen of blood,
Thrice steept and dipped in Phlegetonticke flood.
Then shall I stamp the figure of the night
On Tarquins brow, and mark him for her son,
The heir of darkness, bastard of the light,
The cloud of heaven, th'e clipser of the sun,
The stain in Vestaes cheeks, which first begun
In Tarquins flesh, begot of fiery dust.
" O thou the hell of love, vntutred Lust.
" It bribes the flesh to war against the spirit,
" With tickling blood mustring in every vain,
" It weanes the conscience from her heavenly merit,
" Deprauing all chaste thoughts, het maiden train,
" It makes the heart think, and vnthinke again:
" It taints the breath with fire, the brain with blood,
" And sets a devil where a God had stood.
Being in the eye, Lust is a Cockatrice,
" Hemlocke in taste, a canker in the thought,
" And in the life a moth, which in a trice
Consumes that treasure which so dear was bought,
And cost so many dropps of blood (for naught)
So many streams of blood, and baths of sweat,
To bathe our spirits, and to quench our heat.
O hell-eyde Lust, when I behold thy face
Praefigured in my Ghost, drawn in my mind,
I think of Sydons flowers that grow apace,
And favor thee by quality and kind,
" They look like faith before, and fame behind:
But if thou savor these well-fauoured evils,
They have the sight of gods, the sent of devils.
If I had like a curious herbalist,
Measurde thy quantity by quality,
Or Esculapius-wise, on Reasons fist,
Had planted virtue by the property,
Or with the lapidaries policy
" Made choice by insight, that's the note of wit,
And not by outward hue to judge of it,
Then like that skillful Esculapius,
(Setting apart the color of deceit)
I might have known Tarquin from Tyreus,
And Lucrece bed from Philomelaes bait,
Vesta concei^'d what Venus did conceit:
But wanting Esculapius in my choice,
I left sweet verdure for a flattering voice.
" Did Beauty that same bauins blaze, incense thee?
" That flower of ^me which buds with vanity,
" That string of fortunes wheel, which does commence thee
The graduate of hell borne iniquity,
Was beauty made the mark of luxury?
Then heavens from henceforth let the world behold
" Beauty in lead, deformity in gold.
Say Beauties beams dazzled thy clowdie eyes,
" This Beauty hangs but at the heels of time,
And when times wings a loftier measure flies,
Then Beauty like poor Iearus must clime,
Or plunge into the puddle of her slime:
" For Beauties limbs are of a waxen frame,
" And melts like Icarus wings at every flame.
Sawst thou the colors which quaint Phydias drew,
In dead-liue pictures with a touch of art.
Such red and white has Beauty being new,
Made only to amazeth' amazers heart,
Yet Phydias colors piercing like a dart
Were staind with every breath, and lost their prime,
" So Beauties blot drops from the pen of time.
But O my heaven, shall I forget thy spheres,
O spheres of heaven, shall I let pass your skies?
O skies which wears out time, and never wears,
Shall I make dim the tapers of your eyes?
O eyes of heaven, Sun, Moon, and stars that rise
To wake the day, and free imprisoned night,
Shall my obliuious vapor cloud your light?
It Is thou o chastity, shall I sorsake thee,
Or drown thy memory in my bloody stream?
Remember o my soul, did she not make thee
Out of Dianaes ribs? did not that beam,
(Which glisters in thy spirit like Ioues-eie-gleame,)
Reflect from Vestaes face upon thy heart,
Like Phoebus brow the pride of heavens art.
O thou that make the Via Lactea whiter,
" That virgin-gallery of maiesticke Jove,
" Fair Iunoes maze, to foot it, does delight her,
" The silver path of heaven, and bath of love,
There sits the lamb, the swanne, the turtle dove,
Ensigns of peace, of faith, and chastity:
" O silver stage to golden harmony.
" That quire of saints in virgin-ornament,
" Where Angels sing like queristers of heaven,
" Where all the Martyrs kneel the element
" Where Cynthiaes robe, and great Apolloes steauen,
Hangs at the altar of this milken haven:
And to conclude, not able to begin,
I write of that which flesh has never seen.
It Was thou o chastity m'eternall eye,
The want of thee made my ghost reele to hell,
It Was thou o chastity, that guild'st the sky
With beams of virtue, it is thou do dwell
In that white-milken-christall-siluer cell:
Thou laundresse to the gods and goddesses,
Washing their souls in fonts of holiness.
O thou that deckst our Phoebus in the East,
Circling his temples with spiritual beams,
And guides his vestall chariot to the west,
Through that pure crystal tracke of lacteall streams,
Siluering his wheels with alablaster gleames,
Then tempring the bright porphurie of his face,
" With chaste Endimions blush, the die of grace.
That doing duty to his father Jove
Upon his knee of fire, bids him arise,
And blessing all his beams with kissing love,
Like a maiesticke father guilds his eyes,
To add a rarer shine unto the skies,
Then takes his chariot with a brighter pride,
And cries alowd, S. Vesta be my guide.
S. Vesta, O thou sanctifying Saint,
That lends a beam unto the cleerest Sun,
Which else within his fiery course would faint,
And end his race ere he had half begun,
Making the world believe his power were done,
His oil burnt out, his lamp returnde to slime,
His fires extinguishde by the breath of time.
" O thou the pearl that hangs on Iunoes brow,
" Like to the Moon the massy pearl of night,
" Thou jewel in the ear of Jove, to show
The pride of love, the purity of light,
" Thou Atlas of both worlds, vmpire of right:
" Thou haven of heaven, th'assigner of each sign,
" Sanctities saint, Diuinities divine.
" O thou the silver taper of the Moon,
Set in an alablaster candlestick,
That by the bed of heaven at afternoon,
Stands like a lilly (which fair virgins pick,
To match it with the lilly of their cheek:
" Thou lilly lamb, thou crystal fether'd dove,
That nestles in the palace of thy Jove.
O touch my veins again, thou blood divine,
O feed my spirit thou food angelical,
And all chaste functions with my soul combine.
Color my ghost with chastity, whose All
Feeds fat lean Death and time in general:
Come silver dove, heavens alablaster nun,
I Will hug thee more then ever I have done.
Lucrece, alas, thou picture of thy self,
" Drawn poor and pale by that old painter time,
" And ouerdasht by Death that meagre elfe,
Which dries our element of blood to thime,
And tempreth our old ashes with new slime:
Lucrece I say how can thou Lucrece be?
" Wanting a God to give a life to thee.
Bleed no more lines, (my heart,) this Knife, my pen,
This blood my incke, has writ enough to Lust,
" Tarquin, to thee thou very devil of men
I send these lines, thou art my fiend of trust,
To thee I dedicate my toombe of dust:
To thee I consecrate this little-Most,
Writ by the bloody fingers of my Ghost.
This little scrole of fire (that burns my hand,
In repetition of thy fiery name)
I fold upon my heart (my bloody land)
And to thy ghost my ghost does send the same,
" Entitled, The lines of blood and flame,
" The Ghost of Lucrece, that's the Ghost of blood,
" The Ghost of Tarquin, that's the fiery flood.
Now for thy title, and deserved style,
In dedication to thy worthiness,
" To thee the second of Cocytus I Will,
" Chief senior to the Phlegetonticke mess,
" High steward unto Plutoes holiness:
" Temprer of flames, the L. Tysiphonie,
My bloody fires begs patronage of thee.
Now lack I nothing but the post of hell,
To fly like Vestaes arrow from my bow
With these my red hot news, and then to tell
" How many times my heart did ebb and flow,
(Like seas) with tears above, and blood below:
And from poor Lucrece mouth tell Tarquin thus,
That Philomel has writ to Tyreus.
Here stops the stream of tragic blood and fire,
And now Melpomene hales my spirit in,
The stage is down, and Philomelaes quire
Is hushed from prick-song: Acherons bells begin
To call our ghosts clad in the spirits of sin:
Now Tyreus meets with rauishde Philomel,
Lucrece with Tarquin; in the haule of hell.
FINIS.
The Epilogue.
RHamnusia in a chariot of Revenge,
Heapt up with Ghosts of blood, and spirits of fire,
Has pilde up Lucrece Ghost, so to avenge
Her chaste untimely blood, of flamde desire:
Now at the bar of hell (Reuenges quire)
Pleades Lucrece with a tongue of tears and bloods,
First speaks her heart, and then her eyes, in floods.
Can death that shrimpe of spirits, that bonie wretch,
That meagre-element, that beggar god,
From Lucrece sky such heavenly colors fetch?
From beauties wrist to wrest that golden rod,
Which makes all red and white dispearse abroad?
Deaths power is come, and beauties triumph past,
She was as chaste as fair, as fair as chaste.
Her hair which in Arachnes finest loome,
Was kissed with silver shickles, O that hair,
Which made Collatium shine in spite of Rome,
Keaming her trefses, like Jove's golden heir,
He made Rome bright, she made Collatium fair: (breath
That hair which daunc'st in beams before her
Serves now to stuff the gaping ribs of death.
Her eyes the curious fabric of her world,
Apolloes touchstones where he tried his beams,
And when her eyes outmatcht his fires: he hurld
His crown of splendor into quenching streams,
Raging to see beauties enrowled theames
Writ in her eie-rowles: but alas, those eyes
Which liu'de in beauty, now in beauty dies.
Her tongue which Orpheus tunde beforehe did,
And strung before he ^ou^nied unto hell,
That new Pernassus by a rivers side,
Where music soiournes, and the Muses dwell,
O tongue of hers, Dianaes silver bell,
That rung chaste prayers to the church of heaven,
Now she of it, and it of her bereauen.
Her breath which had a violet perfume
Tempred with rose alverdure, O her breath,
Through discord of her tongne, did all consume
Unto the air of earth, she did bequeath
That pension of her life, from life to death:
How ill was this best owde on Death, that elfe,
" Which robs all others, yet still poor it self.
Her teates, twixt whom an alablaster bridge
Parts each from other; like two crystal bowls
(Standing aloof upon the bodies ridge)
Bears chastities white- Nectar-flowing souls,
O valley decked with Floraes silver roules:
Why give thou suck to death? it will be fed,
For know, death must not die till all be dead.
And to conclude, her all in every sphaere,
(That like the Sun on crystal elements)
Did shine in cleerenesse bright, in brightness clear,
Her head her skies, her soul her firmaments,
Now staind by death, before by rauishments:
First Tarquin-life, clad her in deaths array,
Now Tarquin-death, has stolen her life away.
FINIS.

