The Triumphs of Truth.

A Solemnity unparalleled for Cost, Art, and Magnificence, at the Confirmation
and Establishment of that Worthy and true Nobly. Minded Gentleman, Sir THOMAS
MIDDLETON, Knight, in the Honorable Office of his Majesty's Lieuetenant, the
Lord Mayor of the thrice Famous City of LONDON.

Taking Beginning (...) Lord-ships going and proceeding (...)e from receiving
the Oath of Ma(...) Westminster, on the Morrow o^ (...) and Iudes day, (...) 19
1613.

All the Shows, Pa(...), Chariots; Morning, Noone, and Night-Triumphes.

Directed, written, underdeem'd into Form from the Ignorance of some former
times and their Common Writer.

By Thomas Middleton.

LONDON. Printed by N(...) dwelling at the sign of the Hand, o(...)
^^^^^rne-Bridge. 1613.

TO THE GREAT EXPectation of Virtue and Goodness, and most worthy of all those
Costs and Honors, which the Noble Fellowship and Society and Grocers, and
general Love of the whole City, in full heaped bounties bestow upon him, the
truly. Generous and Iuditious, Sir Thomas Middleton, Knight, Lord Mayor of the
Honorable City of London.
AS often as we shall fix our thoughts upon the Almighty Providence, sooften
they return to our capacities laden with Admiration, either from the Divine
works of his Mercy, or those incomprehensible of his Justice: but here to
instance only his Omnipotent Mercy, it being the Health and Preservation of
all his works: and first not only in raising, but also in preserving your L.
from many great and insident dangers, especially in foreign Countries in the
time of your Youth and Travels: and now with Safety, Love and Triumph, to
establish You in this years Honor: crowning the Perfection of your Days, and
the Gravity of your Life, with Power, Respect and Reverence. Next, in that my
self (though unworthy) being of one Name with your Lordship, notwithstanding
all Oppositions of Malice, Ignorance and Envy, should thus happily live,
protected by part of that Mercy (as if one Fate did prosperously cleave to one
Name) now to do Service to your Fame and Worthiness, and my Pen, only to be
employed in these Bounteous and Honorable Tryumphs, being but shadows to those
Eternal Glories that stand ready for Deseruers, to which I commend the Deserts
of your Justice, remaining ever

To your Lordship, in the best of my observance, Thomas Middleton.

THE TRYVMPHS Of Truth.
SEarch all Chronicles, Histories, Records, in what language or letter soever;
let the inquisitiue man waste the dear Treasures of his Time and Eyesight, he
shall conclude his life only in this certainty, that there is no subject upon
earth received into the place of his government with the like State and
Magnificence as is the Lord Mayor of the City of London. This being then
infallible (like the Mistress of our Triumphs) and not to be denied of any,
how careful ought those Gentlemen to be, to whose discretion and Judgment the
weight and charge of such a business is entirely referred and committed by the
whole Society, to have all things correspondent to that Generous and Noble
freeness of cost and liberality, the streams of Art, to aequall those of
Bounty; a Knowledge that may take the true height of such an Honorable
Solemnity; the miserable want of both which in the impudent common Writer, has
often forced from me much pity and sorrow; and it would heartily grieve any
understanding spirit to behold many times so glorious a fire in bounty and
goodness offering to match in self with freezing Art, sitting in darkness,
with the candle out, looking like the picture of Black Monday.

But to speak truth, which many beside my self can affirm upon knowledge, a
care that has been seldom equaled, and not easily imitated, has been
faithfully shown in the whole course of this business, both by the Wardens
and Committies, men of much understanding, industry, and carfulness, little
weighing the greatness of expense, so the cost might purchase perfection, so
fervent has been their desire to excel in that (which is a learned and
virtuous Ambition) and so unfeignedly pure the loves and affections of the whole
Company to his Lordship; If any shall imagine that I set fairer colors upon
their Deserts, then they upon themselves, let them but read and conceive, and
their own understandings will light them to the acknowledgement of their
errors. First, they may here behold love and bounty opening with the morning,
earlier then some of former years, ready at the first appearing of his
Lordship, to give his ear a taste of the days succeeding glory, and thus the
form of it presents it self.

At Soper-lane end a Senate House erected, upon which Musicians sit playing;
and more a quicken time, a sweet voice married to these words:

THE SONG.
Mother of many honorable Sounes,
Think not the Glass too slowly runs
That in Times hand is set,
Because thy worthy Son appears not yet:
Lady be pleased, the hour grows on,
Thy joy will be complete anon;
Thou shall behold
The man enrold
In Honors books, whom Virtue raises,
Loue-circled round,
His triumphs crowned
With all good wishes, prayers, and praises.

After this sweet air has liberally spent it self, at the first appearing of
the Lord Mayor from Guild Hall in the morning, a Trumpet placed upon that
Scaffold, sounds forth his welcome; then after a strain or two of Music, a
Grave Foeminine Shape presents it self, from behind a silk curtain,
representing London, attired like a reverend Mother, a long white hair
naturally flowing on either side of her: on her head a model of Steeples and
Turrets, her habit Crimson silk, near to the Honorable garment of the
City: her left hand holding a Key of gold, who after a comely grace, equally
mixed with Comfort and Reverence, sends from her lips this Motherly salutation.

The speech of London. Honor and Joy salute thee, I am raisd
In comfort and in love to see thee, glad
And happy in thy blessings, nor esteem
My words the less, cause I a woman speak,
A woman's counsel is not always weak.
I am thy Mother, at that name I know
Thy heart does reverence to me, as becomes
A Son of Honor, in whose soul burns clear
The sacred lights of divine fear and knowledge,
I know, that at this instant, all the works
Of Motherly love in me, shown to thy Youth
When it was soft and helpless, are sum'd up
In thy most grateful mind, thou well remembrest
All my dear pains and care, with what affection
I cherish thee in my bosom, watchful still
Over thy ways,
Set wholesome and Religious Laws before
The footsteps of thy youth, showed Thee the way
That lead thee to the Glory of this Day.
To which (with tears of the most fruitful joy
that cuer Mother shed) I welcome Thee.
Oh I could be content to take my part
Out of Felicity only in weeping,
Thy Presence and this Day is so dear to me.
Look on my age (my Honorable Son)
And then begin to think upon thy Office:
See how on each side of me hang the cares
Which I bestowd on Thee, in silver hairs.
And now the Faith, the Love, the zealous Fires
With which I cheered thy Youth, my Age requires,
The duty of a Mother I have shown,
Through all the Rites of pure affection,
In Care, in Government, in Wealth, in Honor,
Brought Thee to what thou art, thow'st all from me,
Then what thou should be I expect from Thee.
Now to Thy Charge, Thy Government, Thy Cares,
Thy Mother in her age submits her years.
And though (to my abundant grief I speak it,
Which now ore-flowes my joy) some Sons I have
Thanklesse, unkind, and disobedient,
Rewarding all my Bounties with Neglect,
And will of purpose wilfully retire
Themselves, from doing grace and service to me,
When they have got all they can, or hope for, from me,
The thankfulness in which Thy Life does move,
Did ever promise fairer fruits of Love,
And now they show themselves, yet they have all
My blessing with them, so the world shall see
It Is their unkindness, no defect in me;
But go Thou forward (my thrice Honored Son)
In ways of goodness, Glory is best won
When Merit brings it home, disdain all Titles
Purchased with Coin, of Honor take Thou hold,
By thy Desert let others buy't with Gold;
Fix thy most serious Thought upon the Weight
Thou go to undergo, it is the just Government
Of this Famed City, ( Me) whom Nations call
Their brightest Eye, then with great care and fear
Ought I to be ore-seene to be kept clear.
Spots in deformed Faces are scarce Noted,
Fair cheeks are stained if never so little blotted.
See thou this Key of Gold? it shows thy charge,
This place is the Kings Chamber, all pollution,
Sin and Uncleanness must be locked out here,
And be kept sweet, with Sanctity, Faith and Fear,
I see Grace take effect, Heavens Joy upon her,
It Is rare, when Virtue opes the Gate to Honor,
My blessing be upon thee, Son, and Lord,
And on my Sons all, that obey my word.

Then making her Honor, as before, the Waits of the City there in service,
his Lordship and the Worthy Company, are lead forward toward the water side,
where you shall find the River decked in the richest glory to receive him;
upon whose Crystal Bosom stands five Islands art-fully garnished with all
manner of Indian Fruite-Trees, Drugges, Spiceries; and the like, the middle
Island with a fair Castle especially beautified.

But making haste to return to the City again, where Triumph waits in more
Splendour and Magnificence, the first then that attends to receive his Lordship
off the water at Bainards Castle, is Truths Angel on Horseback, his Raiment
of white Silk powdered with Stars of Gold: on his head a Crown of Gold, a
Trumpeter before him on Horseback, and Zeal the Champion of Truth, in a
Garment of Flamecoloured Silk, with a bright hair on his head, from which
shoot Fire-beames, following close after him, mounted alike, his Right hand
holding a flaming Scourge, intimating thereby that as he is the manifester of
Truth, he is likewise the chastizer of Ignorance and Error.

The Salutation of the Angel. I have within mine Eye my blessed Charge,
Hail Friend of Truth, Safety and Iay attnds thee;
I am Truths Angel, by my Mistress sent
To guard and guide thee, when thou took'st thy Oath
I stood on thy Right hand, though to thy eye
In visible form I did not then appear,
Ask but thy Soul it will tell thee I stood near;
And 'twas a Time to take care of Thee then
At such a Marriage before Heaven and Men,
(Thy Faith being wed to Honor) close behind thee
Stood Errors Minister, that still sought to blind thee,
And wrap his subtle mists about thy Oath,
To hide it from the nakedness of Troth,
Which is Truths purest glory, but my light
Still as it shone, Expeld her blackest spite;
His Mists fled by, yet all I could devise,
Could hardly keep them from some Peoples eyes,
But thine they flew from, thy Care's but begun
Wake on, the Victory is not half yet wun,
Thou will be still assaulted, thou shall meet
With many dangers, that in voice seem sweet,
And ways most pleasant to a worldlings eye,
My Mistress has but One, but that leads hye
To yo'n triumphant City follow me,
Keep thou to Truth, Eternity keeps to thee.

ZEAL. On boldly Man of Honor, thou shall win,
I am Truths Champion, Zeal, the Scourge of Sin.

The Trumpet then sounding, the Angel and Zeal rank themselves just before
his Lordship, and conduct him to Pauls-chaine, where in the South-yard Error in
a Chariot with his infernal Ministers attends to assault him, his Garment of
Ash Color Silk, his head rowld in a cloud, over which stands, an Owl, a
Moale on one shoulder, a Bat on the other, all Symboles of blind Ignorance and
Darkness, Mists hanging at his Eyes: close before him rides Envy his Champion,
eating of a humane heart, mounted on a Rhenoceros, attired in Red Silk,
suitable to the bloudinesse of her manners her left Pap bare, where a Snake
fastens, her Arms half Naked, holding in her right hand a Dart tincted in
blood.

The greeting of Error. Art come? O Welcome my triumphant Lord,
My Glories Sweetheart! how many millions
Of happy wishes has my love told out
For this desired minute, I was dead
Till I enjoyed the Presence, I saw nothing,
A Blindness thicker then Idolatry,
Cloue to my Eye-bals, now I am all of Light,
Of Fire, of Joy, Pleasure runs nimbly through me,
Lets join together both in State and Triumph,
And down with beggarly and friendlesse Virtue,
That has so long impouerish't this fair City,
My Beasts shall trample on her naked breast,
Under my Chariot-wheeles her Bones lie pressed,
She never shall rise again, great Power this day,
Is given into thy hand, make use on it Lord,
And let thy Will and Appetite sway the Sword,
Down with them all now, whom thy heart enuies,
Let not thy Conscience come into thine Eyes
This twelue-month, if thou love revenge or gain,
I Will teach thee to cast mists, to blind the plain
And simple eye of Man, he shall not know it,
Nor see thy Wrath when it is upon his throat,
All shall be carried with such Art and Wit,
That what thy Lust Acts, shall be counted fit,
Then for Attendants that may best observe thee,
I Will pick out Seriants of my band to serve thee,
Here Is Gluttony and Sloth, two precious Slaves,
Will tell thee more then a whole heard of Knaves,
The worth of every Office to a Hair,
And who bids most, and bow the Markets are,
Let them alone to smell, and for a need,
They Will bring thee in Bribes for Measure and light Bread,
Keep thy eye winking, and thy hand wide open,
Then thou shall know what Wealth is, and the scope
Of rich Authority, Ho it is sweet and dear,
Make use of Time then, thou'st but one poor Year,
And that will quickly slide, then be not nice,
Both Power and Profit cleaues to my Advice,
And what is he locks his Ear from those sweet Charms,
Or runs not to meet Gain with wide-stretch't Arms,
There is a poor thin threadbare thing, called Truth,
I give thee warning of her, if she speak
Stop both thine ears close, most Professions break
That ever dealt with her, an Unlucky thing,
She Is almost sworn to nothing, I can bring
A thousand of our Parish, besides Queanes,
That nere knew what Truth meant, nor ever means.
Some I could cull out here, even in this Throng,
If I would show my Children, and how strong
I were in faction; 'ldsse poor simple Stray,
She Is all her life time finding out one way:
Shee' as but one foolish way, straight on, right forward,
And yet she makes a toil on it, and goes on
With Care and Fear forfooth, when I can run
Over a hundred with delight and pleasure,
Backe-waies, and by-waies, and fetch in my Treasure
After the wishes of my heart, by shifts,
Deceits, and slightes, and I Will give thee those gifts;
I Will show thee all my corners yet untold,
The very nookes where Beldams hide their gold,
In hollow walls and chimneies, where the Sun
Never yet shone, nor Truth came ever near,
This of thy Life I Will make the golden year: Follow me then.
Envy. Learn now to scorn thy Inferiors, those must love thee,
And wish to eat their Hearts, that sit above thee.

Zeal stird up with Divine Indignation, at the Impudence of these Hel-hounds,
both forces their retirement, and makes way for the Chariot wherein Truth his
Mistress sits, in a close garment of white Satin, which makes her appear
thin and naked, figuring thereby her simplicity and neerenesse of heart to
those that embrace her; a roabe of white silk cast over it, filled with the
eyes of Eagles, showing her deep insight, and height of wisdom, over her
thrice sanctified head a milke-white Dove, and on each shoulder one, the sacred
Emblemes of Purity, Meekness, and Innocence, under her Feet, Serpents, in
that she treads down all Subtelty and Fraud, her Forehead empal'd with a
Diadem of Stars, the Witness of her Eternal descent; on her Breast a pure
round Cristall, showing the brightness of her thoughts and actions; a Sun in
her Right Hand, then which, nothing is truer, a fan filled all with Stars in
her left, with which she parts Darkness, and strikes away the vapors of
Ignorance; if you hearken to Zeal her Champion after his holy anger is past
against Error, and his crew, he will give it you in better terms, or at
least more smoothly and pleasingly.

The speech of Zeal. Bold Furies, back, or with this scourge of Fire
Whence sparkles out Religious chast-desire
I Will whip you down to darkness; this a place
Worthy my Mistress, her Aeternall Grace
Be the full object to feast all these eyes
But Thine the first, he that feeds here is wise;
Nor by the naked plainness of her weeds
Judge thou her worth, no burnisht gloss Truth needs;
That Crown of Stars shows her descent from heaven;
That Roabe of white filled all with Eagles eyes,
Her piercing sight through hidden mysteries;
Those milke-white Doves her spotless Innocence;
Those Serpents at her feet her victory shows
Over deceit and guile, her rankest foes,
And by that Cristall Mirror at her Breast,
The cleerenesse of her Conscience is expressed;
And showing that her deeds all darkness shun,
Her Right Hand holds Truths Symbol, the bright Sun;
A Fan of Stars she in the other twists,
With which she chaceth away Errors mists:
And now she makes to thee, her so even Grace,
For to her Rich and Poor look with one Face.

The Words of Truth. Man raysd by Faith and Love, upon whose Head
Honor sits fresh, let not thy Heart be led
In ignorant ways of insolence and pride
From Her, that to this day has been thy guide;
I never showed thee yet more Paths then one,
And thou have found sufficient That alone
To bring Thee hither, then go forward still,
And having most power, first subject thy Will,
Give the first Fruits of Justice to thy Self,
Then do thou wisely Govern, though that Elfe
Of Sin and Darkness still opposing me,
Counsels thy Appetite to Master Thee.
But call to mind what brought thee to this Day,
Was Falsehood, Cruelty, or Revenge the way?
Thy lust or pleasures? peoples curse or hate?
These were no ways could raise Thee to this State
The ignorant must acknowledge, if then from Me,
Which no Ill dare deny, or Sin control,
Forsake me not, that can advance thy soul:
I see a blessed yielding in thy Eye,
You Are mine, lead on, thy Name shall never dye.

These words ended, they all set forward, this Chariot of Truth and her
celestial handmaids the Graces and Virtues, taking place next before his
Lord ship, Zeal and the Angel before that, the Chariot of Error following as
near as it can get, all passing on, till they come into Paul's Churchyard,
where stand ready the five Islands, those dumb Glories that I spoke of before
upon the water, upon the height of these five Islands sit five persons
representing the five Senses, Visus, Auditus, Tactus, Gustus, Olfactus, (or)
Seeing, Hearing, Touching, Tasting, Smelling; at their feet their proper
Emblemes, Aquila, Ceruus, Araneus, Simia, Canis, an Eagle, a Heart, a Spider, an
Ape, a Dog.

No sooner can your eyes take leave of these, but they may suddenly espy a
strange Ship making toward, and that which may raise greater astonishment, it
having neither Saylor nor Pilot, only upon a white silk streamer these two
words set in letters of Gold, Veritate Gubernor, I am Steered by Truth; the
Persons that are contained within this little Vessel are only four; a King
of the Moors, his Queen, and two Attendants of their own color, the rest of
their followers, people the Castle that stands in the middle Island, of which
company two or three on the top appears to sight, this King seeming much
astonished at the many eyes of such a multitude, vtters his thoughts in these
words.

The Speech of that King. I see amazement set upon the faces
Of these white people, wondrings, and strange gazes,
Is it at me? does my Complexion draw
So many Christian Eyes, that never saw
A King so black before? no, now I see
Their entire object, the're all meant to thee
(Grave City Governor) my Queen and I
Well honored with the Glanees that by,
I must confess many wild thoughts may rise,
Opinions, Common murmurs, and fixed Eyes
At my so strange arrival, in a Land
Where true Religion and her Temple stand:
I being a Moor, ethen in Opinions lightness
As far from Sanctity as my Face from whiteness;
But I forgive the Iudgings of th'Vnwise,
Whose Censures ever quicken in their Eyes,
Only begot of outward form and show,
And I think meet to let such Censurers Know,
How ever Darkness dwells upon my Face,
Truth in my soul sets up the Light of Grace;
And though in days of Error I did run
To give all Adoration to the Sun,
The Moon and Stars; nay Creatures base and poor,
Now only their Creator I adore:
My Queen and People all, at one time wun,
By the Religious Conversation
Of English Merchants, Factors, Trauailers,
Whose Truth did with our Spirits hold Commerse
As their affairs with us, following their path
We all were brought to the true Christian Faith:
Such benefit in good Example dwells,
It often has power to convert Infidels;
Nor could our Desires rest, till we were led
Unto this place, where those good Spirits were bred;
And see how we arrived, in Blessed Time,
To do that Mihresse Service, in the Prime
Of these her Spotless Triumphs, and to attend
That Honorable Man, her Late sworn Friend.
If any wonder at the safe Arrive
Of this small Vessel, which all Wethers drive
According to their Rages, where appears
Nor Mariner nor Pylot (arm'd' against fears)
Know this came hither from man's guidance free,
Only by Truth Steered; as our Souls must be;
And see where one of her fair Temples stands,
Do Reverence, Moors, bow low, and Kiss your hands,
Behold our Queen.

Queen. Her Goodnesses are such
We cannot Honor Her, and Her House too much.

All in the Ship and those in the Castle bowing their bodies to the Temple of
Saint Paul, but Error smiling betwixt Scorn and Anger to see such a devout
humility take hold of that complexion, breaks into these,

Error. What, have my Sweete-fac'st Devils forsook me too,
Nay, then my charms will have enough to do?

But Time, sitting by the Frame of Truth his Daughters Chariot, attired
agree-able to his Condition, with his Hower-glasse, Wings, and Sith, Knowing
best himself when it is fittest to speak, goes forward in this manner:

This Time has brought to effect, for on thy Day
Nothing but Truth and Virtue shall display:
Their Virgin Ensigns, Infidelity,
Barbarism and Guile shall in deep Darkness lie.
O I could ever stand still thus, and gaze,
Never turn Glass again; wish no more days
So this might ever last, pity the Light
Of this rich Glory must be casde in Night;
But Time must on, I go, it is so decreed,
To bless my Daughter Truth, and all her seed
With Joys Immortal, Triumphs never ending:
And as her Hand lifts me, to thy Ascending
May it be always ready ( worthy Son)
To hasten which, my Hours shall quickly run,
See thou you place, Saint Paul's Cross.
thither I Will weekly bring thee,
Where Truths celestial Harmony Thou shall hear,
To which I charge Thee bend a serious Ear:
Lead on, Times swift Attendants.

Then the five Islands pass along into Cheape-side, the Ship next after them;
the Chariot of Truth still before his Lord-ship, and that of Prror still
chac'st before it, where their Eyes meet with another more subtle Object,
planting it self close by the little Conduite, which may bear this Character,
the True Form and Fashion of a Mount Triumphant, but the Beauty and Glory
thereof ouer-spred with a thick Sulphurous Darkness, it being a Fog or Mist
raisde from Error, enuiously to blemish that Place which bears the Title of
Londons Triumphant Mount (the chief Grace and Luster of the whole Triumph) at
the four corners sit four Monsters Errors Disciples, on whom hangs part of
the Mist for their clothing, holding in their hands little thick Clubbes,
colored like their Garments; the Names of these four Monsters, Barbarism,
Ignorance, Impudence, Falsehood, who at the near approaching of Truths Chariot,
are seen a little to tremble, whilst her Deity gives life to these words.

Truth. What Is here? the Mist of Error? dare his Spite
Stain this Triumphant Mount? where our delight
Has been Divinely fixed so many Ages,
Dare darkness now breathe forth her Insolent Rages,
And hang in poysnous Vapors over the Place
From whence we received Love and returned Grace?
I see if Truth a while but turn her Eyes,
Thick are the Mists that over fair Cities rise:
We did expect to receive welcome here,
From no deformed Shapes but Divine and Clear,
In steed of Monsters that this place attends;
To meet with Goodness and her Glorious Friends,
Nor can they so forget me to be far,
I Know there stands no other envious Bar:
But that foul Cloud to Darken this Bright Day,
Which with this Fan of Stars I Will Chase away.
Vanish Infectious Fog that I may see
This Cities Grace, that takes her Light from Me.

At this her powerful command, the Vanish, give Way, Cloud suddenly rises,
and changes into a bright spredding Canopy, stuck thick with Stars, and
beams of Gold, shooting forth round about it, the Mount appearing then most
rich in Beauty and Glory, the four Monsters falling flat at the Foot of the
Hill; that grave Foeminine Shape, figuring London, sitting in greatest Honor;
next above her in the most eminent place, sits Religion, the Model of a fair
Temple on her Head, and a burning Lamp in her Hand, the proper Emblemes of her
Sanctity, Watchfulness, and Zeal; on her right Hand sits Liberality, her head
circled with a Wreath of Gold, in her hand a Cornucopia, or Horn of Abundance,
out of which rusheth a seeming Flood of Gold, but no way flowing to
Prodigality; for as the Sea is governed by the Moon, so is that wealthy River
by her Eye, (for Bounty must be led by Judgment) and hence is Art-fully
derived the only difference between Prodigality and Bounty, the one deals
her Gifts with open eyes, the other blindfold; on her left side sits Perfect
Love, his proper Seat being nearest the Heart, wearing upon his Head a wreath
of white and red Roses mingled together, the Ancient Witness of Peace, Love
and Union, wherein consists the Happiness of this Land, his Right hand holding
a Sphaere, where in a Circle of Gold, is contained all the 12 Companies Arms;
and therefore called the Spaere of true Brotherhood, or Annulus Amoris, the
Ring of Love: upon his left hand stand two Billing Turtles, expressing thereby
the happy Condition of mutual Love and Society: on either side of this Mount
are displaid the Charitable and Religious works of London (especially the
worthy Company of Grocers) in giving maintenance to Scholars, Soldiers,
Widows, Orphans, and the like, where are placed one of each number: and on
the two Heights sit Knowledge and Modesty; Knowledge wearing a Crown of
Stars, in her Hand a Perspectiue Glass, betokening both her High Judgment,
and Deep In-sight, the Brow of Modesty circled with a Wreath all of red
Roses, expressing her Bashfulnesse and Blushings, in her hand a Crimson Baner,
filled with Silver Stars, figuring the white Purity of her Shamfastnesse, her
cheeks not red with Shame or Guilt, but with Virgin-Feare, and Honor. At the
Back of this Triumphant Mount, Chastity, Fame, Simplicity, Meekness, have
their Seats, Chastity wearing on her Head a Garland of white Roses, in her Hand
a white Silk Banner, filled with Stars of Gold, expressing the aeternity of
her vn-spotted Pureness: Fame next under her, on her a Head a Crown of
Silver, and a Silver Trumpet in her hand, showing both her Brightness and
Shrilnesse: Simplicity with a Milke-white Dove upon her Head, and Meekness
with a Garland of mingled Flowers, in her hand a white Silk Banner with a red
Cross, a Lamb at her Feet, by which both their Conditions are sufficiently
expressed; The Mount thus made glorious by the Power of Truth, and the Mist
expeld, London thus speaks.

London. Thick Scales of Darkness in a Moments space
Are fell from both mine Eyes, I see the Face
Of all my Friends about me (now) most clearly,
Religions Sisters, whom I Honor dearly;
Oh I behold the work, it comes from Thee
Illustrious Patroness, thou that made me see
In Days of blindest Ignorance, when this Light
Was even extinguished, Thou Redeem'st my sight;
Then to Thy Charge (with Reverence) I commend
That worthy Son of mine, thy virtuous Friend,
Whom on my Love and Blessing I require,
To observe Thee Faithfully, and his Desire
To imitate Thy will, and there lie bounded,
For Power's a Dangerous Sea, which must be sounded
With Truth and Justice, or Man soon runs on
Against Rocks and Shelues to Dissolution;
Then that thou may the Difference ever know,
Twixt Truth and Error, a few words shall show;
The many Ways that to blind Error slide
Are in the entrance broad, Hell-mouth is wide,
But when Man enters far, he finds it then
Close, Dark and Straight, for Hell returns no Men;
But the One sacred Way which Truth directs,
Only at Entrance Man's Affection Checks,
And is there strict alone, to which place throngs
All Worlds Afflictions, Calumnies and wrongs.
But having past those, then thou find'st a way
In breadth, whole Heaven, in length, aeternall Day,
Then following Truth, she brings Thee to that way;
But first observe what works she here requires,
Religion, Knowledge, Sanctity, Chaste Desires,
Then Charity, which Bounty must express,
To Scholars, Soldiers, Widows, Fatherless;
These have been still my Works, they must be thine,
Honor and Action must together shine,
Or the best part's Eclipst, behold but this,
Thy very Crest shows Bounty, here it is put,
Thou give the open Hand, keep it not shut;
But to the Needy, or Deserving Spirit,
Let it spread wide, and Heaven enrowles that Merit;
Do these, and prove my Hopeful Worthy Son,
Yet nothing's spoke, but needfully must be done.
And so lead forward.

At which Words the whole Triumph moves in his richest glory toward the Cross
in Cheap, at which place Error full of Wrath and Malice to see his Mist so
chaced away, falls into this Fury.

Error. Heart of all the Fiends in Hell!
Could her Beggarly Power expel
Such a Thick and Poisonous Mist
Which set Enuies Snakes to twist;
Up Monsters, was her Feeble Frown
Of Force to strike my Officers down?
Barbarism, Impudence, Lies, Ignorance,
All your Hell-bred Heads advance,
And once again with Rotten Darkness shroud
This Mount Triumphant, drop down sulphurous Cloud.

At which the Mist falls again, and hangs over all the Beauty of the Mount,
not a Person of Glory seen, only the four Monsters gather courage again,
and take their Seats, advancing their Clubs above their Heads, which no sooner
perceived, but Truth in her Chariot making near to the place, willing still to
rescue her Friends and Servants, from the Powers of Ignorance and Darkness,
makes use of these Words,

Truth. Dare yet the works of Ugliness appear
Against this Days Brightness, and see Us so near?
How bold is Sin and Hell, that yet it dare
Rise against Us? but know (Perditions Heir)
It Is Idle to contend against our Power,
Vanish again Foul Mist from Honors Bower.

Then the Cloud dispersing it self again, and all the Mount appearing
Glorious, it passes so on to the Standard, about which place, by Elaborate
action from Error it falls again, and goes so darkened, till it comes to S.
Laurence lane end, where by the former words by Truth vtter'd, being again
chased away, London thus gratefully requites her Goodness.

London. Aeternities bright Sister, by whose Light,
Errors infectious Works still fly my Sight.
Receive thy Servants Thanks; Now perfect Love
Whose Right hand holds a Sphaere, wherein do move
Twelve blessed Societies, whose beloved increase,
Styles it the Ring of Brotherhood, Faith and Peace,
From thy Harmonious Lips let them all taste,
The Golden Counsel that makes Health long last.

Perfect Love then standing up, holding in his right hand a Sphaere, on the
other, two Billing Turtles, gives these words.

Perfect Love. First then I banish from this Feast of Joy,
All Excess, Epicurisme, both which destroy
The Healths of Soul and Body, no such Guest
Ought to be welcome to this Reverend Feast
Where Truth is Mistress, who is admitted here,
Must come for Virtues love more then for Cheer,
These two white Turtles may example give
How Perfect Joy and Brotherhood should live,
And they from whom Grave Order is expected,
Of rude Excess must never be detected;
This is the Council which that Lady calls
Golden Advice, for by it no man falls
He that desires Days healthful, sound and blessed,
Let moderate Judgment serve him at his Feast,
And so lead on, may Perfect Brotherhood shine,
Still in Sphaere, and Honor still in thine.

This Speech so ended, his Lordship and the Companies pass on to Guild Hall;
and at their Returning back, these Triumphs attend to bring his Lordship
toward Saint Paul's Church, there to perform those yearly Ceremonial Rites,
which Ancient and Grave Order has determined, Error by the way still busy and
in Action to draw Darkness often upon that Mount of Triumph, which by Truth
is as often dispersed: then all returning homewards full of Beauty and
Brightness, this Mount and the Chariot of Truth, both placed near to the
Entrance of his Lordships Gate, near Leaden Hall; London, the Lady of that
Mount; first gives utterance to these words,

London. Before the Day sprang from the Mornings Womb
I rose, my Care was earlier then the Light,
Nor would it rest till I now brought Thee Home,
Marrying to one Joy both thy Day and Night;
Nor can we call this Night, if our Eyes count
The Glorious beams that dance about this Mount,
Sure did not Custom guide'em, Men would say
Two Noones were seen together in one day,
The Splendour is so piercing, Triumph seems
As if it sparkled, and to Men's esteems
Threw forth his Thanks, wrapped up in Golden Flames,
As if he would give Light to read their Names
That were at Cost this Day to make him shine,
And be as free in Thanks, as they in Coin,
But see Time checkes me, and his Sith stands ready
To cut all off, no State on Earth is steady,
Therefore Grave Son the Time that is to come,
Bestow on Truth, and so Thour't welcome Home.

Time standing up in Truths Chariot, seeming to make an offer with his Sith to
cut off the Glories of the Day, growing near now to the Season of Rest and
Sleep, his Daughter Truth thus meekely stays his Hand.

Truth. Father desist a while till I send forth
A few Words to our Friend, that Man of Worth:
The Power that Heaven, Love, and the Cities choice,
Have all conferred on Thee with Mutual voice,
As it is Great, Reverend, and Honorable,
Meet it with equal Goodness, strive t'excell
Thy former Self, as thy Command exceeds
Thy last-yeares State, so let new Acts, old Deeds;
And as great men in Riches and in Birth
(Heightning their Bloods, and joining Earth to Earth,)
Bestow their best hours and most serious cares
In choosing out fit Matches for their Heirs:
So never give Thou over day or hour
Till with a Virtue thou have matched this Power:
For what is Greatness if not joined with Grace?
Like one of High-bloud that has married Base.
Who seeks Authority with an Ignorant Eye,
Is like a man seeks out his Enemy:
For where before his Follies were not spread
Or his corruptions, then their clearly read
Even by the eyes of all men; it is so pure
A Cristall of it self, it will endure
No poison of Oppression, Bribes, Hired Law,
But 'twill appear soon in some crack or flaw,
How e're men sooth their hopes with Popular breath,
If not in Life, she'ile find that crack in Death:
I was not made to fawn or stroke fin smooth
Be wise and hear me then that cannot sooth:
I have set Thee High now, be so in Example,
Made thee a Pinnacle in Honors Temple,
Fixing ten thousand Eyes upon thy Brow
There is no hiding of thy Actions now,
They must abide the Light, and imitate Me,
Or be thrown down to Fire where Errors be.
Nor only with these words thy ear I feed,
But give those part that shall in Time succeed,
To thee in present, and to them to come
That Truth may bring you all with Honor home
To these your Gates, and to those, after these
Of which your own good Actions Keep the Keys;
Then as the Loves of thy Society
Has flowde in Bounties on this Day and Thee,
Counting all Cost too little for true Art,
Doubling rewards there where they found Desert,
In Thankfulness, Justice, and Virtuous care
Perfect their hopes, those thy Requitals are;
With Fatherly Respect embrace'em all,
Faith in thy Heart, and Plenty in thy Hall,
Love in thy Walks, but Justice in thy State,
Zeal in thy Chamber, Bounty at thy Gate:
And so to Thee and these a Blessed Night,
To thee Fair City, Peace, my Grace and Light.

Trumpets sounding Triumphantly, Zeal, the Champion of Truth on Horseback,
his head circled with strange Fires, appears to his Mistress, and thus
speaks:

See yonder, Lady, Errors Chariot stands,
Brauing the Power of your incenst commands,
Emboldned by the privilege of Night
And her black Faction, yet to crown his Spite
Which I Will confound, I burn in Divine wrath.

Truth. Strike then, I give thee leave to shoot it forth.

Zeal. Then here is to the destruction of that Seat,
There Is nothing seen of Thee but Fire shall eat.

At which, a Flame shootes from the Head of Zeal, which fastening upon that
Cariot of Error sets it on Fire, and all the Beasts that are ioynde to it.

The Fire-worke being made by Master Humphrey Nichols, a Man excellent in his
Art: and the whole Work and Body of the Triumph, with all the proper Beauties
of the Workmanship most Artfully and Faithfully performed by John Grinkin: and
those furnished with Apparel and Porters by Anthony Monday, Gentleman.

This proud Seat of Error lying now only glowing in Imbers, (being a Figure
or Type of his Lord-ships Justice on all wicked offenders in the Time of his
Government,) I now conclude, holding it a more learned Discretion to cease of
my self, then to have Time cut me off rudely, and now let him strike at his
pleasure.

TAM ROBVR ^ TAM ROBOR. IN-COLIS ARBOR IOVIS. 1610.
NO



printer's or publisher's device

The Song with the Note.
^ MOther of many honorable Sons, think not ^ thy glass too slowly runs,
That in Times hand is ^ set, because thy worthy Son appears not yet, ^ Lady
be pleased the hour grows on, thy ioys will be ^ complete anon, thou shall
behold, the man in-rold, ^ in honors-booke whom virtue raises, love circled, ^
round, his tryumphes crowned, withal good wishes, ^ prayers and praises.

What greater comfort to a Mothers heart,
Then to behold her sons Desert:
Go hand in hand with love,
Respect and Honor (Blessings from above)
It is of power all greefes to kill,
And with a flood of joy to fill.
Thy Aged Eyes,
To see him rise,
With Glory dect, where Expectation.
Grace, Truth, and Fame,
Met in his Name,
Attends his Honors Confirmation.
BASSVS.
^

FINIS.

