The Map of Mock-begger Hall, with his situation in the spacious Country,
called, Anywhere.
To the tune of It is not your Notherne Nancy: or Sweet is the Less that Loves
me.


I Read in ancient times of yore,
That men of worthy calling
Build alms houses and Spittles store,
Which now are all down falling:
And few men seek them to repair,
Nor is there one among twenty,
That for good deeds will take any care,
While mock beggar hall stands empty.
Farm houses which their fathers built,
And Land well kept by tillage,
Their Prodigal sons have sold for gilt,
In every Town and village.
To th'City and Court they do resort
With gold and silver plenty,
And there they spend their time in sport,
While mock beggars hall stands empty.
Young Landlords when to age they come,
Their rents they will be racking,
The tenant must give a golden sum,
Or else he is turned packing,
Great fines and double rent beside,
Or else they will not content be,
It is to maintain their monstrous pride,
While mock beggar hall stands empty.
Their fathers went in homely frees,
And good plain broad-cloath breeches,
Their stockings with the same agrees,
Sowed on with good strong stitches.
They were not then called Gentlemen,
Though they had wealth great plenty,
Now every gul's grown worshipful,
While mock beggar hall stands empty.
No gold nor silver parchment lace
Was worn but by our Nobles,
Nor would the honest harmless face,
Wear Ruffes with so many doubles,
Our bands were to our shirts sown then,
Bot cloth was full as plenty,
Now one band has more cloth than ten,
While mock beggar hall stands empty.
Now we are Apes in imitation,
The more indeed's the pity,
The City follows the Strangers fashion,
The Country follows the City,
And ere one fashion is known throughout,
Another they will invent ye,
It Is all your gallants study about,
While mock beggars hall stands empty.
The second part, To the same tune.


ME thinks it is a great reproach
To those that are nobly descended,
When for their pleasures cannot have a Coach,
Wherewith they might be attended,
But every beggarly Jack and Gill
That eat scant a good meal in twenty,
Must through the streets be ^alted still,
While mock beggar hall stands empty.
There Is some are ratled through the streets,
Probatum est, I tell it,
Whose names are ^^apt in parchment sheets,
It grieves their hearts to spell it,
They are not able two men to keep,
With a coachman they must content be,
Which at playhouse doors in his box lies asleep,
While mock beggar hall stands empty.
Our Gentlewomen whose means is nothing
To that which they make show of,
Ma^e use all the fashions in their clothing,
Which they can hear or know of,
They take such care themselves to deck,
That money is often so scanty,
The (...) is forced to complain of the back,
While mock beggar hall stands empty.
It may well be that some will muse,
Wherefore in this relation,
The name of Mock beggar I do use,
Without any explanation,
To clear which doubt before I end,
Because they shall all content be,
To show the meaning I do intend,
Of mock beggar hall still empty.
Some Gentlemen and Citizens have
In diverse eminent places,
Erected houses rich and brave,
Which stood for the owners graces,
Let any poor to such a door
Come, they expecting plenty,
They there may ask till their throats are sore,
For mock beggar hall stands empty.
Thus in these times we can perceive
Small charity comfort yielding,
For pride does men of grace bereave,
Not only in clothes but in building,
Man makes the senseless stones and bricks
Which by heavens goodness lent be,
Express his pride by these vain tricks,
Thus mock beggar hall stands empty.
FINIS.
Printed at London for Richard Harper, near to the Hospital gate in
Smithfield.


