A MAD WORLD, MY MASTERS.

As it has bin lately in Action by the Children of Paul's.

Composed by T.M.



LONDON, Printed by H. B. for WALTER BVRRE, and are to be sold in Paul's
Churchyard, at the sign of the Crane. 1608.

A mad World, my Masters.
Enter Dick Folly-wit, and his consorts, Lieftenant Mawe-worme, Ancient Hoboy,
and others his Comrades. Lieft. Captain, Regent, Principal,


Anti. What shall I call thee?
The Noble spark of bounty;
The life-bloud of Society.

Folly-w. Call me your Forecast, you whoresons, when you come drunk out of a
Tavern, it is I must cast your plots into form still; it is I must manage the
Pranck, or I Will not give a louse for the proceeding: I must let fly my civil
fortunes, turn wilde-braine, lay my wits vpo'th Tenters, you raskals, to
maintain a company of villains, whom I love in my very soul and conscience.


Lieft. A ha, our little forecast.


Folly-w. Hang you, you have bewitched me among you, I was as well given till I
fell to be wicked, my Grandsire had hope of me, I went all in black, swore but
a Sundaies, never came home drunk, but upon fasting nights to cleanse my
stomach; sl'id now I Am quite altered, blown into light colors, let out
oaths by the minute, sit up late till it be early, drink drunk till I am
sober, sincke down dead in a Tavern, and rise in a Tabacco-shop: here is a
transformation: I was wont yet to pity the simple, and leave them some money:
sl'id, now I gull them without conscience; I go without order, swear without
number, gull without mercy, and drink without measure.


Lieft. I deny the last, for if you drink nere so much, you drink within
measure.


Folly-w How prove you that sir?


Lieft. Because the drawers never fill their pots.


Folly-w Masle that was well found out all drunkerds may lawfully say, they
drink within measure by that trick, dna now I Am put in the mind of a trick
can you keep your countenance villains? yet I am a fool to ask that, for
how can they keep their countenance that have lost their credits?


Ants. I warrant you for blushing Captain.


Folly-w. I easily believe that Ancient, for thou lost thy colors once; Nay
faith as for blushing, I think there is grace little enough amongst you all, it is
lent in your cheeks, the flag's down; well, your blushing face I suspect not,
nor indeed greatly your laughing-face, unless you had more money in your
purses: then thus compendiously now, you all know the possibilities of my
hereafter fortunes, and the humor of my frolike Grandsire Sir Bounteous
Progress; whose death makes all possible to me: I shall have all, when he has
nothing; but now he has all, I shall have nothing: I think one mind runs
through a million of them; they love to keep us sober all the while the're
alive, that when the're dead we may drink to their healths; they cannot abide
to see us merry all the while the're above ground; and that makes so many laugh
at their fathers funerals: I know my Grandsire has his Will in a Box, and has
bequeathed all to me, when he can carry nothing away; but stood I in need of
poor ten pounds now, by his will I should hang my selte e're I should get
it, there is no such word in his Will I warrant you, nor no such thought in his
mind.


Lieft. You may build upon that Captain.


Folly w. Then since he has no will to do me good as long as he lives; by
mine own will, I Will do my self good before he dies, and now I arrive at the
purpose. You are not ignorant I Am sure, you true and necessary implements of
mischief; first, that my Grandsier Sir Bounteous Progress is a Knight of
thousands, and therefore no Knight since one thousand six hundred: next, that
he keeps a house like his name Bounteous, open for all comers: thirdly and
lastly, that he stands much upon the glory of his complement, variety of
entertainment, together with the largenes of his Kitchen, longitude of his
Buttery, and fecunditie of his Larder, and thinks himself never happier then
when some stiff L. or great Countess alights, to make light his dishes: these
being well mixed together may give my project better encouragement, and make my
purpose spring forth more fortunate: to be short, and cut off a great deal of
durty way; I Will down to my Grandsire like a L.


Lieft. How Captain?


Folly-w. A French ruff, a thin beard, and a strong perfume will do it: I
can hire blew coats for you all by Westminster clock, and that color will be
soonest believed.


Lieft. But prithee Captain?


Folly. Push, I reach past your fadomes; you desire crowns.


Lieft. From the crown of our head, to the sole of our foot bully.


Folly-w. Why carry your selves but probably, and carry away enough with your
selves.


Enter M. Penitent Brothel. Ant. Why there spoke a Roman Captain, M. Penitent
Brothell.


M. Pen. Sweet M. Folly-wit..

Exit Here Is a mad brain a'th first, whose prankes scorn to have presidents;
to be second to any; or walk beneath any: madcaps inventions, has played more
tricks then the cards can allow a man, and of the last stamp too, hating
imitation, a fellow, whose only glory is to be prime of the company; to be
sure of which, he maintains all the rest: he is the Karion, and they the Kytes
that gorge upon him.

But why in others do I check wild passions,
And retain deadly follies in my self?
I tax his youth of common received riot,
Times Comicke flashes, and the fruits of blood;
And in my self sooth up adulterous motions,
And such an appetite that I know dams me,
Yet willingly embrace it, love to Harebraines wife,
Over whose hours and pleasures her sick husband
With a fantastic but deserud suspect,
Bestows his serious time in watch and ward;
And therefore I Am constraind to use the means
Of one that knows no mean, a Curtizan,
One poison for another, whom her husband
Without suspicion innocently admits
Into her company, who with tried art
Corrupts and loosens her most constant powers,
Making his ielousy more then half a wittoll,
Before his face plotting his own abuse,
To which himself gives aim.
Enter Curtizan. Whilst the broad arrowe with the forked head
Misses his browe but narrowly; see here she comes,
The close Curtizan, whose mother is her bawd.

Curtiz. Master Penitent Brothell.


M.Pen. My little pretty Lady gull-man, the news, the comfort?


Curtiz. You Are the fortunate man sir, Knight a'th holland skirt: there wants
but opportunity and she is wax of your own fashioning, she had wrought her
self into the form of your love before my art set finger to her.


M. Pen. Did our affections meet? our thoughts keep time?


Curtiz. So it should seem by the music, the only jar is in the grumbling
base violl her husband.


M. Pen. Oh his waking suspicion!


Curtiz. Sigh not M. Penitent, trust the managing of the business with me, it is
for my credit now to see it well finished: if I do you no good sir, you shall
give me no money sir.


M. Pen. I am arrived at the Court of conscience; A Curtizan! O admirable
times! honesty is removed to the Common place. Farewell Lady.

Exit. Penitent.
Enter mother. Moth. How now daughter?


Curtiz, What news mother?


Moth. A token from thy keeper.


Curtiz. Oh from sir Bounteous Progress: he is my keeper in deed, but there is
many a piece of venison stolen that my keeper wots not on; there is no park kept
so warily, but looses flesh one time or other; and no woman kept so privately,
but may watch advantage to make the best of her pleasure: and in common reason
one keeper cannot be enough for so proud a park as a woman.


Moth. Hold thee there girl.


Curt. Fear not me mother.


Moth. Every part of the world shootes up daily into more subtilty: the very
spider weaues her caules with more art and cunning, to entrap the fly.

The shallow ploughman can distinguish now,
Twixt simple truth and a dissembling browe.
Your base mechanic fellow can spy out
A weakness in a L. and learnes to floute.
How do behooue us then that live by sleight,
To have our wits wound up to their stretched height?
Fifteen times thou know I have sold thy may denhead,
To make up a dowry for thy marriage, and yet
There Is may denhead enough for old sir Bounteous still,
Heel be all his life time about it yet, and be as far to seek when he has
done.
The sums that I have told upon thy pillow!
I shall once see those golden days again:
Tho fifteen, all thy may den heads are not gone:
The Italian is not serude yet, nor the French:
The British men come for a dozen at once,
They ingrosse all the market, Tut my girl,
It Is nothing but a politic conueyance;
A sincere carriage, a religious eyebrowe
That throws their charms over the worldlings senses;
And when thou spiest a fool that truly pities
The false springs of thine eyes,
And honorably doates upon thy love,
If he be rich, set him by for a husband;
Be wisely tempered and learn this my wench
Who gets the opinion for a virtuous name
May sin at pleasure, and nere think of shame:

Curtiz. Mother I am too deep a Scholar grown To learn my first rules now.


Moth. It Will be thy own, I say no more; peace, hark, remove thy self, oh,
the two elder Brothers.


Enter Inesse, and Possibility. Possibi. A fair hour sweet Lady.


Moth. Good morrow gentlemen, Master Inesse, and M. Possibility.


Esse Where Is the little sweet Lady your daughter?


Moth. Even at her book sir.


Poss. So religious?


Moth. It Is no new motion sir, she has took it from an infant.


Poss. May we deserve a sight of her, Lady?


Moth. Upon that condition you will promise me gentlemen, to avoid all profane
talk, wanton complements, indecent phrazes, and lascivious courtings* (which I
know my daughter will sooner die then endure,) I am contented your suits
shall be granted.


Poss. Not a bawdy syllable I protest.


Inesse. Syllable was plac'st there, for indeed your one sillables are your
bawdiest words, prick that down.

Exeunt.
Enter Mast. Harebraine. Hareb. She may make nightwork ont, it was well recovered,
He Cats and Curtizans strowle most in the night, Her friend may be receiude and
conuayde forth, nightly, He be at charge for watch and ward, for watch and ward
in faith, and here they come.


Enter two or three. First, Give your worship good even.


Hareb. Welcome my friends, I must deserve your diligence in an employment
serious: the troth is, there is a cunning plot laid, but happily discovered, to
rob my house: the night uncertain when, but fixed within the circle of this
month: nor does this villainy consist in numbers:

Or many partners, only some one
Shall in the form of my familiar friend,
Be receiude privately into my house,
By some perfidious servant of mine own,
Addressed fit for the practice.

First. O abominable!


Hareb. If you be faithful watchmen, show your goodness, And with these Angels
shore up your eyelids: Let me not be purloind, purloind indeed; the merry
Greeks conceive me: there is a Iem I would not loose, Kept by the Italian
under lock and key: we English men are careless creatures: well, I have said
enough.


Second. And we will do enough sir.

Exeunt.
Hareb. Why well said, watch me a good turn now, so, so, so,
Rise villainy with the Lark, why it is prevented,
Or steal't by with the leather winged Bat:
The evening cannot save it, peace; Oh Lady Gulman, my wifes only company!
welcome; and how does the virtuous Matron, that good old Gentlewoman thy
mother? I persuade my self, if modesty be in the world she has part on it: a
woman of an excellent carriage all her life time, in Court, City, and Country.


Curtiz. Sha's always carried it well in those places sir; witness three
bastards a piece: how does your sweet bedfellow sir? you see I Am her boldest
visitant.


Hareb. And welcome sweet Virgin, the only companion, my soul wishes for
her; I left her within at her Lute, prithee give her good counsel.


Curtiz. Alas, she needs none sir.


Hareb. Yet, yet, yet, a little of thy instructions will not come amiss to her.


Curtiz. I Will bestow my labor sir.


Hareb. Do, labor her prithee; I have conuay'd away all her wanton Pamphlets,
as Hero and Leander, Venus and Adonis, oh two lushious mary-bone pies for a
young married wife, here, here, prethie take the resolution, and read to her a
little.


Curt. Sha's set up her resolution already sir.


Hareb. True, true, and this will confirm it the more, there is a chapter of
Hell, it is good to read this cold weather, terrify her, terrify her; go,
read to her the horrible punishments for itching wantonness, the pains allotted
for adultery; tell her her thoughts, her very dreams are answerable, say so;
rip up the life of a Curtiza, and show how loath some it is.


Curt. The gentleman would persuade me in time to disgrace my self, and
speak ill of mine own function.

Exit.
Hareb. This is the course I take, I Will teach the married man
A new selected strain, I admit none
But this pure virgin to her company,
Puh, that is enough; I Will keep her to her stint,
I Will put her to her pension,
She gets but her allowance, that's bare-one,
Few women but have that beside their own,
Ha, ha, ha, nay I Will put her hard toote.
Enter wife and Curt.
Wife Feign would I meet the gentleman.


Curt. Push, feign would you meet him, why, you do not take the course.


Hareb. How earnestly she labors her, like a good wholesome sister of the
family, she will prevail I hope.


Curt. Is that the means?


Wife What is the means? I would as gladly to enjoy his sight, embrace it as
the --


Curt. Shall I have hearing? listen?


Hareb. She Is round with her in faith.


Curt. When husbands in their ranck'st suspicions dwell,
Then it is our best Art to dissemble well,
Put but these notes in use, that I Will direct you,
Hele curse himself that ere he did suspect you,
Perhaps she will solicit you, as in trial
To visit such and such, still giued denial,
Let no persuasions sway you, they are but fetches
Set to betray you, Ielousies, slights and reaches,
Seem in his sight to endure the sight of no man,
Put by all kisses, till you kiss in common,
Neglect all entertain, if he bring in
Strangers, keep you your chamber, be not seen;
If he chance steal upon you, let him find,
Some book lie open against an unchaste mind,
And coted Scriptures, tho for your own pleasure,
You read some stirring pamphlet, and convey it
Under your Skirt, the fitest place to lay it,
This is the course my wench to enjoy thy wishes,
Here you perform best, when you most neglect,
The way to daunt, is to outuie suspect,
Manage these principles but with Art and life,
Welcome all Nations, you are an honest wife.

Hareb. She puts it home in faith, even to the quick
From her Elaborate action I reach that,
I must requite this maid, faith Im'e forgetful.

Wife Here Lady, convey my heart unto him in this Jewel,
Against you see me next you shall perceive
I have profited, in the mean season tell him
I am a prisoner yet, a'th masters side,
My husbands jealousy, that masters him, as he does master me,
And as a keeper that locks prisoners up,
Is himself imprisoned under his own key,
Even so my husband in restraining me,
with the same ward bars his own liberty.

Curt. I Will tell him how you wish it, and I Will wear
My wits to the third pile, but all shall clear.

Wife I owe you more then thanks, but that I hope
My husband will requite you.

Curt. Think you so Lady? he has small reason for it.


Hareb. What done so soon? away, to it again, to it again, good wench to it
again, leave her not so, where left you. come.


Curt. Faith I am weary sir.
I cannot draw her from her strickt opinion.
With all the arguments that sense can frame.

Hareb. No; let me come, Fie wife, you must consent; what opinion is it, let us
hear?


Curtiz Fondly and wilfully she retains that thought, That every sin is
dambd.


Hareb. Oh fie, fie, wife! Pea, pea, pea, pea, how have you lost your time? for
shame be converted: there is a diabalocall opinion indeed; then you may think
that usury were dambd: you're a fine merchant in faith; or briberie? you know the
law well; or sloth? would some of the Clergy heard you in faith; or pride? you
come at Court; or gluttony? you're not worthy to dine at an Aldermans table:

Your only deadly sin's Adultery,
That villainous ring-worme, woman's worst requital,
It Is only lechery that's dambd to the pit-hole;
Ah, that is an arch-offence, believe it squall,
All sins are venial but veneriall.

Curtiz. I Have said enough to her.


Hareb. And she will be ruled by you.


Curtiz. Fah.


Hareb. I Will pawn my credit ont; come hither Lady,
I will not altogether rest ungrateful,
Here, wear this Rubie for thy pains and counsel.

Curtiz. It is not so much worth sir, I am a very ill counselor truly.


Hareb. Goo too I say.


Curtiz. You Are too blame in faith sir, I shall nere deserve it.


Hareb. Thou have don't already: farewell sweet Virgin, prithee let us see thee
oftener.


Curtiz. Such gifts will soon entreat me.

Exit.
Hareb. Wife, as thou love the quiet of my breast,
Embrace her counsel, yield to her aduices;
Thou will find comfort in them in the end;
Thou Wilt feel an alteration, prithee think on it:
Mine eyes can scarce refrain.

Wife. Keep in your dew sir, least when you would, you want it.


Hareb. I Have pawnde my credit on it, ah did thou know, The sweet fruit once,
thoud'st never let it go.


Wife. It Is that I strive to get.


Hareb. And still do so.

Exeunt.
Finit Actus Primus.
Incipit Actus Secundus.
Enter Sir Bounteous with two Knights. First, You have bin too much like your
name Sir Bounteous.


Sir Boun. Oh not so, good Knights, not so, you know my humor; most welcome
good Sir Andro Pelcut, Sir Aquitaino Colewort, most welcome.


Both. Thanks good Sir Bounteous.

Exeunt at one door
At the other, enter in have a footman. Foot. Oh, cry your worship heartily
mercy Sir.


Sir Boun. How now linen stockins, and threescore mile a day; whose footman
art thou?


Foot. Pray can your worship tell me, Hoh, hoh, hoh, if my L. be come in yet.


Sir Boun. Thy L! what L?


Foot. My L. Owe-much sir.


Sir Boun. My L. Owe-much! I have heard much speech of that L. h'as great
acquaintance in the City; that L. has bin much followed.


Foot. And is still sir; he wants no company when he is in London: he is free
of the Mercers, and there is none of them all dare cross him.


Sir Boun. And they did, he would turn over a new leaf with them; he would make
them all weary on it in the end: much fine rumor have I heard of that L. yet had I
never the fortune to set eye upon him; art sure he will alight here Footman? I
am afraid you are mistook.


Foot. Thinks your worship so sir? by your leave sir.


Sir Boun. Puh; passion of me, Footman, why Pumps I say come back.


Foot. Does your worship call?


Sir Boun. Come hither I say, I am but afraid on it, would it might happen so
well, how do know? did he name the house with the great turret a'th top?


Foot. No says did he not sir.


Sir Boun. Come hither I say, did he speak of a cloth a gold chamber?


Foot. Not one word by my troth sir.


Sir Boun. Come again you lowzie seven mile an hour?


Foot. I beseech your worship detain me not.


Sir Boun. Was there no talk of a fair pair of Orgaines, a great guilt
candlestick, and a pair of silver snuffers?


Foot. It Were sin to belie my Lord, I heard no such words sir.


Sir Boun. A pox confine thee, come again, puh,


Foot. Your worship will undo me sir.


Sir Boun. Was there no speech of a long dining room, a huge kitchen, large
meat, and a broad dresser board?


Foot. I have a greater maw to that indeed, an't please your worship.


Sir Boun. Whom did he name?


Foot. Why one Sir Bounteous Progress.


Sir Boun. Ah, a, a, I am that Sir Bounteous you progressiue round-about
Rascal.


Foot. Laughs, puh --


Sir Boun. I knew I should have him in the end, there is not a Lord will mis me I
thank their good honors, it is a fortune laid upon me, they can sent out their
best entertainment, I have a kind of complementall gift given me above
ordinary country Knights, and how soon, it is smelt out I warrant ye, there is
not one Knight in the Sheere able to entertain a Lord in the kue, or a Lady in the
nick like me, like me, there is a kind of grace belongs to it, a kind of Art
which naturally slips from me, I know not on it I promise you, it is gone before
Im'e aware on it, cuds me I forget my self, where --


First. Does your worship call?


Sir Boun. Run sirrah, call in my chief gentleman in the chain of gold, expedite;
and how does my good Lord? I never saw him before in my life, a cup of bastard
for this footman.


Foot. My Lord has trauaild this five year sir.


Sir Boun. Trauaild this five year? how many children has he? some bastard I
say.


Foot. No bastard an't please your worship.


Sir Boun. A cup of Sack to strengthen his wit, the footmans a fool; oh, come
hither master Gunwater, come hither, send presently to master Phesant for one
of his hens, there is Partrige in the house.


Gun. And Wild-duck an't please your worship.


Sir Boun. And Woodcock an't please thy worship.


Gun. And Woodcock an't please your worship, I had thought to have spoke before
you.


Sir Boun. Remember the Phesant, down with some Plouer, clap down six
Woodcocks, my love's coming; now sir.


Gun. Ant please your worship there is a Lord and his followers newly alighted.


Sir Boun. Dispath I say, dispatch, why where is my music? he is come indeed.


Enter Folly-wit like a Lord with his Comrades in blew coats. Folly. Footman.


Foot. My Lord.


Folli. Run swiftly with my co^mendations to S. Jasper Topas We Will ride and
visit him in the morning say.


Foot. Your Lordships charge shall be effected.

Exit.
Folly. That Courtly comely form, should present to me Sir Bounteous Progress.


Sir Boun. You Have found me out my Lord, I cannot hide my self, Your honor in
most spatiously welcome.


Folly. In this forgive me Sir, that being a stranger to your houses,
And you, I make my way so bold, and presume
Rather upon your kindness then your knowledge,
Only your bounteous disposition.
Fame has diuulgd, and is to me well known.

Sir Boun. Nay, and your Lordship know my disposition, you know me better then
they that know my person; your honor is so much the welcomer for that.


Folly-w. Thanks good sir Bounteous.


Sir Boun. Pray pardon me, it has been often my ambition my L. both in respect
of your honorable presence, and the prodigal fame that keeps even stroke
with your unbounded worthiness;

To have wished your Lordship, where your Lordship is
A noble guest in this unworthy seat:
Your Lordship nere heard my Organs.

Folly-w. Heard of them sir Bounteous, but never heared them.


Sir Boun. The're but double guilt my L. some hundred and fifty pound wilt fit
your Lordshippe with such another pair.


Folly-w. Indeed sir Bounteous?


Sir Boun. O my L. I have a present suit to you.


Folly-w. To me sir Bounteous, and you could nere speak at fitter time? for
I Am here present to grant you.


Sir Boun. Your Lordship has been a traveler.


Folly-w. Some five year sir.


Sir Boun. I have a Grandchild my L. I love him; and when I die I Will do
somewhat for him: I Will tell your honor the worst of him, a wild lad he has been.


Folly-w. So we have been all sir.


Sir Boun. So we have been all indeed my L. I thank your Lorships assistance;
some comic prancks he has bin guilty of; but I Will pawn my credit for him, an
honest trusty bosom.


Folly-w. And that's worth all sir.


Sir Boun. And that's worth all indeed my L. for he is like to have all when I
die; imberbis Iuuenis, his chin has no more prickles yet then a midwiues:
there is great hope of his wit his haire's so long a coming; shall I be bold
with your honor, to prefer this aforesaid Ganimed to hold a plate under your
Lordships cup?


Folly-w. You wrong both his worth, and your bounty, and you call that boldness;
Sir I have heard much good of that young Gentleman.


Sir Boun. Nay h'as a good wit in faith my L.


Folly-w. H'as carried himself always generously.


Sir Boun. Are you aduisde of that my L.? h'as carried many things cleanely: I Will
show your Lordship my Will, I keep it above in an Out landish box; the
whoreson boy must have all: I love him, yet he shall nere find it as long as I
live.


Folly-w. Well sir, for your sake, and his own deserving, I Will reserve a place
for him nearest to my secrets.


Sir Boun. I understand your good Lordship, you will make him your Secretary: my
music, give my L. a taste of his welcome.


Astraine played by the Consort, Sir Bounteous makes a Courtly honor to that L.
and seems to foot the tune. Sir Boun. So, how like you our Airs my Lord? are
they choice?


Folly-w. The're seldom matched believe it.


Sir Boun. The Consort of mine own household.


Folly w. Ye sir.


Sir Boun. The Musicians are in Ordinary, yet no ordinary Musicians: your
Lordship shall hear my Organs now.


Folly-w. Oh I beseech you sir Bounteous.


Sir Boun. My Organist.

The Organs play, and couerd dishes march over the Stage. Come my L. how does
your honor relish my Organ?


Folly-w. A very proud Air in faith sir.


Sir Boun. Oh, how cannot choose, a Walloon plays upon them, and a Welchman
blows wind in their breech.

Exeunt.
A song to the Organs. Enter sir Bounteous with Folly-wit, and his consorts
toward his lodging. Sir Boun. You must pardon us my L. hasty cates, your honor
has had even a hunting meal on it; and now I am like to bring your Lordship to
as mean a lodging, a hard Down bed in faith my L. poor Cambricke sheets, and
a cloth a Tissue Canopy, the Curtains indeed were wrought in Venice, with the
story of the Prodigal child in silk and gold, only the Swine are left out
my L. for spoiling the curtains.


Fol. TO was well prevented sir.


Sir Boun. Silkin rest, harmonious slumbers, and venetiall dreams to your
Lordship.


Fol. The like to kind Sir Bounteous.


Sir Boun. Fie, not to me my L. I Am old, past dreaming of such vanities.


Folly. Old men should dream best.


Sir Boun. Their dreams indeed my L. you have gi'nt us: tomorrow your Lordship
shall see my Cocks, my Fish Ponds, my Park, my Champion grounds; I keep
Champers in my house can show your Lordship some pleasure.


Fol. Sir Bounteous you even whelme me with delights.


Sir Boun. Once again a musical night to your honor; I Will trouble your Lordship
no more.

Exit.
Fol. Good rest sir Bounteous; so, come, the vizards, where be the masking
suits?


Leift. In your Lordships Portmantua.


Fol. Peace Leiftenant.


Leift. I had rather have war, Captain.


Fol. Puh, the plot's ripe; come, to our business lad, Tho guilt condemns, it is
gilt must make us glad.


Leift. Nay, and you be at your distinctions Captain, I Will follow behind no
longer.


Fol. Get you before then, and whelme your nose with your vizard, go.

Now Grandsire, you that hold me at hard meat,
And keep me out at the Dags end, I Will fit you;
Under his Lordships leave, all must be mine
He and his Will confesses, what I take then
Is but a borrowing of so much before hand;
I Will pay him again when he dies, in so many blacks,
I Will have the Church hung round with a noble a yard,
Or requite him in Scutchions, let him trap me
In gold, and I Will lap him in lead; quid pro quo: I
Must look none of his Angels in the face forsooth,
Until his face be not worth looking on; Tut lads,
Let Sires and Grandsires keep us low, we must
Live when the're flesh, as well as when the're dust.
Exit.
Enter Curtizan with her man. Curt. Go, sirrah, run presently to M. Penitent
Brothel; you know his lodging, knock him up, I know he cannot sleep for
sighing; tell him I Have happily bethought a mean,

To make his purpose prosper in each limb,
Which only rests to be approved by him:
Make have, I know he thirsts for it.
Exeunt. Within. Oh.


Enter in a masking suit with a vizard in his hand, Folly-wit. Fol. Hark,
the're at their business.


First. Thieves, thieves.


Fol. Gag that gaping rascal, tho he be my Grandsires chief Gentleman in the
chain of gold, I Will have no pity of him; how now lads?


Enter the rest Vizarded. Leift. All Is sure and safe, on with your vizard sir;
the servants are all bound.


Fol. There Is one care past then, come follow me lads, I Will lead you now to the
point, and top of all your fortunes; yo'n lodging is my Grandsires.


Leift. So, so, lead on, on.


Ant. Here Is a Captain worth the following, and a wit worth a man's love and
admiring!


Enter with Sir Bounteous in his night-gowne. Sir Boun. Oh gentlemen, and you
be kind gentlemen, what countrymen are you?


Folly w. Linconsheere men Sir.


Sir Boun. I am glad of that in faith.


Folly-w. And why should you be glad of that?


Sir Boun. Oh, the honestest thieves of all come out of Linconsheere; the
kindest naturde Gentlemen; the'le rob a man with conscience: they have a
feeling of what they go about, and will steal with tears in their eyes: ah
pitiful gentlemen.


Folly-w. Push, Money, money, we come for money.


Sir Boun. Is that all you come for? Ah what a beast was I to put out my money
the other day: alas good gentlemen, what shift shall I make for you? pray come
again another time.


Folly-w. Tut, tut sir, money.


Sir Boun. Oh not so loud sir, you're too shrill a Gentleman; I have a L. lies
in my house, I would not for the world his honor should be disquieted.


Folly-w. Who my L. Owemuch? we have took order with him before hand, he lies
bound in his bed and al his followers.


Sir Boun. Who my L? bound my L? Alas what did you mean to bind my L? he could
keep his bed well enough without binding: you have undone me i'nt already, you
need rob me no farther.


Folly-w. Which is the Key, come?


Sir Boun. Ah I perceive now, you are no true Linconsheere spirits; you come
rather out of Bedforesheere, we cannot lie quiet in our beds for you: so, take
enough my Masters; spur a free horse, my name's sir Bounteous, a merry world
in faith; what Knight but I keep open house at midnight? well, there should be a
conscience, if one could hit vppon't.


Folly-w. Away now, ceaze upon him, bind him.


Sir Boun. Is this your Court of equity? why should I be bound for mine own
money? but come, come, bind me, I have need on it; I have been too liberal to
night, keep in my hands: nay, as hard as you list; I am too good to bear my
L. company, you have watched your time my Masters; I was Knighted at
Westminster, but many of these nights will make me a Knight of Windsor; you have
deserude so well my Masters; I bid you all to dinner to morrow, I would I might
have your companies in faith, I desire no more.


Folly-w. Oh ho sir!


Sir Boun. Pray meddle not with my Organs, to put them out of tune.


Folly-w. Oh no, heeres better music sir.


Sir Boun. Ah pox feast you.

Exit.
Folly-w. Dispatch with him, away; so, thank you good Grandsire; this was
bounteously done of him in faith; it came somewhat hard from him at first; for
indeed nothing comes stiff from an old man but money: and he may well stand
upon that, when he has nothing else to stand upon: where is our Port-mantua?


Leift. Here Bully-Captaine.


Folly-w. In with the purchase, it will lie safe enough there vnder's nose I
warrant you: what, is all sure?

Enter Ancient.
Ant. All Is sure Captain.


Folly-w. You know what follows now, one villane binds his fellows; go, we
must be all bound for our own securities raskals, there is no dallying' vppo'th
point; you conceit me: there is a L. to be found bound in the morning, and al
his followers, can you pick out that L. now?


Leift. O admirable spirit!


Folly-w. You nere plot for your safeties, so your wants be satisfied.


Anti. But if we bind one another, how shall the last man be bound?


Folly-w. Pox on it, I Will have the footman escape.


Foot. That's I, I thank you sir.


Folly-w. The Footman of all other will be supposde to escape, for he comes in
no bed all night; but lies in's clothes, to be first ready in the morning: the
horse and he lies in litter together; that is the right fashion of your bonny
Footman: and his freedom will make the better for our purpose; for we must
have one in the morning to unbind the Knight, that we may have our sport within
our selves: we now arrive at the most ticklish point, to rob, and take our
ease, to be thieves and lie by it, looker to it lads, it concerns every man's
gullet; I Will not have the jest spoilde, that is certain, tho it hazard a
windepipe: I Will either go like a L. as I came, or be hanged like a these as I
am; and that is my resolution.


Leift. Troth a match Captain, of all hands.

Exeunt.
Enter Curtizan with M. Penitent Brothel. Curtiz. Oh M. Penitent Brothel!


M. Pen. What is it sweet Lady Gulman, that so seazes on thee with rapture and
admiration?


Curtiz. A thought, a trick, to make you sir especially happy, and yet I my
self a sauer by it.


M. Pen. I would embrace that Lady with such courage, I would not leave you on
the loosing hand.


Curt. I will give trust to you sir, the cause then why I raisde you from your
bed so soon; wherein I know sighs would not let you sleep, thus understand
it: You love that woman (M. Harebraines wife) Which no invented means can
crown with freedom, For your desires and her own wish, but this, Which in my
slumbers did present it self.


M. Pen. I Am covetous Lady.


Curtiz. you know her husband lingering in suspect, Locks her from all society,
but mine.


M. Pen. Most true.


Curtiz. I only am admitted, yet hitherto That has done you no real
happiness; by my admittance I cannot perform that deed, that should please you,
You know: wherefore thus I Have conuaid'd it, I Will counterfeit a fit of violent
sickness.


M.Pen. Good.


Curtiz. Nay it is not so good by my faith, but to do you good.


M. Pen. And in that sense I called it, but take me with you Lady; would it be
probable enough to have a sickness so suddenly violent?


Curtiz. Puh, all the world knows women are soon down; we can be sick when we
have a mind to it, catch an ague with the wind of our fans, surfeit upon the
rumpe of a Lark, and bestow ten pound in physic upon it; we are likest our
selves when we are down: it is the easiest Art and cunning for our sect to
counterfeit sick, that are always full of sits when we are well; for since we
were made for a weak imperfect creature, we can sit that best that we are made
for: I thus translated, and your self slipped into the form of a Physician.


M. Pen. I a Physician Lady, talk not on it I beseech you, I shall shame the
whole College.


Curt. Tutman, any guacksaluing terms will serve for this purpose; for I am
pitifully hanted with a brace of elder brothers, new perfumde in the first of
their fortunes, and I shall see how forward their purses will be to the
pleasing of my pallat, and restoring of my health; lay on load enough upon them,
and spare them not, for the're good plump fleshly Asses, and may well enough
bear it: let gold, Ambre, and dissolved Pearl, be common ingrediences, and
that you cannot compose a cullisse without them: put but this cunningly in
practice, it shall be both a sufficient recompense for all my pains in your
love, and the ready means to make Mistress Harebraine; way, by the visiting of
me to your mutual desired company.


M.Pen. I Applaud thee, kiss thee, and will constantly embrace it.

Exeunt.
Voices within. Sir Boun. Ho, Gunwater!


Fol. Singlestone!


Within Ienkin, wa, ha, ho.


Within Ewen!


Within Simcod!


Fol. Footman! whewe --


Foot. Oh good your worship, let me help your good old worship.


Enter Sir Bount, with a cord half unbound, Foot with him. Sir Boun. Ah poor
honest footman, how did thou escape this massacre?


Foot. Even by miracle, and lying in my clothes sir.


Sir Boun. I think so, I would I had lain in my clothes to Footman, so I had
escaped them; I could have but risse like a beggar then, and so I do now, till
more money come in; but nothing afflicts me so much, my poor Geometrical
Footman, as that the barberous villains should lay violence upon my L. Ah, the
binding of my L. cuts my heart in two pieces; so, so, it is well, I thank thee,
run to thy fellows, undo them, undo them, undo them.


Foot. Alas, if my L. should miscarry, the're unbound already sir; they have no
occupation but sleep, feed, and fart. Exit.


Sir Boun. If I be not ashamde to look my L in the face, I Am a Sarassen my L.


Folly w. Who Is that?


Sir Boun. One may see he has been scard, a pox on them for their labors.


Folly-w. Singlestone!


Sir Boun. Singlestone? I Will nere answer to that in faith.


Folly-w. Suchman-


Sir Boun. Suchman? nor that neither in faith; I am not brought so low, tho I be
old.


Folly-w. Who Is that in the chamber?


Sir Boun. Good morrow my L. it is I.


Folly-w. Sir Bounteous good morrow, I would give you my hand sir, but I cannot
come at it; is this the courtesy a'th country sir Bounteous?


Sir Boun. Your Lordship grieves me more then al my loss; It Is the vnnatural'st
sight that can be found, To see a noble gentleman hard-bound.


Folly-w. Trust me, I thought you had been better beloved sir Bounteous; but I
see you have enemies sir, and your friends fare the worse for em: I like your
talk better then your lodging; I nere lay harder in a bed of Down; I have
had a mad nights rest on it: can you not gesle what they should be Sir
Bounteous?


Sir Boun. Faith Lincolneshire men my Lord.


Folly-w. How? fie, fie, believe it not sir, these lie not far off I warrant
you.


Sir Boun. Think you so my Lord?


Folly-w. I Will be burnt and they do, some that use to your house sir, and are
familiar with all the couneiances.


Sir Boun. This is the commodity of keeping open house my Lord, that makes so
many shut their doors about dinner time.


Folly-w. They were resolute villains, I made my self known to them, told them
what I was; gave them my honorable word not to disclose them.


Sir Boun. O saucy unmannerly villains!


Folly-w. And think you the slaves would trust me upon my word?


Sir Boun. They would not?


Folly-w. Forsooth no, I must pardon them, they told me Lords promises were
mortal, and commonly die within half an hour after they are spoken; they were
but gristles, and not one amongst a hundred come to any full groth, or
perfection, and therefore tho I were a L. I must enter into bond.


Sir Boun. Insupportable Rascals.


Folly-w. Troth Im'e of that mind Sir Bounteous you fared the worse for my
coming hither.


Sir Boun. Ah good my Lord, but Im'e sure your Lordship fared the worse.


Folly-w. Pray pity not me sir.


Sir Boun. Is not your honor sore about the brawne of the arm? a murren meet
them, I feel it.


Folly-w. About this place Sir Bounteous?


Sir Boun. You feel as it were a twinge my Lord?


Folly-w. I, even a twinge, you say right.


Sir Boun. A pox discover them, that twinge I feel too.


Folly-w. But that which disturbs me most Sir Bounteous lies here.


Sir Boun. True, about the wrist, a kind of Tumid numnes.


Folly-w. You say true Sir.


Sir Bount. The Reason of that my Lord is, the pulses had no play.


Folly-w. Mass so I gest it.


Sir Boun A mischief swell them, for I feel that to.


Leift. Sli'd here is a house haunted indeed.


Sir Boun. A word with you sir.


Folly-w. How now Singlestone?


Lieft. Im'e sorry my Lord your Lordship has lost.


Sir Boun. Pup, pup, pup, pup, pup.


Folly-w. What have I lost? speak?


Sir Boun. A good nights sleep say.


Folly-w. Speak, what have I lost I say?


Lieft. A good nights sleep my Lord, nothing else. Curtens drawn


Folly-w. That Is true, my clothes come.


Lieft. My Lords clothes, his honor's rising.


Sir Boun. Hist, well said, come hither, what has my Lord lost, tell me,
speak softly?


Lieft. His Lordship must know that Sir.


Sir Boun. Hush, prithee tell me.


Lieft. It Will do you no pleasure to know it Sir.


Sir Boun. Yet again? I desire it I say.


Lieft. Since your worship will needs know it, they have stolen away a jewel in
a blew silk riband of a hundred pound price, beside some hundred pounds in
fair Spur-Royals.


Sir Boun. That Is some two hundred in the total.


Lieft. Your worship's much about it Sir.


Sir Boun. Come follow me, I Will make that whole again in so much money, let not
my Lord know on it.


Lieft. Oh pardon me Sir Bounteous, that were a dishonor to my Lord, should it
come to his ear, I should hazard my undoing by' it.


Sir Boun. How should it come to his ear? if you be my Lords chief man about
him, I hope you do not use to speak, unless you be paid for it, and I had rather
give you a Counselors double Fee to hold your peace, come, go too, follow me I
say.


Lieft. There will be scarce time to tell it sir, my Lord will away instantly.


Sir Boun. His honor shall stay dinner by his leaue', I Will prevail with him
so far; and now I remember a lest; I bad the whoreson thieves to dinner last
night, I would I might have their companies, a pox poison them.

Exit.
Lieft. Faith and you are like to have no other guess Sir Bounteous, if you
have none but us, I Will give you that gift in faith.

Exeunt.
Finit Actus Secundus.
Incipit Actus Tertius.
Enter Master Harebraine with two elder brothers, Master Inesse, and Master
Possibility. Possibi. YOu see bold guests Master Hareb.


Hareb. You Are kindly welcome to my house; good Master Inesse, and Master
Possibility.


Inesse That Is our presumption Sir.


Hareb. Rafe?


Rafe Here Sir.


Hareb. Call down your mistress to welcome these two Gentlemen my friends.


Rafe I shall Sir.

Exit.
Hareb. I will observe her carriage, and watch The slipperie reuolotions of her
eye, I Will lie in wait for every glance she gives, And poyze her words in the
balance of suspect, If she but swag she is gone, either on this hand Over
familiar, or this, too neglectfull, It does behoue her carry her self even.


Possibi. But master Hareb.


Hareb. True, I hear you sir; wa'st you said?


Possibi. I have not spoke it yet Sir.


Hareb. Right, so I say.


Possibi. Is it not strange, that in so short a time, my little Lady Gulman
should be so violently handled?


Hareb. Oh, sickness has no mercy sir,
It neither pitties Ladies lip, nor eye,
It crops the Rose out of the Virgins cheek,
And so deslowres her that was nere deslorw'd,
Fools then are maids to lock from men that treasure,
Which death will pluck, and never yield them pleasure;
Ah gentlemen, tho I shadow it, that sweet Virgins sickness griues me not
lightly, she was my wives only delight and company;
Did you not hear her gentlemen, in the midst
Of her extremest sit, still how she called upon my wife,
Remembered still my wife, sweet mistress Harebraine,
When she sent for me, a one side of her bed stood the Physician,
the Scriuener on the other, two horrible objects, but,
mere opposites in the course of their lives, for the Scriuener
binds folks, and the Physician makes them loose.

Poss. But not loose of their bonds Sir?


Hareb. No by my faith sir, I say not so, if the Physician could make them loose
of their bonds, there is many a one would take Physic, that dares not now for
poisoning, but as I was telling of you, her Will was fashioning, Wherein I
found her best and richest Jewel, Given as a Legacy unto my wife, When I read
that, I could not refrain weeping, well of all other, my wife has most reason
to visit her, if she have any good nature in her, she will show it there, now
sir where is your mistress?


Rafe She desires you, and the gentlemen your friends, to hold her excused,
sha's a fit of an Ague now upon her, which begins to shake her


Hareb. Where does it shake her most?


Rafe All over her body Sir.


Hareb. Shake all her body? it is a saucie fit, Im'e jealous of that Ague, pray
walk in gentlemen, I Will see you instantly.


Rafe Now they are absent sir, it is no such thing.


Hareb. What?


Rafe My mistress has her health Sir,
But it is her suit, she may confine her self
From sight of all men, but your own dear self Sir,
For since the sickness of that modest Vergin
Her only company, she delights in none;

Hareb. No; visit her again, commend me to her, Tell her they are gone, and only
I my self Walk here to exchange a word or two with her.


Rafe I Will tell her so sir.

Exit.
Hareb. Fool that I am, and madman, beast! what worse?
Suspicious over a creature that deserves
The best opinion, and the purest thought,
Watchful over her that is her watch her self,
To doubt her ways, that looks too narrowly
Into her own defects; I, foolish-fearefull
Have often rudely, out of giddie flames
Bard her those objects which she shuns her self,
Thrice I Have had proof of her most constant temper,
Come I at unawares by stealth upon her,
I find her cercled in with Divine Writs
Of heavenly meditations; here and there
Chapters with leaves tuckt up, which when I see
They either tax pride or adultery,
Ah let me curse my self, that could be jealous
Of her whose mind no sin can make rebellious.
And here the unmatched comes, now wife in faith they are gone,
Push, see how fearful it is, will you not credit me?
They Are gone in faith, why, hinke you I Will betray you? come, come, thy delight and
mine, thy only virtuous friend, thy sweet instructresse is violently taken,
grievous sick, and which is worse, she mends not.


Wife Her friends are sorry for that Sir.


Hareb. She calls still upon thee, poor soul, remembers thee still, thy name
whirles in her breath, where is mistress Harebraine says she?


Wife Alas good soul,


Hareb. She made me weep thrice, she has put thee in a jewel in her Will.


Wife Eee'n tot'h last gasp a kind soul.


Hareb. Take my man, go, visit her.


Wife Pray pardon me sir, alas my visitation cannot help her.


Hareb. Oh yet the kindness of a thing wife; still she holds the same rare
temper; take my man I say.


Wife. I would not take your man sir, tho I did purpose going.


Hareb. No? thy reason?


Wife The worlds condition is it self so vild Sir,
It Is apt to judge the worst, of those deserve not,
It Is an ill-thinking age, and does apply
All to the form of it own Luxury,
This censure flies from one, that, from another,
That man's her Squire, says he; her Pimpe, the the other,
She Is of the stamp, a third, fourth, I ha known her:
Iu'e heard this, not without a burning cheek:
Then our attires are taxt, our very gate
Is called in question, where a husbands presence
Scatters such thoughts, or makes them sink for fear
Into the hearts that breed them, nay surely if I went Sir,
I would entreat your company.

Hareb. Mine? prithee wife, I have been there alreadle.


Wife That Is all one; although you bring me but to the door Sir, I would entreat
no farther.


Hareb. Thu'rt such a wife; why I will bring thee thither then, but not go up
I swear.


Wife In Faith you shall not, I do not desire it sir.


Hareb. Why then content.


Wife Give me your hand you will do so Sir.


Hareb. Why there is my lip I will.


Wife Why then I go Sir.


Hareb. With me or no man, incomparable such a woman. Exeunt.


Viols, Gallipots, Plate, and an Houre-glasse by her. The Curtizan on a bed,
for her counterfeit fut. To her, Master Penitent Brothell, like a Doctor of
Physic. M. Peni. Lady?


Curt. Ha, what news?


M. Peni. There Is one Sir Bounteous Progress newly alighted from his
footecloth, and his Mare waits at door, as the fashion is.


Curt. Sli'd, it is the knight that privately maintains me, a little
short-olde. spinye Gentleman, in a great dublet.


M. Peni The same, I know them.


Curt. He Is my sole Reuenew, meat, drink, and raiment; my good Physician
work upon him, Im'e weak.


M. Peni. Enough.


Sir Boun. Why, where be these Ladies? these plump soft delicate creatures? ha?


M. Peui. Who would you visit sir?


Sir Boun. Visit, who? what are you with the plague in your mouth?


M. Peni. A Physician sir.


Sir Boun. Then you are a loose-liuer Sir, I have put you to your purgation.


M. Peni. But you need none, you are purged in a worse fashion,


Curt. Ah, Sir Bounteous.


Sir Boun. How now? what art thou?


Curt. Sweet Sir Bounteous.


Sir Boun. Pashion of me, what an alteration's here? Rosamond sick old Harry?
here is a sight able to make an old man shrink, I was lusty when I came in, but
I am down now in faith, mortality, yea? this puts me in mind of a hole seven
foot deep, my grave, my grave, my grave, hist, master Doctor a word sir,
hark, it is not the Plague? is it?


M. Peni. The Plague Sir, no?


Sir Boun. Good.


M. Peni. He never asks whether it be the Pox or no, and of the twain that
had been more likely.


Sir Boun. How now my wench? how do?


Curt. Huh, weak Knigh, huh.


M. Peni. She says true, he is a weak Knight indeed.


Sir Boun. Where does it hold thee most, wench?


Curt. All parts alike Sir.


M. Peni. She says true still, for it holds her in none.


Sir Boun. Hark in thine ear, you are breeding of young bones, I am afraid I
have got thee with child in faith.


Curt. I fear that much sir.


Sir Boun. Oh, oh, if it should, a young Progress when all is done.


Curt. You have done your good will Sir.


Sir Boun. I see by her, it is nothing but a surfeit of Venus in faith, and tho I
be old, I have gin't her, but since I had the power to make thee sick, I Will
have the purse to make thee whole, that is certain; master Doctor.


M. Pent. Sir.


Sir Boun. Lets hear I pray, what is it you minister to her?


M. Pent. Marry Sir, some precious cordial, some costly refocillation, a
composure comfortable and restoratiue.


Sir Boun. I, I, that, that, that.


M. Pent. No poorer ingrediences then the liquor of Currall, clear Amber, or
Succinum, Unicorns horn six grains, Magisterium, Perlarum one scruple.


Sir Boun. Ah.


M. Pent. Ossis de Cord Cerui half a scruple, Aurum Potabile or his tincture.


Sir Boun. Very precious Sir.


M. Pent. All which being finely contunded, and mixed in a stone or glass
mortar, with the spirit of Diamber.


Sir Boun. Nay pray be patient Sir.


M. Pent. That Is impossible, I cannot be Patient and a Physician too Sir.


Sir Boun. Oh, cry you mercy, that is true Sir.


M. Pent. All which aforesaid.


Sir Boun. I, there you left Sir.


M. Pent. When it is almost exsiccate or dry, I add thereto olei Succini,
olei Masi, and Sinamoni.


Sir Boun. So Sir, olei Masi, that same oil of Mase is a great comfort to both
the Counters.


M. Pent. And has been of a long time Sir.


Sir Boun. Well, be of good cheer wench, there is gold for thee; huh, let her
want for nothing M. Doctor, a poor kinsewoman of mine, nature binds me to
have a care of her; there I guld you M. Doctor: gather up a good spirit wench,
the fit will away, it is but a surfeit of gristles: ha, ha, I have sitted her; an
old Knight and a cock a'th game still, I have not spurs for nothing I see.


M. Pen. No by my faith, the're hatched, they cost you an Angel sir.


Sir Boun. Look to her good M. Doctor, let her want nothing, I Have given her
enough already, Ha, ha, ha.

Exit.
Curt. So, is he gone?


M. Pen. He Is like himself gone.


Curtiz. Here Is somewhat to set up with; how soon he took occasion to slip
into his own flattery, soothing his own defects; he only fears he has done
that deed, which I nere feared to come from him in my life, this purchase came
unlooked for.


M. Pen. H'ist, the pair of sons and heirs.


Curt. Oh, the're welcome, they bring money.


Enter M. Inesse and Possibility. Poss. M. Doctor.


M. Pent. I come to you Gentleman.


Poss. How does she now?


M. Pen. Faith much after one fashion sir.


Iness. There Is hope of life sir.


M. Pen. I see no signs of death of her.


Poss. That Is some comfort; will she take any thing yet?


M. Pen. Yes, yes, yes, she will take still: she has a kind of facility in taking:
how comes your band bloody sir?


Iness. You may see I met with a scab sir.


M. Pen. Diuersa genera Scabierum, as Pliny reports, there arediners kind of
Scabs.


Iness. Pray lets hear them sir.


M. Pen. An itching scab, that is your harlot; a sore scab, your usurer; a
running, your promooter; a broad scab, your intelligencer; but a white scabbe,
that is a scald knave and a Pander: but to speak truth, the only scabs we are
now a days troubled withal, are new officers.


Inesse. Why now you come to mine sir, for I Will be sworn one of them was very
busy about my head this morning, and he should be a scab by that, for they are
ambitious and covet the head.


M. Pent. Why you saw I deriu'de him sir?


Ines. You Physicians are mad Gentlemen.


M. Pent. We Physicians see the most sights of any men living, you're
Astronomers look upward into'th air, we look downward into'th body, and
indeed we have power upward and downward.


Ines. That you have in faith sir.


Pos. Lady, how cheer you now?


Curtiz. The same woman still, huh.


Poss. That Is not good.


Curtiz. Little alteration, Fie, fie, you have been to lavish Gentlemen.


Ines. Puh, talk not of that Lady, thy health's worth a million; here M.
Doctor, spare for no cost.


Pos. Look what you find there sir.


Curtiz. What do you mean gentlemen, put up, put up, you see I Am down and
cannot strive with you, I would rule you else; you have me at advantage, but if
ever I live, I will requite it deeply.


Iness. Tut an't come to that once, we will requit our selves well enough.


Pos. Mist. Harebrain, Lady, is setting forth to visit you too.


Curtiz. Hah, huh.


M. Pen. There struck the munit that brings forth the birth of all my joys
and wishes; but see the jar now, how shall I rid these from her?


Curti. Pray gentleman, stay not above an hour from my sight.


Ines. S'foot we are not going Lady.


M. Pen. Subtly brought about, yett' will not do, the'le stick by it; a word
with you gentlemen.


Both. What says M. Doctor?


M. Pen. She wants but settling of her sense with rest, one hours sleep
gentlemen would set all parts in tune.


Pos. He says true in faith.


Ines. Get her to sleep M. Doctor, we will both sit here and watch by her.


M. Pen. Hels Angels watch you, no Art can prevail with them; what with the
thought of joys, and sight of crosses, my wits are at Hercules pillars, non
plus vltra.


Curt. M. Doctor, M. Doctor?


M. Pen. Here Lady.


Curtiz. Your physic works, lend me your hand.


Pos. Farewell sweet Lady.


Ines. Adue M. Doctor.


Curt. So.


M. Pen. Let me admire thee,
The wit of man, wanes and decreases soon,
But women's wit is ever at full moon.
Enter Mist, Harebrain. There shot a star from heaven,
I dare not yet behold my happiness.
The splendour is so glotious and so piercing.

Curtiz. Mistress Harebraine, give my wit thanks hereafter, your wishes are in
sight, your opportunity spacious.


Wife. Will you but hear a word from me?


Curtiz. Whooh --


Wife. My husband himself brought me to the door, walks below for my
return; jealousy is prick-eard, and will hear the waging of a hair.


Curtiz. Pish, y' are a faint-liuer, trust your self with your pleasure, and
me with your security, go.


M. Pen The fulness of my wish.


Wife. Of my desire.


M. Pen. Beyond this sphere I never will aspire.

Exeunt
Enter M. Harebraine listening. Hareb. I Will listen, now the flesh draws nie her
end,
At such a time women exchange their secrets,
And ransack the close corners of their hearts;
What many years has whelmed, this hour imparts.

Curtiz. Pray sit down, there is a low stool, good Mistress Harebraine, this
was kindly done; huh give me your hand; huh, alas how cold you are: even so is
your husband, that worthy wise Gentleman; as comfortable a man to woman in my
case, as ever trod -- huh -- shoe leather, love him, honor him, stick by
him, he lets you want nothing, that is fit for a woman; and to be sure on it, he
will see himself that you want it not.


Hareb. And so I do in faith, it is right my humor.


Curt. You live a Ladies life with him, go where you will, ride when you will,
and do what you will.


Hareb. Not so, not so neither, she is better looked to.


Curt. I know you do, you need not tell me that; it were even pity of your life
in faith, if ever you should wrong such an innocent gentleman; fie Mistress
Harebraine, what do you mean? come you to discomfort me? nothing but weeping
with you?


Hareb. She Is weeping, t'as made her weep, my wife shows her good nature
already.


Curt. Still, still weeping? huff, huff, huff, why how now woman? hey, hy, hy,
for shame leave; suh, suh, she cannot answer me for snobbing.


Hareb. All this does her good, beshrew my heart and I pity her, let her shed
tears till morning; I Will stay for her, she shall have enough on it by my good
will; I Will not be her hinderance.


Curt. O no, lay your hand here Mistress Harebraine: I there, Oh there, there
lies my pain good gentlewoman: sore? Oh I, I can scarce endure your hand
vppon't.


Hareb. Poor soul, how she is tormented.


Curtiz. Yes, yes, I eat a Cullisse an hour since.


Hareb. There Is some comfort in that yet, she may escape it.


Curtiz. Oh it lies about my heart much.


Hareb. I Am sorry for that in faith, she will hardly escape it.


Curtiz. Bound, no, no, I Would a very comfortable stool this morning.


Hareb. I Am glad of that in faith, that is a good sign, I smell, she will escape
it now.


Curtiz. Will you be going then?


Hareb. Fall back, she is coming.


Curtiz. Thanks good Mistress Harebraine, welcome sweet Mistress Harebraine, pray
commend me to the good gentleman your husband.


Hareb. I could do that my self now.


Curtiz. And to my uncle Winchcombe, and to my Aunt Lipsalue, and to my cosen
Falsetop, and to my cosen Lickit, and to my cosen Horseman, and to all my good
cosens in Clearken well, and Saint Ioneses.


Enter Wife with Master Penitent. Wife. At three days end my husband takes a
journey.


M. Pent. Oh thence I derive a second meeting.


Wife. May it prosper still, Till then I rest a captive to his will: Once again
health, rest, and strength to thee sweet Lady: farewell, you witty squall;
good M. Doctor have a care to her body if yous stand her friend, I know you can
do her good.


Curtiz. Take pity of your waiter, go: farewell sweet Mistress Harebraine.


Hareb. Welcome sweet wife, alight upon my lip, never was hour spent better.


Wife. Why, were you within the hearing sir?


Hareb. I that I was in faith, to my great comfort; I deceiud you there wife, ha,
ha;
I do entreat thee, nay conjure thee wife
Upon my love, or what can more be said?
Oftener to visit this sick virtuous maid.

Wife. Be not so fierce, your will shall be obaide.


Hareb. Why then I see thou love me.

Exeunt.
M. Peni. Art of Ladies.
When plots are even past hope, and hang their head,
Set with a woman's hand, they thrive and spread.
Exit.
Enter Folly-wit with Lieftenant Maw-worme, Ancient Hoboy, and the rest of his
consorts. Folly-w. Wast not well manag'de, you necessary mischiefs? did the plot
want either life or Art?


Lief. Tw's so well Captain, I would you could make such another Musse at all
adventures.


Folly w. Do cal't a Musse? I am sure my Grandsire nere got his money worse
in his life, then I got it from him, if ever he did cozen the simple; why I was
borne to revenge their quarrel; if ever oppress the widow? I, a fatherles
child have done as much for him; and so it is through the world either in jest or
earnest, let the vserer look for it, for craft recoyles in the end, like an
ouercharg'd musket, and maymes the very hand that puts fire to it; there needs
no more but a Usurers own blow to strike him from hence to hell, it will set him
forward with a vengeance; but here lay the jest whoresons, my Grandsire
thinking in his conscience that we had not robbed him enough over night, must
needs pity me in the morning, and give me the rest.


Lieft. Two hundred pounds in fair Rose-Nobles I protest.


Folly-w. Push, I knew he could not sleep quietly til he had paid me for
robing of him too, it is his humor, and the humor of most of your rich men in
the course of their lives; for you know, they always feast those mouths that
are least nedie, and give them more, that have too much already; and what call
you that, but robing of themselves a Courtlyer way; Oh.


Lieft. Cuds me, how now Captain?


Folly-w. A cold fit that comes over my memory, and has a shrode pull at my
fortunes.


Lieft. What Is that Sir?


Folly-w. Is it for certain, Lieftenant, that my Grandsire keeps an
uncertain creature, a Queen?


Lieft. I that is too true Sir.


Folly-w. So much the more 'preposterous for me, I shall
hop shorter by that trick; she carries away the thirds at least;
twill prove en-tayld land I am afraid when all is done, in faith
nay, I have known a vicious-old-thought-acting Father,
Damb'd only in his dreams, thirsting for game,
(When his best parts hung down their heads for shame,)
For his blancht harlot dispossess his son,
And make the pox his heir, twa's gravely done:
How had thou first knowledge on it Lieftenant?

Lieft. Faith from discourse, yet all the policy That I could use, I could
not get her name.


Folly-w. Dull slave that never could spy it.


Lieft. But the manner of her coming was described to me.


Folly-w. How is the manner prithee?


Lieft. Marry sir she comes, most commonly coacht.


Folly w. Most commonly coacht indeed, for coaches are as common now adays, as
some that ride in them, she comes most commonly coacht.


Lief. True, there I left sir, guarded with some leash of Pimps.


Folly-w. Beside the coachman?


Lieft. Right sir, then alighting, she is privately received by master Gunwater.


Folly-w. That Is my Grandsires chief Gentleman in the chain of gold, that he
should live to be a Pander, and yet look upon his chain and his velvet iacket


Lieft. Then is your Grandsire rounded in the ear, the key given after the
Italian fashion, backward, she closly conuaid into his closet, there remaining,
till either opportunity smile upon his credit, or he send down some hot
caudle to take order in his performance.


Folly-w. Peace, it is mine own in faith, I haa'te.


Lieft. How now Sir?


Folly-w. Thanks, thanks to any spirit, That mingled it among my inventions.


Anti. Why master Folly-wit?


All. Captain?


Folly-w. Give me scope and hear me,
I have begot that means which will both furnish me,
And make that queen walk under his conceit.

Leift. That were double happiness, to put thy self into money and her out of
favor.


Folly-w. And all at one dealing?


Ant. S'foot I long to see that hand played,


Folly-w. And thou shall see it quickly in faith; nay it is in grain, I warrant it
hold color: Leiftenant, step behind yo'n hanging; if I mistook not at my
entrance, there hangs the lower part of a gentlewomans gown, with a mask and
a chinclout; bring all this way: Nay, but do it cunningly now, it is a friends
house, and I Would vfe it so, there is a taste for you.


Ant. But prithee what will thou do with a Gentlewomans lower part?


Folly-w. Why use it.


Ant. You Have answered me indeed in that, I can demand no farther.


Folly. Well said Leiftenant.


Leift. What will you do now sir?


Folly-w. Come, come, thou shall see a woman quickly made up here.


Leift. But that is against kind Captain, for they are always long a making
ready.


Folly-w. And is not most they do against kind I prithee? to lie with their
Horse-keeper, is not that against kind? to wear half moons made of another
hair, is not that against kind? to drink down a man, she that should set him
up, pray is not that monstrously against kind now? nay over with it Leiftenant,
over with it, ever while you live put a woman's clothes over her head: Cupid
plays best at blind-man buff.


Leift. You shall have your will maintenance, I love mad tricks as well as
you for your heart sir; but what shift will you make for upper bodies Captain?


Fol. I see now you are an Ass, why I Am ready.


Leift. Ready?


Folly. Why the Doublet serves as well as the best, and is most in fashion,
weere all Male tot'h middle, mankind from the Beuer to the Bum, it is an
Amazonian time, you shall have women shortly tread their husbands; I should
have a couple of Locks behind, prithee Lieutenant find em out for me, and wind
'em about my hatband, nay you shall see, we will be in fashion to a hair, and
become all with probability, the most musty-visage Critic shall not except
against me.


Left. Nay i will give thee thy due behind thy back, thou art as mad a piece of
Clay --


Folly. Clay! do call thy Captain Clay? indeed clay was made to stop holes,
he says true; did not I tell you rascals you should see a woman quickly made
up?


Ancient. I Will swear for it Captain.


Folly. Come, come, my mask and my chin-cloute -- Come into'th Court.


Left. Nay they were both 'ith Court long ago sir.


Folly. Let me see, where shall I choose two or three for Pimps now? but I
cannot choose amiss amongst you all, that's the best; well, as I am a Queen,
you were best have a care of me, and guard me sure, I give you warning before
hand, it is a monckie taylde-Age. Life, you shall go nigh to have half a douzen
blythe fellows surprise me cowardly, carry me away with a pair of owers, and
put in at Putney.


Left. We should laugh at that in faith.


Folly. Or shoot in vppo'th coast of Cue.


Left. Two notable fit landing places for Leachers, P. and C. Putney and Cue.


Folly. Well, say you have fair warning on it, the hair about the hat is as
good as a flag vppo'th pole at a common Playhouse to wast company, and a
chin-cloute is of that powerful a traction I can tell you, twill draw more
Linen toot?


Left. Fear not us Captain, there is none here but can fight for a whore as
well as some Innes a Court-man?


Folly. Why then set forward; and as you scorn two shilling brothell, twelve
penny Pandarisme, and such base bribes, guard me from bonny Scribs, and bony
Scribes.


Left Hang 'em, pensions, and alowancces, four pence half penny a meal, hang
'em.


Exeunt. Finit Actus Tertius.
Incipit Actus Quartus.
Enter in his chamber out of his study, Master Panitent, Once, Ill, a Book in
his hand reading. Mast. Pae. Ha? read that place again, -- Adultery
Draws the Divorce twixt heaven and the soul!
Accursed man that standst diuors't from heaven,
Thou wretched unthrift, that have played away
Thy Eternal portion at a minutes game,
To please the flesh, have blotted out thy name:
Where were thy nobler meditations busied?
That they durst trust this body with it self,
This natural drunkard that undoes us all,
And makes our shame apparent in our fall.
Then let my blood pay fort, and vex and boil,
My soul I know would never grieve tot'h death,
The Eternal spirit that feeds her with his breath:
Nay I that knew the price of life and sin,
What Crown is kept for continence, what for lust?
The end of man, and glory of that end
As endless as the giver:
To dote on weakness, slime, corruption, woman?
What is she, took asunder from her clothes?
Being ready, she consists of hundred pieces,
Much like your German cloak, and nere allied
Both are so nice, they cannot go for pride.
Beside a greater fault, but too well known,
They Will strike to ten, when they should stop at one;
Within these three days the next meeting's fixed,
If I meet then, hell and my soul be mixed.
My lodging I know constantly, she not knows,
Sins hate is the best gift that sin bestows:
I Will nere embrace her more, -- never -- better witness, never.

Enter the Devil in her shape, claps him on the shoulder. Succubus. What at a
stand? the fitter for my company?


Mast. Pae. Celestial soldiers guard me,-


Succubus. How now man? Lase did the quickness of my presence fright thee?


Mast. Pae. Shield me you ministers of faith and grace.


Succubus. Leave, leave, are you not ashamd to use such words to a woman?


Mast. Pae. Thou Art a Devil.


Suc. A devil? feel, feel man, has a devil flesh and bone?


Mast Pae. I do conjure thee by that dreadful power --


Suc. The man has a delight to make me tremble;
Are these the fruits of thy aduenturous Love?
Was I entisst for this? to be soon rejected?
Come, what has changd thee so, Delight;

Mast. Pae. Away.


Succubus. Remember.


Mast. Pae. Leave my sight.


Suc. Have I this meeting wrought with cunning.
Which when I com^e I find thee shunning?
Rowze thy amorous thoughts and twine me,
All my interest I resign thee:
Shall we let slip this mutual hour,
Comes so seldom in her power?
Where Is thy lip, thy clip, thy fadome?
Had weomen such loves. would't not mad 'em?
Art a man? or do abuse one?
A Love! and know not how to vse-one?
Come, i will teach thee --

Mast. Pa. Do not follow.


Succubus. Once so firm and now so hollow?
When was place and season sweeter?
Thy bliss in sight and dare not meet her?
Where Is thy courage youth and vigor?
Loves best pleased, whent's seard with rigor:
Ceare me then with veins most cheerful,
Weomen love no flesh that is fearful;
It Is but a sit, come Drinck't away,
And dance and sing, and kiss and play -- Fa le
La, le la, Fa le la, le la la; Fa le la, fa la le
La le la.

Mast. Paen. Torment me not.


Succu. Fa le la, fa le la, fa la la, loh.


Mast. Pae. Fury.


Succu. Fa le la, fa le la, fa la la loh.


Mast. Pae. Devil! I do conjure thee once again,
By that soule-quaking thunder to depart,
And leave this chamber, freed from thy dambd Art.

Succu. Stamps --

and Exit.
Mast. Pae. It has preuayld -- Oh my sin-shaking Sinews! what should I
think? Iesper, why Iesper.


Iesper. Sir! how now? what has disturbed you sir.


Mast. Pae. A sit, a qualme, -- is mistrisse Hargraue gone?


Iesper. Who sir? mistrisse Hargraue?


Mast. Pae. Is she gone I say?


Iesper. Gone? why she was never here yet.


Mast. Pae. No!


Iesper. Why no sir.


Mast. Pae. Art sure ont.


Iesper. Sure ont? if I be sure I breathe, and am my self?


Mast. Pae. I like it not; -- where kepst thou?


Iesper. In The next room sir.


Mast. Pae. Why she struck by thee man.


Iesper. Youde make one mad sir, that a gentlewoman should steal by me and I
not hear her, sfoote, one may hear the rusling of their bums almost an hour
before we see 'em.


Mast. Pae. I will be satisfide, -- although to hazard,
What though her husband meet me? I am honest;
When men's intenes are wicked, their guilt haunts em,
But when they are just, they are armd, and nothing daunts 'em.

Iesper. What strange humor call you this? he dreams of weomen and both his
eyes broad open!

Exeunt.
Enter at one door Sir Bounteous, at another Gum-water. Sir Boun. Why how now
master Gumwater? what is the news with your have?


Gum. I have a thing to tell your worship --


Sir Boun. Why prithee tell me, speak man.


Gum. Your worship shall pardon me, I have better bringing up then so.


Sir. Boun. How sir?


Gum. It Is a thing made fit for your Ear sir --


Sir. Boun. Oh -- o -- o -- cry you mercy, now I begin to taste you, -- is she
come?


Gum. She Is come sir?


Sir Boun Recouerd, well and sound again?


Gum. That Is to be feared sir.


Sir Boun. Why sir?


Gum. She wears a Linen cloth about her Iawe,


Sir Boun. Ha, ha, haw, -- why that is the fashion you whoreson Gumwater.


Gum. The fashion sir? live I so long time to see that a fashion, which rather
was an Emblem of disprayse, It was suspected much in Mounsiers days.


Sir Boun. I, I, in those days, that was a queasie time, our age is better
hardened now, and put oftener in the fire, we are tried what we are: tut, the Pox
is as natural now, as an Ague in the Spring time, we seldom take physic
without it; here, take this key, you knew what duties belong to it, go, --
give order for a Cullize, let there be a good fire made in the matted chamber, do
you hear sir? --


Gum. I know my office sir.

Exit.
Sir Boun. An old man's venery is very chargeable my masters, there much
cooquery belongs to it.

Exit.
Enter Gumwater with Follywet in Curtizans disguize, and maskt. Gum. Come Lady,
you know where you are now?


Folly. Yes, good master Gumwater.


Gum. This is the old closet you know.


Folly. I remember it well sir.


Gum. There stands a Casket, I would my yearly revenue were but worth the
wealth that's locked int Lady; yet I have fifty pound a year wench.


Folly. Beside your apparel sir?


Gum. Yes faith have I.


Folly. But then you reckon your chain sir.


Gum. No by my troth do I not, neither: faith and you consider me rightly
sweet Lady, you might admit a choice gentleman into your service.


Folly. Oh, pray away sir.


Gum. Pusha come, come, you do but hinder your fortunes in faith, I have the
command of all the house, I can tell you, nothing comes intot'h kitchen, but
comes through my hands.


Folly. Pray do not handle me sir.


Gum. Faith you are too nice Lady: and as for my secrecy you know I have vowed it
often to you.


Folly. Vowed it? no, no, you men are fickle, --


Gum. Fickle? -- sfoote bind me Lady --


Folly. Why I bind you by virtue of this chain to meet me to morrow at the
Flowredeluce yonder, between Nine and Ten.


Gum. And if I do not Lady let me lose it, thy love and my best fortunes?


Folly. Why now i will try you, go too.


Gum. Farewell sweet Lady.

kisses her Exit.
Folly. Welcome sweet cockscombe; by my faith a good induction, I perceive by
his ouerworne phrase, and his action toward the middle region still there has
bin some saucy nibling motion, and no doubt the cunning queen waited but for
her prey, and I think it is better bestowd upon me for his souls health; -- and
his bodies too; i will teach the slave to be so bold yet, as once to offer to
vault into his masters saddle in faith: Now Casket, by your leave, I have seen
your outside often, but that's no proof. Some have fair outsides that are
nothing worth: ha? -- now by my faith a gentlewoman of very good parts,
Diamond, Rubie, Sapphire, Onix cum prolo Silexque; if I do not wonder how the
queen scapte tempting, I Am an Hermophrodite, sure she could lack nothing, but
the Devil to point to it, and I wonder that he should be missing; well, it is
better as it is, this is the fruit of old-grunting-venerie. Grandsire, you may
thank your Drab for this; oh fie, in your crinckling days Grandsire, keep a
Curtizan to hinder your Grandchild, it is against Nature in faith, and I hope you will
be weary ont: Now to my villains that lurk close below: Who keeps a Harlot
tell him this from me, He needs nor these, disease, nor enemy.

Exit.
Enter Sir Bounteous. Sir Boun. Ah sirrah, me think I feel my self well
tosted, bumbasted, rubd and refresht; but in faith I cannot forget to think how
soon sickness has altered her -- to my taste, I gave her a kiss at bottom
o'th stayres, and byth mass me thought her breath had much ado to be sweet,
like a thing compounded me thought of wine, Beer, and Tobacco, I smelt much
Pudding in it. It may be but my fancy, or her physic: For this I know, her
health gave such content, The fault rests in her sickness, or my sent. How
do thou now sweet girl, what well recouerd? Sickness quite gone, ha?
speak -- ha? wench? Frank Gulman, why body of me, what is here? my Casket wide
open, broke open, my Jewels stolen -- why Gumwater --


Gum. Anon anon sir.


Sir Boun. Come hither Gumwater.


Gum. That were small manners sir in faith, i will find a time anon your worship's
busy yet.


Sir Boun. Why Gumwater?


Gum Fo nay then you will make me blush in faith sir. --


Sir Boun. Where Is this Creature?


Gum. What creature is it you'de have sir?


Sir Boun. The worst that ever breathes.


Gum. That's a wild Bore sir.


Sir Boun. That Is a vilde whore sir; -- where did thou leave her Rascal?


Gum. Who? your Recreation sir.


Sir Boun. My Execration sir.


Gum. Where I was wont, in your worships closet.


Sir Boun A pox engrosse her, it appears too true, See you this Casket sir.


Gum. My chain, my chain, my chain, my one and only chain.

Exit.
Sir Boun. Thou runst to much purpose now, Gumwater, ye? Is not a Queen
enough to answer for, but she must join a thief to it, a theeuing Queen, Nay
I have done with her in faith, it is a sign she has been sick a late, for she is a
great deal worse then she was, by my troth I would have paund my life upon it,
did she want anything? was she not supply de?

Nay and liberally, for that's an olds man's sin,
We Will feast our Lechery, though we starve our kin.
Is not my name Sir Bounteous, am I not expressed there?
Ah fie, fie, fie, fie, fie, but I perceive
Tho she have never so complete a friend,
a strumpets love will have a wast in the end,
and distaste the vessel: I can hardly bear this;
But say I should complain, perhaps she has pawnd 'em,
Sfoote the Judges will but laugh at it, and bid her borrowe
more money of em, make the old fellow pay for's lechery,
that's all the mends I get, I have seen the same Cafe tried at
Newbery the last Sizes.
Well, things must slip and sleep, I will dissemble it,
because my credit shall not loose her luster,
But whilst I live, i will neither love nor trust her.
I ha done, I ha done, I ha done with her in faith.
Exit.
Master Paenitent Once-Ill-knocking within; enter a Seruus. Enter Master
Paenitent Seruus. Who'se that knocks?


Mast. Pae A friend.


Seruus. What Is your will sir?


Ma. Pae. Is master Hargraue at home?


Seruus. No, newly gone from it sir.


Mast. Pae. Where Is the gentlewoman his wife?


Seruus. My mistrisse is within sir.


Mast. Pae. When came she in I pray?


Seruus. Who my mistrisse? she was not out these two days to my knowledge.


Mast. Pae. No? trust me I Would thought I Would seen her, I would request a word
with her.


Seruus. I Will tell her sir.


Mast. Pae. I thank you -- It likes me worse and worse. --


Enter mistrisse Hargraue. Wife. Why how now sir? it was desperately aduenturd, I
little looked for you until the morrow.


Mast. Pae. No? why what made you at my chamber then even now?


Wife. I at your chamber?


Mast. Pae. Puh -- dissemble not, come, come, you were there.


Wife. By my life you wrong me sir.


Mast. Pae. What?


Wife. Firsty' are not ignorant what watch keeps over me, And for your chamber,
as I live I knowt not.


Mast. Pae. Burst into sorrow then, and greeses extremes, Whilst I beat on
this flesh.


Wife. What is it disturbs you sir? --


Mast. Pae. Then was the devil in your likeness there.


Wife. Ha?


Mast. Pae. The very Devil assumde thee formally,
That face, that voice, that gesture, that attire,
Even as it sits on thee, not a pleate alterd,
That Beuer band, the color of that Periwig,
The Farthingale abone the Nauill, all;
As if the fashion were his own invention,

Wife. Mercy defend me.


Mast. Pae. To beguile me more.
The cunning Succubus told me that meeting
Was wrought a purpose by much wit and Art,
Wept to me, laid my vows before me, vrgd me,
Gave me the private marks of all our Love,
Wood me in wanton and effeminate rimes,
And sung and danst about me like a Fayry,
And had not worthier cogitations blessed me,
Thy form and his enchantments had possessed me.

Wife. What shall become of me my own thoughts doom me.


Mast. Pae. Be honest; then the Devil will nere assume thee,
He has no pleasure in that shape to abide,
Where these two sisters reign not, lust of pride;
He as much trembles at a constant mind
As looser flesh at him, -- be not dismayde:
Spring souls for joy, his policies are betrayde;
Forgive me mistrisse Hargraue, on whose soul
The guilt hangs double,
My lust and thy enticement: both I challenge,
And therefore of due vengeance it appeard
To none but me to whom both sins inher'd;
What knows the lecher when he clips his whore
Whether it be the Devil his parts adore:
They Are both so like, that in our Natural sense,
I could discern no change nor difference.
No marvel then times should so stretch and turn
None for Religion, all for pleasure burn.
Hot zeal into hot lust is now transformde,
Grace into paynting, charity into clothes,
Faith into false hair, and put off as often,
There Is nothing but our virtue knows a mean,
He that kept open house now keeps a Queen.
He will keep open still, that he commends,
And there he keeps a table for his friends:
And she consumes more then her Sire could hoord,
Being more common then his house or board:
Enter Hargraue. Live honest, and live happy, keep thy vows,
She Is part a Virgin whom but one man knows:
Embrace thy husband, and beside him none,
Having but one heart, give it but to one.

Wife. I vow it on my knees, with tears true bred
No man shall ever wrong my husbands bed.

Mast. Pae. Rise, I Am thy friend for ever.


Harebraine. And I thine
For ever and ever, -- Let me embrace thee sir, whom I will
love, even next unto my soul, and that's my wife,
Two dear Rare Iems this hour presents me with,
A wife that's modest, and a friend that's right,
Idle suspect and fear, now take your flight.

Mast. Pae. A happy inward peace crown both your joys


Harebraine. Thanks above utterance to you, -- now? the news?


Seruus. Sir Bounteous Progress sir,
Inuites you and my mistrisse to a feast,
On Tuesday next; his man attends without --

Harebraine. Return both with our willingness and thanks.
I will entreat you sir, to be my guest.

Mast. Pae. Who I sir.


Harg. Faith you shall.


Mast. Pae. Well, i will break strife.


Harebraine. A friend's so rare, i will sooner part from life.


Enter Follywit, the Curtizan striving from him. Folly. What so coy, so
strickt, come, come.


Cur. Pray change your opinion sir, I am not for that use.


Folly. Will you but hear me?


Cur. I shall hear that I would not.

Exit.
Folly. Sfoote this is strange, I Have seldom seen a wench Stand upon stricter
points, life she will not endure to be courted, does she ere think to prosper?
I Will nere believe that Tree can bring forth fruit, that never bears a
blossom, Courtships a blossom, and often brings forth fruit in forty weeks;
Twere a mad part in me, now to turn over: if ever there were any hope on it,
it is at this instant, shall I be madder now then ever I have been? 'ime in the
way in faith.

Man's never at hie height of madness full,
Until he love and prove a woman's gull;
I do protest in earnest I nere knew
At which end to begin to affect a woman,
Till this bewitching minute, I nere saw
Face worth my object, till mine eye met hers, I should laugh and I were caught
in faith, I Will see her again that's certain, what Ere comes ont, by your favor
Ladies.

Enter the Mother.
Mother. You Are welcome sir.


Folly. Know you the young gentlewoman that went in lateley?


Mo. I have best cause to know her, 'ime her mother sir.


Folly. Oh in good time, I like the gentlewoman well, a pretty contrived beauty,


Mother. I, nature has done her part sir.


Folly. But she has one uncomely quality.


Mother. What Is that sir?


Folly. Sfoote she is afraid of a man.


Mother. A less, impute that to her bashful spirit, she is fearful of her
honor.


Folly. Of her honor? slid 'ime sure I cannot get her maiden head with
breathing upon her, nor can she loose her honor in her tongue.


Mother. True, and I have often told her so, but what would you have of a
foolish virgin sir, a wilful virgin, I tell you sir, I need not have been
in that solitary estate that I am, had she had grace and boldness to have put
her self forward, always timorsome, always backward, ah that same peevish
honor of hers, has undone her and me both good gentleman: the suitors, the
jewels, the ioynters that has been offered her, we had been made women for
ever, but what was her fashion? she could not endure the sight of a man for
sooth, but run and hole her self presently, so choice of her honor, I am
persuaded, when ere she has husband, she will eene be a president for all
married wives, how to direct their actions, and their lives.


Folly. Have you not so much power with her, to command her presence.


Mother. You shall see straight what I can do sir.

Exit.
Folly. Would I might be hanged, if my love do not stretch to her deeper and
deeper, those bashful maiden humors take me prisoner when their comes a
restraint ont upon flesh, we are always most greedy vppont, and that makes
your mercha^ts wife oftentimes pay so dear for a monthfull: give me a woman as
she was made at first, simple of her self, without Sophistication, like this
wench, I cannot abide them when they have tricks, set speeches and Artfull
entertainments, you shall have some so impudently aspected, they will outcry
the forehead of a man, make him blush first, and talk him into silence, and
this is counted manly in a woman, it may hold so, sure womanly it is not, no,
If ere I love, or any thing move me,

T will be a woman's simple modesty.


Enter Mother bringing in striuingly the Curtezan. Curte. Pray let me go, why
mother what do you mean? I beseech you mother? is this your conquest now?
great glory it is to overcome a pore and silly virgin.


Folly. The wonder of our time sits in that browe,
I nere beheld a perfect man till now.

Mo. Thou childish thing, more bashful then thour't wise,
Why do thou turn aside, and drown thine eyes?
Look fearful fool, there is no temptation nere thee,
Art not ashamd that any flesh should fear thee,
Why I durst pawn my life the gentleman means no other but honest and pure
love to thee, how say you sir?


Folly. By my faith not I Lady.


Mo. Hark you there? what think you now forsooth? what greeues your honor now?
Or what lascivious breath intends to rear
Against that maiden Organ your chaste care?
Are you resolved now better of men's hearts?
Their faiths and their affections, with you none,
Or at most, few whose tongues and minds are one.
Repent you now of your opinion past,
Men love as purely as you can be chaste: to her your self sir,
The ways broke before you, you have the easier passage,

Folly. Fear not, come; erect thy happy graces in thy look;
I am no curious wooer, but infaith
I love thee honorably.

Cu. How mean you that sir?


Folly. Sfoot as one loves a woman for a wife,


Mother. Has the gentleman answered you, tro?


Folly. I do confess it truly to you both,
My estate is yet but sickly, but I Have a Grandsire
Will make me Lord of thousands at his death.

Mother. I know your Grandsire well; she knows him better.


Folly. Why then you know no fiction; my state then will be a long days
journey above the wast wench.


Mo. Nay daughter he says true.


Folly. And thou shall often measure it in thy coache,
And with the wheels tract make a gridle for it.

Mo. Ah twilll be a merry iourny.


Folly. What is it a match, if it be clap hands and lips;


Mo. It Is done, there is witness on it.


Folly. Why then mother I salute you.


Mother. Thanks sweet son; -- Son Folliwit, come hither, if I might
counsel thee, we will eene take her while the good moods upon her, send for a
Priest, and clapped up within this hour.


Folly. By my troth agreed mother.


Mo. Nor does her wealth consist all in her flesh,
Tho beauty be enough wealth for a woman,
She brings a Dowry of three hundred pound with her.

Folly. Sfoote that will serve till my Grandsire dies I warrant you, heel drop
away at fall a'th leaf, if ever he reach to all Hollantide i will be hanged.


Mother. O yes son, he is a lusty old gentleman.


Folly. Ah pox, he is given to weomen; he keeps a queen at this present.


Mo. Fie.


Folly. Do not tell my wife ont.


Mother. That were needless in faith.


Folly. He makes a great feast upon the leauenth of this month, tuesday next,
and you shall see Players there, -- I have one trick more to put upon him; my
wife and your self shall go thither before as my guests, and prove his
entertainment, I Will meet you there at night, the jest will be here, that feast
which he makes will, unknown to him serve fitly for our wedding dinner, we shall
be royally furnished, and get some charges by'te.


Mo. An excellent course (in faith) and a thrifty, why son, me thinks you begin
to thrive before you are married.


Folly. We shall thrive one day wench, and clep enough? Between our hopes
there is but a Grandsires puff.

Exit.
Mo. So girl, here was a bird well caught.


Cur. If ever, here: but what fo'rs Grandsire, twill scarce please him well.


Mo. Who couets fruit, nere cares from whence it fell,
Thou'st wedded youth and strength, and wealth will fall:
Last thourt made honest.

Cur. And that's worth 'em all.


Exeunt. Actus Quintus.
Actus Quintus: Vlli. Enter busily Sir Bounteous Progress for the feast. Sir
Boun. Have a care blew-coates; bestir your self Master Gumwater, cast an eye
intoth kitchen, orelooke the knaves a little, every lack has his friend to day,
this cosen and that cosen puts in for a dish of meat, a man knows not till
he make a feast how many varlets he feeds, acquaintances swarm in every
corner, like flies at Bartholmewtide that come up with drouers, sfoot I think
they smell my kitchen seven mile about master Shortrod and his sweet
bedfellow, yare very copiously welcome.


Harebrain. Sir, here is an especial dear friend of ours, we were bold to make
his way to your table.


Sir Boun. Thanks for that boldness ever, good Master Shortrod, is this your
friend sir?


Hareb. Both my wifes friend and mine sir.


Sir Boun. Why then compendeously sir, -- yare welcome.


Mast. Pae. In Octauo I thank you sir.


Sir Boun. Excellently retorted in faith, he is welcome for's wit; I have my sorts
of salutes, and know how to place em Courtly; walk in sweet gentlemen, walk
in, there is a good fire in the Hall, you shall have my sweet company instantly.


Harebraine. I good sir Bounteous


Enter Semus. Sir Boun. You shall indeed gentlemen; how now, what news brings
thee in stumbling now?


Semus. There are certain Players come to town sir, and desire to interlude
before your worship.


Sir Boun. Players? by the mass they are welcome, the'yle grace my
entertainment well, but for certain players there thou lie boy; they were
never more uncertain in their lives, now up and now down, they know not when
to play, where to play, nor what to play, not when to play for fearful fools,
where to play for Puritan fools, nor what to play for critical fools -- go
call em in, -- how fitly the whorsons come vpo'th feast, troth I was even
wishing for em, -- oh welcome, welcome my friends.


Folly. The month of May delights not in her flowers, More then we joy in that
sweet sight of yours.


Sir Boun. Well acted a my credit, I perceive he is your best Actor.


Semus. He has greatest share sir; and may live of himself sir.


Sir Boun. What what? put on your hat sir, pray put on; go too, wealth must be
respected, let those that have least feathers stand bare; and whose men are you
I pray? nay keep on your hat still.


Folly. We serve my Lord Owemuch sir.


S. Boun. My L. Owemuch, by my troth the welcomst men alive give me all your
hands at once, that honorable gentleman? he lay at my house in a robbery once,
and took all quietly, went away cheerfully. I made a very good feast for him;
I never saw a man of honor bear things brauelier away, serve my L. Owemuch?
welcome in faith: some Bastard for my Lords Players, -- where be you boys?


Folly. They come along with the Wagon sir.


Sir Boun. Good, good, and which is your Politician amongst you? now in faith he
that works out Restraints, makes best legs at Court and has a suit made of
purpose, for the companies business, which is he, come* be not afraid of him.


Folly. I am he sir.


Sir Boun. Art thou he? give me thy hand, hark in thine ear, thou row lest
too fast to gather so much moss as thy fellow there, champ upon that, ah, and
what play shall we have my masters?


Folly. A pleasant witty Comedy sir.


Sir Boun. I, I, I, a Comedy in any case, that I and my guests may laugh a
little, what is the name out?


Folly. It Is called the Slip.


Sir Boun. The Slip? By my troth a pretty name, and a glib one: go all and slip
intoot, as fast as you can cover a table for the players. First take heed of a
Lurcher, he cu^s deep, he will eat up all from you. Some Shirry for my Lords
players there. Sir, why this will be a True feast, a right Miter supper, a
play and all, more lights -- I called for light, here come in two are light
enough for a whole house in faith. Dare the thief look me in the face? O impudent
times! go too, dissemble it.


Enter Mother and Curtezan. Moth. Bless you sir Bounteous.


Sir Bount. O welcome, welcome, Thief, Queen, and Bawd, welcome all three.


Moth. Nay heeres but two on's sir.


Sir Boun. A my troth, I took her for a couple, I Would have sworn there had
been two faces there.


Moth* Not all under one hood sir.


Sir Boun* Yes faith would I, to see mine eyes bear double.


Moth. He make it hold sir, my daughter is a couple, She was married yesterday.
Sir Boun. Buz.


Moth. Nay to no buzzard neither, a right Hawk When ere you know him.


Sir Boun. Away, he cannot be but a Rascal* walk in walk in, bold guests,
that come vnfent for -- post, I perceive how my Jewels went now, to grace her
marriage.


Curt. Would you with me sir?


Sir Boun. Ey, how hapt it wench, you put the slip upon me,
Not three nights since? I name it gently to you,
I term it neither Pilfer, Cheat, nor Sharke.

Curt. Y'ear past my reach.


Sir Boun. I Am old and past your reach, very good; but you will not deny this
I trust.


Curt. With a safe conscience, sir.


Sir Boun. Ye? give me thy hand, fare thee well, I have done with her.


Curt. Give me your hand, sir, you nere yet begun with me.

Exit.
Sir Boun. Whew, whew? O audacious age.
She denies me and all, when on her fingers,
I spide the Ruby sit, that does betray her,
And blushes for her fact, well there is a time sor't,
For all is too little now for entertainment.
Feast, mirth, I harmony, and the play to boot.
A Iouiall Season. How now, are you ready?

Enter Folly-wit. Folly. Even upon readiness sir.


Sir Boun. Keep you your hat on.

Takes it off.
Folly. I have a suit to your worship.


Sir Boun. Oh cry you mercy, then you must stand bare.


Folly. We could do all to the life of action sir, both for the credit of your
worships house, and the grace of our Comedy.


Sir Boun* Cuds me, what else sir?


Folly. And for some defects (as the custom is) we would be bold to require
your worships assistance.


Sir Boun. Why with all my heart, what is it you want? speak.


Folly. One's a chain for a Justices hat sir.


Sir Boun. Why here, here, here, here whoreson, will this serve your turn?


Sir Bo. What else lack you?


Folly. We should use a ring with a stone int.


Sir Boun. Nay whoope, I have given too many rings already, talk no more of
rings I pray you, here, here, here, make this Jewel serve for once.


Folly. Oh this will serve sir.


Sir Boun. What have you all now?


Folly. All now sir -- one y time is brought in the middle of the play, and I
would desire your worships watch time.


Sir Boun. My watch, with all my heart, only give time a charge that he be not
fidling with it.


Folly. You shall nere see that sir.


Sir Boun. Well now you are furnishe sir, make haste away.


Folly. Even as fast as i can sir, -- I Will set my fellows going first, they must
have time and leisure, or they are dull else. He stay and speak a prologue, yet
overtake them, I cannot have conscience in faith to go away and speak nere a word
to them, my Gra^dsire has given me three shares here, sure I Will do somewhat for
them.

Exit.
Enter Sir Bounteous and all the Guests. Sir Boun. More lights, more stools,
sit sit, the play begins.


Short. Have you players here Sir Bounteous?


Sir Boun. We have them for you sir, fine nimble Comedians, proper actors most
of them.


Mast. Pae. Whose men I pray you sir?


Sir Boun. Oh* there is their credit sir, they serve an honorable popular
Gentleman, eclipped my Lord Ow-much.


Short. My Lord Ow-much, he was in Ireland lately.


Sir Boun. O you nere knew any of the name but were great travelers,


Short. How is the Comedy called, Sir Bounteous?


Sir Boun. Mary sir, the Slip.


Short. The Slip?


Sir Bou. I, and here the prologue begins to slip in vpon's.


Short. It Is so indeed Sir Boun.


Enter for a Prologue Folly-wit. Prologue. Folly* We sing of wand^ing knights,
what them betyde,
Who nor in one place, nor one thing abide,
They Are here now, and anon no scouts can reach em
Being every man well horst like a bold Beacham,
The Play which we present, no fault shall mere
But one, you will say it is short, we will say it is sweet:
It Is given much to dumb shows, which some praise,
And like the Term, delights much in delays.
So to conclude, and give the name her due,
The play being called the Slip, I vanish too.
Exit.
Sir Boun. Excellently well acted and a nimble conceyt.


Short. The Prologues pretty in faith.


Mast. Pae. And went off well.


Sir Boun. I that's the grace of all, when they go away well, ah-


Cur. A my troth and I were not married, I could find in my heart to fall in
love with that Player now, and send for him to a supper; I know some in the town
that have done as much, and there took such a good conceypt of their parts
into'th two-penny room, that the Actors have bin found ith morning in a less
compass then their Stage, tho twere nere so full of gentlemen.


Sir Boun. But, passion of me, where be these knaves, will they not come away,
me thinks they stay very long.


Mast. Pae. Oh you must bear a little sir, they have many shifts to run into.


Sir Boun. Shifts call you em, they are horrible long things.


Folly. A pox of such fortune the plots betrayed:

Folly-wit returns in a fury. All will come out, yonder they come taken upon
suspicion, and brought back by a Constable, I was accursed to hold society with
such Cockscombs, what is to be done? I shall be shamde for ever, my wife here and
al, ah pox -- by light happily thought upon, the chain* Invention stick to me
this once, and fail me ever hereafter: so, so, --


Sir Boun. Life I say, where be these Players, oh are you come, troth its time,
I was even sending for you.


Short. How moodily he walks, what plays he tro?


Sir Bou. A, Justice upon my credit, I know by the chayn there.


Folly. Unfortunate Justice.


Sir Boun. Ah -- a -- a --


Folly. In thy kin unfortunate.
Here comes thy Nephew now upon suspicion,
Brought by a Constable before thee, his vilde associates with him,
But so disguizde, none knows him but my self,
Twice have I set him free from officers sangs,
And for his sake, his fellows: let him look to it:
My conscience will permit but one wink more.

Sir Boun. Ye shall we take Justice winking.


Folly. For this time I have be thought a means to work thy
freedom, tho hazarding my self; should the Law ceaze him,
Being kin to me, twould blenush much my name, No;
I Would rather lean to danger, then to shame.

Enter Constable with them. Sir Boun: A very expleate Justice.


Con. Thank you good neighbors, let me alone with em now.


Left. Sfoote whose yonder?


Anc. Dare he sit there?

2. Follywit.

3. Captain -- puh --


Folly. How now Constable what news with thee?


Constable* May it please your worship sir, -- here are a company of auspicious
fellows.


Sir Boun. To me; puh -- turn to the Justice you whoreson hobby horse, this is
some new player now, they put all their fools to the Constables part still.


Folly. What Is the matter Constable, what is the matter?


Constable. I have nothing to say to your worship -- they were all riding a
horseback ant please your worship


Sir Boun. Yet again: a pox of all Asles still, they could not ride a foot
unless twere in a bawdy house.


Con. The Oftler told me they were all unstable fellows sir.


Folly. Why sure the fellow's drunk.


Left. We spide that weakness in him long ago sir, your worship must bear
with him, the man's much oreseene, only in respect of his office we obeyed him,
both to appear conformable to law, and clear of all offense: for I protest
sir, he found us but a horse back:


Folly. What he did?


Lift. As I have a soul, that's all, and all he can lay to us.


Constable. In Faith, you were not all riding away then.


Lift. S'foot, being a horseback sir, that must needs follow.


Folly. Why true sir.


Sir Boun. Well said Justice, he helps his kinseman well.


Folly. Why Sir, do you use to bring Gentlemen before us for riding away,
what will you have em stand still when they are up, like Smug vpo'th white horse
yonder? are your wits steept? He make you an example for all dizzy Constables,
how they abuse justice, here bind him tot his chair.


Con. Ha, bind him hoe?


Folly. If you want cords, use garters.


Con. Help, help, Gentlemen.


Lift. As fast as we can sir.


Con. Thieves, thieves.


Folly. A gag will help all this, keep less noise^ you knave.


Con. Oh help, rescue the Constable -- oh, O.


Sir Boun. Ho, ho, ho, ho.


Folly. Why la you who lets you now?
You may ride quietly, I Will see you to,
Take horse my self. I have nothing else to do.
Exit.
Constable. Oh, -- oh -- oh --


Sir Boun. Ha, ha ha, by my troth the maddest piece of Justice gentlemen, that
ever was committed.


Scort R. He be sworn for the madness on it sir.


Sir Boun. I am deceiu'de, if this prove not a merry Comedy and a witty.


Mast. Pae. A less poor Constable, his mouth's open, and nere a wife word.


Sir Boun. Faith he speaks now even as many as he has done, he seems wisest
when he gapes and says nothing, ha ha; -- he turns and tells his tale to me
like an ass, what have I to do with their riding away, they may ride for me,
thou whoreson Cockscombe th^n; nay thou art well enough seru'de in faith,


Mast. Pae. But what follows all this while sir, me thinks some should pass
by before this time, and pity the Constable.


Sir Boun. Byth mass and you say true sir, -- go sirrah, step in, I think
they have forgot themselves, call the knaves away they are in a wood I believe.
--


Constable. I, I, I.


Sir Boun. Hanke, the Constable says I, they are in a wood, -- ha, ha, --


Nub. He thinks long of the time sir Bounteous.


Sir Boun. How now? when come they?


Seru. A less an't please your worship, there is not one of them to be found sir.


Sir Boun. How?


Short. R. What says the fellow?


Seru. Neither horse nor man sir.


Sir Boun. Body of me thou lie.


Seru. Not a hair of either sir.


Short. R. How now sir Bounteous.


Sir Boun. Cheated and defeated, vngag that rascal, I Will hang him for's
fellows, I Will make him bring em out.


Constable. Did not I tell your worship this before, brought em before you for
suspected persons, Hayd em at towns end upon warning given, made signs that
my very iaw bone aches, your worship would not hear me, called me Asle, saving
your worships presence laughed at me.


Sir Boun. Ha?


Short. I begin to taste it.


Sir Bo. Give me leave, give me leave, why art not thou the Constable in the
Comedy?


Constable. Ith comedy? why I am the constable in the common wealth sir.


Sir Bo. I am guld in faith, I am guld, when wast thou chose?


Consta* On thursday last sir.


Sir Bo. A pox go wit'ht, ther't goes.


M. Peni. I seldom heard Jest match it.


Short. Nor I in faith.


Sir Bo. Gentlemen shall I entreat a curtesy?


Short* What is it sir?


Sir Bo. Do not laugh at me seven year hence.


M. Peni. We should betray and laugh at our own folly then, for of my troth
none here but was deceiud int.


Sir Bo. Faith that's some comfort yet, ha, ha, it was feately carried, troth I
commend their wits, before our faces, make us asses while we sit still, and
only laugh at our selves.


M. Peni. Faith they were some counterfeit rogues sir.


Sir Bo. Why they confess so much them selves, they said theyd play the slip,
they should be men of their words, I hope the Justice will have more conscience
in faith, then to carry away a chain of a hundred mark of that fashion.


Short. What sir?


Sir Bo. I by my troth sir, besides a jewel, and a jewels fellow, a good
fair watch that hung about my neck sir.


Short. Sfoote what did you mean sir?


Sir Bo. Me thinks my Lord Owemuches players should not scorn me so in faith
they will come and bring all again I know, push they will in faith, but a jest
certainly.


Enter Follywit in his own shape, and all the rest, Folly. Pray Grandsire give
me your blessing?


Sir Bo. Who? Son Folliwit?


Folly. This shows like kneeling after the play, I praying for my Lord Owemuch
and his good Countess, our honorable Lady and mistress.


Sir Bo. Rise richer by a blessing, thou art welcome.


Folly. Thanks good grandsire, I was bold to bring those gentlemen my friends.


Sir Bo. Their all welcome, salute you that side, and i will welcome this side.
Sir to begin with you.


Short. Master Follywit.


Folly. I am glad it is our fortune so happily to meet sir.


Sir Bo. Nay then you know me not sir.


Folly. Sweet Mistress Harebraine.


Sir Bo. You cannot be too bold sir.


Folly. Our marriage known?


Curte. Not a word yet.


Folly. The better.


Sir Bo. Faith son would you had come sooner with these gentlemen.


Folly. Why Grandsire?


S. Bo. We had a play here.


Folly. A play sir, no.


Sir Bo. Yes faith, a pox a'th Author.


Folly. Bles us all, why were they such vild ones sir?


Sir Bo. I am sure villainous ones sir.


Folly. Some rawe-simple fools.


Sir Bo. Nay bith mass these were enough for the euish knaves.


Folly. What sir?


Sir Bo. Which way came you gentlemen, you could not choose but meet em.


Folly. We met a company with hampers after em.


Sir Bo. Oh those were they, those were they, a pox hamper em.


Folly. Bless us all again.


Sir Bo. They have hamperd me finely sirrah.


Folly. How sir.


Sir Bo. How sir, I lent the rascals properties to furnish out their play, a
chain, a jewel, and a watch, and they watched their time, and rid quite away
with em.


Folly. Are they such creatures.


Sir Boun. Hark, hark gentlemen, by this light the watch rings alarm in
his pocket, there is my watch come again, or the very Cosen German toot, whose is it,
whose is it? by the mass it is he, have thou one son? prithee bestow it upon thy
Grandsire, I now look for mine again in faith, nay come with a good will or not at
all. I Will give thee a better thing a piece, a piece gentlemen.


Short. Great or small,


Sir Boun. At once I have drawn chain, jewel, watch and all.


Mast. Penit. By my faith you have a fortunate hand sir.


Short. Nay all to come at once.


Lift. A vengeance of this soolecy.


Folly. Have I escape the Constable to be brought in by the watch?


Cou. O destiny, have I married a Thief mother?


Mot. Comfort thy self, thou art before hand with him daughter.


Sir Boun. Why son, why gentlemen, how long have you bin my Lord Ow-much his
servants in faith?


Folly. Faith Grandsire, shall I be true to you?


Sir Boun. I think it is time, thoust been a these already.


Folly. I knowing the day of your feast, and the natural inclination you have
to pleasure and pastime, presumde upon your patience for a jest as well to
prolong your days as --


Sir Boun. Whoop, why then you took my chain along with you to prolong my
days did you?


Folly. Not so neither sir and that you may be seriously assured of my herafter
stablenesse of life, I have took another course.


Sir Boun. What?


Folly. Took a wife.


Sir Boun. A wife? sfoot, what is she for a fool would marry thee a madman?
when was the wedding kept in Bedlam?


Folly. She Is both a gentlewoman and a virgin.


Sir Boun. Stop there, stop there, would I might see her.


Folly. You have your wish, she is here.


Sir Boun. Ah, ha, ha, ha, this makes amends for all.


Folly. How now?


Lift. Captain do you hear? is she your wife in earnest?


Folly. How then?


Lift. Nothing but pity you sir.


Sir Boun. Speak son is it true?
Can you gull us, and let a queen gull you.

Folly. Ha.


Cour. What I have bin is past, be that forgiven,
And have a soul true both to thee and heaven.

Folly. Is It come about, tricks are repaid I see.


Sir Bo. The best is sirrah you pledge none but me
And since I drink the top, take her and hark,
I spice the bottom with a thousand mark.

Folly. By my troth, she is as good a cup of Nectar, as amy
Bachelor needs to sip at.
Tut give me gold, it makes amends for vice,
Maids without coin, are candles without spice.

Sir Boun. Come gentlemen toth feast, let not time waste,
We have pleased our ear, now let us please our taste
Who lives by cunning mark it, his fates cast,
When he has guld all, then is himself the last.

FINIS.

