CONCERNING Imposition of hands.

A Sermon at the Lord Archbishop his visitation Metropolitical, held, at Saint
Marie Cray in Kent, by the Bishop of Rochester his Graces Commissioner, the 7
of September last,

Preached by Richard Milborne Doctor of Divinity, and Parson of Seuen-oke in
Kent.

LONDON Printed for Matthew Law, and are to be sold at his shop dwelling at
the sign of the Fox in Paul's Church yard.

To the Reader.
THe Preacher of this sermon unwilling to any and utterly unwitting of this
edition, could not premise either preface praeparitoy to the Reader, or Epistle
dedicatorie to any Personage: yet without his leave it was thought fit for the
press, both in respect of the subject which it principally handles, and also
that the world may take knowledge, that (making no comparison) there is to be
found even in rural parishes both sufficiency for employment, and soundnes for
judgment, and ability for government, Nam et hic quoque Dij sunt, says
Heraclitus. It is their grief indeed, who through neglect lay so obscured, and
their plea none other, but theirs in the gospel, Nemo nos conduxit, but
withal their comfort that it is not the passage of this age alone, for both
Solomon in his time complained of it, that while meaner qualities were
advanced, better deserts went a foot, and their riding experience teaches
them, that brazen stirrops must help men to horseback, and support them in the
saddle.

1. Timoth. 5.22. Lay hands suddenly on no man, neither be partaker of other
men's sins: keep thy self pure.


AS the whole Scripture in general is accounted Speculum Christianisimi, Iam.
1.23. a looking glass for all Christians, wherein they may see what they are
by nature, and what they ought to be by grace: Ierom. ad Occa.
So this Epistle in particular is termed of the Fathers, Speculum cleri, or
Sacerdotii, a true steal glass, wherein every Clergy man ought to look and
learn how to fashion his conversation; so as it may be seemly for himself,
graceful to others, and glorious in the sight of God. The consideration hereof
has led me to the choice of this Text: wherein (me thinks) there is a clear
and full reflection of all such affairs, as do occasion this present
assembly: and those I take to be three, according to the clauses of this verse.
viz. First confirming of faith in some, secondly reforming of faults in others,
and thirdly preserving, such a christian purity in all, as best becomes the
Church of Christ. Now the performance of all these several duties, is
peremtorily imposed upon Timothy the first Bishop of Ephesus, either for that
imposition of hands (as it is here taken) was a particular office of his
eminent order, or that he had absolute authority to censure the sins of
others, or that his integrity was the pattern, by which the behavior of all
believers must be squared, as 1. Tim. 4.12. (...), Yet is not this direction
so streictly restrained unto Timothy, but that in sundry respects, it may and
ought to be extended by a rule of necessary consequence to all his
assistants, for doctrine or discipline within his jurisdiction.

And therefore we are to esteem this as a general charge given to all Church
governors, 1. Tim, 3, 15
for their better instruction, how to behave themselves in the Church of God.

The whole charge contains a double prohibition, and a single iniunction. The
former prohibition tends to prevent the rash imparting of good to others, the
latter restrains a voluntary partaking of evil with others.

To begin with the first, which is of a narrower compass, and principally
respects Timothy and his successors: It is somewhat darkely set down in a
ceremonial phrase of Laying on of hands. The full unfolding whereof requires
a threefold inquiry, first what was the use of imposing hands, Secondly why it
was chosen for such use, Thirdly what abuse hereof is here forbidden. For the
first (...) Imposition of hands, is a ceremony of great antiquity, and as it
were of gray hairs, which has been used of the Church of God to four
special ends, whereupon the schoolmen have given it four diverse names. 1.
Curatoria, 2. Reconciliatoria, 3. Ordinatoria, 4. Confirmatoria, for Curing,
Reconciling, Ordination, and Confirmation.

Luke, 4.40. who laid his hands on every diseased body brought unto him, and
healed them, and it was promised to continue for a time in the Church, Mar.
16.18. They shall lay their hands on sick, and they shall recover; which
afterward was performed in Ananias, who restored fight to Saul by this gesture.
Act. 9.17. and in Paul himself Act. 28.8. who so cured Publius his father, of
a fever and a blodie flixe.

paenitentiaries into the Church, from which they had departed in the heat of
persecution, or been cast out by excommunication, for after the appointed time
of their penance was expired, they were restored to the Communion and
fellwoship of the faithful, by this means, as appears by Ciprian, lib. 3.
epistola 14. and the third council of Carthage. canon. 32. Cuiuscunque
paenitentis publicum and vulgatissimum crimen est, and quod vniuersam Ecclesiam
co^mouerit, ante absida 1. atrium Ecclesiae manus eis imponatur. Alluding, as
it should seem, to the custom of presenting the sacrifice under the law, set
down. Exodus 29.10. for as there the Priests put their hands upon the head of
the beast that was to be sacrificed, before the Tabernacle of the congregation:
so here a true Penitentiarie is by the like ceremony presented as a living,
reasonable holy and acceptable sacrifice unto God, at his restitution unto the
visible society of the Saints.

Iosuah by Moses made Captain of the host of Israel, Number. 27.23. or in the
Church, so were Deacons ordered, Act. 6.6. So were Barnabas and Saul authorized
to the work of their calling among the Gentiles, Act. 13.3. And so was
Timothy consecrated a Bishop by the imposition of Saint Paul's hands. 2. Tim.
1.6. where that (...) in Timothy is of the sou^dest interpreters understood to
be nothing else, but functio episcopalis and donum prophetiae an Episcopal
function with the gift of prophecy, and other graces fit for that great place.

Laying on of hands is called confirmatorie, because it was used with fervent
prayer, for the blessing of children, or for the strengthening and increase of
grace, lately begun in young professors of godliness. Thus did Iocob bless
Ephraim and Manasses, the sons of Joseph, Genesis 48.15. whose practice (being the
primitive pattern of this sacred ordinance recorded in the scripture) is
expressed at large, both for the circumstance of imposing his hands on the
childrens heads, with particular respect of their future estate, as also for
the substance of his prayer conceived for that purpose. God before whom my
fathers, Abraham and Isaac did walk: God which has fed me all my life long
unto this day, and the Angel which has delivered me from all evil, bless
these children. Thus also did our blessed Savior bless those little ones that
were brought unto him. Mat. 19.13. with this request, that he would put his
hands on them and pray. Thus did Peter and John lay their hands upon the
Samaritanes lately baptized by Philip the Evangelist, that they might receive a
greater measure of grace Act. 8.17. And thus Saint Paul confirmed those 12.
Ephesians after baptism, Act. 19.6. And by this rite procured unto them
sensible gifts of the holy Ghost. Now as the Apostles were warranted to the
observation of this custom, either by their masters practice or precept, or by
some special direction of Gods spirit, whereof they were then fully possessed,
according to Christ's promise. Nam nullus homo elficere potest vt externu^
symbolum contimeat certam pro missionem gratiae, Chemnicius,
So they likewise commended it unto the Church, as an holy ordinance of
perpetual continuance, in which respect Imposition of hands is marshalled
among the fundamental points of Catechism, taught in the primitive Church,
Heb. 6.2. So that as repentance from dead works, faith toward God, the
doctrine of baptismes, of the general resurrection and eternal judgment are
still to continue: In like sort is the laying on of hands after baptism, as
there it is placed. And as the Apostles of Christ left it; so it has for many
hundred years continued in the christian world, as a sacred institution of
great reputation, magnified of the ancient Fathers, Tertull. Cyprian. Ambr.
August.
as a singular means to confirm, increase, and perfect spiritual graces,
begun in baptism, whereof one says spiritus sactus, Eusebius emissenus
sermon de penticosse,
qui in font baptismi plenitudinem tribuit ad innocentiam, in confirmatione
augmentum praestat ad gratiam, the holy Ghost, which in the fountain of
Baptism gives that fulness, that suffices for innocence, afterward in
confirmation, exhibiteth an augmentation of further grace, necessary for
performing the duties of a Christian life, and resisting of all sinful
temptations, so that their common conceit of this sacramental complement is,
that as by baptism the faithful are received in familiam Dei: Aquia, in sum
part. 3, q, 72 art. 1,
so by confirmation cooptantur in militiam Dei, or as another speaks, in
baptismo regeneramur ad vitam, post baptismu^ confirmamur ad pugnam, This was
the ancient account of this religious rite, never impeached for many ages,
until of late some ( Over licencious in censuring the judgment of antiquity)
besides sundry trifling cauils, have excepted against it in two maine respects.
First that it is a fruitles ceremony, because no such manifest spiritual
effects of languages and prophecy, are now attained by it, as were in the
days of the Apostles, But to this imputation Saint Augustine answered long
ago. Lib. 3. cap. 16. de baptis cont. Donat.
Neque enim temporalibus and sensibilibus miraculis attestantibus, per manus
impositionem medodatur spiritus sanctus, sicut antea dabatur ad commendationem
rudis fidei, and Ecclesiae primordia dilatanda, sed inuisibiliter and latenter
cordibus diuina charitas inspiratur. And least any should imagine, this to be
but an idle fancy of that Father, it is very plain in scripture, that God
does usually grace the first institution of his ordinances, with extraordinary
tokens of his favor, which afterward cease with out any disparagement to his
ordinance, as at the first erection of that Sanedrin, or great Council of
state among the Jews, Number. 11.25. every one of the seventy Elders prophesied
for a season, to testify that their calling was from heaven; the surceasing of
which gift in them and their successors, was no derogation to their vocation,
being once sufficiently ratified.

Leuit. 9.24
Moreover at the first institution of the Leuiticall Priesthood and Sacrifices,
there came a fire out from the Lord, and consumed upon the Altar, the burnt
offering and the fat; which was not usual afterward, save at the establishing
of Gods worship, when the Temple was dedicated, 2. Chron. 7.1. and at the
restoring of religion upon that general apostasy in Elias his time, 1. King.
8.38. Many sacrifices were well accepted of God, albeit they were not in like
sort consumed with fire from heaven, as these were. So then, as it were strange
divinity, to affirm that the spirit of God does not now descend upon the
waters of ordinary baptism, because it is not seen in the bodily shape of a
Dove, where in it came down upon Christ, Mat. 3.
at his baptising; or to hold that in the common ministry of the word
preached, the spirit is not given, because it falls not visibly upon the
hearers, as it did at saint Peter's first sermon to the Gentiles, Act. 10.44. No
less strange is it, to conclude, that there comes now no increase of saving
grace by confirmation, because imposition of hands, is not now accompanied with
such miraculous effects, as gave it countenance at the beginning. Miracula
cessarunt, ne eorum consuetudine frigesceret genus humanum, Aug, de ver. relig,
ca, 25
quorum nouitate flagrauit.

The second exception taken against this sacred ordinance, is in regard of the
Minister thereof, namely a bishop or chief Pastor of the church, which breeds
a conceit (say they) that it is a more excellent mystery of religion, then
the sacrament of Baptism, which may be had at every inferior Ministers hands.

1 That it is a spice of refurbished Donatisme, to value sacraments or sacred
ordinances by the worth of their Minister. Paul's time was an argument of some
weight especially in cases of this condition) that the chief Governors, 1.
Cor, 11 16
and spiritual Fathers only have ordinarily exercised this duty from the
first institution of it. For when Jacob laid his hands on Joseph's sons, he
was the ancientest Patriarch among the people of God; and while Christ lived,
children were presented to him alone, not to any of his Disciples: And after
his ascension, none but the Apostles confirmed those, whom inferior teachers
had baptized: and when they had finished their course, Act. 8.
the charge of imposing hands is committed, as we see here to Timothy a
Bishop, and consequently to others of like preeminence. And this custom seems
to be grounded upon two special reasons: The first whereof is, that whereas
the wonderful effects of the Patriarchs blessings upon their children and
posterity, has bred an opinion in all the world, that there is somewhat more
in a natural fathers blessing, then in another man's, either for that God more
respects the dignity of his place, or the zeal of his affection toward the
party for whom he prays: even so it is as probable, that a spiritual Fathers
prayer, is most powerful to procure blessings unto the children of the Church,
who in dignity of place comes nearer unto God, and for zealous devotion is
supposed far to exceed any natural father, yea although he be (...) as S.
James, speaks of Elias subject to passions like other men, Iam. 5.17
yet his fervent prayer avails much.

Paul's assertion, (...) to be Presidents and preseruers of unity and peace
among Gods people, for otherwise there would be Tot schismata, quot Sacerdotes:
Acts 20.28 Ierom.
so by the wisdom of the same spirit, some duties (whereupon the peace of the
Church does chiefly depend) are reserved to that order, of which sort are
these. 1. Cor. 12. I am Paul's, I am Apollos, I am Cephas; for avoiding hereof,
none are to undertake any work of the Ministry, but such as are ordained or
licenced by the Ordinary of the place where they live. 1. Cor. 1.14
which moved Saint Paul to thank God, that he had baptized so few of the
Corinthians; for preventing of discord in this respect, the wisdom of Gods
Church has judged it necessary, that all her children after baptism received
in sundry places, and by diverse inferior persons, should in convenient time, be
presented unto the chief Pastor and peseruer of Peace in Gods family, who
might equally ratify their ingrafting into the mystical body of Christ, and
acknowledge them indifferently to be the children of the Church, and pray
respectively for increase of faith, and other saving graces in them all. And
thus much for the use of this ceremony in religious affairs. Next we are to
consider, why it was chosen for such purposes.

Delectus.
Now for the better understanding hereof we are to know, that as in nature the
soul frames a body fit for his employment and operation, so does the spirit
of God make choice of such Elements and Ceremonies, as do most lively
represent the benefits to be conveyed by them, as of water for baptism, and
bread and wine for the Lords Supper. The like is to be thought of this
Ceremony, which has continued immutable in the manifold abrogations and
shipwracks of many other rites, that there is in it such a proportion with the
spiritual blessing derived by it, as is most fit to instruct, and affect the
faithful in all ages, which may be thus conceived.

In the Psalm 77.30. it is said, that God did lead his people like sheep, by
the hand of Moses and Aaron. So that the Magistrates hand, whether it be
civil or ecclesiastical, is accounted the hand of God, whose Vicegerents they
be.

laying on of hands, it plainly test^fieth, whence men receive such favors.
It was the hand of God that gave them this or that grace, that set them in such
and such place. hand, so long as men continue faithful in their callings,
Psalm. 44 3
and thankful for the graces obtained, they may be secured of Gods defense and
assistance, against all difficulties and dangers, that shall encounter them in
their vocation. hand of God is mighty to maintain the good: so is it pote^t
to punish the bad, whether they be strangers from the covenant, as the hand of
God was heavy upon the Philistims of Ashdod, 1. Sam. 5: 6.
for profaning the Arc, or the children of the Church, as the Prophet
complains, Psalm. 32.4. Thy hand is heavy upon me day and night, for abusing
that high place, and great grace, which he had received. The consideration
whereof ought to curb all men's consciences in these cases. And this is the
sense, and as it were the life of this Ceremony.

Eccle. 3.11.
The wise man affirms that God made every thing beautiful in his time. Now
this (...) argues a defect of due time, and consequently a deformity in this
action. Haste in some religious duties does well, and is very come^ndable, as
in repentance. Psalm. 119.60. I made haste, and delaied not to keep thy
commandments. In heating Gods word, Iam. 1.19. Let every man be swift to
hear. In performing vows, Eccle. 5.3. When thou have vowed to God, defer
not to pay. And others of that nature, in which as Cyprian said (when he was
halled to his martyrdom) In rebus sacris nulla est deliberatio. But there be
other sacred acti^ is of a doubtful sequel, wherein ha^^e is very hurtful
and reproueable, as the Apostle testifies, admonishing to be slow to speak,
and slow to anger. Iam. ^.19.
In these and some other of like condition (whereof imposition of hands is one)
we may say with Solomon, Prou. 19, 2. Qui festinat uon pedibus sed manibus
peccat. 1. against him who imposes hands; Non decit.
for it neither beseems his wisdom, being the high steward in Gods house,
Luke 12.42
to give them their allowance out of season, nor the gravity of his calling;
for as he comes near to the highest in place, so ought he to be most
deliberate in his proceedings, like the highest Planets that be of the slowest
and most regular motion; nor the reverent regard he ought to have of this
sacred ordinance, for there is no fruitful laying on of hands, without a
lifting up of hands in solemn prayer, which necessa^^y requires a pause,
Eccle. 5.1. ^it not thy mouth be rash, nor thy heart ^astie to utter a thing
before God.

No^ expedit
imposition of hands is not expedient for such as they are laid on, Virtus
agentis est ex natura recipie^tis, says the Philosopher, and experience
teaches it to be true, in the contrary effects of the Suns heat, in wax and
clay: wherefore if the party on whom hands are laid, be not capable of the
grace, thereby offered, it fares with him as with old bottels, in which new
wine is put: and this was the cause of those preparatiue sanctifications before
the participatio^ of holy things in the time of the law, Exodus 19 10. Mat. 9.17
Ito ad populum and sanctifica eus hodie and cras, says God to Moses before
the giving of the law. Job 1 5
And Job first sanctified his sons, and then sacrificed for them. laying on
of hands is unlawful in regard of all the special ends, for which it was
used. Non licet.


ad curandum, there is a time necessarily required to consider whether the
patient have faith to be healed, Act, 14 9.
as S. Paul did ere he cured the lame man at Lystra.

ad reconciliandum, the trial of true repentance was with all diligence to be
made, which cannot be discerned upon a sudden, least he that was loosed in
earth, should remain bound in heaven. The former ages have been very
cautelous and circumspect in this point, and therefore they measured out the
time of repentance, according to the quality of men's offenses, for to some
they enjoined it, for the space of three years, to others for seven years, to
others for ten years, to other for thirteen years, as appears by the 11.
Canon of the 1. Nicene Council, entitled De his qui sponte lapsi sunt,
qualiter debeant poenitere.

Ad confirmandum, hands must not be laid on, before children be thereunto
prepared, until they be seasoned with the rudiments of Religion, and be
capable of exhortation, not to receive the grace of God in vain, nor turn it
into wantonness, but that they be careful to grow up in true godliness,
according to the grounds thereof, laid and learned in their tender years.

ad Ordinandum, what a long time is necessary to examine the sufficiency of
men for that calling, unto which so few are sufficient (...)? says the
Apostle, 2. Cor. 2.16. who can suddenly tell what skill they have (...), 2 Timothy 2.15
to divide the word of truth aright? or to speak a seasonable word to the
weary soul? or who knows without long trial, what grace they have (...),
Gal. 2.14
to walk with a right foot according to the truth of the Gospel?

Nazianzene in his Apology, compares the course of a Clergy man's life to a
Tumblers walking upon a cord, whose safety consists (...), in an exact
even carriage of his body, for the least swaying to either side is no little
hazard of his life. So if a Clergy man (says he) swerve on either hand
(...), A small slip of his, either in faith or manners, procures no small
danger both to himself and those over whom he is placed. This was it that
moved the faithful in the primitive Church to such prayer and fasting, Act,
13.3,
before they laid hands on any for ordination; and this was it that afterward
caused those Ieiunia 4. temporum, the quarter fasts of ember weeks to be
yearly kept throughout all Christendom, and a decree to be made, that no
Ecclesiastical orders should be Canonical, which were not given on the
Sabbath days next ensuing one of these set and solemn fasts, as if the most
devout prayers of the whole Catholic Church were requisite to beg a competent
blessing for this holy iunction.

Thus we have the contents of the first prohibition, restraining the rash
imparting of good to others. Now let us see the second, which seems to be of
a larger extent, in forbidding the presumptuous partaking of evil Neither be
partaker of other men's sins. Vitia serpunt ad vicinos, and contactu nocent,
(says Seneca) sins are like plague sores, which breath out an infectious
steame to all by standers: so then for the fuller opening of this point we must
first consider, by what passages, vices creep from one to another, and infect.
Secondly, quomodo nocent, how they hurt or endanger others by their infection.
For the first, as the Lawyers make two sorts of accessaries, one before the
fact or offense committed, another after: so the same division will stand well
in Divinity; for sin is like the serpent Amphisbaena, which has one sting
in the head, and another in the tail, and powers our poison at both ends,
and that ore trisulco, with a three forked sting; for before the working of any
wickedness others may be partakers of it three ways, 1. iubendo, 2.
prou^c^ndo. 3. consulendo. Direct precept word or
Saul, 1. Sam. 22.21. because he bad Doeg the Edomite fall upon them: writ,
or of Writ, as the killing of Vriah the Hittite, is laid to king David's
charge, 2. Sam. 12. Tu occidisti Vriam gladio: For that Ioab did set Vriah in
the forlorn hope, by David's direction. Indirect authorizing


(...) ^unda vel balista. Page.
This is the meaning of the wisema^, Prou. 26.8. when he says Applicat lapidem
balistae, qui praebet honorem stolido: He puts a pellet into a stone bow to
be discharged at al adventure, that sets afoole in place of authority; the
inconvenience whereof is fitly described in the first verse of the same
Chapter: As snow in summer, and rain in harvest, so is honor unseemly for a
fool: for a bad Magistrate in the civil state, or a wicked governor in the
church, blastern the blossom and blade (the hope of future increase) and
either rotteth the ripe finit of Gods harvest, or else never lets it come to
ripenes, through the unseasonable moisture of his malignant misdeameanour.

Prouocaando, by provocation, we may draw other men's sins upon our selves,
either by daring of them, Daring.
as Iezabel urged Achab to the oppression of Naboth, 1. Kings 21.7. Tune nunc
exerceres regnum super Israelem? for which offense, as the dogs licked
Naboaths blood, so they devoured her flesh, 2. Kings, 9.36. In like sort the
common prouocations of others to needles oaths, frivolous contentions,
excessive drinking and swilling, etc. fall within the compass of this fault.
Or by alluring intisements of profit, as Prou. 1.14. Cast in thy lot among us,
we will all have one purse. Or of pleasure, Prou. 7 ^8. Come let us take our
fill of love until the morning.

Consulendo. Other men's iniquities are made ours by evil counsel giving. So
Balaam was guilty of the stu^bling block which he counseled Balaack to put
before the children of Israel, Numb. 24.14. And therefore he stumbled upon the
Israelites sword, in his going homeward, Numb. 31.8. Also they slew Balaam the
son of Peor with the sword. And so sinned Achitophel in aduising Absolon to
unnatural lust, which was none of the least occasions, that brought him to an
unnatural end, 2 Samuel 16.21.

These are the passages, by which we partake others offenses, before they be
committed, and as it were, the three forked sting in the head of sin; like
unto which, is that other in the tail: for after a wickedness is wrought,
others may be accessaries unto it in three respects. First, Conniuendo. 2.
Consentiendo. 3. Defendendo. Romans 13.4. for cutting off malefactors, therefore,
qui tolerat aliena peccata, cum tollere possit, sua facit. This was it, which
Saint Paul so sharply censured in the Corinthians, 1. Cor. 5.1.
who neglected the rod of discipline against the incestuous person; and this
was it, that pulled powne an endless judgment on Eli his house, for that as a
Father and chief Judge of Israel, 1. Sam, 3 13
was by duty and conscience bound, he did not judge his graceless sons,
whose covetous and lascivious life brought Religion into extreme contempt and
disgrace, 1. Sam. 2.17. Men abhorred the offering of the Lord.

Consent makes other men's sins ours, whether it be expressed in deed, as Ps.
50.18. When thou see a thief, thou runnest with him, and thou art partaker
with the adulterers. Or in word, as 2. Epist. John 11. verse. He that bids
an Heretic God speed, is partaker of his evil deeds. Or else, if it be by a
suppressed consent, for there is consensus silentii, when sin is not rebuked
by those, that are warranted thereunto by special calling, according to the
commandment given, Leu. 19.17 Thou shall plainly rebuke thy brother, neither
suffer sin to rest in him: the reason hereof is, for that as malum consilium
inducit in peccatum; ita malum silentium relinquit in peccato. Exodus 23, 4,
And it is a great want of charity to deny that favor to a man, which must be
afforded to a bruit beast, yea, to an enemies Ass. But if a man want a warrant
to reprove, Ezech 9.8.
then he must mourn for the offense, and pray for the offender, so happily he
may escape the general scourge when it comes: otherwise, as one says,
Peccatum tuum est, quod tibi non displicet, in whom soever it be.

Defendendo, that is by lessening, excusing, justifying, or countenancing of
them, when men are blinded or besotted with violent passions; to extenuate or
justify their own sinful actions, as Jonas did his anger, Ion. 4, 9.
is usual, but to become a Proctor, or a Patron of other men's offenses
(seeing every one is naturally prone to mislike that evil in others which
they allow in themselves) this beewrayes an affection strangely depraved and
poisoned with wickedness. Solomon casts these two into an equal balance of
abomination before God, Prou. 17.15. to justify the wicked, and to condemn
the just: and therefore this kind of iniquity is branded with a double curse,
one of God, Esaias. 5.20. Woe unto them that speak good of evil; another of
man, Prou. 24.24. He that says to the wicked thou art righteous, him shall
the people curse, and the multitude shall abhor him.

Thus it appears, how other men's vices creep and infect us. Now it is to be
considered, quomodo nocent, what hurt comes by this contagion.

The slight regard and slender conceit that most men have of their own
misdeedes, wherein they be sole and principal agents, does evidently show,
that they make small, or no conscience of being accessaries to the trespasses
wrought by others; but it is the voice of Heaven, Revel. 18.4. That those, that
be partakers in sins, shall be partners in plagues; yea, it is a rule of
equity, approved both by natural and civil reason, that accessorium sequi
congruit naturam princpalis, and that as well in capital punishments, as money
mulcts; agentes and consentientes pari poena plectentur: According to the
practice of all nations in the best governed states. Now as the execution of
this justice in temporal causes does bridle multitudes from much mischief,
which otherwise they would commit: so ought it to curb men much more in cases
of conscience, especially for these two considerations. for in true
construction of Divinity, every sin is a wilful murder of the soul. And
it is attempted against the life of the king of Kings, because the redemption
thereof, cost the son of God his life. lege talionis, the Keeper or Jailer
wilfully suffering any to escape committed to his custody, shall suffer as in
case of the party escaped, be it for debt, felony or treason. This rule
holds also in Gods justice, when a Magistrate suffers a malefactor to pass
unpunished that comes within his compass, as it was threatened to king Achab,
for letting Benchadad go; whom God had delivered into his hand to be put to
death, being an unpeaceable foe to the people of God, 1. King. 20.42. Because
thou have let go out of thine hands, a man whom I appointed to die, thy life
shall go for his life, and thy people for his people, as it fell out in a
strange fashion shortly after, 1. Kings 22.34. The like sentence may all men
justly fear, who neglect the punisment of offenses in Church or common wealth,
especially being tied thereunto by solemn oath, which wrappeth them in a
double danger, one of the sin, which they shall suffer uncensured; another,
of taking Gods name in vain, which can never escape a fearful affliction.
Lib. 1, cap. 9, de ciuita. Dei.
Saint Augustine searching out the special reasons, why in common calamities
of war, famine and plague, good men oftentimes perish with the bad, says
thus; iure vitam istam cum iis amaram sentiunt, quibus peccantibus amari esse
noluerunt; They justly taste the bitterness of Gods wrath, who would not be
bitter in rebuking the public transgressors of his will. So then to conclude
this point, we may very well affirm, with a reverent Father and Martyr of
our own Church, that although it be a strange prayer, yet it is as necessary a
one, as any man can use; O Lord deliver me from my other men's sins.

Timothy and other his Assistantes, or equals; Keep thy self pure.

The keeping of any thing presupposes a former possession of it, and therefore
we are not to doubt, but Timothy had attained to a great measure of Christian
purity before his consecration, it being the principal quality required in a
Bishop, 1. Tim. 3.2. to be unreprovable, (...), that is, free either from
all such imputations, as are punishable with any reproachful penalty among
men, or else not subject to any moral Epilepsies of gross sins, which
bereave a man for the time, of all sense and show of true godliness.

Further, this precept, Keep thy self pure, implies the continual purifying
of his mind: for as a glass be it made never so clean, will daily gather
dust and motes, if it stand in any open place, and therefore needs continual
wiping: so is it with the best man's soul and conscience that ever was, if he
neglect at any time to purge his heart from suggested or homebred corruptions.

Now the purity, which is here enjoined, I take to be twofolde; the first
local, as he was a Bishop, according to that speech of the Psalmist; Psalm.
93, 5
Holiness becomes thy house for ever. The second personal, as he was a
Christian professor of piety, and conformable to that commandment, Esaias.
52.11. Be ye clean that bear the vessels of the Lord; and both be most
requisite in every spiritual Father. Cor. 11.2. The Apostle foresaw how hard
a matter it would be for Timothy, or any other in his place, to withstand
the importunate motions and violent persuasions either for sparing the
disobedient from censures deserved, or for preferring the insufficient to
places undeserved; therefore he does to precisely inioin him to keep his
integrity in these affairs, upon which the purity of the whole Church
depends.

Timothy must preserve his personal purity in regard of religion, whose
chief commendation is to be (...), Iam. 27. pure and undefiled; and such ought
all professors thereof show themselves to be; yet neither in the sense of
nouatian heretics, August. de haere 38 s. cap
who fancied to them selves an impossible purity, needing no repentance; nor
of common hipocrites, which is that generation, that is pure in their own
conceit, though they be not washed from their filthiness, Prou. 30.12. But
the purity here meant, is soundnes of faith and sincerity of manners, which
as it was pictured in the high Priests pectorall, Exodus 28. by Vrim and
Thummim; so is it chiefly required in Timothy, and all such as occupy his
place in the Church of God. First, in regard of his excellent order. Dignitas
ordinis.
The Philosopher affirms, that all qualities be perfectest in their first
subjects; so is heat in fire, coldness in water etc. A Bishop is primum
subiectum religionis; therefore his holiness and vprightnes must exceed all
other men's.

Vide Vatabl: not. ad hunc locum
The weightes and measures of the Sanctuary, to wit, the sicle, talent and
cubite; were of a double bigness to those for common use, Exodus 30.13. even so
should the virtues in the Ministers of the Sanctuary, be of a suitable size.
And this seems to be implied in the sacrifices for their sins, appointed
Leuit. 4. for there the priests offering is commanded to be as much as all the
congregations, a young bullock without blemish for the priest alone, ver. 3.
and no more for all the people, ver. 14. Timothy for the countenance and
credit of Religion; Countenance.
for all pure things are more precious then mingled, as is evident in metals
and liquors, pure gold and silver, pure wine and oil, are in higher
estimation, then when they be mingled with baser substance. Scalig.
Now purum est quod nihil habet alieni. All strangenes in Divinity is of a
badde note and name, as strange Gods, strange fire, and strange flesh, and so
are all strange opinions and conditions in the Professors of it, as Eccles.
10. 1. a little folly be it mental or moral, makes his reputation
unsavory, that is in estimation for wisdom and glory.

Thus the base and corrupt carriage of any man procures disgrace to himself,
and contempt of his place and profession, whatsoever it be in the state civil
or ecclesiastical.

Timothy and his equals must keep themselves pure above other men, for the
continuance of Religion, because the purest creatures are least subject to
corruption, as is manifest in nature: the celestial bodies, stars and planetes
continue in their original course, being free from all elementarie mixture.
Corruption in every thing is a forerunner of destruction: so on the contrary,
the sincerity of Religion is a singular means to preserve it.

To keep Piety in original purity, two duties are necessary; and
transmitting the Suns beams: For certainly, Mat. 5.8.
as the pure hearted shall see God: so there is reason, why they should see
furthest into the secrets of God, according to that, Psalm 25.14. The secret
of the Lord is revealed to them that fear him: and his covenant to give them
understanding. Secondly, in regard that innocence of life, breeds liberty of
speech, it falls out often that a corrupt teacher is many times tongue tied,
but as the Grecians say, (...), an honest heart cannot be daunted in
delivering any truth.

be troubled or pudley, yet if the fountain be clear, it will soon clear
them again; and lest any should be discouraged with singleness in this kind
of sincerity, which the Apostle requires so strictly in this Prelate; Keep
thy self pure, (whatsoever become of others) as though (...), one were none to
do any good. Yes, says a Greek Father, in many cases, (...), one man truly
zealous suffices to reform a whole multitude, not only of the Laity, but
even of the Clergy, Zozomon lib. 2, cap. 14. histo, tripart,
as Paphnutius alone swayed the whole Council of Nice, in the controversy
concerning Ministers marriage.

Thus according to the charge laid upon me, I have laid open the Apostles
charge unto you. God for his great mercies sake grant us all conscience and
grace, so to discharge it, as may be most for his glory and our own good,
through Jesus Christ, to whom with the Father and the holy Ghost, be ascribed
all honor, power, and praise, now and evermore, Amen.

FINIS.
LONDON Printed by I. VV for Matthew Law, and are to besolde at his shop at
the sign of the Fox in Paul's Churchyearde, 1607:


