ABRAHAM SVTE FOR SODOM. A Sermon Preached at Paul's Cr^sse the 25 of AUGUST.
1611. By ROBERT MILLES, Preacher of Gedny fenne, and Sutton St. Edmonds in
Holland Lincolneshire

LONDON Printed by William Hall for Matthew Law, and are to be sold at his Shop
in Paul's Church yard at the sign of the Fox. 1612.

TO THE RIGHT Worshipful Sir WILLIAM WELBY, Knight of the Honorable order of
the BATH, felicity in this life, and salvation in the next.
AS the Apostle to the elect Lady and her children whom he loved in the truth:
2. Ioh. 1.
So in singleness of the same spirit (Right Worshipful) I consecrate unto
you this spiritual gift and plain discourse, whi h as an adiutor (rather then
an auditor) in my proceedings, you viua voce lately heard delivered. Cantare in
foro was a Roman absurdity; and when a man speaks wisely but once in his
life, he must presently be in Print, dixit insipies. Such spiteful spirits
are consuming Rachels at Leahs pregnancie: Genesis 30.
Egyptian flies in Jsraels fatness: Exodus 1.12.
muttering Saul's at David's success: 1. Sam 18.8.
reproachful Amaziahs at Amos industry: Amos 7.12.
and such as, Cum sua non edunt, carpunt aliena, let them either commend or
amend, approve or publish meum or suum. The Orator spoke better then these men
do, Omnis nostra cura debet in hoc versari semper, sipossumus, vt boni aliquid
efficiamus: sin minus, vt certe nihil mali. All the good J can in this regard
is, by Scire meum, vt sciat alter, and for sinister censure J answer with the
Prophet: Esaias 49.4.
My judgment is with the Lord, and my work with my God. It is fathered of
Saint Hierome, Secaesum flagellis ad tribunal Dei, that he was whipped before
Gods seat for his incessant reading of humane Authors: and that he was
accused there, quod Ciceronianus, non Christianus foret, and therefore he made
a vow utterly to abjure them.

And in this age of vanity, wherein profane pamphlets are as dainty
novelties, as Apes and Peacockes were in Salomons days from Cilicia: 1. Kin.
10.22
what can better beseem Christians, then to read sacred History, and to
meditate in that, which tends to edification, Romans 15.2.
in eodem prato lepurem, lacertum, florem reperias: and if perhaps cinicall
Alexander by cumical curiosity out of Sampsons dead Lion extract poison, Judge.
14.14.
yet a well affected Apollos will find food and sweetness. Since importunity
has prevailed with me among others spectare, and spectari, I commend this
labor (Right Worshipful) to your acceptance and protection, which if you
shall please to patronise now floting like a poor Hollander in an Arc of
reed in this Sea of glass, Apoc. 15.2.
and injuriously handled by profane Philistines; Tu patronus eris, quando
maiora canemus.

Your Worships in all integrity duly devoted, Robert Milles.

Abraham's suit for Sodom.
GENESIS 18.32. I will not destroy it for tennes sake.


RIght Honorable, right Worshipful, and blessed beloved: Ignis non melius
quam igne, and amor amore accenditur: As the flame is continued by fire, so
friendship by reciprocal amity, says Ambrose. And this was seen and observed
in GOD himself, 1 Ioh. 4.10.
the first friend and lover of mankind, toward his servant Abraham the father
of the faithful. For as God did manifest his professed love by manifold
promises to him, and daily conference with him; So Abraham again repaied God (
lege talionis as it were) for requital, obedience, sacrifice, praise, and
prayers, so that both their affections mutually were revived and preserved by
such friendly means, even as fire is maintained by fuel. Among sundry signs
of Gods favor toward Abraham, God was never more familiar with him then in
this Dialogue, and neighbourly parlce, betwixt them two in behalf of the
Sodomites. For when God purposed in his secret and sacred wisdom to destroy
the City of Sodom, (whose sins cried for vengeance from heaven) he first
after the manner of men paused on the matter, and was loath to do it, before
he had taken the advice of a friend, or before he made Abraham (whom the
Apostle terms Gods friend) privy to his purpose: Iam. 2.23.
Shall I hide from Abraham that which I do? Verse. 17.


Hereupon Abraham assured of Gods love, began to argue, and to reason the case
with God, and often craving pardon for his boldness, he told the Lord, that
it stood not with his justice and credit (who is high Lord chief Justice of
the whole world) to destroy the righteous with the wicked: and there fore
desired him if there could be found fifty good men in the City, to spare it
for their sake: which God of his mercy, wherewith he always tempereth his
judgments, favorably granted, and easily yielded unto. Abraham, straightway
goes with a privy search through the City of Sodom, and at last after much
labor lost, he returned to God with a non est inuentus: and then after the
manner of courtly Petitioners, Qui timide rogat, negare docet: He that asks
faintly teaches how to be denied flatly, as Seneca speaks. Abraham
proceeded further, and still (under correction for his presumption) he
obtained from God a writ ad melius inquirendum, and then he falls from
fifty to five and forty, then to forty, so to thirty, nay, to twenty: and at
last remembering, that God would not the death of a sinner, Ezekiel. 18.23.
he urges him with his promise, and now the sixth time he prays the Lord to
spare Sodom, if it shall afford but ten righteous persons. And in these
words God sets down his rest, and final resolution, and bids Abraham take
it for an answer, and so content himself: I will not destroy it for tens
sake. So that my discourse at this time for your fairing (right Honorable,
right Worshipful, and blessed Brethren) may be called Abraham's suit for
Sodom, wherein for method and memory sake I will tie my self to three
parties, which shall stand in stead of three parts.

First, in God his slownesse, in executing judgment, and punishing sin.

Secondly, Abraham, the sympathy, and compassion of the godly for their
brethren.

Thirdly, Sodom, wherein ten righteous persons could not be found, the small
number of the faithful, and fewnes of good men in the Church.

Among all the names of God in the whole and holy Scripture, Drut. 32.6. Esaias
63.16. Malac. 1.6. Matthew. 23.9. 2. Cor. 6.18. 1. Pet. 1.17.
there is one more familiar, comfortable, and delightsome to his children, then
all therest, and that is the name of Father, which he most commonly practices
in nature. For as affectionate fathers, and indulgent parents in correcting
their children give an admonition before hand, (rebuke goes before the rod, and
a warning before the whipping:) So it pleases our heavenly Father in executing
due punishment for our sins, to give us a caveat before his capias, and
always to warn us, before he wound us. Genesis 6.
Thus did he deal fatherly with the first world, to whom he granted above an
hundred years, space for repentance, whilst that Noah, (whom the Apostle
calls (...) the herald or Preacher of righteousness) was composing the Arc
for security of the worlds remainder. 2. Pet. 2.5.
Thus dealt God with populous Niniuie, and would not suffer sleepy-headed Jonas
to rest, Iona. 3.1.
until he had proclaimed his embassage in the streets. Thus did the Messiah
Christ show himself a father to Jerusalem, Mat. 23.37.
who would often have gathered them together, and saved them, but they would
nor. Yea, thus long did God forbear the City of Sodom, and daily forewarned
them by rightcous Lot, 2. Pet. 2.7.
whose soul was continually grieved at their uncleanness, and duly presaged
their overthrow. It is memorable of Bias a Judge of Greece, that he never gave
sentence of death upon any on the bench but he sorrowed, and shed tears. And
such a tender-harted Judge is God himself in punishing sinners, as that
nothing grieueth him more, then to condemn a sinner, or to cast away a man by
death: which the Prophet considering, said, God punishes not with his heart.
Lanent. 3.32
And the Wiseman lays forth Gods unwillingness to correct, as plainly,
Sapient. 12.12.
Thou chastnest them measurably that go wrong, and warnest them by putting
them in rememberance of the thing wherein they have offended, that leaving
wickedness, they may believe in thee. The sweetest lesson, 2. Sam. 23.1.
that ever David. Isreal's sweet Singer either felt or sung at any time
voluntary on his Harp and tenstringed instrument, Psalm. 16.15.103.8.
it was of Gods mercy, all his descant was of Gods patience, and the foot and
burden of all his Psalms is nothig else but of Gods longsuffering,

Yea, further to show you how loath and unwilling God is in punishing sin,
the Prophet resembles the Lord to an Archer, Psalm. 7.12.
which bends his bow, vnlocketh his quiver, and rubbeth beth his shafts
before he shoot. And to a man of war, which stretches himself, flourishes
with his weapons, trauazeth his ground, and whetteth his sword before he
strike. Theodosius the Emperor was so merciful, as that he always gave
ten days liberty to the enemy for deliberation, before he would show any
extremity. And as kind a Captain was he, who in besieging any City first used
to display a white ensign, next day a black banner, and at last (if they
would not yield) red colors in sign of blood, fire and sword. O Blessed
beloved, and Christian Citizens, far more pitiful is the Lord of hoasts
toward sinners, long suffering, great in mercy, and repenting for evil, Icel.
2.13.
as the Prophet speaks: and He is the God of Peace, and not of dissension;
1. Cor. 14.33.
and such is his lenity in judgment, as he is loath to pluck his hand out of
his bosom, first offering composition, and a peaceable truce to the sinful,
and always sounds a friendly parlee of mercy, before his fearful alarm of
judgment; and hence the Apostle truly calls him, The God of patience and
consolation. Romans 15.5. Cant. 1.3.
Hugo upon these words, Trahe me, Draw me, says, That God draws men unto
himself, Aut terrendo minis, caedendo flagellis, aut blandiendo beneficijs, i
Either by terrifying us by menaces, ^ourging us by judgments, or wooing us by
benefits; so that GOD neglects no opportunity, and uses all means possible
to reclaim sinners, and to winsoules. And herewith he sometimes vpbraided I
srael: (...) 11.4.
I led them with cords of a man, Zach. 11.7.
even with bonds of love. The Prophet Zachary in laying forth Gods delay in
execution of his judgments, secondeth him, whether the Prophet brings in God
in the person, habit and shape of a Shepherd, which leads his flock with
two several staves, of sundry names, and diverse properties: Nognam, and
Chobelim, iucunditatem, and dissipantes, and as our translation has it, Bewty,
and Bonds. So that Gods chief staff is Bewty, enamuled with rich jewels of
mercy, and set with precious pearls of blessings, Number. 17.8.
fairer then Aarons rod flourishing with blossoms, and laden with ripe
almonds. And this sheepehooke God first holds up in sign of mercy, and
favor, and pity toward sinners, and heereunto alludeth the Kingly Prophet
and Prophetical Shepherd, Psalm. 80.1.
Pascens I sraelausculta, ducens tanquam pecus Joseph. Thou which feedest
Israel hear, leading Joseph as a Sheep. Now when this staff of Beauty bears
no sway, nor that we will not be ruled by this goulden Scepter of Beauty, then
God breaks it in his fury, as Moses did the Tables of stone, Exed. 32.19.
and betaketh him to his other staff Bonds; and this is grievous, It is a
fearful thing to fall into the hands of the Lord. Heb. 10.31.
And all this is nothing else but to manifest, how God delights in mercy, and
how loath he is at all times to execute judgment. Thus God here dealt with
Sodom, who would not in any wise destroy it, if among many thousands he
could have had but his tithe, ten righteous persons, I will not destroy it for
tens sake.

But what shall I stand to display the patience, longanimitie, and suffering
forbearance of the Lord toward the first age, Niniuy, Jerusalem, or Sodom?
Have these places tasted, and seen the goodness of the Lord above all others?
Shall we with the hartburning Israelites murmr and complain: Exed. 17.7.
Number Dominus in medio, an non? Have not we tasted, nay, have not we surfeited
of the Lords mercy, and long suffering? O blessed beloved and Christian
Citizens, even this our Israel wherein we live, this Canaan, which we inhabit,
God in his patience and compassion has had as vigilant an eye over it, Deuteronomy.
11.12.
as ever he had over the holy land from the beginning of the year unto the end
thereof, and in respect of that favorable aspect, wherewith God has always,
beheld, and vpheld this Land, and this people. I may say of it, as Syluius does
of Rhodes, Semper in sole sita est Rhodos, The glorious sunshine of Gods
love, the comfortable beams of his blessings, and the forcea^^e reflection of
his mercies have continually been transplendent through this region, and have
ouershadowed this land, as the Cherubins the Mercy-seate, as with this Island,
Exed. 25.28. Psalm. 147.2^
He has not dealt so with every nation.

Nay, even this new Jerusalem, this (...) of the whole world, Lament. 1.1.
great among Nations, and Princess among Provinces, no place more then this
City, has in all treasons, conspiracies, insurrections, plagues, and other
judgments been so much forborne, gently forewarned and measurably punished,
that when the Lord God had as just a quarrel against it, as ever he had
against Sodom, yet he never destroyed it, so that this people may sing with
the Prophet this encomiasticke of Gods mercy, It is the Land mercy, Iere. 3.22.
that we are not consumed, because his compassions fail not. And all this
while that I speak of nothing else but the mercy of God, this is a doctrine I
know, That makes up the mouth of a worldling: O this sweet loue-song of Gods
long suffering, is a fit of music fitting a careless carnalist, and to a
dissolute liver it is like Mercuries still pipe, which played Argus his hundred
eyes asleep at once. Yea, the whole world now adays dreams on mercy, loves
to hear of mercy, hops of mercy, presumes on mercy, wholly groundeth on
mercy, and hereby abuse all Gods mercy, and because God is so patient, and
merciful, they presume thereof, and make too hold with God, tempting and
provoking him by continual breach of his law, according to that of the
Wiseman, Because ill works are not presently punished, men fearelesse commit
mischief. Thus Adam not seeing Euah presently to die, stood a long time in a
quandarie, and inter precem mulieris and praeceptum creatoris, as Bernard
speaks, betwixt his Wifes demand, and his Creators command, at last
thinking GODS word wind, Iere. 17.15.
resolved, and did eat. Thus Israel gibed and iested at Gods threatenings by
his Prophets: a ich debar Ichoua, iabo na, where is the word of the Lord? let
it come now. Thus the Psalmist infers the profane abuses of Gods mercy:
Quomodo sciuit Deus? Psalm. 73.11.
Est scientia in excelso? i. How came God to the knowledge of this? Is there
knowledge in him above? And this contempt of Gods judgments thundered out of
his word, and this abuse of Gods forbearance in not destroying stroying, it was
that cry which pierced the heavens from Sodom.

Now then to dash the mirth of Mercy-men (which are the merry-men of the world)
and to tell them what they are to hold unto, for their presumption of mercy,
abuse of Gods patience, and delay of repentance: who, though they live never so
dissolutely, as though there were neither Heaven nor Hell, God, nor Diucll, yet
if they may have but one hour to repent, they ask no more, they are safe, and
assure themselves of salvation, if on their deathbeds they have but strength
and liberty to breath out a poor peccaui, and cry GOD mercy: Vox Diaboli
non hominis, The voice of a Devil, not of a man. Of all spiritual graces, and
gifts of God, Repentance is the greatest, which he daily offers, and when
he sees both his mercy and repentance to be skorned, and grow in contempt,
that we still live in sin, never leave sin, until we be ready to die in
sin: what mercy can such a wretch expect at his death, who has abused Gods
mercy all his life? And what kind of repentance call ye that, when, if he
might have lived any longer, would never have dreamed of repentance? Exed.
16.28.
It falls out with Gods mercy, as with Manna, which God commanded to be
gathered early in the morning, and reserved too long became corrupt. So the
true and heavenly Manna, the Mercy of God, it is sweetest, when it is gathered
and apprehended in the golden morning of a man's youth, but when it is sought in
the evening, Eccle. 12.1.
in a man's dotage, and at a man's death, when a man is weakest, and not able to
employ either hand, eye, ear, or tongue, Psalm. 135.17.
like an Idol. O this is a dangerous gathering of Manna, and an unseasonable
seeking of mercy, and to such Augustine gives a cold comfort: Maledictus, qui
offert florem iuuentutis suae Diabolo, and faecem senectutis Deo reseruat. i.
Cursed is he, who offers the prime of his youth to the Devil, and reserueth
the corrupt dregs of his old age for God. Gregory upon the watches mentioned
inthe Gospel, says, Matthew. 24.25.
that there be three watches in a man's whole life, wherein it behooves him to
be careful, and as a wakefull and wary watchman to keep his watch. The
first is Childhood, the second Youth, and the last Old age: So that he which
remissely passes over his Childhood, let him be more careful of his watch in
Youth: and if he pass his Youth over his head dissolutely, let him in any case
look to his last watch of Old age. Nam quos diu, vt conuertantur, tolerat;
non conuersos durius damnat. i. Those whom God suffers long in hope of their
conversion, he condemns more grievously not being converted: And therefore
the holy Ghost gives a short day, Hodie si vocem eius audieritis, Psalm. 95.7.
To day if ye will hear his voice.

This is the cause, why many and most rich men make bad and uncomfortable ends,
and die so disquietly, Luke 2.29. Genesis 49.33.
that with old Simeon, they depart not in peace, and with Jacob, they pluck
not their feet up into the bed, for that, as Bion speaeth, a dissolute life
makes a desperate end. And surely for further verity herein, I could yet
never observe in my private experience, (which has been somewhat more then
ordinary in these cases) that a worldly man, the man of earth, Psalm. 10.20.
a morrow repenter, or a mercymocker, who in his life has chiefly followed
the world, and the pleasures and proffits thereof, ever made good end, or
desired to be dissolved, but like Tantalus in hell ( Auido fugaces captantem
ore cibos) tortured, not to taste of meat, ready to fall in his mouth. Such
at their ends, when they purposed to repent, had no mind, no joy, nor power
to repent, and when they presumed of mercy, they perished in misery: which the
Wiseman in his observance complains of, and lamenteth: O Mors, quam amara est
tui memoria homini pacifice viuenti in his, Eccle. 41.1.
quae sunt cius? O Death, how bitter is thy sting to a man that lives securely
in his substance? So then for this point of delaying or rather decaying
repentance, and abuse of mercy, I am of Bernards mind, that among infinite
delaiers hardly one is saved and of Hieromes opinion, that such livers seldom
or never make a good end. Let then such as live desperately without fear of
judgment, and yet die presumptuous of mercy, be packing with this mittimus,
made by the prudent Counselor, Say not, Eccle. 9.6.
the mercy of the Lord is great, he shall put away the multitude of my sins:
For mercy and wrath make haste with him, and his indignation shall rest upon
sinners: and as it follows in the seventh verse, Put not off from day to day,
for suddenly shall his wrath break forth, and when thou art without care and
secure, thou shall be destroyed.

Let Sodomes destruction then become our instruction, and let it be a fearful
Foelix quem faciunt, unto all those that fear not judgments threatened, abuse
mercy offered, and defer repentance till the last cast.

Julius Caesar, the founder of your Milo, and tower of Shechem (Christian
Citizens) gave the Snaile in his Ensign, with this Motto, Lent festinandum,
Softly and fafely: And Gods poesy, although it be Tardus ad iram, Slow to
wrath: and that with Qu. Fabius the Roman, Cunctando restituit rem, although
God be long in coming, and flow in doing, and march fair and easy in
punishing sin, yet at last, when God can forbear no longer, nor endure our
indignities, nor brook our contempt of his honorable mercies, 2. Reg. 9.20.
then like Iehu the soon of Nimshi, he marches furiously, and at once he
pays us home for all: Icre. 10.24.
and against this let every good man pray, O Lord correct me, but with
judgment, not in thine anger, least thou bring me to nothing.

Furthermore, it rests yet, (and that appertinentlie) to consider, why God
especially singled out Sodom, and chiefly bent his force against it, and
wherein Sodom sinned above all other places besides, in so much that Sodom is
famous, or rather infamous in the course of Scripture. First, the people are
said to be Cattaim ladonai meod, valde, peccatores coram domino: Genesis 13.13.
and again, Deuteronomy. 32.32.
The Jews vine is like the vine of Sodom and Gomorrah: and again, They
declare their sins, as Sodom: Esaias 39.
and again, The iniquity of my daughter Jerusalem is greater then Sodom:
Lamen. 3.6.
and again, Contemners of the Gospel shall have easier judgment, then
Sodom: Matthew. 10.15.
and again, Sodom and the Cities there about were wicked, 2. Pet. 2.6. Jude 7.
and made examples for ungodly livers. Let us then take a glaunce, if not a
suruay of Sodoms sins, and see what they were, for which God destroyed them.

The Spirit of God makes no long beaderowle of them, but abstracteth them, and
like sour Coach-horses which draw the Chariot of iniquity, yoaketh them thus.
Ezekiel 16.49.
Pride, Fullness of bread, I dlenesse, Contempt of the poor, this was the
iniquity of thy Sister Sodom. What, were here all Sodoms sins, and all that
God could object against it, or charge Sodom withal? Under this number of
four, their manifold sins are inferred, as For three transgressious of
Damascus, and for four, For three transgressions of Tyrus, Amos 1.3.
and for four: For three transgressions of Moab, and for four, whereby a
multitude is meant. And as Leah called her first child Gad Bagad, a company
comes, Genesis 30.11.
presaging her increase of issue, so these four mother sins and capital
vices of Sodom had many fellows, many followers and partners, like traitorous
Absalon and Achitophel, 2. Sam. 15.12.
which by their flattery drew many men's hearts after them.

The first sin of Sodom like to Pharaohs desperate forehorse, Exed. 14.23.
which set first foot in the Sea, it is Pride, which always loves
superiority and prioritie. If there were seauenty times seven deadly sins,
Pride would be first. Pride affects principality. Pride will have the
highest room, and Pride is here placed first, as Vriah by David in the
forefront of the battle. 2. Sam. 11.15.
And worthily has Pride pre-eminence, for it was the first sin which usurped
heaven, intruded it self into Paradise, and has now like conquering Alexander
overrun the whole world. Superbia in caelo nata est, sed velut immemor, qua
via cecidit, illac nunquam redire potuit, Pride, says Hugo, was bread in
heaven, but could never yet call to mind which way it fell, nor find the way
thither again. And the Wiseman says more, Eccle. 10.3.
(...) i. Pride is the beginning of sin. Since the fall of our great beldame
Euah, Pride is held the woman's sin. and posted off to her, (...), as to the
weakest vessel. If therefore women would see themselves and their pride in a
glass, 1. Pet. 3.7.
I refer them to the Prophets Cristall, (it may be called the woman's
Chapter) where God threatens, and cries out against all the newfangled toies,
Esaias 3.16.
infinite fashions, and disguised garments of that sex, whereby their Pride,
as the Tavern by the Yuy-bush is descried for Sodomiticall. And for proud men
otherwise in heart, which will be aut Caesares, aut nulli, commanders, or no
body; like to Saul, higher then any of the people by head and shoulders: 1.
Sam. 9.2.
the Apostle stops their mouths strangely, God resists the proud. 1 ames
4.6.
To this purpose it is memorable how the ancient Romans portraitured Pride
like the Devil, with a triple Crown on his head. On the first was engraven
Transcendo: on the second Non obedio: on the third, Perturbo. A proud man first
aims at a high place of authority, then he makes laws and keeps none, but
lives as he lists, and at last perturbat omnia Dauus, there is no quiet, no
peace, where he dwells, nothing but trouble and discontent. They that never saw
a Pope, behold this picture, and you shall hardly know whether he be a
Sodomite or a Devil. In a word, I will say no more of a proud man, then
Innocentius will swear for me, Omnis fere vitiosus diligit sibi similem,
solus superbus odit superbum: Whereas among other sins the drunkard loves his
fellow, the thief his partner, and the adulterer his consort: yet one proud
man (if two be neighbors) never brooketh the other, but like Eteocles and
Polynices smoke, their breath is odious pro and contra. So that this proud
sin, and sin of pride, it brought with it envy, malice, hatred, wrath,
discord, suits, quarrels, and breach of brotherly love.

The second sin of Sodom, is Fullness of Bread, a sin, whereof God gave
Israel warning aforehand, that when they should come into the promised land of
Canaan; Deuteronomy. 6.11
and there had glutted themselves, and were full, then beware, lest thou forget
thy Lord, etc.

This was Baltazars sin who at his riotous banquet, in excess of wine,
amongst his Princes, wives and concubines; forgot the Lord so far, Dan. 5.6.
as Gods finger chalked his folly on the walls. In this fullness sinned
churlish Nabal, 1. Sam. 25.11.
in forgetfulness of poor David and his tired followers. And in this fulness
perished the giuttonous belly-god in the Gospel, who would rather choke with
the crust, Luke 16.21.
then hungerbitten Lazarus should have the crummes.

O I fear me, Blessed Brethren that we have in these days many Sodomites,
boon companions, and sensual good fellows, quite drowned and overwhelmed in
this sin of fullness of bread and drink. These are those beasts, 1. Cor.
15.32.
with whom the Apostle encountered at Ephesus after the manner of men, whose
chief school point was this, Let us eat and drink, for to morrow we shall
die. Against these gormandizing Epicures God grieueth, and denounces a woe,
that eat the lambs of the flock, and calves out of the stall, drink wine in
bowls, and anoint themselves very costly, But no man says he is sorry for
the affliction of Joseph. Amos 6.6.


And let me the unworthy messenger of God aggrauate my Lord and masters
complaint and continue with homely Amos a just exclamation against luxurious
drinkers, and insatiable spunges, who see, that a great and small cup can be
but filled to the brimme: and yet they themselves enforce their own vessels,
and carcases to ouerflow, and with the superfluity of their fullness drown
themselves not only in drink, but in a flood of wickedness. O what an horrible
shame is it in Israel, when through simple snuffes of strong drink, and pure
wine, many flowers of chambers, and pauements in houses are more moist and
slippery, then the channels in your streets? Is not this also a sin of Sodom,
when the surfeiting reuersion of fat trenchers shall be cast under the table
to dogs? Christ who for our sakes often was an hungered never did it, utterly
misliked it, and expressly forbad it, and Dives his dogs chose rather to
feed on Lazarus his soars, Matthew. 7.6. Luke: 16.21.
then of such sinful diet. Right honorable, right worshipful, and Religious
Citizens, Acts 26.2.
I will confess with the Apostle, and think my self happy, that I speak
this day before them, who have knowledge of Customs and laws, and therefore I
beseech you to hear me patiently. Among all political laws of the Persians,
(which till this day are famous for their certainty, there never was any more
profitable either to Gods Church, or the common wealth, then that of King
Ahashuerosh, observed specially in his own Court for order of drinking, Ester.
1.8.
when none might compel another to drink, but at every man's pleasure under
pain of displeasure. And not unworthy is Plato reported for divine, who forgot
not this among his constitutions, (...), no man to drink to another. But we
like swilling and swelling Sodomites, drink till our bellies break in the
midst, as Judas did: Act. 1.18.
drink with Bohemoth, that can draw up Jordan into his mouth, Job. 40.18.
takes it with his eyes, and thrusts his nose through, whatsoever meets
him, and ten times worse then beasts that drink for necessity, we by only
drinking, metamorphize our selves into beasts. As excellently, as truly said
he, Nos coelum terraemiseemus, We mingle heaven and earth together, that is,
the herbs and fruits of the earth, all variety of fish in the waters, all the
fowls of the air, all the strong wines, odours, and spicerie procreate by the
fire we congest, and heap into a dunghill belly, and all little enough, and
thus we sin with our Sister Sodom in fullness. Here then (to shut up this
point) the divine meditation of abstinent Augustine, Illud ante omnia rogo, and
per tremendum diem iudicij vos adiuro, etc. Brethren, says he, I entreat you
one thing above all the rest, and thereunto I adjure you by the dreadful day
of judgment, that as often as ye feast one another, ye would banish one
custom out of your banquets, even as the Devils poison, namely, when as men
meet, they use to drink either voluntary, or urged, grandi menura, sine
mensura, i. in great measure, without measure: because this use has hitherto
remained by tradition from Pagans and the Heathen, and therefore beseems not
a servant of Jesus Christ. And this sin of fullness it engendered riot,
drunkenness, whoredom, and forgetfulness both of God and man.

Next, follows Idleness, scelere ante alios immanior omnes, as bad as the
worst, and worse then the rest. That Idleness is no small sin, observe from
the Creation, and ye shall find, that the Creator placed not Adam in Eden as an
idle suruayer, to stand gazing, or to walk up and down till he was weary but
ad colendum, and custodiendum, to till it, Gene. 2.15.
and keep it. And so far did God disallow idleness in the commonwealth of
Israel, as he by an edict and prohibition forbad idle begging. In the
Primitive Church, Deuteronomy. 15.2.
this was a great matter, which Paul sound fault withal among his charge, We
hear, that there are which walk among you inordinately, 2. These. 3.12.
and work not at all: Them, that are such, we command and exhort you by the
Lord Jesus Christ, that they work with quietness, and eat their own bread:
and to cut off such rotten members, he sets down a penalty, He which will
not work let him not eat. Blessed beloved, I cannot justly complain of this
Jerusalem, nor make your City Sister to Sodom, (God forbid) for idleness, so
might I incur Scandalum magnatum, and for my Vae vobis purchase a Coram
nobis, this place being an open enemy to idleness, and far from Sodom in
this sin especially. Why? here are the aduenturous Merchants of Tire and
Sidon, which bring gould from Ophir, and Merchandise from Arabia. Here is the
curious hand of Hiram daily busied in expert work of brass. Here ye may hear
melodious Iubal praising God early and late on the musical instrument. Here
you may see the industrious labor of Tubal Cain in his iron work. Here is
painful Iabal, father of such as dwell in Tents, and buy Cattle. Here
dwells laborious Joseph, skillful in Architecture. Here live Solomon's
provident and prudent Ants, which in Summer make provision for winter. And
here be Pistrina socordiae, houses of correction for idleness, and as strict
suruaying Magistrates for punishment of idleness, as ever was hard-hearted
Pharaoh contrary to the Israelites.

Notwithstanding Longae sunt Regum manus, that Magistrates have long arms, and
many years: yet latet anguis in herba, when Moses was on the Mount, Exodus
32.19.
Israel played the wanton: and even in this City (though not in the heart) yet
in close back wings and obscure angles thereof, there be many nests full of
idle birds, which the careful Magistrate seldom finds out. Ignauum fucos
pecus a praesepibus arcent, There is in the regiment of Bees an intrusiue and
troublesome Droane, which eats up the sweet honey, for which the poor
painful creatures have labored for long before. And in the curious Bee-hiue
of this commonwealth there are four sort of idle Bees, much like the four
Sects of Philosophers, which sometimes flourished in Athens, the Academicke,
Epicure, Peripatetique, and the Stoike. The first were greatly given to study
and contemplation, and these are your idle gamesters, who are all night in
speculation, devising new tricks, and inuenting strange conueyance by Cards and
Dice, which next day they put in practice. God says, Gent. 3.19.
In the sweat of thy face thou shall eat thy bread, and these idle Bees live
by the sweat of other men's brows, only by playing. 1. Sam. 17.49.
David with one smooth stone out of his bag discomfited the whole host of the
Philistines: And this idle Gamester with a blind bone out o^ his iugling box,
with the actiuity of a Polupragmaticall finger, can in one hour undo many a
hopeful heir: I had almost said, many an honest Tradesman. Of the second
Philosopher the Epicure, I spoke before in fullness of bread, and therefore I
leave him to his pleasure, which is his Summum bonum. The third is the
Peripateticke, who used to dispute walking, and in this order are
Cunnycatchers, who like the Devil are always compassing the Earth, and still
going up and down seeking whom they may dououre. Job. 2.2. 1. Pet. 5.8.
These cunning Philosophers walk from Inn to Inn, from East to West, from
Towrehill to Tyburne, (and there I leave them) and with Satan can turn
themselves into an Angel of light, full of good words, and with Judas embrace
a man with a courtly boonecongee, and at parting cut a man's throat, and
empouerish many a plain dealing country guest with cousenage in copartnership.

The fourth idle Be, or sect of Philosophers is the Stoike, who used to keep
their acts and disputations standing. And these I call your mimicall
Comaedians, and apish actors, who with Thraso thunder out sesquipedalia verba,
a heap of inkehorne terms to the tenor of a poor Colliar, and with a
ridiculous Tu quoque move many a fool to laugh at their own follies. And
further the licentious Poet and Player together are grown to such impudency,
as with shameless Shemei, they teach Nobility, Knighthood, grave Matrons and
civil citizens, and like Country dogs snatch at every passengers heels.
Yea, Plays are grown now adays into such high request (Horresco referens) as
that some profane persons affirm, they can learn as much both for example
and edifying at a Play, as at a Sermon. O tempora, O mores, O times, O manners,
tremble thou Earth, blush ye Heavens, and speak O head, if ever any Sodomite
uttered such blasphemy within thy gates. Did the devil ever speak thus
impiously in this conflict with the Archangell? Jude 9.
To compare a Iasciuious Stage to this sacred Pulpet and oracle of truth? To
compare a silken counterfeit to a Prophet, to Gods Angel, to his Minister, to
the distributer of Gods heavenly mysteries? And to compare the idle and
scurrile invention of an illiterate bricklayer, to the holy, pure, and
powersull word of God, which is the food of our souls to eternal salvation?
Lord, forgive them, they know not what they say.

So that this Sodomitic all fin of idleness is hatched under her wings another
brood neglect of Gods word, disobedience to authority, theft, and the very
nurserie of sin. Now I come to the last and least sin of Sodom, Contempt
of the poor, this comes behind all the rest, ashamed to show it self, as
the these hanging back from the bar. The infinite number of poor souls in
this our iron age, their hard lodging at our barred gates, their continual
clamors in our stopped ears, and their slender relief from our shut hands,
are able to make me to fill this Sanctuary and holy place with nothing else but
Echoes of Charity: Charity seems to be so hard among us, as though it were
never heard of amongst us. Exodus 17.6.
But as Moses with one stroke of his rod enforced water from the flintie rock,
so my desire is, that the hearts and souls of the uncharitable, moved at this
instant with my light touch of Charity, may hereafter extend and power forth
fresh springs and streams of liberality. Of all good works which we do in
this life (and they are not many) there is none more acceptable to the Almighty
then works of mercy, whereunto Christ comfortably to encourage us in our
charitable course, promises out of his free mercy an immortal Kingdom for
reward. Matthew. 25.3.
Come ye blessed. And if rich men would ask me the high way to heaven, I
would answer them as the son of God did the young man, Math. 19.21.
Go and sell, and give to the poor.

In speaking of Contempt of the poor, this sin of Sodom, I beseech you in a
short exhortation only (right Honorable, right Worshipful, and beloved in
the Lord) not to hear me, but the word of God, for I dare say with Job, I am
full of matter, Job 32.18.
and the spirit within me compels me. Demetrius King of Macedon, in the
fiege of Rhodes, especially tendered and preserved the picture of Protogenes.
And to rich men, such as contemn the poor, I present for their fayring an
image or picture to carry with them into the Country, not to be hung in their
Hals, or painted in their Parlors only, Iere. 17.1.
but to be imprinted with a pen of iron, or the point of a diamond in the table
of their hearts: and this picture it is the emblem or portraiture of Charity,
to put them in remembrance of the poor, Matthew. 13.9.
and Let him that has an ear to hear, hear.

A naked Child, with a merry Countenance, covered in a clowd, with a bloody
heart in the right hand, giving honey to a Be without wings. Now as Sampson said
to his guests, Unless ye had ploughed with my heifer ye could not have found
out my riddle: So this mystery must have an interpreter, and the meaning is
this. Charity is figured a Child, because the charitable ought to be humble,
and courteous as a Child. Mat. 18.2.
Chariy is pictured naked, for that Charity seeks not her own. 1. Cor. 13.5.
Charity looks merrily with a pleasant countenance. 2. Cor. 9.7.
God loves a cheerful giver. Charity is covered with a clowd: Alms, Matthew.
6.2.
and works of mercy ought to be done privately without vainglory, or
ostentation. Charity holds a bloody heart in the right hand. A good man is
merciful and lends, Psalm. 112.5.
and his heart always goes and agrees with his hand. Charity offers honey
to a Be without wings, that is, relieueth and helps such poor, as for want
of wings, for want of some limme, or member of their body, impotencie and
infirmity cannot labor for honey, cannot work for their living. And such a
practitioner in Charity was that good and just man Job, as himself (to the
shame of our worldlings) confesses: Job. 29.12.
I delivered the poor that cried, and fatherless, and him that had none to
help him: O I fear me, that we have many that behold pictures, look one
Caesar's picture their coin: but few that look on, or like this picture of
Charity, Prou. 22.9.
or have a good eye, that be charitable to the poor. Leuit. 16.
The Leuiticall Priest entered once a year into the holiest place: and the
Romans noted such as once yearly entered not into their Templum Misericordiae.
Thus deal our rich Cormorants in exercising Charity, they once by the year
perhaps respect the poor; nay, once in their lives; like the Swine, which is
profitable at his death, or with the Mole, which sees only at her end, they
at their deaths think they purchase heaven by a halfepenie dole, or a
Christmas dinner. O blessed Brethren, and Christian Countrymen, to woo you
from contempt of the poor, (for there is no comparison betwixt this charitable
City, and the hard Country.) Remember this one thing, Manas pauperis est
gazophylacium Christi, and quicquid pauper accipit, Christus acceptat. i. The
poor man's hand is Christ's treasury, and look, what the poor receives,
Christ accepts. Is the poor man's hand Christ's treasury? Is the poor man's
box his Exchequer? O I fear me, Christ has a poor stock, an empty Chest
full of thanks in the one end, and stuffed with God help thee in the other,
but not a penny to supply necessity. James 2.16.


Besides, and beyond all this to stir ye up to Charity, and to draw you
from Sodoms sin, contempt of the poor: I remember, that the Apostle
specifieth three christian virtues or sisters, 1. Cor. 13.13.
which all at once came down from heaven to get themselves husbands on earth
among the sons of GOD Faith, Gene. 6.2.
Hope and Charity. The elder sister Faith, sought her husband a great while,
and found none to her liking, until at last she met and marched with Abraham,
by whom she had many children, and since that time he is called the Father of
the faithful. Romans 4.16.
Hope the younger sister went somewhat longer vnsped, many cast an eye on Hope,
and fed their fancies by Hope, but none could away to live only in Hope. At
last comes David, and he without fear, distrust, or delay, contracteth
himself, and marries with Hope: and she proved so sweet a spouse, and
comfortable a wife unto him, and so faithful a helper in all his troubles,
persecutions and miseries, as he only received comfort by her: yet my soul
keep thou silence unto God, for my hope is in him. Psalm 62.5.65.5.146.5.
And again, O thou the hope of all the ends of the earth: And again, Blessed
is he, whose hope is in the Lord his God. And again, Psalm. 142.5.
I hope to see the Lord in the Land of the living. But for the youngest sister
Charity, who was fairest but poorest, who had the best proportion and worst
portion, she wandreth still up and down and finds none that either mind
her, or she has a mind unto. This poor soul, Charity is yet on her
pilgrimage, she trauelleth from land to land, from nation to nation, from
house to house, from door to door, and no man entertaineth Charity, haec
quia pauper erat. If Charity come to the great and Noblemans gate, a grimme
Porter presently terrifieth her. If she come to the Merchants door, either a
minsing maid, or a surly Seruingman rebukes her. If she chance to rap at the
Porch of the Country Gentleman's manner-house, the Dawes from the Chimney top
make her answer, Solitudo ante ostium, there is cold cheer, when nobody
keeps house. If Charity knock at the Clergies door, O she troubles Sir
John at his Book, with her Pater noster, and so the proverb is verified, No
penny, No Pater noster. If she stumble on the Lawyers threshold, he gives
her something to cover her nakedness, and sends her away with a statute lace
for a largis. If she try farther the Physicians hospitality, he perhaps
tendering her health least she should surfeit, purges Charity with a bitter
pill of contempt, or a spoonefull of diet drink with God help. And thus in
all estates, and conditions of people, Charity is contemned and excluded:
Charity is rejected and abhorred; and no marvel then, if Charity be cold,
when neither winter nor summer, in court or country, city or village, any man
vouchsafes Charity one nights lodging. O Lord, lay not this sin, Contempt of
the poor to the charge of rich men. And this sin it brought covetousness,
oppression, usury, injustice, extortion, fraud and injury, and where the poor
is not relieved, God is little believed.

What shall we say then? Shall we accuse Sodom, and excuse our selves? Were
the Citizens of Sodom greater sinners then we? I must answer with the
Messiah, I say nay, except ye repent, Luke 13.3.
ye shall all perish. For let us weigh their sins and ours in an equal
balance, and iumpe both of them together upon the weights, and try which is
heauiest; and cast them up all in a gross sum, and see, which are most in
number. What shall I speak of oaths, blasphemies, and swearing in Faires, and
Shops in bargaining; yea, among Children in the streets who can sooner and
more readily swear by the name of God, then they can tell their own names.
Are not we as bad as Sodom?

What shall I speak of profaning the Lords Saboath, by idle walking in fields,
and drinking in obscure corners, whilst the food of our souls is in
distributing? Is not this a sin of Sodom? For lust and secret whoredom,
Prou. 30.20.
like Salomons harlot wiping our lips, as though all were well: Gene. 38.18.
We with Judah difcry our selves and filthiness by our signet, cloak, and
staff: nay, the horrible and namelesse sin of Sodom has poisoned some. And
are we inferior to Sodom? For falsehood, deceit, flattery, dissimulation,
cruelty, and usury, we can boldly say with Job. Our iniquity is sealed up
in bags: Job. 14.17.
and this age goes far beyond Sodom. Name me any sin, Genesis 31.19.
yea Idolatry, and you shall find many Labans with his wooden gods, close
Papists at their beads, and many illiterate Levites playing the morrow Mass
Priests in Micah his house for ten sickels of silver by the year, Iud. 17.10.
a suite of apparel, meat and drink: such are iugling Jesuits, and secret
Seminaries, inueigling simple souls for their penny-father Pope: O this is at
least a sin of Sodom, and a damnable sin of the whore of Babylon, Psalm.
38.4.
the Church of Rome. So that if David said of his sins, That they were gone
over his head, and a burden too heavy for him to bear, 40.12.
and more in number then the hairs of his head: O what shall we say of our
sins? even with Job. 9.20. If I should justify my self, mine own mouth
shall condemn me. And if God for four sins thus handled Sodom by fire, O
how shall he deal with Villages and Country Towns (sic magnis componere
parua solebam) wherein many more sins, and more grievous sins daily reign,
then ever did in Sodom. And surely, that God is thus forbearing, we must
acknowledge his love and long suffering, and say with thankful Jacob, We are
not worthy of the least of all thy mercies. Gene. 32.10.
And now I come at last, though long, to the second part and party of my
division, namely in Abraham, the sympathy and feeling compassion of the
faithful for their afflicted and sinful brethren.

It is said of Hippocrates twins, that they always looked each on the
other, and in action imitated one another, which affection ought to be in all
Christians one toward another, Romans 12.13.
(...) to laugh with them that laugh, and weep with them that weep.

And surely, this affection and tender heart has always been in Gods
servants (as we may observe) for Gods people, their sins, and punishment.
Thus zealous Moises, when he saw the people dancing about the golden calfe,
brake forth for grief in sorrow of his soul for their sin: Exodus 32.31.
Either spare them O Lord, or race me out of the book which thou have
written. Thus Samuel mourned for Saul's reiection. 1. Sam. 15 35.
Thus the Prophet foreseeing in the spirit Gods judgments hanging over the
people for sin, Esaias 24.16.
cried out Razi li, razi li, O li: bogedim bagedu, vbeged, bogedim, bagedu,
that is, My secret, my secret, woe is me: The transgressors have offended, the
transgressors have grievously offended. Thus was Jeremy grieved in his spirit
for Israel: Iere. 8.21.
I am sore vexed for the hurt of the daughter of my people. And again, Iere.
9.1.
O that mine head were full of waters, and mine eyes a fountain of tears, to
weep day and night for the slain. This compassion was in his brother Prophet,
Ezekiel 9.8.
Ah Lord God, will thou destroy all the residue of Israel, in pouring out thy
wrath upon Jerusalem? And as pitifully complains Daniel, Dan. 9.16.
O Lord, according to all thy righteousness, I beseech thee, let thine anger,
and thy wrath be turned away. Am. 7.2.
Neither was the Thecoite Heards-man behind them in commiseration, Spare I
beseech thee, for who shall raise up Jacob, for he is small? and so the Lord
repented for this. Ion. 4.5.
Thus also Jonah solitary in his cell and booth without the Citie-gate mourned
for Niniuie. Mark 3.5.
Yea, this lively feeling of our brethrens infirmities was in Christ hiselfe,
who sorrowed for the hard heart of the Synagogue, and prophesying the
desolation of Jerusalem, Luke 19.41.
he wept over it. And in his Masters steps walked the Apostle Paul, who wished
himself to be separated from Christ, Romans 9.3.
for his brethren his kinsemen according to the flesh. And lastly in this
place, righteous Lot, 2. Pet. 2.8.
who sat at the gate of Sodom, was inwardly vexed for the Citizens sins, and
punishments menaced by God for the same.

Take this then (blessed Brethren) for a manifest sign of the child of God,
and a true mark of a good man, to be sorry for his brethren, and to grieve at
their punishment for sin. But where shall we single out amongst the sons
of Adam a compassionate Abraham? an humble suitor for Sodom? or a man
sorrowing for sin in another? Hagar indeed mourned for Ismael, Jacob for
Joseph: Joseph for Benjamin, the Israelitish virgins for Iephthaes daughter,
Marie for Lazarus, and we for the deceasse and departure of our friends, and
hinc illae lachrymae. But if we see our brother, neighbor, or familiar, to be
a vicious liver, wedded to wickedness, and sunk in sin, we salve it up with
Humanum est, so that now adays sin in young men is nothing but a trick of
youth, and in old men an infirmity of age, and here is all the reckoning we
make of sin. Cato the grave Senator of Rome was observed never to laugh, but
once, and that was, when he espied out of his casement an Ass eating thistles,
that the senseless beast should take pleasure in pricks, which should have
been spurs unto him to take pains. So we, seeing our brethren eating up
sin as bread, and drinking iniquity as water, rather laugh with Democritus
at their follies, then with Heraclytus lament their faults. Shall I speak
plainly? Those, that make a Maygame of sin in others, laughing at a drunkard
in the channel, applauding a swaggerer in his blasphemies, and as David says,
Psalm. 50.28.
running with a thief, and taking part with the adulterer: they are brethren
to cursed Cham, Genesis 9.22.
who seeing his aged father in a drunken fit, blabbed it to his brethren in
derision and contempt, when rather he should have concealed it and sorrowed for
it.

The Elephant, as natural History testifies, if he meet a wounded person
wandering in the wilderness, safely conducteth him therein: and the like is
fathered on the Dolphine, who, when Arion was cast into the Sea, speedily
conveyed him to the shore. I could wish, that after the president of our father
Abraham in this place toward sinful Sodom, we were either Elephants or
Dolphins in spark of good nature one to another, when rather we seem Lions
and Dogs: to pity one another, to sorrow for another sin, and to pray one
for another. The neighbourly Samaritane, Luke 10.34.
to the poor passenger may teach us this lesson: his wounds resemble afflicted
finners: his descension from Jerusalem to Jericho, his fallng from the Church
of God, his spoiling by thieves, sinners overthrow by Satan: The Priest and
Leuite, which went aloof, Sunt mali Ecclesiae ministri, says Lyra, Curantes
tantum de leuatione pecuniae, non sanatione culpae. Like our Romish Priests,
which ease a man of his money, but never heal his sin, or help his soul. Now
the good stranger, Infundens oleum misericordiae and vinum iustitiae: It is
any good man moved in pity and piety at a sinners wretched estate, who
powers in the oil of commiseration, and wine of rightcousnes, and uses all
means possible to reclaim him, and cure his infirmities.

To this purpose tends the counsel of the Apostle: Bear yea one another
burden. And as Christ stretched forth his hand, Gal. 6.2.
and caught fast hold on Peter, when he was ready through weakness to sinkeon
the sea: So ought we toward our sinful brethren, overwhelmed with the waves
of wickedness, to have compassion on them, to lament their desperate
condition: and by our good advise and counsel, and comfort out of the word of
God to save their souls: and this is to show our selves with Abraham here, to
be the children of Abraham.

Saint Augustine greatly approves this work, and thus persuades unto it:
Piaest illa tristitia alienis vitijs ingemiscere, non adhaerere: contristari,
non implicari: dolor contrahi, non attraht. This is godly sorrow indeed to
pity men's sins, not to be polluted by them: to sorrow for them, not to sink
in them: to be withdrawn in dolor, not drawn unto them by delight. And when
I consider, how backward we are in this point of Christianity, to have a
patheticall feeling and lively touch of a sinful man's misery, and an inward
grief for judgments due for their sins: Then I remember Saint Bernard his
complaint in his time for such defect of dnetie among men: Cadit asinus, and
est qui subleuet: per it anima, and non est, qui curet, First the Ass falls
into the ditch, and he finds a helper by and by: but the sinful soul
perishes, and no man takes care. And herein we are like the base minded
Gergesenes, who had more care over their swine, Matthew. 8.25.
then their souls. O blessed brethren and Christian Citizens, this one sin
want of compassion and brotherly affection has possessed head and tail,
better and worse, and all conditions and callings. Esa. 9.15.
O where shall we find a lamenter of sin, a reprehender of sin, a mourner
for judgment, executed for sin, a reclaimer of sinners, or with Abraham a
pitiful petitioner to God for sinful Sodom? The indulgent parent ioyeth in
his lewd children, and applaudeth his prodigal Absalon, as old Eli did his
sons, and thinks all well without any contradiction or correction of their
sins, The pampering mother glories in her proud darling, delights in her
pride, and maintains her in all lasciuiousnes, as Herodias did her dancing
tripped Solomon, and finds no fault in sinning. Look further among all
sorts of men, and see how remiss every man is in this point, to reclaim his
neighbor, to reprehend his brother, or to rebuke a sinful person. Yea, this
sin of flattering men in sin is now adays gone so far, and has infected
so many: as it is sometimes found in the house of Leui, and in the Schools of
the Prophets, and against this God cries out in high discontent: Ierem. 8.11.
From the Prophet to the Priest every man deals falsely, for they have healed
the hurt of the daughter of my people with sweet words, saying Shalom, Shalom,
Veen Shalom, Peace, peace, and there is no peace. And surely (blessed beloved)
as it is odious in the sight of God: so it is hateful to every good man, when
a mealy mouth Minister shall superficially and nicely glaunce over sin, as
men walk onice. When Ministers (who ought to be Boanerges the sons of
thunder, as Christ called James and John,) Mark 3.17.
when they, I say, shall either fear with smoothing Zidkijah to speak the
truth, 1. King. 22.24.
or forbear with white-liuered Amaziah to rip up the bowell of sin: Am. 7.13.
I make no better of such temporizers, then of forsworn and unconscionable
Country Churchwardens, who praesent Omnia been, when all the parish is out of
square. Job utterly misliked this, Job 32.22.
I may not give titles to man, least my maker take me away suddenly. And the
Apostle was afraid thereof, If I should please men, Galy. 10.
I were not the servant of Christ.

Let us all then (Blessed brethren) imitate the life of our faithful father
Abraham: let us with him sorrow and grieve for our sinful brethren: let us
with Abraham pray for Sodom: and let us after the example of Abraham entreat
God, and labor him by continual prayers to be merciful to sinners. And
herein we shall perform that excellent work commended by the son of
wisdom Solomon: Pro. 11.30.
Lekak Nepashoth Kakam, i. He is wise, that wins Souls. To fold up this
part in a narrow plaite, and to wind up in a word: there is no such manifest
sign of true love, and godly friendship among men, as one to find fault with
another for sin, and to rebuke a friend for his inordinate life. And
therefore howsoever Scipio distasted Bias in opinion, Ama, tanquam osurus: I
take his meaning thus, that we ought so to love a friend, as therewithal we
should hate his bad conditions, and embrace the man, but hate his manners: and
this is the private duty of one toward another, and a Christian office, which
ought to be found in the heritage of Jacob. And among many moral praecepts
and civil Laws established by God himself in the common wealth of Israel,
this was enacted for one: Leuit. 19.17.
Thou shall not hate thy brother in thine heart, but thou shall plainly rebuke
thy neighbor, and suffer not sin upon him. And the Apostle has a worthy
saying. Acknowledge your faults one to another, James 5.16.
and pray one for another, that ye may be healed: For the prayer of the
righteous avails much, if it be fervent. Solomon shuts it up thus: Pro.
27.5.
Open rebuke is better then secret love. But more plain is the holy Ghost by
the Prophet: Shubu, Vehashebu, Return, Eze. 13.30.
and cause others to return: and that man, which returns himself to the
Lord, and with him makes others to return: he mav sit down and say with
old Jacob joyful of Joseph's life. Rab, I have enough. Genesis 45.25.


Thus at last I come to the last part, namely, in Sodom, wherein ten righteous
persons could not be found) the small number of the elect, and fewness of
good and faithful men in the Church. The estate and condition of the Church of
God is elegantly set forth by the princely Preacher of Israel Solomon: Eccle.
9.14.
A little City and few men in it etc. This small City with few men in it
represents the Church militant on earth, which is daily assaulted by the
strong man up in arms Satan, Luke 11.21.
and was delivered by the policy of the poor wiseman Jesus Christ, Colos. 2.3.
and yet none is thank full for his pains, hardly one to ten, as it fell out
among the leapers. So that whereas Babylon is said to be a great City, Luke
17.17.
and Niniuy to be very spacious; Dan. 4.28.
forty and odd miles about: Job. 1.2.
yet the Church of God is but a little one, and as it is small, so there be but
a few therein. This was apparent in all ages, that most in the world were
badde, and that the Kingdom of Satan always exceeded Gods. At the deluge the
wickedness of man was great, and the whole world corrupt, and there were only
eight, that found grace in the sight of the Lord. Just Joseph in Egypt,
tanquam Rosa inter spinas, as a rate rose among a world of thorns. Job in the
land of Huz, a black Swanne, to keep himself upright in an heathen Nation.
Nicodemus the night-walker, with Joseph of Arimathea, and a small handful of
others in the whole Synagogue of the Jews. And in this City of Sodom (besides
Lot and his household) God apposed city and suburbs with the number of ten.
The Arc of Noah praefigured this paucity and defect of the faithful, and of
such as should be saved in the Church, when the number of unclean beasts
exceeded the number of the clean. And even in these days, when the whole
world swarmeth with multitudes of people, and men surpass in number the moates
in the sun, and sands on the shore. If GOD should look from heaven, Psalm.
14.3.
or come in progress to judgment, he shall find but a few good, hardly
fifty in a City, ten in a Corporation three in a village, two in a house
good: nay, I fear me greatly we would send him away discontent, as from
Sodom, for want of ten righteous persons, and cut him short of his tith. It is
no marvel then, if God call his Church a Vineyard, Isay 5. Psalm. 80.8.
which is but a small spot, and a little plot in respect of the slender
quantity of vines, which it contains and evil quality of grapes, which it
affords.

The ancient Hebrews give an ingenious and exquisite reason, why the great
name of God (...) is written almost in all nations and tongues, only with
four letters. The Jews call him Jehovah, the Grecians (...), the Latinists
Deus, the Egyptians Thewt, the Persians Syros, the Arabians Alla, the French
Dieu, the Germans Got: to import, that in the four parts of the world both to
the Jew and Gentile, his name is known, and that God has his Church every
where: and if not ten, as in Sodom, yet can he find some, which be his,
although they be of no note or account in the world: Romans 11.5.
There is a remnant through the election of Grace. This was that comfortable
answer, which God gave to jealous Elijah, when he was out of all heart for
the small number of Gods Children. I can find seven thousand in Israel, 1.
Kings. 9.18.
that never bent knee to Baal, or kissed him with their mouth; So likewise the
seed, Matthew. 13.8.
that was sown in four several grounds, the fourth part of it took root and
fructified: 1. Cor. 3.6.
and wheresoever Paul planteth, or Apollo waters, all labor is not lost, in
some God will give increase, and among an heap of hearers God has a secret
number, which are his. The Apostle Paul affirms, that not only a small
number are elect: but he shows also, of what manner they be, which are of
Gods Church. Not many wise and mighty after the flesh are called, but poor and
vile, and things which are not. And Herome considering this, said: Eplchecula
pauper cula Ecclesin, The Church consists of the simplest sort and me auest
men.

Now then as in the overthrow of Sodom, Lot secured himself in the little
City, Bela or Zoar for his sanctuary, Genesis 19.20.
and so escaped Gods vengeance and punishment: So (right Honorable, right
Worshipful and blessed Brethren). 2 Thessalonians. 2.1.
I beseech and exhort you by the coming of our Lord Jesus, and by our
assembling unto him, that your conversation be holy, and in godliness: that
whenever the Lord shall threaten storm and tempest upon sinners, of fire and
brimstome, as on Sodom: we may be assured of little Zoor for our refuge and
receptacle, that Gods Church may be our defense: that we be sure, we be not
only of Israel, Romans 9.6.
but Israel, members of the Church, and in the small number of Gods elect. This
was the daily prayer and meditation of Nazianze.

(...).
Quaere ratem Noae, vt mortis
discrimina vitem.
So that without this Arc of Gods Church there is no safety in this life, nor
salvation in the next.

Non Deus huic Pater est, cui non
Ecclesia matter.
Among all the heavenly and powerful words which proceeded from the Mcssiah,
there is none in my mind more motine, or stirring to make a man mindful of
himself, then this; Many are called, but few are chosen. Mat. 20.16.
And verily a right bad man, if he well and rightly consider this point, the
small number of the elect, and those that shall be saved: it will make him cry
out with Balaam; Let my soul die the death of the righteous, Number. 23.10.
and let my last end be like his. Praeclara rara, choice things are most rare,
as we may observe in nature. Of ordinary stones there are store, but precious
stones are scan: unprofitable herbs grow every where, but g^aine and flowers
more sparingly: and in the Church there be many, but few which are Gods, many
vessels, but few of honor: and therefore our Savior encourages his handful
and small company: Luke 12.32.
Fear not little flock There is one speech vtterd by the Apostle, which as
often as I think on, so often do I fear, and tremble: Romans 9.28.
The Lord will make a short count on the Earth. Where there is a small flock,
a short count will serve the turn. A Bill of few parcels is soon summed: And
the complete number both of the elect and castawaies being known before hand
to the Lord: the audit at the day of judgment will be very short, and he
will make a quick dispatch at the general Assise of the glorious Resurrection
when he shall give sentence of life and death.

Fathers, Men, and Brethren, and all ye, (that hear me this day) there is
none here present, but he assures himself, that his name is registered in the
Book of life: eueric man hops to be saved: Salvation is the golden Bell, for
which we all run: Salvation is the mark, whereat we all aim: and every
man has one foot (as he thinks) already in Heaven. To encourage all, and to
exanimate none in their course, a man may easily resolve himself, whether he
be in the right way, or no: in the high way toward Heaven, and so consequently
know also, if he be in the number of the elect, by that direction and rule
taught by our Saufour: Mate. 7.13.
Enter in at the straight gate, for it is the wide gate and broadway, that
leads to destruction, and many there be, which go in thereat: Because the
gate is straight, and the way narrow, that leads unto life, and few there he
that find it. Here are proposed two ways, and two gates, which all the world
walk in and enter in at, the wide gate and broad way, the narrow way, and
straight gate. The first is the broad cart-way, and wide staring gate, which
leads to Hell, and a blind man may hit it, and many go thither. The other is
a little footpath scarce beaten, and a straight portall to Heaven, and a far
traveler often misseth it, and this is found of very few. Note as Saint Paul
said to his, so I to you, 2. Cor. 13.5.
Prove and examine your selves, which of these two ways ye walk in, and which
of these two doors ye look within: and then shall it be seen, whether ye be
in the number of most and worst, or in the number of fewest and best, and
whether ye shall be saved or damned.

Do thou walk in the old way, which is the good way? Ier. 6.16.
Art thou strict and precise in fasting and praying? Ephesians. 6.14.
Art thou straight girt about with verity, Apoc. 1.13.
and the goulden girdle of continency? Psalm. 119.
Do thou narrowly keep thy feet from every evil way, that thou may
observe the word? Do thou not follow a multitude to do evil, Exodus 23.2.
nor the world by the broad way, and wide gate? Iosu. 20.13.
Do thou set down thy rest with Iosuah, I and my house will serve the Lord?
O this is a sign, that thou art the child of God, and booked among the number
of the elect, and that thou art s^aled for the servant of God in thy forehead
among the Tribes of the children of Israel. The more I consider this point,
that the whole City of Sodom could not afford ten righteous persons, and
how small a number there is in Gods Church predestined to salvation: when I
think, that the huge Monarchy of Satan far exceedes the little Aristocratie
of God: how at the last day Hell shall be thrunged and crowded full of
repronates, and heaven empty in comparison, and few faued: So long am I bound
hand and foot from sinning, and sin all this while has no power to reign
in my morniall body, and this was the heavenly vow and divine meditation of
Anselmus: Si hinepeccatum, and illina infernum habereus, ac vni little necessrio
immergi deberem: prius me in infernum demergerem, antequam peccatum
committerem. If (says he) Hell were on one side, and Sin on the other, and
that perforce I must into one of them: I would first, run headlong into Hell,
before that I would meddle with sin. O sanctified soul! O mortified breast!
how far do we digress from this reverent aduertisment, of this blessed
Saint?

To temper all my speech by the time, I will make my conclusion an exhorration,
drawn out of Christ's Sermon concerning his second coming to judgment: Luke
17.34.
wherein he warns us to be watchful and careful, and not secure or
dissolute, as in the days of Noah. For (says he) two shall be in one bed,
the one received, the other left: two in the field, one received, and his
fellow forsaken: And seeing at the coming of the Son of man in his glory
there shall be a separation, Matt. 25.32.
either on the right hand for sheep, or on the left hand for goats: Let us
all I beseech you, strive and endeavor to be numbered among those that shall
be received: and that we may be counted sheep of the Lords hand and people
of his pasture, like Jacobs colored sheep: Genesis 20 41. Cant. 1.7.
let us get us forth by the tents of the shepherds.

First, therefore as ye have heard (Blessed Beloved) of the longanimity,
long-suffering and patience of the Lord in executing judgment, and punishing
sin in his forbearance of Sodom, with which he would in no wise have dealt
rigorously: Let us all be warned hereby, how we abuse Gods goodness and
clemency, by praesumption of mercy, delay of repentance, and contempt of his
menaces: Let us not despise the riches of his bountifulness, Romans 2.4.
but know that the bountifulness of God leads thee to repentance.

Secondly, in Abraham, who became an humble suter to God for Sodom: Let us as
the children of Abraham, when we see our brethren sunk in sin, loose in
life, and that they have sold themselves to work wickedness (as it was said
of Achab:) Let us sorrow for them, 1. King 21.
pray to God for them, and use all means to convert them: and let us with the
merciful father make merry at the return of our prodigal brother, Luke 16.10.
and with the blessed Angels rejoice at the conversion of a sinner.

Lastly, in that the whole City of Sodom, was stalled with ten good men,
and could not yield them to God, let populous Cities and great places make
sure, that there may always be found among them a righteous Lot, and above
the number of ten, yea rather ten thousand recorded in the writing of the
house of Israel. And let private families, and every household take heed, that
when the Lord shall come at his general visitation through our streets, and
pass along by our houses, that then the posts of our doors be sound
sprinkled with the blood of the ^ambe, that so God may stalk us, and that the
plague of destruction may pass over our heads. Yea, let us all with faithful
Rahab display out of our windows a red carnation ribbin died in the blood of
Jesus Christ, that God may thereby know us, and have mercy on us at his coming
to dissolve the World. That then we may be taken up from the tents of Keder,
and out of this vale of misery, to be infranchized Citizens in the holy
City of new and true Jerusalem, where (as Augustine speaks) the King is
verity, Law is Charity, Dignity is Aequitie, Peace Felicity, Life aeternity.

Grant (dear Father) we beseech thee, these and (...) other things necessary
both for our bodies and souls in this life and the next, even for thy Son
Jesus Christ his sake our Savior, to whom with thee and the holy Ghost in
Trinity, be all power, praise, glory, thanksgiving, and dominion in unity now
and for ever. Amen.

FINIS.

