NEVVES FROM MILLAINE.

The Copy of a Letter written from Millaine to Venice, by Signior PADRE,
concerning a strange Prince, called Prince Mammon, who is lately come into that
State, and has taken up one of the principal Houses (belonging to a chief
Nobleman of that Country) for himself and followers; does pass through the
streets also of the City in his Coach with 6. Horses. Does visit the Sick of
the Plague, and both heal and Kill at his pleasure, appearing like a Man, and
when he pleases, vanishing into a Spirit.

Translated out of the true Italian Copy.

ALSO, The Abridgement of the Articles of Pacification of Italy, made betwixt
his Imperial Majesty and the most Christian King at Ratisbone, the 13. th of
October, 1630.

Both in Latin and English.

LONDON. Printed for NATH: BVTTER. 1630.

THE COPY OF A LETter, written from Millaine to Venice, on the nineteenth of
September, Nouostilo by Signeor PADRE, as follows.
THE great wonders we see in these our Times, press me to impart the same to
you, that you may be truly informed what has happened here in the City of
Millaine, within this fortnight; whereof I will set down nothing, but what I
have seen with mine own eyes. On the sixth of this instant Month of
September, here appeared a Spirit, (for so I must call him) that took upon him
a humane shape, which calls himself Prince MAMMON, he seems to be about the
age of fifty years, he wears his beard very long and square cut, he is
neither lean nor fat, great nor little, high nor low, the color of his
skin, is neither white nor black, but is a man of a midling stature, and of
a very clear complexion. At his entrance into the City, he appeared in a very
fair Caroach of green Velvet, embrodered within and out with Gold, Pearl,
and precious Stones, which Caroach was drawn with six such Horses, as nature
never framed goodlier Creatures, all trapped with rich imbrodered Harness,
suitable to the Caroach; he was attended with sixeteene Footmen, young, proper,
and beardlesse, who with the Coachman and postilian, were all futed in Liveries
of green Velvet, imbrodered with Gold, Pearl and precious Stone, suitable to
the Caroach and Horses. The Horses seemed like Turkish Gennets, and were of
such a composure for color, and shape so vndescriable for curiosity, that
there was no imperfection to be found in them; because, when so many
excellencies meet together, they make a thing Supernatural. This Spirit thus
humanized, rode through the City, in the State and Equipage of an Ambassador,
in a flow motion, till he came to a goodly Palace of the Earl Triuoleheos,
which is situate in the Roman Street, where he commanded his Caroach to stay,
and finding the doors thereof fast barred up with locks, and Iron bolts (the
said Earl having left his said House, for fear of the infection of the
Plague) he commanded his Servants to enter, but being told the doors were
fast, he alighted and came to the doors, and immediately without any violence,
the doors flew open, and he entered and furnished the same House with forty
Beds, for himself and his retinew, where he ^aue great entertainment to all
that came, and cured all diseases; but especially, the Plague, which at this
time rages very sore in this place. He can transform his shape at his
pleasure, and day and night he travaileth through this City: And when he visits
the sick, he asks them whether they will be healed, and do such things as
he shall require of of them to do: if they say they will, he heales them
immediately, but if they refuse or stick at the motion, he strikes them with a
Rod that he has in his hand, and the party so struck dies presently, as it
has happened to many in this City. This being known to the State, they
consult with the Prelates; namely, the Cardinal and Bishop of this Diocese,
and when the Senate of the Clergy had attempted all ways, both Spiritual and
Temporal, that could be imagined, for the chasing hence of this Fury, and
could not do it: at the last they concluded, that it was the will and pleasure
of the Almighty God, to permit and suffer him to be there, for this I know,
that after they had sent the Marshall with 200. men, well furnished with
Pistols and other munition to apprehend him, imagining, him to be some Witch,
or such like Impostor, he suffered himself to be attached and carried to the
Prison gate, where he made himself invisible, and so got out of the Officers
hands, and shortly after he was found at his Palace, feasting and entertaining
such as came to him. Moreover I hard, that hereupon the Cardinal with the
consent of the rest of the Clergy, determined to summon him to the Cathedral
Church of the City, to give an account to them what he intended there to do,
which Summons was given on the Friday fortnight after his appearing in the
City, as he was riding in his Caroach: unto which Summons he did yield
obedience, but with this Prou so, that the said Cathedral might be adorned in
fitting manner, to receive a Prince of his Honor and Dignity, for (as he
affirmed) he was a Prince of 15. Legions, whereupon there was prepared to
receive him, a sumptuous Cloth of Estate, with Chayres and Cushions suitable:
and under his feet was laid a curious Carpet of Tapestrie, wrought with silk
and gold. The night following his Summons and proceeding in his Appearance, he
seemed to scatter much Dust in the said Cathedral, and in the Greek Street,
where he knew the most of the people of the City would be, by which means it
is conceived, that a great number of the people were infected; for the next day
following, there dyed of the Plague between 6. and 7000. of this City; but at
this time prefixed, he being come unto the Cathedral where all the learned of
the City were assembled, he was Interogated, and unto four of their Questions
he made direct Answers. But then said, it was nobleness and Princelike to
vouchsafe to answer, and therefore of his benignity and human Clemency, he
had answered accordingly; but said, he would not further answer them, unless
with more and greater authority he were compelled thereunto. Whereupon a Post
is dispatched for Rome, that the Popes authority may be had. But after he had
stayed all further questioning of him, voluntarily, and of his own accord, he
fell upon a serious discourse of the high mysteries of the most sacred Trinity,
delivering such truths thereof, as their own Judgments and understandings
could not choose, but ratify, wherein he showed such great learning, that all
that were present and could understand him, stood amazed, and astonished to
hear him: Which discourse when he had ended, he took a solemn leave, and
meekly departed to his Palace, aforesaid. By which time the Earl Trinoleheos,
hearing how his house was entered, returned thither full of indignation, but
when he came in presence of the Prince, he was stricken with such awe and
reverence, that his anger turned into a Courtly Complement, saying: he was
infinitely bound unto his Highness, that he had so honored him, as to make
use of so mean a Cottage to be his receptacle: Whereto the Prince replied,
that he would not prove ungrateful, and therewith took a Vial of clear
water out of his pocket, and said to the Earl, I give this liquor to your
Honor, which you must esteem as dear as your own life, the virtue whereof,
is this, that if you take a dram thereof in pure wine every morning fasting,
neither you nor your Court, shall be in any danger of the Infection of the
Plague, but may without fear lay your hand upon a running sore. We shortly
expect the return of the Popes Authority, which we believe will be here with
the next Post, and after that I shall inform you of many and almost incredible
things: the Prince continues both night and day passing through all the parts
of the City, at his pleasure: he spends liberally, and eats and drinks
plentifully, and when he will, he can and does Inuisibly, and when he thinks
good, refines his humane shape. I have many things to write unto you, which I
am forced to omit, until the next Post, and in the mean time, I kiss your
hands:

Millaine the 19. of September, nouo Stilo, 1630. Your assured, S. PADRE.

An Abridgement of the pacification of Italy, made betwixt his Imperial
Majesty, and the most Christian King at Ratisbone 13. October, 1630.
1. THe Peace shall be universal, not only in Italy, but also in Germany,
neither shall the one offend the other any way, nor either assist the others
Enemies by any means.

2. To the Duke of Sauoy for his pretentions to Montferrato, Trino, and other
places in Montferrato shall be assigned, the Annual Revenues whereof shall
amount unto 18000. Crowns.

3. The Duke of Loraynes pretensions are reserved unto some amicable
Composition, or some process by comprimise, or the Emperors judicial
decision, to be performed within the next 6. months ensuing the Inuestiture of
the Duke of Niuers.

4. The Duke of Guastale for his pretensions to the State of Mantua, certain
Towns shall be assigned, whose revenues amount unto the value of 6000.
Crowns.

5. The Duke of Niuers shall acknowledge his fault in writing, and demand
pardon thereof.

6. Likewise the Imperial Majesty by the pure intercession of the Pope, and
the most Christian King (to be interposed in writing) shall grant the
Inuestiture of both the Dukedom of Mantua, and (...).

7. By vigor whereof he shall afford his Imperial protection thereof, against
all those who will molest him.

8. Presently after this Treaty, and the Subscription of the Deputies of both
parties, in the Hall, and n tice given thereof in Italy, all hostilities on
both sides shall cease.

9. Then after 15. days all Caesar's Soldiers must be drawn out of Italy,
Mantua, and Canetta reserved, as also the King of Spaines Soldiers, and within
the same time likewise the Soldiers of the most Christian King, reserving
Pinnarola, Bricaras, Susa, and Auigliana, and finally the Duke of Sauoy, his
Soldiers reserving Trino.

10. The City, Castle, and Fort of Casall, with other places of Montferrat,
excepting the assigned unto the Duke of Sauoy, must be restored to the Duke of
Niuers, which he may fortify with convenient Garrisons depending only upon
him.

11. Then Mantua, and also Canetta, shall be by the Emperor consigned unto the
Duke of Niuers, as also Pinnarola, Bricaras, Susa, and Auigliana, by the King
of France, to the Duke of Sauoy, and their Garrisons withdrawn from all places.

12. The passages held in the Valtolina, and the Forts there erected, the
Emperor shall cause to be restored to their former estate.

13. Hostages on both sides shall be put into the hands of the Pope, or the
great Duke of Tuscane, or of some Catholic Prince in Germany, till the
premises be performed.

14. The Commonwealth of Venice shall be included in this Peace, and they
likewise shall withdraw their Soldiers.

15. As for the controversies concerning the Cities and Bishoprics of Metz,
Verdun, and Tull, the Abbacie of Bruxens, and other places attempted and
innouated by the French, in the prejudice of the Empire, they are remitted to
another Treaty to be made, remaining still the Fort of Moyenarch in it being.

16. The Duke of Lorayne likewise is included in this Peace.

17. A general friendship is agreed upon, and a mutual restitution of all
immovable goods on every side, with a free relaxation of prisoners.

18. If the Treaty of Peace commenced in Italy, be concluded before the
subscription unto this present Treaty, in all that shall be subsisted upon.

19. With a firm faith all these things are promised by his Imperial Majesty
for himself, and the Duke of Sauoy, and their assistants, and of the most
Christian King, by his name given.

Ratisbone the 13. of October, 1630. Underwritten.
Antonino Abbate in Crems Munster, Ottoliber Barone A Moetiz, Hermanus Liber
Barone A Questerbarch.
On the left hand,
Brulart, Counselor of the most Christian King, Frater Josephus Cacusinus.


These precedent Artic. we do give you (gentle Reader) as we have received
them, printed in several Languages beyond the Seas, with advice that they were
so concluded at the Diet at Ratisbone, but whether they shall be received, and
ratified on all sides or not, we do not as yet understand, and therefore we
intend, if there comes any certainty thereof to our hands, to give it you with
our next Curranto.

COMPENDIVM Pacificationis Italicae, initae inter Maiestatem Caes. and Regem
Christianissimum.
1. PAx erit vniuersalis, non modo in Italia, verum etiam in Germania, neque
vnus alterum, quocunque modo effendet, aut alter alterius hosts quocunque modo
vel ratione iuvabit.

2. Sabaudiae Duci pro suis paerten sionibus ad Monferratum adsignabitur Trinum
and alia loca in Montferrato, quorum reditus annuatim ascendant ad 18. millia
scutorum.

3. Lotharingiae Ducissae praetensiones reseruantur ad amicabilem compositionem
vel processum Compromissi, vel decisionem Caesaream Iudicialem, secuturam intra
semestre proximum a concessa Niuernensi Duci investitura.

4. Guastallae Duci pro suis praetensionibus ad statum Mantuanum adsignabuntur
certae terrae, quarum reditus ascendent ad valorem annuum 6000. annorum.

5. Nivernensis culpam suam agnoscet, and in scriptis depreacbitur.

6. Tum illi Maiestas Caes. praevia intercessione Summi Pontificis and Regis
Christianissimi in scriptis interponenda, inuestituram vtriusque Ducatus
concedet.

7. Eiusque vigore protectionem Imperialem tribuet aduersus quoscunque qui
illum vellent molestare.

8. Statim post Tractatum in aula a Deputatis vtrinque subscriptum and in
Italia notificatum, hostilitates omnt ex part cessabunt.

9. Tum intra quindenam abduci debebunt ex Italia Milites Caesarei, reseruata
Mantua and Caneto, Milites Hisp. Regis, Milites Christianissimi, reseruatis
Pignarelo, Bricaras, Susa, and Auigliana; Et Milites Ducis Sabaudiae reseruato
Trino.

10. Cluttas, Castrum and Fortalititiom Casalense alitaque loca Montferrati,
exceptis Duci Sabaudiae assignatis, restitui debent Duci Niuernensi, qui illa
poterit munire praesidijs conuenientibus, and a se tantum dependentibus.

11. Inde Mantua quoque and Caueto ex part Caes. Ma. Duci Niuernensi,
Pignarolo, Bricaras, Susa and Auigliana ex part Regis Christianissimi,
abductis praesidijs Duci Sabaudiae consignabitur.

12. Passus in Valtellina and Rhaetiae occupatus and Fortalitra ibidem erecta,
Ma. Caes. in pristinum statum restitut sacret.

13. Obsides hinc inde dabuntur ad manue Summi Pontificis, vel Magni Ducis
Hetruriae, vel Principis alicutus Catholice in Germania, de nec antedicia
compleantur.

14. Respublica queque Veneta in hac pace includitur, ipsa quoque militem suum
abducere debebit.

15. Controuersiae, ratione Ciuttatum and Eptscopatuum Metz, Toul, and Verdun,
and Abbatiae Sorrensis, and quae ibidem locorum attentata vel innouata fuerunt
exparte Gallorum in praeiudicium Imperij, ad alium Tractatum instituendum
remittuntur, manente fortalitio in Magenwick in suo esse.

16. Dux Lotharingiae quoque in hoc Tractatu inclusus est.

18. Si in Italia Tractatus pacis initus and conclusus fuerit ante praesentis
subscriptionem, illa praevalebit.

19. Optima fide haec omnia promittuntur a Ma. Caes. pro se, Rege Catholico and
Duce Sabaudiae, suis assistentibus, and lege a Christianissimo suo, nomine.

Dat Ratisbonae 13. October. 1630. Abbas in Kremsmunster, Otto a Nostitz liber
Baro. Herman a Questenberg. Brulard Regis Christianissimi Consillarius Status,
and Orator fr. Capucinus Josephus Assistens.


FINIS.

