MICHAELMAS Term.

AS IT HAS BEEN Sundry times acted by the Children of Paul's.



AT LONDON, Printed for A. I. and are to be sold at the sign of the white
horse in Paul's Churchyard. An. 1607.

Inductio.
Enter Michaelmas Term in a whitish Cloak, new come up out of the country, a
Boy bringing his Gown after him! Micha: Boy?


Boy: Here sit!


Mi: Lay by my conscience, give me my Gown,
That weed is for the country,
We must be civil now, and match out Evil,
Who first made Civil, black; he pleased the Devil;
So; now know I where I am, me thinks already
I graspe best part of the Autumnian blessing
In my contentious fadome, my hand's free,
From wronger and from wronged I have fee,
And what by sweat from the rough earth they draw,
Is to enrich this silver harvest, Law,
And so through wealthy variance, and fat brawle,
The Barn is made but Steward to the Hall;
Come they up thick enough?

Boy: Oh like hops and harlots sir!


Mi: Why do thou couple them?


Boy: Oh very aptlye, for as the hop well boiled will make a man not stand
upon his legs: so the harlot in time will leave a man no legs to stand upon!


Mi: Such another and be my heir, I have no Child,
Yet have I wealth would redeem beggary,
I think it be a curse both here and foreign,
Where bags are fruitful'st, there the womb's most barren,
The poor has all our children, we their wealth;
Shall I be prodigal when my life cooles,
Make those my heirs whom I have beggared; Fools?
It would be wondrous; rather beggar more,
Thou shall have heirs enough, thou keep'st a whore,
And here comes kindred too with no mean purses,
Yet strive to be still blessed with Clients curses.

Music playing. Enter the other 3. Terms, the first bringing in a fellow
poor, which the other 2. aduanceth, giving him rich Apparel, apage, and a
pandar. Exit. Mi: What subtlety have we here? a fellow
Shrugging for life's kind benefits, shift and heat,
Crept up in 3. Terms, wrapped in silk and silver,
So well appointed too with Page and Pandar,
It was a happy gale that blew him hither.

1. Thou father of the Terms hail to thee. 2. May much contention still keep
with thee. 3. Many new fools come up and fee thee. 2. Let them pay dear
enough that see thee.
1.
And like Asses use such men,
When their load's off, turn them to graze again.
2.
And may our wish have full effect, Many a suite, and much neglect.
3.
And as it has been often found, Let the Clients cups come round.
2.
Help your poor kinsmen when you ha got them. You may drink deep, leave us
the bottom;
3.
Or when there is a lamb fallen in, Take you the lamb, leave us the skin.
Mi: Your duty and regard has moved us,
Never till now we thought you loved us,
Take comfort from our words, and make no doubt,
You shall have suites come sixteen times about.

All. We humbly thank the patron of our hopes.

Exeunt. Mi: With what a vassaile -- appetite they Gnawe,
On our reuersions; and are proud,
Coldly to taste our meats, which eight returns
Serve in to us as courses;
One day our writs like wilde-fowle fly abroad,
And then return over Cities, Towns, and Hills,
With Clyents like dried strawes between their bills;
And it is no few birds pick to build their Neasts,
Nor no small money that keeps Drabs and Feasts!

But Gentlemen, to spread my self open unto you, in cheaper Terms I salute
you, for ours have but sixpenny fees all the year long, yet we dispatch you
in two hours, without demur; your Suites hang not long here after Candles be
lighted: Why we call this play by such a dear and chargeable Title, Michaelmas
Term? Know it consents happilye to our purpose, tho perhaps faintlie to the
interpretation of many; for he that expects any great quarrels in Law to be
handled here, will be fondly deceived, this only presents those familiar
accidents, which happend in Town in the circumference of those six weeks,
whereof Michaelmas Term is Lord: Sat sapienti, I hope there is no fools in the
house!

Exit. Enter at one door Master Rerrage, meetiug Master Salewood. Salewood:
What Master Rerrage?


Rer: Master Salewood* Exceedingly well met in Town, comes your Father up this
Term?


Sal. Why he was here three days before the Exchequer gapte.


Rer. Fie, such an early Termer?


Sal. He Is not to be spoke withal, I dare not ask him blessing, till the
last of November.


Rer. And how looks thy little venturing Coosen?


Sal. Faith like a Lute that has all the stringes broke, no body will meddle
with her.


Rer. Fie, there are Doctors enough in Town will string her again, and make her
sound as sweet as ere she did, is she not married yet?


Sal. Sh' as no luck, some may better steal a horse than others look on. I
have known a virgin of five bastardes wedded, faith when all is done we must
be feign to marry her into the North I Am affrayd.


Rer: But will she pass so think you?


Sal: Puh, any thing that is warm enough is good enough for them; so it come
in the likeness, tho the Devil be in it, the'ile venture the fiering.


Rer: They Are worthy spirits in faith, heard you the News?


Sal: Not yet.


Rer: Mistress Difficult is fallen a widdowe.


Sal: Say true, is Master Difficult the Lawyer dead?


Rer: Easily dead sir.


Sal: Pray when died he?


Rer: What a question's that? when should a Lawyer dye but in the vacation, he
has no leisure to die in the Tearmetime, beside the Noise there would fetch
him again.


Sal: Knew you the nature of his disease.


Rer: Faith some say he dyed of an old grief he had, that the vacation was
fourteen weeks long.


Sal: And very likely. I knew 'twould kill him at last, t'as troubled him a
long time, he was one of those that would feign have brought in the heresy of
a fifth Term, often crying with a loud voice, oh why should we loose
Bartholmew week?


Rer: He savors, stop your Nose, no more of him.


Enter master Cockstone, a Gentleman meeting master Easy of Essex. Cock: Young
master Easy, let me salute you sir, when came you?


Easy: I have but Inn'd my horse since master Cockstone.


Cock: You seldom visit London master Easy,
But now your Fathers dead it is your only course,
Here Is gallants of all sizes, of all lasts,
Here you may fit your foot, make choice of those
Whom your affection may rejoice in:

Easy: You have easily possessed me I am free,
Let those live hindes that know not liberty.

Cock: Master Rerrage?


Eas: Good master Salewood, I am proud of your society.


Rer: What gentleman might that be?


Cock: One master Esaias, h'as good and in Essex,
a fair free-brested Gentleman, somewhat too open,
bad in man, worse in woman,
the Gentrye-fault at first, he is yet fresh
and wants the City powdring, but what news?
Is It yet a match twixt master Qomodoes the rich Drapers
daughter and your self.

Rer: Faith sir, I am vildly riuald!


Cock: Vildly? by whom.


Rer: One Andrewe Lethe crept to a little warmth, and now so proud that he
forgets all storms, one that nere wore apparel, but like ditches 'twas cast
before he had it, now shines bright in rich embroderies, him master Quomodo
affects, the daughter him, the mother only me, I rest most doubtful, my side
being wookest.


Cock: Yet the mothers side being surer than the Fathers, it may prove, men
plead for money best, women for love.


Rer: Slid master Quomodo?


Cock: How then, afraid of a woollen draper.


Rer: He warned me his house, and I hate he should see me abroad!


Quomodo with his two spirits, Shortyard and Falselight. Quo: Oh my 2. spirits
Shortyard and Falselight, you that have so enricht me, I have industry for you
both?


Sho: Then do you please us best sir.


Quo: Wealthy employment.


Sho: You make me icth sir.


Quo: You Falselight as I have directed you.


Falls: I am nimble.


Quo: Go, make my course commodities, look, seek, with subtle art beguile
the honest eye, be near to my trapwindowe, cunning Falselight.


Falls: I never failde it yet.


Exit Falls. Quo: I know thou did not;
But now to thee my true and secret Shortyard,
Whom I dare trustee'n with my wife,
Thou nere did mistress harm, but master, good,
There are too few of thy name Gentlemen,
And that we feel, but Citizens abundance,
I have a task for thee my pregnant spirit,
To exercise thy poynted wits upon.

Sho. Give it me, for I thirst.

Quo: Thine care shall drink it,
Know then I have not spent this long Vacation
Only for pleasures sake, give me the man
Who out of recreation culls advantage,
Dives into seasons, never walks, but thinks,
Ne^ides, but plots, my journey was toward Essex.

Sho: Most true?


Quo: Where I have seen what I desire.


Sho: A woman?


Quo: Puh; a woman, yet beneath her, that which she often treades on. Yet
commands her land, fair neat Land.


Sho: What is the mark you shoot at.


Quo: Why the fairest to cleave the heir in twain, I mean his Title to
murder his estate, stifle his right in some some detested prison, there are
means and ways enough to hook in Gentry, besides our deadlye enmitye which thus
stands they are busye 'bout our wives, We 'bout their Lands.


Sho: Your revenge is more glorious,
To be a cuckold is but for one life,
When land remains to you, your heir, or wife!

Quo: Ah sirrah, do we stinge'm, this fresh gallant rode newly up before me!


Sho: I beseech his name.


Quo: Young master Easy.


Sho: Easy? It may fall right.


Quo: I have inquired his haunt, stay, ha, I that, it is, that's he, that's he!


Sho: Happily!


Quo: Observe, take surely note of him, he is fresh and free shift thy self
speedily into the shape of gallantrye, I Will swell thy purse with angels, keep
foot by foot with him, out-dare his expenses, flatter, dice, and brothell to
him, give him a sweet taste of Sensuality, train him to every wastfull sin,
that he may quickly need health, but especially money, ravish him with a dame
or two, be his bawd for once, I Will be thine for ever, drink drunk with
him, creep into bed to him, kiss him and undo him, my sweet spirit.


Sho: Let your care dwell in me soon shall it shine, What subtlety is in man,
that is not mine.


(Exit. Quo: O my most cherefull spirit, go, dispatch, Gentrye is the chief
fish we Tradesmen catch.


(Exit. Easy: What Is here?


Sale: Oh, they are bills for Chambers.


Eas: Against Saint Andrews, at a Painters house, there is a fair chamber ready
furnished to be let, the house not only endewed with a new fashion forepart,
but which is more convenient for a Gentleman, with a very provident backe-doore.


Sale: Why here is virtue still; I like that thing that is necessary, as well as
pleasant.


Cock: What news in yonder paper.


Rerra: Ha? seek you for news, there is for you!


Sale: Whose it is? in the name of the black Angels, Andro Gruill.


Rer: No, Andro Lethe!


Sale: Lethe?


Rer: Has forgot his fathers name, poor Walter Gruill that begot him, fed him,
and brought him up.


Sale: Not hither.


Rer: No; 'twas from his thoughts, he brought him up below.


Sale: But does he pass for Lethe.


Rer: Among strange eyes that no more know him, then he knows himself,
that's nothing now, for master Andro Lethe, a gentleman of most received parts,
forgetfulness, Lust, Impudence, and Falsehood, and one especial Courtly quality;
to wit, no wit at all, I am his Rival for Quomodoes daughter, but he knows
it not.


Sale: Has spyed us ore his paper.


Rer: Oh that's a warning to make our duties ready.


Cock: Salute him, hang him.


Rer: Puh, wish his health a while, heel be laid shortly, let him gorge
Venison for a time, our doctors will bring him to dry mutton; seem respective
to make his pride swell like a Toade with dew.


Sale: Master Lethe!


Rer: Sweet master Lethe.


Lathe: Gentlemen your pardon, I remember you not.


Sale: Why we supt with you last night sir!


Lethe: Oh cry you mercy, it is so long ago,
I had quite forgot you, I must be forgiven,
Acquaintaince, dear society, suites and things,
Do so flow to me; that had I not the better memory!
Twould be a wonder I should know my self,
Esteem is made of such a dizzy metal;
I have received of many gifts ore night
Whom I have forgot ere morning, meeting the men,
I wished em to remember me again,
They do so: then if I forget again,
I know what helped before, that will help then,
This is my course, for memory I have been told
Twenty preserues, the best I find is gold;
Ey truly! are you not knights yet, Gentlemen.

Sale: Not yet!


Leth: No, that must be looked into, it is your own sault,
I have some store of Venison, where shall we devour it,
Gentlemen?

Sale: The horn were a fit place.

Leth: For Venison, fit,
The horn having chaste it,
At the horn -- we will Rhyme to that. --

Cock: Taste it.


Sale: Wast it.


Rer: Cast it.


Leth: That's the true rhyme indeed, we hunt our Venison
twice I tell you, first out a'th park, next out a'th Belly.

Cock: First dogs take pains to make it fit for men,
Then men take pain to make it fit for dogs.

Leth: Right.

Cock: Why this is kindness, a kind Gallant, you,
And love to give the dogs more than their due,
We shall attend you sir.

Leth: I pray do so.


Sale: The horn.


Leth: Easily remembered that you know!


Exeunt. But now unto my present business, the Daughter yeildes, and Quomodo
consents, only my mistress Quomodo, her mother without regard runs full against
me, and sticks hard! Is there no law for a woman that will run upon a man at
her own apperill. Why should not she consent, knowing my state, my sudaine
fortunes, I can command a custerd, and other bakemeats, death of sturgeon, I
could keep house with nothing, what friends have I? how wellam I beloved, even
quite throughout the scullery, not consent? it is even as I have writ, I Will be
hanged, and she love me not herself and would rather preserve me, as a
private friend to her own pleasures, than any way advance her daughter upon me
to beguile herself, then how have I relieved her in that point, let me peruse
this letter. Good mistress Quomodo, or rather as I hope ere the Term end,
mother Quomodo, since only your consent keeps a loofe off and hinders the
copulation of your daughter, what may I think, but that it is a mere
affection in you, doting upon some small inferior virtue of mine, to draw me
in upon your self, if the case stand so, I have comfort for you: for this you
may well assure your self, that by the marriage of your daughter I have the
better means and opportunity to your self, and without the least suspicion.
This is moving stuff, and that works best with a Citizens wife, but who
shall I get to convey this now: my Page I halent forth, my Pandar I have
imployd about the country, to look out some third sister, or entice some
discontented Gentlewoman from her husband, who^e the laying out of my appetite
shall maintain, nay I Will deal like an honorable Gentleman, I Will be kind to
women, that which I gather in the day, I Will put into their purses at night, you
shall have no cause to rail at me, no faith, I Will keep you in good fashion
Ladies, no meaner men then knights shall ransom home your gowns, and recover
your smocks, I Will not dallye with you -- some poor widow woman would come as a
necessary bawd now: and see where fitly comes -- my mother! curse off poverty
does she come up to shame me, to betray my birth, and cast soil upon my new
Suite, let her pass me, I Will take no notice of her, Scuruye -- murrey -- Carsey!

Moth: By your leave and like your worship.


Leth: Then I must proudly venture it; to me good woman.


Moth: I beseech one word with your worship.


Leth: Prithee be breife then.


Moth: Pray can your worship tell me any tidings of one Andro Gruill, a poor
son of mine own.


Leth: I know a gallant Gentleman of the name, one master Andro Gruill and well
receiude amongst Ladies.


Moth: That not he then!

He is no Gentleman that I mean.


Leth: Good woman if he be a Gruill, he is a Gentleman in the mornings: that's a
Gentleman a'th first, you cannot tell me


Moth: No truly, his father was an honest upright Tooth-drawer.


Leth: O my teeth.


Moth: An't please your worship, I have made a fore journey out, all this
vacant time, to come up and see my son Andro, poor Walter Gruill his Father
has laid his life, and left me a lone woman, I have not one husband in all the
world, therefore my coming up is for relief an't like your worship, hoping
that my son Andro is in some place about the Kitchen.


Leth: Kitchen, puh, fah.


Mo: Or a seruingman to some Kinght of worship.


Leth: Oh let me not endure her! Know you not me good woman?


Mo: Alas, an't pleease your worship, I never saw such a glorious suite
since the hour I was ^ersend.


Leth: Good, she knows me not, my glory does disquire me,
Beside my poorer name being drencht in Lethe,
She Will hardly understand me, what a fresh air can do!
I may employ her as a private drudge,
To pass my letters and secure my lust,
And nere be noted mine, to shame my blood,
And drop my stayning birth upon my raiment, faith good
woman you will hardly get to the speech of master Andro,
I tell you.

Mo: No?

Marry hang him, and like your Worship, I have known the day when no body
card to speak to him!


Leth: You must take heed how you speak ill of him now I cantell you; he is so
employde.


Mo: Imployde for what?


Leth: For his behavior, wisdom, and other virtues.


Mo: His virtues? no it is well known, his father was too poor a man to bring
him up to any virtues; he can scarce write and read.


Leth: He Is the better regarded for that amongst Courtiers, for that's but a
needy quality!


Mo: If it be so, then heel be great shortly, for he has no good parts about
him.


Leth. Well good woman, or mother, or what you will.


Mo: Alack the day, I know your worship scorns to call me mother: it is not a
thing fit for your worship indeed, such a simple old woman as I am.


Leth: In pity of thy long journey, there is sixpence British: tend upon me, I
have business for you.


Mo: I Will wait upon your Worship.


Leth: Two pole off at least.


Mo: I am a clean old woman, an't like your Worship.


Leth: It goes not by cleannes here good woman, if you were fowler, so you were
brauer, you might come nearer.


Mo: Nay and that be the fashion, I hope I shall (Exit. get it shortly, there is
no woman so old but she may learn; and as an old Lady delights in a young
Page or monckey, so there are young Courtiers will be hungry upon an old woman,
I warrant you.


Exit. Enter Le^hes Pandar with a Country wench. Pand: Come, leave your puling
and sighing.


Count: Beshrew you now, why did you entice me from my father


Pand: Why? to thy better advancement, would thou a pretty beautiful --
Iuicy squall, live in a poor thrumbd house in the cuntry in such servile --
habiliments, and may well pass for a gentlewoman in the City, does not 5
hundred do so think thou, and with worse faces, oh, now in these latter
days, the Devil raygning it is an age for cloven creatures? but why sad now?
yet indeed it is the fashion of any Curtizan to be sea-sicke in the first Voyage,
but at next she proclaims open wars, like a beaten soldier: why
Northamptonshire Less do dream of virginity now? remember a loose-bodied
Gown wench, and let it go, wires, and tyres, bents and bums, felts and falls,
thou that shall deceive the world, that Gentlewomen indeed shall not be known
from others; I have a master to whom I must prefer thee, after the aforesaid
decking, Lethe by name, a man of one most admired property, he can both love
thee and for thy better advancement be thy Pandar himself, an exlent spark of
humility.


Count: Well heaven forgive you, you train me up to it.


Pand: Why I do acknowledge it, and I think I do you a pleasure in it.


Count: And if I should prove a harlot now, I should be bound to curse you.


Pand: Bound? nay and you prove a harlot, you will be loose enough.


Count: If I had not a desire to go like a gentlewoman, you should be hanged,
ere you should get me to it I warrant you.


Pand: Nay that's certain, nor a 1000. more of you, I know, you are all chaste
enough, till one thing or other tempt you^ deny a Satin gown and you dare now?


Count: You know I have no power to do it, and that makes you so wilful: for
what woman is there such a beast that will deny any thing that is good.


Pand: True they will not, most dissembler.


Count: No, and she bear a brave mind she will not I warrant you.


Pand: Why, therefore take heart, faint not at all,
Women nere rise, but when they fall,
Let a man break, he is gone, blown up,
A woman's breaking sets her up,
Virginity is no City -- Trade,
You're out a'th Freedom, when you're a maid,
Down with the lattis it is but thin,
Let courser beauties work within:
Whom the light mocks, thou art fair and fresh,
The gilded flies, will light upon thy flesh.

Count: Beshrew your sweet enchantments, you have wun.

Pan: How easily soft women are undone:
So farewell wholesome weeds where treasure pants,
And welcome silks, where lies disease and wants:
Come wench, now flow thy Fortunes in to bless thee,
I Will bring thee where thou shall be taught to dress thee!

Count: Oh as soon as may be, I am in a swone till I be a gentlewoman, and
you know what flesh is man's meat, tell it be dressed.


Pan: Most certain, no more a woman.


Exeunt. Actus Secundus.
Enter Rerrage, Salewood, Lethe, Easy, with Shortyard alias Blastfield, at
dice. Rer: Gentlemen I ha sworn I Will change the room: dice?


Leth: You see I Am patient gentlemen*


Sale: I, the feinds in it, you're patient, you put up all. Devils.


R^^* Come set me gentlemen!


Sho: An Essexgenrleman sir.


Eas. An unfortunate one sir.


Sho: Indeed sir.


Eas: He Is second to my bosom.


Sho: I Will give you that comfort then sir, you must not want money as long as
you are in town sir.


Eas: No sir?


Sho: I am bound in my love to him to see you furnished, and in that comfort I
recover my salute again sir.


Eas: Then I desire to be more dear unto you.


Sho: I rather study to be dear unto you -- boy, fill some wine. -- I knew not
what fair impressier I receiud, at first, but I began to affect your society
very speedily.


Eas: I count my self the happier.


Sho: To master Alsup sir, to whose remembrance, I could love to drink till I
were past remembrance.


Eas. I shall keep Christmasse with him sit, where your health shall likewise
undoubtedly be remembered, and thereupon I pledge you: -- I would sue for your
name sir.


Sho. Your suite shall end in one Term sir: my name is Blastfield.


Eas. Kind master Blastfield, your deerer acquaintance.


Rer. Nay come, will ye draw in Gentlemen? set me:


Eas. Faith I Am scatterd.


Sho. Sir, you shall not give out so meanly of your self in my company for a
Million: make Such privy to your disgrace? you are a Gentleman of fair
fortunes; keep me your reputation; set 'em all, there is crowns fo you.


Eas. Sir you bind me infinitely in these courtesies.


Sho. You must always have a care of your Reputation here in Town master
Easy, although you ride down with nothing, it skils not.


Eas. I Am glad you tell me that yet, then IN,e indifferent. Well, come: who
throws? I set all these.


Sho. Why, well said.


Sale. This same master Lethe here begins to undo us again.


Leth. Ah sir, I came not hither but to win.


Sho. And then you will leave us, that's your fashion.


Leth. He Is base that visits not his friends:


Sho. But he is more base taht carries out his winnings.
None will do so but those have base beginnings

Leth. It is a thing in use and ever was, I pass this time.


Sho. I wonder you should pass. And that you're sufferd.


Leth. Tut, the Dice are ours,
Then wonder not at those that have most powrs*

Rer. The Devil and his Angels.


Leth. Are these they? Welcome dear Angels, where you are cursed nere stay.


Sal. Here Is luck.


Eas. Lets search him Gentlemen, I think he wears a smock:


Sho. I knew the time, he wore not half a shirt, just like a Pee.


Eas. No, how did he for the Rest?


Sho. Faith he compounded with a couple of Napkins at Barnet, and so trus'd up
the lower parts.


Eas. It Was a pretty shift in faith.


Sho. But master Lethe has forgot that too.


Eas. A mischief on it to loose all: I could --


Sho. Nay but good Ma Easy, do not do your self that tirannie I beseech you, I
must not ha you alter your body now for the Purge of a little money: you undo
me and you do.


Eas. It Was al I brought up with me, I protest master Blastsield, all my rent
till next quarter.


Sho. Pox of money, talk not on it I beseech you, what said I to you? Mass I
am out of cash my self too, -- Boy.


Boy. Anon sir.


Sho. Run presently to master Gum the Mercer, and will him to tell out two or
three hundred pound for me, or more according as he is furnished: I Will visit him
ith morning say.


Boy. It shall be said sir.


Sho. Do you hear boy?


Boy. Yes sir.


Sho. If master Gum be not sufficiently ready, call upon master Profit the
Goldsmith.


Boy. It shall be done sir.


Sho. Boy.


Boy. I know I was not sent yet now is the time.


Sho. Let them both rest till another occasion: you shall not need to run so
far at this time, take one nier hand go to Ma. Quomodo the Draper, and will
him to furnish me instantly.


Boy. Now I go sir.


Eas. It seems you are well known master Blastfield, and your credit very
spacious here ith City.


Sho. Master Easy, let a man bear himself portly, the whorsons will creep
to him a'th their bellies, and their wives a'th their backs: there is a kind of
bold grace expected throughout all the parts of a Gentleman: then for your
obseruances, a man must not so much as spit but within line and fashion. I tell
you what I ha done: sometimes I carry my water all London over, only to
deliver it proudly at the Standard, and do I pass altogether unnoted think
you? No, a man can no sooner peep out his head, but there is a bow bent at him
out of some watch tower, or other.


Eas. So readily sir.


Sho. Push, you know a bowe's quickly ready, tho a Gun belong a charging, and
will shoot five times to his once, Come, you shall bear your self Iouially:
take heed of setting your looks to your losses, but rather smile upon your
ill luck, and inuit 'em to morrow to another breakefast of Bones.


Eas. Nay i will forswear dicing.


Sho. What? peace? I am ashamed to hear you: will you cease in the first
loss, show me one Gentleman that ere did it? Fie vppon't I must use you to
company I perceive, youde be spoilde else: forswear Dice? I would your
friends heard you in faith.


Eas. Nay I was but in jest sir.


Sho. I hope so, what would Gentlemen say of you? there goes a Gull that
keeps his money, I would not have such a report go on you, for the World as
long as you are in my company. Why man fortune alters in a Minute, I ha known
those have recovered so much in an hour, their purses were never sick after.


Rer. Oh worse then consumption of the Liver! consumption of the patrimony.


Sho. How now? mark their humors master Easy.


Rer. Forgive me, my poste^itie, yet vngotten.


Sho. That's a penitent Maudlen Dicer.


Rer. Few know the sweets that the plain life allows. Vilde son that
surfets of his fathers brows.


Sho. Laugh at him master Easy.


Eas. Ha, ha ha.


Sal. I Will be damned and these be not the bones of some queen that couzened
me in her life, and now consumes me after her death.


Sho. That's the true-wicked-blasphemous, and soul-shuddering Dicer, that will
curse you all service time, and attribute his ill luck always to one Drab or
other.


Leth. Dick, Hell-gill: the hapie News.


Hell. I have her for you sir.

Leth. Peace, what is she?


Helg. Young, beautiful and plump. -- a delicate piece of sin.


Leth. Of what parentage?


Helg. Oh a Gentlewoman of a great house.


Leh. Fie, fie.


Helg. She newly came out of a Barn; yet too good for a Tooth-drawers son.


Leth. Is she wife or maid?


Helg. That which is dantiest, Maid


Leth. I Would rather she would been a wife.


Helg. A wife sir, why?


Leth. Oh Adultery is a great deal sweeter in my mind.


Helg. Diseases gnaw thy bones. I think she has deserud to be a wife sir.


Leth. That will move well.


Helg. Her firstlinge shall be mine. Swine look but for the husks, the meat
be thine.


Sho: How now Boy?


Boy. Master Quomodo takes your worships greeting exceeding kindly, and in
his commendations returns this answer, that your worship shall not be so apt
to receive it, as he willing to lend it.


Sho. Why, we thank him in faith.


Eas. Troth, and you ha reason to thank him sir, it was a very friendly
answer.


Sh. Push, a Gentleman that keeps his days even here ith City (as I my self
watch to do) shall have many of those answers in a tweluemonth, master Easy.


Eas. I promise you sir I admire your carriage, and begin to hold a mor
reu'rend respect of you.


Sho. Not so I beseech you, I give my friends leave to be inward with me, --
will you walk Gentlemen?


Leth. Wee're for you. Present her with this Jewel my first token.


Enter a Drawer. Draw. There are certain Countrymen without enquiring for
master Rerage, and master Salewood.


Rer. Tennants!


Salew. Thou reuiu'st us Rascal.


Rer. When Is our next meeting Gentlemen?


Shor. To morrow night, This Gentleman, by me inuites you all, Do you not
Master Easy?


Easy. Freely sir.


Salew. We do embrace your love -- a pure fresh Gull


Short. Thus make you men at parting duetifull, And rest beholding to you, it is
the slight To be remembered, when you are out of sight.


Easi. A pretty virtue.


Exeunt. Enter the Countrie-Wenches Father, that was ent^^c'd for Leth: Father.
Where shall I seek her now? -- oh if she knew The Dangers that attend on
women's lives, She would rather lodge under a poor thatcht Roof Then under
carved seelings: she was my joy, And all content that I received from life, My
dear and only Daughter: What says the Note she left, let me again With
stayeder grief peruse it -- Father? wonder not at my so sudden departure,
without your leave or knowledge, thus under pardon I excuse it, had you had
knowledge of it, I know you would have sought to restrain it, and hinder me
from what I have long desirde, being now happilye preferred to a Gentleman's
service in London; about Holborne, if you please to send, you may hear well of
me --

As false as she is disobedient,
Iy'e made larger inquiry, left no place
(Where Gentry keeps) unsought, yet cannot hear,
Which drives me most into a shameful fear:
Woe worth the infected cause that makes me visit
This man-deuouring City -- where I spent
My unshapen youth, to be my ages curse,
And surfetted away my name and state,
In swinish Riots, that now being sober,
I do awake, a Beggar, -- I may hate her.
Whose youth voides wine, his age is cursed with water,
Oh heavens! I know the price of ill, too well,
What, the confusions are in whom they dwell,
And how soon Maids are to their Ruins won
One minute, and aeternally undone:
So in mine may it: may it not be thus? --
Though she be poor, her honors preceous,
May be my present form, and her foud fear,
May chase her from me, if her eye should getme,
And therefore as my love and wants advise.
I Will serve until I find her in disguise.
Such is my care to fright her from base evils
I leave calm state to live amongst you, devils.

Exit Lethes Mother enters with Quomodoes wife with the Letter. Toma. Were
these fit words think you to be sent to any Citizens wise, to enjoy the
Daughter, and love the mother too for a need? I would foulye scorn that man,
that should love me only for a need I tell you: and here the Knave writes
again, that by the marriage of my Daughter, a has the better means and
opportunity to my self, he lies in his Throat like a villain, he has no
opportunity of me, for all that, it is for his betters to have opportunity of
me, and that he shall well know -- a base proud knave -- a has forgot how he
came up, and brought two of his country men to give their words to my husband
for a suit of green Karsey, a has forgot all this, and how does he appear to
me, when his white Satin suttes on, but like a Magot crept out of a Nutshell,
a fair body and a foul neck, those parts that are covered of him, looks
indifferent well, because we cannot see them else for all his clensing, pruning
and paring, he is not worthy a Brokers Daughter, and so tell him.


Gri. I will indeed forsooth.


Toma. And as for my Child, I hope she will be ruld in Time, though she be
folish yet and not be carried away with a cast of Manchets, a Bottle of wine,
or a Custard, and so I pray certify him.


Grui. He do your errant effectually.


Toma. Art thou his Ant -- or his --


Gri. Alas -- I am a poor drudge of his.


Toma. Faith and thou were his Mother, he would make thee his drudge I warrant
him.


Gri. Marry out upon him, sir reverence of your mistrisship


Tom. Here Is somewhat for thy pains, fare thee well.


Gri. It Is more then he gave me since I came to him.


Enter Quomodo and his Daughter Su. Quo. How now, what prating have we hear?
whispers, dumshowes? why Tomazin, goo too -- my shop is not altogether so dark
as some of my neighbors, where a man may be made Cuckold at one end, while
he is measuring with his yard at the other.


Toma. Only commendations sent from Master Lethe your worshipful Son in
law that should be.


Q^o. Oh, and that you like not* he that can make us rich in custom, strong in
friends, happy in suites, bring us into all the romes a sundaies, from the
leads to the seller, pop us in with Venison til we crack again, and send home
the rest in an honorable Napkin -- this man you like not forsooth?


Su. But I like him father.


Qu. My blessing go with thy liking


Su. A number of our Citizens hold our credit by it to come home drunk, and say
we ha been at Court: then how much more credit is it to be drunk there
indeed?


Qno^. Tut, thy Mothers a fool -- pray what is Master Rerage whom you plead
for so?


Toma. Why, first he is a Gentleman.


Quo. I, he is often first a Gentleman that is last a beggar.


Su. My father tells you true, what should I do with a gentleman, I know not
which way to lie with him.


Quo. It Is truetoo -- thou know beside, we undo Gentlemen daily


Toma. That makes so few of them marry with our Daughters, unless it be one
green foot or other* next, M. Rerage has land and living, the other but his walk
in the street, and his snatching diet, he is able to entertain you in a fair
house of his own, the other in some nooke or corner, or place us behind the
cloth like a company of Puppe^s: at his house you shall be served curiously,
sit down and eat your meat with leisure, there we must be glad to take it
standing, and without either salt, cloth, or trencher, and say we are
befriended too.


Quo. Oh, that gives a Citizen a better appetite then his Garden.


Su. So say I Father, me thinks it does me most good when I take it standing,
I know not how all women's minds are:


Enter Falslight. Quo. Faith I think they are al of thy mind for that thing,
how now Falslight?


Falsl. I have descri'd my fellow Short-yard, alias Blastfield, at hand with
the Gentleman.


Quo. Oh my sweet Short-yard! -- Daughter, get you up to your Virginalls: by
your leave Mistress Quomodo.


Tom. Why I hope I may sitith shop, may I not?


Quom. That you may, and welcome sweet hony-thye, but not at this season,
there is a Buck to be struck.


Toma. Well, since i am so expressly forbidden, i will watch above ith gallerie,
but i will see your knauerie.


Exit. Quom. Be you preparde as I tell you.


Falsl. You near feared me:


Exit. Quom. Oh that sweet, neat, comely, proper, delicate parcel of land,
like a fine Gentlewoman ith waste: not so great as pretty, pretty: the Trees
in Summer whistling, the silver waters by the Banks harmoniouslye gliding, I
should have been a Scholar, an excellent place for a student: fit for my
Son that lately commenced at Cambridge, whom now I have placed at Innes of
Court: Thus we that sildome get Lands honestly, must leave our heirs to
inherit our knauerie: but whist, one turn about my shop and meet with them.


Enter Master Easy, with Short-yard, alias Blastfield. Easi. Is this it sir?


Short. I, let me see, this is it: sign of three Knaves, it is it^


Quom. Do you hear sir, what lack you Gentlemen? see good Kersies or broad
clothes here, I pray come near -- Master Blastfield?


Short. I thought you would know me anon.


Quom. You Are exceeding welcome to Town sir, your worship must pardon me, it is
always mistie weather in our shops here: we are a Nation the Sun ^ere
shines upon, -- Came this Gentleman with you?


Short. O salute him fairly, he is a kind Gentleman, a very in ward of mine.


Quo. Then I cry you mercy sir, you are especially welcome.


Easi. I return you thanks sir.


Quo. But how shall I do for you now Master Blastfield?


Short. Why what is the matter?


Quo. It is my greatest affliction at this instant, I am not able to furnish
you.


Short. How master Quomodo, pray say not so, sl'ud you undo me then.


Quo. Upon my Religion Master Blastfield, bonds lie forfeete in my hands, I
expect the receite of a thousand every hour, and cannot yet set eye of a
penny.


Short. That Is strange me thinks.


Quo. It Is mine own pity that plots against me Master Blastfield, they know
I have no conscience to take the for feture, and that makes em so bold with my
mercy.


Easi. I am sorry for this.


Quo. Never the less, if I might entreat your delay but the age of three
days to express my sorrow now, I would double the sum, and supply you with
four or five hundred.


Short. Let me see, -- three days.


Quo. I good sir, and it may be possible.


Easi. Do you hear Master Blastfield,


Short. Ha?


Easi. You know i have already enuited all the Gallants to sup with me to night.


Short. That Is true in faith.


Easi. T will be my everlasting shame, if I have no monye to maintain my
bounty.


Short. I nere thought upon that -- I looked still when that should come from
him, we have strickly examined our expenses, it must not be three days
Master Quomodo.


Quo. No the^ 'me afraid twill be my grief sir.


Easi. Master Blastfield, i will tell you what you may do now.


Sho. What good sweet bedfellow.


Eas. Send to Master Goome, or Master Profit, the Mercer and Goldsmith.


Sho. Mass that was well remembered of thee -- I perceive the Trout will be a
little troublesome ere he be caught -- Boy. (...) Boy* Here sir.


Sho. Run to Master Goome, or Master Profit, and carry my present occasion
of money to em.


Boy. I run sir.


Quo. Me thinks Master Blastfield, you might easily attain to the
satisfaction of 3. days, here is a Gentleman your friend I dare say will see
you sufficiently possessed till then.


Eas. Not I sir, by no means: master Blastfield knows I Am further in want
then himself, my hope rests all upon him, it stands upon the loss of my
credit to Night, if I walk without money.


Sho. Why master Quomodo, what a fruitless Motion have you put forth, you
might wel^ assure your self this gentleman had it not if I wanted it: why our
purses are brothers we desire but equal fortunes: in a word we are man and
wife, they can but lie together, and so do we.


Eas. As nere as can be in faith.


Sho. And to say truth, it is more for the continuing of this Gentleman's credit
in Town then any incitement from mine own want only, that I count to be so
immediately furnish^ -- you shall hear him confess as much himself.


Eas. It Is most certain master Quomodo.


Enter Boy. Sho. Oh here comes the Boy now: How now Boy, what says master
Goome, or master Profit?


Boy. Sir, thei'r both walk forth this frostie morning to Brainford, to see a
Nurse-childe.


Sho. A Bastard be it, spite and shame.


Eas. Nay, never vex your self sweet master Blastfield.


Sho. Bewitched I think.


Quo. Do you hear sir? you can persuade with him.


Eas. A little sir.


Quo. Rather then he should be altogether destitute, or be too much a vexation
to himself, he shall take up a commodity of cloth of me tell him.


Eas. Why la! by my troth to was kindly spoken.


Quo. Two hundred pounds worth upon my Religion say.


Sho. So disastrously.


Eas. Nay, master Blastfield, you do not hear what master Quomodo said
since, like an honest true Citizen in faith: rather then you should grow diseasde
upon it, you shall take up a commodity of two hundred pounds ^orth of cloth.


Sho. The mealie Moth consume it, would he hame turn Peddler now? what should
I do with cloth?


Quo. He Is a very wilful Gentleman at this Time in faith: he knows as well
what to do with it, as I my self Iwis: there is no Merchant in Town but will be
greedy upon it, and pay down money vpo'th nail, the'l dispatch it over to
Middle-borrow presently, and raise double commodity by exchange, if not, you
know it is Tearme-time, and Michaelmas Term too, the Drapers harvest, for
footcloaths, riding suts, walking suits, chamber gowns, and hall gowns.


Eas. Nay, I Will say that, it comes in as fit a time as can be.


Quo. Nay take me with you again ere you go sir, I offer him no trash (...) him,
but present money, say, where I know some Gentlemen in town ha been glad, and
are glad at this time, to take up commodities in Hawks hoods, and brown paper.


Eas. Oh horrible, are there such fool^s in town?


Quo. I offer him no trash tell him, upon my Religion you may say, -- Now my
sweet Shortyand, -- now the hungry fish begins to nibble: one end of the worm
is in his mouth in faith.


Tomazin above. Tom. Why stand I here (as late our graceless Dames
That found no eyes) to see that Gentleman
Al^ue in state and cred^^ (...)
Help to rip up himself does all he can,
Why am I wife to him that is no man?
I suffer in that Gentleman's confusion.

Eas. Nay be persuaded in that master Blastfield it is ready money at, the (...)
beside, the (...) and all falls in as pa^ as can be (...) help it.


Short. Well Master Easy, none but you could have persuaded me to that, come,
would you would dispatch then Master Quomodo, where is this cloth?


Quo. Full and whole within, all of this piece of my Religion Master
Blastfield, feel't, nay feel't and spare not, Gentlemen! your fingers and your
judgment.


Short. Clothe's good.


Easi. By my tro^h exceeding good cloth, a good wale t'as,


Quo. Falslight.


Falsl. I Am near out 'athe shop sir.


Quo. Go, call in a Porter presently to carry away the cloth with the Star
mark, whither will you please to have it carried Master Blastfield?


Short. Faith to Master Beggar-land, he is the only Merchant now: or his
Brother Master Stilliard-downe, there is little difference.


Quo. You Have happened upon the money men sir, they and some of their Brethren I
can tell you, will not stick to offer thirty thousand pound to be cursed
still, great monyed men, their stocks lie in the Poores throats: but you will
see me sufficiently discharged Master Blastfield ere you depart.


Short. You have always found me righteous in that.


Quo. Falslight.


Falsl. Sir.


Quo. You may bring a Scriuener along with you.


Falsl. I Will remember that sir.


Quo. Have you sent for a Citizen Master Blastfield.


Short. No faith not yet -- Boy!


Easi. What must you do with a Citizen sir?


Short. A custom they are bound to alate by the default ofeuill debtors, no
Citizen must lend money without two be bound in the bond, the second Man
enters but for custom sake.


Easi. No, and must he needs be a Citizen?


Short. Byth mass stay, i will learn that Master Quomodo!


Quo. Sir.


Short. Must the second party that enters into bond only for fashions sake
needs be a Citizen? what say you to this Gentleman for one?


Quomo. A less sir, you know he is a mere stranger to me, I neither am sure
of his going or abiding, he may Inn here to Night, and ride away to morrow,
(although I grant the chief burden lies upon you) yet we are bound to make
choice of those we know sir.


Short. Why he is a Gentleman of a pretty living sir.


Quo. It may be so: yet under both your pardons I Would rather have a Citizen.


Easy. I hope you will not disparadge me so? it is well known I have three hundred
pound a year in Essex,


Short. Well said, to him thy self, take him up roundly.


Easy. And how doubtfullie so ere you account of me, I do not think but I
might make my bond pass for a hundred pound'ith City.


Quo. What alone sir?


Easi. Alone sir: who says so? perhaps i would send down for a Tennant or too.


Quo. I, that is another case sir.


Easy. Another case let it be then.


Quo. Nay, grow not into anger sir.


Easy. Not take me into a Bond, as good as you shall good man Goose-cap.


Quo. Well Master Blastfield, because I will not disgrace the Gentleman, i am
content for once, but we must not make a practice on it.


Easi. No sir, now you would you shall not.


Quo. Cuds me, i am undone, he is gone again.


Short. The Netts broke.


Toma. Hold there dear Gentleman.


Easy. Deny me that small curtizie? s'foot a very Jew will not deny it me.


Short. Now must I catch him warily.


Easy. A jest indeed, not take me into a Bond quo they.


Short. Master Easy -- Mark my words, if it stood not upon the eternal
loss of thy credit against Supper --


Easy. Mass that is true.


Short. The pawning of thy horse for his own Vittailes.


Eas. Right in faith.


Sho. And thy utter dissolution amongst Gentlemen for e^^er.


Eas. Pox on it.


Sho. Quomodo should hang, rot, stink.


Quo. Sweet boy in faith.


Sho. Drop Dam.


Quo. Excellent Shortyard.


Eas. I forgot all this: what meant I to ^wagger before I had money in my
purse? how does master Quomodo? is the Bond ready?


Quo. Oh sir.


Enter Dustbox the Scriuener. Eas. Come we must be friends, here is my hand.


Quo. Give it the Scriuener: here he comes.


Dust. Good day Master Quomodo, good morrow Gentlemen.


Quo. We must require a little aid from your pen, good master Dustbox.


Dust. What be the Gentlemen's names that are bound sir?


Quo. Master John Blastfield Esquireith wild of Kent, and what do they call
your bed f^llowes name?


Sho. Master Richard Easy: you may easily hit on it.


Quo. Master Richard Easy of Essex Gentleman, both bound to Ephestian Quomodo
Citizen and Draper of London: the sum two hundred pound. What Time do you
take master Blastfield for the payment?


Sho. I never pass my Month you know.


Quo. I know it sir. October sixteenth to day, sixteenth of November say.


Eas. Is it your custom to return so soon sir?


Sho. I never miss you.


Enter Falslight like a Porter, sweating. Falls. I am come for the rest of the
same price master Quomodo.


Quo. Star-marke, this is it, are all the rest gone?


Fa^. Thei'r all at Master Stilyard downs by this time.


Eas. How the poor raskall's all in a froth?


Sho. Push, their ordaind to sweat for Gentlemen, -- Porters backs and women's
bellies bear up the world.


Eas. It Is true in faith, they bear men and money, and that is the world.


Sho. Ye'aue found it sir.


Dust. I Am ready to your hands Gentlemen.


Sho. Come Master Easy.


Eas. I beseech you sir.


Sho. It shall be yours I say.


Eas. Nay pray master Blastfield.


Sho. I will not in faith.


Eas. What do you mean sir?


Sho. I should show little bringing up, to take the way of a stranger.


Eas. By my troth you do your self wrong tho master Blastfield.


Sho. Not a whit sir.


Eas. But to avoid strife, you shall have your will of me for once.


Sho. Let it be so I pray.


Quo. Now I begin to set one foot upon the land, me thinks I am felling of
Trees already, we shall have some Essex Loggs yet to keep Christmasse with,
and that is a comfort.


Toma. Now is he quarting out the Executioner.
Strides over him: with his own blood he writes:
I am no Dame that can endure such sights.

Exit. Sho. So his right wing is cut, will not fly far
Past the two City hazards, Poultrie, and Woodstreete.

Eas. How like you my Roman hand in faith?


Dust. Exceeding well sir, but that you rest too much upon your R. and make
your ease too little.


Eas. I Will mend that presently.


Dust. Nay it is done now, past mending: you both deliver this to master Quomodo
as your deed?


Sho. We do sir.


Quo. I thank you Gentlemen,


Sho. Would the Coin would come away now, we have deserved for it


Enter Falslight with the cloth. Falsl. By your leave a little Gentlemen.


Sho. How now? what is the matter? speak?


Falsl. As fast as I can sir -- All the clothes come back a^ genesis


Quo. How?


Sho. What Is the news?


Falsl. The passage to Middle borrow is stopped, and therefore neither Master
Still yard-downe, nor Master Beggerland, nor any other Mercha^t will deliver
present money vppon't.


Quo. Why what hard luck have you Gentlemen?


Eas. Why Master Blastfield?


Sho. Pish --


Easi. You Are so discontented too presently, a man cannot tell how to speak to
you?


Sho. Why what would you say?


Ea. We must make some what on it now sir.


Sho. I where? how? the best is it lies all upon my neck, Master Quomodo,
can you help me to any money fort? speak


Quo. Troth Master Blastfield, since my self is so unfurnished, I know not
the means how, there is one 'ith street a new setter up, if any lay out money
vppon't twill be he.


Sho. His name:


Quo. Master Idem -- but you know we cannot give but greatly to your loss,
because we gain and live by it.


Sho. Sfoo't will he give any thing.


Ea. I, stand upon that.


Sho. Will he give any thing? -- the Brokers will give nothing? to no purpose.


Quo. Falslight.


Falsl. Over your head sir.


Quo. Desire Master Idem to come presently and look vppo'th cloth.


Falls. I will sir.


Sho. What if he should offer but a hundred pound?


Eas. If he want twenty on it lets take it.


Sho. Say you so?


Ea. Master Quomodo we will have four or five hundred pound for you of his
own within three or four days.


Sho. It Is true, he said so indeed.


Eas. Is That your wife master Quomodo?


Quo. That Is she, little Tomazin?


Eas. Under your leave sir, i will show my self a Gentleman.


Quo. Do, and welcome Master Easy.


Ea. I have commission for what I do Lady from your Husband.


Toma. You may have a stronger commission for the next, an't please you, that is
from my self.


Enter Sim. Eas. You teach me the best law Lady.


Toma. Beshrew my blood, a proper, springfull, and a sweet Gentleman.


Quo. My Son: Sim Quomodo? here is more work for you Master Easy, you must
salute him too, for he is like to be heir of thy land I can tell thee.


Sim. Vim, vitam, sprinque salutem.


Quo. He shows you there he was a Cambridge man sir, but now he is a Templer,
has he not good grace to make a Lawyer?


Eas. A very good grace to make a Lawyer.


Sho. For indeed he has no grace at all.


Quo. Some gave me counsel to make him a Divine.


Eas. Fie, fie.


Quo. But some of our liuerie think it an unfit thing, that our own Sons
should tell us of our vices: others, to make him a Physician, but then being my
heir, i am afraid he would make me away: now a Lawyer thei'r all willing
too, because it is good for our trade and increases, the number of
Cloath-gownes, and indeed it is the fittest for a Citizens Son, for our word
is, what do ye lack? and their word is what do you give.


Easi. Exceeding propper.


Enter Falsight for Master Idem. Quo. Master Idem welcome.


Falls. I have seen the cloth sir.


Quo. Very well.


Falls. I am but a young setter up, the uttermost I dare ventture upon it is
threescore pound.


Shs. What?


Falst. If it be for me, so, I am for it: if not, you have your does and I have
my money.


Easi. Nay, pray master Blastfield refuse not his kind offer.


Shs. A bargain then master Idem, clap hands -- he is finely cheated: come,
let us all to the next Tavern and see the money paid.


Eas. A match.


Quo. I follow you Gentlemen, take my Son along with you.

Exeunt. Now to my keys: ^^me Master Idem, he must fetch the money, first
have I caught him in a bond for two hundred pound, and my two hundred pounds
worth a doath again for threescore pound: admire me all you studyents at Innes
for cousenage.


Exit. Finis Actus ses^^dus.
Incipit Actus Tertius.
Enter Let^es pa^der, Helgill, the Cau^trie wench coming in with a new (...)
Gawne dressed Gentlewoman like, the Tailor p^intes it, and a Tyrewomen busy
about her head. Helg. You talk of an alteration, here is the thing it self,
what base birthe does not raiment make glorious? and what glorious birthes do
not ^agges make infamous? why should not a woman confess what she is now?
fince the finest are but deluding shadows, begot between Tyr^^omen and
Tailors? for instance, behold their Parents.


Com. Say what you will, this wire becomes you best, how say you Tailor?


Tail. I promise you it is a wire would draw me from my work seven days a
week.


Curt. Why do you work a sundaies Tailor?


Tailor. Hardest of al a Sundaie, because we are most forbidden


Curt. Troth and so do most of us women, the better day the better deed we
think.


Com. Excellent exceeding in faith, a narrow card wire sets out a cheek so fat
and so full, and if you be ruled by me, you shall wear your hair still like a
Mock-face behind, it is such an Italian world, many men know not Before from
Behind.


Tail. How like you the sitting of this gown now Mistress Comings?


Com. It sits at marvelous good Ease, and comely discretion.


Helg. Who would think now this fine Sophisticated squal came out of the
Bosom of a Barn, and the loins of a Haytosser.


Curt. Out you saucy pestiferous Pander, I scorn that in faith.


Helg. Excellent, already the true phrase and style of a strumpet, stay, a
little more of the red, and then I take my leave of your Cheek for four and
twenty hours -- Do you not think it impossible that her own Father should
know her now, if he saw her?


Curt. Why I think no less, how can he know me, when I scarce know my self.


Helg: It Is right.


Curt. But so well you lay wait for a man for me.


Helg. I protest I have bestowed much labor about it, and in fit Time, good
news I hope.


Enter one bringing in her Father in disguise to serve her. 1 Iu'e found one
yet at last, in whose preferment I hope to reap credit.

Curt. Is that the fellow?

1 Lady it is.


Curt. Art thou willing to serve me fellow?


Fath. So please you, he that has not the heart to serve such a Mistress as
your beautiful self, deserves to be honored for a fool, or Knighted for a
Coward.


Curtiz. There Is to many of them already.


Fath. Twere sin then to raise the number.


Curt. Well, we will try both our likings for a month, and then either proceed,
or let fall the suite.


Fath. Be it as you have spoke, but it is my hope A longer Term.


Curt. No truly, our Term ends once a month, we should get more then the
Lawyers, for they have but four Terms a year, and we have twelve, and that
makes them run so fast to us in the Vacation.


Fath. A mistress of of a choice beauty, amongst such imperfect creatures I ha
not seen a perfecter: I should have reckoned the fortunes of my Daughter
amongst the happiest, had she lighted into such a service, whereas now I rest
doubt full, whom or where she serves.


Curt. There Is for your bodily advice Tailor, and there is for your
head-counsell, and I discharge you both till to morrow morning again.


Tay. At which time our neatest Attendance.


Coin. I pray have an especial care howsoever you stand or lie, that nothing
fall upon your hair to batter your wire.


Exeunt Curt. I warrant you for that -- which Gown becomes me best now, the
purple Satin or this?


Helg. If my opinion might rule over you --


Enter Lethe with Rerage and Salewood. Leth. Come gallants, i will bring you to a
Beauty shall stricke your eyes into your hearts, what you see you shall desire,
yet never enjoy.


Rer. And that is a Villainous torment.


Sale. And is she but your vnderput Master Lethe?


Leth. No more of my credit, and a Gentlewoman of a great house, Noble
parentage, unmatchable Education, my plain Pung. I may, grace her with the name
of a Curtizan, a Backslider, a Prostitution, or such a Toy, but when all comes
^o al it is but a plain Pung, look you Gentlemen, that is she, behold her.


Curt. Oh my beloved strayer! I consume in thy absence.


Leth. La you now -- you shall not say i will be proud to you Gentlemen, I give
you leave to salute her* I me afraid of nothing now, but that she will utterly
disgrace them, turn tail to them, and place their kisses behind her, no by my
faith, she deceiues me, by my troth sha's kissed am both with her lips: I thank
you for that music masters, sli'd they both court her at once, and see if she
ha not the wit to stand still and let them: I think if two men were brewde into
one, there is that woman would drink them up both.


Rerg. A Cockscombe, he a Courtier.


Curt. He says he has a place there.


Sale. So has the Fool a better place then he, and can come where he dare not
show his head.


Leth. Nay, he are you me Gentlemen.


Sale. I protest you were the last man we spoke on, we are a little busy yet,
pray stay there a while, we will come to you presently.


Leth. This is good in faith, endure this and be a slave forever, since you
neither savor of good breeding nor bringing up, I Will slice your hamstrings but
i will make you show mannerly -- pox on you, leave courting, I ha not the heart to
hurt an Englishman in faith, or else --


Sale. What else?


Leth. Prithee lets be merry, nothing else -- here, fetch some wine.


Curt. Let my Servant go for it.


Let. Yours, which is he?


Sho. This sir, but I scarce like my Mistress now: the loins can nere be safe
where the Flies be so busy -- Wit by experience bought foyles wit at
School: Who proves a deeper knave then a Spent fool, I am gone for your
worships wine sir.


Helg. Sir, you put up too much indignity, bring company to cut your own
throat, the fire is not yet so hot, that you need two Screenes before it, it is
but new kindled yet, if twere risse to a flame, I could not blame you the^ to
put others before you but alas all the heat yet is comfortable a cherrisher,
not a defacer.


Let. Prithee let them alone, they will be ashamed o^t anon I troe, if they have
any grace in 'em.


Helg. I Would feign have him quarrel, fight, and be assuredlye killed, that I might
beg his place: for there is nere a one void yet.


Enter Shortyard with Easy. Curt. You Will make him mad anon.


Sale. It Is to that end.


Sho. Yet at last, Master Quomodo is as firm as his promise.


Eas. Did I not tell you still he would.


Sho. Let me see, I am seven hundred pound in bond now to the Rascal.


Eas. Nay you are no less Master Blastfield, look to it, by my troth, I must
needs confess sir, you ha been vncommonly kind to me, since I ha been in
Town, but master Alsup shall know on it.


Sho. That Is my Ambition sir.


Eas. I beseech you sir. Stay, this is Lethes haunt, see, we have caught him.


Leth. Master Blastfield and Master Easy, you are kind Gentlemen both.


Sho. Is that the beauty you famde so?


Leeh. The same.


Sho. Who be those so industrious about her?


Let. Rerage and Salewood: ^le tell you the vnmannerlyest trick of them, that
ever you heard in your life.


Sho. Prithee what is that?


Leth. I ^nuyfed them hither to look upon her, brought them along with me, gave
them leave to salute her in kindness, what do they but most sawcilie fall in
love with her, very impudently court her for themselves, and like two craftye
Atturneyes, finding a hole in my lease, go about to defeat me of my right.


Sho. Ha they so little conscience?


Leth. The most vnciuilst part that you have seen, I know they will be sorry
for it when they have done, for there is no man but gives a sigh after his sin of
women, I know it by my self.


Sho. You parcel of a rude, saucy and unmannerly nation.


Lethe. One good thing in him, heel tell them ont roundly.


Sho. Cannot a Gentleman purchase a little fire to thawe his appetite by, but
must you that have been daily sindg'd in the flame, be as greedy to beguile
him on it? how can it appear in you but maliciously, and that you go about to
engrosse hell to your selves? he auen forbid, that you should not suffer a
stranger to come in, the Devil himself is not so unmannerly, I do not think
but some of them rather will be wise enough to beg* Offices there before you,
and keep you out, marry all the spite will be they cannot sell them again.


Eas. Come, are you not to blame -- not to give place? -- To us I mean --


Let. A worse and a worse disgrace.


Cur. Nay Gentlemen, you wrong us both then, stand from me, I protest i will draw
my silver Bodkin upon you.


Sho. Clubs, clubs, -- Gentlemen stand upon your Guard.


Curt. A Gentlewoman must swagger a little now and then I perceive, there would
be no civility in her Chamber else, though it be my hard fortune to have my
keeper there a coward, the thing that is kept is a Gentlewoman borne.


Sho. And to conclude a Coward, infallible of your side, why do you think
in faith I took you to be a Coward? do I think you will turn your back to any
man living? you will be whipped first.


Eas. And then indeed she turns her back to some man living.


Sho. But that man shows himself a Knave, for he dares not show his own
face when he does it, for some of the common Counsel in Henry the eights
days thought it modesty at that time, that one Vizzard should look upon
another.


Easi. It Was honestly considered of them in faith.


Enter Mother Gruill. Sho. How now? what piece of stuff comes here?


Leth. Now some good news yet to recover my Repute, and grace me in this
company; Gentlemen, are we friends among our selves?


Sho. Vinited.


Leth. Then here comes Reuish to confirm our Amity -- Wag* tail, salute
them all they are friends.


Curt. Then saving my quarrel to you all.


Sho. Toe's all


Curt. Now be shrowe your hearts, and you do not.


Sho. To sweet Master Lethe.


Let. Let it flow this way dear Master Blastfield, Gentlemen to you all.


Sho. This Re^ish wine is like the scowring-sticke to a gun, it makes the
Barrel clear: it has an excelent virtue, it keeps all the Sinckes in man
and woman's body sweet in June and July, and to say truth, if Ditches were not
cast once a year, and Drabs once a Month, there would be no abiding in the
City.


Let. Gentlemen, i will make you privy to a letter I sent.


Sho. A letter comes well after privy, it makes amends.


Let. There Is one Quomodo* a Drapers Daughter in town whom for her happy
portion I wealthily affect.


Rer. And not for love? this makes for me his Rival, bear witness.


Leth. The Father does elect me for the man, The Daughter says the same.


Sho. Are you not well?


Le. Yes all but for the mother, she is my sickness.


Sho. Birlady and the Mother is a pestilent, wilful, troublesome sickness I
can tell you, if she light upon you handsomlye.


Let. I find it so: she for a stranger pleades: Whose name I ha not learned.


Rer. And ene now he called me by it.


Let. Now as my letter told her, since only her consent kept aloof of, what
might I think on it, but that she merely dooted upon me herself.


Sho. Very assuredly.


Salt. This makes still for you.


Sho. Did you let it go so in faith?


Leth. You may believe it sir, now what says her answer?


Sho. I, her answer.


Gruil. She says you are a base proud knave, and like your worship.


Leth. How?


Sho. Nay, hear out her answer, or there is no goodness in you.


Grui. You ha forgot she says in what pickle your worship came up, and brought
two of your friends to give their words for a suit of green Kersye.


Leth. Drudge, peace, or --


Sho. Show your self a Gentleman, she had the patience to read your letter
which was as bad as this can be, what will she think on it, not hear her
answer? speak, good his drudge.


Guil. And as for her Daughter, she hopes she will be ruled by her in time, and
not be carried away with a cast of Manchets, a bottle of Wine, and a Custard,
which once made her Daughter sick, because you came by it with a bad
conscience.


Let. Gentlemen, i am all in a sweat.


Sho. That Is very wholesome for your body, nay you must keep in your arms.


Gru. Then she demanded of me whether I was your worships Ant or no?


Let. Out, out, out, Gru. Alas said I, I am a poor drudge of his.


Faith and thou were his Mother (quoth she) heed make thee his Dru dge I
warrant him --

Marry out upon him (quoth I) an't like your worship.

Leth. Horror, horror, i am smothered, let me go, torment me not.


Exit. Sho. And you love me, lets follow him Gentlemen.


All. Agreed.


Exeunt Sho. I count a hundred pound well spent to pursue a good jest Master
Easy.


Easi. By my troth I begin to bear that mind too.


Sho. Well said in faith, hang money-good jests are worth silver at all times.


Eas. They Are worth gold Master Blastfield.


Exeunt. Curt. Do you deceive me so? are you toward marriage in faith Master
Lethe it shall go hard but i will forbid the Banes, i will send a messe^ger into
your bones, another into your pursse but i will do it.


Exit. Fath. Thou fair and wicked Creature, steept in Art,
Beauteous and fresh, the soul the fowlest part.
A common Filth, is like a House possessed,
Where if not spoild, you will come out fraide at least,
This service likes not me, though I rest poor,
I hate the basest use to screene a whore.
The human stroke nere made him, he that can
Be Bawd to Woman, never leapt from man.
Some monster wunne his Mother,
I wished my poor child hither, doubled wrong,
A month and such, a mistress were too long,
Yet here a while in others lives i will see,
How former follyes, did appear in me.

Exit. Enter Easy with Shortyards Boy. Eas. Boy.


Boy. Anon sir.


Eas. Where left you Master Blastfield your master, say you?


Boy. An hour since I left him in Paul's sir -- but you will not find him the
same man again next time you meet him.


Eas. Methinks I have noe being without his company it is so full of kindenes
and delight, I hold him to be the only Companyon in earth.


Boy. I, as Companions go now adays that help to spend a man's money.


Eas. So full of nimble wit, various discourse, praegnant apprehension, and
uncommon entertainment, he might keep Company with any Lord for his grace.


Boy. I, with any Lord that were past it.


Eas. And such a good free hearted honest, affable kind of Gentleman: Come Boy
a heaviness will possess me till I see him.


Exit. Boy. But you will find your self heauyer then, by a seven hundred pound
weight, -- Alas poor Birds that cannot keep the sweet Country, where they
slye at pleasure, but must needs come to London to have their wings clipped, and
are feign to go hopping home again.


Exit. Enter Shortyard and Falslight like a Sarieant and a Yeoman to arrest
Easy. Sho. So, No man is so impudent to deny that -- Spirits can change their
shapes, and soonest of all into Sergeants: because they are Coosen Germans to
spirits, for there is but two kind of arrests till Doomes-day, the Devil for
the soul, the Sergeant for the body, but afterward the devil arrests body
and soul Sergeant and all, if they be knaves still, and deserve it* now my
yeoman ^aslight.


Falls. I Attend you good Serjant Shortyard.


Shor. No more master Blastfield now -- poor Easy hardly be set.


Fals^. But how if he should go to prison, weere in a mad state then, being
not Sergeants.


Sho. Never let^^ come near thy belee^e that heel take prison, or stand out
in law, knowing the debt to be due, but still expect the presence of Master
Blastfield, kind M. Blastfield, worshipful M Blastfield -- and at the last --


Boy. Master Shortyard, master Falslight.


Sho. The Boy: a warning-piece, -- see where he comes.


Enter Easy with the Boy. Eas. Is not in paul's.


Boy. He is not far off sure sir.


Eas. When was his hovre say thou?


Boy. Two sir.


Eas. Why two has struck.


Boy. No sir, they are now a striking.


Sho. Master Richard Easy of Essex we arrest you.


Eas. Ha?


Boy. Alas a Surgeon, he is hurt ith shoulder.


Sho. Deliver your weapons quietly sir.


Eas. Why what is the matter?


Sho. You Are arrested at the suite of M. Quomodo.


Eas. Master Quomodo?


Sho. How strange you make it, you are a landed Gentleman sir, I knew it is but a
trisse, a bond of seven hundred pound.


Eas. La, I know you had mistook, you should arrest One Master Blastfield,
it is his bond, his debt.


Sho. Is not your name there?


Eas. True, for fashions sake.


Sho. Why and it is for fashions sake that we arrest you.


Eas. Nay, and it be no more, I yield to that: I know Master Blastfield will
see me take no injury as long as i am in town, for Master Alsups sake.


Sho. Whose that Sir?


Eas. An honest Gentleman in Essex.


Sho. Oh, In Essex! I thought you had been in London, where now your business
lies, honestye from Essex will be a great while a coming sir, you should look
out an honest pair of Citizens.


Eas. Alas sir, I know not where to find them.


Sho. No, there is enough in Town.


Eas^. I know not one by my troth, I am a mere stranger for these parts,
Master Quomodo is all, and the honestest that I know.


Sho. To him then lets set forward: -- Yeoman Spiderman, castan eye about for
Master Blastfield.


Eas. Boy -- Alas the poor boy was frighted away at first.


Sho. Can you blame him sir -- we that daily fray away Knight's, may fright
away Boys I hope.


Exeunt. Enter Quomodo with the Boy. Quo. Ha? have they him say thou?


Boy. As sure as --


Quo. The land's mine, that's sure enough boy.
Let me advance thee knave, and give thee a kiss,
My pl^t's so firm I dare it now to miss.
Now shall I be diuulgde a landed man,
Throughout the liuerie: -- one points, another whispers,
A third frets inwardly: let him fret and hang,
Especially his envy I shall have,
That would be feign, yet cannot be a knave,
Like an old leather girt in furde Gown,
Whose mind stands stiff but his performance down.
Now come my golden days in: -- whither is the worshipful
master Quomodo, and his fair Bedfellow rid forth,
To his land in Essex? whence comes those goodly load of
Logs? from his land in Essex? where grows this pleasant
fruit, says one Citizens wife in the row; at master Quomodos
Orchard in Essex; oh, oh, does it so, I thank you for
that good news in faith.

Boy. Here they come with him sir.


Quo. Grant me patience in my joys, that being so great I run not mad with
'em.


Sho. Bless master Quomodo.


Quo. How now Sergeants? who ha you brought me here, master Easy?


Eas. Why la you now Sergeants, did I not tell you you mistook?


Quo. Did you not hear me say. I had rather ha had master Blastfield, the more
sufficient man a great deal?


Sho. Very true sir, -- but this Gentleman lighting into our hands first --


Quo. Why did you so sir?


Sho. We thought good to make use of that opportunity, and hold him fast.


Quo. You did well in that I must needs say, for your own securities, but
it was not my mind master Easy to have you first, you must needs think so.


Eas. I dare swear that master Quomodo.


Quo. But since you are come to me, I have no reason to refuse you, I should
show little manners in that sir.


Eas. But I hope you spoke not in that sense sir, to impose the bond upon me.


Quo. By my troth that is my meaning sir, you shall find me an honest man, you
see I mean what I say, is not the day past, the money vntendred, you would ha me
live uprightly master Easy?


Eas. Why sir, you know master Blastfield is the man.


Quo. Why sir, I know master Blastfield is the man, but is he any more then one
man? two entered into bond to me, or I Am fowly coozn'd.


Eas. You know my entrance was but for fashion sake.


Quo. Why, i will a gree to you, you will grant it is the fashion likewise when the
Bond's due to have the money paid again.


Sho. So we told him sir, and that it lay in your worships curtezie to arrest
which you please.


Quo. Marie does it sir, these fellows know the law, -- beside, you offered
yourself into Bond to me you know, when I had no stomach to you, now beshrew
your heart for your labor, I might ha had a good substantial Citizen, that
would ha paid the sum roundly, although I think you sufficient enough for seven
hundred pound, beside the forfeyture, I would be loath to disgrace you so much
before Sergeants.


Eas. If you would has patience sir, I do not think but master Blasefield
is at Carriers to receive the money.


Quo. He will prove the honester man then, and you the better discharged, I
wonder he should break with me, it was never his practice, you must not be
angry with me now, tho you were somewhat hot when you entered into Bond, you
may easily go in angerly, but you cannot come out so.


Eas. No, the Devils in it for that.


Sho. Do you here sir, a my troth we pity you, ha you any store of Crowns
about you?


Eas. Faith a poor store, yet they shall be at their service that will strive
to do me good, -- we were both drunk last night, and ^eer thought upon the
bond.


Sho. I must tell you this, you have fell in to the hands of a most merciless
deuourer, the very gul athe city, should you offer him money, Goods or lands
now, he would rather have your body in prison, he is a such a nature. Eas. Prison
we are undone then.


Sho. He Is a such a nature, look? -- Let him owe any man a spite^ what is his
course: he will lend him money to day, a purpose to rest him tomorrow.


Eas. Defend me?


Sho. Has at least sixteen at this instant proceeded in both the Counters:
some batchler, some masters, some doctors of captivity of 20. years standing
and he desires nothing more then imprisonment.


Eas. Would Ma. Blastfield would come away.


Sho. I, then things would not be as they are -- what will you say to us if
we procure you two substantial subsidy Citizens to bail you spite on's
heart, and set you at liberty to find out master Blastfield.


Eas. Sergeant! here, take all, i will be dear to you, do but perform it.


Sho. Much.


Falls. Enough sweet Sergeant, I hope I understand thee.


Sho. I love to prevent the malice of such a rascal, perhaps you might find
master Blastfield to night.


Eas. Why, we lie together man, there is the jest on it.


Sho. Fie. -- and you will seek to secure your bail, because they will be two
Citizens of good account, you must do that for your credit sake.


Eas. I Will be bound to save them harmless.


Sho. A pox on him, you cut his throat then, -- no words.


Eas. What Is it you require me master Quomodo?


Quo. You know that before this time I hope sir, present money, or present
imprisonment.


Sho. I told you so.


Eas. We nere had money of you.


Quo. You had commodities, an't please you


Eas. Well, may I not crave so much liberty upon my word, to seek out master
Blastfield?


Quo. Yes, and you would not laugh at me: we are sometimes Gulls to Gentlemen*
I thank 'em; but Gentlemen are never Gulls to us, I commend 'em.


Sho. Under your leave master Quomodo, the Gentleman craves the furtherance of
an hour, and it sorts well with our occasion at this time, having a little
urgent business at Guildhall, at which minute we will return, and see what
agreement is made.


Quo. Nay take him along with you Sergeant.


Eas. I Am undone then.


Sho. He Is your prisoner; and being safe in your house at your own disposing,
you cannot deny him such a request: beside, he has a little faith in Ma.
Blastfields coming sir.


Quo. Let me not be too long delaid I charge you.


Eas. Not an hour in faith sir.


Exeunt. Quo. O master Easy, of all men living I never dream* you would ha
done me this injury: make me would my credit, fail in my commodities, ring
my state into suspicion: for the breaking of your day to me, has broken my day
to others.


Eas. You tell me of that still, which is no fault of mine master Quomodo.


Quo. Oh what is a man but his honesty master Easy, and that's a fault amongst
most of us all, -- Mark but this note, I Will give you good counsel now, -- as
often as you give your name to a bond, you must think you christen a child, and
take the charge on it too: for as the one, the bigger it grows the more cost it
requires: so the other the longer it lies, the more charges it puts you too,
only here is the difference a child must be broke, and a bond must not, the
more you break children, the more you keep 'em under: but the more you break
bonds, the more they will leap in your face, and therefore, to conclude, I would
never undertake to be Gossip to that bond which I would not see well brought
up.


Eas. Say you so sir? -- I Will think upon your counsel hereafter for it.


Quo. Ah fool, thou should near ha tasted such wit but that I know it is
too late.


Tom. The more I grieve:


Quo. To put all this into the compass of a little hoop Ring
Make this account, come better days or worse,
So many bonds abroad, so many boys at nurse.

Eas. A good medicine for a short memory: -- but since, you have entered so
far, whose children are desperate depts I pray?


Quo. Faith they are like the of-springs of stolen lust, put to the hospital,
their fathers are not to be found, they are either too far abroad, or too close
within, and thus for your memories sake.

The desperate Debtor hence deriues his name,
One that has neither money, land nor fame,
All that he makes, prove Bestards, and not Bonds,
But such as yours, at first are horn^ to lands.

Eas. But all that I beget hereafter ^le so one disinherit Master Quomodo.


Quo. In the mean time heeres a shrewd knave will disinherit you.


Eas. Well, to put you out of all doubt Master Quomodo, i will not trust to your
curtezie, I ha sent for bail.


Quo. How? you have co^z^ed me there y^aith.


Eas. Since the worst comes to the worst, I have those friends 'ith City, I
hope that will not suffer me to lie for seven hundred pound.


Quo. And you told me you had no friends here at all, how should a man trust
you now?


Eas. That was but to try your Courtesy M. Quomodo.


Quo. How vnco^scionably he gulls himself -- they must be wealthye subsidie-men
sir, at least fortye pound 'ith Kings Books I can tell you, that do such a
feate for you.


Enter Shortyard and Falslight, like wealthy Citizens in Satin suits. Eas.
Here they come what so ere they are.


Quo. Berlady Aldermans Deputies, I am very sorrye for you sir, I cannot
refuse such men.


Sho. Are you the Gentleman in distress?


Eas. None more then my self sir.


Quo. He speaks truer then he thinks, for if he knew, The hearts that owe
those faces -- a dark shop's good for somewhat.


Eas. That was all sir.


Shor. And that is enough, for by that meanes' you have made your self ^able to
the Bond, as well as that Basefield


Eas. Blastfield sir.


Sho. Oh (...) ^ou mercy it is Blastfield indeed.


Eas. But under both your worships favors I know where to find him presently.


Sho. That Is all your refuge.


Boy. News, good news Master Easy.


Eas. What boy?


Boy. Master Blastfield ^y master ha^ received a tho (...) pound, and will be
at his lodging at supper.


Easy. Happy^ news, hear you that Master Quomodo?


Quo. It Is enough for you to hear that, you are the fortunate man sir.


Eas. Not now I beseech your good worships.


Sho. Gentleman, what is your to^her name?


Eas. Easy.


Sho. O Master Easy -- I would we could rather pleasure you otherwise Master
Easy, you should soon perceive it, i will speak a proud word we have pitied
more Gentlemen in distress, then any two Citizens within the freedom -- but
to be bail to sea^en hundred pound action, is a matter of shroud weight.


Eas. I Will be bound to secure you.


Shor. Tut, what is your bond sir?


Eas. Body, goods, and Lands, immediately before Master Quomodo.


Sho. Shall we venture once again, that have been so often undone by Gentlemen?


Fall. I have no great stomach to it, it will appear in us more pity then
wisdom.


Eas. Why should you say so sir?


Sho. I like the Gentleman's face well, he does not look as if he would
deceive us.


Eas. O not I sir.


Sho. Come we will make a desperate voyage once again, we will try his honesty,
and take his single bond, of body Goods and Lands.


Eas. I dearly thank you sir.


Sho. Master Quomodo?


Quo. Your worships.


Shortyard. We have took a Course to set your prisoner free.


Quo. Your worships are good bail you content me.


Sho. Come then, and be a witness to a Re^ullisance.


Quo. With all my heart sir.


Sho. Master Easy, you must have an especial care now to find out that
Blastfield.


Eas. I shall have him at my lodging sir.


Sho. The (...) will (...) you selse, Master Quomodo will come upon vt, and
(...) you.


Eas. I know that sir.


Sho. Well since I see you have such a good mind to be honest ^e lea^e some
greater (...) sweat with you to find him my self.


Eas. H^are then my mis^rie ends (...) A strangers kindness often exceedes a
friends.


Exeunt. (...). Thou art deceiu^d thy misery but begins,
"To beguile goodness, is the coare of sins.
My love is such unto ^hee, that I die
As often as thou drink'st up (...)*
Yet have no means to warn thee from't, for he
"That sowes in Craft, does rape in Jealousy.

Rerrage. Now the letters made up and all, it wants but the print of a s^ale,
and away it goes to Master Quomodo: Andrew Le^he is well whipped in it, his name
stands in a white sheet here, and do^s penance for him.


Sale. You have shame enough against him, if that be good.


Rer. First as a contempt of that reverend Ceremony, he has in hand, to wit,
marriage.


Sale. Why do you say to wit marriage, when you know there is none will marry
that is wise.


R^r. Had it not more need then, to have wit to put to it if it be grown to a
^olly?


Sale. Y'^ue ^un, i will giue't you.


Rerag. It Is no thanks now, -- but as I was saying: as a soul contempt to that
sacred ceremony, he most audaciouslye keeps a Drab in town, and to be free
from the interruption of blew Beadles, and other bawdy Officers, he most
politickly lodges her in a Constables house.


Sale. That Is a pretty point in faith.


Rer. And so the wa^ch that should fe^ch her out* are her chiefest guard to
keepeher in.


Sale. It must needs be for look how the Constable plays his Conscience, the
watchmen will follow the suite.


Rer. Why well then.


Enter Easy with Shortyard like a Citizen. Eas. All night from me he is hurt,
he is made away.


Sho. Where shall we seek him now? you lead me fair ^aunt's sir.


Eas. Pray keep a little patience sir, I shall find him at last you shall see.


Sho. A Citizen of my e^se and substance to walk so long a foot.


Eas. You should ha had my horse but that he has eaten out his head sir.


Sho. How would you had me hold him by the tail sir then?


Eas. Manners forbid, it is no part of my meaning sir, -- oh here is Master
Rerage, and Master Salewood, now we shall hear of him presently: -- Gntlemen
both.


Sale. Master Easy, how fare you sir?


Eas. Very well in health, did you see Master Blastfield this morning?


Sale. I was about to move it to you.


Rer. We were all three in a mind then.


Sale. I ha not set eye on him these two days.


Rer. I wonder he keeps so long from us in faith.


Eas. I began to be sick.


Sal. Why, what is the matter?


Eas. Nothing in troth, but a great desire I had to have seen him.


Rer. I wonder you should miss on it lately, you are his bedfelow


Eas. I lay alone to night in faith, -- I do not know how, O here comes master
Lethe, he can dispatch me: Master Lethe!


Leth. What Is your name sir? -- O cry you mercy master Easy.


Eas. When parted you from master Blastfield sir?


Leth. Blastfield's an Ass, I have sought him these two days to beat him.


Eas. Your self all alone sir?


Leth. I, and three more. --


Exit. Sho. I am glad, I am where I am then, I perceive it was time of all hands.


Rer. Content in faith, let us trace him.


Exount after Lethe. Sho. What? have you found him yet? neither? what is to be
done now? i will venture my body no further for any Gentleman's pleasure, I know
not how soon I may be called upon, and now to ouer-heate my self. --


Eas. I Am undone.


Sho. This is you that slept with him, you can make fools of us, but i will turn
you over to Quomodo fort.


Eas. Good sir.


Sho. I Will prevent mine own danger.


Eas. I beseech you sir.


Sho. Tho I love Gentlemen well, I do not mean to be undone for 'em.


Eas. Pray sir, let me request you sir, sweet sir, I beseech you sir.


Exeunt. Music. Finit Actus tertius.
Incipit quartus.
Enter Quomodo, his disguised spirits, after whom Easy follows hard. Sho.
Made fools of us! not to be found!


Quo. What, what?


Eas. Do not undo me quite tho Ma Quomodo.


Quo. You Are very welcome, master Easy, I ha nothing to say to you, i will not
touch you, you may go when you please, -- I have good bail here I thank
their worships.


Eas. What shall I say, or whom shall I beseech*


Sho. Gentlemen, S'lid they were borne to undo us I think, but for my part, I Will
make an oath before master Qomodo here, nere to do Gentlemen good while I
live.


Falls. I Will not be long behind you.


Sho. Away; if you had any grace in you, you would be ashamed to look us ith
face, ywis I wonder with what browe you can come amongst us, I should seek my
fortunes fa^re enough if I were you, and neither return to Essex, to be a
shame to my predecessors, nor remain about London, to be a mock to my
successors.


Quo. Subtle Shortyard!


Sho. Here are his lands forfeyted to us master Quomodo, and to avoid the
inconscionable trouble of law, all the assi^^ance he made to us, we willingly
resign to you.


Quo. What shall I do with Rubbish, give me money: It Is for your worships to
have land, that keep great houses, I should be hoysted.


Sho. But master Quomodo, if you would but conceive it aright, the land would
fall fitter to you then to us.


Eas. Curtzing about my land.


Sho. You have a towardly son and heir as we hear.


Quo. I must needs say, he is a Templer indeed.


Sho. We have neither posterity in Town nor hope for any abroad; we have
wives, but the marks have been out of their mouths these twenty years, and
as it appears, they did little good when they were in: we could not stand
about it sir, to g^t riches and children too* it is more then one man can do.
And I am of those Citizens minds that say, let our wi^es make shift for
children and they will, they get none of us; and I cannot think, but he that
has both much wealth and many children, has had more helps coming in then
himself.


Quo. I am not a Bow wide of your mind sir. -- And for the thristie and
covetous hopes I have in my son and heir Sim Qmomodo, that he will never
trust his land in Wax and Parchment as many Gentlemen have done before him.


Eas. Al y-blow for me.


Quo. I will honestly discharge you, and recevue it in due form and order of
law, to strengthen it for ever to my son and h^yre, that he may undoubtedly
enter vppon't without the let or molestation of any man, at his or our pleasure
whenever.


Sho. It Is so assurde unto you.


Quo. Why then master Basie you are a freeman sir, you may deal in what you
please, and go whether you will. Why Tomazin, master Easy is dome from
Essex, bid him welcome in a cup of small Bear.


Tom. Not only vilde, but in it tyrannous.


Quom. If it please you sir, you know the house, you may visit us often* and
dine with us once a quarter.


Eas. Confusion light on you, your wealth and heir,
Worm gnaw your conscience, as the Moth your ware,
I am not the first heir that robbed, or begged.

Exit. Quo. Excellent excellent, sweet Spirits.


Sho. Landed master Quomodo.


Quo. Delicate shortyard, commodious Falslight,
Hug and away, shift, shift.
It Is slight, not strength that gives the greatest lift.
Now my desires are full -- for this time,
Men may have Cormorant wishes, but alas
A little thing three hundred pound a year,
Suffices nature, keeps life and soul together,
I Will have 'em l^pt immediately.
I long to warm my self by the wood, -- A fine journey in the Whitsun-holy
days ^yfaith, to ride down with a number of Citizens, and their wives, some
upon pillions, some upon S^de saddles, I, and little Tomazin ith middle our
some and heir S^m Quomodo in a peach color Taffata Iack^t, some hors^^
length, or a long ^ard before us, there will be a fine show on's I can tell
you, where we Citizens will laugh, and lie down ge^ all our wives with child
against a bank and get up again, ^stay, ha ^ast thou that wit in faith it will* be
admirable, to see how the very thought of green fields puts a man into sweet
inuenttions. I will presently possess Sim Quomodo of all the land, I have a
toy and i will do it: and because I see before mine eyes that most of our heirs
prove notorious Rioters after our deaths, and that cousonage in the father
wheels about to folly in the son, our posterity commonly foylde at the
same weapon, at which we plaide rarely. And being the world^ beaten word,
what is got over the Devils back, (that is by knauerie) must be spent under his
belly, (that is by lechery) being awake in these knowings, why should not I
oppose 'em now, and break destiny of her custom, preventing that by
policy, which without it must needs be Destiny? and I have took the
course, I will forthwith sicken, call for my keys, make my Will, and dispose
of all, give my son this blessing, that he trust no man, keep his hand from
a queen, and a Scriuener, live in his fathers faith, and do good to no body:
then will I begin to rave like a fellow of a wide conscience, and for all the
world counterfeit to the life, that which I know I shall do when I die, take
on for my gold, my lands, and my wrytings, grow worse and worse, call upon
the Devil, and so make an end* by this time I have indented with a couple of
searchers, who to uphold my device shall fray them out a'th Chamber with report
of sickness, and so la, I start up, and recover again: for in this business I
will trust, no not my spirits Falslight and shortyard, but in disguise note the
condition of al, how pitiful my wife takes my death, which will appear by
November in her eye, and the fall of the leaf inher body, but especially by
the cost she bestows upon my funeral, there shall I try her love and regard,
my daughters marrying to my will and lyking, and my sons affection after my
disposing: for to conclude* I am as jealous of this land as of my wife, to know
what would become of it after my decease.


Exit. Enter Curtezan with her disguised father. Fath. Tho I be poor, it is my
glory to live honest.


Curt. I prithee do not leave me.


Faith. To be bawd.
Hell has not such an office,
I thought at first your mind had been preserved,
In virtue and in modesty of blood,
that such a face had not been made to please the unsettled Appetites of
several men,
Those eyes turned up through prayer, not through lust,
But you are wicked, and my thoughts unjust.

Curt. Why thou art an unreasonable fellow in faith, do not al Trades live by
their ware, and yet called honest Livers? do they not thrive best, when they
utter most, and make it away by the great? is not hole-sale the chiefest
merchandise? do you think some Merchants could keep their wives so brave but
for their hole-sale? you are fowly deceived and you think so.


Fath. You are so glewde to punishent and shame, Your words even deserve
whipping -- to bear the habit of a Gentlewoman, and be in mind so distant.


Curt. Why you fool you, are not Gentlewomen Sinners? and there is no coragious
Sinner amongst us, but was a Gentlewoman by the Mothers side I warrant you:
besides, we are not always bound to think those our fathers that marry our
Mothers, but those that lie with our Mothers, and they may be Gentlemen borne
and born again for ought we know, you know.


Fath. True: corruption may well be Generatious first, Wee're bad by nature,
but by custom worst.


Exeunt. A Bell Toales, a Confused cry within. Toma. Oh my Husband.


Sim. My Father, O my Father.


Falls. My sweet Master, dead!


Enter Shortyard and the Boy. Short. Run boy, bid 'em ring out, he is dead,
he is g^ne.


Boy. Then is as arrant a knave gone, as ere was called upon.


Sho. The happyest good that ever Shortyard felt,
I want to be expressed, my mirth is such,
To be struck now eene when his joys were hye,
Men only kiss their knaueries, and so dye,
Iu'e often marked it.
He was a famous Coozner while he lived,
And now his Son shall reap it, i will ha the lands,
Let him Study law after, it is no labor
to undo him for ever: but for Easy,
Only good confidence did make him foolish,
And not the lack of Sense, that was not it,
It Is worldly craft beats down a Scholars wit,
For this our Son and heir now, he
From his conception was entayl'd an Ass,
And he has kept it well, twenty five years now,
Then the sleightest art will do it, the lands lie fair,
No Sin to beggar a deceivers heir.

Exit. Enter Tomazin with Winefride her maid in have. Toma. Here Wenefride,
here, here, here, I have always found thee secret.


Wini. You shall always find me so Mistress.


Toma. Take this letter and this Ring.


Wini. Yes forsooth.


Toma. Oh how all the parts about me shake, -- enquire for one Master Easy
at his old lodging 'ith the Blackfryers,


Win. I will indeed forsooth.


Toma. Tell him the party that sent him a hundred pound the other day to comfort
his heart, has likewise sent him this Letter and this Ring, which has that
virtue to recover him again for ever say -- name no body Winifride.


Win. Not so much as you forsooth.


Toma. Good Girl, thou shall have a mourning Gown at the buryall of mine
honesty.


Win. And i will effect your will a my Fedelitie.


Exit. Toma. I do account my self the happyest Widdowe that ever
counterfetted weeping, in that I have the leisure now, both to do that
Gentleman good, and do my self a pleasure, but I must seem like a hanging
Moonea little waterish a while.


Enter Rerage, Curtezans Father following. Rer. I entertain both thee and thy
Device,
Twill put them both to shame.

Fath. That is my hope sir,
Especially that strumpet.

Rer. Save you sweet widdowe,
I suffer for your heaviness.

Toma. O Master Rerage, I have lost the dearest husband that ever woman did
enjoy.


Rerg. You must have patience yet.


Toma. Oh talk not to me of patience and you love me, good Master Rerage.


Rer. Yet if all tongues go right, he did not use you so well as a man might.


Toma. Nay, that is true indeed Master Rerage, he nere vsd me so well as a
woman might have been used, that is certain in troth ta's been our greatest
falling out sir, and though it be the part of a widdowe, to show her self a
woman for her Husbands death, yet when I remember al his unkindness, I cannot
weep a stroke in faith Master Rerage, and therefore wisely did a great widow
in this land, comfort up another, go too Lady (quoth she) leave blubbering,
thou think upon thy husbands good parts when thou sheddest tears, do but
remember how often he has lain from thee, and how many naughty slipperie
turns he has done thee, and thou will nere weep for him I warrant thee -- you
would not think how that counsel has wrought with me Master Rerage, I could
not dispend another tear now, and you would give me nere so much.


Rer. Why I count you the wiser Widdowe, it shows you have wisdom, when you
can check your passion, for mine own part, I have no sense to sorrow for his
death, whose life was the only Rub to my affection.


Toma. Troth and so it was to mine, but take courage now, your'e a Landed
Gentleman, and my Daughter is seven hundred pound strong to join with you.


Rer. But Lethe lyes'ith way.


Tomaz. Let him lie still, You shall tread ore him or i will fail in will.


Rer. Sweet widdowe.


Exeunt. Enter Quomodo like a Beadle. Quo. What a beloude man did I live? my
Servants gall their fingers with ringing, my wives cheeks smart with weeping,
stand in every corner, you may take water in my house -- but am not I a wise
fool now? what if my wife should take my death so to heart, that she should
sicken vppon't, nay swone, nay dye? when did I hear of a woman do so, let me
see, -- Now I remember me, I think it was before my Time; yes, I have heard of
those wives that have wept, and s^bd, and swound -- marry I never heard but
they recovered again, that is a comfort la, that is a comfort, and I hope so will
mine -- peace, it is nere upon the time, I see, here comes the worshipful
liuerie, I have the Hospital Boys, I perceive little Tomazin will bestow cost
of me, -- I Will listen to the common censure now, how the world tongues me when
my ^are lies low.


Enter the Liuerie. 1. Live. Who Quomodo? merely enricht by shifts, And
cousnages, believe it.


Quo. I see the world is very loath to praise me,
It Is Rawlye friends with me, I cannot blame it,
For what I have done, has been to vex and shame it.
Here comes my Son, the hope, the landed heir,
Ont whose rare thrift, will say men's tongues you lie,
I Will keep by law what was got craftily.
Me thinks I hear him say so:
He does salute the liuerie with good grace,
And solemn Gesture --

Bead. oh my young Worshipful M. you have parted from a dear Father, a wise and
proui-dent father.


Sim. Art thou grown an Ass now?


Bead. Such an honest Father --


Sim. Prithee Beadle leave thy lying, I am scarce able to endure thee in faith,
what honesty did thou ere know by my Father speak, rule your tongue Beadle
least I make you prove it, and then I know what will become of you, it is the
scuruy est thing in the earth to belie the dead so, and he is a beastly Son and
heir that will stand by, and hear his father belyed to his face, he will nere
prosper I warrant him, Troth if I be not ashamed to go to Church with him, I
would I might be hanged, I fear such filthye Tales go on him, oh if I had
known he had been such a lewd fellow in his life he should nere have kept
me company.


Quo. Oh -- o -- o!


Sim. But I am glad he is gone, tho twere long first, Shortyard and I will
revel it in faith, I have made him my Rentgatherer already.


Quo. He shall be speedilye disinherited, he gettes not a foot, not the
Crown of a Molehill, i will sooner make a courtyer my heir for teaching my wife
tricks then thee, my most neglectfull Son? Oh now the coarse, I shall
observe yet farther.


A counterfeit Coarse brought in, Tomazin, and all the mourners equally
counterfeit. Quo. O my most modest, virtuous and remembering wife, she shall
have all when I dye, she shall have all.


Enter Easy. Tom. Master Easy? it is, oh what shift shall I make now? oh --


Falls down in a feigned swound. Quo. Sweet wife she sownes, i will let her
alone, i will have no mercy at this time, i will not see her, i will follow the coarse.


Exit Eas: The Devil grind thy Bones, thou co^sning Rascal.


Moth. Give her a little more air, tilt up her head, comfort thy self good
widdowe, do not fall like a Beast for a husband, there is more then we can
well tell where to put them, good soul.


Tom. Oh, I shall be well anon.


Moth. Fie, you have no patience in faith, I have buried four Husbands, and
never offered them such abuse.


Tom. Cousen, how do you?


Eas. Sorry to see you ill Couze.


Toma. The worst is past I hope.


Pointing after the Coffin. Eas. I hope so to.


Toma. Lend me your hand sweet Couze I have troubled you


Moth. No trouble indeed forsooth -- Good Cousen have a care of her, comfort
her up as much as you can, and all little enough I warrant ye.


Exeunt. Tomaz. My most sweet love.


Eas. My life is not so dear.


Toma. I have always pittyed you.


Eas. You Have shown it here. And given the desperate hope?


Toma. Delay not now, you have understood my love, I have a priest ready, this is
the fittest season, no eye offends us, Let this kiss Restore thee to more
wealth, me to more bliss.


Eas. The Angels have provided for me.


Finis Actus Quartus.
Incipit Quintus et Vltimus.
Enter Shortyard with writings, having cousned Sim Quomodo. Short. I have not
Scope enough within my breast,
To keep my joys containde: I Am Quomodoes
heir: the Lands assurances, and all are mine
(I have tript his Sons heels up) above the ground,
His father left him: had I not encouragement?
Do not I know what proves the Fathers pray?
The Son nere looks on it, but it melts away.
Do not I know the wealth that is got by fraud?
Slaue's share it like the riches of a Bawd.
Why it is a curse unquenchable, nere cooles.
Knaves still commit their consciences to fools:
And they betray who o'wde em, heeres all the bonds,
All Easies writings, let me see:

Enter Quomodoes Wife married to Easy. Toma. Now my desires wear crowns.


Eas. My joys exceed, Man is near healthful, till his follyes bleed.


Toma. Oh, behold the Villain, who in all those shapes Confounded your estate.


Eas. That slave, that villain.


Short. So many Acres of good meadowe --


Eas. Rascal.


Sho. I hear you sir.


Eas. Rogue, Shortyard, Blastfield, Sergeant, Deputy, cousner


Sho. Hold, hold.


Eas. I thirst the execution of his ears.


Toma. Hate you that office,


Easi. I Will strip him bare for punishment and shame.


Sho. Why do but hear me sir, you will not think what I have done for you.


Eas. Given his Son my Lands.


Sho. Why look you, it is not so, your not told true,
I have Coosned him again merely for you,
Merely for you sir, it was my meaning then
That you should wed her, and have all again.
A my troth 'its true sir: look you then here sir, you shall not miss a
little scrowle sir, pray sir, let not the City know me for a knave, there be
ritcher men would envy my preferment if I should be known before them.


Eas. Villain, my hate to more revenge is drawn,
When slaves are found, it is their base Art to fawn,
Within there --.

Sho. How now? fresh warders.


Eas. This is the other, bind him fast, have I found you Master Blastfield.


Sho. This is the fruit of Craft,
Like him that shootes up hye, looks for the shaft
And finds it in his forehead, so does hit
The Arrowe of our fate, wit destroys wit:
The head the bodies bane, and his own bears,
You hae Corn enough, you need not reap mine ears,
Sweet Master Blastfield.

Eas. I loath his voice, away.


Exit. Toma. What happiness was here, but are you sure you have all?


Eas. I hope so my sweet wife.


Tom. What difference there is in Husbands, not only in one thing, but in all.


Eas. Heeres good deeds and bad deeds, the writings that keep my lands to me,
and the bonds that gave it away from me.

These my good deeds shall to more safety turn,
And these my bad have their deserts and burn.
I Will see thee again presently, read there.

Toma. Did he want all, who would not love his care?


Enter Quomodo. Quo. What a wife have thou Ephestian -- Quomodo, so loving so
mindful of her duetye not only seen to weep but known to swone, I knew a
Widow about Saint Antlings so forgetful of her first Husband, that she
married again within the tweluemonth, nay some berladye within the month: there
were sights to be seen, had they my wives true sorrows seven nor seven years
would draw them to the stake, I would most tradesmen had such a wife as I,
they hope they have, we must all hope the best: thus in her honor.


A modest wife is such a Jewel,
Every Goldsmiths cannot show it:
He that is honest, and not cruel,
Is the likelyest man to owe it.
And that is I, I made it by my self, and coming to her as a Beadle for my
reward this morning, i will see how she takes my death next her heart.

Toma. Now Beadle.


Quo. Bless your mistrisships eyes from too many tears, Although you have
lost a wise and worshipful Gentleman.


Toma. You come for your due Beadle, here 'ith house.


Quo. Most certain, the Hospital money and mine own poor forty pence.


Toma. I must crave a discharge from you Beadle.


Quo. Call your man, i will heartilye see my hand to a Memorandum.


Toma. You deal the truel yer.


Quo. Good wench still.


Toma. George, here is the Beadle come for his money, draw a Memorandum that
he has received all his due he can claim here ith house after this funeral.


Quo. What politic directions she gives him, all to secure her self, it is
time in faith now to pity her, i will discover my self to her ere I go, but came
it off with some lively jest now, that were admyrable: I have it? after the
memorandum is written and all, i will set my own name to it Ephestian Quomodo,
she will start, she will wonder how Ephest* Quomodo came the there that was buried
yesterday: you are beset little Quomodo.


Tom. Ninteene, twenty five pound, 1, 2, 3, and 4. d.


Quo. So, we shall have good sport, when it is read:


Eas. How now Lady, paying away money so fast?


Tom. The Beadles due here sir


Quo. Whose? it is Easy, what makes Easy in my house, He is not my wives over
seer I hope:


Eas. What Is here?


Quo. He makes me sweat.


Eas. Memorandum that I have received of Richard Easy, all my due I can claim
here in the house* or any hereafter for me: In witness whereof, I have set to
mine own hand, Ephestian Qommodo.


Quo. What have I done? was I mad?


Eas. Ephestian Quomodo.


Quo. I, well, what then sir? get you out of my house, First you master
Prodigal had land, away.


Tom. What is the Beadle drunk or mad? Where are my men to thrust him out a
doors.


Quo. Not so good Tomazin not so.


Tom. This fellow must be whipped.


Quo. Thank you good wife.


Eas. I can no longer bear him.


Tom. Nay sweet husband.


Quo. Husband I me undone, beggard, couzend, confounded for ever: married
already? will it please you know me now mistress Harlot, and master Horner,
who am I now?


Tom. Oh, he is as like my the other husband as can be.


Quo. I Will have judgment, i will bring you before a Judge, you shall feel wife
whether my flesh be dead or no, i will tickle you in faith, in faith.


Exit. Tom. The Judge that heel solicit knows me well.


Eas. Lets on then, and our greeuances first tell.


Exeunt. Enter Lethe with officers, taken with his Harlot. Rer. Here they come.


Sus. O where.


Let. Heart of shame, upon my wedding morning so disgracd*
Have you so little conscience Officers,
You will not take a bribe?

Cur. Master Lethe we may lie together lawfully hereafter, for we are coupled
together before people ynow in faith.


Rer. There goes the strumpet.


Sus. Pardon my wilful blindness and enjoy me.
For now the difference appears too plain,
Betwixt a base slave and a true Gentleman.

Rer. I do embrace thee in the best of love,
How soon affections fail, how soon they prove.

Enter Judge, Easy, and Tomazin in talk with him. Iud. His cousnages are
odious, he the plaintiff,
Not only framde deceitful in his life,
But so to mock his funeral.

Eas. Most just.
The Liuerie all assembled, mourning weeds,
Throughout his house even down to his last servant
The Herald richly hirde to lend him Arms,
Faind from his Ancestors, which I dare swear knew no
other Arms but those they labored with,
All preparations furnished, nothing wanted
Save that which was the cause of all, his death,
If he be living.

Judge. It Was an impious part.


Eas. We are not certain yet it is himself,
But some false spirit that assumes his shape,
And seeks still to deceive me.

Quo. Oh are you come? my Lord? their here, good morrow Tomazin.


Judge. Now what are you?


Quo. I am Quomodo my Lord, and this my wife,
Those my two men, that are bound wrongfully.

Iud. How are we sure you are he?


Quo. Oh you cannot miss my Lord.


Iud. I Will try you. Are you the man that lived the famous cousner?


Quo. O no my Lord.


Iud. Did you deceive this Gentleman of his right,
And laid Nets ore his land?

Quo. Not I my Lord.


Iud. Then you are not Quomodo but a counterfeit,
Lay hands on him, and bear him to the whip.

Quo. Stay, stay a little I pray, now I remember me my Lord, I cousned him
indeed, it is wondrous true.


Iud. Then I dare swear this is no counterfeit.
Let all doubts cease this man is Quomodo.

Quo. Why la you now, you would not believe this, I am found what I am.


Iud. But setting these thy odious shifts apart,
Why did that thought profane, enter thy breast,
To mock the world with thy supposed death?

Quo. Conceive you not that my Lord? a policy.


Iud. So.


Quo. For having gotten the lands I thirsted still,
To know what fate would follow 'em.

Iu^ Being ill got.


Quo. Your Lorpship apprehends me.


Iud. I think I shall anon.


Quo. And thereupon,
I out of policy possessed my son,
Which since I have found lewd, and now intend
To disinherit him for ever,
Not only this was in my death set down,
But thereby a firm trial of my wife,
Her constant sorrows, her remembering virtues,
All which are Dewes, the shine of a next morning 'dries 'em up all I see it.

Iud. Did you profess wise cousenage, and would dare
To put a woman to her two days choice,
When of a minute does it?

Quo. Less, a moment
The twinkling of an eye, a glimpse, scarce something does it,
Your Lordship yet will grant she is my wife.

Tom. O heaven!


Iud. After some penance, and the Deues of law
I must acknowledge that.

Quo. I scarce like
Those Deues of law.

Eas. My Lord, although the law too gently lot his wife,
The wealth he left behind he cannot challenge.

Quo. How?


Eas. Behold his hand against it.


Quo. He does deuize all means to make me mad, that I may no more lie with my
wife in perfect memory, I know it b^t^et the lands will maintain me in my
wits: the land will do so much for me.


Judge. In witness whereof I have set to mine own hand,
Eph^stian Quomodo.
It Is firm enough your own sir.

Quo. A jest my Lord, I did I knew not what.


Iud. It should seem so, deceit is her own foe
Craftily gets, and childishly lets go.
But yet the lands are his.

Quo. I, warrant ye.


Eas. No my good Lord, the lands know the right heir, I am their master once
more.


Quo. Have you the lands?


Eas. Yes truly I praise heaven.


Quo. Is this good dealing? are there such consciences abroad, how? which way
could he come by 'em?


Sho. My Lord i will quickly resolve you that it comes to me
This cousner whom too long I called my patron,
To my thought dying, and the fool his son
Possessed of all, which my brain partly sweat for,
I held it my best virtue, by a plot
To get from him what for him was ill got.

Quo. O beastly Shortyard!


Sho. When no sooner mine,
But I was glad more quickly to resign.

Iud. Craft once discovered shows her abject line.


Quo. He hits me every where, for craft once known,
Does teach fools wit, leaves the deceiuer none.
My deeds have cleft me, cleft me.

Enter Officers with Lethe and the Harlot. 1. Off. Room there.


Quo. A little yet to raise my spirit.
Here master Lethe comes to wed my Daughter.
That Is all the joy is left me: ha? who is this?

Judge. What crimes have those brought forth?


Gent. The shame of lust,
Most viciously on this his wedding morning,
This man was ceazde in shame with that bold Strumpet.

Judge. Why, it is she he means to matrye.


Leth. No in truth.


Judge. In truth you do.
Who for his wife his Harlot does prefer,
Good reason it is, that he should martie her.

Curt. I crave it on my knees, such was his vow at first,


Pand. I Will say so too
And work out mine own safety,
Such was his vow at first, indeed my Lord,
How ere his mood has changed him?

Leth. O vilde slave!


Curt. He says it true my Lord,


Iud. Rest content,
He shall both marry and taste punishment.

Leth. Oh intolerable! I beseech your good Lordship if I must have an outward
punishment, let me not marry an inward, whose lastes will nere out, but grow
worse and worse: I have a wife stays for me this morning with seven hundred
pound in her pursse, let me be speedily whipped and be gone, I beseech your
Lordship.


Gent. He speaks no truth my Lord, behold the Virgin,
Wife to a well esteemed Gentleman,
Loathing the Sin he follows.

Leth. I was betrayed, yes faith.


Rer. His own Mother my Lord,
Which he confessed through ignorance, and disdain,
His name so changed to abuse the world and her.

Let. Marry a Hailot, why not? it is an honest man's fortune, I pray did not one
of my Cou^triemen marrye my Sister? why well then, if none should be married
but those that are honest where should a man seek a wife after Christmas? I
pity that Gentleman, that has nine Daughters to bestow, and seven of them
Seeded already, they will be good stuff by that time, I do beseech your
Lordship to remove the punishment, I am content to marry her.


Judge. There Is no removing of your punishment.


Leth. O good my Lord.


Judge. Unless one here assembled
Whom you have most unnaturally a busde, beget your pardon.

Leth. Who should that be?
Or who would doote, that has been so abusde?
A troublesome penance -- sir.

Quo. Knave in your face, leave your mocking, Andrew, marry your Qeane and be
quiet.


Leth. Master Easy.


Eas. I Am sorry you take such a bad course sir.


Leth. Master Quomodo.


Toma. Enquire my right name again next time, now go your ways like an Ass as
you came.


Leth. Mass I forget my mother all this while, I Will make her do it at first,
pray mother your blessing for once.


Moth. Calst me Mother? out, I defy thee slave.


Leth. Call me slave as much as you will, but do not shame me now, let the
world know you are my Mother.


Moth. Let me not have this Villain put upon me I beseech your Lordship.


Judge. He Is justly cursed, she loathes to know him now,
Whom he before did as much loath to know,
Will thou believe me woman?

Moth. That Is soon done.


Judge. Then know him for a Villain, it is thy Son,


Moth. Art thou Andrew my wicked Son Andrew?


Leth. You would not believe me Mother.


Moth. How art thou changed? Is this suit fit for thee? a Tooth-drawers Son,
this country has ee'ne spoilde thee since thou camst heather, thy manners
better then thy clothes, but now whole clothes and ragged manners, it may
well be said that truth goes naked, for when thou had scarce a shirt thou
had more truth about thee.


Judge. Thou art thine own affliction Quomodo:
Shortyard we banish, it is our pleasure.

Sho. Hence forth no woman shall complain for measure.


Judge. And that all Error from our works may stand,
We bannish Falslight evermore the land.

FINIS

