SIR ROBERT SHERLEY, SENT AMBASSADOVR IN THE NAME OF THE KING OF PERSIA, TO
SIGISMOND THE third, King of POLAND and SVVECIA, and to other Princes of EVROPE.

His Royal entertainment into CRACOVIA, the chief City of POLAND, with his
pretended Coming into ENGLAND.

Also, The Honorable praises of the same Sir Robert Sherley, given unto him in
that Kingdom, are here likewise inserted.



LONDON Printed by I. WINDET, for John Budge, and are to be sold at his Shop
at the Great South door of Paul's. 1609.

TO THE WORTHY and well experienst Gentleman, Sir THOMAS SHERLEY, Son to
that happy Father, Sir Thomas Sherley, and Brother to that Noble Gentleman, Sir
Robert.
Worthy Sir,
THe self same office of love and due praises which the world put it self
into, at your long desired ariuall in England, falls happily upon me to perform
the like duty toward your worthy Brother, nor can I recite more Encomiums of
his Actions, then those of your own has rightly and properly challenged to
themselves; I Will speak thus much of you both, and the world shall judge it free
from flattery, you well may be own Brothers in birth, that are so near kin
to one another in Actions of Fame and Honor: so commending you both to
eternizing memory of your own Virtues and Fortunes, I remain an unworthy
obseruer of them both.

Your Worships, in his most selected studies, THOMAS MIDLETON.

To the Reader.
READER, This Persian Robe, so richly wouen with the praises only of Sir
ROBERT SHERLEY (thy Conntriman) comes to thee at a low price, though it cost
him dear that wears it, to purchase so much fame, as has made it so
excellent. It is now his, forever, Thine so long as it is his; for every good
man (as I hope thou art) does participate in the Renown of those that are
good, and virtuous.

He has been a traveler a long time, give him now a welcome home; the Arms
of his own Country embracing him, will be more joyful to him, then all those
of so many foreign Kingdoms, with which he has so often been honored.

If a man that has ventured through the world, may deserve thy love, thou
can not chose, but bestow as much of it upon him, as upon any. Look upon him
truly, and thou shall find a large general Chronicle of time writ in a little
Volume.

He comes laden with the Trophyes of War, and the honors of Peace. The Turk
has felt the sharpness of his sword, and against the Turk is he now
whetting the swords of Christian PRINCES. Much more could I speak of him, but
that I should do wrong to the common Laws of civility, by taking away that
Reverence from Strangers, whom (from Countries afar off) you shall presently
hear giving ample testimonies of his Nobleness.

Vale:
News from PERSIA and POLAND, touching Sir Robert Sherley, being sent
Ambassador to diverse Princes of EVROPE, famed as well for his Wisdom and
experience, as for his knowledge and vnderstanging of many Tongues.
ALbeit that man can receive his Birth but from one place, yet is he Borne a
Freeman of all the Cities of the world The whole earth is his Country, and he
that dwells fardest off. is by the laws of nature, as near to him in love as
his kindred and acquaintance. This General Charter being given by the King of
this Uniuersall Crown, to all Nations, has caused men from time to time, (by
the virtue of that Privilege) to forsake the places of their first being, and
to travel into other Countries. The benefits that kingdoms have gotten by
this means, cannot in so small a volume, (as this in hand) be comprehended.
Travel is the golden Mine that inricheth the poorest Country, and fills the
barrennest with abundant plenty. It is the chain that at first tied Kingdoms
together, and the Musical string that still maintains them in Concord, in
Leagues and in Unity. The Portugalls have hereby Crowned themselves and there
Posterity with garlands of never dying honor. The Spaniards have their names
(for this) so deeply engraven in the Chronicles of Fame, that they can never
be forgotten. The French likewise and the Dutch, have raised their glories to
a nobler height, only by these Adventures. In imitation of all whose labors,
or rather in Emulation of all their Fames, our Englishmen have not only Stepped
as far as any of them Al, but gone beyond the most, and the best of them. And
not to reckon those men of worth (in this kind) of our own Nation, whose
voyages and trauells (by sea and land) to set down, were able to fill whole
volumes, I will only at this time (not with a loud and shrill trumpet, as they
deserve, but as it were upon an instrument tuned and directed by another) give
only a soft touch at the Praises of this worthy Gentleman (Sir ROBERT SHERLEY)
of whose adventures, dangers, and various fortunes, both good and bad, to draw
a true picture in the right and lively colors; would as easily feed men's eyes
with gazing admiration, as the large pictured tables of others have filled them
with wonder.

Being therefore contented (at this time) to swim but in a shallow stream, of
his Fame, sithence greater sails are likely hereafter (and that very shortly)
to swell with the true report of his actions, You shall understand that Sir
ROBERT SHERLEY, after a long, a chargeable, and a dangerous progress through
most (if not all) the Kingdoms in Europe, receiving entertainment from the
Princes of those Dominions, sitting to such a ghuest, desire of glory still
more and more burning within him. At the length, he left Europe, and traveled
into Asia, receiving noble entertainment at the hands of the King of Persia, In
whose Court he so well and so wisely bore himself in all his Actions, that the
Persian (with much of his love, of which he tasted most plenteously) heaped on
his head many honorable favors.

That common enemy of Christ and Christians, (the Turk) lifting up his sword
continually (for the most part) not only against the Polack, the Hungarian,
Bohemian, and other Princes of Christendom, but also thirsting after the rich
Empire of Persia, and showing a mortal hatred to that Kingdom by being ever
up in Arms against it; It was thought fit that (the Persian himself
confessing and worshipping Christ,) Aid should be required at the hands of
Christian Princes in the Persians behalf, against so barbarous, so ambitious
and so general an enemy. Heerupon the honor of such an Embassy, was conferred
(by the King of Persia) upon Sir Robert Sherley, as a man worthy and apt to
treat with Christian princes in so weighty a business, he himself being a
Christian born, and a gentleman that had Traveled, and by experience knew the
conditions, State, and policies of most of their Kingdoms.

First therefore was he employed into Poland, where by Sigismund (the King of
Poland and of Suecia) he was received with great magnificence, and applause
both of the Polack himself and of his people.

And because it is not fit, that every Common and popular ear, should stand
listening to the private business of Princes in a Deseignement, that concerns
the Uniuersall state of Christendom, we will not therefore at this time be
interpreters of the Persians Embassy but rather wait his expected coming who
has in charge to deliver it by word of mouth himself.

In the mean time not withstanding (forbearing to reckon up the rich presents
given by the Poland King, to Sir Robert, the honors done to him, by the Polish
Lords, and the favors thrown upon him by the Common people) You shall be
witnesses only, to those, (not unworthy) praises of Him, by which his Fame
(amongst Scholars by those of the better sort) was lifted up, at the time of
his staying in Poland.

A fourefold Anagram upon Sir Robert Sherleys Name.
ROBERTUS SHERLAEIVS.
1 Heus Labor, Tueris Res. 2 Seruus, ast Hero Liber. 3 Libertas, ero Seruus. 4
Virtus, Labores sere.
Encomions or Praises, as well upon the Name, as the negotiation of Sir ROBERT
SHERLEY, an English Knight, sent Ambassador from the King of the Persians, to
the Princes of Europe.
MErcurius, seeing the Ambassador ready to take his journey, resigneth unto
him his office, as being messenger or Herald to the Gods, according to the
fiction of Poets, and with that office bestows the gift of eloquence upon
him, because he may have power to persuade the princes to whom he is sent: and
withal, adds a wish, that those Christian Kings whom he is to solicit, may
not be cold in joining their forces together, but that they may enter into an
honorable, a piou^ and inviolable league against that common enemy, the Turk.

Mercuries speech.
THou (O Sherley) being borne an Englishman, art sent from the Persian Empire
to the Kingdoms that lie in Europe, thy place is full of honor, thy message
of weight: discharge thou therefore boldly those things, which the great Lord
of Persia, commands thee to do* It is not chance, that throws this high
office upon thee, but a full Synod (or Parliament) of all the Gods, do
appoint thee to be their Messenger, to the great Kings of the earth. For this
cause, I that am Heavens winged Messenger, seeing thee ready to depart, present
my self thus before thee, and uttering only so much, as in the letters of thy
name lies mystically hidden, and that is this,

Heus Labor, -- tu Res hoc ore Tueris
Persarum. --
O exceeding Labor! yet thou art the man, that must defend the state of the
Persians, even by the force of my eloquence. Go on therefore, be thou Mercurius
in the Courts of Kings: I give thee my place; I give it to thee, that art more
worthy of it then my self. O that the princes of Europe, would knit an
indissoluble league together, with thy Master (the Persian Monarch,) and tie
all their Sinews to one Arm, that a noble War may be begotten. Let Bellona
(the goddess of battles) breath courage into the breasts of soldiers; and
let no Country be dishonored by bearing men, that have no hearts to come into
the field. O let not that covetous Dragon, which once watched the golden
firmament, sleep in the bosoms of Kings, and with his poison, infect them
with that covetous disease of hoording up gold. Cast off (O you Princes) your
sensual pleasures, and let it be your Ambition to wear Garlands of Oak,
which are the Crowns of Conquerors. Prefer immortal Fame before all those
Dangers, over which you must of necessity pass, be they never so invincible in
the show of undertaking, and aspire only to that life which shall remain,
when your bodies lie dead. Heaven (in your doing so) shall smile upon your
enterprises* Hell shall be conquered, and that hel-hownde brood of Mahomet
be utterly confounded. Uniuersall peace shall Crown the world, and the
Barbarous Turks, feel the Sinews and puissant Arms of Europe.

To the Nations (unto whom the Ambassador is sent, on great and serious
affairs, as rightly may be coniectured.) A desire and wish is made, that all
Kings in Christendom, may entertain this holy War, with the same courage,
constancy and zeal, that the Persian does.
HHearken O you Polanders, Italians, French, and you Germans; Enrich your
Chronicles, with an Act of a wonder never heard of in the world before: For
behold, a Britain, is sent on a royal message, from the King of the
Persians. A Britain is sent, but who is it? Such a one he is, as by his name
(being before Anagramatizde) he may apparently be deciphered.

Ast Liber, Seruus Hero. Freeborn and a servant only unto his Sovereign*

He, even he, is sent to you (O you Nations of Europe,) from the confines of
the Persians, bringing along with him, the name of his Lord, and with that
name, the sound of an Approaching war.

The destinies begin to promise some great matter: The God of Battles
(hereupon) speaks cheerefullly. God himself prepares the Armor; muster your
selves together therefore (O you Kings) and with a religious defense, draw your
swords against the Turks.

A gratulatorie compendious Speech, to Sir ROBERT SHERLEY, commending both his
Virtue, and present Fortune.
O Sherley, thou that art an honor to the Persians, as well as to the
Britains: within whose head dwells experience and wisdom, and upon whose
tongue eloquence writes her charms: whatsoever he was, that at first durst
say that Fortune was Blind and that she bestowed extraordinary benefits upon
undeserving men, let him know, that all this while he has bin in an error:
for Fortune had more eyes then Argus, when she Crowned this Englishman with so
many Persian honors and offices, That Monarch (O thou Renowned Britain) whose
sword is dreadful to the Thracian Tyrant, makes thee a partner in the cares
and burdens of his empire: for he has seen, yea he has ever seen, and found
thee constant in execution of all his just and Royal commandes.

The Empire of the Persian is here commended: The Kings and Princes of Europe
being called to give witness, how much glory the dexterity of Sir ROBERT
SHERLEY, has added to the Persian Monarchy: Upon which, he appears to the
Persians a Gentleman of such merit, as that England may very justly accuse
Persia of wrong, for detaining him from her.
THe same of the Persian Empire does not grow up only in a mean Soldier, for
their Cities are full of renowned and worthy Captains: from the Ancient
discipline and Stratagems of war, are the glories of the Persians sprung up
and continue famous, But (O thou honored Englishman) she derived her first
principles from thy practice and knowledge. Far be my words from the base
servitude of flattery: for within a short time, Kings shall rise up as
witnesses of what I speak. Let thine own Country envy the kingdom of Persia
for enjoying this honor, (which by thee is given her) yea, let her challenge
thee to be delivered back again as her own, yet let her claim be made in
such manner, that England and Persia, may not grow into quarrel about thee, But
rather thus let them both share thee. Let rich Persia enjoy thy presence, and
reckon thee in the number of her Citizens, and be proud in the possession of a
man, so worthy: Let England glory that she alone, is happy in thy Birth, and
that she bears the honor of giving thee thy name. But howsoever, (O thou, the
Dignity and Luster of two renowned Kingdoms) Go thou on, in thine intended
embassage, and perform these Heasts, which the great Persian thy Lord has
imposed upon thy Integrity.

A short Speech uttered as it were by the whole body of the Polish Court, to
ROBERT SHERLEY Ambassador from the invincible King of the Persians.
IT is not thy rich garments Embroydered so thick with gold, and wouen by
Grecian workmen, that draws our eyes into admiration by beholding thee: It is
not thy sparkling Jewels, nor those costly precious stones that adorn thy
Kobe, which dazzle our sight. It is not thy comely ryding, nor skillful managing
of that Thracian courser, upon whose back thou sictest, whilst the proud beast
it self, Champs on the glistering bit in disdain to be so curbed, that makes
us to look after thee, It is not that victorious Semyter of thine, wherewith
thou have made the earth drunk so often with so much blood of those, that are
enemies to the Persians, that causes us to stand gazing at thy presence: No it
is the beauty of thy mind wherewith our eyes are enchanted. It is the
excellent music of thy tongue, that so ties our ears to thy charms, Thou
being able to speak and to answer se many several nations, in their own
proper languages.

Englands Complaint to Persia for her SHERLEY.
O Persia! thou glorious kingdom, thou chief of Empires; the Palace sometimes
where Wisdom only kept her Court, the Land that was governed by none but by
wisemen: Yet must I tell thee, and with grief do thou enforce me to tell
thee, that against all Law of Nations, thou robbest me of my subject. Why
should the right of another be thine? It is Justice for every one to keep
their own. But thou make up thy gain by my loss. Is this Equity? Is this
tolerable? Cease to do it: and send home (O Persia) That son of mine to me
that am his mother: for to me only is he due. But (aye me) the honors of his
own Country, and the palaces of my Kingdom, are by him (belike) neglected and
seem not worth the looking on; And though to the eye of the world I may
perhaps appear beautiful and great, yet in his eye, I show no bigger then a
small corner of the world. I do envy thee therefore (O Persia) only for him:
yet sithence I cannot enjoy him, Fare thou well, O thou my darling, and with
that farewell bear along with thee, the Praises which I give thee. I rob
Persia, Persia robs not me: My loss is to me more honor: for the Persian
Empire, borrowes her brightness from the beams of one of the Sons of England.

SHERLEY to his native Country.
O Thou my Country, if I should pay back into thy hands so much as by bond is
due unto thee from me, I should then lay down my life at thy feet. But my
thoughts aim at greater matters, It is not Breath I would pay thee, but Fame:
Take thou from me so much Honor, as may make me live for ever. Liberty is the
Gole to which I run, but such a liberty it is, as may free me from the common
baseness of the multitude, and make me worthy to be respected by the eye of a
King.

Seruus hero, I am a servant to that great Master, to whose feet all the
Persians bow and do reverence: I am his servant, that I may be his messenger,
and bear the Treatyes of such a King, to other Kings in Christendom. I am
destin'de out, to deliver his mind in their own languages, to Foreign Princes
and to the Monarchs of the earth. Let them therefore come together, and
quickly shall the Turkish fury be calmed, and being weakened in her own
strengths, shall be glad to kneel to the power, and mercy of others. And
thou, (O my Native Country), if thou would be pleased to knit thy forces in
this just and universal War, to what Dignities may thou advance thy self?
Whatsoever is dishonorable, has a base descention, and sincks beneath Hell,
But Whatsoever is good and honest, lifts up the unblemished brow on high, and
makes it Level with the front of heaven.

The Authors wish and request to virtue, that she would give unto SHERLEY such
a fruitful harvest of his Labors, that having Conquered the hardness of
them, his Name may aspire to the full height of his desert.
OUertue! the noblest and boldest guide, thou that give to men the due Crown
of Praises, prosper thou the honored enterprises of Sherley: But touching
those paths which must lead him to titles of fame and honor, make them even
and certain before him; He has no desire to have his name eaten out by the
rust of idleness, no; he will never unworthily sink beneath his own proposed
fortune.

Another of the same Author, touching Sir Robert Sherley being called as it
were by Fate, to manage the affairs of Foraine Princes.
WHat is the cause that Sherley has not all this while lived in the same
Country, that first lent him breath? This is the reason, a spirit so great was
not to be contained within so small a circle, as his Country. Besides,

He is the child of Fate and highly sings
Of kingly Embassies to none but Kings.
Crownde with these praises as you hear in Poland, and leaving the same of his
memorable actions behind him, bending his coarte to other Princes of
Christendom with the same Royal Embassage of honorable, and Christian
confederacy against Mahomet and his Adherents, it shall not be amiss here to
speak of the Kingdom of Persia, where Sir Robert received such honorable
entertainment, suitable to his noble Actions, and the virtues of his mind, as
also the manners, fashions, rites, and customs, that are and have been
observed by the Persians; and first, for their Religion which they have
observed of old, doing worship and reverence in their upright zeal to the
Sun, Moon, Uenus, Fire, Earth, Water, and Winds, erecting neither Altars nor
Statues, but in open Fields offering their sacrifices, which Sacrifices were
superstitious, and full of idle Ceremonies too tedious to be here rehearsed: For
their Kings; the golden line of them is drawn out of one family, that custom
amongst the Persians never as yet suffered change or alteration, and so severe
their laws are in effect, to the punishing of all rebellious treasonable and
disobedient people, that whosoever be be that is found repugnant in the least
demeanor to the will and affection of the King* he is presently ceazde upon by
the Tormentors, his head and arms chopped off, and with his detested body
thrown into some common field, without either grave or covering: And for their
palaces and royal mansions, this has ever been the continued custom amongst
them, that every King has had his seat Royal erected on some high hill or
mountain, the Bowels of which he makes his safe Treasure house, where all his
riches, Jewels, and Tribute moneys are with exceeding carfulness kept hid
and secret; And so much they do detest Sterility and Barennesse, that from the
highest to the lowest they take many wines in marriage, counting the fruitful
propagation of the Empire, the only happiness they can raise to it, and so
much they thirst after humane fruitfulness, that the Kings themselves propound
great gifts and rewards, To those that in one year brings forth the greatest
harvest of mankind; From five year old to four and twenty the male children
practice to ride great horses, to throw the Uulnerable and Inevitable darte,
to shoot in Arbalists or long steel bows, and all such manly exercises which
shames many other Christian Countries, and may justly vpbraide them of
effeminacie and Lazynesse.

Their victuals for the most part, by which the common sort of people are sed
and do live by, are Acorns, and Hedge-peares, their Bread course and hard,
their Drink the running Springs, For their Apparel, the Princes and those
that live ingreatest respect amongst them, adorn their bodies with a Triple
robe, and another garment in the fashion of a cloak hanging down to their
knees, the inward linings all of white silks and the outward facing like
poudred Ermins, In Somer for the most part they walk in purple, the winter
refuses no color, about their temples they wear a great Tyara, being a stately
orname^t high and round with a Cone at the top, from which descends a rich
fair pendant of some costly embrodered stuff, as Tissae, etc.

Attirde in some of which ordinary Persian habits his Agent Master Moore is
lately arrived in England, bringing happy tidings of this famous English
Persian, as also of his coming to England to the exceeding great Joy of his
Native Country, laden with honors through every kingdom, as the deserving
ornaments of his virtue and labor; And thus, ingenuous Reader, have I set down
by true and most credible Information a brief Epitome of Sir Robert Sherlyes
entertainment into Cracouia the chief Cittye of Poland, together with all
those several speeches delivered to him by the Scholars of that Country,
which although they may seem to the nice ear of our times, not altogether so
pure and polished as the refined labors of many english wits, yet therein they
striued to express both their fashion and affection to the worthy virtues of
Sir Robert, and for a taste of their Style and manner of writing, it shalnot be
amiss, if you cast your eye upon these verses following, composed by a
Scholar worthily reputed in that Cuntry, one Andraeas Loeaechius, and those
are they which at this I borrow to shut up the honorable praises of our Famous
English Traveler.

Ad illustrissimum and maximi tum ingenij tum animi virum, Dom. Robertum
Sherlaeum, Equitem Anglum Regis Persarum nomine ad Europae PP. legatum.
AEmule Honos Animo Proauis, Lux alta, Britannae
Qui gentis pessum non sinis ire Decus;
Non vni dat Cuncta Polus, sed Carmina Apollo,
Mars vires, Arcas Nuncius Ingenium.
Haec cuncta vnus habes, est vis, sunt ora deserta,
Numina auara aliis, prodiga facta tibi;
Persia seiactat gemino in te munere, Martis
Pectore belligeri; Palladis ingenio,
Tantus honor licet, te Scoti hannd subtrahe Vena,
At Venam excedit pondere vatis Amor.
Immo Censendum satis est Cecinisse Poetam
Quod tibi se fassus carmine and ore rudem;
Parua loquor, ne te venturis subtrahe saeclis:
At Fidei, ut Famae sue sce parare modum.
FINIS.

