THE MIND OF THE Frontispiece.
TIme censures all things, Darkness envies Time;
Light from above, does in its beauty shine,
Discovering sinful plots; 'cause it is divine,
True Life is honored, finding out the crime.
The impartial Judge foreshewes the horrid fate,
That Sin and Death will be unfortunate.
Bold Ignorance does plead: with Sin he will dwell.
Death brings At tornies for to plead his cause,
The Grave- maker being idle, blames the Laws,
The Devil takes his vassal back to hell.
All their defense does prove but empty breath,
Sinne's by the sinner stain, Life conquers Death.
POEMS Occasioned by a melancholy vision Or Amelancholy vision upon diverse
Theames Enlarged Which by several Arguments ensuinge is showed His gaudit musa
tenearis By H. M London printed by ID for Laurance Blaike lock and are to be
sold at his shopp at the sugar loose next Temple barrin Fleetstreet 1639

John Droes hout sculy


TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, MY VERY good Lord, THOMAS Earl of Winohelsee, etc.
RIGHT HON:
WHen I had composed these unpolished lines, and being urged by some of my
friends, to put them into the wide world, to shift for themselves; I thought it
somewhat an unnatural part, to turn my newborn Muse out of doors
harbourlesse being unknown, lest she should be tossed to and fro, with some
hollow blast of arrogant breath. Then musing on the many undeserved favors
that I have received from your Lordship, which I know not how to requite; I
thought of presenting my homebred Muse to your Honor; being the first fruits
of my poor endeavors in this kind, and as part of the testimony of my humble
service in thankfulness to your Lordship. Although somewhat discouraged, when I
considered the greatness of your person, together with your worth, and gifts
of mind, meeting with learning and piety, which makes you shine as a fixed
Star in our English region. And then looking back how unworthy my plain
Muse is of your Honors acceptance; But when I considered again, what small
and weak endeavors (such which might claim kindred with this of mine) have
been accepted of great personages when they have been drawn as a clew from the
bowels of love (which I hope your Lordship conceives no less of mine.) And the
Eagle though she soars aloft, does not disdain to stoop low, and the Sun
that is so glorious, does not deny his spangled beams, nor cloud his smiling
countenance from these infereour dark bodies here below, and that the noblest
spirits are accompanied with the humblest minds (which I have ever found in
your Lordship) then my doubts vanished as the mist before the heat: so I
resolved to present (as here I do) these lines to your Honors protection,
Humbly craving your Lordships acceptance, that they may bear your name; So
with your Honors countenance, they shall pass secure; Thus praying that the
Lord will enrich you with spiritual blessings, and that the dew of heaven may
sweeten the fatness of the earth, to you and your noble offspring forever.

And remain your Honors most humble Servant: HUMPHRY MILL.

TO THE READER.
WHen first I entertained thoughts of composing a few lines, for my own private
use, (having opportunity, more than enough, without begging, or borrowing from
other occasions) I did not intend that any (unless it were some familiar
friend) should so much as see my melancholy Muse in her closet, much less to
see her in an open market, especially in so mean a dress, (it being no other,
but that which she was wrapped in at her first breathing, without altering
matter, fashion, or trimming.) But because I kept her not so close, as I might
have done, some, which I call friends, have betrayed her, and prevented me in
my purpose: for she was seen walking abroad without my consent. Thus when I
perceived, that when I gave her an inch, she did take an ell; I sought to
restrain her. But ever when she was faulty in this kind, she came not home
alone, but brought one or other to excuse her, and to plead for her liberty,
and so being backed by her acquaintance (which she had got in a short time) she
grew bold; then I conceived, that if I did not give her leave, she would take
it unaskt; then partly for fear, that she might be corrupted, and partly by
persuasions, whether willingly, or unwillingly, I gave consent that she might
come and go at her pleasure, But withal, charging her that she should keep
a good decorum, that I by her means, might receive no blame.

I suppose it is not expected, that she should go in gaudy attire, neither do
I desire, that she should take up any upon trust, nor borrow much, for she
has no necessity of it; I have not mounted upon Eagles wings, nor pierced the
clouds for words to advance her worth, but in terms nearest at hand, such as
I am best acquainted withal, and as any indifferent Reader may well
understand. She is not adorned only with leaves, but she bears fruit too,
is black frosts hinder not, or wild beasts crop not the branches before it
come to maturitie, or a worm engender in the root; from envious tongues to
cause it to wither.

If she meet with any that will not afford her a good word, yet let him
vouchsafe her a good look, and she will not die in his debt: wherein she
fails (if thou be able to judge) take it in the best sense, she gives
occasion, to use thy charity in conception, in that she sung in winter, her
throat might be hoarse, and being the first time that she sung, she would not
overstraine her voice; I make no question, but she can answer for her self, to
give satisfaction to any reasonable man.

But because I have known her from her infancy, and seen her behavior,
being always modest, temperate, sober, loving, and honest, not apt to flatter
or dissemble, nor yet to hide the faults of her friends, neither censorious, or
harsh to any, but to such as do more than deserve it.

I cannot but commend her; and I could wish that she were grafted upon a
better stock: that her fruit might be more pleasant.

She began to pluck at the wings of Time, but seeing the feathers fall so fast
of themselves, she stepped upon vanity, which she found to be nothing but the
ruins of time, so staid not there; then being clothed in mourning weeds, and
in a melancholy humor, with a sad tune, she sings a Tragedy of Darkness;
but Light coming in, she changes her note, putting on fresh garments, falls
in love with him, and sings his praise. But he proving somewhat inconstant,
here could not make a match, but remains in promise for after times. But Life
being the thing that has gained such report, and so much desired, she tunes a
Comedy; but finding the miseries of it break in here upon her, and that it is
not the thing that it is taken for, being full of changes, her concords falls
into discords; Then she sets her self against Sin, the cause of all
disorders, having assistants which bears their parts, and the burden of the
song, with the heavenly powers; and hell is forced to sing the base: then being
in triumph, she ventures upon Death as a party with Sin, and gets the day.
But finding the day of execution rejourned, she frames her songs of degrees for
her friends; to take off their hearts from those dying comforts, and sets them
in a way, that they might not outlive their happiness.

The Verses are various in kind as the subjects are, each one has his
several. I need not show, how those that are interwoven, do agree with the
bases, and how the couplets are entire, etc. For such that know the nature of
them already, and for such as do not, let time and experience, teach them; Let
those that are wise, affect matter more than words, but chiefly, that which
tends to raise the soul in her flight heavenward, which my Muse in her songs
desires. Now I leave her with you, use her well: she has undergone a heavy
Press to gain your acquaintance, she will bear her own charge, she will
be constant to you, her acquaintance will bring you profit, if you turn her
not out of doors; howsoever she will speak the best, or say the least of her
ill usage.

TO THE READER.
GOod Readers, still in silence do pass by,
The faults incident to humanity,
And in the inward Chamber of the heart,
A Lodging finds, and takes all in good part.
These precious lines, by wisdom were obtained
From him that govern's still the stars unstained.
And now by whom, he does the truth declare,
Observer he of time, is it not rare.
And in the eye of such as light do hate,
Which hell has hardened, and made obstinate,
Empty darkness waits on them at noone,
Like Egypt dogs, they will bark still at the Moon.
But where there is grace composed with policy.
Heavens influence waiting constantly,
About the heart, that he shall so indite,
Matter sweet for the soul, or hand to write.
If instances for witness be produced,
The wise will conclude, that time is abused.
But now the Author of this lively book,
Studently, ingeniously, has forsook,
The windy froth, and vain glorious sound,
Can have no footing here, upon this ground.
Judgment, affections, in reading is desired,
No admiration, but divine's required.
Those sweet perfumes, which sweetens every verse
Read, mark, again unto thy self rehearse.
If information of the wiles of sinrie,
By reading this, unto thy soul comes in,
Instead of sleights, or jeeres, thy soul will praise,
The Lord, that gifts men so, in these our days.
Thus to unmaske the devils brats and sin,
And shows such life, that all should strive to win.
I have to say in truth of commendation,
More from experience than by relation.
If evidence unskilled in poetry,
Proves not a blanck in any lotterie,
Then here stay not, but step within the door,
There Is Poetry, variety, and store.
W. G.

OF THE POEMS of his Friend.
I Read those lines, in them a worth I spied,
I turned them back, and found this empty side?
To praise the worth, I had a mind unto it,
'T will praise it self, what need I then to do it?
I took my pen, no longer did contest,
To try my skill, my love will prove the best:
The lines are useful, sweet, and full of matter,
Composing words which men at random slatter.
They are like darts to those that live in sin,
They leave all speechless, that have shameless bin?
And sin it self, is followed with such strength,
With all his power, he is overcome at length.
To all that love truth, cordials, comforts sweet
They do convay, to all directions meet.
Plain things are raised, the lofty level made,
Things lasting prized, those slighted that do fade,
In pleasing terms, not strange, nor yet too low,
They bear a grace, yet such that all may know.
And if this be thy Musestuning strings,
How sweet will it be, when she both tunes and sings?
Go now with praise, fear not to find success,
What Is here is thine own, thou have not robbed the press.
Had I but hope, that I so well could do,
I Would wish, that I were melancholy too.
P. H.

To his Friend, H. M.
Honor is due to him that does advance,
Undoubted truth, with lively circumstance.
MVch of this skill this Author has found out;
PVts Sinto silence: questions out of doubt.
HAving pursued the cause of desolation,
RAising the hearts sweetly with meditation.
YOur souls may see, their enemies descri'd,
Man's wit is pliable, truly sanctified,
IN laying siege, against sin, thy Poetry,
LEaves it accursed, in hellish destiny.
LEt not thy conquest die, let us know the thing,
SAlly forth little book, fear no deadly sting.
In Libri and Authoris Encomion.
I Need not praise this Book, nor more to tell,
But that the matter in it will make it sell.
The work it self wants naught to set it forth,
'Twill fast enough away, through its own worth.
Though some the Carver, not the Authors skill,
Do more admire the pencill than the quill.
Such Empericks indeed may fashion it,
The perfecting's compact by Art and Wit.
Some men there are, that for their worthy parts,
Their virtue and their skill in many Arts,
Deserved honor here; and those that can,
Discern the sequel will applaud the man.
And must confess he has deserved fame,
And everlasting praise, but mark this same,
And to succeeding ages after tell,
The period of his life may end, and well.
His name forgotten be, but yet this know,
The work remains for ever, not for show.
But for instruction of a civil life,
Abasing vice, too common, frequent rife,
Excluding it, yet still in brief refines,
True virtues worth, eminence, throughout his lines,
Now this to add, and so conclude my Muse,
Read it, then censure't, for it is meet for use.
THO: COLLET.

The Arguments.
A Melancholy Vision.
Of Time, with its use.
Of the Vanity of the world.
Of the Nature of Darkness.
Of the Nature of Light.
Of all sorts of Life.
Of the Condemnation of Sin.
Of the Arraignment of Death.
The Reprive of Sin, and Death.
Advise about Sin.
Instructions touching Death.
The Resolutions of the Muse.
AN ACCIDENTAL Melancholy Vision which occasioned the Poems.
ME thought I saw, Time, in his speedy course,
His sith new ground, his glass being almost run,
All men did strive in vain, to break his force,
Tears would not stay him til his work were done,
He cut down all, none could his fury shun.
Alas (thought I) he will take me in his way,
My heavy heart, took earnest of decay.
Me thought, all sorts, me company did bear,
My eyes did fail, my tongue grew speechless to,
My ears were stopped, my breath grew short, my fear
Did so increase, I knew not what to do:
But yet I heard, from whence, or what, or who,
I could not tell; my spirits were aghast:
With world adue, me thought I breathed my last.
But yet my spirits were but in a trance,
For Darkness with his mantle spread me ore,
With that, I did my courage much advance
Against darkness, yet the combat was so sore
That I grew sadder than I was before,
But yet think I, i will in defiance stand,
For I will never be at his command.
Like one destract, I was overwhelmed a while,
With grief, and care, lest I should lose the day,
Then in comes Light, and with a cheerful smile
Revives my spirits: Darkness slinkes away,
So on the sudden, ended was the fray.
Light shined a while, but what will (...) ever?
What Is made for time, a little time (...)
Then light began, much like a pleasant spring,
My heart grew warm, I had the sense of it:
The winters past (thought I) now birds dosing,
Why should I thus now melancholy sit?
Come, come, rejoice, I hold it very fit.
I was on sudden ravished in my soul,
But that which followed, did my joys control.
For life brought Care, she looked on me so strange,
Best things below, do prove but pleasing toys,
I found his friendship subject still to change,
Worm-eaten pleasures, breeds uncertain joys,
And are like Rattles, only fit for boys.
Alas (said I) how am I thus deceived?
I catch at comfort, and am still bereaved.
Then Sin, he promised full content to me,
But on such terms, I should take his direction:
Fear not (said he) for we shall well agree.
But then (thought I) it will breed a worse infectio^,
To stain my soul with horror and dejection,
I gave denial to his cursed suit,
And did resolve, his vileness to confute.
I turned about, and law sin was in hold,
Nay now (thought I) I Will have of sin my will,
Seeing that he was so impudent and bold,
To tempt me by his promises to ill:
The souls of many he does daily spill.
I gave my voice against him; by and by,
I turned my face, and saw him sentenced lyc.
Well now (thought I) I hope, the worst is past,
I will rejoice, and while my Muse does sing,
I Will over-looke my sorrow, and forecast,
To tune my soul, and strike the pleasant string.
But Death peept in, which more ill news did bring.
What must I die? is all my labor lost?
Sin set him on, seeing he by me was crossed.
But yet resolving, while I had my life,
To try an action, so my cause was tried;
And Death was cast, which ended all my strife.
But then the Devil, he could not abide,
That sin, and death, should die: for then his pride,
Would be abated; so he got them quit:
Now farewell world, I must into the pie.
But then at last, I found another shift,
I slighted death, and thought on heaven above,
I thought it best, to make it still my drift,
To get the sense of Gods eternal love:
Me thought'twas brought me by the heavenly Dove:
And musing of him when he was ascended,
And what he brought; so was my Vision ended.
1 COR. 7. 29. This I say Brethren, the Time is short. ECCLES. 3. 2. There is a
Time to be borne, and a Time to die. ECCLES. 9 10. Neither does man know his
Time, but as the Fishes that are taken in a not, and the snare, so are the
Children of men snared in an evil Time, when it falls upon them suddenly.
EPHESIANS. 5. 16. Redeem the Time, because the days are evil.
A DESCRIPTION OF THE NATVRE AND QUALITY of TIME. As also the abuse of it,
with the good use of TIME.
POEMS.
Time, thou art that precious part, that God does give to man:
That living here, may in Gods fear, proceed the best he can.
Time's more of worth, when it is set forth, in Nature sweet and kind,
Than Gold: being lost, the man is crossed, that seeks to gain, or find.
Time being gone, sure there is none, can call it back again,
Its in God hand, Time cannot stand, the Lord of times does reign.
When Time is past, though thou make haste, to o're-take, its seldom seen,
But if thou creep, time does not sleep, but swift has ever been.
If thou but go, time does not so, it runs, thou runn'st, 'twill fly,
Get time before, and keep in store, lest God thee time deny.
Thy great estate, time will but hate, to stay for thee therefore,
Time knows not how, nor God allow, to differ rich from poor.
Time's like wise short, though fools in (...) to make it shorter strive,
Poor fools indeed, that whipps with (...) time gone, yet thinks to thrive.
Alas aday I who is it that may, more then his day stay here?
What mortal can exceed his span, though living now in cheer?
Death has time pressed, that all the rest, that on the earth abide,
Ere it belong, though nere so strong, the dust may under hide.
Uncertain too, not much ado, can make us know our time,
Our sudden change, should not be strange, though it come in our prime.
When men mind not, then it is their lot, to die: they naught desire it,
Time will away, it must not stay, though all the world would hire it.
Though men do deem, and some esteem, time long: yet short's the flower,
When men are strong, it lasts not long, times cream's but like an hour.
Long do we grow, ere we know how, to use our time, and then,
We eat, and drink, and little think, to die, like other man.
Much time we sleep, some time we weep, some time we sport and play,
Some time we win, most time we sin, thus spend we many a day.
Some time we joy, and vainly toy, saying come lets merry be;
For when death comes, we in our tombs, this mirth shall never see.
Some time we dress, we take no less time, to put off again,
Sometime we walk, sometime we talk, these things who can refrain?
When strength does fail, old age is frail, and natures ruins are,
Though old men be, we seldom see them, for their souls prepare.
Unless before, they had in store, a stock of comfort got,
They cannot pray, not truly say, O Lord thou art my lot.
Not first, nor last, of time that is past, our time we vainly spend:
The cream and flower, used by Gods power, brings comfort at the end.
This being true, I heard one rue, how vile a beast am I?
Lost time I have, what may I crave, but like a beast to die?
O time, thy price, if good advice had wrought upon me then,
I had thee bought, and for thee sought, will it never come again?
Thy front was fair, adorned with hair, but balde behind thou art,
To follow thee, boots not for me, for grief has killed my heart.
Thou art too swift, for me unthrift, whether I do go, or run.
My friend also, is turned my foe, alas, my thread is spunne.
Short is the pleasure, of sinful leisure, but still the sting remains,
Long lives the smart, which kills my heart, with never dying pains.
I did believe that on my sleeve, time, and Repentance fast
Was pined: and when I cared not, then they both were quickly past.
Then thou my friend, that see my end, take heed at any rate,
For now in hell, I go to dwell, all comforts come too late.
Make use of time, now in thy prime, lay hold on saving grace,
Lest at the last, God do thee cast, from heaven his dwelling place.
Into that Lake, where lives the snake, with hell hounds yelling fast,
Where thou shall cry, and burning lie, thy dolor still shall last.
GOOD USE OF TIME. With means to be used to make advantage of it.
Well, now I see, what misery. that time ill spent does bring,
Hearing these words, they cut like swords, tears from my eyes they wring.
Time be my friend, i will make an end, and leave my vain delights,
I will thee use, and not abuse, and give to thee thy rights.
Thou art of price, I will be wise, to make of thee such gain,
As through Gods grace, I Will thrive apace, Gods love shall me constrain.
Though short time is, I will not miss, in time to serve the Lord,
And then will he, still present be, and comfort me afford.
Then time make haste, and run as fast, or having wings thou fly.
Then to my fort, I will resort. under Gods wings i will lie.
Though suddenly, thou come to try, how ready I shall be,
Then thus I say, I Will watch and pray, from fear I shall be free.
Against that hour, Lord by thy power, of comforts give mestore,
Live thou my soul, free from control, when time shall be no more.
Now thou my friend, that good intend, use well the time while here
Thou stay: then sure, thou shall endure, fresh comforts shall appear.
Alas, how may I, thou will say, make use of times sad story,
I may at, last, when time is past, by grace attain to glory?
Serve God, while young, when thou art strong to overcome thy Lust,
Make haste also, and with time go, or be behind thou must.
Deny thy strength, and now at length, make God thy chiefest guide,
Let in thy breast, sin never rest, but chiefly down with pride.
Believe thou art, freed from the smart of sin, of death, and hell,
By him that came; from heavens frame, sometime on earth to dwell.
Be good and kind, to all that mind the God of time to serve,
Serve all in love, from God above, let thy heart never swarve.
Unloose thy joys, from earthly toys, and willing be to part,
For worldly things, no comfort brings, let heaven have thy heart.
So now we see, how we may be, of time, good stewards then,
Let us be blessed, Lord to thy rest, and enter may: Amen.
FINIS.
1 JOHN, 2. 17. The World passes away, and the Lust thereof. 1 COR. 7. 31. The
fashion of this World passes away.
THE FADING CONDITION, OF EARTHLY THINGS. With the Application of it.
THe Vanity of earthly things, appears on this wise,
False joy true discontent it brings, who could them not despise?
What are the Nobles of the earth, but honored clodds of clay?
Though they are made so great by birth, such time consumes away.
What are the learned here below, but reverend heaps of dust?
Also the wisest that I know, dissolved be they must.
What are the richest of the time? ere grown they fade away?
So do the greatest in their prime, even fade till quite decay.
What are the fairest of this age? but skin thick beauties found?
Must not the stoutest though they rage, lie even with the ground?
And must not poor and lowly too, at last be lower brought?
All of all sorts, though much ado, ere long must turn to naught.
If Nobles be, though honored, so mortal in their kind?
I Will be content, though meaner bred, and coming thus behind.
Shall find as much respect with death, the worms, and eke the grave,
As truly honored Nobles, since, they there no Lordships have.
If learning will not much avail, when time begins to close,
Though they are like, when they prevail, the Lilly and the Rose.
The learning of the truth shall be, the thing I most intend,
When all things changed thus shall be, my comfort shall not end.
If worldly wisdom, does no good, to help in time of need,
I Will not adore the serpents brood, nor run with them to speed.
My wisdom for to know my God, his Christ, through his good grace,
My self, my sins, and eke Gods rod, 'twill make me mend apace.
If rich men, and their riches are, thus subject all to fade,
O pity them, that with much care, their gods of them has made.
My care shall be, to be as rich, in God I may or can,
To bring my self up to the pitch, to fear nor flatter man.
What cannot greatness death withstand? nor shun his mortal dart?
Let no man think to take in hand, to free him from that smart.
My care shall be, to frame my life and daily die to sin,
And living may, thus free from strife, a heavenly life begin.
Nor cannot beauty with her smiles, once charm deaths frowning face?
Who then so hard y thinks his wiles, can turn his common trace
I love the beauty that is within and in the heart does lie,
It Is fresh in heaven, being freed from sin, when death it self shall die.
Cannot the man, that is so stout, himself free from the dread?
What is the man, that goes about redemption from the dead?
I desire to take away the sting, from death, and him disarme,
Being done by faith, to God i will sing, his praise, thus fre'd from harm.
And why must poor, and lowly men, lie lower in the dust?
It Is so decreed, I say again, that all men living must.
Poor be content, for you shall see, the rich for all their store.
As low interred, in earth shall be, though men do them adore.
Let low in heart, rejoice that have a Kingdom for their own,
The King of Kings will all them save, when proud are overthrown.
Let Us all prepare our selves for change, We must not long stay here,
That God to us may not be strange, then come thou King of fear.
Not noble birth, nor learning high, nor wise, nor rich, nor great,
Nor fair, nor stout, poor, nor lowly, (...) must be worms meat,
Come down proud hearts, for thus I say, that death has no remorse:
Obend to God, and to him pray lest thou be broke by force.
Then farewell all contents below, all must to judgment come:
How they have lived, so shall they know, for to receive their doom.
FINIS.
GENESIS 1. 2: The Earth was without form. and Darkness was upon the Deep. ROMANS
13. 12. Cast away the works of Darkness. EPHESIANS. 5. 11. Have no fellowship
with the unfruitful works of Darkness, but reprove them rather.
POEMS.
DARKNESS DISCOVERED. With the dreadful effects thereof.
The Argument in Charge.
1.
COme, come my Muse, put on thy sad array,
Black darkness scorning, in a hateful tone,
And if thou can him banish quite away,
Thou shall have praise almost of every one:
Be bold, and by him be not thou out-fac'd,
If he will not part, let him remain disgraced.
2.
Thou black and hideous monster on the earth;
Darkness I mean, I never yet could find,
That he which made the world, brought thee to birth
Thou art of hellifh nature, kin by kind,
To that cursed fiend, that rules in thee by might,
Thou must give place, he claims thee for his right
3.
If hell had been, before there was a Devil,
I should have judged that thou had bin the same,
As first, so worse than any other evil,
Thou art; till now. I never knew thy name,
A dreadful night-hag, blackness type of death,
Thou hinder'st light, thy vapors poison breath.
4.
An evil spirit thou art, there is no doubt,
Thou do so haunt me, where so ere I go,
Though I remote be, thou do find me out,
And lookst so ghastly like a deadly foe,
If I haste home, yet thou art there before,
Waiting my coming, for to vex me more.
5.
Thou art so bold, no company or place,
Can shake thee off; thou most unwelcome guest,
The comeliest creature thou do still disgrace,
Only with blind men, thou art in request;
Or hateful creatures that do shun the light,
Do follow thee, and so play least in sight.
6.
Had not the glorious light appeared, still thou
Had kept possession of the world, and then
None ever could at any time tell how,
To differ beasts (though wild) from sons of men,
Gods praise of all his works, had quite bin lost,
Had he not brought in light, and darkness crossed.
7.
But still thou shar'st with light, of time and place,
And show thy swarthie visage every where,
I Would make thee creep in holes, not snew thy face
No more thou should, if I could powerst care,
The obscurest den, should ever be thy tomb,
Till hell did take thee, at the day of doom.
8.
Men were not made with eyes, and not to see,
Such pleasant colors, made were for delight,
What use of these, when men in darkness be,
What do thou then, but rob us of our right?
Do peep in now? be gone, or else i will fire
Thy horrid shape; let cursed be thy hire.
9.
Thou envious viper, why so long do keep
Possession of some countries? ere thou part,
Would have a creature, half a year to sleep?
No fruit thou have, poor beasts do feel the smart,
Thou keepst from others, me^ must wait thy leisure,
There Is no excuse, nor reason, it is thy pleasure.
10.
A man that travels on his way, he thinks,
No harm is near him; but thou hid'st the way,
Then suddenly into a pit he sinkes,
So by thy means, that, does his life destroy,
Thou do not care, thou would not blush awhit
If all that lives should fall into a pit.
11.
Contrarily, when men in Darkness go,
They see a bush, but take it for a Thief,
And so a friend, is taken for a foe,
Of all mistakes in mischief, thou art chief,
I never knew thee to repent of any,
Of all such wrongs, though they were nere so many.
12.
Thou hant'st the day, that it can never rest,
Thy fury shows the curstness of thy spirit,
And when the cha^pion hides him in the west;
Thou take his place, there thou would still inherit;
But light does conquer, and breaks up thy fort,
Monrun from thee, to light they do resort.
13.
What use of thee can any creature make?
For any good? what profit do thou bring,
Or what delight can any creature take
In thee? thou envi'st every living thing?
But Batts and Owls, are company for thee,
And graves remote, how noisome ere they be.
14.
Nay worse tha^ all that I before have told
You Are good for nothing, but with sleeping dreams
Thou cheatest men: the blindest are most bold,
And when they wake, their wants are in extremes,
Thou fright'st men too and make some fools, so^e mad.
All this is true, o this is worse than bad.
15.
Yet worse I Will say, that no man can deny it,
Thou coverest sin, and do still take his part,
Thou art reserved and close, I do defy it,
Thou hid'st sins vermin, that should feel the smart,
And good that should lie open to the world,
Thou hid'st it so, that in a grave it is hurled.
16.
A traitor thou art, guilty of the treason,
That traitors act in vaults, and hideous Cells,
Thou keep'st their counsels, is there any reason,
But thou should share with the^ in deadly spells.
Nay thou are first in all things that are ill.
Thy partners die, but thou remainest still.
17.
By thy assistance thieves do seek their prey,
They rob and steal, thou do their counsel keep,
When they break houses, it is not in the day,
It Is in thy presence, when men are asleep:
Thou cozening varlet, do not thou partake?
With all such villains, thou do share a stake.
18.
Me^ spend whole nights in play, their means and al,
Thou do them shelter with a sable hue,
They Will turn thee into day, but they inthrall
Themselves: day is their night, and shame their due,
For when light peeps on them, they slink away,
Thou make them bold, but light does them bewray.
19.
What art thou but a Pandar to the whore,
To countenance such baseness that they do?
When thou have curtain'd light, and not before
They serve their lusts, art thou not guilty too?
Such things are covered, yea maintained by thee,
As clownes blush at, and mad men hate to see.
20.
Thou go with death, you both agree together,
If one go first, the other follows fast,
Who is the master? it is no matter whether,
How can you 'gree? too slow thou, he too fast
Runs? death in darkness throws his dart so right,
You both conspire against the blessed light.
21.
Darkness, thou take on thee such dreadful state,
That sin and death, does still upon thee wait,
Having their love, thou do procure thee hate,
Of all that know thy tricks, and find thy bait:
Thou art accursed of all that see thy shape,
It Is more ugly, than any Bear or Ape.
22.
Thou chargest men, with candle, torch and tapers,
Those that do purchase any time of thee,
(When thou do come, and bring thy hateful vapors)
Shall buy it dear, if they would constant be,
Thou ever still do seek for to undo us,
And enviest much, when any light comes to us.
23.
Though I chide thee, yet still thou star'st upon me,
And do not shrink a whit, thou make me fret,
Thou do outface me, pressing more upon me;
With thy black guard, thou do upon me set:
I call for light, but thou do wait till when,
My candle's out, and then thou come again;
24.
Man's time is short, yet thou take half his life;
He answer must, for that black time that thou
Do bring on him; it is that, that breeds us strife,
To be redeemed from thee, we know not how,
The willinger to part from earth I Will be,
Freed from thy shade, I perfect light shall see.
25.
Unlike to God thou art, no darkness dwell
With him may: thou have nothing else, thy name
Is darkness: thou will soon all light expel,
If thou had might, for free thou art from shame,
Thou dare not look in heaven, this I know,
God lets thee stay for punishment below.
26.
Most fitly unto hell, I thee compare,
For darkness there, is of no other hue,
Thy ugly presence, adds to their care,
That love not light, so darkness is their due;
Thou constant art, yet there thou do not hide,
Their faults, though thou do with them still abide.
27.
Nay worse, for there thou do the worse torment,
And vex them justly, here thou vexest all,
The best thou hindrest from their good intent,
Both good and bad; with snares thou do inthral,
From fire there, thou take the light away,
Thou bring'st us night, and take from us the day.
28.
Be thou confined to hell, for only there,
Thy kingdom is, yet here thou come to dwell,
And with thy shape thou putt'st us still in fear,
Art thou so large, not room enough in hell
For thee: but thou must rove about the earth?
With tragedies thou act'st a monstersbirth.
29.
Thou like hells factor, gets men in thy claws
And keep'st them fast, they cannot get from thee,
Then hellish darkness, opens wide his jaws,
And swallows them in endless misery.
Those that on earth do show to thee regard,
Thy partner does in hell, their works reward.
30.
Darkness in hell, seems like thy younger brother,
For thou before had being in the world,
Did thou fall out with him? or from each other
Part with consent? that he to hell was hurled,
Or does he there, possession keep for thee,
Till thou come there, for all eternity?
31.
For though thou stay'st on earth a while, yet thou,
Ere long, shall not in any place be found
Saving in hell, let hell hounds tell thee how
By thee their sorrows do the more abound:
Penned up together, you shall be for aye.
Look not toward heaven, for eternal day.
32.
Thou with black storms, do ever join thy might
In day thy foggy mists, do cast their vailes,
Which hang before us, keeping off the light,
On tops of hills, or dwelling in the dales:
And thou in mischief do eclipse the Sun,
To force a night, before the day be done.
33.
Nay worst of all, thou make men blind within,
Thou take possession only of the heart,
And so through darkness, men do live in sin,
Losing their way so by thy cursed art:
No love of truth, (for why they cannot see)
Does once appear, being hood-winkt so by thee.
34.
The mind to folly, thou do ever bend,
Through ignorance, thou keep'st it still in hold,
To hinder good, thou have a cursed end,
To cloud the light; thou shameless art and bold,
Thou keep'st assizes, close, within the soul,
Thou will be judge, and thou must all control,
35.
If once the will, do but a freedom crave.
And labor darkness, for to disinherit,
Then if thou can not chain him like a slave,
Thou Wilt blind him so, that he will think to merit:
Which is as bad, or worse, thus for to change;
Blind zeal from light is far remote and strange.
36.
The Affections are so darkened, by thy power,
They live below, and worldly goods desire,
Desiring things that perish in an hour;
Affecting not the light, or to aspire
Above thy reach, but with thee will remain,
They lick the dust, and judge loss to be gain.
37.
The mind, the will, affections are included,
In thy black dungeon, thou do keep them fast,
And so poor creatures are by thee deluded,
They love thee more than light, light has no taste
With them, for light they never yet did know,
They Will know thee here, or else in hell below.
38.
Those not a few, that thou do cheat so still,
The most of men, thou hidest in thy tent,
For half the world. is not enough to fill,
Thy hellish prison; but it is still thy bent,
To coverall men with thy hellish shade,
As if that all were for destruction made.
39.
Thou make me^ think, that evil's good, good evil,
Such do thee love; is it for thy comely looks?
Or else, because thou art so like the Devil,
They so delight to read thy cursed books?
Or is it that they may free from fear or wit,
Still sin unseene, when they in darkness sit?
40.
Though men have eyes, through thee they cannot see,
No not themselves, for they are blind within,
Thou flatter'st such, how vile so ere they be,
Which work for thee, hate light and mock at sin,
To humor all, thou have a great desire,
That plead for thee, and love thy fruitl esse hire.
41.
Thou art the cause, that men do live like bruits.
They look not up, they are so with thee possessed,
They are thy spawns, I know the^ by their fruits,
I Will never look for reason, in a beast:
Ocursed darkness, how do thou bereave,
Their souls of light, and in them darkness leave.
42.
Thou will not be expeld by any strength,
Nor adjurations charge, thou art so stout,
Till God from heaven brings his light at length,
Into the minds, and so does cast thee out:
Yet thou do lurk, and turn again to enter
Into the heart; thou art so bold to venture.
43.
In single actions, thou do hide a part,
If good, the comfort, thou do still disgrace,
If bad, thou usest such black handed art,
Men cannot see their own deformed face,
whether good or bad: small difference does appear,
The good is clouded, bad (though foul) seems clear.
44.
though light be round about thee, yet thou keep'st
Possession: for thou will not stir from thence,
Thy night is always, yet thou never sleep'st,
Light from on high against thee does commence,
A suit in judgment; though he get the day,
Being impudent, thou will not get away.
45.
Keep off from me, I charge thee come not hither,
Go, go to Egypt, once again to dwell,
And let the dreamers say, when thou come thy-
That thou most fitly do resemble hell,
or wait in deserts, let the sleepers call there,
Thee back: or mourners to the funeral.
46.
Let such as have not mourning garments made,
Tattend the funerals to their graves by day,
Take up on trust, of thy black cypress shade,
Let doomes-day be appointed for thy pay:
Let greeved persons that should weep alone,
In thy sad presence, breath a silent groan.
47.
Go, be a bug-beare to the Indians wild,
And live with savages, in dark some holes,
or dwell with worms beneath, for they are mild,
They Will not thee chide, go tarry with the moles,
Till thou art sent for; these will like thee best:
Shameless thou art, thou would go else, being so pressed.
48.
Me thinks to dwel' among Turks, might thee suffice,
Their bounds are larger, than all Christendom;
Thou shall be welcome, there they will thee prize,
What need'st thou then to us, so constant come?
Get, get thee gone, thy Canopie no more,
Spread over us, do this, I Will quit the score.
49.
Let such bribe thee, that Nature have denied,
A comely shape, and let those be in fee
With thee: that thou may them in darkness hide:
That have no hope of grace or good to see:
Let vagrants use thee, as a charmet' affright,
Their froward brats, to tell them here comes night.
50.
And let the screetch-owles, with their doleful noise,
Accompany thy presence, and withal,
To usher in thy train, with hollow voice,
Let night-birds meet together, great and small:
No other music, but the passing bell,
Thy woes so sad, as death himself can tell.
51.
Let no man name thee, but in great disdain,
And blush when thou art open set before,
Let none wish for thee, thou increasest pain
Of death, to such that do but help thee ore:
When thou art seen, let desperate sinners quake,
That must in hell of thee possession take.
52.
Let fools by thee, be ever so affrighted
That they may tremble when they do thee see;
Let changelings cry, still when they are benighted,
And bawling curres, then howl for fear of thee:
Let mad men quiver when they hear thy name,
Or see thy shape (though wild) they may grow tame.
53.
might,
Then now I Would leave thee, leave thee? would I
I speak as I would have it unawares,
The thoughts of leaving, makes my heart so light,
That for the present, I am free from cares:
Then say I, is this ravishment in thought?
Its but a dream, which waking turns to naught.
54.
For when I turn my face, it glides away,
And doors are shut, and darkness in does slinke,
Then all amort, I bid my pengoe play,
I write no more, he creeps in through a chinke:
I think to strive, it is but in vain for me,
For with this spright, I haunted still shall be.
55.
If I could kill thee, I would soon dispatched it,
Run through thou had bin, I know it many times,
Yet still thou liv'st, thy evil who can match it?
Men die with less, and for less sinful crimes:
There Is none can hang thee, still thou slip'st the knot
I Will have thee banished, this should be thy lot.
56.
Thou stop'st mine eyes, thou can not stop my tongue,
I Will tell thy projects to the world, that they,
May shun, or hate thy company, and long,
And love, and prize the lightsome cheerful day:
I will not make with thee a composition,
Nor none should else, by my will or permissio^.
57.
My cares are open, them thou can not close,
With all thy magic: comfort still I find,
In darkness I can smell a fragrant rose,
Though thou bring'st sadnessc, this does ease my mind.
I will not fear thee much: for why should I,
God gives me light, thy blackness todescrie.
58.
I Will raise my thoughts (though dark) above thy flight,
And meditate on blessed things to come,
And take possession of eternal light,
By faith: though thou will not avoid the room.
Come do thy worst, why should I favor crave,
Of thee that art a these, a sharke, a slave?
59.
(Then thus I think, again.)
If he will not part, by fair means nor by force,
But stay with us, and vex us in despite;
I Will send a Satire that shall scourge him worse,
He feeling 'smart, perhaps he will take his flight.
It boots not, he being senseless feels no pain,
A whipp's as nothing, this thought is but vain.
60.
Being vexed, I to him say:
Remain imprisoned, in a fatal Cell,
And let the stars, the Moon still watch thee there,
But with enchantments, thou get'st out to dwell,
The stars are hid, the Moon does not appear.
(Then thus my Muse reply:)
What remedy, but patience, that is best,
Lay me aside, go sweetly take thy rest,
61.
(Then I look back:)
On what my Muse did speak, I set my mind,
I naught regard his power, nor his charms,
Nor fear his looks, my soul shall be inclined,
To light: then I will never dread his harms.
It Is but a time, half my time here is light,
My mind shall see heaven, in the darkest night.
62.
Then to my Muse I say,
Alas, alas, is all thy labor lost?
Does darkness still remain? what still abide?
Is there no way to have his horror crossed?
Does he not care though thou do sharply chide?
Be not dismayed, thy labor is not vain,
Except his own, all men shall him disdain.
63.
Wind up thy clew, for thou have staid too long,
Acting thy part, so tragical and grim,
Though darkness stay still with us yet among,
Yet charge him that he goes not into him
That Is dispossessed of him; nor in the heart
Once claim a share, where light has got a part.
64.
Warn all in light, to stand upon their guard,
Let those in darkness for their freedom strive,
Let all at all times, ever be prepared,
To Oppose it, till they do by light arrive
In heaven: where, no darkness they shall see,
But free from fear eternally shall be.
65.
If Darkness grumble,
Speak not at all, though he do vex and grutch,
And mutter out his froth, or yet his crew,
Reply: seeing thou do them so boldly touch,
Its known full well what thou have spoke is true.
They Will show thou did but rub him on the sore,
The more they stir, still they will stink the more.
66.
Mnse, thou art honest, I must take thy part,
Though thou art plain, let none thy truth despise,
Thou art not trimmed with any curious art,
Thou wear'st thy own, that best does fit thy size.
Go, go thy way, plain dressing likes me best,
For heathenish painting's grown out of request.
FINIS.
GENESIS 1. 3. And God said, Let there be Light, and there was Light. PSALM. 36.
9. For with thee is the well of life, and in thy light shall we see Light.
POEMS.
LIGHT SET FORTH IN HIS BEAVTIE. With the Effects thereof.
The Argument in Charge.
1.
NOw come my Muse, and sweetly sing, the prasse of light, no other thing;
Shall hinder thee: I have intent,
To help thy tune, my heart is bent.
2.
His pedigree, his beauty, worth,
His use, esteem, his truth set forth,
His company, and proper place,
And chide all those, that him disgrace.
3.
Oblessed Light, need I a task,
To sing thy worth, let none me ask,
Thy self as motives, may suffice,
To cause my pen thy songs devise.
4.
If I should hold my tongue, some Vale,
Or Hills, of Plants, would tell the tale,
Or Beasts, nay stones, would find a tongue,
To speak thy praises, ere 'twere long.
5.
If I could find an Eagles quill,
Dropped from her wing, I Would try my skill,
With it to raise my note so high,
And set thy worth, above the sky.
6.
I am too shallow in this art,
In Comedy to act a part,
For thee, that art so sweet and fair,
I fear my words will be but air.
7.
But if I speak, perhaps some other,
Will fall to write, whose worth they smother;
Thy glory show, that better can,
And will thy beauty freely scan,
8.
Light, thou art so divine a thing,
Let all the world thy honor sing,
To bring thy favor in request,
And call thee still, their welcome guest.
9.
The God of lights, thy father he,
Does so proclaim himself to be,
Thy birth is honored: so do thou.
Dwell with thy fathers Children now.
10.
Thou first wast made of all the rest,
His works to grace, thee he thought best,
He let thee rule, and called thee day,
Thou did drive darkness far away.
11.
Thou spread'st thy self, blessed was thy name,
And all did mount, and blaze thy fame,
For thou did show thy face to all,
To rich, to poor, to great and small.
12.
Thou ready wast, for to attend,
The creatures when they did ascend,
From earth; thou welcom'st in their train,
'T was all for love, thou had no gain.
13.
The Sun he borrowed light of thee,
The Stars we know, beholding be,
To thee: the Moon would be but dark,
Had she none of thy heavenly spark.
14.
So pure and perfect still thou art,
With that, that is ill, thou take no part,
No vileness can unto thee cleave,
Cursed creatures would thy presence leave.
15.
But thou their doings do epsy,
And chase them with thy lightened eye,
And bring'st them naked on the stage,
And make them hateful to this age.
16.
The goodness that lies hid of those,
That love thee, thou do it disclose,
In time thou will so spread their fames,
That men shall joy to hear their names.
17.
Thy self and all things thou do show.
Thou would have us, the glory know
Of God in thee; and all the rest,
How in his creatures he is blessed.
18.
All things had been but blind and dumb,
Had thou not mustred up the sum
Of them in order, and their glory,
Who could have known the worlds great story.
19.
Constant art thou, for to this day,
Thou do not from us part away,
But show thy face, and let'st us see,
Thy beauty, with thy purity.
20.
Thou art of day the Princess still,
We Will serve thee freely with good will.
And for to recompense our pains,
Thy presence brings sufficient gains.
21.
Thou show thy beams also in night,
When darkness rules, thy lesser Light
Breaks in to guide us, in our way,
(...) darkness would lead us astray.
22.
Though thou art high, thou do not grutch,
To stoop and light below, all such
As need thy aid, and feign would use
Thy beams: thou do them not refuse.
23.
Nay thou the bad do not deny,
Thy aid, but come in presently,
To do them good. So good for ill,
Thou do repay, it is thy good will.
24.
For such as would resist thy might,
It Is but in vain, for thou in sight,
Break'st in upon them, in what place,
So cre they be; to their disgrace.
25.
Thou art so swift, that in an hour,
Over all the world thou spread'st thy power,
Thou overlook'st the world, and when,
Thou draw'st away, swift art thou then.
26.
Thou pleasant art, for to behold,
When thou thy sweetness do unfold,
All comely creatures thou do grace,
All flowers smile upon thy face.
27.
And thou do ease the greeved mind,
When thou come in, they comfort find,
From false suspicious thou do free,
All such as suffer wrongfully.
28.
Most useful every way art thou,
For all things that we may know how,
By thy assistance for to do,
All business: and praise thee to.
29.
Thou art admired for thy worth,
My pen can never set thee forth,
As thou deserve; but this I say,
What Is better than the light of day?
30.
Who is so honored with his store,
Of friends, as thou; for thou have more
Then all the world? to claim as due,
Who does not for thy friendship sue?
31.
Who has attendants like to thee,
For Kings and peoples seek to be,
Graced with thy presence? they cry still,
Come stay: of thee let us have our fill.
32:
When thou do hide thy self a while,
Then all amort, and not a smile,
Breaks forth: but all to silent rest,
Betake themselves, in night it is best.
33.
But when thy morning does appear,
With one consent, and pleasing cheer:
We meet thee for to welcome in,
So sweet a guest, still thou have been.
34.
The pretty Birds, with music sweet,
Do usher thee in, as it is meet;
I wish their notes and tunes so shrill,
Might make thee tarry with us still.
35.
The Beasts arise, though thanklesse they,
Do eat and drink, then sport and play.
They follow thee, and in their kind,
Show, they to praise thee, have a mind.
36.
If darkness were not mixed below,
Among'st thy splendour, this I know,
Thou would appear so bright, that then,
Thou would not suit with mortal men.
37.
To do us good, thou willing art,
And thou with fire take a part,
To light my Candle still at night,
When thy maine part is taking flight.
38.
I pray thee hide not now thy face,
From me, nor leave me in this case.
I am thy Friend, I sing thy praise,
Afford thy help my voice toraise.
39.
Thou art too modest, stay and hear,
Depart not so, I Will make appear,
How thou do all the world excel,
Turn night to day, come with us dwell.
40.
But if thou do this thing refuse,
I Will meet thee early with my Muse.
And sing my song amongst all those,
'Twill please thy friends, and shame thy foes.
41.
Thou art impartial for to hide
Our faults, that thou can not abide;
Thou take thy time to bring't about,
Our sinful folly to set out.
42.
How might we thrive, if we did make,
Good use of thee? delight to take,
Advantage still of every day,
And walk still onward on our way.
43.
How vile are such, that do not prize,
Thee: or against thee shut their eyes,
The night of darkness they love more,
For thou do rub them in the sore.
44.
Thou do not keep their counsel fast,
They long for night, and wish thee past.
That they might sin, then free from fear,
When they are sure, thou art not there.
45.
The traitor, he works in the vault,
When thou art gone, none sees his fault
He thinks; and so he works secure,
But thou do force him to thy lure.
46.
The thief though not so bad as he,
Thinks that when he is rid of thee,
Then he may safely seek his prey,
Till thou his mischief do be wray.
46.
The whore, with all the baudy crew,
They shun thy face, yet for their due,
Thou bring'st disgrace and open shame,
And make them cursed in their name.
47.
The Backbiter in secret goes;
And thinks that thou can not disclose,
His plots: but thou discoverest all,
And he himself receives the fall.
48.
And all that Batt-like seek to hide,
Themselves from thee, shall be descride.
Their sins by thee, shall be brought out.
With all hels rabble, and the rout.
49.
Let none but hell hounds thee despise,
Whose cursed practice do devise:
To make thee hated, let them dwell,
With darkness in the lower hell.
50.
Let all that know thee, love thee still,
In heart in mind, in soul, and will,
Let all their actions be divine,
As thine are, so I would have mine.
51.
Light has a time, it will away,
Let Us do our work, while we have day,
And love it, that we may receive,
A brighter, when this does us leave.
52.
Let Us do nothing by day or night,
But what we'd have brought to the light,
Let Us love all good, and hate all ill,
We may in light, rejoice our fill.
OF HEAVENLY LIGHT.
53.
But as thou art in heaven now,
To ser thee forth I know not how;
My praise, would but thy worth disgrace,
And cloud the beauty of thy face.
54.
I never saw, nor yet did hear,
How famous in thy glory, there
Thou art: the least part of thy worth,
The learned cannot set it forth.
55.
The Angels which above do dwell,
They are most fit thy praise to tell:
Thou art transcendent so above,
That God with thee is much in love.
56.
In thee he does set up his throne,
And thou art so preferred that none,
That mortal are, can ere attain,
To see thee with thy glorious train.
57.
Thou there immortally do shine,
Thy splendour never does decline,
True light indeed thou do appear,
I shall not see thee shine so here.
58.
The Angels do in thee delight,
The Saints do claim thee as their right,
And Saints and Angels do rejoice,
In thee, so 'le I make thee my choice,
59.
So soon as ere thou had thy birth,
Thou wast in Heaven, light on earth,
Is but a shade, as there thou art,
The least that can, be called a part.
60.
There is no night to follow thee,
Nor yet eclipse, or shade to be,
Nor spot, nor let, in all thy course,
All these are here, with more, and worse.
61.
Thou large and boundless art above,
As heaven is, thou do not move;
From place to place, as here amongst men,
Thou go and come, and go again.
62.
When thou art here, then others stay,
And wait thy ley sure, and long way,
Often times before thou do repair,
To them, they die in dark despair.
63.
Mistake me not, I do not chide,
For long thou do with us abide,
How can I do, now less than deem?
But that thou do us more esteem?
OF LIGHT IN the soul.
64.
Thou think it not enough to light,
Our bodies, but thy splendour bright
Does pierce our spirits, and we find,
Thou art of heavens blessed kind.
65.
Men see and feel, yet cannot well,
Express thy might, till thou do dwell,
A while in them, but then they say,
Light blessed art thou, still with us stay.
66.
When thou with power to the soul,
Break'st in, though darkness thee control,
It Is but in vain for to withstand,
Thy presence has a great command.
67.
Yet darkness will not clean go out,
But lurk in corners like a scout,
Yet thou do him in corners spy,
And do his darkness then deserie.
68.
It Is by degrees that thou come in,
Not all by force, thou striv'st to win
The sonle to love thee, and to bend,
It Is power to a blessed end.
69.
Though course thy entertainment be,
Thou art not pettish, for to flee
From them, though they so foolish are,
As not to welcome thee with care.
70.
Thou will not grudge, nor yet disdain,
The poorest soul, to entertain,
Thou will as soon, to such resort,
As those that tend the Princely Court.
71.
Thou art a wonder here below,
In the blessed soul for to bestow,
Thy light; and others that are by,
See nothing, but in darkness lie.
72.
Thou art so excellent by kind,
When thou do once possess the mind.
Thou make a little world of glory,
When men relate thy blessed story.
73.
Thou art so bountiful and free;
Though men are blind, and long to see,
But cannot: yet thou by thy might,
Bring'st them unask't, a better light.
74.
Though light be small, and clowded when,
He first does enter into men,
Ere long he will drive all mists away,
And shine in them as perfect day.
75.
Thou make the difference to appear,
When thou do shine so bright, and clear,
We may perceive, who stands for thee,
And who for darkness; cursed they be.
76.
When thou in man, set'st up thy throne,
And with thy seepter sway'st alone,
Thou like a conqueror do suppress,
The brood of darkness, more or less.
77.
Thy government is sweet, yet strong,
It Is mixed with mildness, and among,
Thou usest motives to assuage,
Revenge cursed pride, and lustful rage.
78.
Thou labour'st man for to exalt,
And do; but he is in the fault,
To slight thee so, and to abuse,
Thy light, or else it little use.
79.
Thou should command the heart and all,
That is in man, for 'twas in thrall,
Before thou came, then thou by force,
Redeem'st us, else we had grew worse.
80.
Thou make us men, we were but bruits,
The works of darkness were our fruits,
We were but fools, and did despise.
The truth: till thou made us more wise.
81.
We were till thou did us repair.
But flesh and bones, and empty air,
Like Idols eyes that cannot see,
Or darksome Cells, just so were we.
82.
When we went singing on towered hell,
With Omnia been, all is well,
When we to thee had no desire,
But loved dark sinful fruitless hire,
83.
Thou came with power from above,
To bring us tidings of Gods love,
Thou promis't us to meet us there,
Thou usest means our hearts to cheer.
84.
Thou guard'st us so, that we may spy,
An evil, when it comes us nigh,
And show us means for to escape,
Though sin and Satan on us gape.
85.
And light'st us, secretly, we may
(Unseene of such that would betray
Thee) pass securely by all them,
Guid'st us to new Jerusalem.
86.
And then thou never leave us more,
But with thy orient splend or store,
Do fill our eyes, our souls, we shall
Be blessed, with Saints, and Angels all.
87.
But lest my muse, so wanton prove,
And with thee fall too much in love,
I Will turn the strain, lest she and I,
Act with thee, sweet Idolatry.
88.
Art thou a creature, and so bright,
What then is he that gave thee light,
The mighty God, that breathed thee forth,
Must needs be, of more wondrous worth.
89.
His eyes are clearer than the day,
The Sunne's but dark, to him I Will say,
If he withold his beams from thee,
What may thon then but darkness be.
90.
He finds that out, which thou can not,
And from his light cannot a jot,
Be hid, what ere he brings to thee,
All first by him, discerned be.
91.
The smallest things both good and bad,
God sees them all, and ever had
A just account, he always takes,
View, of what man no reckoning makes.
92.
At all times, he does us descrie,
And find our turnings presently.
There is no darkness with him mixed,
He Is here and there, yet ever fixed.
93.
At all times, in all places too;
He is, though we with much ado,
Cannot be brought to understand,
Or think he is still so near at hand.
94.
Christ was that Light, that did excel,
Though he did in a stable dwell,
A while: yet then, so perfect cleero,
Our blessed day star did appear.
95.
And Light from heaven down he brought,
Of some desired, Of some unsought,
For men did rather darkness love,
Then Light, that came from God above.
96.
The blessed Spirit, is that Light,
That dwells within, and gives us sight.
To see our selves, and to discern,
The good from bad, and makes us learn.
97.
The Light of comfort in distress,
Comes still from him, he does express,
The Light of Glory to the soul,
Where he does rule without control.
98.
In heaven God himselfe's the Light,
Christ ruling with his princely might,
The spirit shines eternally;
They all agree in unity.
99.
God makes thee as an instrument,
To bring about his blessed intent.
To spread thy beams ore all for use,
That they might be without excuse.
100.
God gives thee, as a gift to those,
For help, that are thy cursed foes,
To show his bounty, and his love,
But have no part in thee above.
101.
Nor that, that is graven in the mind,
For that alone, his friends do find,
As types of heaven, thou art here,
To them, till they do see thee there.
102.
Who would not love thee, while they may,
Enjoy thee walking? for thy way,
Is pleasure and delight, let such,
I hat see thee choose thee, prize thee much.
103.
The Light of grace, that is in the heart,
Let Us still esteem it as a part,
Of heaven: and long for the rest,
The light of Glory, with the blessed.
104.
Lord raise our hearts, with true desire,
To thee, and let our souls aspire,
With joy, the best part of our glory,
Thou art: with thee I Will end my story.
GENESIS 1. 25. And God said, Let the earth bring forth the living thing,
according to his kind, and the Cattle according to his kind, and every
creeping thing of the earth, according to his kind, and God saw that it was
good. GENESIS 2. 7. The Lord God also made man of the dust of the ground, and
breathed in his face the breath of Life, etc. GAL. 2. 20. Nevertheless I live,
yet not I now, but Christ lives in me, and the life that I live in the flesh,
I live by the faith of the Son of God, who has loved me, and gave himself
for me. ROMANS 6. 23. The gift of God is eternal life, through Jesus Christ our
Lord.
POEMS.
OF LIFE. The Charge and the Argument.
Of Life in General.
1.
MUse, raise thy tune, with lively voice
Thy Theme is Life, now forthy choice,
Thou have varieties to sing:
The Plants, the Beasts, do yield thee store,
Man's life, by nature, gives thee more.
Both sweet and sour, yet but one thing.
2.
The life of grace, may call thee debtor,
If that thou do not sing the better,
His worth, his beauty, and his praise:
The Life of glory does excel,
But that thou can not sing so well,
Except thou were with him always.
Of Life in General, and of the Vegetative Life of Plants.
3.
Life thou wast breathed from God above,
And art a token of his Love,
To all his creatures thou wast best:
Himself in thee, he did set forth,
The living God, of glorious worth,
Shows how in thee, his works are blessed.
4.
Thou giv'st a Luster to the earth,
All beauty, joy, and pleasant mirth,
Attend thy presence with good will:
Thou art the form of orders frame,
And thou art blessed, in thy name:
And all the world do praise thee still.
5.
The plants that live a senseless life,
To show thy virtue, are at strife,
For to exceed in growth each other:
They gratify thy kindness when,
They bring forth fruit to pleasure men:
Thy fruitfulness they do not smother.
6.
Some for the taste so pleasant are,
Some physical, are found so rare,
As some are pleasant to the eye:
Thou in them all, had first a being.
In feeding, clothing, and in seeing.
And show a lively majesty.
7.
A little seed, thou make to be,
A comely, sweet, and fruitful tree:
And colors shine, so in a flower,
That all may say thou art a guest,
To be esteemed above the rest;
For all increase is by thy power.
8.
And when they are besieged with cold,
Which threatens death, yet thou art bold,
To keep possession under ground:
Fast in the roots; there thou do dwell,
So close, that none can thee expel;
Thy private holes cannot be found.
9.
When thou with patience, and with strength,
Have overcome thy foes at length;
Then thou in triumph do display,
Thy lively colors every where;
And thou do smile with pleasing cheer,
Then all our sorrow turns to joy.
10.
Then sweet and mildely, thou do reign,
Not tyrant-like, by force to gain,
A kingdom: for it is thy due
Thou do advance the feeble plants,
That hangs the head, and succor wants,
That gav st them garments, fresh and new.
11.
But if they do receive a wound,
Then thou do languish in a sound,
With grief; till thou art forced to part:
But if he leave a stock behind,
Then for his sake thou art so kind,
That thou do cherish up his heart.
12.
But if that we desire to use,
The plants, thou will not us refuse,
But of them freely we may take
A better life, for to preserve:
So every means thou do observe,
Deni'st thy self there for man's sake.
13.
They put their mouths, and suck relief,
From earth their mother being chief,
For native soil, to feed them still:
She never yet was known to grutch,
Though they did draw never so much;
From her, but each one had his fill.
14.
Unless they were from place to place,
Removed, as strangers in that case;
So strange might be their welcome cheer:
But when acquaintance grew they found,
Such food; that profit to the ground
They brought, and blessings left they there.
15.
They cannot walk, but being fixed,
Their profit is with pleasure mixed,
Thou do not vagrants of them make,
But where we leave them, there they stay,
And thou do watch them, that we may,
Still of their fruits in plenty take.
16.
Thou art in fruit, when it is dry,
Being scortcht or drowned still thou do lie,
In it, the quintessenee to prove;
Or else our meat, and drink would be,
But dead steps, to our misery:
In this we find thy constant love.
OF THE SENSItive Life of Beasts.
17.
The beasts that live of reason void,
Thou art by sense of them enjoyed,
They love thy presence, and they show,
That they beholding to thee are:
They to preserve thee have a care,
As though they did thy goodness know.
18.
They know the means, and do desire,
Their food, as wages for their hire:
To maintain life, the ground of all:
The work or service that they do,
Thy principles do manage too.
If thou do leave them down they fall.
19.
They seek to find a place of ease,
And as a friend they would thee please,
To show that they do thee regard;
And if they find it, then they take,
Delight, it is all still for thy sake,
But thou do them for this reward.
20.
They shun the means that would destroy
Thee, they resist, or run away,
When fear of losing thee they doubt:
They use thy power, claim a right
In thee: as Beasts they do delight,
Yet cannot rightly set thee out.
21.
They live in pastures pleasantly,
And never think of dangers nigh,
Thou giv'st them freely such content,
By sense they know no time but that,
Till with thy friendship, they grow fat:
Then death their pleasures do prevent.
22.
At last they struggle so for life,
And with the butchers are at strife,
To keep thee still, and thou do greeve,
But yet by force, thou must depart,
Though it does vex thee to the heart.
They cry, thou can not them releeve.
23.
Thou make them nimble, active, strong,
And comely too, but then ere long,
When thou do part, deformed they,
Remain: and never have thee more.
Thou have no life for them in store,
When once thou take thy flight away.
OF THE LIFE OF Reason in men: Or, Natural Life.
24.
Tdis does not trouble thee so much,
To part with plants, or beasts as such
As live a life of Reason, then,
Thou had thy being here below,
That thou thy self, might now bestow,
Most freely on the Sons of men.
25.
The grass that lives for Beasts, does die,
And beasts for men, good reason why,
That they might live to serve the Lord,
In this let Life with us agree,
To differ plants, and beasts, from we,
Then we with Life shall still agree.
26.
To man thou art the sweetest thing,
For thou all comfort still do bring.
Thy presence gives content to all.
They spend their means thee to maintain,
What ere they lose, if thee they gain,
Thou do delight both great and small.
27.
Thou giv'st a beauty to the face,
And thou art still the comeli'st grace,
To all; there is nothing like to thee,
Though thou art seated in the heart,
Thou do appear in every part,
And thou alone, thy self can see.
28.
And thou of all, art much desired,
And with the world they will not be hit'd.
To leave thee: but to thee as right,
Do yield themselves, and do obey
Thee; and by walking on their way.
They show thy glory, and thy might.
29.
Thou causest clods of earth to walk,
And giv'st us breath, by thee we talk,
And knowledge too, for to discern,
What Is good, what is bad, and so we choose
The good, and do the bad refuse.
And by thee we may ever learn.
30.
Thou still desire for our good,
Such natural convenient food,
That thou thy freedom might enlarge,
To us thy love thou do express.
To have us shun all vain excess:
And thou at all times bear the charge.
31.
When once thou do a danger spy,
Thou giv'st us warning presently,
And show that thou do us esteem,
But if we cannot it avoid,
But must with trouble be annoyd,
Thou do us labor to redeem.
32.
But if thou can not with thy skill,
Relieve us in our sorrow still,
With us thou stay'st to bear apart;
For thou do greeve to see us weep,
And wait'st our leisures while we sleep,
Which brings some ease, unto the heart.
33.
Much misery thou do endure,
With us, and yet thou nere art sure,
To be rewarded for thy pains;
Thou stay'st with us a little while,
Thou do but come and give a smile,
We cannot call thee here our gain.
34.
Alas, I cannot but lament,
For thou have still a true intent,
To do us good, thou do endeavor;
But we thy proffers do abuse,
Or else so slightly do them use,
There Is cause of fear, to lose thee ever.
35.
You Are gone sometimes, before we know,
How to enjoy thee herebelow,
Thou do on sudden take thy time,
We judge thee coming on a pace,
But thou do leave us in disgrace,
When we are coming to our prime.
36.
If thou do tarry with old age,
Then like a Bird within the cage,
Thou long'st still for thy liberty:
For there thou can not use thy strength,
Yet thou art quiet, then at length,
You both are freed from misery.
37.
God breathed thee first, in the beginning,
In man, but he lost thee by sinning.
And ever since thou art so strange,
Thou art a tennant here at will,
There is no lease, though we try still,
We cannot know our time of change.
38.
We cannot say, it is long of thee,
That we endure such misery,
But it is from change we do receive,
Such bitter potions in this world,
But when we in our graves are hurled,
Then thou of us do take thy leave.
39.
Thou do not bring us to distress,
But we bring thee into no less,
Our sins thy vigor so do quell,
That if there were no other course,
To drive thee out, we should grow worse,
Till we did thee from us expel.
40.
Thy foes are many, great and strong,
They dwell in Garrisons among
Thy soldiers: and they pitch their tents,
Surpised thou art within the field,
And death does come, which makes thee yield
With engines, and with instruments.
41.
Men have not here enough of thee,
That live in pride and jollitie,
Thou act'st thy part, then thou art gone,
Alas thy Scene here is so short,
They cannot show their sinful sport,
As they would, then they make their moan.
42.
They do not draw their Cesternes dry,
Nor suck the sweet, nor sore so high,
Nor do that mischief they desire,
They have not time to bring to pass,
Their cursed ends; their empty glass,
Does show death comes, and brings their hire.
43.
Men make thee shorter, than thou art,
By playing here so vile a part,
They drink, or curse thee out of door,
They love thee not, so well as those,
Things that take thee away; and foes
They to themselves appear therefore.
44.
How few are there, that set thee forth,
In practice, or to spread thy worth;
Do praise thee in a living frame?
They hide thee so in heaps of dust,
That thou art eaten up with rust:
Men cannot know thee, but by name.
45.
Thou will away, ere it be long,
Who would not use thee being strong,
Set out thy beauty in its kind:
Let Us all endeavor while we may,
With life to enjoy a happy day,
Show that we live in heart and mind.
46.
Let principles within us move,
Still to the fruits of living love,
Toward God and man, that we may show,
That we have not our lives in vain,
But of them make such blessed gain.
That others may its power know.
47.
Thy props decay, ere thou do fall,
With want, disease, afflictions all,
Conspire against thy living breath,
Thy comforts die, and leave thee here,
Thy joyful presence turns to fear,
And who so welcome then as death.
48.
Thou hid'st thy self within the breast,
But death will never let thee rest;
But hunts thee till he drives thee thence,
Life takes his leave upon the lips,
Away in silence, then he skips
Unseene, but mist with present sense.
49.
But thee, I cannot choose but blame,
Me thinks thou have an empty name,
How can I truly call thee Life?
When evils come, thou giv'st us sense,
And so we have for recompense,
The fruits of sin, which turns to strife.
50.
Most men do thee desire long,
When they are active, rich and strong,
And live in pleasure, health, and case,
If they old age and sorrow see,
Thou do increase their misery,
Thy friendship turns unto disease.
51.
A stab, disease, or gust of wind,
Will turn thee out, thou art inclined,
For small occasions to distafte,
Thou leave us still to pay the rent,
We for thy sake, are often shent,
Thou leave the house ruined and wastes
52.
When thou art parting, then the eye,
Grows dim, the visage presently,
Does look so dreadful, and so pale,
The feet and hands do grow so cold,
The body fashions to the moulde,
The tongue that faltets in the tale.
53.
If we could see thee there, we'd stay,
But thou do slily glide away,
And leave the creature, deaf and dumb,
Me thinks thou should thy house repair,
And make it wholesome, sweet and fair,
What, will thou to it, no more come?
54.
But when thou art thus forced to part,
And take thy vale of the heart,
Then sad and dismal is thy voice,
That heavy parting, wrings out tears,
With greese and anguish, mixed with fears.
Our friends will grieve, our foes re joyce.
55.
What horror do poor men conceive,
When thou do take thy solemn leave,
Which leaves no hope to meet again,
The shadow then of death in deed,
Makes way for hell, he sowes such seed,
The fruit of which, is endless pain.
56.
We are arrested for thy debt,
And in a prison we are set,
A yard at least, within the ground;
And thou the principal art gone,
And we must bear the brunt alone,
Non est inventus, gives a sound.
57.
Now life do thou my counsel take,
Against sin and death, a party make,
And in defiance ever stand:
Take courage to thee, show thy power,
And let them not the world devour,
Then live thou blessed in the land.
OF THE NEW LIFE. OR, THE LIFE OF Grace in the Soul.
58.
New Life and true, when thou art made,
Within the soul, thou do not fade,
But do thy freshness still retain,
Thou art not subject then to die,
Above all ill thou do epsy,
Such things: as brings in perfect gain.
59.
Thou li'st so close unto the soul,
There is no power can control,
Thy blessed state, or yet remove,
Thy siege; for thou have made it strong:
And thou have patience us among,
There thou art constant in thy love.
60.
Confusion, deadness, did beset,
Our hearts, till victory thou did get,
Ore us, and brought us into frame,
And thou at all times do thy best,
To settle living peace and rest,
Ore us: to bring a blessed name.
61.
We cannot see nor apprehend,
Thee; but thou do thy power bend,
Which does thy presence then discover,
That men unskild in art may read,
Thy book of life, being open spread,
Thou art an upright constant lover.
62.
Though thou art weakened there sometimes,
By treachery, and heinous crimes,
That men do think thy force is raised,
Yet cause thou can with fresh supply,
Of new fetched power from on high,
Quicken repentant souls, you are praised.
63.
And if thou do receive a wound,
Or else through faintness in a swound,
Fall: then thou have a present cure,
The blood of him, that once was slain,
By death, he did thy freedom gain,
This thou apply'st, and do endure.
64.
Thou art a shelter to all those,
To whom thou do thy self disclose:
A faithful friend thou art indeed,
What they do lend thee, thou do pay,
And with increase, much every day,
Thou do return their fruitful seed.
65.
In troubles thou do us defend,
If thou can not our sorrows end,
Thou do support us in the same:
Thou do our parts then ever take,
We are beloved, it is for thy sake,
Who would not joy, to hear thy name.
66.
Thou little wast at first, bur thou
Do much increase, we know not how,
Thou do not always grow by sense;
But afterward we may perceive,
That thou do with us vigor leave,
So fruitful is thy recompense.
67.
Comely and sweet, needs thou must be,
Thou came from heaven, so that we.
Do entertain the heavens guest;
And this is all thy drist I know,
For to instruct us here below,
And then to lead us to our rest.
68.
In heaven still remains thy spring,
While we on earth thy praises sing,
So we can never draw thee dry:
The more we have, the more we may,
Draw from thy fullness; more I say,
We have it free, we need not buy.
69.
Thy root's above, yet thou art here,
I nere knew any graffe to bear,
So distant as you seem to be;
But when I find thy root do grow,
By faith in men, as thou do now,
My differing thoughts do then agree.
70.
Thou art so comely to behold,
If I had art, thee to unfold,
I Would show the beauty of thy face,
That men should thee so much admire,
And love should kindle such desire,
As for thy love, to sue apace.
71.
But thou art shadowed so with sin,
Men cannot know thee so within,
As otherwise, thou would appear,
And misconceits, do vale thee too,
We cannot find with much ado
Thy glory out, though never so clear.
72.
And men that are but poor and base,
In outward things, yet in this case,
Excel: they seem thy face to hide,
The world thinks not, that poorearay,
Can harbor thee, that art so gay,
The truth of this is daily tried.
73.
Men think there is no difference,
'Twixt thee, and thy sweet influence,
And natural life, that is so poor,
They prize that more, for that they know,
Which lives by sense, like beasts below,
Till they have spent their fading store.
74.
Thou do preserve the chiefest part,
The soul; and guardest so the heart,
And living comforts do bring in,
All other sweetness dies apace,
And leaves their masters in disgrace,
They are like blanks, which nothing win.
75.
Men cannot have of thee too much,
Nor yet do thou to any grutch,
Thy strength at need, if they thee choose,
And thou do use thy mighty power,
Against all those that would devour,
Them, or their life seek to abuse.
76.
All things that furthers thy increase,
The fruit of joy, the word of peace,
Thou do them use as excellent,
With all good means, thou do agree,
To help our growth's as we may see,
To make us lively, is thy bent.
77.
Thy fruit is pleasant, for to taste,
And fair, plentiful and vaste,
They only know it, that do find,
Thee, in their souls; and they can tell,
How thou in goodness do excel,
Thy praises please well such a mind.
78.
But they that to this life are strange,
And never know what it is to change,
They see no favor in thy face,
Nay, some will ever be at strife,
For such as stand for thee their life,
And would thy Image quite deface.
79.
Thou art not stained with hatesull pride,
Nor any other sin beside;
Thou keep'st thy self, still free from all,
Though we sin here, it is so we must,
Till we are level with the dust,
But thou do bring our souls from thrall.
80.
Thou art so like a Turtle true,
When death does claim us for his due,
Thou would not leave us, till the last;
The soul then too, enjoyes her fill,
Of thee, and dwells in heaven still,
Wishing that that black storm were past.
OF THE LIFE OF GLORY.
81.
At last the body thou will meet,
With triumph and with joy so sweet,
To welcome home thy ancient friend;
The body and the soul rejoice,
That ever they made thee their choice,
This joy shall never have an end.
82:
Now thou in heaven do excel,
Thy glory there, I cannot tell,
How to express the least degree:
The Saints above, that wear thy crown,
Can truly blaze, thy rich renown,
I wish that I were there to see.
83.
No death, nor sorrow there does wait,
There is no sin, to lay a bait,
Nor yet the shadow of distress,
There is no cause of fear, for ever,
The Devil durst nere to endeavor,
For to attempt thee more or less.
84.
Thou art so full of beauty then,
Thou shin'st so in the souls of men,
Their bodies do enjoy the same,
Their souls and bodies are more bright,
Than stars are in the clearest night,
All life to this, does seem but lame.
85.
That Is nothing else but light divine,
Thou in the meanest Saint do shine,
Transparently, and sweetly still,
All Saints and Angels do accord,
With thee to praise the living Lord,
And all of them there have their fill.
86.
Thou art so active too, that now,
All things are pleasure to thee; thou,
No stop at all haste in thy ways;
Thy vigor's quick and nimble too,
The work that thou have there to do,
The living God, it is still to praise.
87.
Thy glory is exceeding great,
Otree of life, who of thee eat,
Are no way subject to decay,
And all that do enjoy thee there,
Their glory does in thee appear,
Most blessed evermore are they.
88.
The God of life does honor give,
To thee himself does with thee live,
Thy worth is far above the sky,
He rules by thee, and in his Love,
Thou shall be blessed with him above,
Past time, to all eternity.
FINIS.
POEMS, Pleasant and Profitable. THE ARRAIGNMENT, Together with the
condemnation of Sin, and Death.

OR, A Discovery of the alluring sleights of Sin.

And then Tormenting.

For which he is accused, and legally condemned.

So likewise Death being unsatiable, he is accused and condemned.

A Repreive begged by Satan for them; granted by the Lord, upon condition.

Whereunto are added, sundry Directions and Instructions, for our conversations
touching Sin and Death.

BY H. M.

London Printed, by John Dawson. 1639.

THE ALLVRING SLEIGHTS OF SIN, AND PROMISES.
First, for the Thoughts.
The Argument, with charge to the Muse.
MUse, raise thy voice, armed with revenge to sin.
Disclose his plots, and evidence give in
Against him; though he his defense do make,
Dashed with reply, for the poor sinners sake,
Bring verdict in, then sentenc't let him be,
To hell: his pleaders judge to misery.
The alluring nature of sin.
When sin with heavens Angels found success,
And since that time (on earth) has found no less,
It goes on still, to bring men down to hell,
Where Satan is, which once above did dwell,
Yet for reward, does promise much content,
So serpent like, it does men circumvent.
Sin first begins, much like a rubbing sore,
A little give, that little calls for more.
Thus many littles do rise to a sum,
And so ensnared from sin, then few do come.
Man loves his sin, but sin returns him hate,
Man bids a price, but sin holds up its rate.
Man gives his hand, his eye, or any part,
All will not serve, till sin has got the heart.
What think thou me (says sin) to be so base,
That give delight, to any of that race?
That does me love, and tread my pleasant ways,
I Will give thee mirth, come now fulfill my joys.
If rich thou will, then rich thou sure shall be,
Or to be great; I Will greatness promise thee,
If to be wise, thou set thy hearts desire,
Come follow me, and men shall thee admire.
Name what thou will, and thou shall have thy mind,
Unto me only loving be and kind.
I Will change my self, to Angel shape to please,
Thy humors fond, and so I will thee ease.
If merry thou, then merry will I be,
If sad thou art, I Will seem to greeve for thee;
If play thou will, then will I make thee sport,
And show my face, when thou art all amort.
Come please thy thoughts: thy thoughts are now as mine,
Thy thoughts are free, to sin thy thoughts incline,
Sometimes to pride, sometimes to lust and rage,
Sometime to scorn the best men of the age.
Sometime sin past, let on thy thoughts long stay,
Sometime let present sin, drive that away:
Sometime thy thoughts for sin to come, be pressed,
Till it come forth, let thy thoughts never rest,
The desperate temptation of sin, to vile words.
And let thy words be lying, proud, and stout,
Still make thy self, the best of all the rout:
Great words of slanders, malice, strife, and wrong,
Why art thou made, but thus to use thy tongue?
Say what thou will, to any, never care,
Speak loftily to fools, they will think thee rare,
Draw men with words to me, i will thee reward,
When they by means of thee, do me regard,
Plead thou for sin, but for the adverse part,
Swear, curse them down, and vex them to the heart.
The cursed temptation of sin, to hellish practices.
So let thy practice answerable be,
To thoughts and words, as thou have learned of me.
Deny no sin, no pride, or want on lust,
Grow rich by fraud, see on the world thou trust.
What needst thou care (for rich) when thou art fed,
Both full and fat, with the deceitful bread.
And for the poor, what are the poor to thee?
Care for thy self, poor thou in time may be.
Get what thou can, return it not again,
And seek thy ease, though others are in pain.
And if on any, goods or money spend,
Let be on such, as such like things intend.
Resort to such, as go in the same way,
Which Satan's guard, attend on every day.
Care not to pray, good books read not, nor hear,
Love pleasant things, for back and belly cheer:
Detract from good men, see thou honor give,
To those that serve me, and most rudely live.
Shame truth in practice, out of favor strike it,
Be still perverse, and I shall ever like it,
And to observe these things be thou addressed,
What Is wanting now, ere long shall be expressed?
The blasphemous consent of the sinner to the temptations of sin.
If this be true, that sin does promise me,
I Will follow it, and so we shall agree.
To please my self shall be my chiefest care,
Oppose me not: I think no man does dare.
Why should I not in sinful thoughts delight?
Why should I not speak proudly in despite?
I Will be perverse, in practice, say who will,
Turn back thy heart, in sin take not thy fill.
What can I wish, but pleasure and content?
This I shall have, I need not to repent.
I shall be rich and great, I like it well,
And counted wise, with them amongst whom I dwell.
Why should I live a melancholy life?
And lose the sweet of sin to purchase strife?
I am not bound to any, rich or poor,
Get what I can, I Will part with nere the more.
Unless it be to such, as love sins hire,
Fear not the fable of eternal fire:
Good men, and goodness, I will still disgrace,
Ere I have done, truth shall not show her face.
I Will be a refuge to the viler sort,
To jeere Religion, shall be still my sport:
So I Will go on in sin, without control,
What do thou mean? speak thou immortal soul.
A divine speech of the Soul to the body.
Why do thou thus, add daily sin to sin?
Why do thou gender horror thus within?
Why do thou sell thy self, which once was bought,
With Christ his blood (for sin) which brings thee naught.
Shame and confusion follow thee in have,
All thy delights, then quickly will be past:
Why wast thou made, that thou do thy endeavor
Going about to purchase hell for ever?
Or what have I done, that thou sell'st me quite,
For aye to dwell, with everlasting night?
Wast thou not made to help and succor me?
Was I not made to teach and comfort thee?
Was not Gods Image stamped upon me when,
He breathed me life, as he did other men?
Why labor'st thou, to make me like the devil?
Who can be less, when he has done so evil?
Thou art become a prison to me now,
And to be freed (alas) I know not how,
Open this prison, that I must not do,
By violence; for that is sinful too.
O that I had but freedom for to fly,
From this dunghill, that does upon me lie,
Then to the mountain of eternal rest,
There would I live, and dwell among the blessed.
The speech of the Soul works effectually bringing the Sinner to the brinke
of despair.
Alas poor soul, thy lamentation greeves me,
Nothing I have, of what sin says he gives me:
But horrid conscience with his dreadful store,
Brings evils on me, and these call for more.
Sin promised sweet, the sour comes in place,
And credit too, and for it comes disgrace:
And to be rich, but who so poor as I?
My wisdom is, true folly I descrie.
Nothing of truth does once from sin proceed,
Sin is untruth, in thought, in word, and deed:
Thy painted face, I do defy and scorn,
Woe worth the timethat ever I was borne,
To make a league with thee, the mouth of hell,
Where I ere long (I fear) must go to dwell.
Every Creature brings report of vengeance.
When to the heavens, I do lift mine eye,
They all at once, my sins so great defy.
And do disdain, to smile upon me so,
I apprehend, each one is turned my foe.
When I astorme or tempest see appear,
My thoughts are troubled with perplexed fear.
The fiery storm that never will blow ore,
I think comes toward, for me laid up in store,
I being foul; or if the weather fair,
It shames me quite, and fills me with despair:
And if a Christian meet me, I think then,
I shame the company of all such men,
If one as vile (I note) as I have been,
He brings fresh torment, such is seldom seen,
When in the streets I go, I fear some tile,
Will vengeance take, on me that am so vile.
A beast I see at slaughter, then I sorrow,
It Is thine to day (think I) it is mine tomorrow:
And when I eat or drink, I fear Gods hand,
With meat in mouth, will cut me from the land.
The little Birds that lift their notes on high,
With pleasant tunes my foulness do defy,
They free from care, ten thousand on me wait,
They fly from snares, sin takes me with its bait.
The earth I tread on, murmures for to bear me,
All things upon it, with one consent do fear me:
And when it is chopped, me thinks it threats to swallow,
Me quick: for I still in my sin do wallow:
Of rain that falls to cause a pleasant crop,
I fear ere long, to be denied one drop.
When heaps of dust, in pit's cast, I think still,
All such as I, the infernal pit must fill,
When I see men, cut down the tender grass,
Then fearful thoughts within my breast do pass,
Thinking I see Times sith, (that is sins hire)
To make me fuel for devouring fire.
When night draws on the day then draws away,
It Is like that night, that never will decay,
That utter darkness which in hell will be,
The thoughts of which, add to my misery.
When I put off my raiment, then think I,
The worms will come to supper by and by:
When I lie down (in bed) desiring sleep,
My body has no rest, my soul does weep.
If slumber, does but once, possess mine eyes,
My conscience calls for wrath, for vengeance cries,
The stars that twinckle when I chance to see,
They seem to blush at my deformity.
When morning light appears to my sight,
I wish for wings, to fit me for a flight.
Lest that should bring me naked on the stages,
And make me odions to all after ages.
Thus am I still afraid, oftime and place,
And every thing, my ruin brings a pace.
Help I have none, the Lord he will not hear me,
For when I pray, his angry looks do fear me:
Satan stands by, and claims me for his own,
Sin helps me not; by sin I Am overthrown.
Sin fails of his promises, and doomes the Sinner to misery.
Now sin speaks truth, that seldom truth does tell,
I will thee help, but't shall be into hell;
What thou have done, I pray thee blame not me,
For what I 'ue done, my office sets me free,
I am enabled by the devils power,
For to enlarge his kingdom every hour:
Why should not I thus promise much content?
Although the truth be far from such event:
How would such fools brought be to lust and pride,
Were not il things, as good things beautified?
Thou car'dst for none, who now does care for thee?
Away, be gone into thy misery.
By Faith and Prayer, he claims an interest in Gods mercy.
O Lord this horror justly falls upon me,
The rage of sin, and Satan lies upon me.
And now I sincke, for ever, to the dark,
Eternal pit; where hellish curres do bark:
All comforts fail, Lord if thou fail me too,
I am undone, to make no more ado.
Was never none restored, that was so bad?
Was never none brought back, and mercy had?
Thy hand was up, and yet thou did not strike,
Save me, for I my former ways dislike:
My sins are great, greater thy mercies are,
My sins are many, more thy mercies far.
What though my sins exceed in weight and measure,
Thou with a word can ease me at thy pleasure.
My sins do but as creatures sins appear,
But mercy from a God, frees men from fear.
Why did thou send thy son from heaven to die
But them to save, that under wrath did lie?
And so to free from under Satan's band,
And to redeem poor, captives by his hand?
And I am one, that in my sight am lost,
Seek me again, let Satan's will be crossed.
And then will I thy goodness still unfold,
And cause poor sinners mercy to behold.
He finds success in his suit with God.
Alas poor man! I pity on thee take,
I do intend, thee my redeemed to make:
Thou shall from sin and Satan be set free,
Only, thou shall be servant unto me.
I heard thy moan, my bowels could not stay,
To grant thy suit no longer I Will delay.
Thy dreadful passion came before my sight,
Then my compassion sent down heavenly light:
I will thee make an instrument of praise,
To fight with sin and Satan, all thy days.
Seeing I have brought thy soul and body back,
From hell, whether sin commanded thee to pack,
And after thou have served me herein love,
Then thou shall dwell with me in heaven above.
And sin and death, that sought to ruin thee,
Shall be arraigned, and both condemned by me.
The nature of Death, with his unsatiable speech and lamentation.
When death by sin, had once possessed the earth,
And found that man was mortal made by birth,
Still since that time, he strikes at all mankind,
As well the great, as those that come behind.
The first man living, though a mighty King,
Death ventred on, and struck him with his sting.
All good and bad, that lived in ancient time,
Though some lived long, yet some died in their prime.
The best that ever on the earth had breith,
Though free from sin, yet was not freed from death
So till this day experience proves true,
He darts down some and claims the rest for due.
His hungry jaws will never be satisfied,
While one does live and on the earth abide.
And if that once the man that lives he have.
Brought down to death he bars him in the grave
And so triumphs, and rules among the slain,
For where his kingdom is there he does reign.
When he has pill'd the world, of all her store,
Though this is done (yet) still he wishes more.
O, that there were an other world or two,
I would to work and make no more ado.
O that I mght but use, my kingly power,
Then I would seek man's ruin every hour.
Graves yield no food, that give me such content,
As living, flesh, to that my mind is bent.
Nothing there is, so pleasant to my taste,
As lives of men, when I do lay them waste.
What, am I made a King but for a time?
No power can I use, amongst the flime,
Unless it be, the silly worms to slay,
That can I in the least part of the day.
I thought I should have been a King for ever,
Sin set me up I doing my endeavor.
Performed the work that I was bid to do,
I feared no man for I was hardy too.
Assure, so quick, for in a little space,
All nations, people were brought in deadly case.
And must I needs give ore this mighty trading:
Which constant was, though all the world was fading.
This is not all (I think) I heard some say,
I must be bound ore to the judgment day:
If it be so, I my defense will make,
As Kings of all their subjects, place doetake.
Until that time, you will hear no more of me,
How stands the case, then all the world shall see.
Sins probable destiny.
Sinne's now accused, with all his sinful crimes,
Laid to his charge, it is corrupt are the times:
The righteous man, which does against sin stand,
Is very like to have the upper hand.
Unto the seat of Justice sin is brought,
An equal judge does never stand for naught.
But tries the truth, and gives to each his due,
When once of it, he has had a careful view.
Sin being apprehended, is accused before an impartial Judge.
Sin has me vexed, ere since I had a being,
And all men else, that careful are in seeing;
Shall find him plotting mischief with his will,
With malice, murder, striving for to kill.
The seed of good, that in man's heart are sown,
And every plant that is not of his own.
If one be good, that he would from him take,
If one be bad, he tries him worse to make.
From bad to worse: from worse, to worst of all,
More could I say, sin counts these things but small.
Sins vile answer and Request.
Answer to this, what, is this true or no?
It Is all but lies, he is my deadly foe.
He speaks for malice his words have no savor,
He Is but a fool, and thinks to curry favor.
Because (forsooth) I am not so precise,
Though I do swear, he tells as many lies,
He hates my ways, and I hate his as much,
I do him scorn as also loath to touch.
What though in mirth I take my liquor well,
What though I brawle, and rail with them I dwell.
What though I play and sport, both day and night,
Though I blaspheme, and court what I might.
I force no man if I can any draw
With craft or fraud, I hold it in good law.
This I will add, I Will open all my store,
Seeing he is vexed, I Will vex him ten times more
Because indeed, I do not often pray,
And when I do, my heart shall be away.
He Would have me read, and hear a black reproach,
Poor foolish things, yet far above my reach.
Pray Sir consider (this) and free me quite,
Out of the hands of this malicious wight.
The Impartial Judge his answer, he turns over Sin and Death, to be tried
by the Judge of the world.
Now well it is, I heard you each oue single,
But thy vile words have made my ears to tingle,
What he did say, thy words have now made worse
What can expect, but Gods eternal curse?
His words are true, thine most unjust appear,
Sin's the Delinquent, the Righteous man I clear;
I Will turn thee over to that righteous Judge,
To whom the world must yield; though many grudge.
There thy confession, shall be on record,
Besides the rest, that will come word for word:
I have no bail, must I in prison lie?
That matters not, from God thou can not fly:
And Death, of whom I heat such ill report,
I understand to be thy great confort,
Call him to me: it is no matter, let him stay,
Both are reserved unto a greater day.
The righteous man, that did thee apprehend,
Will ruin thee, thou can it not defend.
And Death by Life, will be und one also,
Your seeming friends, each one will turn a foe
The Righteous man has leave granted to prosecute Sin, and Life to prosecute
Death.
Who Is that below, that feign would speak with me?
A poor sinner (Lord) that lies in misery.
What is that other, which by thee does stand?
Lord this is Life, that does preserve a land.
What would ye have? speak both, for both have breath?
Free me from sin. Free me (likewise) from death.
What has Sin done, or Death, seeing you desire?
Sin promised good; but death comes for sins hire.
Here they are both, give us both leave to speak,
If thou deny Lord, both our hearts will break:
Both speak your minds, the Saints I made the Jewry,
All that do ill, are like to taste my fury.
Now sinner speak, for righteous made thou art,
Not by thy works; in Christ thou have a part,
Life stay a while, a little silent be,
Then thou shall speak, and none shall hinder thee?
The Information against sin in general.
Sin was at first, where Angels now do dwell,
There ventred sin, and brought some down to hell.
When thou had man made, with thy blessed hand
And for his sake had blessed all the Land,
(The best of earth) in place of Paradise,
Thou did man set; and set on him a price,
There he had then, all things at his command,
The fiercest creatures, then upon him faun'd.
This Tyrant did a breach soon after make,
Thou cursed'st man and all things for his sake.
Then thrust he was from Paradise so sweet,
The earth being cursed, so justice thought it meet.
All fish and foul, then kept far of a lowering,
The beasts untamed. and so became devouring,
Sin was the cause, Cain did his brother kill.
Poor Innocent! Lord 'twas against thy will.
And did not sin, those native tongues confound,
And Babels building level with the ground?
So 'twas for sin, God drowned all the earth
A monstrous womb, brings an untimely birth,
When fire on Sodom, and those goodly Cities,
Fellt was for sin, wast not a thousand pities?
Nay, thouthine own deliveredst by thy hand
Captives to be within a Heathen land,
For sin, and there a long time were in pain.
Till thou in mercy brought them back again.
Nay Christ himself when he a surety came,
For man: then sin caused him to be are the blame,
A sinner he was, though this seems strange,
It Was not his own, yet made his by exchange.
And it was for sin thon did prepare a hell,
Where sin must be, and all that love it well.
The Information against sin for his particular.
Now for my self, the greevance that I nd,
For ever does torment me in my mind,
And draws me on, to serve my cursed will,
Sometimes to one, sometimes to other ill.
From doing good, he hinders me, and when,
He cannot (thus) prevail with me, O then,
He strives; to bring upon me other things
Cares of this world, which armed are with stings.
If to my duty, constant I abide,
Then he does seek to puff me up with pride.
At every turn, for me he lays a bait,
And ever for to catch me lies in wait.
And if he catch me he is well, I sick,
If he do not, he has an other trick.
He tells me vengeance is for my reward,
The Lord, my service does no whit regard
And fills my Conscience with such horrid store,
Of thoughts despayring as I said before.
He Would make me frame such hard conceits of thee,
That thou no mercy have in store for me,
This is so bad, nay worse then all that's past,
For to sorsake thy mercy at the laft.
Now Lord I pray thee, think upon this case,
And root out sin, quite from man's living race.
For this is true, thou know it all full well,
Of all these things, thy blessed Saints can tell.
The truth of this, I know sin does defy it,
Put sin aside, no creaturne can deny it.
Sin begins, and railes at the person. He is confined to the charge.
What can thou say? these things are too too bad!
Believe them not: this Rascal, he is mad.
It Is not my sleights, my person it is he hates,
He speaks in gross: and like a Parret prates:
As bad himself, in heart; though fair in show,
With flattering words, he cheateth not a few,
His life was base and vile, it was known full well,
I saw such things, I am ashamed to tell.
What, sin grow modest now? so does the Devil,
This worse then bad, does still increase thy evil.
Thou do blaspheme (seeing) I this man do take,
To mercy and resolve him blessed to make.
Do think, that I, do not man search within
That I need thee, to agravate his sin?
Speak to the case, or else hold still thy tongue,
He hurts thee not, but thou do him the wrong.
Sins defense for him self.
Thou know I am, almost as old as time,
And yet I am, but coming to my prime.
I for thy Justice did prepare a place,
When none was found: it is not a doubtful case.
And what I do, I do it by permission,
And to thy will, I ever yield submission.
I try the good, and make the badd appear,
The world may know, who doththee love and fear
In doing that, which I am bid to do,
But when it is done should I be guilty too.
I am a king and hold it in disgrace,
To be arraing'd (thus) in an open place.
Being so beloved almost of every wight,
Except some few which owe to me a spite.
The most of which are weak, or else are poor,
And sometimes such that go from door to door.
My labor's free, I never yet had pay,
I, of my stock do spend still to this day.
But what I do, I do it by persuasion,
Not by constraint when I do make invasion.
Some of the best, their weakness glory in,
Infirmities; what are they else but sin?
Nay sin in thine does work still for the best,
And through their trouble enter they to rest.
Sin thou forgivest, sinners with thee abide,
And so by me, thy mercies magnified.
He craves leave for his witnesses to speak.
Now let these speak, which I have called to be
My witnesses, for they will stand for me.
Now all are here let Ignorance be first,
The second, he that for redd earth does thirst,
The third, the man, that's overcome with Lust,
The fourth be Pride, they speak will, what is just.
Leave is Granted.
It Is very like my Justice will be known,
To thee, and them, when you are all orethrowne.
Come, let them speak in this thou have thy will,
Although I know, twill nothing be but ill.
Old clownish Ignorance speaks first (he is silenced.)
I hard my vather zay, that God dud make
A leeving mon his pleazar vor to take.
Above oll things himzelf he shood zarve vurst,
On that Beelzebub woule wos accursed.
I know no harm of all that zin ere did me
I ready wos to do what ere zin bid me.
Ichave him known omost a hunderd year,
And never to this day put me in fear.
Now be metroth I leek him passing well,
He dos oll good vor ought thot I con tell,
Chamzure when I am zad he makes me merry
Zhaks of my dumps and makes me zing downdere
Chave known zomtimes when I was very zick
Zin made me well and zhowd zome pretty trick.
In oldorn times when zin was more regarded
Our land by him was better then rewarded.
Now every boy zeems wizer than his Vather
And to be poor tho rich by zin tha'd rather
Twaz never good world ze^se we had zo much preaching
Vor zin goes down on beardles boys sta^s teaching
Who ere zaw noddies zhow themselves zo mad,
To vex umzelves whon pease they mout a had;
Chaue zonns my self if they zo wise do prove
To vollow zuch they zoone shood lees my love.
Pray let him go again withuz to dwell,
Cham zure old vokes, woll leek it vary well.
Come hold thy tongu thy vilenesmaks me grutch
Another speak for thou have spoke too much.
Covetousness the second.
Sin lived with me, (as I may say) while now,
He made me rich, I Will not relate it how,
I cared it fair, none could in me epsy,
A noted fault to say black is thy eye.
My Gold I got by sin does my heart cherish,
And helps at need when other helps do perish,
I never knew grief (that sin upon me brought,
Letthem have grief (for me) that for grief sought.
I gain by sin, give loosers leave to prate,
Were not for sin, I'had nere got this estate.
If sin do good, why should he suffer bad?
Let sin have that, as formerly he had.
To stand for sin, I hold it my best part,
If sin go down, alas 'twill kill my heart.
What he did promise me, he also paid,
And what is false his enemy has said.
Pray free him (now) or else I must restore,
My goods ill got. I have done, I Will say no more.
Wanton Lust the Third.
I am sorry now, to see sin at the bar,
What is the cause this man proceeds so far?
Sin ever did, with pleasure much delight me,
When all things else, did seek still to affright me.
Sin was to me, still full of pleasing strains,
In my esteem my pleasure is my gains.
Say what you will, these tricks of youth all must,
Agree, to me, and will fulfill their lust,
Man is not made of all, to take direction,
Nor like a stock, to be without affection.
Sin shows me beauty kindles my desire,
And then those sparks, come to a flaming fire.
When many cares and fears, upon me stay,
Sins pleasant objects, drive them all away.
Sin's such a thing as brings to no man strife,
Sin is so sweet, I love it, as my life.
Let sin be quit, for he is good and kind,
Speak brother Pride, for I have spoke my mind
Pride the fourth:
I never knew, but Sin went bravely dressed,
And ever did accompany the best.
He went along, so graceful in the street,
He joy'd my heart, when once I did sin meet.
To all his friends observing time and place,
He Would be most free, or else he held it base.
At any feast, or any meeting then,
He took his place above all other men.
He spoke so much, and in such lofty strains,
That all might see he had not shallow brains.
Himself behaved with such great Majesty,
That each man did upon him cast his eye.
And by his looks, he seemed both grave and wise,
Poor silly men, always he did despise.
He scorned to be a servant unto any,
But like a Lord, he sought to rule ore many.
He slights advice, his own ways like him best,
Once cross his will, he cannot take his rest.
He ore his equals, used to domineere,
And his inferiors, always kept in fear.
He hated all, that would not to him bend
And turns his foe, though first, a seeming friend.
If he be once in place of Justice set,
He Would tyrannize, or otherwise would fret.
In lower place, if that he chanced to be,
He would contemn and curse his misetie
And if that men, would not his counsel take,
He Would cast them off, and varlets of them make.
If one in parts, did but before him go,
Then most of all, he proved his deadly foe.
And all of whom, he gets the upper hand,
He keeps them down, and binds them in his band
All this and more like things, do call sin Father,
Sin is in hold, that he were free Id'e rather.
He Is now by one that loved him once, betrayed,
He Is now in fear of him, he made afraid.
He has been bold, but now he seems to quake
I hope thou will some pity on him take.
Shall he prevail ore sin, when sin is stronger?
For he hates sin, when he can sin no longer.
A general speech, rejecting sins witnesses, with a command for a reply.
Now sin has spoke, and all that for him stand
This will not do, to free him from my hand.
His witnesses (sin) have discovered clear,
Though bad before now worse it does appear.
And they themselves, for standing on his side.
Will vile appear, for they shall now be tried.
Speak man thy mind in making thy reply,
Lay home the truth, that no man can deny.
A Reply against sins defense, particularly.
What is thy age, or what does it avail?
I'ts nothing worth, when goodness does men fail?
It does increase, and bring Gods wrath apace,
And for thy age, makes thee in worser case,
Twa's notthy mind that god should have the praise:
Pretending right, thou intend'st wicked ways.
God needs not sin for to set forth his glory.
Nor any thing of all thy sinful story.
This wicked way, that thou proceedest in,
Thou make God, the author of thy sin:
God never approves thee, nor thy sinful acts,
He made his law, to damn, thy cursed facts.
Thou do oppose Gods will, with all thy might,
To yield to his law is against thee quite.
It Is not to try, thou meanst but to destroy;
All living men thou seek'st still to annoy,
Good men, thou do so hamper with thy snares,
And thou the bad, bring'st to eternal cares.
Thou lying wretch, does God command thee evil,
Then damn thee for it? thou have it from the devil.
Thou art a King, if so I may believe thee
And shame with men, it seems, does now much greeve thee.
No shame before; thou other bring'st to shame,
Why should thou not, bear, now the greatest blame.
Me^ do thee love, their love will turn to hate
Thy friendship does, make way still for debate.
The poor and weak; that do oppose thy way,
Will be too strong for thee, as thou shall say,
Thy labors which were always freely bent,
Were better spared then they should (...) be spent.
What is thy stock? but cursed porsonous store
Still as thou spendst, increasing more and more,
Thou do none force, but with thy subtle gins;
Thou hid'st the sour, and show the sweet ossins.
But if he will not yield, unto thy will;
Thou tri'est thy power, his soul with wrath to fill
For those that in their weakness made their boast
It Was when that sin, was by Gods power crossed.
Which did through weakness, overcome thy strength,
And over satan, did triumph at length.
What good does come by sin, sin naught intends,
It Is Gods event; sin seeks for cursed ends.
One trouble still, thou bring'st upon an other.
If one be gone thou bring'st in many other.
If any rest comes from Gods blessed hand,
Then thou in malice, do against it stand.
When God in mercy, does forgive ma^s sin,
With doubts, cares, fears, thou fill'st his heart within.
Although Gods grace, be thus exalted high,
To save poor souls that under sin did lie.
This and all good, is far from thy intent,
Gods goodness, that brings forth such event.
His own experience agravates Sin, His witnesses make the case worse.
By proof of all the Saints, that live on earth,
Who knows thy fruits, the'ir al untimely birth.
And I my self, by thee was led away,
Me toundoe, thou sought thus every way.
I did blaspheme, when thon did promise gains,
Then thou did bring, despair for my pains.
Thou have confessed before the Judge below,
Thy wickedness as does the Lord well know.
Thou did despise me with a shameless face,
And used all means, to bring me to disgrace,
I did my suit remove, from common Law,
Where thou did think, to keep me still in awe.
In equity, here I shall find relief,
And ease my mind. and quite expel my grief.
And for thy cause most vile it does appear,
To all that hear, or see, it is very clear.
And those that stand as witnesses for thee,
Now they themselves, as bad appear to be.
They did intend to adorn, thy ugly stature,
But have thee bad, made of a viler nature.
He refuses to answer their bsurditics, but threatens Ignorance.
To answer them, it is not worth the while,
Alas poor fools, sin does them all beguile.
Old ignorance. with his corrupted sense,
Though old he be, he will find sins recompense:
Though twice aslong he live, yet curses store
For him, and such, do still wait at the door.
He threatens Covetousness.
And he that covets wealth, and lays up gold,
Through sin, will find, at last himself he sold;
His golden Gods, cannot him save from danger,
Nor comfort him; God is to him a stranger:
His sinful gains, will prove to him but losses,
And trouble, when sin brings a thousand crosses.
He curses Last, and shows ruin.
And he that is addicted so to lust,
O cursed wretch, he thinks it all but just,
He Will find ere long. his bodily estate,
His soul undone, he I then repent too late:
When he shall in that burning bed be cast,
The sweet of sin, turns sower at the last.
He damneth Pride to Hell.
So Pride, that goes about to set Sin free,
Himself he brings, in the like misery:
He must be stripped, and naked shall appear,
Before the Judge, that all may see and fear,
Though set on high, yet he below must dwell,
And so with Sin possession take of hell.
He craves leave for his witnesses to speak.
So I have done, but four I have brought,
Those ever still, t'whom sin has ruin sought,
So that the blessed, and the damned crew,
Speak to sins face, and say, this is all true.
Let not sin say, 'twas I that did undo him,
And make men think, but one, the rest stuck to him.
Lave is granted.
Speak all they shall, and knowledge shall begin,
He Will kill his heart; then bounty shall step in,
Then Chastity, Humility behind;
When they have spoke, they straight shall comfort find.
My Saints and Angels too, shall all declare,
Sins shame on earth, though they in heaven are,
The damned shall relate a dreadful story,
Speak truth of sin, and so set forth my glory.
Knowledge first speaks.
Lord, sin did strive, in Ignorance to keep,
Making secure: in folly me to sleep.
But when I once found out his hellish art,
I, to be freed from sin, gave thee my heart:
I sought to know thy will, and so to do it,
Still thought of time, when I should be put to it:
I did observe sin with his cursed charms,
Brought some to one, and some to other harms,
According as he saw men's natures bend,
Suting temtptations to his cursed end,
And as he finds his swellings to arise,
There he does blow those sparks, we may surmise.
He Will let men know, all things, but what they should
All outward things, which best do fit their mould.
If he can call, another, fool, or Ass,
He thinks his wisedome's very well to pass:
If he know how to break an idle jest,
Of witty fellows, he counts himself the best.
If he suppose he knows affairs of state,
He sets his knowledge at too great a rate;
If he have been but once in foreign parts,
He will so talk, as though he had all the arts.
Now all this while, he does not once endeavor,
To know the Lord, his ways, which are for ever.
Himself to know, he does not once desire,
He Is so bewitched, and settled in the mire.
If he intends but good, and God to know,
Then sin does seek that good to overthrow.
But if he cannot drive, those thoughts away.
He puts him off, still till another day.
From day, to day, but never comes that morrow,
At last by sin, he is brought to endless sorrow.
If one be brought, restaining outward evil,
He thinks ('it is well) he does detest the devil:
If one does good, that good, then save him must,
Heaven he must have, or else God is not just.
If in these things he does himself deny,
Yet he will threaten judgment suddenly.
Man knows not how, to answer such objections,
Sin has by-ways, and men take his directions
Now Lord, let him no more a being have,
Give saving knowledge, then our souls Lord save
Liberality the second.
Sin strives to make men covetous and base,
Keep what I have, I should in any case.
Persuades me still, that I my self may want,
And if I should, friends would be very scant,
So I must not, diminish of my store,
What though men want, I did not make the^ poor.
Sin would be master, of that men call mine,
I should keep up all that, that is truly thine,
If I do give, it must be sparingly.
Sin says, it is best, to keep it till I die:
But if I do a bounteous heart express,
He Will make me think, I maintain idleness:
And must repent of all the good that is done,
And break the thread, so soon as it is spun:
Or else take warning, not to give to any,
And slight the cries of poor, though never so many
When I deny the poor, that do complain,
Then I must think what is saved, is all clear gain.
Thus labors sin, to make me like a slave,
And live in bondage, unto what I have.
Chastity the third.
Sin with his tricks, does me so much allure,
And with his snares, my hurt does so procure.
With idle objects, and such painted sights,
I fear some ill, which puts my soul to frights,
Lest that I should be taken with those baits,
Which for my life are laid; sin ever waits,
To bring me in by this, his strong temptation,
He might at last bring me to condemnation
He hides the sting, but that which seems delight,
He sets it out, and backs it with his might:
So by degrees, a little makes no matter,
But then to more, thus he does use to flatter:
If this take not, then raises storms within,
Of lusts wildfire, distemper all through sin.
He tells me, those that were in Gods account,
Most holy men, and others did surmount.
Yet they in this sin lived many a year,
If well with them it went, what need'st thou fear?
Go, take thy pleasure, at worst thou may repent,
Fulfill thy lust; tush, thou will nere be shent.
If filthy lust take thus, the guilt it brings,
Goes not alone, but with it other things.
I observe those, that he does conquer when,
They Are so ensnared do never turn again.
Now save us Lord, from all those cursed ways,
And cut off sin, we'll serve thee all our days.
Humility the fourth.
Sin with his breath, would puff me up so full,
Of great conceits, who foolish am and dull,
That what I do, the best I do exceed,
Such thoughts in me sin labors still to breed:
Of what I do, I lose the comfort still,
For sin does try my heart with pride to fill;
And then I must my betters still contemn,
All of all sorts, I proudly must condemn.
Though I do ill, and all men know the same,
I must deny't, as quit from any blame,
And if I am to any man a debtor,
Tush let him wait, for am not I his better.
Nay sin would make me set my self most out,
When cursed pride, my folly spreads about:
If men do not give me the cap and knee,
I scorn them must, as enemies to me.
Will they not bend to such a man as I,
I Would make themknow, their carriage I defy.
If I do good (it is seldom and not much)
A worthy work, sin tells me, of all such,
If one good thought comes in, or word goes forth,
Sin says, it is esteemed of wondrous worth:
Of all that is ill, account God does not take,
But takes all well, even for my persons sake:
(...) trouble's much. but much I cannot speak,
(...) am I (Lord) help, else my heart will break,
That good I do, or have, Lord it is thine own,
The ill is mine: let sin be overthrown.
Then shall thy praises be exalted high,
By humble men, that do on thee rely.
The Lord commands the Saints in heaven to speak what they found of sin.
Now have these mortals each one spoke his mind,
So let immortal spirits speak in their kind:
As they have found and known let them bring in
Their testimony, so 'ile judge of sin.
And as he did my creatures still betray,
So from my wrath, he shall receive his pay
For what is done: so Justice by my hand,
He shall receive; 'twill bring joy to the land.
A speech of the Saints in Heaven, against sin.
We dwelt on earth, but now in heaven are,
To serve the Lord, it was our daily care,
Among many troubles sin was still the chief,
And by his factors did procure our grief.
Both day and night he waited still to catch,
To trap our souls, he evermore did watch:
He Would speak in men, they bold, would not deny it,
And so by sin, our lives were made unquiet.
And we through weakness, many times did yield,
Then sin did triumph, when he got the field.
Then did he blaze our faults, throughout the nation,
And strived to bring us all to desperation.
The strong offended, the weak made weaker were,
The bad grew worse, and at our falls did jeere,
But when by thee we got our former strength,
Against all sin we did resolve at length.
Then sin did strive to force us to his bent,
Against all conscience seeming good intent:
Propounding law;, which claims it as a due,
To have us yield to that which was untrue,
But when we would not gree unto their charms,
We were betrayed, and brought to deadly harms.
Some were adjudg'd in prison to be cast,
And were brought out and burned at the last;
Some of us starved, some cut in pieces small,
Some rackt to death, which death was worst of all:
So many torments ages can record,
That sin did bring, because we kept thy word,
So sinful men, with mischiefs set us round,
Till they had laid us underneath the ground.
But thou (O Lord) when ended were our days,
Brought us above, where now we sing thy praise.
The man presses God by Argument, to destroy sin.
And now thy Saints that live upon the earth,
They do despise, sin makes it still his mirth,
Though they be pillars of the time and place,
Uphold the world, still for man's living race:
Take them away, the world would soon be fit'd,
Sin with his imps against the just are hired:
Lord cut off sin, for now his cause is tried,
And free thy Saints which on the earth abide.
The Angels reply against sin.
Although we were not made like earthly creatures,
But more Divine, and of celestial natures;
Sin was so bold, with Angels he attempted,
Against the Lord: sin was not there exempted,
Then Legions did such treason there conspire,
Sin was adored, the Angels had their hire.
Sin was the cause, that they were cast to hell,
Sin made escape, and still on earth does dwell.
Why should not he, which was the cause of evil,
Partake with wrath, and torment with the devil?
Sin did the Angels blessed state prevent,
So let him now share in the punishment.
Lord thou do keep us by thy blessed power,
Else we should fall by sin within an hour;
We now attend and look to thine elect,
We know that sin does daily them infect,
Drawing from them the comforts of thy grace,
So bringing them into a dreadful case.
Sin does de face thy image in the mind,
An other stamp when we return we find,
So sin does quell the motions of thy spirit,
Yet by their works, sin tells them they shall merit,
Sin does destroy the work of thy creation,
Do thou destroy sin, for man's preservation.
The Damned are called to witness against sin.
Come now ye fiends of darkness, show and tell,
What ye on earth did, what ye find in hell:
You cursed furies, and you damned spirits,
That wrought for sin, and now you have your merits:
Ye horrid factors ever were for sin,
Survey your gains, return, and bring it in.
You lived in sin, and with sin did converse,
Your living death will help you to rehearse.
You were his friends, does friendship still remain?
If all be lost, where is your sinful gains?
Speak now you hell hounds of this dreadful story,
Sin will be silent ever to my glory.
First, how they were deceived by sin, and compares sin to contemptible
things, and how he fails of his promise.
Sin did bewitch us with his cursed smiles,
And by deceit he trapt us with his wiles:
He hid the light, darkness before our eyes,
Was set: and still the truth we did despise.
Like Batts and Owls that hate the lightsome day,
And as the thief loves darkness for his prey;
Such is the sinner, having cursed ends,
Against whoever any good intends.
We hated all, and never had regard,
To man nor cause, unless 'twere for reward:
We were like bruits, save only we could talk,
We lived by sense, and did most vilely walk:
Ocursed viper, who can set thee out?
Great part of hell thou art, there is no doubt,
Thou limb of Satan, none can match thy evil,
God made thee not, but thou did make the devil.
Thou ugly serpent monster of the earth,
Thou bring'st forth daily thy unshapen birth,
Thou scum of vermin, thou art worst of any,
And if there were ten thousand times as many:
The Plagues of Egypt cannot equal thee,
Nor all that have been, are, or ere shall be,
The Serpent has his place where he abides
The lesser vermin on the earth so glides,
They seek not me they sting but once for all,
The body not the soul they cause to fall.
Thou in all places have thy subtle snares,
To bring all men to everlasting cares.
The more thou sting'st the more thou do delight,
Both soul and body thou seek'st to stroy quite.
Sin did not thou like fools lull us asleep?
And darkensse bring when light did once but peep
All seeds of evil in us thou did sow,
All seeds of good thou still did overthrowe.
Our thoughts of God, our souls, our death, our change
Our sins, heaven, hell, all these were very strange.
We had our fills of sin we made our boast
And they that in their sins exceeded most
Were most beloved with us of all the rest
The worst of men, we counted still the best
Though knowledge we did want to purchase fame
We Would swear and lie and thereby raise a name
If good we knew we never did intend
To do that good or if bad strive to mend.
Sin promi'sst us to free us still from strife
And give us good the days of all our life.
And at the end we need not fear but we
Should dwell in heaven, to all eternity.
Some n'ere were raised from the sleep of sin,
Till they in hell close prisoners were within,
But some on earth began their hell before,
The first of that, of which they now have more.
This we can say, and more, if need require,
Now one alone, relate sins fearful hire,
And how we are, and in what woeful place,
Our company, and endless, easelesse case.
Some of them in a dreadful manner relate the torments of hell, and cries out
for vengeance upon sin, and departed.
O heavens hear, and earth, what sin has brought,
Upon all us, that sold our selves for naught:
We are through sin accursed from the Lord,
Of men and Angels, we are all abhorred,
I want a tongue to show this wrathful rage,
And fury to remain times after age.
The blackness and the darkness is so great,
Light there is none, but still abides the heat,
Of fire and brimstone, burning in the flame,
The dregs of sin is mingled with the fame.
We live yet die, and dying still remain:
Our souls with horror, bodies filled with pain.
How dreadful it is, and in what grievous sort,
Laid on all parts and persons, i will report,
We drink our tears, and sorrow is our food,
Curses our portions, we see nor hear of good
The fearful cries and howlings that below,
We heard, these all the damned souls do know,
The ghastly looks, and lamentable groans,
The great complaints, with heavy grief and mones,
Sin there attends and acts still his part,
Blows up the fire, there worms still gnaw the heart:
The dungeon is exceeding large and deep,
Where ugly vermin evermore do creep.
The devils do attend us every hour,
And bring fresh torment by their cursed power.
No dram of comfort ever does come near it,
This heavy doom we hellish Imps must bear it.
We have no friendship, none to show us favor,
And all are fierce, and of a rude behavior,
No ease at all at any time we find,
Our bodies burn, and anguish burns the mind.
Diseases all, strangullion, stone, or gout,
The least part of our torment set not out.
But one thing more, and that is worst of all,
Our pains to all Eternity stay shall.
When days, and years, and ages, are all past,
Our plagues remain, our torments still do last.
No comfort, friends, no ease, nor end will be
Found, now I sink under my misery.
Thou curse of curses, thou the cause of it,
That I and all, that in the infernal pit,
Must stay: yet thou art never a whit ashamed,
Of all thy vileness that has now been named.
Let all that live for ever still disdain
Thy name: and cursed let it so remain,
O Damn him, damn him, to a horrid cell
Not here with us, but in another hell.
For if with us, our sinnings will not cease,
And him to see our torments will increase.
Ah worse, yet is the friend if worse may be,
I must away, the Devils come for me.
The Charge to the Jury.
The case is clear there is none that can deny it,
That sins the canse of all our great disquiet.
The heavenly host with men on earth concluded,
The damned too all were by sin deluded.
These things and more (I do aberre) be true,
And so the case does now appear to you.
Now as you find so give your verdict in,
Accordingly, I Will sentence give on sin.
The Introduction to the verdict.
Against thy person sin was ever bent,
And all thy works to spoil was his intent,
Thy son from heaven down to earth did go,
But sin to him did prove a deadly foe,
And did oppose the work of his redemption,
Which sinful men should give from sins exemptio^.
But when in this he could not have his will,
His blood he shed, the worth remains still.
He watched with death, to keep him in the grave,
Of what was done, men might not comfort have.
But all in vain, 'twas sinful labor lost,
Man was redeemed, and comfort had; sin crossed.
Against the Spirits blessed work in hand,
He sets himself, and goodness does withstand:
And from all men, all comfort he would take,
And in man's heart an I doll God he would make,
It Is time, it is time, to take with sin a course,
With men it is ill, in time it would be worse.
The verdict of the Jurie, against Sin and his witnesses.
We have concluded in our consultation,
And find sin guilty, by the information,
For his defense to be most rude and vain,
His witnesses as bad, appears plain,
They guilty are, as parties in the cause,
They broken have, nay they condemn thy laws.
The reply proves, and their examination,
We find them worthy of a deep damnation.
The Preface to the sentence.
Now sin thou art convicted, all may see,
The Jury to thy judgment does agree;
Thy wickedness is open laid to view,
To all the world: which say that hell's thy due,
And those four men which for thy cause did stand,
The cursed'st work that ere they took in hand,
For love of thee themselves have now undone,
They played for sweet, they have the sower won.
The Sentence against Sin.
I sentence Sin for ever to be cast,
In lowest hell; where furious flames do last,
In dungeon dark where fire is divided.
The light from heat, there thon shall be derided.
All torment that the devils can invent,
With all their store of curses shall be spent,
On thee: from thence thou never shall return,
In flaming wrath thou evermore shall burn,
To all delights now thou shall bid farewell,
Away, begone into the pit of hell,
The sentence against Sins assistants.
And you that for sin acted such a part,
And against my truth have tried all your art,
Receive your doom, for this will be your hire,
Ye cursed go into eternal fire,
Where devils dwell, and monsters do inherit,
The fruits of sin; there each one has his merit,
There you shall stay for ever, and from me,
No light of comfort you shall ever see.
In sorrow you eternity shall spend,
Depart from me, for now you know your end.
FINIS.
POEMS.

CONCERNING DEATH.

AN INDIGHTMENT AGAINST DEATH, by LIFE; being Plaintiff.

With the Event and Issue thereof.

LONDON.

Printed by John Dawson. 1639.

OF DEATH.
1 Cor. 15. 56. Death where is thy sting? Hosea 13. 14. O Death, I will be thy
death. 1 Cor. 15. 26. The last enemy that shall be destroyed, is Death.
The Argument in charge to the Muse.
Address thy self (my Muse) to that sad tale,
Of Death, though grim, and ghastly wan and pale.
His look, fear not, for I will see thee righted,
Speak bold for life, thou need'st not be affrighted:
Accuse him, answer with a sharp reply,
His vain defense, and sentenced let him dye.
A Plea against Death.
Lord now I have brought Death to be arraigned,
A Traitor he already is proclaimed
To be against thy son: the life of all,
The world that has been, are, or ever shall,
Remain on earth: unless some course in hand,
Be taken now to cut him from the Land.
O let me never bear thy name in vain,
To yield to Death; my loss he counts his gain,
Now let this tyrant be by thee destroyed,
That has so long so much my peace annoyed.
An examination of the case, a commana to speak their minds.
What would thou have done to him, speak thy mind?
What he has done that is il, that he shall find.
To him I shall return again like measure,
As he did mete, i will open now my treasure
Of wrath and vengeance, and upon him pour,
And he shall know what it is life to devour.
I Will hear you both, now life speak what of Death
Thou know; and death why he stroys living breath.
And testimony that about the cause,
You can produce according to my laws.
For so i will Judge, and give to each his right,
My truth appear shall in all peoples sight.
The Indightment against Death in general.
When thou at first did breath me in (the soul
Of man) alive he was: who did control,
His living state, but death, when he for ever,
Might then have lived, with doing his endeavor.
But (fearful) Death did stare him in the face,
And did his glory, utterly disgrace
His name was fearful, and men at it bend,
The thoughts of Death brought forth untimely end
To some; the rest that lived the course of nature,
The fear of him did weaken so their stature,
That when he came, he had not much to do,
Half dead before, for they were sinful too,
And captives like, he chained them in the grave,
Close prisoners: none out of his hands could save,
A man so cruel as it does appear,
Men durst not ask, he kept them so in fear,
He scorned to take a courtesy from any,
Nor did regard their tears, though nere so many.
The old man's plaint he never did regard:
The strong man's valor, with death did reward.
The young man's person never did respect,
The infants smiling ever did neglect.
The virgins beauty he did still defy,
The fathers grief he slighteth presently:
The mothers weeping he did still disable,
Although she mist her children at the table:
The child though kneeling, begs life for his father.
Then death in fury, says he will have him rather,
The loving daughter seeks life for her mother,
But death looks in, and cries, give me another.
The masters cares considers not a whit,
The servants pains with death, so pays he it.
The Bridegroomes joy he turns into sorrow,
The Brides delight, today, he spoils tomorrow.
Or any one that sueth for his friend,
If he grieves much, death brings the sooner end,
On him; but helps him not a jot, but brings,
On all men death: and kills all other things.
Thy servants Lord, that were by me maintained,
In all the world, yet death has all them gained:
And while they had a being here on earth,
They trouble had: but seldom knew what mirth
Did mean: yea some of them that I am sure,
Through fear of death, a bondage did endure.
At home, abroad, or ever where they went,
They still did think, his bow was ever bent:
No comfort in the world then did they take,
Of any thing that God did for them make.
I was to them aburthen, yet they call,
For joy: but then the King of fear spoiled all,
And fresh disco^ fort brought into their hearts,
Frighting their minds; death breeds such inward smarts
The thoughts of death bring out the guilt of sin,
Annoye without, distemper all within,
And to this day, it is his practice still,
With darts of death the blood of all to spill.
Where as he finds me, he does hate me so,
His venom spits; and is a cruel foe,
The birds, the beasts, the fish, all that have sense,
A suit of death against him does commence,
And he by might does ever get the day,
And as his right he takes them all away,
The plants that live a bare life and no more,
Scarce men can see life in them, it is so poor,
Death finds it out, as plainly does appear,
And kills their fruit, some once, some twice a year:
At last the stock to death must give a place,
For fruit and stock death does at last disgrace.
Nay, if there were of persons, or of things,
A world of millions more, he would use his stings.
Till all were gone, if thou did not restrain,
His power; then still like a King he would reign,
The more he slayes the more he does desire,
The lower men are, he is raised the higher.
He has confessed the ruin of man's life,
Is that he seeks: he gains, they lose, so strife,
Has been betwixt us, ever since the first,
I do perceive; he for man's blood does thirst,
Till he himself do die, he will never cease,
To kill: his name's enough to stroy man's peace.
Against Death in particular.
What have I done, that death should envy me?
Was I not made, to quicken men by thee?
Why then should death a greater power have,
I being free, to make me like a slave?
If I do ill, correct me with thy hand,
But why should Death have me at his command?
Death had his being at the first by sin,
And as a vassal to him still has been.
Sin goes before, then Death he takes his place,
They both conspire against man's living race,
For they agree in all that suits with evil,
And with consent do gratify the Devil,
For his device, and subtle slights that he,
Did still invent, brought all to misery.
Should Death, that by thee never being had,
And works for sin (O this is too too bad)
Rule over all, that goodly work of thine?
To spoil it too, his malice does incline.
Shall Satan's work stand up, thine overthrown?
Stretch forth thy hand Lord, make thy power known
And from thy Justice, let Death have his due,
The world is witness what I speak is true.
A sharp reproof of Death, he has leave to answer for himself.
What can thou say, seeing this is proved so?
To all my works thou show thy self a foe.
What can expect, but hell for thy reward,
Seeing thou to none, had never yet regard,
If I did not thy malice now restrain,
The life of all that in the world remain,
Thou quickly would lay level with the dust,
Though they resist: yet fall through thee they must.
And in the grave thou would bear such sway,
And wish there were a thousand worlds to slay
More; thou would all them of their lives bereave,
Speak Death thy mind, I freely give thee leave.
Deaths defense for himself.
When God at first, did give to all things being,
And life; a will he gave to man agreeing,
Who was appointed to keep all in awe,
Nor lawless was he, God gave him a law,
If he it brake, I was his sentence for it,
If not, he lived: but he did abhor it.
To be so tied, he broke thy Law that day,
Then for reward I was from thee his pay:
I execute what Justice does decree,
I do thy work, for I am ruled by thee
For by thy word all life must vanish quite,
From all the world: then should not I by right
Take place? what is there on the earth beside,
But life and death, which does the world divide.
Should I deny, when thou do bid me go?
Should I resist, when thou do press me so?
To do thy work, I ever did my best,
Till it be done, I never take my rest.
Should I be bashful, for to go among,
The fair, or fearful, to salute the strong,
Or pass the rich, or take of great a fee,
Or favor honor, where I do it see?
O no, nor any else that thou do send
Me, For I bring them all unto their end,
I in thy hand am still as at this day,
By thy consent I do still life destroy.
A King I Am made by thee, as does appear,
And by thy power all creatures do me fear.
I do subdue thy foes, and make them bow,
And dart them down, to escape they know not how.
When I to men come armed with thy wrath,
They sink down quite, not one the power has
Me to withstand; then life bids them farewell,
But dying life, meets them again in hell.
But of thy Saints, I have been much desired,
They Would have me come, though they with much were hired
To stay below, and not to see thy face,
Where thou do dwell, their souls being full of grace.
Thou also have appointed them a rest,
What way is that, which thou did think the best,
To bring them home, to live in heaven still?
But that I should their mortal life first kill,
And that by me, a passage they must have,
They die but once, then life they still do save,
I can do nothing, but upon the earth,
Nor sway my scepter but with mortal birth.
Yet here I am but for a time to stay,
Though once I thought, I should have reigned for ay
Why should then life torment me in this sort,
In raising on me such an ill report.
In calling me to answer at thy bar,
Life seeks my ruin, he proceeds so far,
Himself is worse, being guilty of such crimes,
Corrupting man, and poisoning still the times;
I do revenge the evil, it is thy cause,
He still does break, I ever keep thy laws.
I do him good, me ill he does requite,
Men live by me, yet he owes me a spite.
Now let these speak what they can say for me,
I make no doubt but then I shall be free.
Deaths assistants have leave to plead for him.
Thou shall have Justice here before my face,
Each one shall speak: and then i will judge the case.
It is not shows nor glosses that will stand,
Instead at all to free thee from my hand,
But it is the truth, by truth thou must be tried,
For that is best all cases to decide.
The Magistrates Plea for death.
Thou have me in a place of Justice set,
I judge a case that life must pay a Debt,
How may this be, if Death were not my friend,
To take my part, and bring life to an end?
Death does his office, I will bear him out,
Lives ruin thus, when ere he bring'st about,
Take him away? alas what can I do?
My servant take? then take the Master too.
No peace nor quiet once would dwell with men,
Not best, but worst, would take all sweetness then.
The Felons here, by death receive their due,
Men live in fear, and say that law is true.
The Heir craves deaths freedom.
What doth't avail, that I am borne to lands,
And if that all should freed be from death's hand's?
All hopes were vain. and for my expectation,
It were cut off, no means of preservation,
Were left for me, worse than my younger brother,
I cannot work, and so can he, and other,
Old men must die, and young men take their places,
They must to dust, death puts life to such cases,
Old men are children, if they live but long,
They to themselves are burdens: for the young
Their spittings, coffings, froward dispositions,
So irksome are, and so hard my conditions,
We would be freed, for them the world is bad,
A better place, we all do wish they had.
Deathus'd to do as great a thing as this,
O pre thee come, and do it, do not miss.
I am in trouble, troubles greeve my heart,
Thou will be quit, for many take thy part.
Thou at our neighbors, wast the other day,
I looked for thee, thou went another way,
Pray free him now, to do one work for me,
The old man take, no more desired shall be.
The Parish Clarke sueth to have Death freed.
Death I am sorry here to see thee stand,
'Twas for thy sake I took this place in hand,
It Is little worth, if thou do from us go.
I tried my friends to get it, and my foe,
Remain still now, because I got the place,
He did sue for it, and came off with disgrace.
Of burials we have hundreds in the year,
And for the rich, great vailes come in so clear
It joys my heart; the rest, some more, some less,
In their degree, their bounty do express.
Besides my fee, they did still some what more,
So many littles do increase my store.
If Death go down, Clarke I will be no longer,
Now I am old, and weak, yet like the stronger,
I must to work; and try my feeble hands;
Or perish must, seeing I possess no lands.
Death did me good, that little that I have,
I got by him, when life was brought to grave.
O quit him, quit him, that I may enjoy;
My profit still; my hopes do not destroy.
The Sextons lamentation for Death.
When trading failed, I brought unto a strait,
For want of means, did for a place lay wait,
The Sexton dyed, the Parson stood my friend,
To help me in, such good he did intend
To me: the Parish with a full consent,
To him agreed, so to the place I went,
Death brought me in great part still of my gains,
What else I had, I ever did take pains
For it: what I for ringing of the Bell,
Had then for rich, when 'twas their dying knell,
Or any other, I will not now relate it,
I scorn to brag, I ever yet did hate it.
Or all the Bells being rung, what ere I got,
'Twas so, and so, I ever had my lot.
With other things which now I will not name,
He did me help, let no one then me blame,
To take his part, alas who can do less,
Seeing he to me such friendship did express.
I cannot hold for to maintain my charge,
If death be gone the Parish is not large,
Enough for vailes, to keep me in such sort,
To pay my debts, live free from ill report.
The trading's lost, that little that I had,
Nor can I work, being old, my sight is bad.
O free Death now; or if thou him destroy,
For company, take me with him away.
The Searchers complain of their losses, and beg that Death may be quit.
We are old women, weak, and very poor,
We trade with Death, and so increase our store,
Death he is first, we second in the place,
To search the corpse: of what, and in what case,
They died: we bring of them a true relation,
And groates a piece allowed for preservation.
But some times more, as clothes, or else some food,
That Is money worth, and is to us as good.
We past our labors are, it is known full well,
Allowance we have, in the Parish where we dwell,
If death should fail, our place would fail us too,
We must go beg, and make no more ado.
Unloose him now, for he has been our friend,
Or let us go with him to know our end.
Let Life decay, and Death take up his place,
Our life else is but Death, our wants deface
Us: better we with death should lie in grave.
Than live on earth; we little comfort have.
Th: Coffin-maker makes moan for the absence of death, and desires his liberty.
I ever have been brought up to a trade,
By death maintained, for Coffins I have made,
Apprentiship most hard I did endure,
I thought to live so well, and be so sure,
In constant trading; shall my expectation,
Thus die in hand, my means of preservation,
Fail me? what then will now become of me?
I perish must, or live in misery.
No other way to live, but boxes small,
I make sometimes, to find me work withal;
I sell them cheap not worth the while to make
For coffins still, good rates I ever take.
Men will not stand in this case for a friend,
When they shallbuy, the price, and so an end
We make: and this will countervaile my pains,
And for this work I have sufficient gains.
What shall I do, if death be kept through strife,
Away? 'twill make me weary of my life.
Let all men speak of death as they do find,
I lived by him, and it is against my mind,
To see him troubled; life did bring him hither,
Discharge him then, that we may trade together.
The Bearers speech for death, and laments their loss.
Our places are to bear the dead to grave,
With watchings, that is all the means we have,
To live: we tried our friends to help us in,
And ever since we constant in it have been,
We were so poor we could not well tell how
For to subsist, the case is altered now,
We got so much by death within a year,
The better still we are, as does appear.
Now we have goods and money too at need,
We pay our rent, and of the best we feed:
We still have wine, and sometime other things,
We do rejoice, though some their hands still wrings.
When we from home do bear the dead away,
To their long home, they in their grave must stay.
Our constant gains to all is known, so well,
We need not speak; therest we will not tell.
What ere it be we would not willingly,
Now lose our gains, nor change it till we die.
It Is nothing worth if death should lie in hold,
Alas we might our sorrows then unfolde,
We were undone, and perish all we must,
Release him now, thou will do, so, we trust.
The Grave-makers lamentation missing Death.
I am a man, I need not here be named,
Though I can dig, to beg I am ashamed,
I make the graves to bury dead folks in,
I am employed, for idleness is sin.
I have no means, but what I labor for,
In The sickness time, though men do me abhor,
My trading's best, when other trades decay,
I make of graves some five, or six a day,
I labor hard, and all men find me willing,
Some give me six pence, and some give a shilling,
If in the Church, some two, or three, somemore,
Thus I Am maintained, and lay up money store,
Thoughtimes more healthful were, yet work I had,
I Am crasie brained, yet this will make me mad.
If death be took away: my trading then,
Will fail me quite, and never come again,
For other work, I am a stranger to it,
To watch at night, alas that will not do it,
To maintain me, my wife, and children small,
It Is but a groate, so want will starve us all,
Death help me still; O free him, else my grave,
I Will dig, then die, I there no want shall have.
The Grave wants Death, and begges him to come to bring meat to the worms and
him.
Death, what is the matter thou art now indighted?
The news I hear, has me full sore affrighted?
My hungry belly thou wast wont to fill,
With flesh: I sweetly did digest it still.
My mouth is wide, my stomach hot like fire,
The more I care, the more I do desire:
My bowels large, my sides and limbs are strong,
Give, give me food. I shall continue long,
I thought some evil had oretaken thee,
Thou brought not meat, as thou were wont to me
Thou for me wast, I for thee in like case,
Thou me releev, dst, I found thy dead a place.
We are all friends, and if we now should part,
The thoughts of this would almost kill my heart.
But life that does accuse thee in this sort,
He envies thee, and raised an ill report
On me likewise, and pickes a quarrel too,
Again all such, with whom he has to do.
Be not dismayed, I hope thou shall again,
Come dwell with me, and rule amongst the slain;
The worms my tenants, they do miss thee now.
They seek for meat to help them, who knows how
But thee? O come and bring us flesh they cry,
Or else we will come and follow thee and die,
I give them houses, if thou can not give,
Meat to them then, long here they cannot live;
They are so silly and so feeble they,
Now cannot go, nay scarce can creep away.
They call to me for food and I have none,
My flesh is eat, and nothing but the bone,
Is left, when I had any they did feed,
With me, it was a charitable deed;
But now alas, I hungry am, and poor,
What Is done is done, now I can do no more,
Death come away, why should thou not be free,
The worms and I will ever honor thee.
Death and his friends are checked, Life is urged to speak to the purpose.
Death, thou, thy friends also have spoke their mind,
Thou think thy cause is good, but thou shall find
Vain thy defense; with thy corrupted crew,
Living by sense, they nothing speak that is true,
They do not care, so they have private gain,
Come in by thee: though all the world be slain,
They help thee not, thy cause the worse made,
They parties are, and with thee drive a trade.
As for thy self when life does make reply,
Thy show of truth best prove is but a lie.
Life to the life of death, the dreadful story,
Speak now, declare, the truth, show forth my glory.
The Reply of Life to all the particulars against deaths defense.
When God did make man blessed in his kind,
And all things else according to his mind,
When man did break the Law of God by sin,
Thou as his curse did presently step in,
God bid thee ('it is true) but thou run'st fast,
For to destroy his work, thou did make haste.
But to obey Gods will or his decree,
Was never yet intended so by thee.
For Truth or Justice, thou car'st not a whit,
And yet thou say thou have a right to it.
Do thou divide the world, is it thy due?
Or any part, 'twere so if lies were true,
Thou willing art to ruin me, and still,
Thou seek'st about my living blood to spill,
Thou do thy worst to keep me still from rest,
The worst of works thou call still the best.
Thou shameless art, and impudent to all,
Thou throw'st thy darts, at rich, fair, great and small.
Thou bidden art, but yet without commission,
Thou would destroy me, crying for permission.
Whether good, or bad, it is all one still to thee,
Thou car'st for none for his integrity.
If in Gods hand thou art, why do thon now,
Thus vex and fret, and wilt not me allow,
A being: but do labor to destroy,
Me still: my glory thou would take away.
A tyrant if a King thou art; it is so,
To all thy subjects first or last a foe,
Thou show thy self most cursed, so vile thou art,
Some may in fear, in love none takes thy part.
Thou do usurp, God made thee not a King,
A name that is forged, through fear thou have the thing
Put on thee: God with wrath does arm thee then
It Is for his foes; but to all other men,
He mercy shows; but thou no pity have,
And friends or foes, thou still do lay them waste.
What good by thee does come to any one,
'Twas by Gods hand, for thou intendest none;
The Saints that did so much desire thee,
'Twas first because from sin they would be free;
And for to see the Lord, and with him dwell,
To speak his praises, and his goodness tell.
Not for thy sake, thy pale and dreadful face,
Frights, all by nature run from thee apace.
Can God (do think) find no way else to bring,
His Saints to bliss? but thou must use thy sting,
To bring them down, some are in heaven blessed,
That nere knew thee, and so might all the rest,
If God did please; thou make as if beholding
God were to thee (in thy defense unfolding)
For spoiling me: that life by thee they gain,
Is not thy mind, that life too, thou would stain;
If thou had power, (but'tis above thy reach)
Thou did on earth such fearful lectures preach:
It Is well thou have but there a time to tarry,
It Is true, though once in this thy mind did vary.
No ill report I ever made on thee,
And this the Judge, and all the world shall see.
Though I am guilty, if the Lord forgive,
My sin; what is that to thee? I still shall live.
What ill I do, is done through sins temptation,
Thou bring'st the guilt, which threatens condemnation.
Thou ruin'st time, and ages to decay,
Thou also bring'st; by takiag me away,
Is It out of love to God, that thou do so,
Revenge the ils? no, no thou art a foe
To all that live, it is not for Gods sake,
It Is still in wrath that thou do vengeance take.
Thou do accuse me of the breach of right,
That so my darkness, may make thine seem light,
Thy self thou praisest that thou do Gods will,
And keep'st his laws, though thou do break them still.
Thou lying serpent; thou do good to me,
When. where was it? can good of evil be?
I will requite thee if thou good have shown,
To me: thy ill to all the world is known.
Can Life by Death a being here retain?
When loss of life, thou countest for thy gain.
It Is true I hate thee, how can I do less?
Thou do on me thy malice still express.
An aggravation and disproportion, betwixt death and the cruellest creatures,
and how he has nothing that is praiseworthy belongs to him.
What shall I say thou cursed viper now?
Set out thee or thy hatred, who knows how?
A cockatrice thou art, of poisoned Aspe,
Thou step'st then in, when men for me do gasp.
The Lion's meek, when he is compared to thee,
The Dragon's tame, how wild so ere he be,
The Leopards do show some respect to men,
The greedy Wolves do prey but now and then.
The hungry foxes do sleep all the day,
And in the night they only seek their prey.
But thou art worse than all that here are named,
Thou spoil'st all men, and never art ashamed.
Both day and night all times thou go about,
And make thy prey of all thou find out.
The Panther when he does destroy man's life,
Seems to grieve, but thou art still at strife
WIth me: for murder thou do not relent,
But if thou miss a blow, thou do repent.
Beasts may be seen, and so may be prevented,
If not, with one alone they will be contented.
Thou like a Thief do come, men not aware,
All thou must have, for one thou do not care.
Thy shape's unseen, I cannot paint thee out,
Not man, nor beast, nor foul, nor vermin rout,
Can thee discover in thy native hue:
Or by proportion give to thee thy due.
If thou be strong, why do men through disease,
Grow weak, before thou do upon them seize?
If thou be bold, why do thou slily creep,
And steal on men by night, when they should sleep?
If thou art valiant, why do thou the brother,
Use as thy means, to make him kill the other?
When armies rise against each other fight,
Though there thou art, thou play'st there least in sight.
If thou art noble, why do hangmen still,
Attend on thee, to execute thy will?
Thou do men starve is this a noble mind?
No favor show thou art to all unkind.
If thou art great, why do not show the same,
To shelter men of praise to get a name?
If thou art fair, come now let us see thy face?
Thy beauties marks may help thee in this case.
Especially, if beauty be within,
But thou art foul, and so have ever been.
If thou art wise, why do thou ever use
To set thy self the wisest to abuse?
In this thy folly does so much appear.
To all the world it is evident and clear.
If thou art just, why do not rescve those,
That serve the Lord in striking down their foes?
If thou have mercy why do slight the tears,
Of poor distressed? thou do increase their fears.
If thou art rich, why do not give a fee,
Both large and good for those that plead for thee?
But thou art poor thy half world's nothing worth,
So well as I can, I have set thee forth.
Deaths friends are reproved, their al surdities are not to be answered, but
they are fitter for correction. Comparisons and advice.
Thy friends that have stood up for thy defense,
Will from thee find a deadly recompense.
They trade with thee, but he that gets the gains
Comes off with loss, his labor for his pains:
There Is none that does the common good desire
Of them: like fools they dote upon their hire.
On present things they dote, but quickly they,
Will lose the sweet, when death takes them away.
The Magistrate I Will satisfy, but for
The rest like Atheists speak, I do abhor
To answer them, absurdities their words
Are: them they use as mad men doc use swords.
Who ever speaks they will not take direction,
I Will not dispute, they are fitter for correction.
To side with death against the life of men,
That precious is, for gains they wish death then.
Should men like beasts by sense live always here?
Has God no ways but what to sense appear.
To feed and cloth his creatures which he made?
He help him can, though other helps do fade.
Must death of others, life unto men give?
Or no means else is in the world to live?
Is there no gains, but must be others losses,
Or comfort have, unless death bring his crosses?
Is this to do by others as to have
The same repaid to thee? or would thou crave
Death for thy self, or shamefully to die,
Others to free, that do in bondage lie?
Another case in this make still thine own,
Thou fain would live, should others be o'rthrown
Be not so brutish in thy cursed desire,
Me thinks it smells of brimstone, and hell fire.
Plead not for death, he will not plead for you;
His friendship's false, his enmity is true.
The Magistrates speech is answered.
The Magistrate that pleads for death so witty,
That he should fall, he thinks it is great pity:
There Is other ways, for Justice to take place,
Sharp punishment, and publicly disgrace.
Justice in rigor should not be expressed,
Injustice it is to all, but to the best
Show clemency and mercy to all such
That are most rude, let pity ever touch,
The heart, and then in love we shall agree,
When Death goes down, O then I shall be free.
Death, none can quit, when he once takes away.
The lives of men, although they went astray,
Though death be gone, still thou may use thy strength
To chastise men, and make them good at length.
A servant now he is, but ere't be long,
He Will master be, and prove for thee too strong.
Unless he be condemned, and silenced quite,
And by decree we take away his might;
Sin s condemned, if it get not repreeve,
Death may be spared men may in quiet live.
Although before some have deserv d to die,
I would not lose nor leave them willingly.
Though worst speed best and best the worst receive
Worst may be best if I do not them leave.
Though thieves by death have here received reward
Yet by thy stripes men will as much regard,
The law of life: now if death be a friend,
Let others judge: for I have made an end.
The charge of the Jurie.
You hear of death; the case is opened large,
Your verdict bring: for this I give in charge,
You speak the truth, and boldly as you find,
Respect not parties, freely show your mind.
Death is a foe to all the case is clear,
The best that live, of him do live in fear.
He is so grim that with his ghastly frown,
He does distract men, then he sinkes them down,
Life seeks but justice, justice he shall have,
My subject he is, he shall not be deaths slave;
Life he is wronged, the truth of this is tried?
Do you consult, the case i will soon decide.
The Preface to the verdict of the Jurie.
Lord this we find to us is very clear,
That Death to Life a foe is: with his fear
Does men like slaves keep under; with his force
Does crush all things, and never has remorse.
He prides himself ore all, he is so vile,
Next Sin, the worst, though you a King him style.
The truth of this all ages that are past,
Have found for they, by death were spoiled at last.
O monstrous death, when men use cursed art.
To torture men, thou take the tyrants part.
The information sets thy inside out,
But the reply, brings it more clear about.
Thy words, thy friends. do no whit mend thy case
But by contraries: Justice now takes place.
The Verdict of the Jurie, against Death.
For Death, we find him guilty of those crimes,
Of frighting men, and killing them all times,
And all things else; that little we can see,
(Take other things that proved so strongly be,
Against him) why he should not deserve to die,
Cut from the earth, and times eternally.
Now doom him Lord, and free us from his snare,
And let him lie in ever dying care.
The Introduction to the Sentence.
Death now thou see thou art convicted truly,
Thy deadly plots I have observed duly:
Against my creatures for so 's the story,
That chiefly made were, to set forth my glory.
When that my son took flesh and man became,
Thoudidstnot spare him: thou join'st with him shame
And brought him down: but then he from the earth,
Was raised again, and had a second birth.
The sentence against Death.
I sentence thee to perish evermore;
With all thy malice set upon thy score:
A stronger death, shall swallow all thy power,
And shall thy Kingdom utterly devour.
Now help nor refuge, none shall give to thee,
Eternal darkness then thy part shall be,
Thou never shall from thence return again,
To domineere or triumph ore the slain.
Take wrath with thee, be filled with curses store
And so begone, and see my face no more.
The Devil knowing that Sin and Death are condemned, his power and malice
appears; but it is restrained.
Satan which once did dwell within the Court,
Of heaven: thence was cast, yet does resort,
Thither again, to pry into Gods actions;
And what he does against his cursed factions,
And what respect he shows unto his own,
That serve him still, and make his power known
The one he does against the Lord uphold,
The other he to shame would bring, so bold
He is, that he does claim a due and right,
To all the world; dispose it by his might.
He would: if God did not subdue his power;
All men he would by treason soon devour.
And now he is vexed that sin and death is cast,
By Jurie, and God has the sentence past,
Upon them hoth; and now he comes to sue;
For a reprieve, as to his Kingdom due.
The Devil sueth for a reprieve for Sin and Death, and uses sundry
Argumsnts.
Lord am not I thy creature, thou did make,
Me glorious? when with Angels I did take
Delight to do what thou did me command:
And pleasure took, to wait then at thy hand.
I sinned but once, yet by that sin I fell,
From heavens glory, to the pit of hell.
Thy creature man, on which thou sett'st thy love,
Still sins, and his sinning does not move
Thee to reject him; but in favor still,
He does receive the fruits of thy good will.
Seeing it is so, that I no hope have ever,
To be restored, though I should use endeavor,
I set my self to stablish me a throne,
Except thy self, I Will be controlled by none.
Now sin and death, are servants unto me,
They do my work, and always willing be,
To bring me honor, profit; they converse,
And trade with men, I have a rich commerce,
By both their means: the pillars of my state,
I them esteem; and I at any rate
Would not them lose; they both do know my bents
I cannot work without such instruments,
Why do thou me before the time torment,
Condemning them to hinder my intent;
Thou know my time is very short to stay,
Here; I am bound unto the Judgment day,
In chains of darkness, then I must abide,
Thy burning wrath: to recompense my pride.
That is as much as Justice can desire,
Now I of thee this onething do require.
If I may have this favor at thy hand,
As devils are, I Will be at thy command.
That sin and death may both their freedom have,
By a reprieve, this is the thing I crave,
And do my work as they were wont to do it,
Give liberty; for they are willing to it.
Thou did at first permit me for to enter,
Into the serpent, I to tempt did venture
The woman first, then in the second place,
Ore man prevailed; and bronght on both disgrace.
The King that was according to thy heart,
Thou gav'st me leave to tempt too, but the smart
He quickly felt; the people were encumbered
With plagues, destroyed soon after they were nu^bred.
Thou did permit me for to try that King,
Who wicked was, by lying him to bring
To an untimely and a fearful end,
That sold himself and never did good intend.
That man that great was, dwelling in the East,
Approved by thee to be of men the best,
Thou did permit me for to try him so,
That he almost did count thee for his foe.
Thou did permit me for to try with fan,
The Apostles faith, so I did man by man,
And by that means they blessed on record,
Do still remain: with all that kept thy word.
Nay when I was from him that was possessed
Cast: when I asked thou granted'st my request,
Into the Swine to enter, thou said go,
Without thy leave, I could not have done so.
Now art not thou as kind as heretofore?
To all thy favors, add this favor more;
To free my servants: Kingdoms if divided
Long cannot stand; this was by thee decided.
By me thy justice shall the more appear,
And mercy too, in freeing some from fear
Though I am bad, it best he comes a devil.
But thou art good: so render good for evil.
Let sin and death be quit that they may still,
Rejoice with me: and execute my will.
Satan is sharply rebuked in sundry particulars by the Lord.
Why do thou claim a privilege that thou,
My creature art? thou art a devil now?
Thou tri'st all means, to make all like to thee,
For desperation, and for misery.
Thou wast in heaven, where no sin did dwell,
Yet thou through pride, against me did rebel
Thou wast not tempted, man by thee was tempted,
Why should not he, by mercy be exempted?
From wrath? which is for evermore thy due,
With all that fell: which are a cursed crew.
For man, I have redeemed him by my Son,
Which paid a price, else had he been undone.
No price nor means can serve to help thee out,
Of thy cursed state: if thou should go about,
It were in vain, though thou a Kingdom have,
And men cannot, yet I will lay thee wast.
Though Sin and Death he still at thy command,
What can thou do, when they are by my hand,
Suppressed? why do thou now so much desire,
To have reprieve for them? because hell fire
Reserved for thee is to that judgment day?
Me thinks these thoughts, thy malice might allay.
That still the more thou art to sin inclined,
The more in hell of torment thou shall find.
The more of men thou drawest to thy will,
The more with wrath I will thy spirit fill.
Though I in justice did some time permit thee,
(Do think that for such sins I do acquit thee?)
T'intice the good or make the bad grow worse,
To make me power on them the greater curse.
Thou do accuse my Saints, and make me try them
I nothing find, but that thou do belie them.
If I command thee not to use thy power,
Against man; then thou will the beasts devour.
If what thou would thou can not bring about,
Thou Wilt play at small game, rather than sit out
Not parted, but ore thrown, thy Kingdom shall
Ere long be: then with cursed great and small.
If sin become thee, comely thou shall be,
Enough shall thou have, with sins misery.
Thou monster vile, should I thee good reward,
When none for sin with thee, can be compared.
If sin and death reprieved are (this thy choice)
How much, how long, would thou with them rejoice.
A Reprieve is granted, that Gods justice might the more appear.
Now though I grant thee this thy vile request,
Of all thy evils this is not the least:
My justice shall on thee the more appear,
In sin, and sinners, horror, guilt, and fear,
Shall wait, and death shall be by me restrained,
So sin, and death, together shall be chained.
Accursed from me they shall be, men shall know,
Its but the fruit of raging flames below:
And as they band against men, so their hire,
Shall be the more in hels tormenting fire,
They shall not hatch the mischief they intend,
I Will crush their force, and cross their cursed end.
But for my foes that side with sin against me,
They earnest give for death and misery.
Reprieved they shall be but on these conditions
That never they orepasse these strict commissions.
Sin and Death prohibited in sundry particulars remain both under sentence
till the time of execution.
Sin shall not reign in any of my own
Redeemed, then he shall soon be overthrown,
Death shall not strike the just before their time,
When they are ripe, I Will pluck them in their prime,
Sin shall not rail nor persecute the best:
Death shall not fright them though that he be pressed
Against then, they shall willing be to part,
From worldly pomp, before he kill the heart:
Sin shall not set up tyrants in high places,
Lest they should bring their betters to disgraces.
Death shall not venture on such presently,
That wicked men judge worthy for to die.
Sin shall not take all fat, and sweet away,
And let men beg, or starve, or go astray,
For want of comfort (casting truth behind)
Nor slight the cries of them distressed in mind.
Death shall not show his face to any one,
In the new birth until the work be done.
Sin shall not mock at men that serve the Lord,
With upright hearts, this I have still abhort'd.
Death shall not vex those that are grieved for sin,
With purpose for a new life to begin.
Sin shall not be in painted shows set forth,
To hinder truth that is so great of worth.
Death shall not seize for small things on the poor,
Or free the rich of greater for their store.
Sin never more shall turn the stream away,
Nor with the highest er'e shall bear the sway,
Death shall not touch a man without my leave,
Or any thing else, of its life bereave:
Let sin and death, still under sentence dwell,
Till they with thee, together meet in hell.
FINIS.
ROMANS 12. 9. Abhor that which is evil, cleave to that which is good. PSALM.
51. 2. Wash me from mine iniquity, and cleanse me from my sin. REV. 2. 7. To
him that overcommeth, I will give to eat of the Tree of Life, which is in the
midst of the Paradise of God.
Serious Directions and Instructions, for our practice touching Sin.
1.
SEeing Sin has got reprieve again,
About the world he will use his might,
To flatter men their souls to stain,
With filthy sin, then with great spite,
He Will lay upon men heavy weights,
And briug their minds to dreadful streights.
2.
The best advise that I can give,
I ready am to show to thee,
How through Gods mercy thou may live,
From sins Dominion ever free.
And from the guilt that follows sin,
Though Sin and Satan bring it in.
3.
Over thy heart be watchful still,
Subdue the rising of the mind,
And bring thy soul to hate all ill,
That now or after thou shall find.
The bent of all thy heart let be,
To serve the Lord, he will honor thee.
4.
The evil motions first of all,
Resist before thou do it like,
Thou easy may keep out of thrall,
If thou defend when sin does strike:
When he does find that he is descrid'd,
He Will soon desist, his face to hide.
5.
The temper of thy nature find,
And chiefly there keep strongest guard,
Against what sin you are most inclined,
For, 'twill thy labors well reward.
Sin will be weak, grace will be strong,
Sin leave thee will ere it belong.
6.
Occasions shun which else will draw,
Thee unto sin, and by degrees,
Thou will neglect, or hate Gods law,
And plunge thy self in miseries.
For if sin get the upper hand,
Then tyrant-like, he will thee command.
7.
Count no sin small that thou do know,
The least's enough to make thee dwell,
(To think thus makes sin greater grow)
In the eternal pit of hell.
There Is no sin small in Gods account,
But sin his mercies do surmount.
8.
Bethink thy self what good there has,
At any time come in by sin,
And thou shall find nothing but wrath,
It brings; as now, so has it been:
No good but bad in sin remains,
Though seeming good, it is cursed gains.
9.
Consider why God does thee feed,
And cloth, to sin? it is not so:
To thee his works he shows indeed,
Thou might him serve not like a foe,
Which of Gods blessings is a grave,
That gives naught, yet more does crave;
10.
Acquaint thy self more with Gods word,
With all things in t, there thou shall see,
That sin and sinners on record
Are cursed, to all eternity:
And that the godly have reward,
Though them the world did not regard.
11.
Love truth divine, and precepts still,
Lay up as treasure in thy heart;
Thy mind with comforts ever fill,
They Will ease and qualify thy smart.
The best parts of Philosophy,
Must stoop unto divinity.
12.
When sin comes think it is poison sweet,
He brings to take away thy life,
He is thy foe be so discreet,
To keep at distance, and at strife:
Against him all thy power bend,
If to thy felse thou good intend.
13.
If Sin entreat, or if it command,
Or suit with humors of thy mind,
Tempt, yet be not at any hand,
To fancies vain be still unkind.
If sin do not thee first disarme,
Thou need'st not fear of taking harm.
14.
When sin does so deforme the shape.
Of men, then look how comely they,
When like an Anticke or an Ape,
They are: nay worse than beasts of prey,
What Is bad in others to behold,
Think worse in thee, this case unfold.
15.
Men would with sin share in the best,
The Account at last all would avoid,
The sour must go with the rest,
Such men by sin will be annoyd:
For when their monsters come to birth,
None would them father on the earth.
16.
There Is none in sin desires to die,
Though live in sin they do desire,
It Is best to leave sin willingly,
Else sin at last will bring its hire,
What Is bad at death, bad now appear,
What Is good at last is good now here.
17.
Avoid the Company that is ill,
Lest they thee poison with their breath,
Resort to such as love truth still,
Such show thee life, the bad bring death.
God will preserve the godly heart,
When wicked men shall feel sins smart.
18.
The worst with God acquaintance claim,
When all their friends do them forsake,
In this they show their cursed aim,
Not for himself they would him take:
Though he be lovely; but to free,
Them from sins wages, misery.
19.
When they that love sin go to hell,
They leave such witness them behind,
A dreadful stinking noisome smell,
And ill examples men do find;
Their names from honor leave they free:
They Are cursed to all posterity.
20.
See what an honor God bestows,
Upon his servants here below,
They daunt the world, and sin orethrowes.
They do Gods will for him they know.
And when that they go to their rest,
They leave behind a name that is blessed.
21.
Let hatred rise against sin, and why?
Not for the shame, but for Gods cause,
And 'twas for sin that Christ did die,
And so by sin we break Gods laws:
Because it is cursed from the Lord,
Let sin by thee be still abhorred.
22.
When sin does seem so Angel like,
Then take good heed lest he on thee,
His poison spit, his sting thee strike,
With it no plague compared can be:
The sweet meats surfeit kills the strong,
With meaner diet weak live long.
23.
Distrust thou most, what most does please,
Be jealous of thy knowledge when,
Its flesh in thee that pleads for ease,
Grace sin resists, though now and then
It takes delight in friendly mirth,
His name's not graven in the earth.
24.
Be ever low in thy conceit,
Of all be willing still to learn,
Though sin for thee do lay his baire,
Thou shall through wisdom it discern,
The lower men themselves do deem,
The higher God does them esteem.
25.
Though sin do vex thee, thou may make
Such use t'accomplish thy desires,
Though here it make thy heart to ache,
Thou shall rejoice when life expires,
The sower of sin makes heaven sweet,
Longed for the more; God thinks it meet.
26.
Above the world free from sins reach,
Live still: no hurt then comes to thee,
So from experience thou shall teach,
Thy soul to keep from misery,
The sense of Gods love shall possess,
The heart with heavens happiness.
27.
Be fruitful in the work of grace,
On heaven ever set thy mind,
Deny thy work in any case,
To all that is good be thou inclined:
Of what thou have, or do, give praise
To God, that strengthens thee always.
28.
Think it is not long that thou shall here,
Be so perplexed with sins ill,
Thy glorious conquest shall appear,
If thou against sin bend thy will:
If thou Gods glory do intend,
Thy joys shall be world without end.
29.
The more thou do make war with sin,
The more thou sett'st Gods glory forth,
So thou shall have true peace within,
And joy, more than the world is worth.
Mad men and fools, alone forsake,
Gods counsel; they part with sin take.
30.
Commit thy self with thy success
To God, and pray still for his aid,
He Will give a sweet and full redress,
To all thy griefs, be not afraid.
Let fear and shame seize on all those,
That hold with sin, to God they are foes.
31.
Remember still that by Gods power,
Sin is restrained and bounded so,
He cannot hurt, much less devour,
Unless the Lord do bid him go;
Keep in with God, and love him still,
Sin works thee good, though he be ill,
32.
It is not sin, but sin beloved,
That cuts thee off from saving grace,
For what thou do, God is not moved,
To give to thee a dwelling place
In heaven; no it is mercies store,
Laid up in Christ for millions more.
33.
Christ was on purpose sent to earth,
To free us from sins cursed sting,
And to destroy that monstrous birth,
(That he might freedom to us bring)
Sins works: as for, so in all those,
That with consent unto him close,
34.
If guilt of sin do once but look,
Or stare thee in the face, O then
Believe that Christ when flesh he took,
'Twas to redeem poor sinful men;
From fear, and wrath, and power of hell,
They might in heaven with him dwell.
35.
If thou can find no blessed store
Nor grace appears unto thy sight,
Then think what thou have felt before,
In darkness thou must have some light;
Experience past will help at need,
Though fruit be spent thou may have seed.
36.
If nothing of that store remains,
Nor seed yet Christ's own work does stay,
And with return the soul constraines,
That from him he will not part away;
Though comfort here we can see none,
It Is best to trust in him alone.
37.
Sin at the last shall be destroyed;
And cast into the darksome pit,
Although he has thee so annoid,
His time is short then think of it,
Though for a time he vex thee sore,
Thou shall be freed for evermore,
38.
And after long and many tears,
Thou shedst for sin, O then at last,
Thou ever shall be quit from fears,
Thy sorrows all shall then be past;
No more of troubles thou shall see,
Then, if for sin thou greeved be.
39.
And if thou have sin overthrown,
And kept the faith with all thy might,
To all the world thou shall be known,
And shall receive in open sight,
Thy portion with the Saints above,
The fruits of Gods eternal love.
40.
That glory cannot be expressed,
By mortal men that are below,
But they that dwell above are blessed,
They do the heavenly beauty know.
Lord bring us thither for to see,
The glory of thy Majesty.
FINIS.
LUKE 21. 28. Lift up your heads, for the day of your Redemption draws nigh.
PHILIP. 1. 21. For me to live is Christ, and to die is gain. 1 THESE. 4. 16.
The Dead in Christ shall rise first.
DIVINE POEMS.
Serious Directions, and Instructions concerning Death. Withal showing who are
unwilling to die, and why. As also, who are willing, and upon what conditions.
Concluding with heavenly Ejaculations.
1.
THough death be sentenced, yet he still,
Remains, and will his freedom have;
While times do last; he will ever kill
Mankind, and throw all in the grave:
That foe that shall be last destroyed,
Is Death; he makes all men afraid.
2.
When men look on, and see his face,
So pale, and ghastly, down they sink,
Then dreadful darkness takes its place,
And waits man's coming at pitts brinke.
Keep company with worms he must.
Till God do raise him from the dust.
3.
This thing to Nature terror brings,
When man must leave his house, though clay,
The comfort of all earthly things,
For sake he must, his score then pay,
Then he that did not live to die,
Then dying, dies eternally.
4.
The man that is wicked, dies before,
Death comes; with horror for his sin,
That worm does gnaw him very sore,
That lives in hell, the soul within.
Death never comes, but brings ill news,
To all that love ill; good refuse.
5.
Those that in honor, wealth, or ease,
Do live, they loath are to depart,
The thoughts of death do not them please,
But death it self quite killes the heart,
A kind of heaven they have here,
They would not change, for worse they fear.
6.
He that is ignorant of good,
And lives by sense so like a bruit,
He Is never taken in that mood,
So fit for death, to bring forth fruit,
This world he knows, no other he
Knows: thinking death brings misery.
7.
The man that is weak in grace would stay,
A while to see the cloud of wrath.
Blow ore to see a glorious day,
That he of truth may see the path:
Though such are slighted in the land,
They are still on the mending hand.
8.
One that is strong yet falls by sin,
He would not die in that same case,
Until true peace he find within:
By grace to live he begges a space,
Such cannot sin so cheap, nor sweet;
As fools do, for they think it meet.
9.
For civil ends some would revive,
To gather and to give estates,
To children, and to see them thrive,
And see him turn, that counsel hates;
When they are dead alive may be:
Men live in their posterity.
10.
Some higher ends have in their eyes,
They Would see in Sion peace, and rest,
Out live they would those fearfvll cries,
That thence are heard, such ends are best:
To see the fall of Babels pride,
Then they would die; the cause is tried.
11.
My general advice is this,
Remember death must seize on all,
Think and prepare (O do not miss)
Thy self: against, when death does call
In expectation daily die;
And willing be in dust to Iye.
12.
In doubtful things men use to fear,
On certain things men do resolve,
What does more plain than this appear,
That death must all ere long dissolve;
Why should a man whose time is short,
Jest at men's death with sinful sport?
13.
Repent of sin the sting of death,
There Is no such thing as many deem,
In It: though that he do stop thy breath,
Thou may be great in Gods esteem;
Hold in with Christ then sweetly sing,
O cruel death where is thy sting.
14.
Death to the best a gain indeed,
Is, they do change this place of strife,
Though in the grave worms on them feed,
Yet they shall have eternal life:
They do but mellow in the dust,
Till God new mould, and make them just.
15.
Have still thy heart on heaven set,
And keep Gods love fresh in thy heart,
(Though Death do catch thee in his net)
'Twill not be fired out by art.
Love stronger does than death appear,
Such love will free thee from deaths fear.
16.
Let wicked men so tremble still,
At thoughts of death, that they may leave;
Their sins, let sorrow their hearts fill,
Ere death does them of life bereave:
That they may learn to hate their sin,
And may a new life once begin.
17.
It Is best for those that live at full,
To set the worst before their eyes,
And rouse themselves (for such are dull)
And have regard to poor men's cries:
You Would best give bread, while here you dwell.
Lest you your water beg in hell.
18.
Learn to know want in midst of wealth,
And die to riches while you live,
And think of sickness in your health.
Do not content to humors give;
Life will not be so strange to these,
If thou from earth dyest by degrees.
19.
The foolish must know (though it is bad)
That death will take them all away,
Then are not such men worse than mad,
That drive off all until that day,
Till they do see needs they must die,
And they despairing quaking lie?
20.
Beat down conceit, and think thou art,
A fool indeed; then thou may learn
To know the turnings of thy heart,
And may true wisdom then discern:
That thou may then receive at last,
Eternal life when this is past.
21.
Let tender hearted men believe,
Their grace is true, though it is not strong,
Let not the thoughts of death them greeve,
They shall be freed ere it be long.
Gods strength is thine, which will prevail,
Against all fears that thee assail.
22.
Those that be strong, yet be fallen down,
And fears of death oppress them so,
That they have lost their great renown,
And God himself seems like a foe,
Strengthen your hearts and feeble hands,
Rescue your selves from fear and bands.
23.
If you be cowards, you will shame,
The cause, your selves, and others will,
Be fearful, when they hear the name,
Of death: such frailties show the ill,
Use well the gifts that God does give,
That though death comes, your joy may live.
24.
And ever after have a care
Of falling from your steadfastness,
You need not then to fear the snare,
Of death, but heavens happiness,
Will tend on you, and you shall see,
The glory of eternity.
25.
Those that would leave a happy seed,
Behind them when death throws his dart,
Must pray, and labor still indeed,
That God with grace may fill the heart.
That they may live to God below,
When they above Gods praises show.
26.
And they that long to see the peace,
Of Sion, ere they would leave their life,
Let them not grutch their lives to cease,
For death will free them from all strife:
In heaven they at last shall see,
Their freedom with felicity.
27.
Some willing are to die, when they
Are vexed, or want their wills in things,
They think they have no score to pay,
Though death them endless torment brings.
They ignorant of death remain,
Till second death bring such their gain.
28.
Some desperate persons that do kill,
Themselves; they seek for it, which they find,
The curse of God their souls shall fill,
The effect will not please well the mind.
The first fruits of hell may suffice,
To reap the crop such fools devise.
29.
Some of a better making do,
Sometimes in passion wish to die,
Such in distress are foolish too,
And fret disdaining misery:
But when God chides them, quickly they
Were sorry, that they went astray.
30.
Those that are Gods, the truth so grace,
Confess they will unto the death,
They willing are to give the place,
To tyrants, and to lose their breath.
Before they will deny Gods name,
They Will give themselves to burning flame.
31.
Such that have peace with God above,
Do draw from earth their hearts content,
And with their sins are out of love.
And to all good their hearts are bent,
Their blessed'st life does then begin,
When death does set them free from sin.
32.
But yet if God would have them stay,
A while on earth they willing are,
To do his will, their souls each day
Confirm: how ere the body fare.
When the body grows toward earth,
The soul brings forth immortal birth.
33.
The wicked still are in extremes,
They would not die if God should call,
They of this world have then such dreams,
Of joy: which they will not part withal.
They Are so be witcht to pleasure here,
There Is nothing else but death they fear.
34.
And others that God bids to save,
The lives of others, and their own,
They Are brought untimely to their grave,
And by themselves are overthrown:
Such fear not death, but down to hell,
They headlong rush, and there do dwell.
35.
I cannot choose but I must chide
Those that in sullen fits would die,
The worlds disgrace cannot abide,
For trouble that upon them lie:
They must of this with tears repent,
Or else of God they shall be shent.
36.
Can any suffering be too much,
For God his cause or glory? when
They shall have a reward with such,
In heaven? these are blessed men,
That never share in troubles more,
They now rejoice though sad before.
37.
Such as are willing for to yield,
Their lives to death, for Christ his sake,
By Death they conquer in the field,
In losing life a better take:
They leave a dread upon all those,
That unto God and them are foes.
38.
Who would not willing be to part,
With earth for heaven? when they have,
Got peace with God, by gracious art,
And knowing God their souls will save?
For heaven let all those be pressed,
That fitted are thus for their rest.
39.
Yet let not any grudge to stay,
Till they have done the work that he
Has set them to, spending their day,
In good, while they here present be
Returning still their pay: therefore,
Work now; then thou need'st work no more.
40.
The more men do, or suffer here,
For truth; their crown they do augment,
Their glory shall the more appear,
Though death do close them in his tent;
God shows his face here most to such,
That lived long, wrought, and did not grudge.
41.
It Is best for bad to die betime,
For living long, their sins increase:
And sinful acts grow to their prime,
Their sins live still, though life do cease.
Though they are rotten in the dust,
Their sins are fresh, they meet them must.
42.
They Would best to tremble in such sort,
At thoughts of death that they may know,
And hear the dreadful ill report,
Of sin, while here they live below:
Death puts an end to vain delights,
Then does begin, hell, horror, frights.
43.
But to the just, their sorrow ends;
They joy (though 'twas begun before)
With full increase, which makes amends
For trouble much, their joys are more:
Of this the blessed Saints can tell,
As damned can relate of hell.
44.
What though the soul and body parts,
Which loving friends have been so long?
The thoughts of this may glad their hearts,
That they shall meet both sweet and strong,
Refined: and with each other joy,
In heaven still without annoy.
45.
Death is no death; it does but open,
A door, the soul away may fly,
And so possess that blessed hope,
It has of true felicity
To leave frail life, who'd think it strange,
To have eternal in exchange?
46.
Death's but a blast, that soon blows ore,
And never more shall look on thee,
The hurt is nothing, fear is more,
Though dreadful it do seem to be.
God will it sweeten from above,
And thou shall find his constant love.
47.
I Will fear it not, for why should I?
For life and death together goes,
By every cross I Will learn to die,
They Are both my friends, but they are foes:
Life does consent with Death each day,
To take part of my life away.
48.
Lord I will serve thee while I here,
Remain: what need I much to care,
For death: when thou freest me from fear?
I will thy goodness still declare.
My life shall ever speak thy praise,
When death comes, I shall live always.
FINIS.
The Resolutions of the Muse, in her Pilgrimage.
NOw I of Time, and Vanity have sung,
Of Darkness, Light, and Life, sad, sweet, and strong,
Of Sin, of Death, Instructions too among;
I Will seek my fortune now, and go about,
I shall be entertained, I make no doubt,
Though I am naked, love will find me out.
I shall be clothed then in a suit of Leather,
And love, and I, both still shall dwell together,
And she will be glad, that ever I came hither.
And if a Noble person do me grace,
To take me in, in this distressed case,
I Will do my service faithful in my place.
If one that is learned take me home to dwell,
I Will pray him then that he will use me well,
Or to a better I my self will sell.
If I should dwell with him that is truly wise,
He Will hide my faults and what is of worth he will prize
And then my song to praise him shall devise.
If he that is honest, bids me welcome in,
I Will do my best to help to kill his sin,
I shall not lose, yet he by me shall win.
If noble, learned, wise, and honest too,
Do show respect to me, who then durst do,
Me wrong? they cannot, it is no matter who:
If one ignoble, seeing me, do grutch,
To show me favor, think it is all too much,
That I receive, I look for none of such.
If one unskilled in any learned art,
Against me proudly act a Tyrants part,
He Will vex in vain, he shall not greeve my heart.
For want of wit, if any do me blame,
Let them as fools, keep in their spite with shame
My song's the same, and so are they by name.
If one that is vile, look with disdainful eye,
On me, because I do his faults epsy;
I Will leave him galled, when I from him do fly.
If any Senior, looking big, and grave,
Conceits he knows, yet he no knowledge have,
If me he slight, I will his absence crave.
Or if I find one with an empty pate,
That nothing speaks, though he do ever prate,
I Will show his shame, but not his person hate.
If one I find, that has a barren soul,
And will not see it, yet do my words control,
Let him be put, with stultus in his roll.
If one that is simple, do desire me,
To gain experience, constant I will be,
To do my best to him, that all shall see.
If any censure me, is this the cause,
Their parboyl'd spirits cannot gain applause?
They break both Gods, Natures and humane laws.
If one detract from good, or turn to ill,
My honest meaning this may follow still,
That such like things, his measure here may fill.
Such Imps to plead for sin, were very fit,
But seldom they have so much art, or wit,
As pride, or lust have; for to manage it.
If one that reads, and rudely breaks my feet,
Or spoils my joints: my music is not sweet,
To him: the Horne-book is for him most meet
If one through envy, proudly do disdain,
To grant me favor, others will obtain,
The fruit, but he has labor for his pain.
If any mend my faults, I will him praise,
And with my voice, his honor I will raise,
His name in me preserved shall be alwsyes.
All that I crave, is but a spotless name,
And not to mount upon the wings of fame,
Plain welcome likes me; quit me all from blame.
You know my mind, for what I speak is true.
Being modest, I will not for favor sue;
Receive me: else I Will bid you now adieu,
FINIS.

