A TRVE AND CERTAIN RELATION Of a STRANGE-BIRTH, which was borne at
Stone-house in the Parish of Plimmouth, the 20. of October. 1635.

TOGETHER with the Notes of a Sermon, preached October. 23. 1635. in the Church
of Plimmouth, at the interring of the said Birth.

By Th. B. B. D. Pr. Pl.

LONDON, Printed by Anne Griffin, for William Russell in Plimmouth. 1635.

portrait of conjoined twins

To the Curious Beholder of the former Picture.
Dear Countryman.
NOT the mere fiction of the overdaring Picturer do thou here behold: But
(if he have done his part) the true Pourtraiture of the work of God, presented
to the world to be seen and to be admired.

Two things I have to deliver to thine ear, which this figure cannot convey
unto thine eye. First, what it intends: Next, how thou may correct the
Picture, if it need amending.

For the first; it intends to acquaint thee with this story. In the County
of Devon, and in the Parish of the famous Town of Plimmouth, there is a
Village called Stone-house; Viculum Piscatorium I may justly term it, a pretty
little Fishertowne, for it consists mostly of men that live by the Sea, and
gain their livelihood by the water. In this village there dwells one John
Persons a Fisherman, whose wife having fulfilled the usual months and weeks
of women's burdens, upon the twentieth day of this present month October fell
in travel, and by the help of a second Mid wife (through Gods mercy and
goodness) was the poor mother (after the weary travel of thirteen or
fourteen painful hours) safely delivered of the burden. A Birth not more
painful to the Mother (tho very painful doubtless being still-borne,) then
strange and wonderful to all the beholders. The eye is not satisfied with
seeing, with admiration: and, as it falls out in such a case, soon is the
fame thereof spread all abroad. Town and Country comes in to see, that
hereafter they might (as I for my part must) say; At such a time, in such a
place, I saw the strangest birth in all respects, that ever I saw or heard
before. Two heads, and necks, two backs, and sets of ribs, four arms and
hands, four thighs and legs: in a word, from head to heel (so far as the
eye could discern) two complete and perfect bodies, but concorporate and
joined together from breast to belly, two in one.

For the second thing propounded, viz. how to correct the picture, if it need
amendment; take this. When I first cast mine eye upon them lying on the table,
I said, surely if those children had bin living, Art might have caused a just
separation of them, for I conceived them to be no other than two bodies joined
together in one common skin. But I soon perceived mine Error, when putting my
finger to feel the Collar the Cannellbone (I mean that place where you see
them O^ f^pcu^ae.
begin to join together) I found that they had but one breast bone common to
them both, and by it, as by a partition wall, were their two bodies (as two
chambers) both joined and separated: joined together in respect of the
external bulk, separated in respect of the internal contents. This
concorporation lasted down to the Navell or a little beneath, which also was
in common to them both, I still speak of what the eye could see, happily so
soon as that string of the umbilicall vessels, by which the mothers womb
supplied food and nourishment to the birth had passed the skin, it might
dispart it self. But outwardly it was one in common. Whence also it was
conjectured, that though these twins might have several hearts, and lungs
answerable to their several heads and necks, yet but one common Liver to them
both. The truth of this conjecture I leave to the College of Physicians to
discover, that is not my profession, nor will I presume to determine any thing
in another Art, only this Objection I have against it: that supposing one
common Liver, it must either gird them round or be misplaced in one of them:
for turning breast to breast, and belly to belly, you join the left side of the
one body to the right side of the other: so that I say, except the liver do
compass it round, it shall be misplaced in the one.

But to return to the story. These two twins were not more nearly joined in
the bulk of body, than they were in all parts and proportions like to one
another where they were disparted; so that two the likest twins that ever you
saw were not more like: nay the glass cannot (I think) give a truer answer to
the face than these were each to other. Which I do the more boldly affirm,
because having satisfied mine eye with beholding them on the one side as they
lay, I caused the women to turn the other side, and laying them as before
(face to face, and foot to foot) I could perceive no difference in them at all
from what I had seen before. One thing I forgot, till it was too late: which
if I had remembered, I verily persuade my self, might have been done, viz. To
lay them one upon another. The which I mention, lest happily any might conceive
that the ioyncture of their bodies might lean to one side more than to
another. I was about to ask the women whether the mother felt them living in
the womb; when presently I corrected my self, seeing each part and limb,
yea, and the whole body of either grown (as indeed it was) to a just maturity:
each by himself, had they been sundered, had been a just birth; having hair
on the heads, nails on their hands and toes, nay which is more (except the
women were much deceived they had some teeth in their head: and to confess the
truth, I thought so too, till others that had more skill and experience
persuaded me to the contrary. Howsoever, the children were each of them as
complete and perfect as Births use to be.

Upon these grounds I corrected my self in my former intended question: for
how should they grow to that perfection of stature, had they wanted life? But
the midwife and the women told me, that they were living and lively some few
hours before they were borne: So that in all likelihood, had a skillful hand
been made use of at the first, they might have lived to see the light, if not
to enjoy it. But God that gave them a life and being in the womb, knowing
that life upon earth would have been a burden to them, provided better for
them, and took them to himself.

Thus have I given a true, and I think a full narration of this work of
wonder which God has showed here amongst us. And with it, I am content to send
abroad some few notes prepared for the confluence of people, met together, when
this birth was laid into the earth. Something me thought was fitting to be
commended to them that saw it, while the thing was fresh in mind; and that
something such as it is: lo here it is. Rather would I shame my self in being
over-busie, than be wanting in what I conceit may not be unprofitable to the
country wherein I live. Read then these notes, And if thou count not this
half hour ill bestowed, thou will I trust (I desire thou would) pray for
him, who if thou love the Lord Jesus in sincerity, prays for thee, that thou
may prosper and be in health, even as thy soul prospers.

Farewell.
Plimmouth, October. 30. 1635*
Heb. 11. 3. Being dead, yet speaks.
AS the Word of God, so the Works of God are for our Doctrine and instruction.
The works of Creation teach us, says Saint Paul, Gods eternal power and Romans
1. ^0.
Godhead. The works of his providence are not behind hand with us: and
therefore says the Holy Prophet, Day unto day utters speech, and night unto
night shows knowledge. True this is in Psalm. 19. 2.
the ordinary and common works of providence: But much more remarkable in
those that are extraordinary, when either the course of Nature is hindered, as
the Sea and Sun stopped in the midst of their Carrier: or altered, Exodus 14.
Ios. 10.
as when the Sun went backe-ward in the days of Hezechiah. Touching which,
says the Psalmist, He has made his wonderful works to be remembered; or as
the Psalm. 111. 4.
words stand in the Original, and the Greek translation. A memorial has he
made to his wonderful works, id est. ZeKeA GNaSaH LeN^PhLeAo Thall. (...).
He has ordained and commanded that they should be remembered; Good reason,
that where God with his fi^ger points forth something in special to the
sons of men, they should follow it with the Eye of the body, till the eye of
the soul, viz. the understanding spirit have thence received some instruction.

Not only the other Creatures: but also the Sons of men are otherwhiles made
the object of these wonderful works of God: Or if you had rather call it the
subject matter, on which he stampeth the marks of his Providence, either in
hindering, or in altering the Ordinary course of Nature, sometimes in the
conception, sometimes in the births of our expected and desired issue.

Conception, I count the natural Conceptio est actio uter^, cum ^^^ris ^t
famina s^mon foecundum ab coexcipitur, misce^^r* ^ovetur, ejusque vis ad
propris^ munu^ exequendum exc^^atur Dan. Sennert. Med. li. 4. part. 2. Sect. 4.
cap. 4.
and proper work of the womb, in receiving, retaining, and ripening the seed
for the Birth. The womb is by the hand of God, sometimes closed up, that it
receives not, as in the case of Abimilechs family. Genesis 20. sometimes opened
or rather loosened, that it retayneth not, as in the case of Abortive and
untimely births. Sometimes weakened, that it ripeneth not the birth, either not
at all, or at least not within the just time. And all these do teach us the
presence Vide Se^nertum capite de partutardo. Qui ex historiis consirmat partum
nonnunquam differri ad mensem 13 14. 15. 18. 20 23. 24. Hae^ rara (inquit) et
pene miraculosa sunt; acciduntque procul dubio ob semen debil^, uter^que
calorem ^anguidum, quib ^^ de causis et saetus tardius absolvitur, et exp^ltr^^
facul^^^ lang^et.
of Gods Providence. Well may we say, The hand of God has been there. It is
he that thus has hindered the work of the womb, and withheld the blessing
of a good Conception. So for the birth.

Birth I must call that which properly and from the Latin we might call
Parturition. This does God by the hand of his special providence hinder
sometime in part, sometime in whole: So that whereas Partus prater-naturalis
est, triplex. Di^^icilis, Nul^us, et Caesareus. Difficilis, ut in Agrippis.
Quibus nomen indi. tum est (Authore Gellio Noctium A^^i^arum lib. 16. ca, 16 eo
quod in ^^sc^ndo, non caput, sed pedes primi extiterans, s^il, ^t Agripp^
dicantur ab ^gritis di^e et pedibus: Cum potius ab agrit^dine partus; qui non
tantum ^^t ex pedibus, sed ex ^a^ibus; praeser^im tamen ex mole corporis
obvtrsa* et exitum ambi^nte; pro^t patet ex Sonner to cap* de partu difficili
praternaturali. Partus Nullus dicitur, quoties infant excludi nequeat;
frustraque con^t^r misera parturi^ns s^ ipsam o^ere suo liberare et exp^dire,
^ortu^ nimirum foet^s, qui nisi vel medicamentis expe^^atur, vel Chirurgi opera
exera^atur, mortem e^ mis^riam ma^ri ^^^^tatur. Partus Casareus Casari nomen
fecit. Ille enim qui primus Caes^ri^ no^^^^ adeptus est, ab e^ dictus fertur,
quod c^so matris utero natus fu^rit. G^s^res quod ex utero excisi sunt,
nom^^antur; ipsaque illa actio dicitur partus Caesareus, Ex his pl^riq^e
mortui; nonnulli vivi; idque (quod rar^ accidit) matre superst^te et
revalescente.
all times of the woman's Travel and labor are full of sorrow, yea (as the
Philosopher says, Aristot. de Historia A^imaliu^, Lib. 7. cap. 9 and the
Scripture it self in part does confirm the same) moreful of difficulty and
danger than any other creatures (an evident demonstration of the Hand of God,
visiting the first sin of our Grandmother E^ah, upon all the sex) whereas I
say all times are full of sorrow, of fear and frightfulness; some do receive
an increase and multiplication, by such accidents supervenient, and unexpected
dangers of births not capable of deliverance till God by the hand of special
Art vouchsafe his gracious help, and good assistance. Of these therefore, as
of the former, well may we say, Digitus dei, It is the finger of God that has
been here, and manifested his presence by hindering the common and ordinary
course of Nature in the Birth of the Womb.

As in hindering, so also in altering and changing the course of Nature, does
God call man to an observation of his Providence: Nay here more than in any
thing else does he show forth his works of wonder: understand me still to
speak of the Conception and of the Births of the sons of men. What variety
of strange births do we see and hear of. Strange births we call them: more
properly, we might term them strange Conceptions: for what the womb in
Conception forms, that is not usually altered in the birth, What variety (I
say) of strange-birthes do we see and hear of? Strange in the quantity of
Stature. This is sometimes Giant-like; otherwhiles Dwarfish and Pigmey-like.
Sometimes beyond, sometimes beneath and short of the ordinary, usual and
common stature of mankind; and as it thus falls out in respect of the whole
body* so sometimes in the parts. One or 2 parts of the body, being of a
different proportion; bigger or less^r than the rest.
stature: strange in the Number of parts. The strangeness here is in defect or
excess. Defect, when one or both hands or feet are wanting: Such was that
woman which we saw here the last year, who wanted hands, and supplied the
want of them in many particulars by her feet. Excess of number: Such was that
Giant mentioned, ^ Sam. 21 20. who had on every hand six fingers, and on every
foot six toes, four and twenty in number. Hitherto refer those whom the
Greeks do call (...); such was Hermaphrodi^^^, the son of Mercury and Uenus,
i^ we may give credit to the ^^tation and composition of his name.
number of parts: Strange in the Multiplication of several births is rare*
^wins are not frequent in our colder climat, much less the multiplication of
Birth^, yet such we find recorded, See Se^nertus cap. de G^m^llorum
generatione, who out of Aristotle, Pliny, and some Modern Authors d^t^ show
the certain^y of this Notorious and in the mouth of every man is that story of
Margar^^, Sist^r to Earl Floris the fourth (as Heilin relates it, writing of
Holland) who being of the age of two and forty years, brought forth at one
birth three hundred three score and five children, half o^ them males, hal^e
females, and the ^dd one an Hermaphrodi^^. They were christened in two B^sons
at the Church of ^^sdunen, by Guido Suffragan to the Bishop of Vtrecht, who
n^m^d the Males John's, and the Females Elizabeth's: all which immediately after
died, and with them their mother: the Ba^ons are yet to be seen in the
aforesaid Church. Thus far He^lin* This miracle, or miraculous accident
befell her (say some) as the just hand of God upon her, for that when a
certain poor woman having two children hanging at her breasts, asked of her
an alm^^ she bitterly upbraided the woman with wheredome, for that she had
both those at one birth, adding, that it was not possible for a woman to
conceive two births at once, except by fornication. A good warning doubtless
to all ^ash headed censurers, who spare not to sp^ake of others at their own
pleasure.
Multiplication: strange in the Concorporation of births, is almost miraculous,
tha^ two should be joined into one. Yet su^^ there have been, as appears by
Landulphu^, in that answer which he gave to the question. An et quomodo
monstra sint baptisanda whether at all, and if so, then how monstrous and
misshapen births are to be baptized A question, that if these incorporated Twins
had been borne alive and lived to Baptism might have put the Minister to his
books how to proceed in the case. The answer to the question is this: Si
perpend^ntur du^s habere animas, not pote duo capita, quatuor brachia, quatuor
pedes, du^s spina^ in dorse, and hujusuiodi* tunc baptis^tur quilibet per se,
and intingatur in loco quilibet per se, id est, If you perceive that they have
two souls, as thu^: That they have two heads, four arms, four feet, two
b^cks and backe-bones, and the like: Then let each of them be baptized by
himself, etc. Of two concorporated and joined back to back, we read. The
story is remembered in Rod^ricu^ a Castro, a Physician of special note
throughout all Europe* as the Title of his Book does style him. He, in Lib. ^.
de Morbis mulierum, cap. 6. coming to speak of monstrous births, m^ko^h five
several kinds of them (as also before him had Andreas La^rentius in his
Historia Anatomica, lib. 8. Qu. 14) more particularly he maket^ the third
kind to be of them that are defective or redundant. Quo numero, says he,
comprehenduntur duo illi qui tergo uno pro duob^^ perfungentes, moribus tamen
diversi, viginti annos vi^erunt, and cum vnus mortem obiret, alter tamd^^
superv^xit, quoad socij ac germam putr^lagin^ fui^ extinct^^.

Two, says he, that were joined back to back, and it seeweth as contrary in
their manners, as in their looks. They lived twenty years, and when one of
them died, till the putrefaction of that body which could not be separated, did
prove the destruction of the survivour. But no mention do any of the forenamed
Authors make of such a birth as this of ours: so that it is likely that they
had heard of none such. But proceed.


Concorporation of several births, but above all most strange in Quality and
kind: The alteration of this, is of all other the most strange, and indeed
monstrous: whether of the whole, or of some part. Alteration of the whole kind
we read of: Beasts that have brought forth mankind births, and women
bri^^ish shapes. Andreas Angelus de Mirabi^^bus mund^ in historia Anni 1597. In
April^ (inquit) Ba^^geis in Hispania in ^^ditum q^oddam Monstr^m pro^u^^^
mundu^: quod ex m^^^orum ad varios scriptu illi^ et Venetiis c^r^o constat
liter^^. Ibi enim vacca, qu^dam du^^ vivos et integr^s omnino homines masculum
et faemi^am enix^ est in lucem

Sennertus, cap de monstris (so also Gastro and Laurentius ibidem. Interdum
accidit ut ^oemin^ varia monstra viv^ntia ^t animal^^ praeter et contra naturam
producant. Serpents, cane^, et alia animalia, vel foetu^ brutorum parts
habentes, et ali^s eosque variis modis monstros^^ geni^os fuisse e Lyc ^^t^ene,
et aliis qu^ de prodigiis et monstris scripserunt, videre est. Neque opera
pretium est historias illas huc adducer^. Alteration of pa^^^: Ex Theatro
Historic^, does Doctor Beard relate this History. A certain Nobleman used
every Lords day to go on hunting in sermon time; which impiety the Lord
punished with this judgment. He caused his wife to bring forth a child with
an head like a dog. That seeing he preferred his dogs before the service of
God, he might have one of his own getting to make much of. Hitherto refer
such strange births as have some ^^berous exc^escenscies. See one recorded by
Castro De Natura Mulierum, li. 3. ca II* quod habebat corn^^ in copi^e alas
dna^, etc. Here in this town not many years ago, when women laid their hair
forth upon wires, a child was born which had on the head (as I am credibly
informed) grissels growing in the shape and fashion of those attires and
dressings.

Castro adds, Qui conceptus etsi a causis naturalibus continga^t, tamen ^ou^
si^e Dei providentia^^^ri credendum est, pro puniendis, et mon^^dis hominibus,
^sden^qus arcend^s ab ^ssranata^^ turp^ libidine.


quality and kind altered and changed. All these, but especially this later
sort, which alter the quality and kind, the Latins call Monstra a
monstrando, quia monstrantur, I would add, ut monstrent. They are showed that
they may show the special handyworke of God, and though, peradventure dead,
yet speak, and tell the forgetful world, that God himself has a special
hand in forming and featuring the births conceived in the womb. Here by the
way, let me touch upon a case of conscience, or two. Whether Monsters and
misshapen births may lawfully be carried up and down the country for ^ights to
make a gain by them? Whether the Births being once dead, may be kept from the
grave for the former ends? Whether the parents of such births may sell them to
another. For These two also are mentioned by Aristotle in his Problemes. Cap.
De Monstris.
my part I would be loath to prejudice the better and moral judgments of any.
But to speak plainly, I do make scruple of the first, and therefore much more of
the two later cases. For if not living they are to be prostituted to the
covetousness of any; much less being dead, when the grave calls for the
bodies of all Christian births: the grave, I say, wherein they are to be laid
up: that therein they may lay down the present dishonor, and thence be raised
again in glory. And if the parents may not do this; how much less may they
deliver it over to another? But you will say to me, suppose them living, why
may they not be used to this end, being fit for none employment? My reasons*
are these. Our delight is to be measured by our desires, nor do I see it
lawful to delight in what may not be desired. And who would desire a misshapen
Birth, to be the issue of his own body? Add this, all Crosses call for
Humiliation: and where that is expected, I see not how there can be place
either for profit or pleasure to be thought upon:

But to return again to what we had in hand. These Births (as I said) though
dead, yet speak and preach to the world the present hand of God in the womb
of the mother.

Adsaetus formationem requiruntur tria: sc.

(1) Ipsum semen ^^cundum utr^usque parentis.

(2) Sang^is mater^^s ^d nutriend^^^^ ^^^um.

(3) Vterus matris been constitu^us, qui ^^men conceptum ^ovcat, ^i^sque
lat^n^^m vim exci^^t: supponitur enim ^^m quandam activam latere in semine
(dico autem ^^men illud quod Gr^ci (...) sc^semen ex utroque parente mi^^um)
supponitur ^nquam ^^m quandam latere, quam ^^c^us matter ^us suo calore excitat
ad actionem suam peragendam: H^^um trium siquid deest: siquid d^bile sit, aut
in^rdi^atum, hinc ^it (inquit Philosophus ut vitiosa sequatur conformat^o
^o^^us, ^n^ sal^^m^ arti^m


In all these accidents and occasions the Philosophers (and physicians also who
build upon the ground of Philosophy, nor can well subsist without them) they I
say would attribute all these impeditions and alterations of Nature to
secondary causes: either internal, as the defectivenesse or excess of
seminall materials; or external, as the dullness of the formative faculty,
or indisposednesse of the Vessels, or strength of Conceit or Imagination.

The Astrologer may add another cause, powerful* in his opinion, to pervert
and overthrow the good intentions of Nature, sc. the constellations of the
planets, and configuration of their aspects. And happily they may pitch upon
some reasons for the coalition of these two twins into one: nor do we deny
but the Philosopher may be allowed in these his conjectures: nor may he seem
to shoot beside the mark, that should ascribe it to some accident, colliding
and dashing these two new-formed Embryons in the womb, casting them so one
upon the other, as that the contiguity and overmuch closeness of their bodies
caused the aforesaid coalition: so have we seen two trees over closely
leaning one upon another grow into one, and covered with one bark. The
Philosopher, I say, may seem to speak reason (not so the Astrologer, at least
in mine Opinion.) Only he and others must be entreated to look higher, and
to take notice of the special hand of God, whose work alone it is to sort and
compound the activities of secondary causes; that what by the blessing of God
might have been otherwise, is now thus disposed of for ends best known to
himself.

This is the conclusion which Religion teaches: and which it becomes me as
a Divine to put you in mind of. The Astrologer is taught to say, Astraregunt
homines. The influence of the Stars do rule the Actions of the sons of
men. But the Christian knows that regit astra Deus, God over-ruleth the
stars. So that if we should grant an influence in the planets, and a power
in the Constellations: yet far be it from us to account it fatal, and
inalterable: No we know that God sits in the Heavens, and does whatsoever
he will. David in the Psalms ascribes to his hand the framing of his body
and members in the wombet. Thine hands have made me and fashioned me. Thou have
covered me in my mothers womb. Thine eyes Psa. 119. 73. Psa. 139. 13 16.
(says he) did see my substance yet being unperfect, and in thy book all my
members were written, which in continuance were fashioned: or (as it is in the
Margent) all of them written, what days they should be fashioned, when as yet
there was none of them. To him therefore belongs the disposing of the
materials and shaping of the Birth: Now then, is God so tied to his
materials, that if there be too much for one, or too little for two complete
and perfect features, he can neither detract nor multiply? Must his work be
cut off with what the Philosopher ^aith of Nature, Intendit quod optimum, facit
tamen id quod potest: that is, Nature intends perfection, but being hindered
does what she can?

Let no man therefore tax me of any excess in religious thoughts, or count it
overmuch curiosity, if I propound to you an observation or two, grounded upon
this and the like occasions. Each Comet (as experience has taught men) is in
its kind Doctrinal, and blaseth forth something or other worthy our
observation. Nec in vanum toties arsere Cometae: seldom are those
super-terrestriall blazes kindled in vain. Men do commonly count them
praenuncios Tully, Lucan. Iosep. de bello Iud. lib. 7. ca. 12.
belli et calamitatum, forerunners of some imminent calamities, and therefore
do call upon one another to appease the wrath of God, by fasting and
Humiliation.

I shall not therefore I hope, transcend the limits of my calling, nor wrong
the providence of God, if I take liberty to say, touching this strange-birth,
which God has caused to blaze here amongst us, and from us, to the whole
Country, to say of it, as the Apostle says of the blood of Abel; being dead,
it yet speaks. What did or does the blood of Abel speak, but the
irreversible wrath of God against Cain, and in him against all wilful and
malicious persecutours of religious persons? I do not say, this speaks so
bitter things; but yet it speaks something in common with the rest of strange
and misshapen Births: and if I deceive not my self overmuch, something in
peculiar by it self: so then it speaks two things, perhaps more, but two I
pitch upon, not averring them both spoken with the same evidence, but both
truly: and which is more, seasonably.

First then this, and all monstrous and misfeatured Births, Observa. 1.
speak this: That it is a singular Mercy of God, when the Births of the Womb
are not mis-formed: when they receive their fair and perfect feature. A Lesson
truly worth the noting in this forgetful Age: Mercies that are ordinary we
swallow; and take small notice of them: Such a work as this causes us to see
what difference there is bet wixt comeliness and deformity: betwixt Perfection
and Imperfection in the Body. Does any make scruple of what I say? Let that man
consider the discomfort of Deformity: How liable it is daily to exprobration
through the evil custom of wicked men, more ready to cast it in the teeth,
than condole or commiserate, if God has stamped a deformity upon the Body.

Know we not that the members of the Body are the Organs and Instruments of
the Soul, in the Service of God and man? Defect or excess must needs breed
grief, because it creates trouble. Consider we this birth, thus
double-membred, to have seen them lying upon the table, to see them deciphered
upon the paper might happily be thought a sight not much unpleasant: But let
your imagination give them life, and tell me how uncomfortable, yea
burdensome must they be to others, yea and to themselves: when as though two,
yet so near incorporated, that the one cannot help the other. How should they
eat, sleep, walk, sit, or satisfy nature, but with much encumbrance. Is it
then discomfort to have a mark of deformity or dis-advantage cast upon the
Births of the Womb? And is it not a singular Mercy to have them born complete
in shape and feature? Doubtless it is.

All reason therefore is that this Mercy of God unto us in the issue of our
Loins should be acknowledged with all thankfulness. If other Mercies, why not
this? The Husbandman, when he has his Corn and Wine increased, when housed:
The Merchant, when his Venture is returned: The Owner when his Ship is arrived,
and both have made a good voyage: If there be any religion dwelling in their
breasts, will in a solemn manner confess before the Sons of men the loving
kindness of the Lord. When women have received safe deliverance from the great
pains and perils of Childbirth, the Church does call them (and surely it had
need to call them) to give hearty thanks to God: And ought not this also to be
remembered, That the Children borne give hope of Comfort to their Parents? Hope
I say, that a fair and well-featured Body may be the comfortable house and
habitation of an Holy soul? Doubtless it ought: Does not David intimate so
much in the aforementioned Psalm, when he says, I ^sal. 139. 14.
will praise thee, for I am fearfully and wonderfully made; Mervailous are thy
Works, and that my Soul knows right-well.

Know we not that God has just cause to blast every birth of ours, if he
would be extreme? Partly, in respect of the abuse of the Bed; which, though he
has sanctified to the use of man by the benediction of the Church, that so in
the sober use thereof every one should possess his Vessel in sanctification
and honor; yet is it too often riotously and wantonly abused. Partly, I say,
for these Abuses, but specially in respect of that Original corruption which
cleaves to the Fruit of the womb, even from the first conception, as the
Psalmist shows. From this gilt and filth not one of all the Race of Adam is
exempted. Psalm. 51. 5.
No sooner do we receave a Being, but it is accompanied with sinfulness: In
which respect, who can deny, but God might justly blast the body with
deformity? Which if he do not when he might, is it not a favor, and so to
be acknowledged? We acknowledge it a special favor to the Soul (as it is
reason we should) that God does exempt any from that common damnation, which
is due to all by Adams transgression: And is it not to be confessed a Mercy to
the body? For why? When the body does want its perfect feature, when the Soul
does want the exercise of wit and reason, more or less: Is not this an effect
of Sin, and so to be accounted: Does God in this any thing more than what
Justice does allow? Shall we say it is an act of his absolute Dominion? I trow
not: What is justly done to some, is it not mercy, not to do to others? Yes
(my Dearly beloved) it is Mercy, free and undeserved Mercy: O that in this
also, as in other things, I say, O that men would therefore praise the Lord for
his goodness, and for his wonderful Works to the Sons of men!

Contrarily, when the Hand of Justice has found any out, when any birth of
ours is brought into the world misformed, and mis-featured: If God has (as it
were) spit in the face, and laid the black-finger of Deformity upon the body,
ought it not to be entertained with sorrow of Heart, and Humiliation? Has God
written in great Letters the guilt of Sin, and in a deformed body drawn a
resemblance of the Souls deformity; drawn it (I say) so; that others may see
and know, that we also are defiled in his sight? and shall we not blush to
hear it, to see it thus cast in our teeth, and laid before us?

This for the Parties: but is this all? Is it nothing to you all that pass by,
or that come to see? Me thinks It should: Can you, any of you, wash your
hands in Innocence? are not you also Sinners in the sight of God? What can
you allege, why this might not have been yours? Did you prevent it by prayer?
I trust you will hereafter: and acknowledge the justness of their Devotion,
who remember women with child: but happily you have not hitherto thought upon
it: If so; If God might have thrown the tower of Siloam upon your heads also,
if set a mark of his displeasure upon your births, and yet has not done it;
will you not see and say, The Lord has done great things for us? Lord, what am
I, that thou have spared me? am I more holy, less sinful than my neighbor?
No, no: It is thy free Mercy and undeserved Favor, Oh enlarge my heart to
praise thy Name.

Here then see and bewail the iniquity and irreligion of this our Age, at
least of numbers in the same. The common sort make no further use of these
Brodigies and Strange-births, than as a matter of wonder and table-talk: look
upon them with none other eyes, than with which they would behold an African
monster, a misshapen beast. It was not thus in the better Ages of the world.
We read in the ninth Chapter of Saint John: that the Disciples, when they
saw the man that was borne blind, they come to our blessed Savior, with Quis
peccavit? Mr Who has sinned? See the Religion of those times: They looked upon
sin as the cause of defective or redundant births. Truth indeed, our Savior
answers: Neither this man, nor his parents. By which Speech of Christ, we
must not think that they are excused from all sin: doubtless his parents
had sinned; and conceived him in sin, else had not this been cast upon him:
No place for defects and deformities in the state of Innocence. But why God
should take the forfeiture in this, rather than in his Neighbor, this was
merely Ex Dei bene-placit^, the good pleasure of God, who had in this a
purpose to prepare and make way for the glory of Christ in curing the man.

The same happily might be said in these occasions whereof we speak: To the
Question, Quis peccavit; Who has sioned? happily Christ (who was acquainted
with the Counsels of his Father) might answer; Neque hic, neque parents,
Neither he, nor his Parents: Not to exempt them from sin altogether, but to
teach us, that some other end and purpose God had beside the visitation of
their sin: (though that also we find sometimes to bemanifested, when God by such
occasions does awaken the conscience to confess secret and unbewailed sins)
beside, I say, the visitation of sin: Sometimes to discover the Atheism,
Irreligion of many, perhaps also their Covetousness, who would rather make a
benefit of such births, and instead of Humiliation for a Cross, teach the
parents to account such births for blessings, which do prove so profitable.
Sometimes to prompt unto the Ministry a word of exhortation needful for the
present state of the people: A meditation which happily his text would not
afford him. Ex. gr. This Lesson, as you see, is by this occasion prompted to
me, presented to you: That you remember hereafter, to acknowledge it as a
Mercy: when Children come into the world well-featured, the members of their
body in a due proportion aptly each to other corresponding, neither defective,
nor redundant: To bewail it as a cross from God, when it is otherwise: that
so penitencie may provide a Remedy, either of the deformity by the hand of
Man; or of the discomfort by the stroke of Death. This Lesson, I say, is now
presented to you, and I trust will be remembered by you: And if so; the Answer
to the Question may go on as it is in the words of our Savior. Neither this
man, nor his parents, but that the works of God should be made manifest in him.

To wind up this first observation in a word, I noted the religion of the
Disciples: they* look up to sin as to the cause of Gods Hand: nor shall it
misbecome us to do the like: provided always, that it be (what they forgot) in
our own occasion rather than in another. Do I suffer? Let me say, Lord, I
have sinned; Thou art just. Does another suffer? Let me say, Lord, thou art
merciful to me: this case might have been mine. Blessed be thy Name for ever.

Something long have I stood upon this, because I am sure this is a Lesson,
which all monstrous and misshapen births, though dead, yet speak for the
Instruction of the Living: I will dispatch the other more briefly, which may
seem to be peculiar to this one in respect of the shape thereof. Observat. 2.


The twins you see are males; brothers, had they been borne alive. To love
as brethren, is the duty of Christians: a Duty frequently remembered by the
Apostles, and powerfully pressed. To love, is to have one soul in two bodies;
One, not so much by union of essence as by combination of Affection: And lo,
here a fit resemblance of this mutual duty: As fit, as lively almost as can be
devised: Here are all the parts and members of Consultation, and operation for
two persons; only here is one body, one breast, one belly: the breast the seat
of the heart, the belly of the bowels: One I say, not in the Identity of
substance; but in the conglutination of external parts from breast to belly:
whether one heart, one liver, one community of Intestines, is more than we
could see; though all reason indeed gives them to be two throughout in all
parts: yet you see, so two in one, that had they lived to the years of
expression, we might well have expected from them united hearts, entire
affections, and more than Sympathy, each to other, as to himself. Surely,
these are not more neere^y conjoined in breast and belly, than Christians ought
to be in heart and affection. These two were one body; Christians are one
spirit: though several bodies Cor. 12. 13*
and souls, yet one and the same spirit diffused into all, to enlive and
quicken all. Nor would it have been more prodigious for these Twins (suppose
they had lived to be men) to have quarrelled and contested one against
another: than it is for Christians to quarrel and contend, specially to live
in the mind of irreconciliation. To these Twins (had they quarrelled) a man
might have said, you are one body: To Christians a man may well say, You are
one spirit: why do you wrong one to another? Was that an Argument in all
reason fit to compound the supposed differences of these? And shall not this
be able to persuade peace, nay love among Christians? Me thinks it should:
Nay, I am sure, if this do not prevail, the faulty person shall one day
smart for it: perhaps when Repentance for it will come too late.

Well, I have now acquainted you with my thoughts. I have showed to you, how
this Birth, though dead, yet speaks: Truth it is, Faith alone has ears to
hear these Lessons, these Instructions: Nature is deaf, and Reason dull in
these occasions: A brutish Ps. 92. 6.
man knows not; neither does a fool understand: Faith quickneth the
Understanding to apprehend: the Will to believe: the Affections to take
pleasure in these Meditations.

Which Faith, since it is the gift of God, let us now turn our selves to him
with hearty devotion, desiring him to bestow upon us the gift of Faith, and all
grace^, by which we may learn to make an holy use, as of all his Works in
general, so of this and the like in special: to the glory of his Name, and
the eternal comfort of our own souls, through Jesus Christ our Lord. To whom
with the Father and the blessed Spirit, Three excellent Persons, one glorious
God, be ascribed all Honor and Praise, now, and for evermore. Amen.

FINIS.

