The Frontispeece explained.
BEhold, the Watchman of the black-brow'd Night,
Who over-looks his charge, by candlelight.
The brats of Hell, by turns do take their places,
To justify their Sins, and plead their cases.
One would be chief, another comes to craveit:
But he that is nearest Hell, is like to have it.
This took most pains, that other gave a price;
The Vmpire pleases all with his device.
The Whore has caught a Gull, (her Scores to pay,)
That Huddles on, to sell himself away.
He leaves his Wife, and Children in distress,
Pimp-wiskin jeares 'em in their heaviness.
The Ruffian-Prodigall, that here you see,
Is come to pay a fine for misery.
He Is in the heat of lust: and he must have
Fuel from Hell to feed it, or a Grave.
But shame and want have cooled the lust, and pride
Of The out-worne Varlet on the other side.
His sinful sweet's congealed into a curse.
Look but a little lower, they are worse:
Where from their sins, into their pains they sall,
Suffering the tortures of the Hospital:
One has his Scull took up, to cleanse his brains
The next is lanced in her bloodlesse veins,
And some are boiling, while the rest do fry:
(All have a taste of Hell, before they die.)
The house that entertained the fowler crew,
Falls, peece-meale down, to render them their due,
Here Is one amazed, another has a maine,
There Is one half dead, lies by another slain.
Both houses punish those that scin'd unseene:
In fine, see how the Devil flies between^
A NIGHTS SEARCH: Discovering the Nature, and condition of NIGHT -- WALKERS
with their associats. digested into a Poem by Hum: Mill.

nocte Latent Mendoe

London: Printed by R: Bishop. for L: B: 1640



A NIGHTS SEARCH. Discovering the Nature and Condition of all sorts of
NIGHT-WALKERS; with their Associates. As also, The Life and Death of many of
them. Together with Diverse fearful and strange Accidents, occasioned by such
ill livers.

Digested into a Poem By HUMPHRY MILL.

Nocte latent mendae; sic sic dixere Poetae;
Ast ego (nec mendax) nocte dieque patent.
LONDON, Printed by Richard Bishop for Laurence Blaicklock at the Sugar-loafe
next Temple-Barre, 1640.

To the Right honorable, ROBERT Earl of Effex, Viscount Hereford, and
Bouchier, Lord Ferrers of Chartley, Bouchier, and Lovaine.
RIGHT HONORABLE,
I Could hardly compose my thoughts, touching the presentation of these my
unworthy endevors, to one so worthy, and truly noble as your Lordship, having
no excuse but your goodness, and the encouragement of those who are truly
honorers of your virtues: Among which number I desire to be known. I have
nothing to plead for my Muse, but that the Subject with the Title, do agree:
And that the fruit she bears, is wholesome, though sour. That which falls with
shaking, is not worth taking up. I know I shall undergo the censure of some,
that can Judge of nothing but what they see; having narrow spirits, only room
for sense at the worst. In respect of such, my Muse was safer walking by Night;
than now by Day. But if it shall please your Lordship to support her with your
hand, and look upon that little good which may appear through a multiplying
glass, and extenuate the weakness, Envy her self will keep at a distance;
and she shall pass with freedom, gayning commendations from your Honors
Approbation. She Is so far adorned with modesty amongst her Opposites, that
she will not bespeak a glance from your eye, but when you be retired from more
weighty occasions. If I should write but what high-borne Fame speaks of your
worth, and call your noble Virtues by their names, I should make the entrance
so pleasing-large, that the Reader would there take up his rest. But it shall
be satisfaction to me, that she is graced with your name: which will preserve
her from living graves. And with my prayers to the God of Truth, for your
Lordships eternal happiness,

I shall rest your most engaged and humble servant, HUMPHRY MILL.

To the Reader.
COURTEOUS READER:
(I Name thee as I would find thee) having had thoughts which often pressed me
to the undertaking of this neglected subject, (not as sinful, but neglected in
the discovery) I could not choose but give entertainment (at last) to so
reasonable a motion: yet not intending to make a work of it, but only to give a
few hints for warning, and Characters to know those devouring locusts, who
strive to spoil all the green plants of the land.

But as I pursued some of them in the chase, I started more of the brood; and
the further I went, the more I found, till at last, I saw necessity of adding
resolution and courage to my purpose; and to search them out for punishment,
which some have done for pleasure. I found many fearful exploits amongst them,
which being but abridged, made these papers swell into such a thickness. Those
that are resolved to follow their lusts, regarding nothing, or spoke or writ,
let them not pass the front of this Book, lest they be tormented before their
time: and suck poison till they burst. I know some like snarling Curres will
bite the Chain, though they break their teeth; and baule at what they
understand not; quarrel with their own shadows, or bark at the man in the
Moon. The painted doxies, and the musk-powd'red Curtizans will be as angry with
me, as Pallas was with the Mice, for haunting her lamp, and gnawing her caul:
and others will cast out smoke and lightning, as Saturnus did among the Armies
of the Frogs and Mice: but I would wish them (as a friend) to say little, what
e're they think, lest they bespeake a smarter whip for themselves. Those that
can digest the sour, need not fear sursetting with the sweet. Let every
reader take what belongs to himself, and pass a gentle Censure on the rest.
The sharpness of it is qualified, where advice takes place, and there are none
that read but may gain, or delight, or profit, more or less, if they stand
not in their own light. I have used their own language in some places to set
out their folly. Though every Phrase or Sentence be not composed of real truth,
yet there is a probability or morality of truth in all. I need not show how a
Metaphorical, Analogicall, or an Allegorical speech retains truth; or how
the figures lead to the substance; or of the liberty of speech that Poetry
affords: In this I had rather learn than teach. I have not used knotty words,
nor rocky expressions in the prosecution of it; but in as suitable terms, as my
slender wit, with so little art, can conceive. Perhaps, the best may find more
than they expect; and the worst more than they desire. My Muse has kept her
self from infection, notwithstanding the many temptations, occasions,
provocations that she has met withal in her search. I suppose. Envy it self
will not question the lawfulness of the subject; seeing the Prophets in diverse
places describe Harlots in their kind; and Solomon that wise King, in their
looks, gestures, speeches, fawning, alluring, etc. before he had any
practical experience of them. But if any ask why must I undertake such a
work? I answer; why should not any man use the gifts that he has received to
profit himself or others? especially if delight put him upon it? or if his
occasions impose not a necessiy of other employments upon him? I was never so
bound to any but I could purchase some time to raise my Genius above these
earthly contents below. For the verses, I have kept to one number and measure,
only the Epitaphs are woven stanza's: In a continued subject, it is not proper
to vary the verse.

I have labored to make the lines so smooth as I could, in placing the
breathing accents where they may fall with most advantage, (except those which
run clean without them) nor have I broke the first, or last foot of the verse,
which might make it run harsh, nor straind the coupling accents above what is
required in the harmony: nor fallen too low in the descent, which might give
the verse an unnatural sound, where the concords should chiefly meet.

If you find any verse a syllable too short in the number, then compare the
measure with it; for if there be a monosyllable that sounds long upon the
letter[r] it will answer to a Spondey, or a Trochey, consisting of two
syllables; especially in the breathing or the coupling accents. If any seem too
long, observe but the cadence, which may fall a syllable longer in the
coupling, yet answer with a true sound: or cls it may fall low, that a Dactyle
which consists of three syllables, bears but the sound of two: and many words
consisting of two, three, four, or five syllables, do naturally fall a
syllable shorter in the pronunciation; or being cut short by Apostrophes,
'twill resolve the doubt. I commit my Muse to your care; her colour's black and
white, you may trust her: she has been purged in the Search, and pressed for
revealing secrets; she will both give and take warning by it, and wishes the
Reader to do the like.

Vale.
Imprimatur: SAM: BAKER. 1640.

To his much respected brother, Master HUMPHRY MILI, upon his Poem called A
Nights Search.
WHen I perused thy smooth and lofty strains,
In this thy Search, the invention of thy brains,
Thy curious language with thy pleasing style,
How thou do praise the honest, lash the vile:
And how thy verses meet, how neatly pointed,
How cleanly limbed, and how exactly joynted;
I could not but commend them; all may see
That Nature has been prodigal to thee.
The best of wit is thine, it is still thy bent
To shame the shameless, clear the innocent.
Thou do in all, so lively act thy part;
Mine eyes did brive mine ears to steal my heart.
Thou have not borrowed what was at a stand,
Nor took up fancies at the second hand;
Nor vamp't an old conceit; nor did thou sit
To stuff in empty words, in stead of wit.
Thy wealthy winged raptures breathe delight
To modest minds; thy end is to affright
All from those odious sins: thou have displaid
The various ways how Young lings are betrayed,
Not like to those that sufet with their bays,
Whose names are far more lasting than their praise.
Those that will twist a wreath for thee,
Must crop the branches of the Cypress tree.
The ancient Poets live in thee again,
To add a lasting glory to thy pen.
Grace beautifies thy parts; but why did hide
Thy worth so long? 'cause thou would not be tried,
By this decrepit age? rich is thy rhyme;
Thy wisdom speaks thee old, before thy time.
'Though those despise thee (that exceptions take)
Whose tongues are dipped in the infernal lake:
The best will honor thec; and thou shall find
Their breath perfumed; thou art not turned with wind,
I thought to chide, but this is all I Will say
Thou camst behind, to steal the wit away.
But I forgive thee: for I doc discern,
Conceited Wits may come to thee and learn.
Though of our name time should the ruin be,
'Twill be revived perpetually in thee.
I needs must love thce, Nature counts it fit:
But reason moves me, to admire thy wit.
Keep off, you vassalls that are wed to lust,
Or here is a Mill will grind you all to dust
THO: MILL Mr of Arts. Oxon.

To my adopted son Mr HUMPHRY MILL, touching his Nights Search.
IN all Night Search 'what can you find
But humor, vapor, smoke, and wind?
Of real goodness then the best.
Is for the most part laid to rest.
They only, whom black night applauds,
As strumpets, panders, thieves, and bawds,
Are open-ey'd; and then each meets
To couple paires in moechall sheets:
Who, least their guilt should come to view,
Have Sentinels that lie perdue,
To keep the viperous brood, such hatch
Both from the Constable, and Watch.
Now, least these should too much abuse
Th'uncautelous world; thy pregnant Muse
Has laid them to the light so plain,
That by the raptures of thy brain,
(If thou son Mill, pursue it still,
And dippe in Helicon thy quill;)
Not one of those thou do display,
Shall dare to show their face by day.
So let those Bats, and Owls that night
Love only, and detest the light,
Into Cimerian darkness run:
For sin did never love the Sun.
More shamed by thy discovery: know,
The Lapidary to make show
Of his best and most orient stone,
A dusky foil it sets upon,
To add to the lusire; so thy Muse
To make its splendour show, did choose
This Argument black and obscure,
To make thy fulgence long endure.
THO: HEYWOOD.

To his kind friend, Master HUMPHRY MILL, upon his special lines of Poetry,
called A Nights Search.
MY kind friend, give me leave to tell you news,
I never in my life was in a Stews:
Nor ever visited a house of sin,
Unless to cure the grinkhams they were in.
I never did by Women set such store,
To leave men's company to see a whore.
Panders and bawds to me have strangers been;
For such procurers, I have never seen
With knowing eyes: till in your book I found them,
Where you have apprehended them and bound them
To answer for their facts: so, truth to tell,
Your booke's no bawdy house, but a Bridewell.
Where they meet punishments upon their merit,
For which your pains do a just praise inherit.
And may all such as lead a life so ill,
Be daily chastised with the laboring Mill.
STEPH: BRADWELL.

To his loving friend, the Author of this Nights Search.
FRiend, how comes this about? what hum'rous fit
Moved thee to make a Constable of thy wit?
Not such as the grave Parish yearly choose
To lead a drowzie Watch, and take abuse
From every drunken gallant: dare not fight,
But when he is guarded on the election night,
Made valiant by the feast; and pays for's cheer
With the shared profits of the following year.
That only makes discovery in the dark,
TO enrich the Justice, and maintain his olarke.
But thou art one (being busy in thy part)
Who ord'rest all with Judgment and with Art.
In one Nights Search thou have discovered more,
Than all the Searchers that have been before.
And which is more, as I believe, do show
Such vice which thy life's practice never did know.
Thy Muse being chaste, and every flowing line
Carr'ing a sense, or moral, or divine,
If understood; though many a clouded mind
Will not the clearness of the intention find.
This subject handled by a Blade oth' times,
That knows to court his less in bawdy rimes,
Would have been renderd odious; he would have shown:
The wicked ills experience made his own.
But thy clean working, on a matter foul,
Has made those ills instruction to the soul.
Examples doe'the wicked chiefly fright,
And nothing's known but by its opposite.
The bad, like Spiders, gather in those fields
Their poison, which to good bees honey yields.
THO: NABBS.

To his kind friend Master HUMPHRY MILL.
UPon thy Search by night, a Search by day
Is made by some; who from thy title say,
What Search should this be? what strange things are done,
That from the glimering candle to the Sun
Are now to be produced? sure, some punke,
Some bawd half-stew'd, some snuffling pander drunk,
Some satin pimp; some plush docoy: me thinks
I see the chain made up of all these links,
With ningle, broker, breaker: and to catch
All these, one man's both Constable and Watch.
And what is all this? must we commend the wit
That spends dear time, and its own strength to sit
Over such a brood as this? the subject's base,
We rather fear, than hope: but pause a space;
And here conceive, the Artists curious hand
May, in'ts impression, at his pleasure stand
In pure, or common matter: yet must shine
In what soever receives it: so thy line
In those course trifles. Briefly, we commend
Not from fair shows, and seeming, but the end
Which wise men still begin withal; begin
With the Authors end, which is the cure of sin,
By ugly sins presentment: and we then
Shall nothing doubt, but you will commend his pen.
Cherish in's Search his laboring Muse, and still
Wish all fair winds breathe o'rethis noble Mill.
THO: BREWER.

Upon the Book, and Author of the Nights Search.
MAny do search and yet for want of light
Are able to discover nothing right:
If thou had wanted light, or sight, even then
Thy Search had been like that of other men.
But being guided by a shining light,
And making use of that thy piercing sight,
Thou have in this one Night, discovered more
Than all thy days, thou ever did before,
Here thou have found out whores, thieves, bawds and panders,
Together with their vassals, and commanders;
And in their lively colors, have discrid,
And painted forth their luxury and pride.
Their cursed traffic for the infernal pit,
And their great labor, more and more to get
Into the mouth of hell; till all at the last
They and their consorts thereinto are cast.
Good ears will listen to thy learned verse
With approbation; and good tongues rehearse
Thy just deserved praise; as for the rest,
That have infected ears, and tongues to jest
At what they understand not; let them still
Be slighted by thee, most Heroic Mill.
THO: GOODEARE Curiae Wardorum.

On the variety of pleasing fancies in the Poem, the Night Search, written by
his friend Mr. HUMPHRY MILL.
YOu that have skill and poetry great store,
That when a line's well drawn how slubberdo're,
Are Patentees of censure, whose high strains,
Do rack the dull perusers lumpish brains
To keep pace with your raptures; deigne awhile,
To listen to the smooth and modest style
Of this industrious Muse, whose merits may
(With your joynt-vote) adorn his brows with bay.
You looser livers who applaud a line
Out-does the ribauld draughts of Aretine;
In whose debauched opinions naught will please
But what is writ in height of wine, and ease,
Whose spleenes are tickeld only at the height,
With some too lust full passage; but will slight
What Is modest and severe; whose searching eye
Graciously smiles on vainer ribauldry:
And by your approbation, praise those lines,
Which both disgrace and eke infect the times.
Draw near and read, perchance you may descry
What may reclaim you from your luxury.
Observe the tricks of the licencious crew,
And with what wiles they plot to ruin you.
Here, see the various cheats at full displaid,
How oft-times by their plots youth is betrayed;
Suppose your selves into like dangers drawn;
Take heed, take heed, your credit lies at pawn.
Read and be wise, for 'twas the Authors care,
That you by these examples should beware.
His Muse meant not to please them, that take pride
To hear a handsome doxy deified;
When all that she is praised for, shall be
The neat contrivance of her letcherie.
How she escapes the watch all hours of night;
The Constable supposing her some sprite,
Dares not affront her; how her chambers be
From the rude violence at Shrove-tide free.
But what the Author touching her shall say,
You Will viewing find it in a differing way.
And if your judgments do conceive him right,
He aims as well to profit as delight.
Peruse him favorably, and you shall see
Much matter handled by his industry;
And when from him you have learned to shun gross crimes,
Be pleased to thank, and praise him for his rimes.
Friend Mill, I could dwell on thy praise; but 'twill
Be a fit subject for some abler quill.
I could commend the smoothness of thy strains,
But it is a work befitteth abler brains
To do it fully: let me therefore be
Only a lover of thy worth and thee.
As it is expected then the learned and wise,
Should this your worth, as I your friendship prize.
Deign your acceptance of these lines, that thence
Your Readers may be taught a lesson hence,
From your example, kindly to accept,
What is devoted to their due respect.
For should you but dislike a line that is here,
It would encourage them to spend a jeere
Upon the lightest criticisme; and take
You for their pattern, who an error make
Of this my forward service; but I fear
These words will prove another trespass here:
And while I labor to abate your ire,
Stirring the embers, I increase the fire.
This, and I Have done; you need not fear its worth,
Only your name will serve to set it forth.
And if the ruder here affrighted gaze
At your unlookt-for raptures, stand amazed:
Let Them awhile but listen, and they will grow
(Being ravished with those numbers from you flow)
In love with wit and fancy: and esteem
You worthy of a laurel Anademe:
Which fame shall crown thy temples with in spite
Of all gaine-sayers of thy Muses right.
Whose worth while other praise, let me admire;
Since, I but add a voice unto their quire.
C. G. ex Oxon.

To the Ingenious Author, Master HUMPHRY MILL, on his book called A Nights
Search.
YOur Mill grindes well; and each pure line
Without a Search may swear it thine.
An obscure subject you display,
In neat expressions clear as day.
Rare Art that can both satisfy
The learned, and the vulgary!
This censure gives a friendly pen,
Thou art the flower of witty men.
Then take this baptism from my quill,
A Mill a Poet, Poet Mill.
Sic approbavit, DAN: FOX. Grayes-Inne.

To his worthy friend the Author of the Nights Search.
IF Decker dockt with discipline and wit,
Gained praises by the Bell-man that he writ;
Or laud on Brath wait waiting did abound;
When a Strappado for the devil he found.
Then may this Mill of Mills, by right of merit,
Equal (if not superior) fame inherit.
Being no Art-invented paper Mill,
That water driving not, lies ever still:
But such a Mill as (in my best account)
Deserves a Mansion on Pernassus mount.
A Mill not agitated (as I find)
Nor set on work by water or by wind.
Nor a poor Edifice by Art compact,
But Nature in this Mill her part did act:
That by self-working of a pan, and pen,
The reputation of luxurious men,
And women, given to soule-killing lust,
Or other vice, grinds as it were to dust;
Making one little world in verse to tell,
What foliyes in this Universe do dwell.
Briefly, this Mill, or Microcosme appears,
In rich endowments old, though young in years:
And though no paper-mill, his worthy name,
This second time pressed paper must proclaim.
His first deserved no carping, nor derision,
For 'twas a useful Melancholy Vision.
And here behold his Nights Search, that may catch
The Constable, perhaps, with all his Watch.
And men in higher office, that are bent
Themselves (and not their Maker) to content;
Whereby the light of reason we may spy,
With Venus, Bacchus, Hermes, many lie.
But were I single (Mill) 'twere best for me,
Next to Divines, still to converse with thee:
In whose vice-hating breast, and active brain,
The Censor Cato seems to live again.
JOAN. PATRIDOPHILUS.

To his judicious friend, Master HUMPHRY MILL, on his Evening Poems.
I Need not win the lookers on to buy
This piece (worth reading over:) every eye
That views thy name to it and has heard thy praise.
Without entreaty will respect the Bays
With favorable perusal: then shall I
Prevent the Readers willing industry;
And as it were, ambitious to be read,
Before thy rare composures, dare to spread
My courser fare at the upper end; but it is
Only to whet their appetites to this:
Which to the second course thou do prepare.
That every palate may commend thy fare.
Taste what you like, and if ought here displease ye,
It Is not because it is bad, but you are queasie.
ROB. NEWTON.

To his friend, HUMPHRY MILL, upon his ensuing Poems.
FRiend, I admire thee, for by heaven I swear,
I have not heard nor seen this many a year,
A subject fitter for my wonder, or
Rather my joy, since flattery I abhor:
For, looking in thy face, I read in thee,
The perfect lines of ingenuitie.
Such is thy work, that thou to fame may wed it,
(By true relation) though I never read it.
Should I conceive thy much aspiring flame
To reach at me? no, I admire the same.
Thy book has more than some will wish indeed,
And that the title does too far exceed.
If any mock the title, say it is flat,
I Will tell him to his teeth, 't's no matter what.
If any say thy lines do cut, or harp
Upon a jest, and say thy wit is sharp;
Thus answer him again, that none but fools
Will be so mad to meddle with edged tools.
To. T. hospitii Lincoln.

To his very good friend, Mr. HUMPHRY MILL, on his Poem called the NIGHTS
SEARCH.
ME thinks, I hear the Punks and Panders say,
There is a Nights Search coming, let us away:
It Is time, I see, there is not a fault has slipped
Away by thee, but has been soundly whipped;
Some burnt in the hand, in the shoulders, elsewhere some;
There Is not a drunkard, filthy queen, or scum,
That Is left unpunisht; nay, it may be said,
Thou have a wit that makes the world afraid.
Men dare not kiss a wench, nor she the men,
For fear of thy two-edged Satyrick pen.
Go on (brave sir) to punish thus the crimes
Of these abusive and adulterous times,
That the age to come may say there was a Mill,
That scowr'd the world from such abortive ill.
Put down your clubs, ye Constables that catch
The leather-winged bats; and you the Watch,
Go stumble home, what needs a rusty bill,
A Welch-hooke, or a halbert? here is a Mill,
That apprehends more Panders, Punks and knaves,
Than all the Beadles with their painted staves:
For this his Nights Search is a piece of work,
That may, for ought we know, convert the Turk:
It Is pity then it should empaled lie,
Within the narrow verge of Britanie:
No, it shall ride in state on Neptunes back,
To the Court of Amurath and Prester Jack.
Who knows what virtue's in it? perhaps his lines
May make them turn away their Concubines.
Grind on brave Mill, thou art for all their frauds:
The great Shrove-tuesdy to the whores and bawds.
ROBERT CHAMBERLAIN.

To the well-deserving, Master HUMPHRY MILL, upon his Poems called A Nights
Search.
Mere flashy Poems best acceptance find,
With men to Novels of the times inclined:
Expressions of a Muse enricht with grace,
(That strikes at sins foul and prodigious race)
Hardly from those deserved praise shall gain,
Who but a thought of good to entertain,
Doloath as death. Be not discouraged then,
If censured by the worthless sort of men.
None that are wise and good, but I dare say,
To read a Poem does so well display
(As yours) the blacknes of these monstrous crimes;
(So freely, boldly practiced in these times:)
And with such art does remedies apply,
To cure the souls each killing malady,
Will much delight and celebrate your praise,
With what is your merits due, the learned Bays.
BAR. PIGOT.

To his friend, Mr. HUMPHRY MILL, upon his rich conceits in his Poems called A
NIGHTS SEARCH.
THe Laws and Statutes which are now in force,
Confirmed by justice, order such a course,
That watchmen guard the night, and while men sleep,
Their goods and persons they in safty keep.
And do (or should) discover noctuall scouts,
As Panders, Pimps, and Bawds, their hellish routs,
And bring them to correction; where the Law
May take effect, and keep them still in awe.
But what is all that to this Nights Search of thine?
Thou have discovered in thy Epick line,
Whole troops of helt-hounds; and thou have displayed
Them to the life; that hell is now afraid
Of thee, thy Genius, and thy searching quill,
Which have revealed another world of ill.
Me thought, I saw thee in thy curious Search,
Much like an Eagle mounted on a perch
To over-looke the world: and having spy'de
A knot of Night-fowles, then thou did divide
Thy nimble feathers; there thou would not stay;
But down thou flew'st, and took'st them for a prey.
Thou did both whip, and teach thy Night-borne prize:
Thou wast too lofty once to stoop for flies.
Yet tenderhearted; thou could not endure
Those that were sore, should go without a cure.
To those that mend not, but will sin again,
The Bridewell lash is easier than thy pen.
Thy book is useful for the Commonwealth,
I love its worth, and thee, and wish thee health.
Mount still with winged raptures; for I know
Thy mind's too spritely (long) to dwell below.
THO: COLLETT.

Upon the deserving Author, Master HUMPHRY MILL, and his Nights Search.
OVt of a drowsy slumber at midnight,
My Muse awakes me, and commands me write
Upon this Nights Search: I was loath to rise;
But rubbed awhile my temples, and mine eyes;
Struck fire, got light, pen, ink, and paper by;
What must I write now? what! yes what? and why?
Must I crowd in among those learned ranks,
That do already overflow the banks
Of this our Mill, with streams from Helicon?
Are there not floods before it many a one,
Of strength enough to drive the wheel about,
But such a weak supply must be drawn out
As I can dribble through a slender quill?
Well, come away; more sacks unto the Mill.
I will make one, but by your leave my Muse,
Stand you aloof: I other aid must use
To praise this work, and workman: to be done
As it should be, by no Muse but his own:
And her I now invoke. Fair modest maid,
Be not in any blush or thought afraid,
That I Will attempt thy Chastity; or wrong
Thee, or thy Poet, though thou' assist my song
In chanting forth his praise; I will not quite
Ravish thee from him: one short hours delight
Intitillations thou can give my brain,
Shall serve my turn; and then fly home again.
Pray be not coy, but, come unto his friend,
Many a man himself so long would lend.
I know he will not be angry: now she comes,
And yields conceit for ten Encomiums,
Were here but space to place them! O she flows,
As if she would turn the whole world out of prose,
Into delightful measures; and the times
Out of rude senses into rationallrimes.
Which of the ancient Poets (with reverence still
Be It spoke) on vices has out-wrote our Mill?
Or of the Modern busy ones who sweeter
Can grind so many mischiefs into meeter?
Write, write apace, all you that boast to be
Traders in Poetry, Prentices, or free,
In praise of this rare Artist; that the earth
May be prepared to welcome this great birth.
This new book of abuses whipped, and stripped,
Which over the witherd old ones head have skipt.
And by its super excellency undone
That which was called the Bel-man too of London.
And here fall down, you Citie-Owles and Bats,
That should watch in the night, (but like dull Cats,
You sleep, or got a birding, while the Rats
Play in the streets before the Counter gates)
Fall down (I say) you Officers of night,
Worship the glory of the Lantern light
That s here held up to you by the hand of Mill,
That shows you the high way to all the ill
He has discoverd; and you should prevent.
Now if you be so ignorantly bent,
Or willfull-blinde, as, we will not see, you say;
You may want eyes to see another day;
Or be so hood-winkt, that you may not spy
When your own wives with other men do lie!
And (under favor) may the City know
What tole or recompense she now does owe
To this industrious Mill, this Watchman? nay
This glory of the night. The City may
Call him her Moonshine; not at least deny
He Is a Night-Dyall to set her Watches by.
Consider now, you that are grave and wise
In City government, and Beadles, Spies,
Informers, and Promooters keep in fee,
The endless unknown worth of Poetry.
Which of enormities discovers more
In one Nights Search than in ten years before;
Had all you Officers compounded for.
And as you love to punish vice, abhor
Ingratitude to virtue; let reward
Engage the Poet then to your regard.
Soshall his Muse your honor sing, and so
Your Mill more merrily the round shall go.
RICHARD BROOM.

To Master MILL, on his NIGHTS SEARCH.
WHere sucb a troop of Worthies do approve,
'Twould seem injustice to conceal the love
I bear thy merits: which should honored be,
By all that do love ingenuitie.
Let me then on these champions of thy fame
Attend; and glory that I have a name
IN the list of thy admirers, and may be
Thought on hereafter for my praising thee.
I am not skilled in complement, nor use
At every trivial cause to rouse my Muse;
Yet truly, I would willingly bestow
That praise upon thee which I justly owe
To thy deserts; but then I must repeat
What others have delivered, and entreat
The loan of some choice fancy, or the wit,
The matter or conceits best suiting it,
From this or that great Artist, lest I run
A new into anobligation.
But I forbear with borrowed coin to pay
The debt I owe, and crave a longer day;
Acknowledging how much our lewder times
Are daily altered by thy well-fill'd rimes.
JO. WILSON, Interioris Templi.

To the Author, M. HUMPHRY MILL, on his worthy work, called A NIGHTS SEARCH.
WHat a good conscience has inspired thy pen,
To throw it is gall upon the faults of men!
And those soule-tempting errors that entice
Loose women to be instruments of vice!
'Twas sure no Constable that is proud to wear
The title of a Parish Officer,
To help his stock, and credit by conniving,
For by severity, there is little thriving.
Nor did a Suburbs Justice teach thee how
To look on sin with a contracted brow;
That brings him profit, and maintains his man,
That writes worse latin than Justinian.
No, no, 'twas zeal in thee, that have refined
Loose Poetry (to lightness more inclined)
And taught it to instruct, not tempt the soul
With wanton raptures, unto acts are foul:
They are by thee so lively made to appear,
Desire dares not attempt them without fear.
What Patron shall reward thee? few there are,
Will to thy full desert a bounty spare.
Those chiefly which delight to spend their means
Upon thy punished bawds and sore-lasht queans.
I wish I could dispose it, thou should be
Master of Bridewell, I so honor thee,
Thou would reform more queans with thy learned quill,
Than beating hemp, or turning of the mill.
THO. N.

Ad amicum fuum candidum, M. HUMPHREDUM MILL, dePoemate faceto, cui Titulus A
NIGHTS SEARCH.
SOme loose-lin'd Rimers by lascivious Lays,
Infect the Air; thou justly bear the Bays,
Thy quill commands a blessed Memory,
Coevall with Long-breathed Eternity:
While thou by Practice and a Poets pen,
Do lash the Brainsick carriages of men;
And so discreetly on a various Matter,
Thy flowing Thoughts most variously do scatter.
Thy Nobler Muse, exites a low-bred strain,
A starved conceit, or fancy from a Swain:
Each verse a rapture is, and every word
A speaking sentence; measures all accord
By due proportion; in this verse of thine
There Is no harsh accent, nor a maimed line.
The sweetened music of thy Newborn lines,
Exceeds old Orpheus pipe, thou charm'st the Times.
While Mirth and Wit, with Modesty make head
To level Vice, and strike profaneness dead,
In this thy Search. That Surg'on wins my heart,
Who if he lance does Anodyze the smart.
What though some Beefe-braines cannot trace thy pen,
But judge thee guilty, as the worst of men!
'Cause their low-fathomes, wedded to their Sense,
Can only judge of things in the Present Tense!
Each Peasant cannot Cube, nor well discry
A Poets Sphere, because his Searching eye
Sublimes it self; we know that spotless name
Is winged abroad to withered Envies shame.
But let it sweli, this truth I Will safely say,
Thy Marshalled Muse has won the field to day;
That when thou pay'st the grave thy debt, To Die,
Will mount thy purchased glory to the sky.
Brave Gallants that swear fealty to sin,
Yield Homage to a lust, or cursed Fien!
This book arrests you; bid your lusts adieu,
Shake hands with Vice, your Mistress, and that Crew;
Or read your Doom with silence, lest you feel
The circling lashes of his Scourge of steel.
Sic approbavit ELIAH PALMER, Londinensis.

To his good friend the Author of the Nights Search.
Feign would I press to drop some lines among
The wits that write thy praise; but being young,
And wanting wit, I fear 'twill be my doom,
My Muse came shuffling in to fill a room.
But my intent is good, that helps the rest;
Thy worth is more than can be here expressed.
Thou have revealed those things, that such as I
May warning take: how do the harlots fry,
And burn alive! thou have displai'da whore
In all her postures; never man did more.
The bawd, the thief, the prodig all, the pimp,
The rascal pander, every hellish Imp
Shall feel thy lash: those that are rotten-ripe,
Drop down before thee; where thou giv'st a stripe,
It Is only 'mendment that can give them ease,
(Join d with thy cures) for their foul disease.
If I should undertake to set thee forth,
I should come short in blazing of thy worth.
But in this work, O! how do thou excel!
I love no flattery, the world can tell.
Thy verse is full of fancy, and thy brain
Drops rich conceits, good language, that thy strain
May please the best of wits; O let it be
Made known to ages what they owe to thee!
PHILIP. CHAMPER NOWNE Medii Templi.

To his respected friend, Master MILL, on his ensuing Poems.
WHen I took pen in hand to write of thee,
An ague took my joints, no part was free:
I would thee and thy Work with praise commend,
But that I knew not when to make an end.
I thought again some palled conceit would fall
Into my quill; then not to write at all
I thought it best; but by and by again,
Me thought I had a fancy in my brain.
With that my barren Muse began to spring,
She somewhat needs would speak, and this's the thing.
How richly is thy Muse adorned, that she
Can sound out things that thou did never see!
She has revealed the plots of hell. By kind
Thou art a Milk indeed, for thoudost grind
Their flesh to naught, and then condemn'st their bones
To be suppressed by hard relentlesse stones.
So full of fancy, decked with rich conceit,
Is all thy Work, by measure, and by weight:
I think that by it daily many a one
Will be reclaimed when thou art dead and gone.
He that does read thy book, will hate the evil,
And speak thy praise, unless it be a devil.
So much is found by thee, that all may say,
Ne re so much known till now (thy night is day.)
Thou do, unfeed, without demurre or pause,
Overthrow the guilty; but thou plead'st the cause
With art and wit, of innocents distressed,
Propounding them away t'attaine to rest;
Preventing all that may be thought or said
Against thee or thy Muse, that hopeful maid,
By all the guard of hell: and thou do bring
Them double shame, in turning back the ^^ing.
How could I stay to tell thy praises over!
My candle's out, now I can write no more.
THO. GITTYNS, Interioris Templi.

A Proeme to the Search, with the occasion of it.
Muse, call thy Genius up, and let thy quill
Prove thee a sharer in the forked hill:
Trace flowery Peneus, taste the silver spring
Of Helicon; scrue up thy treble string:
Begin with co^cords, discords come apace,
And then thou may more freely strike the base.
Let judgment guard thee, reasons counsel ask;
Thou have no common, but a painful task
To undertake; not wanton idle bays:
Love-subjects are too thredbare now adays.
Nor lustful Epigrams, nor jesting rhyme,
Which might corrupt men, rob them of their time:
Nor senseless tales (such trash has venom in it,
No reason; but that sools would be in print)
No, nor the brave exploits of worthy men:
But worthless imps are destined for thy pen.
The bawdy rabble, which have bin protected
By some too often (and punishment neglected)
Must be displaid by thee: their menstr'ous blaince
Launc'd to the quick; their never dying stains
Laid to the view of men; their private ends,
And how they are robbed of reason, wit, wealth, friends;
How vile they make the times, what things did fall
Into the hands of fate, what hellish thrall
Attends upon them; how their shameless breath
At last is sucked into the whirlepoole death.
To those that will return, and will endure
Thy cor'sive, and thy lance, apply thy cure:
Go boldly forth, the Constables will guard thee,
And if thou do good service, they will reward thee.
The watchmen, with the be adles, will attend thee;
Ask light, or weapons of them, they will lend thee;
The Justices will grace thee in thy cause,
And give thee warrants from the strongest laws.
Prepare thy self against tomorrow night,
And be industrious; know, that candlelight
May show thee more than day: for why? the Sun
Does make those night-fowles into corners run.
If any plead for hell, nere favor such;
They have bin favout'd in the world too much.
Search other countries too; for there are weeds
Which harbor serpents, and as hateful deeds
As Britain ever did: lose not thy way,
Thou may be here again by break of day.
Mus. My charge is hard, time short for tedious things!
Thou art a spirit, can not use thy wings?
I never was a subject to this sin;
But now thy search being ready to begin,
I Will help thee in it: and as a stander by
May better judge (casting a serious eye)
Than he that is an actor; so the fame
Of sinful crimes helps me to blaze the shame.
Those that are pincht (perhaps) will fling and kick,
(The gaull'd backed jade will snuff) and seek to pick
A quarrel with thee, and with envy swell;
Though here they are, their venom came from hell:
But answer them at last; none will oppose
Thee in thy Search, unless't be some of those
Which thou have guilty found: and then they will
Show to the world that they are far more ill
Than thou have showed (although they have bin vain)
To peach themselves they will be but fools in grain.
I name'em not; what is at random shown,
In frenzy fits they will make it all their own:
Were they not guilty, they would be possessed
With gentleness, their minds would be at rest.
How ere they rage, yet enter thou their roof,
Though they resist, they are not vengeance proof.
Prevent the bawd, or she will have her desire,
Ere th'watchmen come, she will draw away the fire,
And let her harlots down; such fobs are made
As master-peeces, which do help their trade.
Find out their holes, take but the hearth away,
There shall thou find a hell; the furies play
There in the dark: being apprehended so,
Let no man take a bribe to let them go.
I make no doubt but honest minds will take
The sense at best, and good construction make
Of what is spoke, and meant; and what is weak
They Will silent pass, of what is of worth they will speak.
Hearing the cries of husbands for their wives
Being grown too light (who loved them as their lives.)
Complaints of women, with their grieved moanes,
Their bitter mourning, with their sighs and groans
For their lost husbands; who have bin undone
With following whores: and how poor children run
About for succor, how their brinish tears
Have spoke the parents shame: how free from fears
Vile strumpets walk abroad, how men like flaves
Are chained, and brought untimely to their graves:
How men have lost by trusting such an else,
(I have bin gulled by some of them my self.)
They Will drive men off with words from day to day,
Till they pimp, beg, or die, or run away.
And finding many thus were over-throwne,
I did resolve to make their courses known.
Walking alone over the pleasant fields
Which were enricht with treasure, all which yields
Much matter for delight, 'twas clearly seen
That all the earth was newly clad in green:
It did rejoice that it had cast away.
Its winter suite, which was a suite of gray.
The ayrie Choristers did sweetly sing
Their well-tuned sonnets to the cheerful spring.
Don Phoebus smiled so lovely on the earth,
That it bears twins, or has a second birth.
To make all yet more rich, the gentle showers
With hony-drops resweets the various flowers,
Which now are risen from their frozen beds
To welcome in the Spring: they show their heads
To cheer men's hearts; the milder gales of wind
Alaies the heat, refreshing every mind,
It hardly chides the dust, being calm and fair,
It breathes sweet gusts which do perfume the air.
The beast that was imprisoned and did eat
His bare allowance, now he carves his meat.
The azure-colour heavens joyed to see
Such concord on the earth: the harmony
Possessed me with content; how did this day
Resemble heaven! but, it passed away.
The Charetter of heaven whipped his steeds
That ran too fast before; he never heeds
Our loss, nor care, nor did his fury rest
'Till he had drove them headlong to the west.
The day being slunk away, the season too
Will part ere long (thought I) none can it woo
To tarry here: to qualify our fear,
It promised us a visit every year.
Black Morpheus did begin to chase the light,
I could not call it day, nor was it night:
But being refresht, the notions of my brain
Somewhat revived, homeward I came again.
I heard a cry, and as I passed along
With listening found it was a woman's tongue:
A man replying (made the noise much more)
With railing words, Out of my sight you whore,
I Will travel far enough; What, cannot I
Accompany my friends, but presently
Thou must control me? go thou dirty hag.
I Will bang thy sides, and make thee work, or beg.
The woman's answer modest was, and mild;
Alas, you know that I am big with child;
I Have little ones beside, I am afraid
If you mend not, they will be through want destroid:
You care not for us, nor provide us meat,
We often sit and have no bread to eat:
You spend what ere you get upon a whore,
And now you will be gone to vex me more:
What case am I now in? oh! if you leave me,
I wish the grave more kind, and to receive me.
Then coming to'em, she expressed her grief
To me at large (I gave her some relief)
But he with fury rayl'd, till at the last
A Constable did make him cry as fast;
Who coming, knew the case, where he did dwell;
And to the Justice near to new Bridewell
He had bin brought, but that I made request
For him; he promised to forsake the nest
Of bawdy strumpets, and to end the strife
He did confess his faults, and clear his wife.
Yet afterward this vassal was as bad
As bad might be; which made his wife run mad,
And so she still remains: this gave more strength
Unto my purpose; then my Muse at length
Possessed with fury, pressed with thoughts, grew bold
To bend herself strange stories to unfold.
Though she was angry, she was moved with pity
Toward every one, in Country, Court and City.
It is the sin she strikes at, it is her end
To show examples, others may amend.
These kind of devils (though they range about)
Where once they enter, seldom are cast out.
Her meaning is, in making sharp her pen,
To drive ill spirits out, and save the men.
She fears not envy, Ignoramus least;
One's cursed, but weak, and bayard's but a beast.
If thou do meet her, use her well (she is free)
Or else she may unlookt for meet with thee.
She smiles, yet grieves, to hear how some will roar,
Although they purchase hell to get a whore.
Thy night is come; go, quickly call the watch;
Forth ou have weighty business to dispatch:
Grace honest Poets; as thou walk'st thy round
The wanton Rimer will be quickly found:
Search out the rest, judge as thou find'st their crimes:
Then thou may be a register of times.
A Nights Search.
SECTION 1. The character of a modest, wise Poet, with some touches by the way
at his opposites; his happy end.
THe true borne Poet, that does bend his quill
To scan the world, and finding out the ill,
Provides a cure; and still it is his care
To lance the sore, that others may beware:
He Is temperate, wise, and modest, he will sit
In company to pollish ore the wit.
He Is harmless in his life; no person, place
Are hid from his conceits: he shows that face.
That Is most obscured: his Genius and his pen
May make you think his spirit lives in men.
He Is like a little world; for all things there
Obtain a being in their proper sphere.
All men do meet in him; his searching Art
Sucks in the sweet, and cream of every part,
Gull, knave, or fool, before he will let him pass,
He Will learn the true character of an ass.
He sets out sin (most lively) black as hell,
To fright men from the bait; he can as well
Display't in parts, or gross, or both, or either,
(Though sin and he were never bred together)
As well as any curious painter can
The fashion of a landscape or a man.
The guilty man may read his sin, his shame,
And call it his, although there is not his name:
But virtue in her beauty he has known,
He makes all sure, and takes her for his own:
Then spreads her beauty, that the world may see
She Is lovely in herself; and all may be
Corivals in this match; for she will do
Favors to men, and yet be modest too.
He is a maker, not alone of verse,
But of the matter too; he does rehearse
Much substance in a word: he can compose
His lofty fancies, or in verse, or prose:
But if in verse, how smoothly does it glide
Into the heart? the memory beside
Retains it best: his raptures do translate
The minds of some into a happy state.
His numbers with his measures do agree;
The accents meet with such sweet harmony:
The emphasis is raised with such grace,
That all concurs to keep both time and place.
Good language in his lines he does express,
His couplings join with sense; he is no less
Than heir to Parnassus: he had such a draught
At Helicon, that he is rightly taught
To speak the native tone of all the nine;
But courts Urania, 'cause she is divine.
What ere his measures are, or short, or long,
Lyricks, or Saphicks; if he frames his song
Iambique like, or if Pentameters,
Or double meeters, or Hexameters;
Or if he pitch upon Heroic strains:
'Twill speak his praise, because his seasoned brains
Cast out no dross; he is modest in his line,
What ere his subject be, his worth will shine.
True profit and delight do meet together
In his conceits: although the fool finds neither.
His lines are stored with witty useful pleasure;
Though idiots slight, wise men will prize his treasure.
His company is sweet to those that know
How to make use on it: but he will seldom throw
His breath away upon a scornful ass,
A brute he came, and so he will let him pass.
He takes nor fables, nor conceited dreams,
Nor idle fictions to make up his theames;
Yet he will use them, only to allude
To good, or ill, to shame the multitude.
If melancholy, then he is wise, and grave,
Grief, sorrow, death, are subjects he will have
To work upon; he gives his words by weight;
With vain delights he is quite out of conceit.
If he be pleasant, all his writings tend
To take men with delight: he will commend
A little good, to make'em love the rest:
He Is sad'mongst bad men, merry with the best.
He Will dash an evil out of favor, then
He Will let it blood, but comfort up the men.
He slights the world, nor will he ever be
A favorite to prodigality.
He Is free to all, regarding not his store,
And that is the reason he is often poor.
He hates lascivious rimes, he will not applaud
A fair faced whore, nor yet the common bawd,
But whip'em still; for he will ever pry
In secret places where most dangers lie.
He Is noble-minded (not a sordid else)
He strives to know, and to enjoy himself:
Nor will he flatter great ones for a fee,
Whose worth lies in their wealth, for such as he
Are able to discern: nor will he sawne
Upon his patrons (laying truth to pawn
In every line) unless in him he find
An honest heart graced with a noble mind:
Not like a temporizer, who will hold
Pace with his vices, only for his gold,
Who seribles much, and shameful praise does gain;
T'had better bin undone; for time will stain
His name for ever: most men do detest
All verses for his sake; but yet the rest
Are never the worse; for such this time I borrow:
I have digress'd, I Will speak of him to morrow.
But this ingenious Poet does rehearse
Things as they are, or should be, and his verse
Not stuffed with clouded words, or conjuring strains,
Nor thunderclaps, which might distract the brains
Of honest readers: but in terms most fit
To Express his matter, and to teach them wit.
He does refine conceits, and raise them higher,
His musique's next unto the angels quire.
Nor does he spin it threadbare; he will begin
New fancies as he goes; the spring within
Runs always fresh: he does not trade abroad
With borrowed wit, nor tread the beaten road.
His Genius works when other men do sleep,
His aims are heavenly, and his judgments deep.
He Is humble still, you cannot make him know
His own desert; he is not a man for show.
He does not search for praise, (he loathes all such)
He thinks he is simple, though he knows so much.
But yet to show the vileness of that brood
That do prefer their humors, hate all good,
He Will baffle such men, and he scorns the nest
Of venom-coupledsots: silence is best
To answer such back-biters: he will slight
Detracting vassals that will vomit spite
At what they know not, and will look asquint
On things of worth; what ere has most worth in it
They slubber most with gall; in all that is evil
They Will go as far, and be as like the Devil,
As all their wit can make them: oh! but then
They Will fall with shame before the Poets pen.
Though they like Xerxes whip the sea, and send
A challenge to the hills; yet in the end
The sea's too strong, the mountains are too high
For fools to clamber: so like fools they die.
This honest Poet finds among the wise
His due respect: for they have learned to prize
Persons, and things of worth: and still his bent
Is how to shame the vile, and give content
To all the best. Come, take him as you find him;
He Will think of you, though you do never mind him,
Turn all his verse to prose, it bears the sense
And luster of a poem: and from thence
True worth does spring. The Poets first did teach
Humanity to men, made up the breach,
That rudeness made; all useful Arts were clothed
With Poets wit: why should it then be loathed?
The learned in the languages, rehearse
Much of the sacred text was writ in verse;
As some of Moses law, the Psalms, the Song
Of Solomon, the holy peoples wrong,
Under their foes, by Jeremy related;
The book of Job, and all the songs were stated
In measured Meeters; who would verse disdain,
When Poets have such patterns for their strain!
He that is Dramatick, and does purge the stage
From scurrill dross, and shows this simple age
Their molded trophies; and does always strive
To keep both persons names, and things alive,
His end is good; but idiots learn by this
How to contrive their ways: to do amiss
Some there conclude (of late I heard one say)
I must go meet a whore at such a play.
What pity it is such time, with wit, and cost
Should be bestowed, and prove but labor lost?
This was invented chiefly to be used
By Kings and Nobles, not to be abused
By hackney truls: but now I must return
To lay my honest Poet in his urne:
For having spent his time well, now h'as past
His life to death: the hungry grave at last
Is closed upon him; there he must abide
Until his just and happy cause be tried.
His Epitaph.
YOu sollid stones, incite the gentle dust
To guard this man of worth, that is buried here;
He is a jewel, left unto your trust,
'Till he in glory, gloriously appear.
Though saucie death has laid him in this grave,
His name's alive, and living praise shall have,
SECT. 2. Against lascivious Poets and poetry, and of the ill that is
occasioned by such means.
THou that art skilled in poetry, and wilt
Abuse thy wit, thy parts, to mix the guilt
And filth of lust together, answer here
To what I charge thee with; let shame and fear
Possess thy heart: this first does breed the odds,
Thou striv'st to make the names of heathen gods
Both famous and immortal: always trying
To paint them fresh, and show thy art in lying:
Is It fit a Christian with his muse, his pen,
Should strive to be an ape to heathen men?
Art thou so barren of invention made?
Is wit and fancy low, that thou must trade
Beyond Sea altogether? fictions vain
Must stuff thy verse, and still direct thy strain.
Their feigned gods are guilty (they confess)
Of lust, and rapes, and of all filthiness.
Those Poets with rich nature were endu'd,
Their witty fictions do so much delude
Thee with conceit, that thou have nothing new;
They framed false gods, and worshipped them as true.
Poor men! they roved at random in the dark,
Or natures light, but never had a spark
O'th light above: yet better use they made
Of that, than he who makes his muse turn jade.
I say not but those fictions may be used
To set forth Virtue (not to be abused
To trick up Folly) vices may be shown
In their own colors, and be better kowne,
If well applied: we may leave the dross,
And take the rest, then therein's gain, no loss.
But he that in lascivious strains does glory,
And trims the ruins of a bawdy story,
Does shame his Muse, he strives even to undo her;
She proves a bawd, his wit's a pander to her.
Such poisoned bayts tricked up in gaudy rimes,
Do cheat the simple, and infect the times.
To sinne's too much, more to continue in it,
It Is worse to die and leave his sins in print.
It Is strange! that men who having wit with Art,
Should be so mad to take the devils part!
Does God give men their learning, parts, and wit,
To raise them up, the devils size to fit?
Above the rest, on such he sets a price,
That can with skill paint over his device,
And scribble out a black and hellish roll;
It Is Satan's will: it traps the silly soul.
For any good, he is a stranger to it,
Or plead for truth, he has no heart to do it.
If things of worth do glance but from his pen,
It Is but by chance, he will wish 'em out again.
If he but find one, bred of heavens race,
He strives his cause, or person to disgrace:
And to discourage all that hold with them
Who tread the way toward new Jerusalem.
But if a blade comes, that is to vice inclined,
He Will hugg him, 'cause he only suits his mind,
And he that can to his base humors bend,
(Though nere so bad) he will choose him for his friend
In hindering good, preferring that that is evil,
Is poetry to recompense the Devil?
Will any man esteem that Poet best,
Who in his wanton wit exceeds the rest,
And smooths a path for whores, and does applaud
A shameless villain, and a rotten bawd?
His ulcer'd lines not savouring of the salt,
But raised from burning lust, or wine, or malt,
Do vex the wise; they only cheer all bad men,
Make work for Pimps, and sport for fools and mad men.
A Poets pen should ever strike at vice,
And raise true virtue to a noble price:
And honor truth, dash falsehood out of favor,
Shame foolish Imps, and praise a sweet behavior;
Or else the Devil may a Poet prove,
To honor lust, and give it terms of love.
Of him he borrowes what he does indite,
He would do more, but that he may not write.
It Is like great Pluto has bespoke his quill:
If this be honor, let him have it still.
He does bewitch the youth to bend his mind
To vain delights, (the sting, that comes behind;)
The young man by it is fondly drawn away;
The old man sees vice trimmed, then goes astray:
The modest Maid, whose blushing shows her grace,
She runs away; the whore, whose brazen face
Is varnisht over, she can abide and cry,
Here Is wit at will; it is pity he should die.
The baud she mouths it, sitting on a bench,
A witty Spark, he loves a pretty wench.
Her windows with such pamphlets furnished be,
(The Fiends they dopromote her bawderie)
The VVhiskin laughs until his heart be full;
For with this bait he lately caught a Gull:
Who spent his time to learn this shameless wooing
To sell himself (for fools must needs be doing)
He Is like to thrive, his trade comes on apace,
And all those imps that love the filthy race,
Like Sappho's birds, may chatter out thy praise,
And swear thy scull shall wear the wreath of bays:
The foul that is newly caught will set thee forth,
And sing a catch: oh! here is a man of worth!
Thy Art does teach him to fulfill his lust,
Stirs up the fire, then this vile heap of dust,
Much like an Ape, does on the strumpet grin;
But she so crafty ere he can her win,
Must pay her well: her smiles, and curled locks
Do draw him on; 'till he has got the pox:
Then like a woodcock taken in a snare,
His gold is gone, his empty pare grows bare,
And all his feathers moulted clean away;
And when the Surgeon comes to seek his pay,
This light-brain'd fool, is grown so light in purse,
Except his rot, it is his greatest curse.
He pays no debts, and keeps a hungry table,
He Would run away, but that he is not able.
His sin that promised him such sweet content,
Now stings his soul: the whore when all is spent,
Forsakes him; jearing at his cursed estate;
Her love was false, but perfect is her hate.
Then quickly he begins to stink alive,
While with his gold the queen does seem to thrive:
He Will curse the Poet, rail against his whore;
And being grown so miserably poor,
Disease and want have quenched his lust full flame,
He dies dispairing, leaves a rotten name.
The heavens know if ever he repented;
Amongst men below his death is not lamented;
Excepting those that lived upon his loss,
And's creditors that had so great a cross.
Poor wretched man! that has so short a time!
He Is like a worm that creeps in dust and slime!
Yet spends himself, sin sucking out his marrow;
The world (though wide) does seem for him too narrow;
His brains are nimble to contrive the ill
To please his humors, and his headstrong will.
Those Milldew'd pleasures that delight the sense,
He entertaines; but for his recompense,
Death joins with sin to throw him in his grave,
Dust bars him up, and keeps him like a slave.
His Epitaph.
HEre lics a man bewitched with a whore,
Who spent himself, his time, and his estate:
She slunk away, leaves him to pay the score:
Could any man be more unfortunate?
Now for his debt, Death has attacht his bones,
And keeps them under these bard-hearted stones.
SECT. 3. The wanton Poets Funeral.
THe bawdy Poet's grown as bad as he,
Takes leave of wit, and ingenuitie;
Though he would seem to prove a whore had calling,
She helps him not, although she sees him falling.
Excess of drink, with vileness has overthrown him,
Few friends he has, and some ashamed to own him.
That Morbus which he wished to other men,
Like Eccho's sounding, answers him again.
Great Sol does blush, denies to give him light;
And Luna scorns to come within his sight:
The earth does grumble now to bear him too;
Nor any creature will him service do:
They all disgrace him, he with sin is pressed;
(Shame matched with sorrow, tames both man and beast)
For Celleredge he made his belly large,
And filled it up; but others bore the charge.
And yet (forsooth) he must be counted wise,
Though blasted breath would raise him to the skies,
And his conceit may draw it as his lot,
Yet ere he dies, he turns a very sott:
His land-flood wit that swelled above the brink,
Stole empty air: his soul being like to sink,
His lustful fictions, with the Muses nine,
Affords no help: his sickness is divine.
The inward test, his spirits sad events,
Can find no ease in barren complements.
Like Iordan's streams to Mare Mortuum's lake,
He smoothly glides, a restless rest to take.
Him poverty, and shame does apprehend;
Guilt follows on, and dogs him towered his end;
And having vented all his paultry stuff,
Like Dravtons Moon-calfe, burned to the snuff,
Betwixt extremes, then in his grease he fryes,
'Sparkles a little, and then stinking dies.
From thence his Venus cannot him deliver,
Nor Cupid rescue with his bow, and quiver,
Nor Mars with his valor, no, nor lusty Jove,
(Great Jupiter, will helpless to him prove.)
Swift Mercury and Saturn have agreed,
With all the Gods, to fail him at his need:
Apollo's harp can give him no content;
Parnassus hill, and Helcon have spent
Their cooling drops: bold Bacchus finds no room
To lay a hogshead by him in his tomb.
Ceres can never ease him with the Crop;
The Vote of Chorus brings no healing drop.
But Charon waits to ferry him away,
Where Pluto looks to take him for his prey:
And Cerberus with his winding heads does stretch,
And longs to be the keeper of this wretch.
There Is melody me thinks amongst the throng;
If any mourn, it is 'cause he lived so long.
Sol shows his face with many a pleasant smile,
Since from his sight he is gone that was so vile.
The Moon shines freely, there was none did do her
Such wrong: for he was still an eyesore to her.
The earth is glad she is of her burden eased,
Her furniture is with his absence pleased:
Thus having laid him in the earth so deep,
We'll leave him with the crawling worms to sleep.
His Epitaph.
A Poet lies arrested here by death,
Who honored lust and made it run in rimes;
The world lost nothing but infected breath;
Nor gained he ever by his hateful crimes:
All that he left, or to adorn his hearse,
Or pay his debts, was only bawdy verse.
SECT. 4. The Pimps complaint, the Bawds reply; he changes his course, she
gets another; their life and death.
Pimp. ALas, alas! what mischiefe's here befell?
My friends are dead who loved me very well:
What shall I do! my mind is so at strife!
I Will hang my self, I Am weary of my life.
My place is little worth, my trading's poor,
I spend my vailes, and what I got before
Will soon be gone; this life long cannot hold,
Then poverty will catch me being old.
Provide your self, I Will take some other course:
It Is bad with me, and likely to be worse.

Bawd. Thou silly coxcombe! do thou vex and prate
Hold still thy clack, or else I Will break thy pate.
Have thou forgot when thou wast poor and base,
I took thee in, releiv'd thee in this case?
What wast thou prithee, but a beggars Imp,
When I preferred thee, making thee my Pimp?
Now thou have got good rags upon thy back,
And money in thy purse; thou saucie Jack,
Do dominere? in grumbling in this sort?
Thou slight'st my love, and bringst an ill report
Upon my house: what though those men be dead!
Have I no more that are as bravely bred?
Thou know I have an hundred at the least;
And every one a profitable guest.
All give thee money, feast thee with good cheer;
Thy place is worth fullfifty pounds a year.
But tell me, is it the loss of one or two,
Which makes thee fret, and keep so much ado?
Or else the promise of a larger pay?
Who is it that would inveagle thee away?
Art thou too well? do live too much at ease?
Stay, stay thou fool, and if thou do me please,
When ere I dye, my wealth and household stuff
Shall be thine own; that will be means enough,
If any wench has c^ost thy strong desire,
Let me but know, I Will make her quench thy fire.
But if thou do my favor now refuse,
Go like a sherk, till I shall hear this news
That thou art begging up and down the street;
'T would make me laugh if thee I could but meet.
Thou like a vagrant both to wind and weather,
Shall go as bare as ever thou came hither.
Well, be advised, ere thou do from me part,
I can have choice, but thou will feel the smart.

Pimp. What, are you angry? will you break my head?
I fear you not, I doubt you will creep to bed
Before your time; who then will have the worst?
Of all the world, the bawd is most accursed.
You say you raised me, when you found me poor:
You took me in to man a pockie whore.
To great preferment was I raised then,
A Pimp is still adjudg'd the scum of men.
You call that breeding which does breed men's shame;
And those brave fellows which do use the game
That Is damned to hell; the more they are, the worse;
They snatch the bait but never mind the curse.
Cast up you gains, the profit that comes in,
Hell sets a gloss on it; what is the end of sin?
I thought all well when sin was my delight;
But oh! the wound! how does it now affright
My horrid conscience! now, I hate this thing;
The honey-taste is past, now comes the sting.
It Is not the promise of your wealth that shall
Ensnare my soul in hellish cursed thrall:
Nor yet your threats; I do not fear your charms,
These lofty winds blow me no mortal harms.
Come fair, or foul, there is nothing shall dismay me,
I Will leave my sin, or else it will betray me.
My conscience shall my poverty control,
For th'sweet of sin, I will not sell my soul.
My choice is made, when you your choice do make,
Think on that burning bed, that furious lake
That boiles with brimstone: oh! forsake this way,
Or else the fiends will take you for their prey.
I'had rather beg my bread while here I dwell,
Than beg and howl, and be denied in hell.
Some I have knwne (being taken with a smile)
That served their lusts though time did wink awhile,
It called in death, then thus they make their moan,
The sour is come, but all the sweet is gone!
Seeing such objects bleeding, then thought I
Who would so live, so living would not dye?
As does the Be his progress fly about,
And lights on weeds, and yet sucks honey out:
So have I drawn good from this loath some evil,
And learnd a way how to deceive the devil.
I hate those vermin that do haunt your house,
My vailes, your proffers are not worth a --
I will be freed from't, now I go about it,
Give me free leave, or else I Will go without it.
He being freed from this vile shameful strife,
Does now resolve to lead an honest life.
I wish him happiness; still more to know
What it is to be redeemed from hell below.
Was It ever known that any came from hell?
Or any changed, that once with whores did dwell?
There Is none so bad, that if they can but leave
Their sinful ways, but mercy may receave.
Let none presume, and yet let none despair;
When storms are past, the heavens will be fair.
Muse, stay not here, this convert to applaud
But rurne thy self to shame this shameless bawd.
She melts her grease, as she is running yonder,
With blood-hound sent, to seek a pimp or pander.
She meets a shark, they needs must drink a cup;
He eannot serve: she takes a beggar up;
She changed his rags, and robbed him of his --
And now he is proud, and falls unto his vice
With expedition: having manned a whore,
He gets a fee: now I shall never be poor.
I must be wise (thinks he) though I am bold,
My place is warm, an open barn is cold.
He fits her humor, knowing once her mind,
And she ere long will pay him in his kind.
(They love so strongly, who would have'em parted
Till they'ave been whipped and both together carted?)
He to the bawd spoke thus (and praised his place)

Pimp. Blessed be the time that ere I saw your face,
This is the service I did strive to get,
And by good fortune we together met:
I Am overjoyed that I this place now have;
Who'ld live to beg, and be so poor a slave?
You know my mind, I likewise know your bent,
I make no doubt but I shall give content.
Oh! happy night that brought so sweet a morrow!
Come fill this bowl, I Will drink away all sorrow.

Bawd. If thou prov'st right, thou wilt easily please my mind,
Though I am hasty, thou shall find me kind.
And to my wenches thou must loving be,
And courteous still, that Gentlemen may see
Thou do respect them; they will reward thy pains:
When thou do find thy constant weekly gains,
'Twill cheer thy heart. Look that in any case
Thou art not often absent from thy place.
Never go to Church, for what should thou do there?
'Twill make thee heavy, and bring needless fear.
Nor read, nor study; things being strict and high,
Will break thy brains: why should not thou and I
Live merrily? I have the dainti'st books
Of poetry; if thou but cast thy looks
Upon them once, sadness will steal away;
They make my guests as merry as the day.
And if thou love me, never friendship have
With any that are strict: they will dig a grave
To bury pleasure in; they will prate of death,
Of judgment, hell, and charm thee with their breath.
If any one thou know, that has but coin,
And loves a wench, the gains shall half be thine,
If thou can win him. Do but break a jest
To find his bent; then, never let him rest,
But bring him home; we'll ease him of his cash;
Do It by degrees, thou must not be too rash.
I have two wenches, Kate and little Nell,
They Are pretty rouges, and have their Art so well,
Who ever comes, and does but with them play,
He Is taken: then they make his gold their pray.
These things, and more, hereafter shall thou learn;
Hold up thy head, speak, thou art for my turn.

Pimp. Pray make no question on it; for I Will be true,
And kind to all; but most of all to you.
I have a master that is a joviall blade,
He Is full of gold: I know he loves the trade.
He Will often ask, as I by him do pass,
Where dwells a handsome, young, and trading less?
Do as you promise, let me share a stake,
I Will lay a bait, him we shall quickly take.
When he attends on some fine Curtezan,
And gets a double fee, he is then a man
Much in request: he struts, and cocks his hat,
And has forgot he was a beggars brat.
He Is bold and shameless; that is in him required,
With bawds and whores it is chiefly still desired.
Thus he goes on; the whores do on him smile,
He Is merry-mad: but in a little while
The common Iayles, with Bridewell do consent
To keep this Pimp close to his punishment.
And by degrees, his body with disease
Grows weak; his sin does: fast upon him seize.
His legs do grudge to bear him any longer,
All means are blasted that should make him stronger.
His old familiars he again must have;
Those six-legg'd creepers bring him to his grave;
Whether he died to satisfy the Law,
Or by a hedge, or on a pad of straw;
Or is he tumbled int'a stinking ditch?
It Is one of these, but it is no matter which:
Where e're he lies, there let him still remain,
For if you stir him, he will stink again.
His Epitaph.
HEre lies a beggar that was lately made
A Pimp, to serve a Bawd and man a Whore,
It Is strange a beggar should sorsake his trade!
It made him poorer than he was before.
His bosome-friends returned, to increase his strife,
Conspired with death to take away his life.
And now the bawd is grown so rank in smell,
So stale and hated where she used to dwell;
That she takes leave of joviall merry blithe,
And having quite outlived her hair, her teeth,
(For Partridge, Chickins, Quail, she will often crave it
Worse meat must serve, she will eat when she can have it)
Her custom leaves her now: her household stuff
Must go to pawn for bread: sh'has scarce enough
To feed her craving jaws; her kindred all
Forsake her, loath her; in this shameful thrall
She vomits out her breath. (None ever spied
A gastly'r sight.) And so she sunk and di'd.
Her Epitaph.
'A Woman Bawd who did much mischief hatch,
Did harbor vermin to corrupt the age:
She had a fob to hide them from the watch:
Now she lies plastered in this earthen cage.
Death takes the Drone which used to rob the hive;
She has a grave, who was a grave alive.

SECT. 5. Of two common whores, how they lived and did; and a pimping these,
his life and death.
Muse be not silent, thou have hit the sore,
Refresh thy self, and track the common whore,
Her ways, her wiles, and her declining age,
And her Consorts set with her on the stage.
Their sweet parts acted; cause them to bring in heart,
A just account what profit comes by sin.
This qucane, when pride does once possess her
Or poverty does seem to threaten smart,
Or too much fullness wanton lust does raise,
Or idleness, cause her to take by-ways,
She Is lost for ever. Widow, maid, or wife,
If once she does affect a whorish life.
Then like a Bitch she in her lust will bnrne,
Takes up a rogue, and he must serve the turn.
She walks the fields; more often in the street,
Her bold rude looks, when she a man does meet,
Must make him blush, if he has any grace;
She Is impudent, and will not change her face.
When she is past, observe, and you shall find,
Herbrazen face will cast an eye behind:
She Will fawn, and claim acquaintance with sorne ass,
They must be cozens; then away they pass
Unto some Tavern; with her wiles she will take him,
And ere, they part, a truer Ass she will make him.
He buys his sin, and sels himself away,
And now this whore has made this fool her prey.
When with his wit, his money too is spent,
Then farewell Coz, she leaves him discontent.
She hunts about, and finds some countrey-gull,
Then tries her wits, how she may neatly pull
His feathers off: but when her custom's fading,
She Will take a Shark; for she must needs be trading.
He haunts her still, his sellowes do no less,
She does not own that, that she does possess.
These dunghill flies suck carrion. For their prey
They take by force, or steal her goods away.
(Being desperate villains) if she does but grumble,
They Will beat, and kick her till they make her tumble,
And having had their ends, they leave her bare;
Going to other, there they get a share.
This life they lead, their practice is so ill
They fear the lash, and thus they rob'em still.
Such after-claps, and worse, do chase their pleasure:
(Ill-gotten goods is but deceitful treasure.)
Then ere't be long to Bridewell she is brought,
(She calls it Hell) for there she must be taught
To turn the mill, or beat hemp, choose her which:
If she complains, she is troubled with a stitch,
They Will use a whip to fright this stitch away:
Her gown is blew, and brown bread is her pay.
When she grows old, and time has plowed her brow,
She fills those chinks with painting: think but how
Her painted grease does show; it melts about her:
A shameful object! every boy will flout her.
Then she begins to rattle in the throat,
The harshest discord always is her note;
'Twill rise and fall, like dreamers in their sleep:
And through her nostrils does her language creep.
Now Gallicus is fierce, and takes a skip,
Seizes with fury'pon her upper lip;
Takes part for earnest: you may see her gums,
Her teeth left naked, now she picks up crumbs,
This woman-eater, not content with those,
Does grow so greedy that she eats her nose:
Her eyes are spared, she may reflect, and see
Her monstrous visage, and deformity.
Being noisome; to a cottage she is confined,
Her sap is gone, and nothing left but rind,
That Is shrunk and dry; all hope does quite for sake her:
For better, or for worse, the worms must take her.
Her Epitaph.
HEre lies a strumpet that did use to prey
'Pon any one for gain: at last her sight
Grew odious to the world. She chopped away
Her self: O! Fate, how this might sinners fright!
Old Time grew sick upon it; he loathed her breath,
And he for ease resigned her up to Death.
Another she is grown as bad, or worse:
If her trade fails, she will try to cut a purse,
Or break a house, or cheat; what e're is naught
She Will do: then to the Sessions she is brought:
Arraigned, condemned, she being guilty found:
And ends her da^yes two yards above the ground.
Her Epitaph.
THis shamlesse Imp searched up and down to find
An other world of sin; at last she found
What she would feign have lost; she lest behind
This world: the hangman hid her under ground.
Sh'was overcharged with rope, fast by this place:
Her Motto's this; she died for want of grace.
The villain that did keep her for his whore,
His means is spent; alas! he cannot rore!
He Would borrow cash, but none will take his word,
Then he will swear he will make'em eat his sword.
Now help him at a pinch! he will truly pay
Within a month of the next quarter day:
He Will give his bill, and seal it with his hand,
But he is not guilty of a foot of land.
How happy should he be, had he but coin!
The Broker is resolved to make him fine
Upon receipt of gold: he would in those feathers,
Just like a Turkey, bristle out all weathers.
He Is vexed, but hopes that if the term were come
(With some new trick) he should soon light on some.
If to a place he comes where is but drink,
He Will cock the broom-mans beaver: they must think
He wants not money: by entreaty he
Resolves to grace them with his company.
But if he thinks they'are cowardly and base,
He Will turn his whiskers up, and rub his face,
And seem to take distaste at every word,
He lays his hand, and looks upon his sword;
Stand out on's way; believe me sir he will fight;
(...) blade is old, fit for a man of might.
The Brittons took it when they conquered Wales,
A Captain gin't him coming back from Cales
For his hot service, as a recompense:
It Is hilted since, which cost him thirteen pence.
If one that is valiant does intend to try him,
He Will answer him, (for why should I belly him?)
But he must choose his way: (he'as no desire,
Being burnt before, tolye behind the fire.)
He Is turned to his freedom: first his railing tongue
Must give the onset: that not proving strong,
His heels take place; and he away does run
So soon as ere the combat is begun.
This paultry rascal cheats, and sherks about,
At last some Officer does find him out,
He Is tried; they took his hand against his will,
And made it hiss; me thinks I hear it still.
This graceless wretch will yet no warning take,
But worse, and worse, unlawful shifts he will make;
He breaks a house, and for it he is tried,
Or else for robbing by the highway side.
Then he is condemned to lose his shameless breath:
The time being come, he dies a wooden death.
Before, his whore and he did spit out thunder;
They burned together; but they hang asunder.
His Epitaph.
This sinful clod of earth did still daevise
The pleasant'st way to hell: he had releise
From one who was his whore; but when that prize
Did melt away, and rot; he turned a thief.
His cause was pro and con, and for his life
The halter umpir'd, and did end the strife.
SECT. 6. Course salutations betwixt a pennilesse letcher and his where that
forsook him.
A Man that was addicted to a whore,
His habit showed that he was grown so poor
That he was feign to shark, and shift about;
Amongst his friends he picked a living out.
He did not care so much to be invited,
He scorned the day, and loved to be benighted;
He was not curious, nor did love to hear,
You Are welcome, Sir; for that is your only cheer;
Nor was he dainty, give him what you will,
His hungry stomach would digest it still,
For under Forma pauperis he would eat,
He would not pick a quarrel with his meat,
Though it were musty: he had lost his smell,
His nose being sunk, promised no tales to tell.
Upon a time he walking in the street,
Did meet this whore: and thus he did her greet:
(She looked on him, as though she had not known him,
She scorned him poor, and was ashamed to own him.)
Letcher. Thou painted queen! have thou forgot me now
Thou have undone me! shall I tell thee how,
Thou hedge-bird trull! thou did abuse me first.
I'was blessed before, but by thee made acurst.
I met thee walking, as I crossed the field,
And spoke in jest; thou did in earnest yield
To my first motion: so I gave thee wine;
But thy lascivious and thy wanton twine
Did so bewitch me, that I went astray;
Fool that I was! to be so drawn away
With such a Trull! O! thy dissembling face
That did enchant me! brought me to disgrace!
Thy eyes consented with thy flattering tongue
To work my ruin; shall I bear this wrong
Without revenge? I spent my means on thee;
Thou will not know me in my misery.
Behind my back for me thou fram'st thy mocks,
Thou rotten whore, of thee I gat the pox.
While I had money, thou would often swear,
Of all that lived, to thee I was most dear.
Now all is gone, thou leave me in distress!
(But painted fire it can no heat express)
Do hold thy color? art thou not ashamed
To hear those things that I with grief have named?

Whore. What, what is the matter, thou art grown so rude?
Thou art too bold, my presence to intrude
Without my leave; this is mad kind of meeting,
(So like a brute!) is this thy gentle greeting?
If I had thought thou had been such an Ass,
When thou did meet me, I Would have let thee pass.
I did not beg to have thy wine, nor thee,
'Twas freely proferr'd; thou would give it me.
What else beside, I was unwilling to it;
But thou did urge me, and did make me do it.
My way of living is to use my trade;
What should I do? was I so handsome made,
And not for use? pray, was it ever known,
But without danger one might use her own?
I had no portion e're to set me forth;
And in these times, not any man of worth
Will take a Maid, though she is adorned with graces,
(Well borne and bred) till angels show their faces;
Unless some Vulcan that is coursely bred,
I ever loathed to give my maidenhead
To such a Clown: then blame me not to do
Such things as Nature ever prompt me to.
I was not bred to labor with my hands,
I am a prisoner, bound in Cupids bands;
All actions ent'red let them on me lie;
I will not vex, here will I live and dye:
I knew thee not when thou came to me first,
Thou might have parted having quenched thy thirst;
And kept away till I had sent for thee;
What is the spite that thou do owe to me?
Thy money's spent, which makes thy envy burn,
A trull of six pence might have served thy turn:
Thou being privy to thy poor estate,
Yet come to me! I do thy baseness hate!
I had thy money, thou had pen'worths for it;
Thou wast content then, now thou do abhor it.
I thought thou had a mint; for I Will say that,
Thou wast too free, for ever to be fat.
I loved thee, as I loved another man;
All of their wares will make the most they can.
Would have me watch thee in this time of grief?
The hospitals are bound to give relief
To men diseased: what would thou have me blamed,
Cause thou do want, or with the pox art shamed?
Go like a Letcher, it is thy cankered sore,
That was a breeding many years before.
Let me alone; if once thou do me wrong,
My friends at Court shall quickly tame thy tongue.
Now like a prisoner standing at the bar,
His speech does faulter, and his mind's at war
Against it self: his very heart does ache,
His hands do tremble, and his knees do quake,
His eyes do sparkle, with his hair upright,
His looks are ghastly, which might well affright
A man to see: his lips began to mutter,
But shame did silence them, he could not utter
A word composed; but when he did begin
To make reply, he thought upon his sin.
Poor man distressed! betwixt these two extremes,
Wake and be silent, or discourse in's dreams.
She never changed, nor shameful grief nor fear
Did once possess her: waiting still to hear
His fruitless answer: being in a trance,
He does at last his spirit thus advance.

Letcher. Vile strumpet! guilty of all filthiness,
The badge of shame; none can it so express
As thou deserve! thou art a loathsome grave,
Thou swallow'st men alive; still thou do crave.
The mouth of hell, or else the Devils jaws,
Come short of thee: thou open'st wide thy claws.
Bring'st souls, and bodies, and their states in thrall;
Hell takes no money; but thou take all.
The Spiders venom, and the loathsome Toad
Are not so venom, as to make abode
With such a Serpent: go and hide thy face,
For to thy sex thou art a great disgrace.
Venus is chaste, when she is compared to thee,
And Messaline that was a whore so free,
Which bought her pleasure at so great a price;
Thou sell'st thy sin, which does increase thy vice.
Thou hell on earth! let ages blaze thy shame,
Let time and death seal curses on thy name!
And let a Poet put thy sins in rhyme,
When thou art dead and rotten in thy slime!
Oh! let that place, where first I met this jade,
Be barren ever, let a dismal shade
Attend upon it, let that silent earth
Breed only vermin with a monsters birth!
You fruitless plants, how could you then abide me?
Time blast those trees because they did not hide me:
And let those springs that murmured other times,
For being silent then, share in those crimes
That were committed! let them still be dry,
Or filled with tears; and let all passers by
Take and preserve some as a monument,
To show my sins, they may the like prevent!
And let that path which I went over to see,
Be crossed by none it brought a cross to me!
And ever let that whispering gale of wind
Be banished too; that would not prove so kind
As once to check me! let the light'ned air
Swell up with grief, and break with close despair.
And let those birds that were as Testes to it,
Because they saw, and yet did let me do it,
Never sing again; and when they seek their meat
With empty crawes, let them find none to eat!
And let that T av. rne, where we first did drink,
Break first the Master, after let it sink!
And let those boys, that did at us connive,
Bear half the sin; and let them never thrive!
Oh! let that house which does resemble hell,
(The place I mean where once this whore did dwell)
Be made a dung hill: for it did invite me
To sup with care, for sorrow to benight me!
I am a pattern of this wished ill;
And on record my sins must tarry still:
Black like my crimes! so is this doleful letter,
It may preserve the good, or make them better.
If any one shall read this tragic line
That Is guilty; let him join his heart with mine,
To live again, before we dye for ever;
I Will give the onset from the world to sever.
And let the man who is endu'd with grace,
In this foul glass, behold his fairer face;
With care to keep it from this sinful stain.
Tears will not cleanse it, for it is di'd in grain.

SECT. 7. Of a child found murdered by a whore the mother of it.
A Newborn infant, that was found of late,
Did move beholders to compassionate,
And drop down tears; (for'twas a dreadful sight!
I wish the murtheresse may be brought to light.
I do not doubt, though present time conceal it,
Time will e're long grow angry, and reveal it.
Justice divine, with Justice here below,
Will find such out, and make all murth'rers know
Their heinous fact: muse leave them till that time,
This object now may satisfy my Rhyme.)
This infant by a woman first was found
Rolled up together: lying on the ground,
Put in a bag, being black; 'twas thought therefore
The mother of it was a black-bag whore.
'Twas clad in mourning, and that made the shroud
'Twas buried in; (yet other was allowed)
The neck was broke, and twisted round about,
And wring'd so hard, that streams of blood ran out
Upon the corpse: the neck was black and blue,
The face was pale, the corpse of sable hue:
The blood half water (which might raise up fears)
As though the infant mingled it with tears.
One of the jaws was broke: or else in crying
It might have peacht the murder when 'twas dying,
Or moved some pity; but it is always known,
They Are worse than beasts who do destroy their own.
Poor harmless infant! there is no reason why
Thou being borne, that guiltless thou should dye.
Yet be content, death ended has thy strife,
Thou might have lived in misery: thy life
Have kindred claimed with a continual death:
Thou to thy Maker have resigned thy breath,
And in a moment thou thy race did run,
Thy life did end so soon as 'twas begun.
Thou art redeemed now out of all distress,
But yet the murder that is never the less.
Although thine eyes were closed with envious night,
Thou shall behold the everlasting light.
Thy tender limbs shall to perfection grow
In glory: but we mortals know not how.
Thy soul that God infused, shall now appear
Before him, and be filled with comfort there.
Yet I must weep! oh! call my partners hither,
It Is fit the Iury-men should weep together
For this vile murder! it is a dreadful sin!
He shall be foreman that will first begin:
In broken language let it be expressed,
For Interjections now are counted best.
Let every one here answer to his name,
And keep Decorum; spredding out the shame
Of this foul deed, and make the air to speak,
And cause the bowels of the earth to break;
Or bring the murtheresse out: oh! make it tremble!
For it is solid, and cannot dissemble.
And let that house where now she draws her breath,
Sink down, or spew her out, 'pon pain of death.
Or let her conscience sting, make all appear,
Or dreaming cry, The murtheresse is here:
Or else the stones, when she does pass along,
First make her slip, and after find a tongue
To make her known. Let Constables not spare
To use their power: let it be their cafe
To search suspected houses, round about,
And for this purpose send the Beadles out.
There are such nests of night-birds in all places,
That are to be examined in such cases.
Oh, that they were removed, more Bridewels made;
That all might there beat hemp, and drive a trade!
And if by any means you chance to find her,
Bring her to Newgate, let the Iaylor bind her:
And at the Sessions have her sentence; then
Go visit Tyburne: now it is new again.
Come, answer here, O! murtheresse, where art?
Thou art not quit; for first, or last, the smart
Will have thee outlawed, and arrest thy life,
No bail shall free thee; then begins thy strife.
Was It not a fault thou did commit before,
When thou to serve thy lust did turn a whore?
(A foul offense!) and prostitute thy self
Unto a villain, or a roguish else?
But to a sin so bad, thou add'st a worse,
To wrap thy self fast in a helpless curse.
A work of darkness! thus, thus to destroy
Thy fruit? thy self too thou have cast away.
Where was the voice of Nature? none call to it?
If any call, she never lets them do it.
Or where was conscience? that she did not strive
To tie thy hands, and save thy babe alive?
Had thou no thought of God? was he not there?
Did not his judgments strike thy heart with fear?
Nor what Christ did, or suffered? nor the story
Of man's mortality? nor heavens glory?
Nor of thy death? nor yet of hell below?
Did thou forget, or did thou never know
Thou had a soul, that living lives for ever?
If It dies in sin, it is redeemed never.
Had thou no friend to speak a word in season?
And then to tell thee, 'twas against all reason
To kill the infant? thou had no pretense
For this cursed fact: it was against all sense!
Thy Councellor, alas! it was the Devil,
He did command, nay, urged thee to this evil.
Did think to hide thy shame? that thought was vain:
Thou lay'st it open, and thy inward pain
Gives strength unto it: still thy hateful sore
Breaks out with shame, the Sessions bring thee more:
But at the Gallows shame will then be double:
Conceited freedom brings thee into trouble.
Before, th'Apparator might bring thee in
To pay, or else do penance for thy sin;
Thy life was not in danger. Now it is true,
The Hangman he will charge thee. So adieu.
At first, Citations might have served to charge thee,
Pay and away; but who can now enlarge thee?
They Would not set thee on horseback: being tried,
Now all thy privilege is, thou shall ride.
There will be much ado to bring thee to it;
When all is done, thou had better go a foot.
When thou art gone, thy shame shall tarry still,
My tell-tale Muse will everblaze thy ill.
All beasts are loving ever to their young,
They Will feed, preserve, and rescue them from wrong:
Nay, they will feed their young, how e're they fare:
Nature pleads for it: it is strange beasts have such care:
The birds do labor, up and down they fly,
To gather food against their young ones cry:
And are so tender of them, one will stay
To look to home, when the other is away.
Nay, some so loving, that they will spend their blood.
And lose their lives to do their young ones good.
But thou art cursed; the murder speaks no less,
A hellish policy thou did express.
The Bear grows angry when she wants a whelp,
Thou 'story' dst thy infant when it had no help.
The birds do shame thee, they their young ones feed,
Thou murther'st thine, thou art a Foul indeed!
Thou art afraid of whispering; and thy life
Is but like death; call death to end thy strife.
Thy cursed practice which the Devil taught thee,
Is like a witch, for to a strait't has brought thcc.
Unlike to all thou art, but him in sinning,
Who was a murderer from the beginning,
I Will leave thee now, and end my mournful tones;
Time calls thee in; for now the Gallows groans.
The Epitaph.
You passers by, take notice of these stones
Behavior toward an infant cast away;
They Will overlook this parcel of small bones,
And keep them safe until the Judgment day.
Peace, she is dead: but if you ask me, why?
She was begot, conceived, and borne to dye.
SECT. 8. Of two brave Blades, that would hire a whore betwixt them by the
year.
TWo roaring blades being on a time in drink,
(I censure not, judge you: did they no; stink?
Fierce time did blush, when it had heard and seen them)
They parl'd about keeping a whore between them.
I know a wench, Tom said unto the other,
('Faith; Nick, I love thee, sworn I am thy brother)
That Is very handsome, had she but apparel;
Let Us take her home, for we shall never quarrel;
Allow her means, and use her both alike,
For she is loving, and I know she will strike.
She Is well proportioned, and she is very young,
And middle sized, graced with a pleasing tongue:
She Will be content with thirty pounds a year;
We'll save one half from wine, strong ale and beer;
Nick, speak the word; what, shall we both go to her?
Or bear thy share, and I will go and woo her.
Nick paused a while, his breath so strong did smell,
As if it came from the upper part of hell;
Or else to say, to lessen this his fault,
It came as from the bottom of a vault:
Being raised, at last, he belched out the smoke,
Then drank his cup, and thus his mind he broke:
I like the motion, if she be so neat,
She Will be for us a dish of dainty meat.
We Will take her over, for such ware is dear
With us; or dangerous, though they are plenty here;
I Will pay one half, but yet I Will see her first;
At any time she will serve to quench our thirst.
But yet I fear she will trade with other men,
Which if she does, we will turn her home again.
Tom. Tush, never fear, we will order so the case
To mew her up, she shall not show her face
At any time; for only thee and I
Will keep her close, that none shall her espy:
We Will take a room in private, do not doubt,
Though one should seek, he shall not find her out;
Her habit shall be plain, her face still masked
She Will constant be, though she be often asked:
If she do prove to be a fickle less,
We Will strip her bare, and turn her out to grass.
Farewell till night, I Will drink but this carouse,
Then go and revell in some bawdy house.
A speech of one in the company.
You make me blush to hear your consultation!
What? are you shameless? is not condemnation
Appointed still to wait upon your sin?
Or d'yce forget your souls, that you begin
Your hell on earth? what, do you not regard
God, nor your selves? what, is there no reward
For honesty? or is your shape, your stature,
And dispositions bent to ruin nature?

Nick. Pish, hold your clack:
Are you in earnest? or do you speak in jest?
It Is bad enough, is I should think the best.
Pray let me speak, for reason's on my side,
My ears do tingle, nor can I abide
To hear your lavish casting out your shame;
I will not flatter, least: bear the blame
Equal with you: remember Death will strain
Upon your spirits. Where will be your gain?
Or pleasure, when you are returned to dust?
Then ghastly crawlers feed upon you must.
Yet sin will live, when you are in your graves,
And prove a foe: sell not your selves for slaves.

Tom. Go prating ass! Nick, drink to me in beer;
This fool does preach a chamber-lecture here!
The colt does play, while bayard eats the chafe,
The sow that is silent, cares up all the draffe.
Hang him, he is worse, if time and place would fit,
He Would hugg a wench, and all that have but wit
Would do as much. Would he were hanged for me
That would not do it: but we shall escape all three.
We must take pleasure, we shall nere be younger,
We Will leave it then, when we can have it no longer.

Reply. I see'ts in vain to speak, you both want reason;
You're led by sense like beasts, and practice treason
Against your souls, let senseless creatures teach you,
Know, heaven's angry; vengeance, that can reach you.
The clouds consult to bring a storm of weather,
The thunderbolts come now in troops together,
Charged full of fury: if you will not yield,
You Will have no quarter in that bloody field.
See how the streamers in the air are spread,
Some blew, some white, and some like blood are red,
Threatening destruction; some of sable hue,
They seem to mourn for men turned beasts like you.
The air is so corrupted with your breath,
It spits-out threatening, and it sends out death.
Look how the river does both swell and rage,
Chiding your folly: it would clear the stage
Of such vile actors; but'tis bended so,
Although it murmurs, out it cannot go.
It has done justice on the like before;
Fire next must purge, water can purge no more:
These trees look thin, the leates fall off with fear,
Those that abide hang trembling quaking there,
The dust does creep together, and combind
To turn to vermin, or to make you blind:
The stones have all consented with the dust,
And wait to be revenged upon your lust;
The House cannot keep you, speak I what I think,
Your hell-borne language, that will make it sink.
All things are snares which for you lie in wait,
To take you napping, or'tis my conceit.
The feathered watchmen flying swift about
Do cry for wrath against your coming out:
Se'ing in your vileness to exceed you strive,
The earth does gape, to swallow you alive.
Then I perceiving dangers were so nigh,
There left those varlets, and away went I.

SECT. 9. A fruitless dehortation of a friend, to one that was undone by a
whore.
A careless gallant, having quite undone
Himself, his wife, and morgag'd from his son
His house, and lands, did meet upon a day
A faithful friend, who thus to him did say,
You keep a whore, unto your great disgrace,
Who has or will undo you, and your race
Have cause to curse you: leave these whores who have
For all your cost, provided you a grave.
(You call her sister) can a whore love any,
But for their gold? and so she may love many.
Leave her betime, or in the Doomsday book
You Will find your name of all the world forsook.
This speaking for the present seemed to change
His mind clean from this whore; it is very strange,
He needs must see her face, and he are her tongue,
Then he repents he staid from her so long.
He makes a new agreement with this whore,
And is engaged stronger than before.
To please her mind, with fury he will stammer,
Rail at his friend that would diswade him from her.
The evil spirit takes on him more hold;
Nor will he trust him, though he is weak and old.
Oh! pity him that for a vain delight,
Hazards his soul to everlasting night!
SECT. 10. A fight betwixt two Pimps.
A Pimp went strutting (fearing not a fray)
Being very brave: (for 'twas a gaudy day)
Another met him, who did much disgrace him:
For he was vexed; 'twas he that did displace him.
Sharp words by gross past, those that then did hear them,
Did say'twas strange, that flesh and blood could bear them.
But gaudy Pimp being urged, his sword was drawn,
But being rusty, newly come from pawn,
He could not use it; and his hand did shake,
His heart for fear made all his body quake.
The other got the scabert; being tough
Struck solid blows: poor Whiskin had enough.
Perhaps his blade was short, or very weak,
Or else being brittle, was afraid 'twould break:
Or else being borrowed, would not put him to it;
Or else he promised that he would not do it:
Or otherwise I must conclude from hence,
The hilt was open, ill for his defense.
Or being cautious (so 'twas very good)
He was afraid to spill a subjects blood.
But by and by, he spied his pistoll-gun,
Then he grew valiant, quickly made him run.
But how I pray? I Would tell you but for laughter,
He ran away; the other he ran after.
As was his raiment worth more than his lands,
So were his heels preferred before his hands.
SECT. 11. A heap of Vassalls pleading for precedencis, and priority one
against the other.
Crew assembled (where I know not well)
(They came as from, or traveling toward hell)
Who should be first and chief of all the rout,
Was then the point, they did contend about.
Whore. The whore speaks first, her argument does tend
To prove her calling lawful; and the end
Will make it good: it is honest downright dealing
To use my tail, to keep my hands from stealing.
I trade in love, the price I never make;
What men do give, that I may freely take.
I do maintain you all, your sweetened gains
Sprung from the blood which runs along my veins:
What custom ere comes in, is brought by me;
Why should not I be first, and chieflly free
Of this assembly? crumbs to feed a mouse
Would not be found, nor brooms to sweep the house,
Were It not for me: pray give me then my due,
Speak what you think, what ere I say is true.

Pimp. Be not so confident: although my place
Be to attend: it is that sets a grace
Upon you all. I walk along the street
So spruce, and boldly, powdered very sweet,
Cocking my beaver, looking bigg withal,
The gallants that I meet give me the wall.
When any come I give'em such content,
(That they are won) with some fine complement.
My comely presence brings in many a guest,
Besides acquaintance, who above the rest
Are beneficial; this is no mistake;
What ere they spond' is chiefly for my sake.
Why should not I then be preferred as chief,
Se'ing by my means comes in the most relief?

Pan. Thou prating coxcombe! what do think that I
Am underling to thee? we will quickly try
Which is most useful; I am put in trust
With all their secrets: reason says I must
Be overseer still, I keep the door,
And let them in, and out, and which is more,
I suit the wenches to their own complexions,
If I but speak, they all take my directions.
My wit dos often gain a double fee,
I stay at home, to make an ass of thee.
I Am not so fine in deed, but more I thrive,
Where thou do get a testar, I get five.
The custom soon would fail, if I go hence,
Why should not I have the pre-eminence?

Bawd. Ha, ha, ha, ha, ha, ha, ha.
I laugh to hear these fools; they dominere;
Alas! they know their gains, and being here
Depends upon my love; they make their boast
Of this, and that; it is I that rules the roast.
The house is mine, the furniture I bought;
But yet I see much like a thing of naught
They value me; they might have begged ere this;
I took them in, least they should do amiss.
Although the whore be handsome, she had never
Been thus preferred, had I not used endeavor
To clothe and set her out, nor had she been
But like a novice in this venial sin.
The Pimp was very poor, till I did raise him,
And sor his comely parts, alas, who did praise him
Till I had trimmed him? now he is grow ne so proud,
He Would feign be master; but he is not allowed.
Priority, the pander is as bad:
He would usurp the place he never had;
He has the vailes belonging to his place,
Which puffes him up, I see his ends are base;
He Would set himself aloft; and then he would reign,
Much like a Demi-god, and all my train
Must follow his advise; but soft and fair:
His words being spoke were soon dissolved to air.
I spent my time to learn (when I was young)
This way of living; having used it long.
Age made me weak, and then I entertained
Those that did love that way, and still I gained
Experience in it: you cannot but agree
That I am chief: yo'are servants all to me.

Prodigal. Here Is much ado, and yet but little wir.
Amongst you all; I can no longer sit,
To hear your simple prating: I am he
That every one of you would seem to be.
Words only make a sound; but it is my gold
That claims priority, and takes fast hold
Upon the chiefest place; yo'uld quickly make
Your wants break forth, should I the house forsake.
I pay the whore, and give the Pimp his fee;
I give the pander coin, the bawd may see
Her comings in, comes only from my hand;
You have nor money, house, nor food, nor land
To succor you; nor any way to thrive,
But with my purse; I keep you all alive:
I send in meat, and diverse sorts of wine,
I sold my lands for you: this cost of mine,
Joined with my love, the highest place may crave,
It is my right, and all I Am like to have.
Be wise, and silent, put me still before,
Your hopes depend on me; I Will say no more.

Thief. Ho, ho, ho, ho, ho, ho, ho.
Me thinks I see, as once at Sutors-hill
A silly gull; who having had his will
To break over hedges; being took at last,
I robbed him of his gold, and bound him fast.
Although he made his moan, away went I
To free my self, but there I let him lie.
This brainlesse ass, that now relates a story
Of what he has, and seems to raise his glory
From what he has beslow'd upon a whore,
(The bawdy house does gain, but he is made poor)
When all is spent, he has no other way
To help himself, and yet (forsooth) he will say
Precedence is his: he does beguile
Himself with hopes: I cannot choose but smile.
The day, the place are mine; and he shall find
That I must go before, he come behind.
When I am out of cash, I scorn to borrow,
I have a trick to banish all my sorrow:
One happy night may blow me into stock,
Or with a Pistol, or a stab, or knock,
I gain a weighty Purse: or, if that miss,
I have another way as good as this:
I Will cheat, and steal, and rob a house by night;
And having got my prey, I take my flight.
I have a share from all that rob about,
Iway-lay some, and others find them out.
This fool that sold his land, will nere believe
How much I got upon one Christmas eve
At Hide-parke-corner, or at Bagshot Downs
Another time, among the countrey-clownes.
I cannot want, unless that crooked tree
Dos choke my hopes, and prove a foe to me.
What can the whore, the pander, pimpe, or bawd
Do of themselves? or he that does applaud
His crazie humor? only in the spring
He Will chirp about, and like a Cuckoo sing';
But moult away in winter: when my time
And fortunes usher me into my prime.
I must relieve them all: Judge, who is best?
Shall I not be preferred above the rest?
The case is plain; those that have ears and fight,
Will know I challenge nothing but my right.
As for the pleaders, all their brains are weak:
I am content to let the Vmpire speak.

SECT. 12. The Devil's Vmpire; their causes; the fearful conclusion.
THey plead for place in sin: they might as well
Strive which shall have priority in hell.
The Devil's Vmpire to decide the case.
He comes in hellish-state to take his place;
And by degrees he strives to bring 'em in
As fast unto their pains, as to their sin.
Thus he begins: ho! can you not agree?
I Will make you friends if you will be ruled by me:
You're all my servants; why should you fall out?
Since I am umpire to resolve this doubt,
I Will do with judgment: first, the whore's my child,
Though yet she be not, she may be as vilde
As mistress Bawd: I love to keep her fine,
For I do use her, as a hook and line
To catch Iack-simple: let her stay her time,
And she will be as perfect in her crime
As any of the rest; in act, and tongue:
Alas! you must consider she is but young!
My pretty pimping Boy! be of good cheer,
Thou come as bravely on as any here,
Being but lately entered: this I find
Thy will is good; that does content my mind.
Observe, and gain experience from the rest,
There Is none too wise to learn; thou may be best:
Cheer up, go bravely on, and thou shall have
The chiefest place, and what else thou will crave.
Ho! come my little Pander, thou art he
To whom I do commit much secrecy:
I ever found thee faithful in thy place;
Thy mind is bent to honor, praise, and grace
My kingdom here below: the place is thine;
But make no wordson't, for the gift is mine.
Go on my bully, as thou have begun;
I Will pay thee bravely, when thy work is done.
Come, come, my old acquaintance! gentle Bawd!
Thy constant service I must needs applaud:
The Queen of hell salutes thee; Do thou smile?
To think thou have bin absent all this while?
Thou have my love; I Will keep thee at my cost.
Now take my hand, I think there is no love lost:
Thou served it me young; when that way did not hold,
Thou did me better service being old:
In harboring those that have a mind to play
Their lands, their time, their souls and all away.
I put much trust in thee, and thou art true
Still to my kingdom; honor is thy due,
Pre-eminence is thine: come down to me,
Thou do not know how welcome thou shall be!
But hinder not thy business: let me know
A day or two before! but we below
Are never unfurnished; we can entertain
(In hellish pomp) thy self, and all thy train.
Thy house is like to mine, but that it is less,
Lightet and cooler too; but thou may guess,
How well our guests do suit: until thy tomb
Does close thee up, take thou the chiefest room.
My Spark of velvet! I Am glad to hear and see,
That thou reposest confidence in me!
Thy will I do accept, thou spend'st thy store
To honor sin: what can a man do more?
Thou shall not want, thou need'st not to repent,
I have more ways (when all thy store is spent)
To raise thee up: I make no doubt ere long,
Thou will be fit to grapple in the throng,
For this high place of honor: then I will
Praise thy endevors, and applaud thy skill.
Persist, sweet Honey-chops! lay't on, and spare not:
Some few may envy us: what is that? we care not.
What, what, my bonny Hackster! thou come last?
Thou art my son, this title was not past
In vain upon thee: thou did never give
Occasion of disgrace: but how to live
In honor, reputation, 'twas thy care
To be a man of dread, of courage rare.
Thou do affright the world; such is thy state,
They value thee not at a common rate.
Thou Art free to all my friends; I Will say to thee,
Thou steal'st from them, who feign would steal from me.
Nor art thou cowardly, but bold, and brave
In all thine acts: if some penurious slave
Falls but into thy clutches, thou will make
Him leave his bags, or thou his life wilt take.
Thou be ar'st my image; I have robbed the world,
Although I was into a prison hurled,
I venture still. What Is murder, but a crime
Which I have made almost as old as time?
Spend upon whores, and drink what thou do get,
Fear not the crooked tree; why should thou set
A doubt before thee? try if thou can win
Thine Host, to make a bawdy house of's Inn:
That will promote thy Art. For ought I see,
Prioritie of place belongs to thee.
Continue in thy course, and let me hear
Thy valor speak: I Will help thee, never fear,
It grieves me thus to part; but you all know,
My greatest business lies in hell below.
But, at their parting, think how pale the ground
Did look upon those mortals! what a sound
Did echo in the air! the blushing sky
Did hide it self with clouds! the Heavens great eye
Was blood-shot, dark, and dim; he had resigned
His office up; but that he was confined
Within his bounds. The Heavens dropped down tears,
The orbs grew angry, and the earth with fears
Was overcharged; the smoother streams did glide
More hastily, to turn against the tide:
The plants did shake, all loosing of their hold:
Only the barren Bramble grew more bold.
The beasts, deprived of sense, do gently stand;
Their happiest timelyes in the Butchers hand.
The fowls of heaven, that did sing before,
Are now grown silent, they can sing no more.
Poor tired spirits! can no comfort have,
They Would feign exchange with death to get a grave.
They dye alive; but being much distressed,
One amongst many thus his mind expressed.
What Is all this rumor, but an empty bubble
Dropped from the skirts of hell? the shame will double
Upon them shortly! all the hateful rout
That plead for sinful praise, shall fly about,
Tossed with a blast from hell: then they will see
Sin; pain and shame will have precedencie!
This Vmpire, that would seem to please'em all,
Will bring them in, and leave them in such thrall,
That time can never release; when they shall dwell
With him that has the greatest place in hell.
The Caniball when he a stranger saw,
'He strangely entertained him in his maw:
But this man-eating Devil draws them to it,
He Will burn their flesh, and broyle their souls to boot.
All things will quiet be, when sp'rites are laid,
The clouds dissolve; the Heavens that are staid,
Will move in order; and the earth will spring,
The plants recover strength, the birds will sing,
Poor souls that dwell on earth will then rejoice,
That made the best, though not the sudden'st choice.
The bawd, the thief, with all that did attend them,
Must have their doom: nor time, nor means could mend them.
How is this world deceived! how does it woo
Hels breathed delights! alas! what does it do
To stifle nature! put the rules of reason
Quite out of joint! oh! this fatal treason!
The storm is past, which was a type of death,
Rest now my Muse, for thou art out of breath.
SECT. 13. Of an Irish Foot-mans entertainment in a bawdy house; and what
misery followed.
AN Irish Teige, once walking late at night,
Did cast his eye upon a loathsome spright,
But covered over with flesh; that painted too:
Her tongue being oiled, she thus poor Teige did woo.
Pray, Sir, come in, a friend that loves you here
Would see your face, and drink a cup of beer,
To talk, and laugh; such time is sweetly spent,
That 'grees with mirth; you shall have good content.
He hearing this, stopped; and his thoughts began
To rove, not thinking who should be the man;
He thus replied at last:
Mastris, me tank yo sor yor love an care,
What man is him tat sands for me? I dare
Ga in Sine Patricks name, and sew me vace,
It shon't be zed tat Irish mons be base:
'Shave argee, sait, chill drink some ale, wone, beer:
Vll see te mon, drank an be jocund here:
Che sarve an Anglish Gantelmon, tat have
Began me some skillings, made me feine an brave.
But coming in, there is no man to be found,
But woman-kinde great store: Teiges brains being drowned,
Was fit for any company: he did
Reveal his shame, which nature always hid.
The Bawd perceiving that an easy bait
Would take this Flounder; then she asked him strait,
What wench he would please to have; one young, or old,
A couiser, or a siner; they are sold
As they are high, low, young, fair, richly tired;
Or else as coyne's brought in; so are they hired.
Now Teige thus answers; Me ha won hueg meend
To tat foine Duck as hoydes her vace beheend,
Pre mastris let me ha hur, an I shall
Gee hur some argee, an my zelf an oll.
It is agreed that Nancie must receive him,
Into her chamber; how they did deceive him,
Time will discover:) there a while they staid,
But how they dallied, how they sinned, and played,
Judge by the sequel: having vainly spent
The time allotted for their merriment;
Teige searched his pocket; he was freely willing,
To gratify her love with half a shilling.
But coming down, the Bawd enquiry made,
How he was pleased? what match was drove? what trade?
What he had gin her? further asking when,
He did intend to visit her again?
He told the Bawd how they their time did pass,
How they agreed, how bountiful he was,
To give her sixpence. Then the Bawd called out,
Why Nancie, Nancie, come, resolve the doubt,
What this man had? what thou had of this man?
Then Nancie cried, anan (forsooth, anan.)
What had this man I ask? forsooth I gave
Him his desire, he did but ask and have:
Embraces by the gross, a curious song,
A large Coranto; kisses mixed among;
We did in all things very well agree
But this; I had but sixpence for my fee.
How wench! but sixpence? who shall pay the rest?
I thought he had been an open-handed guest:
Coranto's are not sold at such a rate,
Nor will I lose my money, though it be late.
Give me five shillings (truly, Sir, it is true)
I cannot 'bate a penny of my due.
An Angel is indeed my usual price,
Where once a Crown, I have an Angel twice.
Then Teige dives down into his slops, there found
But just so much that freed him: turning round,
Away ran he most nimbly; for his cash,
Was for his learning, chopped away for trash.
He was ashamed to come in's Masters sight,
His heart being heavy, and his purse so light.
But shortly after he began to find
Some swellings, where guess you: and then his mind,
Being charged with grief, complained, and thus he said:
Hooe I be pained? me trot me be afraid
I chee be spoil d: mine belly all is sure,
Mine fait and trotla, Nancie was an whore;
Mine pictures all bin spended; none dear be
Woll bring a Churgion, and gee him a see;
'Cheed pa'em well agin, when chee con run;
But now chee con't go weel: chee be undon:
Unless some course been takin! oh tat cheat!
Me mo^^ is sore, chee cannot yeat mine meat.
If some tat loved Sine Patrick ded ma now,
Dey'd gee me argees, dey wod vavor sew,
An heilp me in dis case; de Churgin pa,
Chee shoold be well agin Sine Patricks da.
Eles chee shall leese mine Master, and be vein
To starve, or beg, or eles go whom ageine.
Dei'le take te whore as did entice me in!
Rope take te Bawd, as did we me begin
To make da match! shame take Nancie, vor she
(Chee be afeard) ha gin te pock ta me!
A purse is made; a Surgeon now is brought,
He finds the truth; and yet the matter's naught;
The griefe's laid open; and the Surg'on's feign
To lance, and stew poor Tiege. Oh! then the pain
Forced brinish tears! as he distracted stands,
My Muse now leaves him in the Surg'ons hands.
SECT. 14. Arabble of Cheaters in a two fold plot discovered.
A Pack of cheating villains, went to drink,
And spent a night; and with that spent their chink,
And when the night was gone, still they were stained
With deeds of darkness: as they all remained
Together in a knot, being hungry, they
Did cast a plot, how they might take a prey.
As they did thus consult, a Maid past by,
And one among the rest did east an eye
Upon her; and perceiving on her head
Raw flesh good store, although the had no bread.
This Cheater cheapens, soo^e the bargain's made:
And now to show he is master of his trade,
The Maid must carry it home; and as they went
He found a trick to finish his intent.
A Gentleman being walking near that place,
He goes to him, salutes him with such grace,
(And made) as if he knew him; and to hide
His plot, he asked for one who did abide
Near to that place: he judging by his coat
He was some Pimpe, or else a sherke of note,
Slighted his words: then coming to the Maid,
Where she had for him with her burden staid,
Told her that was his Master; she must go
To him for pay, his worship told him so.
He Would trouble her no more, he would take the pains
To carry it home: this project of his brains
Deceived the silly girl: h'has took away
The Pigeons, and the Pullets: for her pay.
She goes unto the Gentleman, but the
Owed her no money; she did plainly see,
How she was cheated: then half wild, half mad
Home she returned; 'twas all the help she had.
Now they have got this meat, if they can think
How't shall be dressed, and compass bread and drink
With such another trick; then they will roar,
And to increase their mirth they will have a whore.
It Is brought into a Tavern, there it is dressed;
They eat most sreely, swearing it is the best
That ever men did eat! nor can they dine
Without great store, and diverse sorts of wine.
They spent their time in drinking healths about;
Sol lights them in, the Moon must light them out:
They call for pottles, where is this rogue so long?
But all their purses are not sixpence strong.
But when black night had in his shady throne
Triumphed a while, they in their canting tone
Expressed their minds: and being all amort
They plotted to be gane, which spoiled their sport.
One project failed, the second was as vain:
Then speaks a third, who had a subtle brain:
You are simple guls! one plot is good enough
To free us all; we'll play at blindmans-buffe,
The Drawer shall be one; let us make him drunk,
Blind him, and slink away: then said the punk,
There Is no way else to do it; come, this is it
That quits the score: all praised him for his wit.
They call a fresh for wine, before they part
They mean to drink, just every one a quart.
The Drawer drinks his share; they brought his mind,
To make the number up at hoodman blind.
A sherke being hoodwinkt stood behind the door,
He gropt about, at last he caught the whore;
She takes her turn (but yet with much ado)
And having roved at large, a bout or two,
She was more nimble; but of all that saw her
She had the praise, when she had caught the Drawer,
He Is bound up close, because he knows the place,
They doubled up the cloth about his face.
If this plot fail, 'twould put'em all in fear,
For it is the last; their jest, and hope lie here:
He was but dull, when they had hid his sight,
He minds no bill, his head alone was light.
He feels about, but as this fool did play,
In earnest, they slunk by degrees away.
Below they bid'em welcome, never said
Call down the Drawer, see if all be paid.
The Drawer having gropt so long about,
Nor felt, nor heard a man; began to doubt
That he was caught: he being unmasked, there is none
That he can find; his play-fellowes are gone.
With that his heart was much possessed with fear,
Nor dares he to go down, nor yet stay there.
But how at last he gave his answer in,
How he was paid, how is fellows did begin
To jeare him with his play: how he was shamed,
(For after this he blind-mans-buffe was named:)
I will not make report, nor will I sweep
The channels for those vermin that did creep
Away so slily: let this pack of knaves
Be hated living, scorned in their graves;
Let golden Phoebus with his piercing eye
Disclose such vassals! Luna still descry
Their ways by night! let day and night consent
To bring them to some open punishment!
Let age which is the Register of times,
Record their shame! let nothing blot those crimes
But tears of sorrow! oh! let all beware
From such examples! who with hell would share?
SECT. 15. Of an outlandish Nunncrie that was a brothelhouse; and how discoverd.
Henric. Bibellius monialis nobilis.

A Germane Nunnery was once erected,
Only sor noble Ladies: being protected,
By no less power than did sure with state:
(They were maintained at a lofty rate)
And to restrain desire, they mew'd'em in;
But afterward it proved a house for sin.
For growing up in years, their minds did run
To break the thread which they in youth had spun.
Young blood is wanton, and it has desire
To Increase the flame, and mingle oil with fire.
Marry age they were denied; that place must be
A cankered snare to their virginity.
When freez-clad winter with his cloudie shade
Had chilled Apollo's beams, and did invade
The Countries with his haile-shot, and did hide
The earth with Mantles, the fleet swelling tide
Had caught a cold; the brooks could no way pass,
Because the streams were pickled up in glass,
All d. scords kept their turns, the mourn full air
Was over spread with clouds, and black despair.
The heat that is least alive, dos take it is hold
In private corners; yet the furious cold
Dos haunt it still; the birds are freest from harm;
For they have feather-beds to keep'em warm.
The beasts did feel the blast, and shrunk together,
Their hides being tanned alive: the blustering weather
Keeps randevow; proclaims no other thing,
But (roaring) cries, that AEolus is King.
Then every tree received a fara'l wound,
And tender plants did languish in a swound.
With his keen breath, be smoothed the watery plains,
And made clear passage for the lofty swains.
In this sharp season, brave young lads (whose ends
Were to salute their sisters, and their friends)
Were met together; and they did consent
To spend a day or two in merriment,
With these young ladies: being welcome there,
And entertained with mirth and royal cheer:
The time with them grew warm, their April yecres
Brought on untimely May; and canceled fears.
For after supper (having pleasing sport)
The Nunns with those that did to them resort
Were dancing in the hall; one ran about,
And suddenly put all the candles out.
Then every man laid hold upon a Nun,
Which with consent did into corners run.
But in this Night-prize, one among the rest,
Applauds his fortune, he had caught the best.
But walking in the dark, of the sudden mist her,
And when she spoke, he knew it was his sister.
Then he cried out, ho! some one change with me;
I Have light upon my sister, she will be
For any but my self. Sin all they did;
But Fame was moved, and would not have it hid,
A shameful visit! hateful love is shown!
Sin, death, and helldo ever loath their own.
Societies of sin, masked with a show
Of strict devotion, next to hell we know,
Do take their ranks; for barren shows are cursed,
A'nd hypocrites are of all people worst.
How hatefull's that profession, that restraines
Virgins from marriage! when their swelling veins
Break into law less lusts, their acts are vilde;
The father's robbed thus of his hopeful child.
And Priories, when they received their rent,
Engaged the yeoman (else they would have'em shent)
To bring a virgin fair, and in her prime,
That they might keep her until such a time,
(Then turn her out with shame) this they thought good,
'Twas not for lust, 'was but to purge their blood.
They are the bane of people where they dwell:
They make such houses Nurseries for hell.
SECT. 16. Of a Letcher, and how the Devil assumed the shape of a
Malesactresse that had been hanged; and lay with him.
Dr. Stroza Cigognu, nobilis Vinetinus Theologus and Philosophus. Lib. de magia
omnifaria, etc.

A Wanton man (if I a man may call him)
Engaged to lust; shame did at last be fall him.
In whoredom, drunkenness he spent his time;
His lodging suited to his loathsome crime.
But walking all alone along the street
(Being very dark) he did a woman meet;
And heard her mutt'ring as she went along,
Complaining of her husband; and the wrong
That she received: how she was much abused,
Turned out of doors, and how her friends were used,
This lustful Ape, thinks he has got a prey,
Pities her case, and thus to her did say:
Fair mistress, walk with me, and you shall have
A lodging to your mind; I only crave
Your love for rent; it is cheap, although't be best,
Accept this kindness; you shall be my guest.
Small courtship served; away with him she went,
To what he did desire, she gave consent:
And when he had beheld her in the light,
Found her exceeding fair: oh! how her sight
Did ravish him! both in a bed they lay,
Where they did spend some time: but when the day
Broke in upon them, all delights were past:
(He turned about) for she had breathed her last:
Her corpse lay by him, cold as any stone;
He felt her carcass, but her life was gone.
Then fear and shame possessed his raving mind;
He called the Bawd, nor he, nor she can find
The cause of this her death, they are much dismayed;
Nor can they hide what sin has now bewrayed.
The neighbors heard it, and came running in,
They knew her face; she suffered for her sin
The sentence of the Law; death was her pain:
But yet the Devil took her up again
To do more work: (with policies to strive,)
Al hough she served him all her time alive.
But Succuba is gone, left sin and shame
Upon the score, to blast this villains name.
She Is buried once again; she will rise no more
To case the Devil, or to turn a whore.
But now this Letcher finds his fact is known,
His hope, his name, his credit's overthrown,
How Gentlemen his company did shun,
How every one that knew what he had done,
Abhorred his sight: (his friends as all amazed,
With fear and shame, they strangely on him gazed.)
And how the guilt did call upon his crime,
To make his name the byword of the time?
Grief seized upon him; shame did make him sad,
His lust was tamed, although his mind was mad.
In this forlorn estate he lived a space,
But dying still; he strived to hide his face
From all the world: the place where he does dwell
Does paint out flames, and represent a hell.
The flesh that feedshim does commence a suit
Against him too: eats like forbidden fruit.
What Is blessed, is cursed to him; he spies a fish,
And thinks he has a Scorpion in his dish.
H s drink does change its nature (by his fin)
'T will not assuage his scalding heat within.
He hates his gold, and envies his apparel,
And every day he strives to pick a quarrel
With what he does possess; 'twill help to burn him,
In his conceit; nor can disswasions turn him.
In The night he thinks his bedfellow does drive
The Furies; cry, Take him away alive.
He Is to himself and all things else a slave,
But suddenly he dropped down to his grave.
All cried that saw him lying on the brim,
Let Incubus never enter into him!
His Epitaph.
THis man did live like a lascivious Ape,
Spending his strength in sensual lust and pleasure;
The Devil did assume a fellows shape
To humor him; and gives his lust full measure:
The grave's his bawd, the devil was his whore;
H'has now enough, that nere was cloyd before.
SECT. 17. Of a North-countrey man's meeting a trull: and how they were drunk
together: his complaint.
WIthin the Northern parts, near Neptun's plains,
Where Thetis used to feed her frisking trains:
Thin Boreas with his breath, did charm the flood,
Envied the dwellers there, and cooled their blood:
The soil was barren too, the men grew poor,
They wrought, and eat to live, but eat no more
Than Nature craved: withal 'twas not so ill,
Some filled themselves, some did their purses fill.
But one among them, having store of gold,
Resolved to ride a journey from the cold;
And in the South, awhile he did abide,
(He had a feeling in the case beside)
And being there, his blood began to thaw,
His lust arose, and sought against the law.
He of his sins did make himself a sword,
And judged the law, to be an empty word.
He meets a whore, she smiled, to him she spoke;
Then he replied, and thus his mind he broke.
Kaind lovin mastresse!
Feath aies be tak-en we thee vary face,
Gee me thee hond, aies kee'st, o sick a grace
Tha have at eance ceame, let me clap mine arm
About thee middell; their is mickle charm
Geine from theene eyes: in it I con freelee ha
Mine weell of thee, an minit is it a da.
Benison leeght on thee! Isles gee thee wine,
Sa mack I love tha: ceame, troth thee be mine.
Away they went together, what they did
'Cause 'twas a stranger, let that fault be hid.
He having staid till midnight, with that punk,
Then out they reeled together, both being drunk,
The watchmen found'em: but the cunning whore
Gave them the slip; another watch before
Perceived a running post, caught her at last,
Put her in Bridewell: there she is bolted fast.
And for the countryman, his brains being sped;
Would feign take up the channel for his bed.
Sometimes he slips, and then he takes a fall;
Then by and by, his head against the wall
Receives a knock; he is with himself displeased,
Although his stomack's full, his purse is eased.
His feet draws out Indentures, as he goes;
His body's like a coarse, his eyes, his nose,
Vnmans his face; and all his parts are pressed
By Maligo; now to proclaim him beast.
His mouth lets in his shame, but lets out reason,
His heart agreed to bring about this treason.
Sometimes he thought himself at home, but when
He felt it warm, his mind did change again.
Then presently he thought, he with this whore
Was drinking healths, as he had done before.
He Would knock the stones, as if he would raise'em up,
And call the boy to bring a bigger cup.
But coming to himself, his brains grew tame,
His eyes being clearer then, to see his shame:
Thus he began; (entreating them for pity)
I is o stranger; not eance yen this City
Befeare this time, nor never weell-agene,
Vnlessen woemin be meare true to mean.
I wea is me! what mum I do to geine
Me geud report? trow ye, a pittisse steine
Hau teane me neame! in trot I is undone!
Prey let me gang, an I awey will run.
Muck ill betide tha jade, for she hau gin
Me sike a welcam, as I feel me sin
Yeating mine sol; O! weell a near that I
Did ken her face, or seen her pinker nie!
I wot neane harm when Is It did gang to teake
A leetell drank; an when Is It cood no speak;
Her run away; whailst I is here beheend;
Whick way hur's gang'd, I ken not: hur's non friend:
She stalne mine coin; me selve dee teell now lee,
Indead la, a deaft less, hur seemed to be.
O weal a da! ere sine I is from heame,
I hau been feinding (...) ta be a meame!
Good firs dischardge ma! Is It chee thang yo than:
An won non nere be cauten sike agan.
They let him go; if he should thaw thus long,
He Would rot away; for whores and drink are strong,
Being joined together. Drunkenness is found
To hate the man; but yet it loves the ground.
It steals in at the mouth, to drown the soul,
Takes place of wit, and does the brains control.
It breeds disease, consumption in the purse,
Bladders the face, the nose; and it does nurse
What e're is ill. The stomach over charged
Does belch out filth, his words are more enlarged,
Regards nor time, nor place, but all may find
Him spewing up the secrets of his mind.
It boyles a man to froth, (oh! hateful crime!)
Brings shame, pain, death, and all before the time.
All that are men, abhor't! has he the day
That drinks down men, to carry shame away?
For carrying drink, this beast the praise does crave,
It Is only that the Brewers horse should have.
SECT. 18. Of strange policies in a newfound Bawd.
Among many Bawds, yet one there was of late,
That had her Imps of any size, or rate;
Her customers of all degrees and ranks
Resorted thither; played their hellish pranks.
If she could meet with any that was young,
And handsome too, and had a nimble tongue,
She Would play the Devil, trying all her skill,
With promises to draw her to that will.
Thus long she lived, through guile she many won
To serve her ends, and so they were undone,
But yet at last, she growing out of sorts,
To feed the stream, and keep her Venus sports;
For both the Bridewels had of them a share;
She nor her pander then did never dare
To own them there; the turning of the mills,
And beating hemp was sore against their wills.
But will they, nill they, they were forct unto it,
Or take the lash, if they refuse to do it:
And shameless Newgate got another part,
They could not budge, which vexed her to the heart.
There was no help, which makes her fret and chafe,
Yet Newgate promised her, to keep them safe.
The Hospitalls had some to try their cure,
Which had the pox, and there they must endure
Sharp tortures, broylings, now a change they find;
They broyl'd before, but in another kind:
With medicines they search and pinch their gutts,
It Is cutting torment! good enough for slutts.
Then weather-beaten Tyburne claims the rest,
And now the hangman is become a guest,
But cannot please them: so they quickly part;
He takes his leave, and leaves them on the cart.
Their faults so bad, the hangman scorns to cloak them,
His pills are slips, yet being tough do choke them:
Yet Gregory he is executor; all they have,
Will only help'em to a highway grave.
Now in this strait, the bawd to raise her store,
Does try her wits, and finds one project more;
Goes to a carrier modestly attired,
Enquires for servants, she would feign have hired
Two at the least: there being none, then he
Must bring her up some, promising a fee
Of forty shillings; sor each one bespoken;
'Twill set him up, or raise him being broken.
A shrewd temptation! so he seeks about,
Mistrusting nothing; when he finds some out,
He brings them up, and has his money paid.
She entertains them, thus they are betrayed
With flattering words: and what they do desire,
She Will promise them; and pay them larger hire
Than they expect; new suits from top, to toe
She freely gives them; she will have it so.
They shall be brave, poor girls! they think it strange,
And do rejoice at this their happy change,
(As they conceive) not used to be so clothed,
Their other garmentsare with them so loathed,
They will not own them: then to lectures next,
She brings them, and they must bring home the text,
(She seems devout) that there they may be viewed,
And that she may the better them delude
With show of goodness: next, unto a play
She will bring them (for there the fowls of prey
Do much resort) they being often spied,
The plot is laid, and now they must betry'd:
If they will yield unto this cursed sin,
And bring new custom; then she does begin
To bless her-selfe, that trading comes again,
She reapes the fruit of her forecasting brain.
But if they will not, after twice, or thrice
Attempted to it; then this her last device
Dos take effect: she will threaten them, and say
I Will strip you bare, and turn you then away.
What, was it for nothing that I made you fine?
To keep you thus, it is for no case of mine.
Go take your rags; those garments which I bought,
Leave them; I will not give them you for naught.
Feign they would go, and yet as feign abide,
They love good names, yet will not leave their pride;
They would not have fine feathers thus to fall;
To put on rags, that grieves them most of all.
They seem to look when they should put them off,
As coming from the hill near Padington.
The subtle moths, conspired with the rot
To take possession: being long forgot;
The ugly form, considered with the sinell
They could not like, nor did it savor well.
Now being neat, they think they shall be prized;
Put on their trash, they shall be much despised.
If they consent they shall enjoy the place,
Or else they must go home with great disgrace:
Sometimes again, they judge it no ways fit;
Then blame themselves, having so little wit.
In this distemper, then the Bawd steps in,
And she will prove, this but a venial sin;
Which brings in profit, pleasure, wealth, and case:
I speak the truth, you may do what you please.
First shows of good, mixed with apparent evil
Draws them to yield; and now they serve the devil.
Alas poor souls! their rising is their fall!
They only breathe, but do not live at all.
But yet ere long this Bawd is questioned for it,
And former vileness: Neighbors do abhor it;
And Newgate does embrace her, as it is meet:
She has preferment, riding in the street
Herself alone: Judge, is not this great state?
(But all such honor women still do hate.)
Her Coach had but two wheels, one horse did draw it:
Her Coachman was a Carman, people saw it.
'Twas open round, regarding not the weather;
Nor was the top once over-laid with leather.
The inside of it being never lined;
T'ad but one boot, and that was quite behind:
'Twas of long standing, and so full of holes,
'Twas ever after forced to carry coals.
Her footmen many, only for that day,
All volunteers, not one of them had pay.
Both sides they run, in running, still they hollowed:
The Marshall rode before, the Beadles followed.
She was saluted as she rode along
With kettle Music; and the basins rung.
Her fame was spread, and she was often crowned
With Carret-tops, and whatsoere the ground
Did there afford: and 'twas at such a time
When Chamber-pots agreed to purge her crime.
Her journey ended, all hermen discharged;
Her fine, her fees, before she be enlarged,
Must all be paid: and then away she is banished,
Down falls her trade, for all her imps are vanished.
She Would plant again, though in another coast,
But that disgrace and shame do haunt her ghost.
She runs all bras; Muse, be thou content
To leave her helpless in her banishment.
SECT. 19. Of a Hackney Hestis; the trade she drove; and how she ended.
A Common Strumpet (as I heard it told)
Being impudent (for whores are ever bold)
She tempted many with het flattering tongue;
And with her eyes to death were many stung.
Sh'ad all the ways that might be had to gain
Fresh customers: at last she did so stain
The Town she dweltin, that a course was taken
To drive her thence; she was of all forsaken:
For she grew odious; time had blazed her name,
Her lewd light carriage still did speak her shame.
She hangs out colors; when her Imps came in,
She fell again unto her wonted sin.
A public house she keeps; all men may be
There entertained; more common now is she
Than highway Truls; though she be now remote,
Vermin do smell, and then begin to dote
Upon fire painted face: she rules the roast,
And every Iack's corivall to mine Host.
He can digest it, though his horns do grow.
(A Tinker patched his face, and peec'd his brow.)
She wants nor money, pleasure, sport, nor ease,
Thus trades a while, until the foul disease
Does seize upon her; then her tempting tongue
Begins to faulter, and her breath's so strong
None can abide it; and her wanton eye
Bewrays her shame; and both her jaws do cry,
We are undone: for P: has seized upon us
With violence, to take our teeth quite from us.
Pain follows pleasure! she can only crawle,
She Is loathed of many, but she is shunned of all.
Her rascal crew forsake her, having spied it,
Alas, poor Host! he only must abide it!
In this distress she does her self bemone,
What shall I do? my friends are from me gone!
And I am left to end my days in grief!
No means I have to bring me in relief!
To serve my lust, how did I daily strive?
And for reward, now I must rot alive!
My shame is noysed everywhere about,
I Am like a monster; boys do hiss me our!
The Surgeon must be paid; but where is the coin?
Alas I am weary of this life of mine!
All that have reason, do abhor my sight;
Darkness attends me; for I loathed the light!
Me thinks the beasts cry, as they daily feed,
(As I go by) There goes a beast indeed!
The fowls all day do at my window call,
And chatter curses, wishing for my fall.
I cannot look toward Heaven, but despair,
Nor but with horror wave the gentle air:
Nor without dread, once tread upon the ground,
Or any way, but hell besets me round.
In this mad fit, she does at last conclude,
(See how the Devil does poor Imps delude!
First to presume; that acted, to despair;
The storm is gathering, while the weather's fair)
To end her life, and fall by her own hand;
She has no power, Satan to withstand.
She Would hang her self, but that she wants a place:
(But I dare say, that'tis for want of grace,
That she attempts it) For she has a halter,
The beame's too high, and so her mind does alter.
At last a beam she finds that is very low,
The halter's laid, but where she does not know,
So she is dismissed: but having place and rope
Another time, O! now she is in hope
To do the deed: but being then prevented,
Prolonged her life: yet being discontented,
She plots a fresh; and finds another way,
How she untroubled may herself destroy.
A well was near her, which was very deep;
(Though she was rotten) she did crawle, or creep
Unto this well; and headlong threw her self;
Her life there ended; so this noisome elfe
Was taken up, as cold as any stone,
She being breathless: for her soul was gone.
Whether, God knows: I will not sentence pass;
I fear the worst: I show you how it was.
A dreadful spectacle! this horrid sight
Filled the beholders with amazement, fright.
Her clothes all being long (not long in getting)
Are now too short, for they are shrunk in the wetting:
Her countenance was black, her tongue hung out;
Her eyes wide open, but she is blind, no doubt.
Fool, why did thou against thy life rebel?
Did think to ease thy self? did think that hell
Was but a fable? grief I doubt begins!
Self murther's judged next to the worst of sins.
Did think that water would so cool thy sore,
To case thy pain? lust was asswag'd before.
Did Satan press thee? or did thou appear
Proffring thy self to him, as volunteere?
Long in a journey did thou scorn to dwell,
That thou did seek a nearer way to hell?
Or did thou think, that by thy self alone,
Thou Would have thy hell, or else thou would have none?
Did think thy shame, and pain would then have ended,
Or else with hell hounds think to be befriended?
Though like a beast thou liv'dst, thou did undo
Thy self; for why? thou can not dye so too.
Worse than a beast thou art, and had: less wit;
They'are taught by Nature to avoid a pit.
Thou heardst that hell was in a place below;
Did go to see, because thou did not know
That was a truth? or whether it was deep?
Or what those vermin are, that there do creep?
The Well was deep, but yet it had a ground;
And hateful creepers were, where thou wast drowned.
Poor fool! alas! did not believe, nor fear
In hell was fire, but no water there?
It Is bottomless; it had bin best for thee
To have believed it, not to go and see:
But this I think, thou could not judge but hell
Was very large; or larger than the Well:
Sure thou did think, 'twas but the way into it.
Yet thou wast worse than mad when thou did do it.
These silly creepers that have here abode,
The Frogs, the Lizard, or the loathsome Toade,
Are not so odious: (nor their shreeks, nor cries
Like them in hell:) nor of so large a size.
We'll hasten now to bring her to her grave:
The Crowner calls a Jury; found they have
She only guilty of this fact committed,
And suffered for it: yet she is of no man pitied.
They parle, and do condemn her; for this cause
A Crosse-way grave, according to the laws,
Is made for her; and thither she is brought
And tumbled in, just like a thing of naught.
Being covered, a stake is driven in
Quite through her Corpse, to show, her heinous sin.
Her friends were shamed (if she had any left)
She through her vildenesse was of all bereft)
None durst be seen, all diu so much abhor her:
For not one grieved, no show of mourning for her.
All mouths are open still, to blaze her shame,
But ears disdain to entertain her name.
The fowls do cry, and will not be at rest,
For being disappointed of their feast.
The worms had had the best on it when she sunk,
But could not once come near her 'cause she stunke.
Muse leave her there still as a way-marke curse,
And wish all better, but none ever worse.
But where is mine Host so long? he is gone astray,
Or else to grass, to cast his horns away.
But does he not go rogueing up and down,
And leave his children now to charge the town?
Or is he so in debt, that even the light
Is hateful to him, so plays least in sight?
Or has he not some Iaylor to attend him?
Or has he not the pox that soon will end him?
I Will send no hue and cry; it is not my task:
After this time I Will never for him ask.
Her Epitaph.
HEre lies a whore that did exceed in evil;
She common was, and had the pox 'twas known:
She Would more, and more acquaintance with the devil:
At last she was by her own hand overthrown.
Let passers by take notice of this stake,
That they may fear, and warning by her take.
SECT. 20. Of a Child borne full of the pox: with a Satyr playing his part
upon the Father.
A Female infant newly being come
Into the world; and living from the womb;
Death soon did follow: while she lived, the fame
Did every minute speak the fathers shame;
She as an Emblem and a type of death
Did show her self, when she received breath.
She was enclosed with the foul disease;
Though little time she lived, she had less ease,
For why? she had extremity of pain,
Till she returned unto the dust again.
Sh'was coffined up, with scurfe and no y some sores,
Her father brought it from his rotten whores
Unto her mother; so it was conveyed
To her; her mother had been else destroyed:
Yet both undone; and yet this rascal vile
Being often shent, he would jeare, and laugh, or smile,
Her grief was much increased, being poor,
Most that he got, he spent upon some whore;
Or on the Surgeon, being often cured;
But no whit better; what he then endured,
Yo'ld think might change his mind; but he grew worse,
Nor is he moved with Gods eternal curse.
He runns in debt, and scores up what he may,
It Is known full well he does not use to pay.
I know he borrowed much his lusts to fit,
Some wished him whipped; he has not paid them yet;
Nor never will; which grieves them most of all:
He Is out of credit now; nor ever shall
Grow more in debt, because no man will lend him;
Speak harsh, he is mad; or fair, it will not mend him.
He must be dieted at the fall and spring;
He Will no strong drink, nor wine, and thus he will sing
A month together; while the Surgeon's by,
He Will seem to grieve; being gone, then presently,
He is the same; no orders will he keep,
But drink, and drab, while civil men do sleep.
If money last, he will not look toward home,
Had they but food, they would rather have his room
Than's company: he will kick his wife about,
And pawn his goods; he has not much I doubt.
In this distress, if she does seek relief,
Amongst her friends, if they but ease her grief,
This monster's wild, spits venom, threats, he will say,
See if they dare to keep his wife away:
If that prevails not, then he will swear, and lie,
He loves her so, that he for her shall dye,
If she returns not home. Thus will he seek,
Till he attaines: she being mild and meek,
Conceives the best; he promising a change,
Goes home again; believe it, it is not strange,
He Is changed indeed: but it is from bad to worse;
She Is almost starved, yet he has no remorse.
Makes he much of her, as he promised? no,
He sells her clothes, then hang her, let her go.
He never goes to Church, but hates all such
That would persuade him to it, thinks all too much
That any do for heaven: calls them asses,
Especially amongst his bawdy lasses.
He Will domineere, when they upon him sawne.
I Will judge the best, his clothes are all at pawn,
Or else he is loath to fright folk with his look,
Or else because the Broker has his book:
Or is he in some Celler under ground?
And drinking, till he thinks the world goes round?
He hangs on others, they must pay his score,
He has no coin, his host will trust no more.
As for the woman, how to set her free,
Alas! I know not, except time agree
To end her life: some Hospital may take him
To try their skill, and as a pattern make him.
No other way can I conceive to do it,
Unless the Sessions do agree unto it;
That he may grieve his wife and friends no more,
To have him hanged, though he was burnt before:
Of all, the hangman then would prove his friend,
He Would never leave him, till he saw his end.
But after all his friendship, he would be mad,
When once he finds his clothes are all so bad.
Muse, leave this goat, for he defiles thy pen;
Rank him with beasts, but never more with men.
But this poor infant I have left too long,
We'd parle a little: could thou use thy tongue,
Thou Would teach my pen, to write with blood or tears,
Or make it silent; and beget strange fears
In those that hear thee, and as strange to see;
T'ould move a stone, to wail thy misery.
Not like a child, thou like a monster rather!
Oh, blame not me! but blame my wretched father!
But quit my mother, for she is guiltless known,
Her comfort here is like mine, quite overthrown.
She was deceived, my fathers flattring tongue
Did so ensnare her (when she was but young)
Though 'twas but nonsense, she could not perceive it;
What ere he spoke, she would willingly receive it:
Her friends being simple, matched her to her sorrow,
To one days mirth, which ended on the morrow.
By love she tried to draw, and turn his heart
From ill, but he still played the devils part.
In sorrow she conceived, and brought forth me,
An object of disdain, that all may see,
I am a wonder, for my fathers sake,
A sign of great displeasure: warning take
All you that see me, or do hear my story,
Amend your lives in time; give God the glory.
All filthy courses see you always hate;
' When Ruin knocks, Repentance comes too late,
Then you must bear the evils that you do,
And your posterity will curse you too.
They Will suffer for your sins; as you may see,
My fathers sins, are now revenged on me.
My suffring's here, for I shall find redress.
And be redeemed out of this deep distress.
God's just and righteous, as he still has bin;
I shall not always bear my fathers sin.
My time is short, how soon my race is run!
I must away, before I see the Sun.
I now salute the world, and bid adieu;
It Is only vain; leave it ere long must you.
I for your sakes was sent; I had my breath
To entertain my friend. Come, gentle death.
The Epitaph.
HEre lies an Infant, while she lived in pain,
Did (in a kind) bewail her fatal birth!
She was an Emblem of her fathers stain,
Till she returned to her mother, Earth.
The sight of her might quell all lust and pride.
Her presence gave us marning; so she died.
SECT. 20. How a subtle Queen fained herself to be with child by a man of
quality; of her lying in, and how the plot was found out.
WAlking alone; about the evening tide,
I heard a voice: turning about, I spied
Two walking hand in hand; and as they went,
They whisp'red out their shame; 'twas their intent
To sin in secret. First, the man did woo,
And soon the female gave consent unto
What he desired: a place then they descri'd,
Which they did think would all their folly hide.
But what is hid from that all-seeing eye,
That Is done in hell, or on the earth? the sky
Is fixed full of eyes to find out sin,
And every creature must give verdict in,
Against the sinful world: but all this while,
Those witless Imps are striving to be guile
Their souls of peace; and having had their ends,
They part for that time, (seeming loving friends.)
But pointed when, and where to meet again:
He breaking promise (for it seems his brain
Grew addle after this) she sent to know
Where all this time he did himself bestow,
Desiring him to visit her; for she
Must show to him her hapless misery.
He told his name, his place, that he was rich,
Unto this whore: and now her fingers itch
To handle some of's gold: she rubs her neyes,
Hangs down her head, and blubbers out, and cries,
She Is half undone; her belly now does swell,
For she is with child by him: she loves him well,
And would not have him shamed; give her relief,
She Would free him on it, and still conceal her grief.
Against her lying in, he must provide
A nurse, and linen; diverse things beside
Which she must have; then, had you heard him curse
This whore, his fate, their meeting ('cause his purse
Grew empty by this means) you would have thought
The Devil spoke by him, what is worse than naught.
He tries with care, and cost, to hide his sin:
For now the time is come, and she lies in,
So neat, and sine; he goes to see her then,
And to supply her wants; and goes again,
And finds her weak: the child in the cradle by,
The bawdy Nurse was rocking: presently
She takes it up; oh, here is th'owne fathers child;
Your eyes, your nose, your picture is not spoiled
In joining up; while this babe does survive,
He Will keep your image, and your name alive:
Do You see your forehead, eyebrows, double chin,
Your little mouth? just as your lips are thin,
So are the child's: his fingers long and small;
He Is quiet too; that suits you best of all.
This gives him no content, away he flings,
And leaves his image; but the Nurse she fings
A Lullaby; the woman that lies in,
Is raised with gold, to strike the merry pin.
He meets a man whom he well knew before,
Reveals the passages 'twixt him and's whore:
And how much goldsh'had had, and os the shame
That he did fear would light upon his name.
His friend (if so you call him) heard the case,
Took his fit time, and went unto that place,
Pretending shameful mirth; but she seemed ill,
And would not once submit unto his will;
Being subtle in her trade, she told him how
The case did stand: he must not touch her now.
Away goes he, acquaints a Magistrate,
How such a man was made unfortunate,
By dealing with a whore: he brings him to him,
Who promised them much kindness he would do him,
To set him free: unto the house they went,
Where he had been, and had his money spent.
They coming in, the Trull seemed very weak;
The Nurse being rocking, she began to speak,
But fear restrained her: for the man, they knew,
Did use to give such birds of night their due.
He taking up the child (but he mistook)
Was quite agreed it had the fathers look;
I am persuaded in this heart of mine,
Who ever sees this babe, may sweare'tis thine.
With violence this child began to cry;
A woman chatg'd with fury, suddenly
Rusht in upon'em, What do you mean to do?
Borrowing my child, pray do not murther't too!
I will not trust you (Bawds and Whores are vilde)
You do not care how you abuse my child.
By this the plot was found; the Whore, the Nurse
Devised a lying in to purge his purse.
The Jade from her preferment had a fall,
She Is sent-abroad, and yet not church'd at all.
The Nurse must go before the month be out,
To old Bridewell, to turn the mill about.
(Her gossipping is spoiled) there she must stay,
To try her strength a twelvemonth and a day.
The other Imp to new Bridewell is had,
To knock the hemp: which work she counts as bad
As Purgatory: now she cheats no men:
A sudden change! there she lies in again.
As for the man, I Would place him with this whore,
But he has promised to do so no more.
Thou little infant! did they bring thee in
To be a patron to a newborn sin?
But I conceived (when I went further in)
It was to draw the tawnie from her skin:
And make the wrinkles smooth, and color fresh
Her corpse decayed; which was like parboyl'd flesh.
She Is pickel'd up; her upper parts do show
As clad in mourning: but she is bare below.
This sight compared with the unsavory stench,
The lust of any Incubus might quench.
Gentilitie with this is all her pride,
She envies nature, 'cause she has denied
Her comeliness; and now she strives to be
A pattern of the worlds deformity.
Dame Nature knew her once; but as she is now,
She scorns to own her, nor will she allow
Her any praise: sh'has brought a new foul in
Into the world; and she is as foul within.
She lying thus in pickle, all the room
Did seem to be allotted for her tomb:
Me thought it had a savor of the slime;
An earthy show! and stunk before its time.
If It had been thus, the worms being weak and blind,
Had been constrained to enter her behind:
Or else below; but they would never rest,
Till they had sucked the plasters from her breast.
This sight would fright them, if they could but see it;
(To suit the rest) had she but cloven feet,
They durst not touch her: feign I Would see her rise,
Make a sack-posser, let her wash her neyes,
And pull the parches off; and rince her skin:
Then let me see if any blood's within;
Set her the glass, that she may dress her head,
Ask whe're she will please to paint, or white, or red;
See how she sets her face, and how she will change,
Now she will be modest, and extremely strange,
Then she will be merry; by and by she will grieve,
Then bridle up her head; you will not believe,
How she will turn her postures, and her shape;
When all is done, she is but bare Natures Ape.
This color is too red, and that is too white;
Or if it lies too thick, 'twill shame her quite.
But being finely tempered, then 'twill do;
Now if her tail were seen, she would paint that too;
One lock of hair lies wrong: she would crisp again,
But that will melt the color from the grain.
She Is ready for to day had she but prayed,
But now it is too late, the cloth is laid;
And guests are come to accommodate this sinner,
With wanton jests and tales, whilst she is at dinner.
When dinner's done, they will pass the time away
In gaming, or with chat, until the play
Is ready to begin; and there her coat,
And painted face, do make her one of note.
She Will praise a lovesick fancy, but she will vex,
If any word, or act, do touch her sex;
She Is powdered sweetly, which may gain delight;
But coming home, she stinks again at night:
Her face is spoiled: her dressings are laid by;
She Is coffined up again. My Muse and I,
With joint consent, did then her absence crave:
And left her as a restless living grave.
SECT. 22. How an old Bawd lay in for a young Whore: they are found and
punished.
A Private Bawd, that used to entertain
A subtle queen, or two; finding the gain,
She did increase her number: and did learn
How every one might come to take her turn.
She kept a hot-house (which did bring her gold)
Under pretense; but 'twas too hot to hold.
One of her creatures being proved with child,
Having no husband; (sin had so beguiled
This simple slut) and now to hide her shame,
The Bawd must seem with child: and who can blame
Her for it? her husband's very well content
To cover it, all danger to prevent.
Being very big with clouts, she does begin
To fit her self against her lying in:
Her reck'ning's out; her groaning's heard by some,
But ere the Midwife and the neighbors come,
The child is borne; some take distaste and cavil,
And some do wonder at her easy travel!
She seems exceeding weak, and very sick;
The Pander's feign to run and buy a Chick,
To pull't alive, then boy le it to a jelly;
The Nurse approves it good to ease her belly.
Some do mistrust: this the discourse they hold,
Admiring that a woman grown so old
Should have so sweet a babe; but having past
The danger of her month, she is church'd at last.
The whore that bore the child, is free from fear,
(But not from danger, though the coast seems clear)
Unto the Bawd she does her self engage,
And goes by Bridewell boldly; and the cage
Affrights her not; but see, the walls ere long,
(Or something else) begins to find a tongue,
And does bewray the plot: and how they swerved;
And they were punished, as they all deserved.
Was It not enough to sin, thou strumpet vilde,
By prostitut on? and to have a child
Unlawfully be got? but thou must make
Another stranger sin? and to forsake
The infant when 'twas borne? father nor mother
It should have known; but time would never smother
Such monstrous crimes. Poor infant! thou art come
Into the world, to be disgraced by some,
And pitied of the rest! for thou wast brought
Unlooked for hither, by a thing of naught.
Take warning by thy mother; do not sell
Thy soul away, for that which springs from hell.
Thou hateful Pander! how could thou abide
To own this child as thine? how could thou hide
This matchless plot? it is like thy fee was more
For this, than ten times keeping of the door.
Or did they gull thee, making thee believe
It was thine own? my pen should then reprive
Thee from the crime. But thou art weak and cold,
So is thy Bawd, grown impotent and old;
Or did thou do it to keep thy self from trouble?
How could thou think, but this would make it double?
Or did thou take a pride to be a father?
That nere wast one before? but I guess rather
Some gallant got it, and his morgag'd state
Is bound to keep thee at a higher rate.
Come near, thou bawdy hagg; thy wrinkled face
With tawnie surrowes, will thy cause disgrace.
Thou have no wit save only for such tricks,
I think thy age has out-runne sixty six.
Thy hollow eyes have almost lost their sight,
Thou have no color, but thy head is white.
Who gave thy baby suck? once thou had store,
But 'twas at least full forty years before.
Or if some Incubus had lain with thee,
How could thy fruit less than a monster be?
Those that did see thy shape, thy lying in,
Did think that elves and goblins did begin
To nurse their changlings there; when thou did speak
They thought the furies did their gorges break.
Some thought a witch bigg with a little devil
Had come to leave it here, because in evil
It should be more expert: or else in hell
(Being hot and dark) she could not nurse it well.
Some thought that (snake-like) thou would turn young again,
And others thought thou would be a shame to men.
Their fancies differd, as their minds were pressed;
Some feared the worst, and others hoped the best.
Thou desperate wretch! how durst thou go to meet
Him that does know the waverings of thy feet?
Or come within his house? do think thy vow
Is prized of him who knows thou mockst him now?
Do come to give him praise in peoples sight
For safe deliverance? lasting paine's thy right.
Do think he does not know thee? or do think,
Although he knows thee, at this fault he will wink?
He Is never deceived; thou wilt find thy conscience will
Join with the Judge, thy soul with guilt to fill.
You Are ever lost, except thou do repent;
I Will leave thee now to corporal punishment.
SECT. 23. Of a strumpet accusing others, and afterward her self: her
protestations.
WHen wealthy summer did decline in strength,
The golden days diminisht much in length,
The waking time which they from night did take,
Being urged upon it, they restitution make,
To reconcile the ods (but not the crime)
Both day and night must share alike in time:
But light found wary friends to plead for day,
Though she be cast, sh'has a months time to pay.
Men did rejoice because the teeming earth
Was safe delivered of a fruitful birth:
But she looked pale upon it; for all her store
Was strained upon, to pay a twelve months score.
This dealing vexed her, feign she would have chid,
But men had bills, and bands for what they did,
And judgment past upon'em; most unkind!
The birds and beasts gleaned what they left behind.
The watery treasure opened wide its mouth,
And grants a license to the weeping fouth,
For bottling up of tears: the clouds did hold
Their swarthy color, to invite the cold.
The trees grew naked, whistling winds did call
The leaves away. The earth deprived of all
Her newborn treasure, makes a league with men,
For one grain she receives, to pay'em ten
Within the year: she does receive the seed
As earnest ties, to pay as they agreed.
(The fool thought all was buried in a tomb,
Some lived in hope) and then she closed her womb.
But keeping Centry at that time, I spied
A walking clod of earth; and when ^tri'd
My skill, to know what creature this might be,
I found she loved the Art of Bawderie.
She being questioned, did with fury prate,
Till she was locked within the wooden grate.
But being freed again, she did unfold
The names of those, who residence did hold
At such a place; the nature of their meeting,
The occasions on it, their feasting, and their greeting.
What randevous they kept; what domineering,
What time they spent in drinking, whoring, swearing;
How Lady-like one of the queanes lay in;
If any ask, she must not be within;
She Is at her Countrey-house to take the air,
To purge her blood, and make her seem more saire.
Her Serving-man will answer at the door,
(He Is but a dunghill Pimp, to attend this whore)
That he is left to manage her estate,
In black and white; this cancelled Ass will prate.
Another is a Maid, new come to town
To buy a gorger, and a Tabbie gown,
And sell a jewel: she goes all in Plush:
She Is newly entered, and she will quickly blush.
She keeps her chamber, lying backward still;
She now takes physic, and she is very ill.
Another, if you knock, will be afraid,
And she (forsooth) goes for her Chambermaid;
She Will wring her hands, and call the Gods above
To right her cause; she has been crossed in love.
The fourth's a daintiewidow, rich, and young,
Her husband di'd at sea, and she stays long
To gather in her debts: she is wary, staid,
And she is resolved to live without a maid.
A Merchant loves her well, and he does watch
To take her in the mind to strike the match.
All those are common: though they do pretend
This, and the other thing: mark but the end,
You Will find this true, if you have common sense;
Call up the Constable, and fetch'em thence.
The Master's Pander, and the Mistress Bawd;
Take them to Newgate, there they will be awed.
When she had spoke, I followed in the round;
The place was searched, the persons all were found
As she descri'd; the first began to frown
When the Bridewell Matron came to change her gown.
She clad in Plush grew mild, and changed her hue.
She was in black, to morrow she is in blue:
The lovesick maid is from her sweetheart barred,
She Would love the Beadle, but he whips too hard.
The widow learnes good huswifrie, she knocks
The hemp; and yet she is angry with the blocks.
The Merchant leaves her; is it not very ill?
Nor can she stir to prove her husbands will.
The Bawd must ride, the Pander's in disgrace,
Yet he is in hope to get the Hang-mans place.
But afterward this tell-tale whore confessed
Her shameful plots; thus she herself expressed:
It Is true, I am a whore, who knows not that?
I love a private corner, like a batt.
I cut a purse sometimes, and take my share
When others do it; and drink away all care.
But yet I scorn to robb the poor, and when
I do it unknown, I pay'em all again.
Those that can spare it, when they come to me,
(If in our love we can but once agree)
I often pillage them: when they grow bold,
I watch my time to seize upon their gold.
I am no market whore, like those that say
Before they truck, sir, what shall be my pay?
Such mercenary trulls, that will not trade
With any man, until the match be made,
I ever hated: it shall nere be fed
(By any blade) that I am basely bred.
I Will be gentile: with any hide-bound elfe,
I have away how to relieve my self.
Could I wear silk, with gold and silver lace,
A beaver of this price, which gives a grace
To all the rest, a gorget of fine lawne,
Edged round with purle, if I did never pawn
A woodcocks golden feathers? take a prey
When it lies open, ready in my way?
Should I refuse such booties? is it reason?
Farewell, it is late, we will find a fitter season
To drink and laugh: the Constable is true,
The Beadle's right; well, once again, adieu.
See here the vileness of this black-breath'd spirit,
Who thinks her damned sin bespeaks a merit:
It Is true, it merits hell: I fear she will creep
Quite from her grave into the infernal deep.
What Is bad in others, is to her a grace,
It may be she does think to have a place
Of eminence in hell; 'pray has there bin
At any time a nobleness in sin?
She did reveal the meetings of a crew
That leigers were for hell, and lay perdue
To stay the passers by: she thought her trading
Might mend upon it, which by their means was fading,
I hope that sin is of the falling hand,
When hell's divided, long it cannot stand.
Ah! how is this world bewitched! how does it play
With serpents, crocodiles which will destroy
Their own familiars! how does it spend
Its marrow, strength, and time! rush to an end
Which brings in endless woe! oh that my pen
Might strip those beasts! the rest may live like men.
SECT. 24. Of a teeme of hackney Jades, that use to go coupled in the night
along the street.
TO usher in the black and silent night
('It Is often seen) six beasts with collers white,
With measured pace, do walk along the street,
Keeping a distance, mincing with their seet:
Like pamperd mares they prance, spreading their flanks;
Being double-ey'd, they keep both file and ranks.
How stately every one would act her part,
If they might draw together in a cart!
Sometimes demure, and sometimes swell, and foam
Like oxen; but they leave their horns at home,
The two before wear beavers, gowns of silk,
Rich diamond-rings, their hands as white as milk;
Their cheeks new playster'd of a Crimson hue,
The ground well sized, but that their eyes were blew.
No shark durst tempt'em; for it cannot be
That they should yield without a law yers fee.
The second two are full two sizes lower,
They Will take five shillings; if you will give them four,
They Will do for once: the villain will rejoice
That he can have'em both, or take his choice:
Their gowns are Tammy, Grogren, and their rings
Are set with Bristom stones, or some such things.
Their hats are Demicastors, and they'are feign
Touse the courser paint, but's laid in grain.
The last are Wastecoters, they want the trick
To temperdirt, nor can they make it stick;
Or if it do, being greasy, soon 'twill melt,
Their linnen's soul, each of them wears a felt.
They wear Saint Martins stones set well in brass,
They shine i'th'night, and they alike will pass.
They Are eighteen pence a piece; they will abuse
You cheap enough; there is not a -- to choose.
What is their fee, they will not be denied,
You must be sure to pay the shot beside.
If some of them be took, the rest not had,
(The term being done) the night proving but bad,
They know each others haunt, where they will meet
To taste your bounty: (watchmen search the street)
Take on of them, thou wilt take a six fold curse;
Then take thou heed, or they will take thy purse.
This is the way to make a man derided;
By this we know, hell is not yet divided.
SECT. 25. An enquiry, after a young man. that was led away with a whore from
his master.
A Young man lately chanced to be in place,
Where was a Trull, who had a brazen face;
Her words she spoke by gross, her tongue was tip't
With shameless boldness: for 'twas newly dip't
In diverse liquors; but she did protest
The Wine she drank was raught; the Ale was best.
Her carriage with her words did so agree
You Would think that hell had none so bad as she.
This pretty beast found out a silly Ass,
They both agreed to go abroad to grass:
His wit lay in his tongue; all that he had;
But now the Ale had robbed him; drunk, and mad,
He now begins to dally, with this whore,
Through her allurements (so have many more
Been taken by her) and his blood grows warm;
What ere he did, he thought it was no harm.
She having brought him to her cursed bent;
Begins to search what coin he had; what spent:
Judge you his case, for she was much in fear
'Twas low; but then an Angel did appear,
Which cheered her heart: the reckoning being paid;
She draw'd him thence, time must not be delaid,
If place be silent: gone they are together;
(Think what is their end) but who can tell me whither?
Feign would I find them, grant me then your aid,
And get a Warrant; search, for they are strayd
Into some corner: if we find them, so;
But if we cannot, hang 'hem, let them go.
How you may know them, I will now describe,
But if you find them, do not take a bribe,
Nor let them go; but show the Man the Devil;
As for the whore, let Bride well prove this evil.
He Is tallow-fac'd, his eyes are black, and narrow,
His chops are thin, he is mouthed much like a sparrow,
With beetle brows, his brain with humor swims,
Eared like an Ass, his hat has narrow brims,
He Is tall and slender, that me thinks might grace him,
But what is said before does still outface him.
His clothes are very poor, his cloak's the best,
A sad brown color; being once but dressed.
I doubt she will persuade him (else she will rail)
To put it for its faults in Brokers Iyale.
And for the Jade, mark, how you may descry her;
By my description I would not belly her.
Her face is swarty, with a hawks-bill nose,
And goggle-eyes: how such a pair as those
Would fright one in the night! her looks so rude
Would make you wonder, if you are endu'd
With common sense; her mouth of the largest size,
Stands always open, or with lust, or lies.
Her head is almost bald, her teeth are thin:
She, like a changeling, slobbers down her chinne;
Her hands are brawny, and her fingers are
Shrunck up for length, yet swelld with spite, or care:
Her body's gross, her legs do keep asunder,
Her feet are sure, yet being so kept under,
They hew each other; but her legs being big,
Will beare'em out in it, she cares not a fig;
Her knees are reconciled, yet by relation,
They Will part asunder on a light occasion:
Her' parrell is as mean, as mean may be;
Her gown is threadbare, and as light as she.
Her gorgets dirty and I heard some grumbl'd,
She wears no russe, for fear it should be tumbled.
Her Felt is out of fashion; yet 'twill last her
Till trading mend; and then she will have a Caster.
These marks will help you, if you do but mind them;
I Will tell you where too, you are like to find them.
First, search the renters; place, and persons mark,
If there you miss, then go to Mutton park:
For that is a noted place; but yet, I fear
The Bawd being lofty, has no poor puncks there.
Search narrowly; blind Alehouses may be
A cover-slut; let not the horns go free.
Then go to Bloomsbury, and common places
Where varlets dwell, and vermin hide their faces.
From thence to Islington, and seek about
In Alehouses, and Taverns; for a rout
Of vassals there do meet: if that be vain,
And having raised the spirits of the brain,
Come back to Turneboll-street; but have a care,
Be not to bold; for why? such creatures are,
Both tempting, and infectious; I have seen them,
And three in all had but one nose between them.
Then by the way that is about the Playhouse,
Search carefully, for I mistrust the day-house;
If still you misse'em, go to Shorditch then,
For that is a place, where whores have beggerd men:
If there you find them not, I Will say it is strange,
Yet be not out of heart, for Pickt-hatch Grange
Is the most likeliest place: For this I know;
They Are either there, or gone to rotten Row.
Enquiry being made, they are found at last;
The common stock was small; they spent too fast.
The Angel was casheer'd, nor can they rest:
For both their purses, were not penny-blest,
Yet rest they did; but how! their bones were staid;
Ere they are freed, the reckoning must be paid.
Now farewell cloak, it is like to go in trouble;
The sweet is past, the sower will be double!
The whore will car'it; quickly he is drawn
To quit himself, to put his cloak to pawn.
Well, gone it is: he sends it by this whore,
He takes no leave, but never sees it more.
He Is pawned the while, his word they will not take,
Nor can I blame them; now his heart does ache:
Yet not recovered; like a beast he sits:
This whore, and drink, have robbed him of his wits.
This is thy doom, poor fool, thou must abide it!
Thy shame breaks out, thou have no cloak to hide it.
Muse, stay a while, for yonder comes the lade,
And thou shall know, what markets she has made,
She being come, begins to tell her tale;
What pains she took, to put the cloak to sale:
She should have pawned it, for a noble price,
But she has sold it, for a noble thrice.
One part she gave to him; the other two
She kept her self: thus queanes do use to do:
One of the parts, she reckons for her pains;
The other part, she counted for her gains:
This long-lane Broker, well deserves a check,
He judgment gives, and hangs it by the neck:
Its master thought, it should but beare's expenses,
It Is feign to suffer, for his foul offenses!
Wast known by any? has it ever been
That cloaks were punished, for their Masters sin?
This tyrant shows some favor to the Cape,
'Twas proved, that was not guilty of the Rape:
It had revealed them, had it not been blind,
And shamed them too, but that it hung behind.
Then he perceiving how the markets went;
His cloak being gone, and all his money spent,
And he himself is brought to such disgrace,
He Will be but hist at, when he shows his face.
Unto the whore, thus he his mind did utter,
(Shame moved his tongue, he could but only mutter.)
Thou dunghill Jade! thou have undone me quite:
The time's accursed, that I came in thy sight!
Thou tempting witch, thou rotten hag, thou monster!
How vile thou art, the World can never conster;
'Twas thou, 'twas thou, did draw me unto sin,
Thou jear'st me now, what pickle am I in?
Time, where is thy sith? oh! that my glass were run!
I had been blessed, had I not seen the Sun!
With that he stopped, grief had his spirits sunk,
He could not speak; then thus begins the Punk:
Thou prating fool! I took thee for an Ass,
Thou art a Rascal; like a coxcombe pass.
Thou foul-mouthed villain, what, do rail at me?
Go hang thy self, and ease thy misery.
Thou simple drone! doe'st think to lick the honey
In Forma pauperis? have thou spent thy money?
And art thou vexed? who is it can give thee help?
Thou art too young; alas, poor sucking whelp!
Have lost thy cloak? maintained how should I be
Or such as I, but by such fools as thee?
Do cry! hold up thy head: and let me kiss thee,
Kiss somewhere else, if I do chance to miss thee.
Go learn more wit; if thou so can, and then
Get money to it, and come to me again.
Until that time, I will thy absence crave,
This is no jeare; and so adieu poor slave!
He sighs, and weeps, nor can he think of rest:
What dreadful torment does possess his breast:
He Would feign be gone, and yet as feign would stay,
But that his cash is spent, he must away:
But whether knows he not, it is his intent
Home to return; yet fearing to be shent,
His mind does change, he would go then to his kindred,
But he shall shame them; so, his journey's hindered.
If he dos walk by day, his friends will spy him;
Or if by night, the watchmen will desery him:
He giving no account; then they in rage,
Will put him into Bridewell, or the Cage.
His cloak he cannot get, yet goes about it:
Nor has he food, nor can he live without it.
He thus laments his case.
Wretch that I am! was I not worse than mad
To yield to such a whore? I Am worse than bad!
Undone, undone! I have my Fortunes crossed:
My Friends are turned my Foes; my credit's lost.
As I do, who can live: nor can I die:
My death's to live; in what a strait am I!
Me thinks the earth does speak to my disgrace,
The stones, the dust spit venom in my face!
Boreas is angry, growing sharp and thin;
The clowdy Air swells, to revenge my sin!
The Heavens frown, they will not endure my sight:
The days controwler, scorns to give me light!
Could I with these, but once more, have a truce,
And with my Friends, if ever such abuse
I do commit again, then let me be
A model of disgrace; that all by me
May warning take; oh! how do I repent
Of all my baseness! homeward I am bent.
I will submit; what though my master please
For punishment, send me to little ease!
Or else corrects me private? let him do it:
I have deserved it, and I Will yield unto it.
In living thus, it adds unto my sorrow,
Fall back, or edge, home I will go to morrow.
SECT. 26. Of a fight betwixta whore and her Money-lesse guest; and upon what
terms they parted.
ASattin Trull, that had bewitched a man
With her enchantments; (for the Devil can
Fulfill his pimps desires;) (a Conjured spell
Works wonders, strange, being newly brought from hell)
She with her powder, charms, or that black art
Makes him her pray, and seazeth on his heart.
She like a spider, weaves her web so fine,
Faced like an Angel, and her speech divine.
A perfect hypocrite! so full of Sin!
None but the Devil was more full within!
I Will not describe her, with her painted face;
Her Character, is in another place.
This paultry whore lived at so high a rate,
So Lady-like, she must be served in state.
With dainty fare, in plate; she will not fail,
So long as she keeps coying with her tail.
This painted fly spends all that he can get,
For he is took prisoner in the Spiders net:
He thought of nothing, but of sport and play;
At last this fly had worn his wings away.
A captive he remaind, and was content
To undergo't; 'twas sweet imprisonment
In his conceir; but 'twas the Spiders will,
To cast her venom to infect him still.
At last the fly got loose, away went he
Creeping along, because he could not flee.
Often he was caught: because he felt no pain,
He longs to be a prisoner once again;
Ere he had got his strength, or impt his wings,
With golden feathers; diverse other things
Were wanting too: as policy and wit,
Which made this vermin, show a Bedlam fit.
What, come thou here? for what? have brought no money?
Thou simple drone, d^st think to taste the honey?
'Pon quarter ticket? can I sup or dine,
Or pay my rent, except thou bringst me coin?
Words cannot clothe me, they are cheap; but thou
Regardst me not, thou broughtst me nothing now.
Then like a Panther flew she in his face,
Her claws were sharp, her talons did disgrace
His form and visage: he was scratch so sore,
The blood ran out, you would think he would come no more
To visit her; because he felt the smart:
Face, purse, both changed; all will not change his heart;
He begs, entreats, oh! here is a valiant spirit!
She pleads desert, and stands upon her merit.
The co^ne he had, he gave her to be quiet;
But still she swears, five pound's but three days diet.
Must I not feast my friends, to raise my name
From ill report, to credit, love, and fame?
I must be open-handed to the poor,
I must give food and money at my door:
And to my neighbors must not I be free,
To win their love, they may speak well of me?
How should I do it? my love, and not my hands,
Must bring in gains; thou know I have no lands.
Out of my sight! never come to me again,
But bring more gold; I Will trade with other men.
He was perplexed, nor knew he what to say;
But cries for mercy, thinking of a way
To make amends, if she would but forgive him,
He Would send her money; for her words did grieve him.
The under Pimp must go, they did agree,
(Seeing he was moved with her necessity)
That he should come again; but not before
A time set down, or sent for by this whore.
Nor durst he come; (oh! this a hellish prize)
For fear that she should scratch out both his eyes.
Fresh customers are come, she must have time,
To tell her money, and to act her crime.
Muse, stay not here, thou have no hope to mend her:
Go out and see, what money he will send her.
He Would take up money, promise any rate,
But here is the spite, his word is out of date.
He tries a second, he no coync can borrow;
A third denies him, to increase his sorrow.
He cannot choose, but see his credit's lost:
He frets, and swears, Was ever man thus crossed?
But then at last, he thought upon his chest,
Where he had clothes; one sure above the rest,
Being very costly, must to Brokers hall,
And be condemned, to free himself from thrall;
He took the gold, and sent it to his trull;
Judge, had he wit? or were his brains so dull
To think it fit, to plaster up this sore
To bleed a frcsh? it cost him six times more.
The whisk in brings the gold; and now this Jade,
Does bless her fortunes, such a thriving trade
None but my self enjoys! how am I blessed!
I live at ease, I eat and drink the best!
My house well furnished, I have joy my fill,
I go in silk, here is gold, more's coming still;
O sweet! O pleasing! profitable sin!
To raise me thus! now I can raise my kin:
I Have brave attendants, one wears silver lace,
The other scarlet, is not this a grace?
Now here is a calm, the blustering Devils laid,
The evil spirit's conjured; hell is staid,
From belehing fury: is it not very strange?
'Twill vent again, when once the Moon does change:
The Pimps must have their sees, need makes'em crave it,
To buy them boots; she is loath to let them have it,
Although her gold does ring such lusty sounds:
Her trading's raised from eighteen-pence to pounds.
It Is but a time! will she be ever young?
Her pounds will fall to nine-pence er't be long.
Age and the P. will shame her shameless lise;
Or hell will arbitrate, and end the strife.
But where is the lecher all this while, that I
Have left so long? thoughts of Adultery,
Have made him drunk; or is he raging mad,
To think upon the pleasure that he had?
And how he is deprived? or of the time
When he shall go once to renew his crime?
Or does he count the minutes of the clock?
Or enjoy time, and wish himself a Stock?
Or does he take an hour for a day?
Or thinks the day a year? or does he stay
In The Country for the air? or in the City,
Expecting still when she will show him pity
To send for him? and think that hour is blessed?
For that hours sake, he will chide, and curse the rest.
The time's not come, she set; nor has he treasure,
He dares not go 'pon pain of her displeasure;
Unless he would sell his eyes, or pawn his face
Against her nails; it is money buys the place.
His heart is dead, although his grief survive;
His body tombs his mind, while he is alive.
The time is tedious, for it will not run;
Nor change the scene, until its part be done.
The place yields no content, nor will he tarric
In any place, his fancy still does vary.
No company can give to him delight,
Except the queen; O! were she in his sight
To put his mind in tune, his grief were past:
H'has nere been merry since he saw her last.
The faithless Broker, on the other hand,
Does fret him too; he will not take his band,
And let him have his suit; no, he must pay,
Or if he does not fetch it at the day,
'Twill be condemned again; so he is perplexed:
The Broker and the whore, though he be vexed,
Show him no favor; how is he distressed!
He Is no more piti'd than a savage beast.
Had he but money, then the Pimp would find him,
And flatter him, and swear, how she did mind him
At every turn; and open such a story,
That how she counted him her chiefest glory.
But now he fears, he will bring some other to her,
That Is flush with gold: and help him then to woo her.
Alaspoore man! why do not think as well,
The way to her is the right way to hell?
Think how Calisto, in his heat of lust,
Beat out his brains; think how this whore will rust,
And moult away: Paulina was more fair,
Dukes did embrace her; like the gilded air
She did appear; she to the Hangman gave
Herself a Prostitute; that she might have
But one meals meat; sh'was afterward denied
A piece of bread; with guilt and shame she di'd.
Cast up thy gain, see how it does amount;
The more thou sinn'st, the greater's thy account.
How vain! how short! how cursed are thy contents!
Take them at best, they are but merriments,
That bring forth shame, guilt, everlasting horror;
Art thou not mad, that thou do thus grieve for her?
Would thou fain have thy children beg their bread?
To hate thee living, and to curse thee dead?
Now turn betime, while yet thou have a space;
For after death, thou wilt find nor time, nor place.
SECT. 27. Of the life, death, and funeral of a Gentleman, undone by a brood
of vermin.
AMournfull accident I must unfold!
I Will speak but that which prating Fame has told:
A Gentleman well bred (for by relation,
His friends were famous for their reputation)
Brought up to learning, never sparing cost;
But yet it was but charge, and labor lost.
For why? his lewdness hurried on his fate,
He followed whores, so was unfortunate.
What e're he got, 'twas spent, and all his care,
Was to grow careless; he would never spare,
But laid it on; for this, who can but see,
That whores are known the costli'st beasts that be?
Much thus he spent, and often he was supplied;
But of his will he was at last denied.
His father found all was but thrown away,
The more he had, the more he went astray.
He to reclaim him, strived to keep him shorter;
It changed him not, but put his mind to torture.
Advice, instructions, promises to woo him,
The likely danger put he often unto him;
Then threatening him, that for his foul demerit,
He Would cast him off, and would him disinherit.
All would not serve, he is so far from mending,
That he is more vile, though not so much in spending.
But tenderhearted parents needs must love
The child, though bad; their bowels still'did move.
Though he was shameless (sin did never grieve him)
Yet still his father could not but relieve him.
He Would often cry out, This unhappy Boy
Has shamed my glory, and o'rethrowne my joy:
I am in doubt, if I his part should take,
I shall be deemed as guilty for his sake:
If I neglect him, though he be so vilde,
I shall be censured too; he is my child.
My grief is great, yet all my hope's not past,
Though he goes far, yet he may turn at last.
How should I joy, to see him turn and thrive!
I Would think my self, the happiest man alive.
My hope dies now; while I fresh hopes would borrow,
Fear threatens me, to aggravate my sorrow.
This Russian values not (as it appears)
His fathers mourning, nor his mothers tears.
Nor weeping of his sister, nor his brother;
Nor yet the counsel of his friends, nor other:
But such as are like-minded with him; they
He Will hug, although they take him as a prey.
His Comrades are such Roarers, you may well
Think they were newly vomited from hell.
For like a gallant of great Pluto's Court,
With borrowed language, one must make him sport:
Although he be a bird fit for a cage,
Yet, if he can but parrat on the stage,
He Is now a Gentleman, the other can coin
New oaths, and swear, This oath at first was mine.
He swears in fou^o, domineering in it;
Hell would elect him Master of the Mint.
Give him the wall, or else he will draw, or stab,
He Is made an Usher to a painted Drab.
His wealth hangs on his back (let us have no mocks)
His riches lie in his Tobacco-box.
He Is valiant! pity it is he wants a sword,
The Gentleman must buy, or pass his word
To furnish him: and then he will brag and boast,
And hack and hew, as mad Tom did the post.
His clothes are all put into Tailors books,
He Will hardly pay, I guess it by his looks:
The Tavern is the place where he will abide;
His sword does hang so neatly by his side,
He looks upon it; it joys him at the heart;
Then knocks, and cries; Rogue, bring the other quart;
But has no coin: it is enough that he
Vouchsafe to grace them with his company.
Then having paid, and drank a round carouse,
They went to revell in a bawdy house,
(As'twas supposed) but there they fell at strife;
The Gentleman ('it was thought) did keep his wife,
And he consented to it; but who can tell,
Whether or no? but this, all was not well.
The wine did work, which stirred up angry words,
From words to blows; and having drawn their swords,
The quarrel grew so hot (and so it past
Between them all) that it fell out at last,
This gallant there was slain; a little wound
Spoiled his delight, and brought him to the ground.
A fearful thing! but e'rehe lost his breath,
He struggeld much with that grim Tyrant, Death,
Confessed his faults, but when his friends came in,
Shame forced him thus to aggravate his sin.
Alas! my sorrow cannot be expressed!
A hell, a hell is gendred in my breast!
My hateful sins have brought me to this case,
And every one seems with a Devils face:
I lived a beast, O! that I might so dye;
I wish in vain! worse than a beast am I!
I scorned advice, now I am scorned of all,
The world may now rejoice to see my fall.
My soul is sunk; it must go, who knows whither?
I Would live, yet dye, and yet I would do neither!
My heat encreast, though I did often drench it:
But now I find, my blood alone will quench it.
Reproach for ever seizes on my name,
And for my sake, my friends must bear the shame.
How short are vain delights! how soon they are gone!
They show content, but yet they give us none.
Vnseason'd pleasures! what is it that they bring,
But guilt? they pass, and bear a dreadful sting,
Which time will never wear out. Alas! this story
Is but a catalogue of painted glory!
I pleased my self with sensual things; and lies
I took for truth: all good I did despise.
I see my folly, how am I too blame!
These cursed contents have but a rotten name.
Thou great Preserver of the souls of men,
Show mercy on me: and thy praises then
Shall be declared by all that know thy love:
And I shall bless thee with thy Saints above.
Vile world adieu! O heavens, take my breath!
And snatch my soul out of the jaws of death!
Thus spoke, he ended; all his breath was spent:
Death seized on him, and closed him in his tent.
To show the case his body then was in,
The consequent of his precedent sin,
I now forbear; I Will give you leave to think
What whores do bring, with great excess of drink.
His friends lament him; how their tears do fall:
They Will all be spent before the funeral.
His mother chiefly lays to heart this cross;
With brinish tears she thus bewailes her loss.
O heavens! how has this black horrid fate
Made such a blessing so unfortunate!
Had he but di'd an infant; or my womb
That brought him forth, had been his senseless tomb,
Both had been happy; how had I been blessed!
For in my grave I had been left at rest.
But now I am tormented; this my sorrow,
Until death come, will never find a morrow.
I see on hopes the more I set my mind,
The less of comfort I am like to find.
Who had more hopes than I had of a son?
Who has less joy? alas I am undone!
Is this a token given by a friend,
To bring my boy to an untimely end?
More she had spoke; but being discontented,
Grief called for tears, and so she was prevented.
The Cause of this his death, how he was slain,
Whose fact it was, all is evident and plain.
Who'd stand upon it? the Sessions would decide it,
But that I think they have already tried it:
He Is coffined up; now this is all I crave,
Provide some tears, and drop them on his grave!
I would not beg, but that his friends have none;
Yet in a week, they will pay you ten for one.
Grave, now receive him; I Have discharged my trust.
Conceal his name: and cover him with dust.
His Epitaph.
HEre lies a man, I can no whit commend him,
He shamed himself in living like a beast;
While he had cash, his Imps would then defend him:
Now he is charged, to make the worms a feast.
His lust, his life, that was so proud and stout,
How soon 'twas with a rapiers point let out!
SECT. 28. Of an old man, wooing, and marrying of a young girl; how they
disagreed, and how she turned a whore.
THere lived a man, (but where I need not tell)
For credit, worth, esteemed of all so well,
That fame began to prate on it: for his life,
To make it sweet, he wanted but a wife:
Death robbed him of his first; she is in her tomb,
Had he another to supply her room,
How happy he should be! for being old,
He must have one, to keep him from the cold.
Wealth's not sufficient, to cheer his age:
He Is newly entering on the seventh stage,
Of bald swift time; his hair with snow was mixed,
But 'twas at odds, for there were paths betwixt,
The hoary-frost, had seized upon his beard,
His face was pale, and wrinkled: you have heard,
How Northern Boreas, from the pole does glide,
To shake his treasure, over the Western bride.
The plants do tremble, Winter is his guest,
Of all the months, December suits him best,
So is his flesh grown chill, his bones do quiver,
Some young one that is warm, must him deliver;
From his cold palsy: O! how feign he would find
One qualified agreeing to his mind!
He sought a while, but 'twas his hap at last
To spy a Virgin, as the stroets he past;
And as he looked, his heart began to melt,
His colour's changed; the passion that he felt,
Did warm his blood: his shaking fit grow's more,
But altered quite; not cold, as 'twas before.
Has Winters Sun now got such power here?
Or will it be thus warm, but once a year?
Frost has no heat in^^ whence then comes this change:
The air is cold, the alteration's strange;
Nor was there sign of fire, how comes this frost
Dissolved so soon? 'twas by a walking ghost.
Sh'had made him young again, if she had staid:
But now he will never be well, till she be laid.
This old man bends his mind, t'obtaine his ends,
H'has hope to have her, 'cause he knows her friends,
He Will go to try; if he be welcome to her,
He Is mad for ever; but his gold must woe her.
He wants a face, he fears she will abhor him;
But yet he hopes, his wealth will do it for him.
Wealth is a Lady; no one will despise her:
But if she does, he knows, her friends are wiser.
He Is gone to try; I wish him good success:
And all that know the man, can do no less.
He speaks but little; that is best at first;
The sight of here is enough to quench his thirst:
Yet he must kiss her; had you seen them play,
You would have laughed: she cried, old man, away.
He must embrace her: O, this precious pearl!
Fie, fio, said she, an old man kiss a girl?
Her friends approved on it; he has hope to speed,
He thinks in time the girl would be agreed.
Home he returns; but ere he goes again,
He Will change his visage: though his habit's plain
He Will have it altered; though his beard be made
To grow so broad, and squared like a spade,
It must be shaved away; and it must be
Turned up, and sharp'c just like a Roman T:
His cloak bag, breeches too, shall be cut less,
He will be suited, in a comely dress.
To suit the rest, he wears his second Ruff,
'Twas made of Cambrick, or some dainty stuff.
His hat's cut narrower, and it is nearly dressed:
(Good husbandry.) He means to keep his best,
Until the wedding: Lovely he had bin,
To look upon, had he but changed his skin.
He Is gone without his staff; he wants no prop,
The worst thing is, (being cold) his nose does drop.
He courts this lovely less, with great delight,
She finds his drift, and then she loathed his sight.
At last he broke his mind to her, and said;
I have a suit to thee: I am a fraid,
Thou will deny me: this is all I crave,
Thy love, thy love, O! that is the thing I Would have:
Sweet honey, grant me this, and I will prove,
So kind to thee, that I Will deserve thy love.
I Have wealth enough, I Will make it all thine own:
If I can have from thee this favourshown,
I shall be blessed; am I too old for thee?
I Am not so old though as I seem to be.
What Is forty years? my wife death took away;
I grieved so much, that made my hair turn gray.
Thou Wilt find me young, and active, never fear;
Be thou but kind; this Diamond-ring, my dear,
Take as a pledge: come, never blush, but speak
Thy mind in love; or else my heart will break!
Young men are fickle, care less of their wives,
Men that are stayed, do love them as their lives.
Thy friends do like it well, if I may find
Thy liking too, O! how 'twill ease my mind!
Then he was silent; but the maid replied:
Sir, you mistake the mark; or shoot too wide.
Does gray hairs dote? how do you think I can
(Being young and fresh) affect so old a man?
In policy you have these words expressed
To try my wit: I take it but in jest.
Love's out of date with you; it is rather meet,
You buy you coffin, and your winding sheet.
I thank you for your love; your wealth, your gold
Provokes me not: if I may be so bold,
I Will say you were not wise, to set your mind,
'Pon one so young: but love they say is blind.
If needs you will wive, then take a marron grave;
Decrepid age, with wealth might comfort have.
Cease, cease your suit; judge, is it a fitting thing
To match cold Winter, to the wanton Spring?
My blood's now rising, yours is in the fall,
You Would do me wrong, your self no good at all.
What good wilt be to you to do me harm?
You Would have a young one, now, to keep you warm.
I cannot think my friends will give consent
To sell me to a living punishment.
Farewell old Father; age might make you know,
Seeing you are rich, you should not look so low.
He hearing this, it cut him to the heart;
But could not speak a word, to case his smart:
His joints did shake, his eyes bewraid their lust;
Then to her friends went he, now speak he must:
Alas! this peevish wench, does slight my proffer,
My love, my person, wealth, whatere I offer
As tokens of good will, are not respected;
The giver, and the gift, are both rejected.
Persuade her but to love me; then will I
Invest her to my wealth: and when I die,
I Will leave her all; if she refuse to give
Her love to me, long here I cannot live.
Then they well weighing, of his great estate,
The credit that he had, how fortunate
She might be in the Match; how they might save,
A sum of money by it; he did not crave
A portion, but her love he aimed at most:
She in his riches; he in her would boast:
They sum'd up all; for they had many ends,
She being raised, she might prefer her friends,
They use persuasions, arguments to move her,
With promises; and how the man would love her.
But threatening was the burden of the song;
She blushed, she wept, and yet she held her tongue.
But discontented, to her self she said:
In what a case am I! I am afraid
I shall be lost for ever. I had rather
Displease my self, than move, and vex my father.
One I must do; I shall be counted vilde,
If he refuse to own me for his child.
Nor will he give me means; I shall be poor,
And if I beg my bread, from door to door
Who Will pity me? if I this old man take,
His wealth can never restitution make
To my afficted mind! how shall I do
To ease my heart, and please my father too?
His age will shame my youth, how shall I meet
My old acquaintance, as I walk the street,
Without a blush? his wrinkled flesh, his breath,
Will be to me as similies of death.
Oh, who would match young blood with parched dust?
Or marrow with dried bones? alas! I must!
Time bring my doom! that is all the hope I have,
That I shall lay him quickly in his grave!
So she submits, and now her Fathers pleased,
The match is made, the Seigniors mind is eased.
But she is grieved; her grieving is in vain:
For it is too late to ease her of her pain.
My Muse was charged (I Am loath that she should stray)
To bid the guests, against the wedding day.
Nor show th'apparrell that they did provide,
To fit the Bridegroom and his lovely Bride.
The preparation for the marriage feast,
What company, who was the chiefest guest.
What mirth they raised, yet how the Bride was sad,
What plate was there, th'attendance that they had.
Nor of the Music, how they played, and sung,
And bore their parts, or how the bells were rung.
What they agreed, their walking after dinner,
Their merry tales, or who was the beginner:
Nor how they supt; the possets at the last;
How he rejoiced, when once the day was past.
Or how the Bride was loat'h to go to bed,
(She was not jealous of her maidenhead.)
How she desired, that her friends would stay,
How he thought long, before they went away.
With sundry other things, if I rehearse,
They'ld rob me of my time, and stuff my verse.
Black Morpheus covered them, old Time did place'em;
But Hymen being angry, would not grace'em.
Dame Nature's vexed at those that made the match:
Her choler's turned to craft, and she does watch,
To do'em a mischief; she the marriage cursed,
She scorned to come to it, though sh'was bid at first.
The Fates are bent against him, in their rage,
They Will graft his head, then bring him on the stage.
They had been married but a little space,
Ere he grew jealous; and he did disgrace
Her in his carriage; he did mind the earth,
And dig'd for gold; she pleasure loved, and mirth.
He was so harsh to her, and did deny
Her things convenient; he was in her eye
Slighted as much; for he was froward, mad;
And feared he had lost, that love he never had.
His fire is quickly quenched, but there is a flame
Of lust in her: nor can he quench the same.
He Is growing downward, she is rising still,
He Would keep her in, but she will have her will.
She calls for money, but he keeps her short;
And sitting by her self, being all amort,
Thus she complains: oh, how am I distressed!
Undone for ever! and my mind's oppressed!
Had death but married me, I had not seen
These days of griese, or matched with age, and spleen.
Oh! that my tender flesh, my blood, and bones,
Were raked in earth, and coverd over with stones!
I should be freed from this cold piece of lead,
That chils my flesh, lies by me in my bed.
Oh! who would suffer such a thing but I?
My temper's hot, and moist, he is cold and dry.
Why should I spend my youthful days in sorrow?
Or stay death's leisure, waiting for a morrow?
Shall I alive, be penned up in my grave?
Mewd up at home, to please this hide-bound slave?
I Will never do it: Lycurgus made a law
To break such matches; and to keep in awe
Such jealous fools: wise Solon did consent
That woman which at home had no content,
Might have some other friend should freely do
Without controwle, what she consented to.
What pity it is, these Laws are out of date!
That could not choose, but be a happy State!
This help I have, I know he is precise,
(Though he be crafty, I will be as wise.)
I Will be so too: I Will go to Church, nay more,
I Will read, I Will pray, I Will seem to go before
The strictest of them; many things I Will do,
Lift up mine eyes; both lie, and flatter too.
He Will never distrust me, then I shall be known,
I Will get acquaintance, and I Will use mine own.
Nature has made me perfect, I was borne
To please my self, and give this Churl the horn.
I shall have gold enough, love, and delight,
When men of worth take pleasure in my sight.
This hypocrite is troubled in her mind,
Dissembles cleanly; if he will be kind,
And let her go, that she may comfort take,
Sh'has sworn to turn a Convert for his sake.
He Is glad; these times to her he will allow,
He does not doubt, but she is a Convert now.
She Is manned along, she is gone, (he does not fear)
To see and to be seen, but not to hear.
When she comes home, she is so grieved for sin,
She cannot tell the text; but she will begin
To change her life: it is true, you may believe her,
She has not sinned enough, and that does grieve her.
She Is provident, she will do the best she can,
To bring her mind to go without a man.
She Would seem to go to Church, but mist the door,
Because her mind was bent to play the whore.
Her customers kept touch; nor did she stay,
But Sermon-time; a game, and so away.
Her forward zeal did please the old man's mind,
Although it burned amiss; he could not find
Out her deceit: before the bells had rung,
She Would still be gone, and staying somewhat long,
At last he did mistrust, and sent a spy,
Who being cunning, with a watchful eye,
Found out her tract; and took her in the lurch;
For of a bawdy house, she made her Church.
This news being brought, oh, how this man lamented!
His passion stopped his mouth: so discontented!
His griefe's to great, to be expressed with tongue,
Or melted into tears, shame's mixed among.
When she came home (poor whore) (she had no doubt
That he mistrusted, or had found her out.)
She seemed to be much taken with the preacher,
And for the sermons sake, she praised the teacher.
She could rehearse the doctrine, and the use,
But left the reasons out; her foul abuse
Is now discovered: yet she dos deny it;
He Is but a knave that says it; I defy it.
But being proved so plainly to her face,
And where she was; she altered then her case.
Not by submission; but she was more bold:
And told her husband; sir, you are too old
For my young years; you cannot give delight;
I like you ill by day, but worle at night.
Age makes you senseless; just like wood, or stone,
You take up room, but all your vigor's gone.
Besides, you are so fretfull, and so froward,
So hide-bound, jealous, dogged, and untoward,
I cannot love you; I must take my pleasure,
I am too quick, to tarry your dull leisure.
You knew my mind before, yet you would crave
My person; but my love you could not have.
You urged my friends, and they prevailed with me
To give my hand; my heart did never agree.
Was not your act in that, as bad as this?
Pray pardon me then, though I do amiss.
He staid not to reply, nor to relate
How by her means, he was unfortunate;
Nor of her former carriage, nor that act,
Though her dissembling did increase the fact.
But he in fury opened wide the door,
And turned her out; now she is a licenst whore.
She Is known abroad, and she willtrade with many,
And by degrees with sharking rogues, or any,
That are but young; she will freely share a stake:
But with no old man, for her husbands sake.
Within the city she does first begin
To set up for her self; and truck with fin.
She keeps all open, and she freely can
Bid welcome to the master, or the man.
But yet she stays not long, in any place,
She Will change her name, and often change her face.
Yet now and then, the prisons crave a fee,
They'are largely paid by such a one as she.
Some by her, lost their credits; some their health,
Some lost their souls (I fear) and all their wealth.
Men were bewitched by this deluding sinner:
And when she found her hel-black troop came thinner,
She left the city walls, though there 'twas fading,
She thought the skirts would yield her constant trading,
When she had found a guest, that pleased her eye,
She never left him, till sh'had drawn him dry.
But walking by her self, two sparks did dog her,
And one of them was but a petty-fogger:
Of true-bred whore-masters; he had the strain,
He Had shameless speech, his nose was died in grain:
He wanted wit, and money, but his hope,
Because he had relation to the Pope,
He should be fortunate, and welcome to her:
And any friendly office he can do her,
(Put coin aside) she shall command him still,
All that he craves, is only her good will,
That he may wait upon her; to a minut,
He Will do her service; she may trust him in it.
She entertaines this servant of renown,
But with his Mistress he is familiar grown,
And very inward; (yet if you had spied him,
You would have thought the Hospital had fri'd him.)
Pretending business at her chamber late,
And e're she rose: they two must lie and prate.
What else they did at any time, or place,
I Will leave it on the score: time will not race
The shame away: they all the debt must pay,
Or here below, or at the Judgment day.
This letcherous Trull is careless of her name,
Forgets her soul, and makes a jest at shame.
She has her choice of Rascals; among the rest,
One seasoned whore-master does like her best:
He Is very brave, although he be not rich;
His colour's like to carrion in a ditch.
His life does stink as bad; he had a wife,
But whilst she lived, she had a begging life.
He spends his means and time to keep this whore,
And for her sake, he will make his children poor.
His friends forsake him, he is led by sense,
He Is scorned of all men; that is his recompense.
The Cancars make him vex, it is worst of all,
They visit him at every spring and fall.
They search within, and creep up in their kind,
To seize upon his eyes, and make him blind.
This queen does carry't smoothly; with her tongue
She does deceive men, modest looks among
Are mixed with her deceits; and with the best
She strives to dwell, and make her whorish nest:
And goes in modest habit; none can know,
But that she is honest by the outward show.
With whores it is grown in fashion in our times,
With seeming modesty to hide their crimes.
Where ere she comes, her promises are large,
If custom fail she cannot pay the charge.
If she be forced, her lodging to remove,
They must believe: she will leave her empty love
Behind in pawn; this pawn is cheap and ill:
But if she pay not, they must keep it still.
Long she continued in this shameful course,
No alteration, but from bad to worse.
The old man tries all means to change her mind,
All is but labor lost; nor can he find
Content without her; he his time had past
With discontent; Death darted him at last.
And now she is joviall; all her debts she will pay,
(If they can get'em) when he is clothed in clay:
To time I Will leave her, she must take her turn
By death e're long. Now he is laid in his urne.
His Epitaph.
THis Seignior sold his joy, to please his lust;
He did repent on it, when his heat was quenchs;
Time judged it fitter he should match with dust,
When he with brinish sorrow had been drencht.
Dame Nature envies all unequal matches:
Death, for his fault, does keep him under hatches.
SECT. 29. Of a proud, stately Harlot raised by her sin; how she rained diverse;
and of many passages in the prosecution of it.
THe gallant whore, who goes in rich array,
Turns day to night; the night she will turn to day:
Although at first her breeding was but base,
Sprouts as a branch from some Imformers race.
Being somewhat handsome in her blushing prime,
She thinks it best, to make use of her time.
Some braying Ass that can but use his tongue,
He Will complement: they being both but young,
Are soon be witcht with one another faces;
Then for their ends they have their meeting places,
Till at the last this Ass had shed his coat,
His braying alters to a mourning note.
The Sergeants, Bailiffs, do increase his fears,
Poor Ass at last does prick, or shake his ears,
And thinks his heelcs are better than his hands,
He whips away into the Netherlands.
This Queen adornes her like a modest Maid:
Alas! another is by her betrayed!
Now she being cunning, will not serve his lust;
His fire burns, and marry her he must:
A little while they do in pleasure swim;
At last he finds she made an Ox of him,
He then complained: Alas! what did I mean,
To marry thus an over-ridden queen?
His way of trading he does quite neglect,
His Creditors will give him no respect.
His stock's confirmed, his credit all is lost:
Poor simple man! he with this whore is crossed!
She lays it on, and spends (while it remains)
On such that promise to allow her gains.
At last, when he had run so far in debt,
He Would buy some wit, but it is too late: he will fret:
His wit and money parted are away,
Now he must run, he can no longer stay.
The time is come this whore did wish to have,
She Will have more freedom with a perjured knave:
She Will trim her self, and paint her face anew:
She Is brave! her face looks of another hew.
Come now who will, this block is far removed:
You are the man that I have ever loved.
Then she will swear that she will be constant to him;
She works him in, but quickly she will undo him.
He must maintain her at a lofty rate;
She goes in pomp; at last her whorish state
Does bring him low; his house he keeps no longer,
He is conveyed to one that is far stronger.
Then he bewailes his lamentable cross;
And does relate their passages; his loss
('It Is evident, poor man! he must abide it)
Breaks out the more, the more he strives to hide it.
Now when this whore does want a man of worth
To keep her brave, she will send her Pander forth.
(Pray call him Captain) she must bear his charge;
Her streams are low, expenses have been large.
Well, out he goes, being hindered by no weather;
His money's spent, but he will shake his feather:
He finds the Spark, he tells him of a Less,
That does for beauty all the rest surpass.
If he would but go, he shall be welcome to her,
She Is somewhat coy; but he will help to woo her.
These joviall blades must make a merry day,
To talk more on it: the reckoning called to pay,
Pimps purse is empty; but's Tobacco-box
To all is free (they would best beware of pox)
In open glasses they must drink the round,
Then suck the weed of eighteen pence a pound.
Now Whisk in brings this joviall gallant up,
A place appointed where they all must sup:
And for their sauce, they have this painted lade
Brought in; he sees her, scone the match is made:
They vow then to be constant to each other:
She is his sister, he must be her brother:
And while he lives, he never will for sake her:
But for his wife, he will bid, The Devil take her.
Now for his whore; her back and belly cheer,
Do cost him full five hundred pounds a year:
Maintains the Pimp that brought him to this thrall:
No other Bawd; she is Whore and Bawd and all.
Now farewell Freeze, h'has got to grace this harlot,
A Stammell suit; but you must call it Scarlet.
In habit like a Citizen she will be;
Sometimes no Lady is more fine than she.
A house for winter, she must have to stand
About the City, with a brave command:
Her Summer House near to the flowing tide,
Rich furniture, gained by her whorish pride.
Now when this Spark is from his Fondling gone,
If none come to her, then she will send for one;
Bring her but money, she will use her trade,
And truck with any, like a Hackney lade.
When he returns, she will wipe her mouth, and say,
Why did my sweeting stay so long away?
He must embrace her, kiss, and call her honey;
She Will quickly search to see what store of money
He'has brought her home; if little, then she will frown,
She wants a satin, or a tabby-gown.
Up he must take it on the Mercers score,
And glad he is that he can please this whore:
And of the Goldsmiths jewels, diamond-rings:
When this is done, still she wants other things.
His state consumes, his friends give council to him
With grief: and plead, this whore will soon undo him.
All will not serve, but he will still adore her.
His wife now sees a queen preferred before her,
With heavy heart does to her husband cry:
Forsake this whore, or I with grief shall dye!
With tears she prays, as she before him stands,
You have an heir, then morgage not your lands.
Alas! you know, 'twill be a living shame,
When he is an heir only but in name!
These infants, they must beg, or else do worse,
You on your children strive to bring a curse:
Shall it be said, this was his fathers place?
He kept a whore, and sold it with disgrace?
Your of-spring-too shall ever bear this slain,
You raised them up, and threw them down again,
Think on that vow you did in marriage make,
With that injunction; which was, then to take
None but my self; you know I am your wife:
This Harlot now has gained your love; sowed strife
Betwixt us two: what is love gone for ever?
Which once I thought, that none but death could sever?
My self, my love was constant still and true;
My friends I did forsake for love of you;
Oh! be persuaded, pity now my smart;
And toward your children, bear a fathers hear?
If to my suit you will not bend your cares,
Let grief dissolve me to a flood of tears!
When thirsty time has drank up all my store,
Then take me death: for I can weep no more;
And let me now a second favor find,
My children take, which I shall leave behind.
And for my husband, let all honest men
Lay out some tears; he will one day pay'em again.
Until that time, I wish, that babbling Fame,
Be silenc't that he never spread his name.
This one thing more (my passion is so strong:)
And then for ever I will hold my tongue:
Some Poet he will write upon your grave,
He kept a whore who used him as a slave,
To maintain her, he did both sell and borrow;
His children beg, his wife she died with sorrow.
Let time and age with men record his fall:
Be warned by him; his whore and he spent all.
This plaint moves not; nor infants moanes about her
He Is vexed at her, and sometimes he does flour her;
Then he relates this story to his drab,
Who answered thus; what, has she eat a Crab?
What, does she prate? a stinking durty slut!
Is she too full? I vow I Will pinch her gut,
And make her glad to eat a piece of bread;
What will she dye, except she may be head?
I Will keep her bare and make her speak me fair;
You must be tutored too about your heir.
Tush, let him work, and set him to a trade;
Pack out the rest: and let this ugly lade
Vex in her grease; what, does she send about
Her privy spics to find our meeting out?
Do, be a fool! and let her railing pass,
And show thy self a tender-harted ass!
What did thou say when she did call me whore?
Pray Love, be quiet. I Will do so no more?
She rail at me! Oh! would I could but meet her
In place convenient: see how I could greet her.
Pray if you love me, make her rule her tongue;
She Is old, and wrinkled, I am fresh and young.
A snotty Jade! I mar'le, how thou could love her!
She Is vexed that I have got respect above her.
Let any one that has but skill to try,
Judge which is handsom'st, whether she or I:
Let none compare me to this homely Ioane!
She sreets because she is saine to lie alone.
Who'ld lie by such a whither'd piece of flesh,
When he may have well favored, sweet and fresh?
Go to thy dow'd, if thou have but a mind:
And quit forget that I to thee was kind.
Sweet, do thon think that I will be so mad,
That ere her words or tears shall make me sad?
No, do not think I have so little wit:
Let, let her swell in this her frenzy fit.
Shall I be ty'de? I Will tame this peevish fool.
And for het tongue, let winter make it cool;
Let night-hags fright her in her bedlam dreams,
Whilst thou and I delight in pleasant theames!
I Will take my pleasure. Why should I do less?
I Will be no slave to what I do possess.
Come, thou art mine; and thou shall find me fair
My love to thee is more than to my heir;
I Will spend my 'state; a brood of brats I have
Who for my means do wish me in my grave;
Thus far I am resolved, for love of thee:
When I am gone, the world is gone with me.
Thou have my heart, thou know I cannot leave thee:
I am too honest ever to deceive thee.
Hanged, let her chat until her tongue be weary:
Care kills a cat, but we will still be merry:
But yet I Will use a trick to make her quiet,
She shall go barer, and have meaner diet.
And if she dye, a grave I Will quickly make her,
I love her so; make speed, come, heavens take her.
SECT. 30. Of the woman dying with grief; Her Funeral.
Muse dip thy quill in blood, or tears of mine
Shall change thy ink, and turn it into brine:
Make sad thy self; and when that envious night
Does cast a veil to rob thee of the light
(Being clad in darkness) then do thou begin
To mend thy pen, and bring those Vipers in.
Draw now thy plaint for the poor woman's sake!
And for her children; hark! what moan they make?
Call in those neighbors that have grief, to spare,
To join their hearts, and help to bear a share.
A wife, a mother, is in such distress;
Dry grief nor tears can never it express!
Let strangers come, and pity her, and say
Alas, alas! poor soul she is cast away!
Pray stay a while, (for I invite you all)
'T'attendher corpse unto the Funeral:
You should have wine and comfits; but the cleft
Is grown so barren, that there is nothing left.
Griefburn'd within her, to a raging flame;
No tears were left to qualify the same;
Being spent, she fell; and then she easd her head;
The heaviest living; but the lightest dead.
The Nightingal did to the black bird sing,
And Robin Red-brest spoke no other thing:
The Thrush, the Starling of her death did prate,
The Lark had come too; but it was too late.
All beasts did mourn (but some with grief were pressed)
Save one that joy'd which was a savage beast.
Grave, use her kindly; grief has made thee gain her!
Worms, grumble not, but gently entertain her!
It Is not her fault, you have no better cheer.
Call but a few; 'twill one day cost you dear:
When death comes to arrest you, for her sake:
You for the spoil must restitution make.
Her Epitaph.
VIew well this heap of dust, drop down a tear
To moisten it, let every tender heart
Mourn over this honest woman (call in sear)
I Will praise those that begin, aid bear a part.
Her husband with his whore desired her death,
He moved with pity took away her breath.
SECT. 31. The shameful triumph of the Whore, the Prodigal, and the Pimp.
WE having brought her pined corpse to rest
Hoping her soul's alive among the ble'st.
We'll turn again, and seek the wanton's three,
The Sot, the Whore, the Pimp which merry be,
And drinking wine, the Whore begins to prate:
Whore. Farewell that hag, which did my person hate;
I Will mourn in sack: now she will rail no more,
Nor send her elfes to harken at the door.
She will not whine, nor can she hear us talk,
Nor spy us here, unless her ghost does walk:
Come, drink to me, I Will pledge it over her grave
My honest chuck? a better friend none have!
She spit her venom, owing me a spite;
Thou wast so constant, would not break delight.
Now thou art mine; come, take a thousand kisses!
Black Ioane's not here to keep us from our blisses!

Prod. My sweetest love! thy speech is framed so witty
With eloquence! much like a pleasant ditty:
Thy cherry lips do open with such grace,
Which when I hear, and look upon thy face;
I see a Lilly does the Rose beguile;
Sometimes the rose takes captive for a while
The lilly too: thy nose smells Flora's savor,
Thy eyes like Diamonds, graced with sweet behavior.
I cannot hold! my arms shall now embrace thee,
My love, my person, and my means shall grace thee:
The Bedlam soole is now returned to dust;
She Will come no more to haunt us here, I trust.
Grave, keep her close; for if thou lett'st her see
The light again, I Will make a grave for thee.
Worms, tarry not; creep forward, and grow mad
To eat her flesh; that little that she had.
Earth, show me favor, let no moving tones
Make thee defer, but soon dissolve her bones.
She being dead, and in her grave thus hurled,
I would not see her now for all the world.
Come, come my Io, let pleasure still delight us,
The hag is gone, and will no more affright us.

Pimp. O, bravely spoken! Nature met with art,
Acts both a Tragic, and a Comic part:
So Poetlike! Rhetorical, and sweet,
In lofty terms, graced with a carriage mere!
A rarity grown too much out of fashion!
Sharp, sweet, unseen, and yet to vent a passion!
You speak of love so rarely, and so true,
That Ovid might have come to school to you.
But being cro'st your looks and words are stern,
Democritus is childish and might learn.
Not words alone: but this I ever find
You are inric'h still with a noble mind.
And all your actions savor of the same,
Which with consent, bring honor to your name.
I taste your bounty; and have cause to praise you!
I Will do my best to honor and to raise you.
O, happy journey! happy'st of the rest!
When first I brought you where we now are ble'st!
For what I'promis'd then, you found no less:
A beauty rare! more than I did express!
That witch is gone, which did disturb our mirth,
A prey of envy swallowed by the earth:
The worms are feasting underneath the ground.
Now farewell Hag, thou have thy mortal wound

SECT. 32. How the prodig all was servile to his whore; with the condition of
the Pimp.
Muse, make a stop, and view those ulcer'd blaines
That stink and run along their fester'd veins.
The whore's a fountain, by whose poisoned spring
This Bat, this Owl, they both do sit and sing:
The Owl so soon as he has filled his crop,
Then of this fountain he must taste a drop;
Though it is infected, yet he will often drink,
It glides so smoothly by the swelling brink!
Unwholesome drops! and change does make it thicker:
Yet dearer than ten quarts of whelsome liquor.
The skip-jack bat, must wait to take his prey,
And taste those drops; the owl being flown away.
Both birds of night: the owl he'lhave no taster:
The bat's the servant, and the owle's the master,
They all rejoice: now his deceitful whore,
Does promise love: she aims at one thing more.
She like a frost has nipt a fruitful head;
She loathed her living, and she hates her dead,
And so her mate, to please her does as much.
Oh! who should think the world had any such!
Unnatural brute, to slight a loving wife
To please a whore! whose love will turn to strife!
And flattring Pimp that has no other living,
But by this whore, unless it be by theeving,
To fawn on him (the pains of hell to lend him)
And breath his praise, when shame does still attend him.
No greater curse, to have a villain made
To be familiar; but it is his trade.
He Is grown so brave, and if you heard him prate,
You Would think he were a man of great estate:
He Will take a house, but if you look for rent,
You are deceived: 'twas never his intent
To pay for sleeping; you may have his bill,
Take that or nothing, pay the rent who will.
For any thing, if he can get but day,
The price parts not; he never means to pay.
Ask him for money, he will quite forsake you,
He Will pay with scoffs, and bid the devil take you.
Affront a Captain? go, you cheating knaves,
Mechanic rascals are poor hungry slaves!
Base pesants vcx a gentleman of fashion?
Ask me for coin, to put me into passion?
I Will make you stay. But if you haunt his ghost,
He Will change his lodging: man and money's lost.
This whore being noted, then to hide her shame,
Will often remove, and often change her name.
Amongst her names, there is one would make her blessed
In lier esteem; a lady is the best.
So takes her name, alas! there is a man
Keeps of the watch, she will hang him if she can,
Though It be her husband, what she can she'ldoe,
Lest she her self be hanged for having two.
She Is coacht along; she shortly must (I doubt)
Ride in that box which carries dogs about,
To keep her close; lest some undone quite by her,
Should brush her coat with kanes; if they do spy her,
It Is good enough, but yet it is very bald,
That such a punck should like the dogs be haled.
Her ladyship (for so she would feign be stilde)
Is grown so proud, so impudent, and vilde
That she will curse this coxcombe, like a slave,
He durst not cross her, she her will must have.
If he by chance does cross her, then she will thunder;
He Is fearful, silent, thus she keeps him under.
Then he must beg and flatter to be sriends:
This paultry whore will then propound her ends.
A piece of gold, a jewel, or a ring,
A scarf, a gorget, or some pretty thing
That she will have, so he must buy her kisses,
Yet he is glad, and counts them for his blisses.
Now he is persuaded, she loves none beside him;
Nor from her sight, she cannot well abide him.
He Will make her honest; was it heard besore
That any man could make an honest whore?
Or can a whore be honest? then I Will say,
That black is white, and night is turned to day,
The stones will fly, and fire will downward bend,
And hell dissolve, all things amiss will mend.
Nor do I credit that a whore loves men,
But sor her ends: and so she is cursed again.
His swearing is rewarded with a curse,
Sweet poisoned pills do make his plague the worse,
He dotes, and dos an Idol of her make,
But 'twas more safe, if he embraced a snake.
If one to jeare him, asks with him to sup,
To see his whore, he will so take him up;
And swear she is as honest as his mother,
Or any one that will make up the other.
If he a journey from her do intend,
And leave for her but twenty pounds to spend,
This queen then grumbles; and her throat she will raise,
Pish, what is that? 'twill serve but for four days!
She must have more; she is a costly sister,
He had been happy, if he had but mist her.
Well, he is gone; think how she whets her brains,
To serve her lust, and to increase her gains:
To show the trade she drives with other men,
Would sad my Muse, and quite tire out my pen.
She chides the day, to turn it into night;
Judge bad enough; and then you will judge aright.
SECT. 33. How a Whore drew her sister to lewdness; arguments on both sides.
Custom comes thick; she cannot serve their turns,
Her wil's to do it; with lust her body burns.
Having a sister that is a handsome maid,
By her temptations she is at last betrayed;
Seeing her pomp, her jewels, and attire,
Brave company, the money for her hire:
This silly girl, her honesty, good name,
Does put to sale; and glories in the same.
Come, take my counsel, do not be a fool,
To make a purle; for what thou learn'dst at school,
Will not maintain thee: and thy father's dead,
Left thee no means; sell, sell thy maidenhead,
And be not peevish: thou may have a prize
Will raise thy fortunes, if thou will be wise.
The work is easy, it is delight and pleasure;
Fool, use thine own, and thou shall purchase treasure;
Did thou but know what pleasure there is seated,
Soon would thou yield, thou need'st not be entreated:
The proverb's true, Frost genders not with fire.
To things unknown there is no great desire.
Do, be a drudge; if thou be built for toil,
Go settle to it: and leave the golden spoil,
Which thou might take, if thou would cast a trench:
Thou wast not made to be a kitchin-wench.
For diverse Knights, and Gallants would attend thee,
What e're thou would have, rhey'l either give or lend thee;
Which is all one: what e're it be that men
Do lend me once, I never pay't again.
Alas, what had I? my poverty was known,
As much as thine; now happy winds have blown
Me golden dust: if I had been an Ass,
To Have been so coy to let that season pass,
What had I done? no, no, I had more wit;
Now here thou see, how Lady-like I sit:
My table's furnished richly still with fare,
All which comes free, I never do take care:
My charge of living, plainly does appear,
Amounts unto a thousand pounds a year.
Be ruled by me, I speak because I love thee,
Of all thy kindred none shall be above thee.
It Is for thy sake, that I relate this story,
Believe thine eyes, and think upon my glory.
All honor me, a Knight would feign me wed,
But he'res the spite, that Cuckold is not dead.
What, all amort does not my counsel please thee?
Speak, pettish fool, thy mind; and that will ease thee.
Sister, though I am poor, I hold it no disgrace,
My honestie's my portion; and my face
Is not ashamed; I dare to show it where
You cannot yours, unless it be in fear.
With my condition, I am well contented;
Though you are raised, you are to be lamented!
My labor likes me; but the world can tell,
You go the way which ends at last in hell.
What is your state, for all your costly diet?
It Is true content, to have a conscience quiet.
What should I do, if I commit such evil,
But give my soul and body to the Devil?
What you enjoy, is all but painted glory,
The repetition makes a shameful story.
Should I consent, then all that did me meet,
Would blaze my shame along the open street:
What e're I got, what would avail my store,
When all shall point, and say, There goes a whore?
And when I dye, my sins would then outlive me;
Such gain is loss, and what the world can give me,
Can no whit cool the scalding heat of sin,
Nor bribe the conscience; but it will bring in
A sad relation to increase my smart;
Then pleasing sin will prove a mortal dart.
Pray urge me not, the stones your words do hear,
They melt with passion, and they quake with fear.
The rustling leaves do grumble at your talk,
The trees do threaten vengeance as we walk.
See how the grass is now bedewed with tears,
O're-spred with palenesse, over-charg'd with fears;
The fish did spy us, as they were at play,
And were ashamed, and so they slunk away.
Bright Phoebus too is hid behind a clowd,
To blast your counsel; being not allowed,
The world affords no place for sin to dwell;
T'go out is worse, for'tis to go to hell.
The truth ere long this sinful world shall find,
And have reward, all suited in their kind.
What, grown precise? what conscionable stuff
You trade in now! I know you have enough;
Pray sell me some; and I will pay you well,
But pass your word, it shall me keep from hell,
Conscience, I think, it is you prate about:
He Is hanged long since, to put you out of doubt.
You show your wit; is this for my reward,
To get you freed? and giving you regard?
'Twas merely love to you that did incite me
To do you good; but ill you do requite me.
You saucieslut! is this the thanks I have
To trick you up, and make you fine and brave,
To censure me? and slight me for my pains?
You Will damn me for it, and curse me, and my gains.
Pray get you gone, and if you cannot brook it,
A better place, let conscience go and seek it.
I Will hear no lectures, nor be taught by you,
I know enough: your counsellis so new,
It Is not digested; never see me more,
Nor call me sister, be thou nere so poor,
I Will never own thee; nor the least relief
Will give to thee to qualify thy grief.
Your Maidenhead, and honesty together,
Will feed you then; and cloth you from the weather,
Conscience is but a Tyrant, at the best,
And in distress will never let thee rest.
The Law of Nature bids thus take delight,
And makes things meet to please our appetite.
It kindles love, and breeds desire to it:
Who durst say, It Is not lawful then to do it?
Some Bedlam Stoic did at first devise
(That wanted nature) treason stuffed with lies,
To mew us up. The earth had too much treasure,
When all was free; and all might take their pleasure?
Have birds free leave to change once every year?
And beasts in common 'gender free from fear?
Shall we that once were made to keep them under,
Enjoy less sweet, in being kept asunder?
A learned Poetsutes a Bedlams dream,
And idle nurses, to the conscience theme.
' The less the better then, whence this will fall,
It Is to be perfect, to have none at all.
It Is not for youth, but for declining age,
To act a winter Satyr on the stage.
Frost is till then prodigious, we may do
What lustful youth and pleasure prompts us to.
What say to this, thou froward silly girl?
Which will thou choose, the pibble, or the pearl?
To live in credit? or receive disgrace?
In some poor cottage, still to hide thy face?
Do love the warmth? or do affect the cold?
Gain something young, or beg when thou art old.
Come, learn some wit; my care of thee is such,
That joins with love, which makes me speak so much,
Fear thou not hell, or ever to be cast
From heaven: why? we may repent at last.
This silly virgin now is in distress!
Feign would she speak; but words cannot express
Her troubled mind: she slides down silent tears:
Her face is wan; within she is full of fears.
She would deny, but fears her sisters blame,
She would consent, but that she fears the shame.
She viewes the state, and has desire to it;
She now resolves, and yet she will not do it;
She Would feign be gone, but that she knows not whither,
She Will stay, then go, and yet conclude of neither.
How is thy comely visage changed quite!
How is the Rose fell from the Lilly white
That were composed so lovely in thy face!
They Are hid with tears, and left thee in disgrace.
Alas! thy grief cannot be well expreft!
A world of care torments thy tender breast!
Thou want a friend; oh! that I had been by?
I Would have theelive, as one day thou would dye.
One grain of grace, is better than the world,
Perfumes thy dust, when in thy grave you are hurled.
Where Is now thy courage? think but how that gain,
That Is got by sin, will breed eternal pain:
Though time be short, thou will outlive thy pleasure,
Then all thy gain will prove but hell-bred treasure.
Why do thou sleep, thou registerst within?
What, art thou birb'd? that thou do wink at sin?
Or do thou wait (till wrath shall cloud the weather)
For hungry death, to sum up all together?
Yet she resolves to cast those dumps away;
Though not invited; they conclude to stay,
To vex her more: till at the last by sin
She strives by force, to let ill spirits in.
Now she is possessed. Alas! she is ensnared,
Forgets the curse that is in hell prepared
For desperate sinners: O! thou fool! to sell
Thy self, and make an entrance into hell!
She Is confident (and will no more be crossed)
Her maidenhead is sweetest, when it is lost.
For gain she trades; she sels (she has such tricks)
Her maidenhead, at least, to five, or six.
When she can hide no longer this device,
Then she grows common at a lower price.
He leave her here, I have no hope to mend her,
I wish her turn again, or death to end her.
Now for the whore which was the cause of this,
She glories in it; there is nothing done amiss
In her conceit; her heart is like a rock;
And she is as shameless as a senseless stock.
To this preferment has she brought there brother,
To make him whiskin, and deceive the other.
But now this letcher is returned again
To court this whore, but more and more the stain
Does take impression; for she has bereft him
Of all his honor; and his friends have left him.
Alas poor man! thy pleasure and thy ease
Do make thee senseless: but a worse disease
Does creep upon thee, than the world can bring.
After the honey thou must have the sting,
And at the best thy honey's mixed with gall;
And with the bait thou take the hook and all.
What, past all cure? let conscience speak thy shame,
Then show thee hell, and parch thee with the flame
Set all thy sins in habit, like a devil,
In battle ray, to fright thee from this evil:
Let every beast, where e're thou do him see,
Show that thou art a truer beast than he!
And all men still that do upon thee look,
Put thee in mind of that great Sessions book,
By which the world is tried! and let the earth
Slight thee as much as any monstrous birth!
And let the warblers of the air now speak
To thy disgrace! the clouds with fury break,
Drop down revenge! the heavens fixed eyes
Blush at thy presence! and the lofty skies
Look pale upon thee! let those moving powers
Present thee wrath! and let all fragrant flowers
Bow down their heads, still to thee let their smell
Be like that brimstone, which does burn in hell!
Let every creature sound (as being taught)
This is the man that sold himself for naught!
His whore and he begin to be so flighted,
They cannot walk, unless they be benighted,
But powted at: and all their meeting places
Deny them shelter, shamed to own their faces;
But spue them out: their lodgings often they change,
Being weary of them; and a thing not strange,
Shame still is constant! and it grows much stronger
Like evening shadows that are ever longer,
The nearer night; and at all turns it takes them:
Keeps closest then, though their best friend forsakes them,
Those little Wags, that meet them in the street,
Will dog them home; and then they will them greet
With Whore-master, with Pander, and with Whore;
They try their skill to drive them from the door.
To purchase freedom, they must draw their swords;
Those knavish boys will not be stilled with words.
SECT. 34. The ruin of the bawdy house, with its appurtenances.
THe house breaks truce (for it is daily tired)
Because for bawd'ry it was never hired.
And being frighted; it is grown strange and bald,
In fear it shall a bawdy house be called.
So with consumption it does pine away,
And being distressed, invites the night to stay,
To hide its shame, it is vexed for what it did,
And being guilty, it would feign be hid.
The roof that hid them, falls into a swound:
And by degrees drops down unto the ground
With grief, that ever it should be so vile,
And in revenge, it chides away the tile:
Gives warning that 'twill stand no longer under,
They fall with fear, and so break all in sunder,
The morphew walls are grown so bleake and thin,
They have (through anguish) Iost the outward skin.
Alas, poor house! 'twould grieve a man to see
That everiestorme should take revenge on thee!
The candi'd frost does make the sore increase,
Nor milder warmth will once admit of peace:
Because they kept them from the raging weather,
Their pun'shment is, they must rot together.
The guilty windows battered with assaults,
Repent, that e're they did conceal their faults:
The stones, the wind, do bring it so about,
That by degrees they pick the quarrels out,
Blaze forth their shame, and witness now bring in,
That with consent condemns them for their sin.
Feign would they speak, but cannot speak aright;
The lead's so heavy, and the glass so light.
The chamber-floore does sink with deep conceit;
And does disdain to bear this sinful weight.
One side blames the other, and they part in splcene:
Which parting seems a little hell between;
Time does refuse to quit it from the stains:
The more it is washed, the more the filth remains.
The bed-stead screcks, with sad and doleiull tones,
And vents complaints, being over-charg'd, it groans,
Seeks to be eased: the head does blame the feet,
The feet the sides; the testerne that does see it,
Does start for fear, that it must bear the blame,
For winking at, and covering of their shame,
Does change itself to sundry ugly shapes,
To fright from sin these vile lascivious Apes.
The posts do vex, which do abate their strength,
And grow so feeble, that they fall at length.
The curtain rods (what honest man did forge them
Do now conceit that they were made to scourge them.
The hooks do hold them that they cannot do it;
So they are guiltless, being willing to it.
The rings that run these curtain rods along,
Before were silent; now they find a tongue,
To pratle forth their shame: and do disgrace them;
Though they are brass, they cannot yet outface them;
They are not freed, the canker runs about,
Without, within, to eat the substance out.
The curtains too 'cause they were easily drawn
To hide their lust, and did upon them fawn,
Now shrink away: their color quite does change
As being sharers; is it not very strange
That senseless things, should be ashamed of sin,
And suffer for it? the moths do now begin,
To seek revenge, and make of them a prey,
And are resolved to eat them quite away.
They do but Justice: so do all the rest
That haunt their ghosts: for they to war are pressed.
The bed is thought to bear the greatest blame,
That did with patience underlay the shame:
The tike complains the feathers are so light,
As they at noone are so they are at night.
But they reply, and very well they may
Confess they are light; but not so light as they;
They must not chide, being gentle, mild and soft;
But when they came, it is proved they grumbl'd often.
They show a reason why they blame the tick,
They could not fly out, 'cause it was so thick.
The cordis questioned; being racked below,
Begins to yield; what ever it does know,
Now blabs it out; receiving many checks,
'Twold needs be loose to catch them by the necks:
But being crossed, it cannot vengeance do,
It swells with malice, till it breaks in two.
The pillows which did bear their musty pates,
Do sret with anger, 'cause as coupled mates,
They gave them ease; but now they do deny it,
They smell the rot, and do at last defy it.
The sheets are found more guily than the rest;
For why? in them those vermin made their nest:
Their shame's made open, for the secret sin
Which they must own; they look both black and thin,
And fear that penance they must do at Paul's,
When e're their partners go to purge their souls.
(Time eite 'em in; judge, is it not very fit
For all such persons? shame may teach them wit.)
They Would turn to many to remove that curse,
And tie the penance only to the purse.
If It he not likely to be brought about,
They Will fee the washer then, to wash them out.
Shall innocents thus suffer in their places,
What they deserve? and quit them from disgraces?
Nor can I clear the coverlet or quilt,
From being sharers in this hateful guilt,
That overlookt them in their cursed delight;
And was so careless, be it wrong or right:
'Twas never moved to vex 'em; let its shades
Dwell still in Newgate, or with Bridewell jades,
Where shame's in use: the Cutpurse too shall crave it;
Then let the dunghils cast lots which shall have it!
The stools, and chaires, when on them they do sit,
Do trembling fall into an aguish fit;
The table mournes for bearing of their meat,
Which feeds their lusts: it is weak, the burden great
The posts, that did uphold this house so long,
Begin to sink; if they had but a tongue,
They Would beg for pardon, promising no more
To prop such baseness, or defend a whore.
Sed, sactum est; though now they do abhor it,
They with the rest are like to suffer for it.
The ashie worms show justice, ever when
They have crept through, they creep clean through again,
Eat out the strength that is seated in the heart,
Quite past recoverie, 'though they feel no smart:
Sharp execution! it is their bawdie hire,
Just fit for nothing, but for flaming fire.
The groundsell being tenderhearted stones,
Do pine away, and change, like dead men's bones:
And melt with tears: feign would they shrink away,
But find no passage; so are forced to stay.
They chide the lime, for holding them together,
And have the men that first did bring them thither;
They being sorry (when the cause is tried)
Shall have this favor, by the highway side,
They still shall stand, as monuments of shame,
And shall bewray the place from whence they came.
But now the door, for being often locked,
Which made them fearlesse; being jeered, and mocked,
Falls in a palsy; open then it flies,
Calls out in passion, to invite some eyes
To see their folly; but the hooks were cross:
She hinges (fearing they should suffer loss)
Part from the door; the lock is chiefly shent,
(Being pliable) 'cause it did give consent
To come and go, with turning of a hand,
Much like a Pander: and did all withstand
That would oppose them in this cursed way.
But then the lock lays blame upon the key,
For forcing it to whatsoever it did;
The key had freedom, but the lock was hid.
The wrangling key pleads, keeping much ado;
The nails were forced, yet they were guilty too:
They loose their hold; the hooks, and hinges sever,
The key is gone; the lock does his endevor,
To purchase freedom: the door as feign would cleave
In sunder; but, it cannot yet get leave:
For execution in a worser kind,
(Justice decrees, not long e're he shall find)
Must be his doom: the lock, hooks, hinges must
Dye with the nails, a lingering death with rust.
The key's pursued (though it be stepped aside)
With Argus eyes, and shall be strictly tried,
When it is found, as chiefly guilty in it;
And then this story shall be put in print.
These hateful Brutes now frighted are away,
By these extremes; but cannot go by day;
For Sol disdaines to give them any light,
And they are ashamed to come in peoples sight;
Nay, silent night (though shameless) would not own them,
They are so vile, had she before not known them.
Darkness prepares for each a sable coat,
Vshers them out, unto a place remote,
Owls tune their organs, as they go along,
The Screech-Owles cries are mixed too among:
The nimble Bats do frisk along before,
The Polcat's called, and he brings many more.
The subtle We sell follows on behind,
And nightly Beetes singing in their kind.
The Mouse was wished, but would not help to place them;
Welfare the Rat, he came, but not to grace them.
Well, gone they are; but whither, who can tell?
My Muse wants sent to track them by the smell:
Nor is it wholesome: yet to clear the score,
If they amend not, the will tell you more.
SECT. 35. Of a Country Clown, being cheated with marrying of a whore, etc.
A Homebred Clown, that had a good estate
Left by his friends: but overruled by fate,
Which wrought his woe; but well he did deserve it.
Read but the story, then you may observe it.
This silly Clunch did love a handsome Less,
Love, did I say? no, but to let that pass,
'Twas but in show; as afterward appeared;
Or loved in jest; in earnest he was jear'd.
She Is confident on's love, though fancy tremble,
She learnes to love, and he how to dissemble.
This Maid had beauty, honesty, and wit,
And portion that might well become, and fit
A better man: none of the former three
Had heat all; so true a Clown was he.
Her love exceeds; alas! it is out of season!
When love gets head; it is not ruled by reason.
The match goes on, in time they have agreed it,
All men conclude, the heavens have decreed it.
And then the day of marriage is prefixed;
Her love's entire, but his with falsehood mixed.
Why she loved him, l'elsay the best I can,
Because the did; or that he was a man;
And he had cause to love this lovely Maid;
But fools want reason: so this foole's betrayed.
The Sun had looked on him with his power,
And tanned his skin: his countenance was sower.
His goggle eyes, and rich enameled snout,
His brawny cheeks, his lips, or what is about
This trunk of treasure, I will not discover:
But how he wooed in's progress, how this lover
Obtain'd's desire; and how he was deceived,
And how he was of all his friends bereaved.
By accident he came into a place,
A man of note did show him there such grace,
He was transported; for he knew not how,
To carry' himself, save only at the plow.
He was not guilty of a jot of breeding,
But full of flesh; and that he got by seeding.
He saw an Imp there, (and her face was painted)
Who was a whore; and for a whore was tainted:
She was his prospect, and did glut his eyes,
His mind with surfets did both fall and rise.
Sometimes he will blush, and sometimes have no color,
Sometimes he is quick, as quickly he grows duller.
He walks about, and then sits down and muses,
Then speaks his mind, but clownish as he uses.
Zur, 'chave a zecret to make nowne to you,
Pray zhow ma vavor, on I Will tell you true,
How stonds my case; I chave a wounded heart,
That Is peirst quite through: for Coupid throw'd his dare.
Here is a wench, I think hurbe be his zistur,
Hur looks dud ravish ma, whon I had kissed hur.
My heart dud zwell, my head dud vall a aching,
My eyes mare dazeld, all my limbs stood quaking.
I con't tell how, my tongue was zilenst quite,
My honds ware manacled; yet we delight
I think upon hur; but I connot rest:
Had I but hur, oh! how zuld I be blessed!
If hur wool ha'ma, oll that ere I have
Zail be hur joyntur, much I woe not crave,
Bezides hur loave; vor I'chave wealth onouffe;
'Chave land, on cattle, houze, on houzo'd flusse.
On oll things vitting vor a contry mon.
Zur, woll you zpeake on help ma whot you con?
He hears, and ponders, and this lovers tale
Does take effect: she being grown so stale,
She stinks to most: but to the Clown her smell,
Seemed sweet (though rank) and pleased his humor we!
This Man of note consid'ring this, replied,
Be not dismayed, thou shall not be denied,
If I can steer the helm; put on, and try,
Perhaps at first (being modest) she will deny:
Take no repulse, her love in time will yield;
When thou have conquered, triumph in the field,
She Is such a one as nature does intend
To make a pattern of; I must commend
Thy wit, thy choice; her carriage is complete,
Her breeding's rare, and her behavior neat:
Her gifts, her parts do add a comely grace
To all the rest, her pleasant smiling face
Does usher in such glory that the sun
Is quite ecclip'st before the day be done.
Her eyes being bright, (the beams with shame return)
They charm the fire, as't has no power to burn.
Why speak I thus, to put a heat to fire?
Love, must have love; that satisfies desire.
I Will make the way: Jove give thee good success!
I wish the winged god may do no less!
Thus having blazed her Fame, what is now agreed
She was in show; but not at all indeed.
He never told (in this he much did fail)
Her body was too heavy for her tail.
Nor of her painting on her wrinkled face,
Nor how she was to all her sex disgrace.
Nor of her living, which was worse than bad,
Her trading brought in all the means she had.
Then he unfolds this matter to the whore,
She tells the bawd; her sister, and before
They do admit him, they consult about him,
She Will leave the man, and have his coin without him.
But then the spokesman vomited his mind:
Though he is a Clown, yet thou may find him kind:
He Will dote upon thee, let thee take thine ease,
And go, and come, and do what ere thou please.
He Will not be jealous, he has not the wit:
But thou must rule him, and thy humors fit.
He Is rich, and thou shall always keep his treasure:
Thou'art wise enough to use it at thy pleasure.
Come, be not coy, seeing fortune gives a call,
And for his faults, know, gold will cover all.
Take something certain; thou know what to do,
Please but this fool, and keep thy trading too.
When he was silent, thus the queen began:
What shall I do? this country Clown, who can
Affect his person? he so like a fool
Behaves himself? alas, he should go to school
Before he seek a wife, and learn some wit
To make a husband, ere he will be fit
To know himself; and such as are above him,
He is so clownish, I shall never love him.
But if i could be married to his land,
And leave his person, then I Would give my hand,
And strike the match, with heart and free consent:
I live at pleasure, and have full content
Without control: if he should marry me,
He Would mue me up: with those that come to see
My changed condition (how socre I sped)
I quickly should grasthorne upon his head.
Your love I tender; but the Clown I hate,
And think it scorn that he should be my mate.
With that the bawd grew angry, looking fierce,
Begins to speak, but cannot well rehearse
Her mind in words: but when the storm was past,
Her tongue broke loose, and thus she spoke at last:
What do thou flight what love to thee does proffer?
Art thou so curious to refuse an offer
That might enrich thee? I Will not thee importune,
Thou art not like to have so good a fortune
If thou refuse him; be not thou so nice;
If once denied, he may not ask thee twice.
His clownish carriage, thou may help to mend it,
And cover all his faults, if thou'ltintend it.
Come, he is wealthy, stand not in thy light:
The pleasant'st day may have a cloudy night.
Riches bring honor, fortune does it send,
What freely comos, thou may as freely spend.
Though he be hidebound, thou may make this Clown
Consormable; and bring his temper down.
When thou art old, thy custom and thy trade
Will quite decay; already thou do fade.
He Will not mistrust thee, thou may take thy time,
And use thy own whilst thou art in thy prime.
Say he should think that thou did do amiss.
Poor man! he will wink, or salve it with a kiss!
If thou should have a man discreet and wise,
He Would track thee out; for wisdome's full of eyes.
If he be poor, his wit will not maintain thee;
Thou will repent; thy friends will all disdain thee.
Reject him not, although he be a peasant,
A country life, with wealth, is very pleasant.
As she concluded, in then came the suitor,
So brisk, as coming newly from his tutor,
And kissed them round, as he was taught to do;
Yet still a clown, and clownishly did woe.
Thus he began:
Zweet heart, I loave tha, woot tho be my wife?
Zay, constable tho like a bonnie country life?
I never zaw anee I cood loave like thee,
Nor ever zhall: zhow then zuch loave to me!
Thine eyes are charms, thy vavor does invite ma,
Thou hanzome duck! O let thy, oave requite ma!
Zpeak wolt ta ha'ma? if thou me deny,
I zhall be zick, on zicknesse makes voke: die.
I thout to night'chad bad tha in mine arms,
But whon I woke, I ch'was bewicht we charms.
I do embrace tho oton in my dreams,
But tan I vinde'tis nothing but extremes
Of loave, and veare, of hope, on passions mixed,
which genders grief; dezpaire ztonds us betwixt.
O pity ma, and caze ma of me zmart!
Tho have abawme would cure my wounded heart:
My wealth, my goods, on whotzoere I ha,
Sholl be thine own, com, do no zay ma na.
This crasty slut knows how to make her game,
She Would seem to blush, but that she wants sharce.
She screws him up unto a higher pin
With silence and delays: now she will begin
To speak her mind; Kind sir, I must be bold
To breath a doubt, your love's too hot to hold:
Nor am I willing my estate to change;
This thing called love, to me was ever strange:
Nor can I brook a silent country life,
I Am far unfit to make a Farmers wife:
I cannot toil, bake, brew, nor serve your swine,
Nor trudge to market, no, nor milk your kine;
Nor such like things, which suits not with my breeding;
But where you woo, I Would have you go a speeding.
And for your love I thank you, and am sorry
You dream of joy; but waking spoils the story.
If you are sick, alas! you must endure it!
It Is not my fault, not have I balm to cure it.
What Is wealth? much care a mar edlife does bring;
I Will n'ere submit to such a foolish thing.
You loved another, let her be our bride,
And so adieu, good fortune be your guide.
So slunk away.
With that in haste he turned himself about
To view the passage; which way she went out
He could not find, but changed like a ghost:
His mind perplexed, his spirit sunk almost!
His heart in pieces now is like to break;
He swells with grief, so that he cannot speak:
Thus he continued, though a little season,
Yet in that time sense robbed him of his reason.
But she relates his wooing all this while;
And how she answered, made them all to smile;
For they agreed that she should only try him,
To prize her more, not that she should deny him,
For fear he would change, and never more to crave her;
For well they knew none but a fool would have her
Then in they came to comfort up his heart,
But she was absent (that did breed the smart)
In policy, which made him grieve the more,
But she to listen stood behind the door;
She Would see the event; her frowns did speak his doom
If she appeared she was a living tomb!
But she was called, the matter was debated,
How he loved her, why he of her was hated.
They urged her to it, feign they would have her married;
She now resolved, but presently she varied.
But to be short, they would not have him deluded,
They joined their hands, the match is now concluded.
But now to show how he embraced his choice,
'Twould make you laugh; and how he did rejoice;
What he appointed for the marriage day,
('It Was thought the savor did his love bewray)
How he directed. Going plodding out
To tell his fortune, as he looked about,
He spied the maid that loved him, told the story
Of this great match, and the intended glory
He Would have at's wedding; how five hundred pound
He had in promise (but not one was bound
To see it paid in money) nor a jot
I fear will ever fall unto his lot!
This harmless soul, in hearing this, replied,
False-hearted man! with grief her tongue was tied,
She spoke no more; her eyes dropped silent tears,
Her color changed, her mind's distressed with fears!
Her heart was swelled, it would dissolve, but when
It sent out tears, grief called them back again!
Sometimes hot fevers seemed to take fast hold,
Then frosty agues made her shake with cold!
Sometimes the spring spreads beauty on her face,
Then comes the autumn which does it disgrace!
Time gave her respit to renew her strength;
The clouds blew over, thus she spoke at length.
What is truth banitht? or is she asleep?
Is faith in morgage, that thou will not keep
Thy promise made? will conscience pass for coin?
Death is corrivall of this heart of mine!
My heart is breaking, but it grieves not thee,
Forwhy? thou bring'st me to this misery!
Now, now, thou leave me, and thon break'st thy vow,
Which God nor Nature ever did allow;
To cleave to one that is to thee a stranger;
Thou do my welfare and thy soul endanger.
In wronging me thou do thy self no right;
Take heed, I fear she is a grain too light.
She Is coacht with gallants up and down the street,
Judge then the rest, and show thy self discreet,
To doubt the worst. Why, do I spend my breath,
But for my Bridegroom, constant, gentle death?
Then down she sunk, as if the day were come
To solemnize the wedding in her tomb!
The worms her guests; they modestly will keep
Their watch, while she does with her bridegroom sleep?
But raising up her breath, as from the ground,
She then revived, for it was but a swound.
Then spoke this clown, 'twas all the wit he had;
Whot ailes theiz voole? Whot art ta turning mad?
Or do dizemble? I wool not believe tha,
Not I, but loss of whot I have do grieve tha.
Dud I make promosse to tha? woo dud hear it?
Come, do thy worst, na troth I woe not veare it.
I thave a zweet heart, though thou zaist hur's light,
Hur vlesh is vast, hur's high on big; thy spite
Breaks out agenst hur, vor thy noze do zwell:
Hur's vaire, of Cowpids kin, I leek hur well.
Hur's handsome, young, well bred, on monstr us witty,
There Is never a viner wench in oll this zitty.
A great huge potion: god omighty zent hur.
I love hur mainly, on I zball content hur,
With money, gouds, and londs, with pigs, on kine,
My zelf on oll: I chave hur heart, z'has mine.
I chom o happy mon: whot ere thou zay.
Thus having spewd his mind, he runs away.
Poor tortured Virgin! how art thou cast down?
Grieve not to leave this false hard-hearted Clown.
Thou lov'dst too soon, too much, and out of season,
Call home thy love, let sense be ruled by reason:
Submit to what the heavens do decree,
Which have in store a better a atch for thee.
Thy heart's so bruised it bleeds with inward pain;
But gentle time will make it whole again.
For better objects keep thy love in store,
Thou shall be blessed; he vexed with a Whore.
But now my Muse, for pleading on thy side
Will lose the love of the Bridgroom, and the Bride:
She weighes it not, nor will the flatter any;
She hates a bribe, and knows a fool from many.
Now they prepare against the wedding day;
(Though not invited) she intends to stay
To see the service in a corner by:
She Will view the couple: now the time is nigh,
Althings are bought, both of them rich apparrel'd,
But coin was wanting, and the Tailor quarreled,
Now they are married.
To show the manner of this solemn feast,
The butchers meat, the foul, and how 'twas dressed;
Or name the guests, or those that did attend them,
What was their own, or what their friends did lend the,
What choice of wine, his waiting on the Bride,
What cost this feast, what paid for sauce beside,
I Will not relate it, it is too long a story:
Blame not my Muse, she is not a grave for glory.
But having dined, he said his fathers grace,
And prayed the Sun to drive away apace,
And whip the steeds with fury to the West,
For in his sight but half could he be blessed.
His spirits moved him Morpheus to invite
To spread his cloud, and haste to bring on night.
Black night being come, he went with his Bride to bed;
He had his wish, but not her maidenhead.
My Muse left them, to enjoy what from love sprung,
For she was modest, and she lost her tongue.
Their nightly pleasures smoothly glide away,
And night is forced to give place to the day.
Her tongue's restored to show their grief o'th'morrow,
Exchanged with joy, unto the Bride-grooms sorrow!
What he took up on ticket, or the score,
For this great feast, and what he owed before,
Must now be paid; he cannot well deny it;
His marriage coin, he can as ill come by it;
Yet safe enough, for it is out at use;
(So forawhile this was his chief excuse)
Where, no man's knows, nor when it shall be paid,
The bond is cancelled, or it is mis-laid.
He was deferred, (it was a cruel spite)
Until Doomsday, at six a clock at night.
His Creditors (as Bees about a hive)
Do haunt him still, nor is he like to thrive;
His costly mistress keeps him low and bare,
Which makes this clown run almost mad with care.
His spokes-mate, or the pander does find out
Where Is money to be lent; it is brought about
That he shall have it; for it, all are bound,
But when us paid, he only can be found:
The other are Non-Residents; their trust
Is to deceive. But pay it in he must;
For they will be gone (for this they must have fees)
Bats have their holes, and Owls have hollow trees.
But having took their pleasures here a while,
The tide runs low, for time does them beguile:
Down in the Country they do haste away,
It Is time, for here it is too hot to stay.
They take their leaves; the farewell of this whore,
Made him an Ox, that was an Ass before.
Away they went; their welcome was but small,
Their comfort cold, as good as none at all.
His friends had heard how he cast off the Maid
That loved him and was by a whore betrayed;
How he had spent his means, and was in debt,
How he was gulled, and how at first they met:
All their proceedings, how she promised large,
How 'twas deferred, and how he bore the charge
Of all their feasts: his mother first 'twas spied them:
Course entertainment! she began to chide them!
What have thou done? thou fool! have sold for naught
Thy self, thy fortunes, that thou here have brought
A noted queen? take her away with thee;
I Will never harbor her: if thou can see,
Go read thy folly. Shall thy fathers name
Die in disgrace? or live in open shame?
What! bring a whore? go, I will never own thee
To be my child; all hate thee that have known the?
They were perplexed, this unexpected change
Gives foul affront: the salutation's strange.
Then went he to a sister that he had,
(A married wife) and there they sped as bad.
It was so noysed up and down the town,
That Simpleton had brought a Hakney down.
No comfort there (his friends were turned his foes)
Nor any where: then back again he goes,
Filled with displeasure: yet of none lamented;
Grief joins with care; he is now grown discontented;
He lives retired, fast bound unto his cross;
He thought to win, but he comes off with loss.
Now, he perceiving how the game does go
Still more against him: feign he would breathe his woe,
But brinish tears prevent him: to the smart
He must be tied, which cuts him to the heart.
Nor help, nor ease, nor succor, nor relief
The earth affords, to mitigate his grief.
His Doxie now he cannot well digest,
She cloyes his stomach that he cannot rest.
To ease himself by thinking of a change,
It Is but in vain: his case is very strange!
And finding his estate consume so fast,
He Is quite disgraced, his parts fall out at last.
SECT. 36. The disagreements of his members and faculties.
HE, all amort, was walking in the street,
His legs, they took exceptions at his feet,
For being forward in this heinous fact,
They are adjudg'd, and censured for the act:
'T was proved they strived which first should keep his time,
And both are equal guilty of the crime.
But then the legs as guilty are accused,
They bore the rest, and let them be abused;
Yet still were silent; nay, they did uphold
The faction too: and being stout and bold,
They would not yield; but ever trudged apare,
With hasto to bring their Master to disgrace:
And yet too flow: for when this Jade did sit
Near unto him, they would not stir a whit.
They were submissive always in her sight:
They Would bow to grace her, seldom stand upright.
They Are doomed, through stiffnesse, not to bow at all;
Or else with faintness, if they bow, to fall.
They blame the knees, which first did bring them to it,
They Would quickly bend, and force the legs to do it:
For temporizing, turning every way,
And flattr'ing him, although he went astray:
Yet true to her, for they would never fail,
But still with patience bear her stinking --
They take distaste, and lay it to the thighs,
Pleading, by them they were deceived with lies,
They being strong, the other being weak,
Persuaded were; their friendship thus did break,
And fall to strife. The hips are faulty too,
For being acquainted when he did her woo:
They soon agreed, that they should make a match;
It plainly shows that they did mischief hatch.
They Are sentenced all; the hips, the thighs, the knees
Must now consume; the flesh must by degrees
Waste from the bones; the bones a drying lay,
The sinews shrink, yet cannot shrink away.
The news of this would fright away the marrow,
But't cannot run, the passage is to narrow.
What near adjoynes, I would not have it named,
The cause is foul, that all would be ashamed
To hear it pleaded; let it silentlye.
But let the reins come answer here what I
Lay to its charge; it ever bred that fire,
Which gender'd shame, and stirred up vile desire:
It moved to ill, and fed that lustful stream,
And rocked this wretch into a golden dream:
And ready was to usher in all lust,
Provoking him; and did betray the trust
It had in charge: and took occasion still
How to bewitch him, yiedling to his will.
So shameless; it was never known to fear her,
But did rejoice, when ever it came near her:
The censure's sharp; the gangrene and the gout
Must search the sore, and eat the matter out.
The back, for joining close unto this part,
Assisting it, is like to feel the smart:
Th'back blames the belly, that it made it strong,
Receiving food, which did maintain it long
In all this business: pamp'ring was the reason,
That it did further, or conceal the treason.
The belly finding, how it was back-bited,
For all its kindness to the back: how slighted:
Began to grumble: and would hold no meat,
But still grew angry, when the jaws did eat.
You Would think him blameless, and might well be quitted;
But he is guilty, and must not be piti'd,
Maintaining all against his Masters cause;
And is condemned according to the Laws.
Then next appears the liver, and the lungs,
They Would shift it off; but, for apparent wrongs,
Who can excuse them? the lungs are chiefly shent,
For they did move to further his intent,
By fanning breath: the liver kept the blood,
Which nourisht vice, which might have been a flood,
To drown his lust: consumption is their lot,
For this offense: the bowels they must rot,
For being false, and joining on their side:
It was a cheat, it cannot be denied.
These bend their envy all against the heart,
He is delinquent; and must bear a part
Of misery: for it was false before
To one of worth: but constant to this whore:
And was so soft, that it would swell, and melt,
And in her presence still high passions felt,
With strength of lust; It must despairinglye,
To see all doomed: that last of all must dye.
Death, Sergeant-like, must strain upon his breath:
If'twill not yield, it must be pressed to death.
The arms are bound to answer to the charge
That Is brought against them; for they did at large
Spread out themselves; still willing to embrace her;
They might have closed; but would not once disgrace her.
'Twas treachery; and yet they did agree,
To make a snare, brought him to misery.
They answer not, for each distracted stands:
But yet at last, they lay it to the hands,
That drew them to so foul a thing as this;
They seemed to grieve, that e're they did amiss.
The hands did hold her often while he kissed her:
And were like lime-twigs; else he might have mist her.
They were like pullies; holding would not fade;
Nor would they loose, until the match was made.
The arms, the hands must suffer all together,
Hang down they must; the blasts and storms of weather
Must show them justice; all the time they have
Now to repent, it is but to scratch a grave.
They blame the head (there all the senses dwell)
That gave consent; it is clear it was not well
To overlook, and yet to be so rash,
To gull him with such stuff, and musty trash.
The brains had chiefly paid for it very dear;
But 'twas not not known that he had any there.
But then they tax the noddle, and the scull
For covering all the plot, though he was dull,
And let things pass at randam: never thought
On It till his master gave himself for naught.
The punishment does fall upon the hair,
That moults away (the scull behind's left bare,)
For lying still, it neverstood upright;
Nor summoned fear when this hag came in sight.
The ears that did receive all false reports,
And keep out true, were tickled with such sports,
And surfetted in hearing of her praisd;
Till she was won, the siege was never raisd.
They Are bound to hear his ruin, and withal
To bear a share; then not to hear atall.
The nose mistook; it could not smell the rot,
But all seemed sweet; now stinking is it is lot
For that offense; the eyes are hated more;
They spied her first, and ever went before,
To usher in the rest with much delight;
But they were dim when she was out of sight:
And did connive her faults; her painted face,
With what was ill, they counted as a grace.
They were the spies to watch and bring in News,
Be the're so false; the heart they did abuse
With misconceits; they were feoffees in trust,
Ill overseers! drawn away with lust!
They did dissemble; any one would think
They closd with sleep, when as they did but wink.
They Would never rest till they had brought about
This fond attempt: all this is out of doubt.
The judgement's past: they must be drowned in tears
In open view, that he that sees, or hears,
May warning take: then dimnesse must over take them,
And by degrees their sight shall clean forsake them.
When fruit is gone, then leaves shall stay behind
To show the reason why the eyes grew blind.
The tongue is deeply guilty in this case,
For flattering first, and then to be as base
To give deny all to that maid, t'whome he
Had been engaged: 'twas plain hypocrisy.
By it the secrets of the heart were broken,
Had it not been for this, none would have spoken.
It blabd abroad what ever it did find,
Though never so closely seated in the mind.
Such was its force, it might have all controlled,
And broke the match, if it had been wise and bold.
It made the motion: then the rest about it
Did yield: the match could not be made without it.
No art but this (he never went to school)
He'ad learned to sell his master for a fools.
He Is sentenc't public to confess the crime;
Then to be silenced for a little time.
And when he speaks, to faulter in his tale,
Imprisoned I, then not capable of bale.
The fault's so great: being bound unto the peace,
His jaw's the grates: but if it get release,
It speaks true nonsense, that is the legal sum:
Then grief, and shame at last must strike him dumb.
But now the chaps, for opening at a beck,
And let him prate at randam without check,
(The teeth did snarle, and bite flesh guiltless, long,
Yet for this fault never snarl'd nor bit the tongue.)
(They were confederates) there fore 'twas no wonder
The chaps must fall; the teeth shall drop in sunder.
Nor is the throat found innocent: for why?
The voice had freedom, though it never did deny
The breath a passage; sounding out the note.
Rough, hot, and dry's the censure of the throat.
There was a sine laid on the subtle breath,
Sentence adjourned until the day of death.
Now all the members, feeling smart, are greived;
They cast a plot (in vain to be releived)
Against the intellectuals; malice breaks:
The heart indites, and every member speaks;
And plead, they governed them, and ever when
They moved them, 'twas as Devils move in men.
They could not stir, nor bring forth such events,
But still were forced, and used as instruments.
All that they did, was by the livened soul
Devised, and acted; who did all control.
This is in justice! can it equal be,
That we should suffer? and the soul go free?
Search out the cause: is it not very fit
Those parts should suffer, and we should be quit?
The Understanding it is, that is first arraigned;
The charge is heavy; for they all complained,
How he deceived them: never tried the case,
But gave consent that Will should take his place:
Which, like a Tyrant, quite suspended Reason,
It might more freely plot and work this treason.
What he propounded, all must yield unto it:
Or else must suffer, if they would not do it.
Be It never so bad, none must dispute the cause,
The Will will stand, and cross all humane Laws.
All Is current coin; what e're it did erect,
To choose this whore, the other did reject.
It made the match, and every thing's done by it;
This is not envy, nor do I belie it.
The Affections, like to pages, fore-most run,
That should be hind-most: having ill begun,
As ill drive on: with haste they turn to passion,
And roaving bring the members out of fashion.
They slight, and hate, where they should truly love;
And love amiss; stand still, when they should move.
Lust steeres the course, the compasse-rule is Sense,
Conceit's the Pilot; no man knows from whence
These Furies come, nor whither they are bound:
Though they are out-lawed, they are ever found
Most busy, with the rest, to all that is evil;
As if they had their lerry from the Devil.
Their censure is; the Vnderstanding's lost;
Or by the Will it shall be ever crossed
In all designs; and carried like a slave,
And be a vassal, nor can freedom have.
The Will for so inttenching on that part,
Against its will, must undergo the smart,
To be imprisoned: neverto be free;
To do, or not to do; it is misery
To be so servile! yet here is no remorse!
Though It will not bend, yet this will break its force.
The Affections lose their strength, nor can they taste
What Is good, or bad, the senses are laid waste:
Or if they move, it is not like that ever
They should attain to what they do endever.
Thus parts, and members in their kinds are fitted;
With shifts or pleadings none of them are quitted.
With one consent condemned as they stand,
They beg reprive, and blame the guilty land.
They make it plain (but if he hear't 'twill mad him)
That was the cause, or else she had not had him.
He could not move her, till he brought in that:
All lean conceits! he took her with the fat:
That did the decd; and promi'st more contents
Than he, or all his clownish complements.
It is decreed that some must morgag'd be
To pay his debts, the others that are free,
The Usurer shall tie them by a band,
Which forfeited, he will strain upon the land.
The feeling Lawyer too, must have a share
E're all be gone. This emblem of true care,
When all is spent, can he live on the rest?
His hope dies first; for warning it is express.
SECT. 37. Of a handsome cunning Whore, that had the Pox, and how she deceived
her husband; and how she died.
A Citizen, who had deserved Fame,
(His honest dealing raised up his name.)
The world did smile upon him: he was blessed
With wealth, with credit, and above the rest
He prized his wife; her carriage seemed so sweet,
So full of beauty! and her words discreet!
So free from choler! she was mild, but witty;
In all appearance, none in all the City
Was more complete; but see, such was his Fate!
None in the land, was more unfortunate!
Though she was fair, mild, young, and seeming wise,
Her heart was false; her husband in her eyes,
Was undervalu'd; she was fraught with cvill.
Her out-side's fair; her inside's like a Devil.
It Is strange dame Nature should be so over seen
To give a beauty fitting for a Queen,
And keep all virtue back: can she dissemble
Her dowry thus? 't may make all beauties tremble?
Or is she moved with spleen? or to enthrall
The Fair? then dame, give virtue none at all.
Or is she blind, to think it is her duty
To give some virtue, and the other beauty?
O, part them not! how sweetly would they shine
Both being mixed! how lovely, how divine
Will be the luster! are the best exempted
From beauty, 'cause she is loath to have them tempted?
Or does she work by owle-light? or has she
Sworn virtue plainly to deformity?
Or vice to beauty? keep them in some place,
Or vice will rob true virtue of her grace.
Here I could lose my self; but I must turn
Unto the Whore; now she with lust dothburne,
And takes her time to walk about the street;
If any letcher does this Harlot meet,
Few words will serve; she will quickly give consent,
Those ways of darkness, give this whore content.
Nor does she stand upon it, though she be sine,
And he but bare; nor does she trade for coin;
She wants not gold, or any thing beside.
But in a while she was so Frenchifide,
That hungry Gall had seized upon her flesh,
Her colour's pale, that formerly was fresh:
And through her flesh it gnaws upon her bones.
She to her husband in these mourning tones
Expressed her mind; alas! I am not well?
My flesh is sore, the Doctors cannot tell
What is the cause: my bones do ache, my hears
Is grown so sad, poor I do feel the smart!
I fear a deep consumption has possessed
My vital spirits, in my grieved breast!
I Am melancholy, keeping so within,
I seldom go abroad to see my kin.
I dote upon a husband, too too much;
I cannot choose, alas! my love is such!
You do not care if death should take my life;
Then farewell Peg! you would have another wife
Within a month. I cannot long remain,
Unless I have a cure for my pain.
The Bath, I understand, is very good,
To ease my griping pain, and purge my blood.
If any thing, it is only that can do it,
If you will consent that I shall go unto it.
This honest loving man, did never distrust
She had the cankers that was bred of lust.
No spark of jealousy possessed his mind,
(Say, is it a gift, that Cuckolds are most kind?)
He thought her virtuous, she to him did pass
For every thing, save only what she was.
And thus he answered her.
How am I grieved for thee, my dearest Love!
Thy pain is mine how do my bowels move?
And melt with true compassion! and my heart
Is swelled with sorrow! oh! the hidden smart
That Is gendred in my breast! my tears are bent,
To pant it out; but grief affords no vent!
Thy words do overcharge me, so that I
Am like to sink! my joy with thee will dye!
What Is all I have to thee? what is my endevor?
Thy life, thy death will make, or matre me ever.
O! cruel pity! shall I have delight
So short a time! will Fortune show her spite?
And rob me of my love? thou art divine,
Flesh cannot long keep such a soul as thine!
The Angels envy earth, for they will come,
And fetch thy soul; and Fame will make thy tomb,
As lasting as thy praise. How do I call
My Genius up to pity this my fall!
O! let me yet enjoy thee! and I will
Slight all things else, but glory in thee still.
Go to the Bath, here is gold and money store;
If thou gain'st health, I never shall be poor.
He would have went himself, or sent his man,
But she replied, no; do the best you can,
Look to the maine; expenses will be large;
I Will go alone, and that will case your charge.
Good company are always going down;
And if you will but bring me out of town,
I ask no more: but pay the Coach-mans fee,
And he will take an honest care of me.
She Is coach'd, and gone; but he is discontent:
And these good wishes after her he sent:
Let that swift Mover, that o're-looks the sky,
Move gently now; and let the runners by
Smile sweetly on her! Sol, give her thy grace!
Although she has more beauty in her face,
Than thou have in thy prime. When stars have gazed
Upon her beauty, let them all amazed,
Yield her the praises! let the spheres below
Melt with desire, when once they do her known.
But never prate, or tell the horned Moon,
Sh' eclipsed the beauty of the Sun at noone
Lest she should hide her face, with envy spite her.
And flinck behind a Cloud, when she should light her.
And let the wanton air be so discreet,
Not steal her breath away to make it sweet.
But let the earth boast (rising one degree,)
For bearing such a lovely saint as she!
Let not the plants with emulation strive!
Or swell with lust, wish to be sensitive!
Put let the flying quire learn how to sing:
Her Odes, her Eulogies! I Will imp the wing
Of him that sings it best; as they begun,
So let their discords into Concords run.
How can the horses drawing her along,
But march in state! let them though they are strong,
Obey her words: yet let them take such pride
Not to draw coaches by the high way side,
Like hackneys any more: but serve some Lord,
(Their worth will then be known) that will afford
Them better keeping. Let the Coach still rest;
'T has done enough in carrying such a guest.
And let the Coachman, though he be a Clown,
('Cause by his care he carried her safely down)
Be raisd to such preferment, that he may
Find by experience what a happy day
It was to him! let low conceits no more
Take up his mind: he never had before
Such credit in a journey; such a bliss!
Oh! how he triumphs that he hap't on this!
Oh! if the Bath can once but give her case,
And ground of hope, to cure her strange disease,
(Though I am absent, yet'twil'swage my pain)
And winged time, but bring her safe again,
How happy shall I be! these thoughts do give
Such sweet impressions that my heart does live.
Come home my joy, and banish hence my fear!
I dreamed to night, and thought I had thee here.
This slut being at the Bath, finds no releife:
(It never cured such a desperate grief)
She thought some villain that was young and fresh,
Would have embraced her care'on rotten flesh,
And covered shame with sin. Oh! hateful thought!
Nay, for her money she would feign have bought
A sin at second hand. Hell's not agreed
To bring a patron for so foul a deed.
All judged for foul: such Imps are seeming-wise,
Her face wants color, nose, lips, teeth, and eyes
Betrayed her hopes; some had much money spent her,
The P: did fright'em and they would not venture.
She Is foul returned, newly from the Bath;
And talks of going home, but mist the path:
Yet she is contented (though she knows it is wrong)
The bawdy house where she at first was stung,
Did entertain her: they'ad renewed their store;
The spirits were gone, that haunted there before:
The gall: or empty purses drew them thence,
And now this whore hopes for a recompense.
Her face was painted fresh, and she was bold;
Sh'had rich attire, and she was full of gold.
At last a Novice coming newly in,
On purpose to commit this cursed sin,
(The Devil having stole him from his Master)
He paies his entrance; and he will be a taster
Of blasted pleasures: when this whore had spied him,
She cast out jests, and smiles; the more she eyed him,
The more she liked him; (thought she) this's the man
That must free me from shame, if any can.
She held him in discourse, and found his mind:
Then he rejoicing that she was so kind,
Grew impudent; being taken with her sight,
Yet fears to speed, because his purse was light.
When she perceived it, then she gave him gold,
And what he loved, she wished him to be bold,
And call for'tin; they supt with dainty fare:
All sorts of wine they had; nor did they spare
For any cost; this Novice did exceed:
His seeming heaven proved a hell indeed.
They having supt, to bed they went together;
He thought good fortune did direct him thither.
She blessed her self, and thought by this endeavor,
She should be cured of her shame for ever.
These varlets lay more ground work for their sorrow,
My modest Muse will come again to morrow.
The night they spent in lust: but when they spide
The mome begin to dim bold Cynthia's pride:
They must be gone, sear called him first away,
And Chanticleer the trumpeter of day
Sounds out alarm, he wished again the moon
But cursed the day, because it came so soon.
Why do thou bring this bold audacious light
Within this room to fright away the night?
Must I, must I be subject unto thee?
The unwelcomst guest, that ever came to me!
Thou art a teltale, and a makebate too:
Why come thou, but to spy what we here do?
Go back again, thy shining visage shroud
In some close cell, or else behind a clowd:
Stay there a while, that I may have my ends:
(A small request) and then we will be friends.
But light's impartial, finding things uneven,
Reveals the truth, because it came from heaven.
Ere they do part, they point both time and place,
To meet again, he thought it such a grace
To be esteemed as worthy of her love:
He thought the gods had sent her from above.
Now home she is gone: for me to show what cheers
He did provide, to welcome home his dear;
How he embraced her, how he did rejoice,
And how he praisd his fortune in his choice;
How they discour'st of what she did endure,
And how he pitied her, and of the cure
Of her unknown, and dangerous disease,
How he revived, and how his heart had ease,
And how he praisd the Bath, and was content
With all the charge, and money that she spent,
And how he gave her more; I need not show it:
Nor is it to any purpose if you know it.
Within three days, the time was come about,
He at her garden house does find her out.
Five pound in gold she gave him; yet was she
In debt to him for his last courtesy.
He muz'd at this! yet thought it was to gain him;
Sh'ad costly fare besides to entertain him.
Such queanes as this, do make the air stink,
And crush their husbands till they make 'em sink.
This codshead then rejoyct, thinks all is well,
But yetere long, he felt his members swell:
His bowels ache, such griping in his bones,
That all his language was expressed in groans:
His color changed, the dimnesse of his eye
With His filtring speech you might his grief discry.
Then to a Doctor went he, for a Drench,
Who ask't him where he met that pocky wench
That had so paid him? but he would not reveal her,
She made him swear, that he should still conceal her.
He to his mistress did his grief discover,
Who told him that she would be his constant lover,
And gave him gold; but at another time
She brought him fifty pounds; (this fills my rhyme;)
And told him, that she'ld make her purse strings crack;
Although her husband did, he should not lack.
Five hundred pounds, said she, I will provide
(Against thy time is out) for thee beside.
But he refused the proffered fifty pound,
Lest he should in a golden stream be drowned.
But he must keep it, till that he had need;
And so they parted, being both agreed.
She long continued in this shameful course
(Before she was found out) wtthout remorse,
She desp'ratly her husbands goods did spend;
Her time, her strength unto a hateful end:
Although it was perceived how she did fall,
Her husband would not see it; love covered all;
But more and more, her vileness did break out;
Her sin, her shame, fame had so spread about,
H'was forced to hear, and see; his heart did say,
Come quickly death, and take my life away!
How am I crossed in my chief delight!
Come, come and hide me, with the shades of night
It Is but a boon to take away my breath:
The life I have is but a living death.
More had he spoke, but passion was too strong;
Tears made him blind, and grief attach't his tongue.
This cunning strumpet in her craft is caught,
And now she finds that sinful pleasure's naught.
Her old disease consents to quit the score:
Then down she falls, and leaves her husband poor.
Her Epitaph.
Here Is painted vice that did deceive the world,
Her lust had caused cankers in her throat;
She died upon it; and in this grave was hurled.
By this you know she was a whore of note:
'Cause she was light, and full of wanton mirth,
She Is cloz'd about with heavy-hearled earth.
SECT. 38. Observations from histories, of lascivious persons, but chiefly from
the collection of Cornelius Agrippa: abridged now for this purpose.
De vanitate Scientiarum.

NOt only now, but in the ancient times
Whores have been common; and those loathson crimes
Have been esteemed; the' Egyptians did devise
With show of worship, how to sacrifice
To Priapus; and Rome did still allow
Of Brothell houses: may not we see how
The shaveling Priests, lean Friars, fat-back Monks,
Did join their dwellings near the filthy puncks?
Houses of Nuns are often private Stews
For common harlots; they devotion use
To shelter sin; and hooded Monks, and Friars
May match the worst, that are lascivious liars.
Heathens did think, 'twas policy in state
To suffer whores; great Solon did create
A law to quit them; Apollo in those ages
Did reck on him one of the seven Sages:
It Is proved by Philemon, and Menander,
('It Is strange a man so wise should prove a Pander)
Young men might have their harlots: he first did
Erect that Temple (where such queanes were hid)
To wanton Venus; they were prized in Greece,
They without fear, their customers might fleece.
When Perses Realm began much to decay,
In Venus Temple they were set to pray.
In Corinth they did use that very thing:
And Ephesus of infamy did ring:
For fair whores, they did raise up sumptuous building,
And praised Venus, when they found'em yielding.
Wise Aristotle had a great esteem
Of common strumpets; he by sense did deem
Them fit for honor; he did so much prize
His Hermia, and Ceres; sacrifize.
He offered to'em. Venus was the first
That used this art in Cyprus; many durst
By her persuasions, to commit this sin,
Yet she must be a goddess. Hell broke in
Then unresisted: Maids did go astray
By custom still, before their marriage day,
To gain a dowry: but they gave a see
To Venus first of their Virginity.
The Babylonians did allow, that all
That were decai'd in goods, or were in thrall,
Should give their daughters to the will of those
(What ere they were, or be they friends, or foes)
That would relieve them; for Aspasia's sake,
Pericles did great battles undertake.
Lampridus says, an Emperor of Rome
Did keeps a house of whores, when is friends did come
Unto his feast, he would make'em freely eat,
(What he provided, was provoking meat)
According to the number of their dishes,
So were their whores; the're bound to reap their wishes.
For bawds, and whores, so much he did esteem them,
That he from death, end prison would redeem them,
He called them soldiers; and he gave them pay:
But chiefly when he found them at the play,
He Would show his bounty: she that loved the art,
And was most skillful, did possess his heart;
And any Mattons that did love the pleasure,
He Would free'em for it, 2nd pay'em from his treasure.
Cirena, in this way did all excel,
She was surnamed the gulf of lust, or hell.
Proculus did deflowre in one night
Ten fair sweet Virgins; with his cursed might
In fifteen days, a hundred he did force:
This Lord of Pluto's never had remorse.
The Poets feign that Hercules did more,
H'of fifty maids made every one a whore
Within a night. Sappho is guilty too,
(A Poetresse) cause she did Phaon woo.
Metrodus concubine, her wit did bend
In writing books, her whoredom to defend.
Leenath' Athenian, would not name her friend,
Though tortut'd on a rack her life did end.
I wonder hell should such a temper give!
To save another she deny's to live.
Rhodope that famous Queen did get so much
(A thriving whore! time found not any such)
As built a Pyramid (in dust she is hurled:)
That still abides a wonder in the world.
Thais would never trade (that fair faced beast)
Except with Kings, or Princes at the least.
But Messalina (being an Emp'rours wife)
Esteemed her lust as precious as her life.
In Stews she did the rankest whores exceed,
Though strength did fail, desires still did breed.
What need I speak of Joane, the Naples Qucene?
Or other Gallants, that would sin unseene?
Or of fair Iulia? or that Monarchs lust?
Or Pasiphae? and how the plague was just?
How many great oncs were by such means got?
How some were cooled with curses, when they were hot?
How Kings have left their Queens? how diverse more
Have been bewitched, disgraced, undone, made poor?
What looks, and gestures, words, and hot embraces,
Bold strumpets use? you will find them in their places.
Lais the whore, was praised by Cephalus,
And Nais extolld by Alcidanus.
Most of the ancient Poets (more or less)
Did wanton solly in their songs express.
But Ovid more, to his Corinna writes
The praise of lust: more sully he indites
In The Art of love (or else the whorish Art)
To paint out whoredom; strumpets had his heart.
In other things do his wit applaud;
But yet in this, what was he but a Bawd?
Octavius for it banisnt him from Rome;
Let bawdy Poets here have such a doom!
Such poy son'd pamphlets heretofore were burned;
And all the Authors out of favor turned.
Let Masters banish them out of their schools,
Lest they corrupt the youth, make them prove fools,
The learned Plato, from the Commonwealth
Did drive such sinners; it is against the health
Of nations, persons; Rome sometimes did renew
Their privilege, when Flaminus they slew,
With diverse more: with blood they purged this crime,
This sin grew out of fashion for a time.
Of this foul fault, who ever guilty is,
Shall find it apt to give him what is his.
The woman's lust does differ from the men,
The young from old, the rich from poor again.
The Countries too, just as they are enraged,
So to their lusts they are diversely engaged.
Man's love is fervent, woman's obstinate,
Young men are wanton, old men purchase hate,
Poor with their service, rich men with their gifts,
The most with feasts, the roaring Sparks with shifts.
The Gentlemen with maskings, sights, and plays,
The barren wit in painting out her praise.
The Italian does dissemble with his love,
With verses he will applaud her still, to move
Her to affect him: then he will jealous grow:
Without a watchman, he will not allow
Her liberty; if he cannot obtain her,
His tongue shall vent out spleen, and he will disdain her.
The Spanyard, in his lust, will much desire
His mistress (with complaints) to quench the fire.
And to obtain her, he will adore her much:
When he has got her, then his mind is such,
Through jealousy he will spoil his; or agreed,
She must be common to releeve her need.
If she denies him, he is much discontented,
And like a fiend before the time tormented.
The French man, being hot, seeks to obtain
His wish with songs; if jealousy his brain
Does once possess, he does lament his case:
If he is decei'vd, he will rail and curse apace.
But if he gets her, long he will not prize her,
He Will love another, then he will despise her.
The German being cold's raised by degrees
To love, by art he strives, and then with fees.
If he mistrust her, he will never abide
Her company: his heats soon qualified.
The Frenchman loves in show, the German covers,
The Spaniard does conceit that all his lovers
Are conquered by him. The Germans love comes to it,
But still he puts in jealousy to boot.
The Frenchman loves a wench that is full of pleasure,
Though she be foul. The Spaniard has his treasure
Laid up in beauty, be she never so rude.
But she that is bash full'st in the multitude,
Does please the Italian; the German does embrace
Her that is bold, and has a brazen face.
The Frenchman turns a fool, being obstinate;
The German he grows wise, when it is too late;
The Spaniard to gain favor in her eyes,
Will undertake some mighty enterprise;
The Italian will such dangers undergo,
As if he would have her where she would or no.
But are not Britains with these vices mixed?
They borrow all, and weave their own betwixt.
Great persons were besotted by this vice,
As Hannibal, and Claudius; Caesar twice.
Achilles for his Brises stopped his fight.
Mark Anthony was wounded with the sight
Of Cleopatra: many more were brought
To end their days; some first, some last, all naught.
How were the people that were once beloved,
Cursed for this sin? when storms of wrath were moved,
They were not quickly laid; some were undone,
And by this means were Nations overrun.
And many wives were by their husbands slain,
When law was out of use; oh hateful stain!
And men for this were murdered by their wives,
And for revenge they sacrificed their lives.
The motherly law in Althea was so changed
To cruel hatred (and her mind estranged)
She slew her sons, and whoredom was the cause
That she and others broke strict natures laws.
Who can digest it but an iron breast?
A wife, a mother here is tur'nd a beast!
But bawdry that does patronize this vice,
And draw them to it, and sets a higher price,
As youth and beauty differs: there is expressed
A middle sort betwixt the worst and best:
It has the help of many arts to draw,
And pleads a custom from the heathens law.
Nor is it like the cobwebs taking flies,
But feathered fowls are taken for a prize.
Not only beasts that winter has made bare,
It takes the pampered with this subtle snare.
The civil young man, and the modest maid,
With matrons, wives, and widows are betrayed.
To help this Art there is many a thing in print,
Young bawdes may learn, the old are perfect in it.
The art of Grammar, how to speak and write,
Does much avail, love letters to indite,
With quaint expressions, flattering words, and moanos,
With Verbs and Adverbs, Adjectives, and tones
From Interjections. Women must believe
They joy in: their presence, in their absence grieve.
Then next to this comes wanton Poetry,
To teach the pen to act adultery.
With Fables, Pastorals, Epigrams in rimes,
Stoll'n from old Venus, to infect the times.
And in our days, some Poets are as bad
That foster bawdes, their wits do make them mad.
Some have to please a puffe-past, or a punck,
Employed their frothy wit; and being drunk;
He that can of his snuff spawn out a brat,
He Will swear there is no poetry like that.
You must be sure his praises not to smother,
He Will pause awhile, and then belch out another;
Drink twice about, and fill him up his glasses,
He Will be the man, the other are but asses.
The Orator comes very close behind,
With eloquence he ravisheth the mind,
And helps the bawd with language to persuade;
But some historians more prefer her trade.
What Is Lancelot? Tristram? Adrialus?
Or Peregrinus? or that of Calistus?
Such want on stories often have such power,
That wives are lost, and maids they do deflower.
She that can frame discourse of such things best,
In City or in Court, above the rest,
She is esteemed; this, and another suitor
Sue forher strongly, yet she is a neuter.
But who would think that Logic should give help
And milk to nourish such a venomous whelp?
The foul it makes seem fair, the black seem white,
The wanton modest; that which gives delight
(Be It never so bad) 't will set upon it a gloss
To cheat plain truth, at last it bears the loss.
And music is a servant to this Art;
But wanton singing bears the greatest part:
Unsavory catches do the mind transport,
Then fleshly lust is counted but a sport.
Ale-meetings are as help, for there they may
Have freedom to embrace, to kiss and play.
The tripping Less that does so smoothly glide,
She Will catch her prey; in corners then they will hide.
Lascivious pictures give to lust a wing,
Venus, Praxitiles, Cupid that wanton thing,
Corrupted Alchida; one being denied
Fortune for's money, by the picture di'd.
Wise Aristotle did so much abhor it,
He Would have the chief inventer punished for it.
The Geomancers, telling fortunes, dreams,
With Soothsayers, they raise men to extremes.
Astrology and Magic hand in hand
Do bring in lust, and modesty with stand.
Potions there are, and drinks bewitched with charms,
Some lost their lives by it, others brought to harms.
Physicians have been guilty, they can come
At any time into a private room,
And work their ends, and then without a fee,
They Will promise to restore virginity:
To keep the paps from growth; besides he will
To do her pleasure, make her barren still:
That she securely cursed sin may hide,
He Will dawb the ruins over of madam Pride;
And color harlots, make them fit for sale,
And starch up pock-holes; books do tell this tale.
Some herbs are found that will increase desire;
Ovid made boast how often he quenched his fire,
And yet it flamed again; a famous Poet!
Not shamed of sin, but all the world shall know it.
Under the show of Physic, diverse do
Undo themselves, make others guilty too,
Eudemus with Livia had his will,
And Drusus knew not: Messalina's ill
Was hid awhile, that Claudius could not find
But she was sick; to lust she was inclined.
Bold Aristippus having Thais, that whore,
At his command, when others kept the door,
Did vaunt upon it, when others spent their state
'Pon her, she keeps him at a lofty rate;
Then sensual things he strangely did applaud,
And this Philosopher did prove a bawd.
And handy-crafts of women draws some in,
If they embroider, weave, or sew, or spin.
Some carry gloves and girdles; with a toy
Such plodding queans do often poor maids betray:
Thus they begin, but when their labor's past,
They Will set up bawdry, having first a taste.
Brave exercise of great ones has obtained
Unlawful love; as Romulus once gained
The Sabine women: so AEneas did
By hunting win fair Dido, being hid
From his companions. Jupiter did use
Shepherds for bawds. It is undoubted news
That Mariners to Venice bring rich fraught,
And retaile Merchants in exchange have naught.
Sumptuous banquets often have enflamed
The blood with lust, then men were not ashamed
To show themselves like beasts: as Virgil writes
In his AEneids; time cursed such delights.
Ther' are many other things which do agree
(To paint a whore) to help out bawdery.
Or all enchantments (yet I dare be bold)
There Is none of them can be compared with gold.
The jealous man with gold is soon appeased;
The simple cuckold, if with gold he is greased,
Is pacified: the watchman's overcome,
Gold opens gates; the private sleeping room
Is entered by it; gold takes part with mones,
Charms, locks and bolts, and conquers bars and stones,
Nay, gold has often dissolved the marriage knot:
Some have been raised by it, (such a lot)
His wife being fair, that he is become a knight:
Another rogue to please a Lords delight,
Has been advanced to a place of state.
Another he is unhappy-fortunate.
An out-worne varlet, that was very poor,
Has been advanced in marrying of a whore,
There Is history that plainly does declare
That Priests with Nuns (although they had a care
To go to shrist) have been as bad as any,
And at their shriving have deflowred many,
Whose souls (to heaven they pretend to gain)
They sacrifice to hell and lasting stain.
They think it sin to marry lawful wives,
But not a sin to lend lascivious lives.
A ruler made his boast, ten thousand fines
He had from Priests which kept their Concubines.
In former time in Rome they did decree
(For Venus temple, and for bawdery)
That in the day men follow, whisper, venture
To ask, to kiss, to promise, and to enter
Without control, in house or postern gate,
And reap their vile desires, being late.
Put fear and shame aside, and banish sadness,
Use oaths, guile, violence, deceit and madness.
The husband cannot know what child's his own,
Yet he must reap what was by villains sown.
But Iulia, that feighing subtle trull,
Took no strange in-come, till her ship was full.
The heathen gods, and persons of great worth,
By practice and permission did set forth
The bawdy art: as Mercury and Pan,
And brave Ulysses, though a noble man,
Was proved a bawd: Pope Sextus did erect
A noted stews, and whores and bawds protect.
Those that did rule their church, did reckon in
Their constant gains, that issued from that sin.
A common proverb up and down did go,
He pays his ducate, keep a whore or no.
In any kingdom swollen with avarice,
There Is nothing ill that is a golden vice.
A woman might (her husband being gone
From home) for money live with any one,
And never be questioned. Countries were oppressed
With heavy burdens: Princes were distressed.
Such that defend it, say, it is to prevent
A worser ill, to give young men content.
If from a kingdom whores are took away,
All married wives and maids would go astray,
And widows too. What case is that place in
Which cannot stand unlesse't be proptby sin?
Who is it but knows, within the holy land
Whores might not dwell? how strongly did it stand,
Till they broke in it! but after't was betrayed,
Fell by degrees. till it was quite destroyed.
The Nicholaits, they to avoid distrust,
Did give their wives in common to the lust
Of any man; lost nature was their guide,
They thought they had religion on their side.
Those rulers that gave way to it, and consent,
Though they no letchers were, the punishment
Shall find'em out: I wish that all may hate
This gulf of hell, before it be too late!
He that is above and sees, and holds his tongue,
The world shall know, will not be silent long.
SECT. 39. Of a company of Roysters coming to a Stews, and chaffering with the
Bawd for the Whores, as men do for Iades in Smithfield, etc.
WHen that black tyrant that does join with night,
Had chased away Don Phoebus from our sight,
And took possession of his lofty seat,
Though light was gone, he left behind him heat;
Some is contracted, which both flames and burns,
Time has decreed, that they should reign by turns.
The lesser eyes of heaven did find out
(When night did rule, and strive to bring about)
Vnmatch'd devices: from prodigious birth,
Proud Pluto's Captains do derive their mirth.
(The turnings of the clew) shame did discry
A market made in hell; my muse and I
Are now at ods about it; her request
Is, that she may go free, or else be pressed
To overlook the market: I am bent
To give her leave, and further her intent.
Black dammee Jack, bold Dick, and highway Ned,
(They were no scoundrels, they were better bred)
Came to a house of fame, they would have bought
They knew not what; when they their money sought,
The Indies had it, for their climate's cold,
They could no silver keep, nor harbor gold.
No entertainment there; so they were feign
To lose their labor, and go back again.
But shortly after, having money store,
They camy again (he first would choose his whore,
Whose purse was fullest) then they call the bawd,
And rouse the pander up; both being awed
When they had shown them gold; we'ave money now.
Come, bring your jades, you cannot but allow
Us here to drive the price; let us see your ware;
Jack. But bring the best, dam me, I never care
If ware be fresh, and good, what rates I give;
I am no fool, hanged, every trade must live.
Give me a jade unrid, that is plump and fat,
With dainty colored hair, for I like that.

Dick. Give me a lively marc whose limbs are strong,
For she will perform a journey though it be long:
Quick-sighted, nimble, with a tender flank;
Not of the highest, nor the lower rank.
Well joynted, free from spavins, with a breast
Broad, large, and comely, with a dainty crest.

Ned. Bring me a beast that is wild with wanton rage,
Her grinders white, her mouth must show her age;
A little head, her havre I Will have her own,
With rolling eves, her face not common known.
Well hipt, round-buttock'd, with a good strong dock,
Her forefeet small, a curious fetter-lock
Upon her feet behind; she must not fail
(To grace therest) to have a be some tail.
Set not too high a price; say what you would have?
I Will give it freely; this's the Jade I crave.
The Bawd commands the Pander to bring out
Her pampered colts, that they may trot about.
Well trimmed, and bridled up; they may be sold
This market day; or hired out for gold.
Now here they come; and one among the rest,
Being young and handsome; on this pretty beast
Jack Damme sets his mind, he does enquire
What for a journey, he must pay for hire?
The Bawd replies, I swear, she is not cracked,
She Is only skittish, having never been backed.
Sh'has no defect, ten pounds to me is due,
But yet I Will have but half so much of you:
In hope you will use her well; pray lay her sost,
She will not fail you, if you walk her often.

Iac. Pray let me try her, for I never durst
Give so much coin, unless I tried her first.
She may be broken-winded, blind, or lame,
(Trub turn about; speak, is not that her name?)
If she should faulty prove, my money's lost,
My time ill spent, I in my journey crossed.
Three pound's enough; I Will give you half in hand,
If she perform the business, then command
The restat my return: my journey's short,
I Will drill her on, the travels but a sport.
Come, I Will not stand with you, you are my friend,
And customer; pay, take her, there is an end.
Then dicing Dick makes choice, he cannot find
(In every part) one suiting to his mind:
At last he 'spid a neat one, fair in show,
She had no fault, but that she was too low.
Pray mistress Bawd (said he) what is your price?
In faith (said she) she has been backed but twice,
She Is every way complete; upon my word,
As sure as all the Country can afford.
Three pound's the rate you must give for her hire,
I Will pawn my life, that she shall never tire.
Here Is twenty shillings; when I come again,
If she proves right, I Will give the other ten.
Well, take her for this once, pray use her well;
She Is somewhat choice; where she did lately dwell,
She fed on candid provender, her thirst
Was quenched with Spanish water: no man durst
Attempt to back her till he gave her gold;
She was too full of metal long to hold
Her spirits in, without a golden show;
She Is small, or else sh'has no defect I know.
You may be friend me, when the gamesters win
Good store of gold, then do but bring'em in
To see my pretty rogues, that is all I crave,
I will requite thee, thou thy choice shall have
Sine pecunia. Quack, no more; I Will bring
Home mony-blades, that love to sit and sing
All care away. Come, little Tib, you are mine,
And for thy hire I have paid a fine.
Now rustic Ned, at last he viewes, to see
Among the Iades, if any lest there be,
That he can fancy; one he quickly caught,
To know her age, and then he spies a fault,
Her mark was out; then he began to dote
'Pon one broke-winded, rattling in the throat;
He did not like; again he turned his eye
Upon another, but he did discry
Her hip was fallen, with a rotten rump,
Her tail quite spoiled, left nothing but a stump;
Another had the glanders, some the fashions,
All were defective; then broke forth his passion
Against the Bawd; you do me much abuse!
Must I take trash which other men refuse?
Is't' cause you think my pockets are not full?
Or do you think me such a simple gull,
That knows no difference? clowns indeed are wise,
They ride not late, or seldom early rise
To go a journey: but at Christmas next
I Will take my time, I shall be th'rowly vexed
If I should miss a boon, that shortly will
Fall I know where; pish, I have money still
To pay a double fee: bring forth a Jade,
And if I like her, we shall quickly trade.

Pand. There are but three in all, two are not able
To work a jot, nor yet come from the stable:
One has a tympany, she is swelled with fat,
The other has been lately over h'at,
Which makes her ill; the third indeed is strong,
As true as steel, being active, sound and young:
Her color will not change, she is perfect black,
I Will take my oath, she is mettle to the back:
But she will be costly, she will always eat
The purest manchet, and the daintiest meat
That can be got: and for her drink you must
Give her French water, mixed with Indian dust:
Four pound's the rate to you, you are my guest,
Though you chose last, (in troth) you have the best:
Come, here she is. Pray give me leave to speak,
What ere you say, me thinks her dock is weak:
Her neck is thin, flat hooft, her back's too long,
And out of flesh too, how can she be strong?
My journey's easy, but she will rise an end,
And falldown back ward under any friend.
Here Is a Iacobus, with all faults I Will take her,
She will perform the task, or else I Will make her.
If she be gentle, ready still to stand,
I Will walk a foot; and lead her in my hand.

Bawd. Well, take her on these terms, and when yo'ave met
With a fair booty, do not me forget,
But bring me coin, and quaintance; I Will have care
To hide the fault, so I may have a share.
Nothing but mum; I hope ere long you will say,
Of all the rest, that Ned's your dainti'st boy.
The Bawd is pleased, the Pander has his fee,
They having baited, they did all agree
To take their journeyes; out they set together,
Being mounted on the furies; then the weather
Began to change: the Devil he runs by;
What need they ride on post, when hel's so nigh?
If Justice strike, they in as little while
May light at hell, as one may ride a mile.
Great Pluto's Postmaster, if any tire,
At next stage he will fit'em: for the hire
They need not care, he will trust: another day,
When all their journeys end, he will have his pay.
The metall'd beast, as black as any coal,
Does faulter first, for she is proved with foale.
Tibs grease is melted; and the Farriar must
Show all his Art; they leave her to his trust.
The young one too is foundered in the belly,
And all her blood is settled to a jelly.
Jack swears Ned's mad, nor does the gamester win;
They Are feign to leave these cattle at the Inn.
But taking fresh ones, they again set forth,
And steered their course point blank unto the North,
With furious speed: their way they cannot miss,
It Is hcls broad way; they may be there by this,
If they returned not; they have Natures Sun
To give them light. Farewell, the market's done.

SECT. 40. Of a fearful Judgment that happened in the city of Angers in
France upon three men; La Fontaine, and two other; how they lay with the
Devil, and how they dyed.
When low-born Morpheus with his swarthy face
Had chac't the day into another place:
With blind conceit, declaring to the sight
To match himself to that sad Queen of night:
The fixed stars denied to give consent,
But hid themselves, being filled with discontent.
Though silent night had hush't the earth; a sleep,
Yet hags did walk, Owlesfly, and serpents creep.
Sleep that was kin to death, laid some to rest,
Lust that was kin to hell, had some possessed.
Among the rest, three gentlemen (whose worth
Was not worth naming) newly coming forth
Into the street, straight one of them began
To speak, (but judge was it like a gentleman?)
You know my boys, how freely I did eat
Of that made dish: it was provoking meat;
It warmes my blood; and summons up my lust,
To seek some Curtizan: ye faith I must;
I boil, and burn within; who can endure it?
It Is a disease, a youthful sin would cure it.
Boon cavaleres, lets seek about for ease,
I know you're both so sick of my disease,
As I am now; there are Stews in this Town;
We Will have the wenches, or we will pull'em down;
I m confident, should I a Devillmeet
Shaped like a woman, walking in the street,
He shall netscape my hands; but I would try
If he had flesh, whe're he would with melic.
(Alas! poor Sodoms Imp! thou wilt quickly know
Him from a woman when you meet below!)
Come Noble blades, walk but along with me,
I Will find a present remedy for all us three.
Be you but bold; and then we need not fear,
(My ride's too strong for flesh and blood to bear)
If we should miss t'attaine a wench with words,
Then let us be valiant, and draw out our swords.
We Will neither beg nor steal, we will but borrow
A curtesy; we'llaugh, and pay to morrow.
Thus said, a we man did appear in's sight,
(A page before her be aring of a light)
Complete in show, so beautified and fair,
Her eyes did light and pierce the clouded air.
To whom this foreman, thus begins to prate:
'Save you fair Lady! walk you here so late?
I Am moved with pity, who can choose but moan
Your sad condition, walking here alone?
Accept me as your servant; none shall wrong
You by the way, if I but walk along.
I am a Gentleman, and it is my use
Thus to preserve fair Ladies from abuse.
Grant me this favor, cast a smi'e on me;
Had I your love, how happy should I be!
Then she replied, sir, this your sweet behavior,
Your love, your care, your undeserved favor
You show to me, deserves more love than I
Shalle're requite, until the time I dye.
But whilst I live, I Will never forget to prize
Your kindness: to requite you I Will devise.
I was by sriends invited to a feast;
(Although, I say it, I was the chiefest guest)
They were so over joyed with my sight,
We could not part till twelve a clock at night.
My husband's gone from home; if he should know
That I was out so late, he would snuff and throw.
Much like a Madman; if you did him sec,
As you'are a Gentleman, you would pity me!
Home I must go, if he is at home before,
He Will brawl, and fight, and kick me out of door.
'Pon small occasions, he will raise up strife,
He Is still unkind. I live a weary life!
They hearing this, did think it was the less
That they did seek for, many words did pass
Amongst them all; her words did give them strength,
And drew them on: with one consent at length,
They ventured out this blast:
Sweet mistress, never fear, for you shall find
True friends of us; soloving, and so kind,
As ever Lady did; our lives, and all
Shall lie at stake: to free you srom this thrall.
The churl shall know that we will take your part,
And rub his gils: and when he feels the smart,
He Will grow more tame: pish, hang this froward fool,
We Will find a trick to make his fury cool.
A jealous coxcombe! we may hit the vein,
And let him blood; then that will help his brain.
Then by and by a key her page drew out,
Let them into a room, all hanged about
With Taffata: the color perfect yellow,
A fire in it, where they did think to swallow
Their pleasures in by gross; soon she was drawn
To prostitute her self; when they did fawn,
And praise her beauty; she did quench their fire;
Each one of them fulfilled his vile desire.
When they had found such full and sweet content,
How fair she was, how soon she did consent;
They judge her as a prize of wondrous worth;
She scorns their coin; they set her beauty forth
The more at large. Much kindness they would do her,
If she will but grant they may come often to her.
Their pleasure was but short; yet in that space
They praised her limbs, her hands, her eyes, her face.
Then thus she spoke; why do you now rejoice
In this your sudden and unwary choice?
What have you gained now, but a horrid prize
A show of goodness, which will prove but lies?
Then one of them replied; I think you are
So fair, so handsome, and beyond compare
For qualities; of such a sweet condition,
France cannot show the like; had I commission
To search the fairest out, I Would come to you;
And what I speak, is nothing but your due.
With that she answered; turn your eyes and see
What purchase you have got; you lay with me,
And had delight: now bid adieu to pleasure,
For your reward is worse than empty measure.
Then pulling up her garments from below,
The storms did rise, the furious wind did blow.
And presently they heard such claps of thunder,
As if the earth were forced to rend in sunder.
The lightning flasht, or elsthey'd had no light:
And there they did behold the fearful'st sight
That ever eyes beheld; the sight of hell,
The horrid shapes the blackness of the cell,
The burning in it, the dreadful cloven feet,
The gasping ghosts, how Devils did them greet.
Then presently they were struck down to gether:
The house was vanished, and the stormy weather
Was put to silence; but they three were found
Grovelling in mire; all the City ground
Could never match that odious stinking place;
This Divelish whore, there leaves them in disgrace.
One coming by when Titans flags were spread,
And spide them all, but one of them was dead:
The other two lay wallowing in the dirt;
(Besides the filth, none could perceive'em hurt)
But they found death was making way within;
Their souls were wounded with the curse of sin,
They for a Priest with one consent did cry,
They Would feign confess their crimes before they dye.
In this distress time did afford them hope,
That they should have their pardon from the Pope.
He that did first vent out lascivious breath,
Now falls to be the second man for death:
For on the morrow, death being moved with lust,
Did ravish him; then left him in the dust.
The other, two days after did resign
Himself to death. Now if this quill of mine
Were dipped in blood, 'twould make the reader fear
A where for ever; and to drop a tear
For these unhapy men; Oh! never more
Let lust prevail! the Devil's turned a whore.
Oh! horrid state! what case were these men in,
To poison time, and dye in such a sin!
Did ever Monsters match with fowler evil?
Did any villains seek to court the Devil?
Till Fountain did begin? did hell intend
A plot to bring them to a cursed end?
Or is it in travel with a stranger birth?
Or has it leave to keepc exchange on earth?
Here Is quick return; 'twil send a whore again,
If it has hope to catch more such vile men.
Did Proserpine, the feigned Queen of hell,
Sendout this Nymph? does Pluto like it well,
To be a Carpenter? (the house seemed fair)
Builds he by Patent castles in the air?
Who Is his Vpholster, that did make the bed?
Or was it a grave, made to enclose the dead?
Whence came the hangings? was it from hell? I know
There Is hanging still; but it is not there for show.
What fire was it, that gave such light to those?
'Twas but the flashes from that hel-hounds nose.
It seemed to be from hell (for 'twas a spark
Too full of heat:) but that it was not dark.
Did Vulcan make the key to let them in?
And paint old Venus over? did he then begin,
To call her first from hell? he is old and lame;
And he is ashamed to answer to his name.
Did Dipsas let that room (a little time)
While they committed this accursed crime?
Or did the Broker do it, cause they were three,
In hopes they'ld pay him with a treble fee?
The Devil's grown a Broker; and I will,
In seeing one, think on the other still.
Give one a prize, pay treble, he willfawne,
If Devils lend, they would have their souls to pawn.
How fell the house so suddenly away?
The works of darkness cannot brook the day.
How soon are shadows gone! though they appear!
Sin ends in discontent; it is blasted here.
Men wanting reason, are deprived of sense,
The Devil seems a whore, for recompense.
Their reason and their sense renews again;
But it is in Justice, as they are seals to pain.
Whores are not Devils yet, time is not past;
Beware, or they will prove Devils at the last.
The grave has shut his jaws upon those men,
I Will write their Epitaph, and weep again.
The Epitaph.
THese hapless Imps were partners in an evil,
That shameless time did blush to hear and see;
They acted sornication with a Devil;
Have spirits flesh? it is strange! how can this be?
They were the beasts, that used a Devils bed:
(A plague they got) but had no maidenhead.
SECT. 41. Of a young man that went to drink with a whore, and how he was
tempted, and gulled.
Upon a time, when the pale Queen of night
Was forced by Titan to yield up her right,
Then bold Aurora does her flags display,
T'invite her guests, to usher in the day:
A night-bird yet was seen; and this I find,
Sh'was truly foul, but made of woman-kinde.
She met a man, well clad, with money plenty;
His outside showed his pockets were not empty.
She looks upon him; but the man was mute,
Then she broke silence, for she had a suit
To him in private; calls him by his name,
(Whether he was a man that used the game
That she affected; or by accident
Had learned his name, to further her intent,
I cannot tell) she profer'd him the wine;
Shake hands, you are a countryman of mine:
I know your friends, pray tell me how they do;
I know your lands, and I have lands there too.
But that my Uncle, like a churl, in spite,
For slipping once, does keep away my right.
My brother sold my linen, and my chest;
I Have diverse things that trouble much my breast,
T'acquaint you with ('twill mitigate my pain)
The help I have, is, freedom to complain.
Thus spoke; unto the Tavern then they went;
(The twig was green, and he was quickly bent)
They Are entertained, and having drank a quart,
She Will make it a pottle; how can friends thus part?
I cannot talk until I take my liquor;
Come, drink about, 'twill make my brains the quicker.
When that was drunk, seeing 'twas his hap to find her,
For charge of wine, he scorns to come behind her.
They make it up a gallon: then this sinner
Does make enquiry, what there was for dinner?
A pullet, and a woodcock she espied,
They must be dressed, and what they had beside,
The bill will show; till then be you content:
I Am loath to leave them in their merriment.
They ate, and drank, she brought in fresh discourse
Of country, friends, until her throat grew hoarse.
But having dined, they both forgot their grace:
This whore grows warm, and with a shameless face
Begins to tempt him: clips him, then she kissed him,
And swears she would not for a world sh'had mist him,
But he not stirred, her bold attempts did grieve him,
He chid her for it; choose whether you will believe him.
Fie, fie, my country woman, and so rude?
I thought you had been with modesty endu'd:
But now I see your ends: fire sends out smoke.
(I am afraid it was but faintly spoke.)
But she replied, It was no fault of mine:
If It be a fault, impute it to the wine.
'Twas for thy sake, affections did me move:
Is that amiss, which springs from too much love?
Be not so stupid, do not frown or vex;
It Is but the fondness of the female sex.
It Is true, it is boldness, thus for me to wooethee,
I Would give delight, that is all the harm I Will do thee.
Have I not beauty, with a color fresh?
Am I not young? have I not tender flesh?
My parts agree, my hand's as white as milk;
Thou may embrace thine arms full of this silk.
But thou deny'st me: art thou such a fool?
What, heartlesse quite? and are thy spirits cool?
A Stoic sure! affections thou have none;
Art thou a man? or art thou wood, or stone?
My countryman! and yet to want a spirit?
I am ashamed; have thou land to inherit
And not a man? Fortune ere long will send it.
What good will it do? thou'It want a heart to spend it;
Thy face does promise more; I fear thou art gelt,
Thou blushest now; then feign she would have felt;
But he denied her; then they fall to drinking:
And now this queen does beat her brains with thinking
How to be gone: leave him to pay the shot:
He Is but dry meat (thinks she) there is nothing got
By such a thick-skin: so she makes excuse
To have a place that was for private use.
This project took, it finished her intent:
The passage being free, away she went.
He in her absence, nor a sleep, nor waking,
His fancy wrought, his brains over charged with aching,
The reckning vexed his mind: she staid so long,
He feared a cheat; but yet he held his tongue.
At last the news was brought that she was fled:
What is my country-woman so ill bred
To slink away so rudely? now to leave me?
With flattering words, oh! how did she deceive me
Is this the love she did to me pretend?
Deceitful slut! but now I see her end:
I Would feign be gone, this place is like a tomb;
Bring in the bill, and let me know my doom.
The bil's preferred, examined too so far
(His cause is heard, and tried at the bar)
That he is guilty: so the man is cast.
Behind his back, they sentence on him past;
Not so severe, but he might be redeemed
With coin: for money makes a man esteemed.
This bil's a bill of debt, 'twas never sealed,
In time the Statute might have it repealed,
And made it void; there is witness that it is due,
T'prevent the worst, just while the bill is new,
It must be paid: it is brought, though he does spread it,
His eyes being dim, the Drawer's feign to read it.
Inpri. Aquart of dainty Muscadine.
Item. With game-Hens eggs in number nine,
Item. Four quarts of Sack, upon my word,
The best that London can afford.
Item. Five quarts of Claret, fine and neat,
To fit your stomachs for your meat.
Item. A Pullet, of the very best,
With sauce, exceeding neatly dressed.
Item. A Woodcock, though 't were somewhat stale,
'Twas fat, and white, it roasted pale.
Item. For bread and linen clean and white,
To please your minds, and give delight.
Item. Small beer, your lusts and heat to cool,
It served a Whore, and pleased a Fool.
Summa totalis.
The reckoning cast, does now amount
Agreeing with a just account.
4 -- 10 -- 18
With sighing, vexing, when he heard it read,
With fixed eyes, and shaking of his head,
With heavy looks, and other signs of grief,
He sues unto his pockets for relief:
And finding succor in his great distress,
(For they redeemed him from his heaviness,
And freed his heels) for that he was content
To keep them as a lasting monument.
He Is gone, but shame attends him: he is a foe
Unto himself still wheresoe'r he go:
His conscience chides, tells him he did not well
To trust himself so near the brink of hell.
Sins entrance still, forerunnes a greater evil,
And whores do lay men open to the Devil.
Besides, report will blaze abroad the shame,
And then disgrace will seize upon his name.
His friends will hear't, they will grieve, in grieving flight him:
His foes will snarl, and in their snarling bite him;
His friends will doubt the worst, till they have tried him:
His foes will speak the worst, and then deride him:
Both friends and foes will hear of his disgrace;
His foes will laugh, his friends, lament his case.
All men will judge him guilty of the ill,
And twatling Fame will nose him with it still.
The sight of Taverns shakes him limb, by limb:
He Will think that some are there bewitched like him:
But going by that Tavern, where the punck
And he did eat, and drink, till both were drunck;
And thinking how they dallied; what a gull
She made of him: Oh! then his heart is full:
He reads the ground, ashamed to show his face:
Cause 'twas to him a sinful, shameful place.
Open disgrace, and secret shame within,
Go hand in hand: this is the fruit of sin.
SECT. 42. How he met with her again; of their discourse, and how he pawned her
for a large reckoning.
But after this, his choler boiled to rage:
He Is grown the scorn, a wonder of the age.
Great shame and horror mixed, breeds his disease,
Revenge alone is bent to seek him ease.
Revenge must make a plaster for his sore;
And to his sins, he would feign add one sin more.
He seeks this whore, nor can he choose but mind her,
Knows not her name, nor when, nor where to find her:
But on a time, Don Phabus being dressed,
His chariot mounted driving to'rd the West,
He rode in state, his countenance was fair,
His glittering beams did gild the wavering air:
The earth was crusted, plants had hoary beards,
A snow-white Canopy did hide the herds.
The airy quiristers were kept in thrall:
And Chanticler's tho speaker for them all.
The Northern treasures broke: it scatters cold:
But that brave Champion seeing it so bold
Drives it to corners: though his golden sight
Does fright it thus; it comes age'n at night.
Turn, turn my Muse, why do thou now digress?
Sinful revenge tho'rt bound here to express?
Upon occasion, walking by that place
Where at the first he chanced to see her face,
(It seems to me, she kept her Market there,
And what she sold, was rotten ware, and dear)
He spied her, she knew him, they must renew
Their former friendship; now they will be true
To one another, they will but quench their thirst,
Not make a day on it, as they did at first.
He had forgot her slip; nor did it move him,
He Is satisfied now, if she will but love him.
The wine they had; he that at first time saw her,
And waited on them, is again their drawer.
He had the charge to watch her, he was willing
To do it to purpose, for it he had a shilling.
The wine was naught, or she had lost her taste:
Sh'd have a dainty bit to break her fast:
It Is very wholesome mornings: 'twill imbellish
The vital parts, and give the wine a relish.
Fri'd Sausages, they had; she was content
To stay with him, and other men prevent,
If he had money: then he shows her gold,
Which joys her heart; and then this whore was bold
To call for wine, and faggots for the fire:
Bespoke a dinner to her own desire:
Then she began to dally, sport, and play,
Sung bawdy songs, to pass the time away:
She does engage her self unto his pleasure:
And tells him he never knew what hidden treasure
She had in store; I know thou know my mind:
Stir up thy heart and thou may quickly find,
Thou have no mind: do, prove thy self an Ass,
To Embrace the box, and let the Jewel pass.
Thy betters would be glad to have this proffer;
And men in Scarlet would embrace this offer;
Nay sue, and sue again to have my love,
By friends, and gifts, and if they could but move
Me to affect'em, happy they would be!
There Is two or three a looking now for me.
I love thee best of all that ere I saw.
Above all things I love bold natures law.
Look upon me; do dote upon a stone?
Or art thou grieved 'cause thou have never a one?
What, molded all of earth? had thou but fire
Mix't with thy blood, thoud'st show it with desire.
My blood is active, see it in my veins;
My spirit's lively, and my youthful reins
Full of desire, but this at last I think,
Thou art a man, but proffered wares do stink.
Thus spoke, she ceast:
He mused a while, feign he his mind would break,
Yet so put to it, he knew not what to speak.
He Will not deny, nor yet would he consent:
While he was pumping how to give content,
Dinner's brought up: the first, then second course:
And after dinner, then the queen grows worse;
But he is the same, if you will but take his word:
I Will leave the doubt; if any can afford
A good construction, help me at a need,
Which way to turn, that we may be agreed.
She calls for fiddlers, but they cannot come:
They are employed in another room.
These sherking rogues did show themselves but poor,
They did not come, to wait upon this whore.
They now provide for supper, and they cast
What foul to have: the reckning must be last.
They dranck, they strived so much as they were able
To bring each other, underneath the table.
He Is turned a hogshead, she is but a barrel;
He leaves the snuffes, and she begins to quarrel.
Their brains are drowned; though they can hardly stand?
They Will drink the other pottle hand to hand.
Now they have sup't the cloth being took away,
Her mind runs on the score, that was to pay:
And feign she would slink away, but that he ei'd her:
She was half gone, and then the drawer spied her.
Then she began to drink afresh again:
She stretched her guts, to overcharge his brain.
Thinking at last to escape, and get renown;
But yet the hogshead drank the barrel down:
And then away goes he, and leaves the whore
Asleep: but waking, she must pay the score.
But when she wak't, and found that he was gone
She was perplex't: for money she had none.
She calls the drawer to bring in the bill,
She reads it thus; though sore against her will.
Breakfast.
Inpri. Three quarts of Allegant fresh and good,
To strenghthen you and help your blood.
Item. Ten quarts of good Canary sack
To drown your brains, bring you to wrack.
Item. Eight quarts of Claret, that was it
That made you drunk, and stole your wit,
Item. For Saussages, and sli'st roast beisse,
That gave the knave and whore releif.
Dinner.
Item. A Capon roasted, very fine:
Honester folks might with it dine.
Item. Two Rahits, Feldivers beside,
You did exceed and show your pride.
Item. A brace of Teile, a dish of Larks,
Not fit for those with bawdy marks.
Supper.
Item. A roasted Hen 'twas fresh and new,
Sh'was never trod so much as you.
Item. A dish of Pigeons, and a Tart,
Such Imps to eat it, vexed my heart.
Item. For Bread, and Cheese, and Linen clean,
That well might shame a nasty queen.
Item. For Fagots which did feed the fire.
To fit you for your whorish hire.
Summa totalis.
The same amounts to you may see,
That you had cost, with baudery,
3 -- 4 -- 5
When she had read the bill, it much did fear her,
She blubbered out (the knavish boys did jeare her)
Such snotty tears that washed the painting out;
The wrinkles now appear, her pearled snout
Has all the color; being grown so hot,
She must be cooled, for now to pay the shot
She must deliver up her beaver hat,
But 'twill not serve, (yet she is vexed at that.)
Then she is stripped out of her silken gown;
Had you but heard her swear, and seen her frown,
You would have thought her mad; she cursed the man.
And called him villain, rogue, thief, what she can
Devise to reckon; then the Drawer last,
He must be hanged, she sentence on him past.
Away she goes, so like a Bedlam hag,
Had she a goblet and a canvasse bag,
Then Besse of Bedlam she had now been named.
Being impudent, she scorns to be ashamed.
Sh'has music as she goes, made by an owl,
And dogs do bark, some other dogs do howl.
But if some Beadle, after this her stripping,
Had been so good to have helped her to a whipping,
Sh'had had her due. I do not speak with fainting,
The stripes had lasted longer than her painting.
But in the morn, when day began to dawn,
She went with money to redeem her pawn:
(For whores and thieves still keep a stock together,
They say it is good to help in stormy weather,)
But if her tail brings in no better prizes,
Her hands ere long will bring her to the assizes.
SECT. 43. To a Fiddler that was importunate to be entertained in a Tavern by
two or three Gentlemen.
A Fiddler coming to a tavern late,
(That day had been to him unfortunate)
His brains being over-soak'd, his tongue was oyl'ds
And tipped with nonsense; but his fiddle failed
To bring him in his vailes (which moved his ire)
Being strung too low, nor could he raise it higher.
He Is out of sorts, but seeking for relief,
His melancholy fiddle tuned his grief.
For want of custom he alone did play
The lamentable tune of Welladay!
Feign he would go home, but then his empty purse
Restrained his purpose, and his brains did nurse
A poor conceit of home; to help his need
His fiddle's better strung; it is agreed
That he should search the house, perhaps he might
(To help his day) speed better in the night.
But coming to a room where he did find
Some company, but not to shoot his mind,
He pressed upon them, would take no denial,
He Would give a lesson, having tuned his Vial.
Then one replied, trench not upon this ground,
What, do thou come to charm us with a sound?
Whence eam'st thou now? spright-like thou do appear,
Speak, art thou come to play upon us here?
Thy hollow-hearted siddle sounds within,
Thou Would be as empty, were it not for fin:
Thou with thy fiddle may compared be,
For that without is varnished like thee.
The upper end does represent thy face,
But thine does change more; trading with the base
Has made thee so: the neck is very long,
So thine would be, if it were once well strung.
But with the strings I will not once compare,
Thine should be hemp, but these are made with hair
Thy fiddle's dry, it sounds with a touch,
Thou art not sound, but thou art wet too much:
Yet both of you are common in the town;
The fiddle has a bridge, thine's broken down.
The pegs will make the strings or low, or higher;
So is thy note, thy face being set on fire.
Iucrease of liquour will not cool thy heat,
Thou sing'st for drink, and thou do scrape for meat.
To touch thy name it is not my intent,
For'tis confirmed by act of Parliament.
But thou art proud, and wilt not own thy name,
Thou art a shifter, can thou shift thy shame?
Thou play'st away thy time, (thy strings will break)
And thou can play, although thou can not speak.
The Milk-maids have a garland, thou must be
Their chief Musician, and thou may be free
Against the Wake, and at the Whitsun A'le
Thou may get in, if thou can tell thy tale
With inpudence. Bears would thy music grace.
But that a Bagpipe-player has the place.
Thy'state's not much, nor much is like to be,
It Is gotten ill, and wastes as fast as thee.
But thou runn'st not in debt, none will thee trust,
Except the chandlers wife, alas! she must!
(Thou bring'st her custom) there in thou may boast,
That thou can score five shillings on the post:
But if she ask it, thou will graspe her middle,
Pay her with words, and bid her go and fiddle.
Thou have no trade, nor wast thou born to land,
Yet all thy gettings are from hand to hand.
If thou can tune thy fiddle, clear thy throat,
Perhaps in time, a round skirt pi^-bald coat
May hide thy faults, then will thou pay thy score,
Musitioner? you are fiddler then no more.
But pr'y thee tell me, wast not thou of late
With roaring blades, and every one for's mate
A doxie trull? when they did dance and drink
Excess of wine? and boiling over the brink,
They sought out hell: he was much like to thee,
That covered sin to gain a Panders fee.
When they went in, it was not their intent
To graft their shame, the Drawer did consent
To draw them in; thy did not think to do it,
Thy fidling, with the wine, provok'd'em to it.
Thou art no Thief, yet thou do steal men's time,
Their honesty, their coin to buy a crime.
Thou art no Cheat, but this all men may know,
For what they give, they have nothing left to show,
Thou art no Bawd, but yet a bawdy song
Thou Wilt chatter out, if wine stop not thy tongue.
Thou art no Beggar, but thou do invade,
And trench most grossly on the beggars trade.
Crowd, crowd away, let us thy absence borrow:
Then thou may play to night, and beg to morrow.
SECT. 44. To an impudent whore that came into an Inn, and clipped and kissed a
man before company.
THou shameless Hag, why do present thy ghost
In this frequented place? is this a coast
Where night-hags use to meet? or art thou come
To show the foulness of the fall of some?
Or art thou sent from hell (our faults to spy)
To drink a hogshead, 'cause the place is dry?
Or (Ignis Fatuus) like that foolish fire,
Would draw us from the way into the mire?
Whence came thou? tell me, turn thy self about?
Thy face does conjure, and thy eyes dart out
Such beams of lightning that it makes me wonder!
Is It not a messenger before a thunder?
What skin is it thou wear'st? I pr'y thee tell,
Art thou the ghost of painted Iesabel?
Or did come newly from the Serpents den,
To parle about a truce and peace with men?
Or art thou come to blaze abroad thy name?
Would keep a school to teach the simple shame?
Or art a gloworme, only seen at night?
Or art a seeming substance to the sight?
Can any spirit drink a round carouse?
What say minehost? Do spirits haunt your house?
I judge thou art none by thy humane tones;
Besides I know a spirit has no bones.
What art thou then? an Angel, or a devil?
No, they are spirits too, they will show thy evil.
A Hag, a woman-sepent, and possessed
With hell above ground: titles fits thee best,
That suits thy nature. Hell Hounds do I know
Break loose sometimes, but yet they dwell below:
They Are shapt with shame: none did I ever see him,
Of all the brood so impudent as thee.
What, old acquaintance met? alas! thou must kiss
Thou did in Newgate or in Bridewell miss him.
Have no regard to company, that thou
Art bent to shame a bashful devil now?
Thy hands are snares. Oh! let me never find
Or hear thy like in any woman kind!
Sin is ashamed, and hell's almost afraid
It shall be questioned, thou art not dismayed.
Heaven sees thee, do not blush? what, past all fear?
Do think to make a prey of any here?
We hate thy looks, (thou sordid trull) and vex
To see shame grounded in the female sex.
What charm do use? thy beauty is not rich;
What art to draw, except thou art a witch?
Get, get thee gone, thou learn'dst of hell to woo,
Thou Would feign be laid, and yet be common too.
Go to the brink of hell to act thy sin.
Not stir? my Muse, pray call the Beadles in
To take her to correction: if this whore,
After the whip, shall sin as heretofore,
And lay her baits; yet bid her (if she durst)
Catch any one that is not from God accursed.
Let all that hope for heaven, have a care,
And shun the bait, as they would avoid the snare.
The subtle devil sets apart such elves
To do that work they cannot do themselves,
To join in lust, they want bones, flesh and blood,
Nor have they throats to tumble down a flood
Of wine or beer: although these sins be rife,
Say, was the devil drunk in all his life,
Except it were with pride? he keeps no whore,
Nor did he're, but to torment them more
Than sin e're joy'd 'em: in the vault of hell,
They Will find that place far worse than New Bridewell.
While I digrest, the queen was slunk away:
My Muse had spoke more, but sh'was loath to stay.
SECT. 45. A Parley between Nature and Fame, about an insatiable man, and of a
modest man, being abused by queanes.
N. WHat is this man that courts this nasty whore?

F. I spread his fame, but never saw'm before:
He Is swarthy black, and yellow, and his looks
Do show he studies harlots more than books.

N. Why, he is too old, his wanton days are past.

F. He Will never leave't while life and strength do last.

N. How does he escape the law? he has been in.

F. It purged his purse, but could not purge his sin.

N. Has he done penance yet, to blaze his name?

F. No, by his money he defers his shame.

N. Was he cursed from the Church in the sight of men?

F. Yes; but by money he came in again.

N. What, is he married that he keeps this vice?

F. He Is married now, he has been married twice.

N. Is this the Trull he keeps? is it only she?

F. One will not serve, he must have two or three.

N. It Is mar'l his wife can beare't! does she not show
Her grievance to the world? does she not know
How to be eased? F. Alas! she cannot find
A remedy to ease her grieved mind:
He slights her weeping, and he keeps her bare,
With poor apparel, and with courser fare.

N. What children has he? F. Diverse; among the res:
He has a son religious; cause he is best,
He hates him most: if he would but love a whore,
He Would be his father, and affect him more.

N. What means has he? F. He had much, but it is spent,
Most of it upon whores! it is his intent
To make an end on it, if he live a while.

N. It Is strange the earth should bear a man so vile
What shall his children do, if he spends all?

F. Why, let them work, or beg, or hang'em all.

N. Can any father be so much o're-seene,
To slight his flesh and blood? or in a spleen,
Run out of all? or for his lustful pleasure?
Turn to a grave to bury all his treasure?
Has he no care of credit? does his name
Rott while he lives? does not his conscience blame
Him for his faults? has he no soul to save?
What, is he sworn to be the Devils slave?
Is nature lost? or is it congealed to lust?

F. He has been burned: e're long he will turn to dust.

N. What servants does he keep? F. Some two, or three,

N. Have they their wages paid? do they agree?

F. He Is inward with his maids, until they swel,
But then he will curse them to the pit of hell,
And turne'em out of doors: they must away
Without their wages. He wants coin to pay.

N. How deals he with his men? F. Almost as bad;
An honest man of late (I heard) he had,
Who, in his heart, still did abhora a whore,
And therefore he was bent to vex him more.

N. How did he vex him? F. To a bawdy house,
(Where he did use to come for Mutton sowce)
He brought this man: when he perceived what place
It was; and thinking what a foul disgrace
'Twould bring to him; he turned himself about;
His master spying him a going out,
Called him again; What, will thou leave me so?
Pray take a cup of liquor e're you go.
He called a queen, and whispered in her care,
She knew his mind; and being many there,
She flew upon him, scratcht him with her nails;
He felt their hands, because he loathed their tail,
They were possessed all with the Devils mind,
If he had had no help, sh'had scratcht him blind.
They beat him too; ('it was hard to be endured)
Then bid him look a Surgeon to be cured.

N. What cause had they? did they pretend a jest?

F. You must not look for reason in a beast.
Such vermin do so venom, with a touch
They Will blast a man; there is too too many such.

N. How escaped he from'em? was he freed by strength;

F. The case being foul, a Gentleman at length,
Redeemed him from their claws; and he for fear,
Ran out of doors, and never came more there.

N. Where staid his master? F. He was in that place:
For 'twas his plot, to bring him to disgrace.

N. How was his carr'age? F. He was like to burst
With laughing at it. How is he accursed!
Oh! beastly act! how does my soul abhor it!

N. Do they not fear they shall be questioned for it?
Our Laws be sharp enough, I wish they may
Be executed too; let such a day
Be kept in mind, writin a bloody letter!
To shame them ever, or to make them better.
They do not fear the Laws of God, nor man:
If Law does search them, they have friends that can
Soon free them from't: if not, they will never relent,
Before the sin bring home the punishment:
Humanitie's banished from'em; let it find
Sweet entertainment in the honest mind!
You shameless hags! come, answer at the bar,
Was his face made for your foul claws to mar?
The Devil has long talons, so have you,
He taught you how to use them, is it not true?
He durst not do so much, not being bid:
You Had no command, nor leave, and yet you did.
A beast (though wild) is daunted at the sight
Of living man; it is hungry appetite
That makes him prey upon him: what desire
Could move you to this fact, except hell fire
Was kindled in your hearts? with hels consent
You spit your fury on the innocent.
What, was it to show how bravely you were bred?
Or else' cause you will be talked on when you're dead?
Then't had been seen more in a single duel,
Not six to one: but cowards are most cruel.
Do You think to escape so? no, you will find this thing
Shall fly abroad upon the nimble wing
Of infamy: you will pay the fine beside,
With smart to boot, when e're the cause be tried.
To please the Letcher you consented: how?
Because you think h'has brought you money now.
But if you find there is nothing to be had,
I think next time you will serve him full as bad.
I know you kick, because I touch the sore;
But if you bite, I Will rub it five times more.

SECT. 46. Of a man's discontent at his wifes lewdness: his travel into the
Netherlands: and how his wife was married to another in his absence; and of his
return, and complaints thereupon.
A man that was sore vexed with a wife,
(A wife? a whore she was that bred the strife)
That he was weary of his life, yet had
No hope to turn her, though she were so bad;
Which did increase his grief, and break his sleep:
And waking, sought out corners where to weep.
She slighted him; nay, when she saw him vex't,
She Would jeare him still, which made him werse perplex't,
At last in secret, full of discontent,
His grief broke out, and thus he did lament.
Alas! alas! I am undone for ever!
Delights adieu! but grief will leave me never,
For angry Fate has all my fortunes cro'st,
My shame appears, but I my self am lost:
I Am forced to yield, and so I must abide it,
My shame breaks out; alas! I cannot hide it.
I thought I had been happy; but I see
That scene is done: this acts my misery!
Fate is a Tyrant, else he would never bring
Shame on the guiltless; but the guilty sting.
Fortune's a partial goddess; then who can
Say, who will be quit, or who is the guilty man?
I have corrivals; should not they be blamed,
And suffer for it? but I, alas, am shamed!
They act the sin in climbing to my bed;
Yet I for that must wear horns on my head.
I cannot pass, but boys will point at me;
But the delinquents, they escape ever free.
My house is grown my prison; but what is worse,
My wife's a common whore, which breeds the curse,
Heavens look down upon me! that I may
Have light, and aid, from her to escape away,
Into some cell remote; where I may dwell,
And spend my days, my miseries to tell!
Let Morpheus hide me with his cole-black shade,
I may no more a laughing stock be made!
I Am borne to crosses; and alas! poor I
Must be content to kiss my cross, and dye!
He thus distressed, to mitigate his woe,
At last-resolves, that to the sea he will go:
He has some hope he shall forget this whore:
She hopes as much that he will come home no more,
As yet, the wind breathes a contrary gust,
Against his will: then stay a while he must.
She feared his mind was changed, because he stayed;
And for his voyage thus at last she prayed:
Hang, hang this Stags head! what, he will never away;
For ought I see, he is resolved to stay.
No way e're to be freed of this cross knave,
That I in's absence may my pleasure have?
You Gods that rule the winds, grant me this boon,
Take him away; I do not care how soon!
Fill full the sails: you gentle Sailers stand,
Receive your fare, and take him from this land!
Make haste away, and lanch into the deep;
Alas! while then, I can nor eat, nor sleep!
Then let the sea-borne Goddess plead my cause!
I am a Nymph that do embrace her laws.
Let Neptunes bosom still his prison be,
And lofty waves embrace him! let not me
Fear his return! let Sharks and Dolphins part
His flesh betwixt them! that will ease my heart.
Or else let raging storms his body sever;
I care not which: so I may see him never.
If none of those will yield to my request,
Yet in this last, I hope I shall be blessed.
You Netherlands, enclose with dust his bones,
Through want, or sword! I Will end my suit and mones.
Well, gone he is, winds see you gently use him,
You Sailers rude, take heed, do not abuse him.
The Goddess is but feigned, nor knows she how
To heal or hurt: she has no power now.
Nor yet great Neptune; (let us have no mistaking)
For all his power is of Poets making.
Nor can the storms destroy men when they list;
There Is one above that holds them in his fist,
Of in the Netherlands; I speak to men,
Pray use him well, or send him home again!
But whither strayes my Muse, and wandering quill?
Come home, search out that whore, and blaze her ill:
This hateful queen keeps open rande vou;
Come Tag, and Rag; and she is common too.
Her tabl'es spread, to entertain all comers,
And thus she lived one winter, and two summers,
Till all was spent; and somewhat else beside
Did gnaw her bones; rott met with lust and pride.
She thought, or hoped her husband now was dead,
She cannot lie alone, but must be wed.
Alas poor whore! as yet she had no suitor;
Her man was bashful, she became his tutor
To draw him on: for daily she did woo him,
She had her will, and that was to undo him.
Undone indeed! for in a little while
He was so shameless, impudent, and vile
He cared for no man; no man cared for him,
Disease stuck close which made his sight grow dim,
Then he would swear, and curse his sory'd fate,
Till at the last his speech grew out of date.
Death warned him hence, he would not be denied,
He lived a brute, and now a beggar died.
The Epitaph.
Death, now I see thou art not pallat nice;
Thou can digest, what I would loath to touch,
Such commons we will allow thee at the price;
Leave dainty cates, and feed upon all such.
Grave, thou did well to plaster up his sore;
He being poisoned, might have poisoned more.
But yet this hag remains, and she must have
Another husband; and her wants do crave
Relief; for all her night-birds now are scattered,
Their wings cut short, and some their noses battered,
She casts her hook; sh'had almost catch a fish,
But that the broth was hot, or else the dish
Was broken ware; so that with very fear
He slipped the hook, and never came more there.
She left her angle then; and cast a net,
With baits to try, if she could any get:
She knew of what, and where such fish would feed;
And at the last she caught a Jack in deed.
You know my meaning, she has got another,
She Will serve him too, just as she served the other.
She had her Bridgroom but a little space,
He was as desp'erat as he is void of grace,
Learning of her: he joy'd in all that is evil:
And having got acquaintance with the Devil,
He played his part a time; until his reins
Had entertained the French; his shallow brains
Grown adle too; his skin from's flesh did peele:
I can but think what torments he did feel!
The earth denied to bear him, those that spied him;
Did stop their noses, all men did deride him.
The grave is open, against his glass is ran,
Death turns the Scene, and so his part is done.
His Epitaph.
DEvouring grave! what purchase have thou gotton?
Or greedy death, what prize is it that he snatched?
Alas! poor purchase! he before was rotten,
Death broke the duel, seeing him over matched.
G: D: We'are both his friends; for why? we did agree
To take him now: and save the hang man's see.
And now this strumpet has outlived her pleasure,
What she has done, so she receives like measure:
In her the fury of the foul disease
Begins to reign: the earth can give no ease,
And heaven will not; hell would feign be dealing
With her disease; but there is no hope of healing.
Her teeth break forth, all creatures do contemn her;
And with consent, they all at once condemn her.
The little children, that can say no more,
Will prattle out, and say, There goes a whore.
She does some good yet, I will never belly her;
The Goldsmith's like to get some money by her;
In making for her mouth a silver stud;
Her palat's down, and yet she would chew the cud.
Some say it is good (I think they do but dote)
To keep the pox from rifling of her throat.
But others say (nor can I 'gree with those)
'Twil keep her speech from creeping through her nose.
Though It bring her ease, pray, whatsoever you do,
Keep silence; else the rest will use it too.
The Goldsmith's come, the plate is very fit,
Had he been careless, she had taught him wit:
(For she was painted with a dainty color)
And paid him like that whore that paid the Sculler,
He set it in: but being such a stink,
He stopped his nose, for he was like to sink.
And having done, receiving then his pay,
He quickly parted; though she bid him stay,
He was too wise: as he his leave did take,
He past his word her teeth should never ache.
'Twas but a jeere: for they were slunk aside,
For shame: or they the stink could not abide.
A fearful case! although she is seen of many,
She has nor favor, nor regard from any.
And like an owl, she keeps her hole; the light
Is hateful to her, but she walks at night.
But stay, I hear her husband's new come over,
Where landed he? at Gravesend? or at Dover?
What matter is it? he will be here to morrow,
Come when he will, he will come but to his sorrow.
He Is come poor man! pray bid him welcome; why?
Cause by his travels, he has learned to dye.
But being come, he heard such heavy news
Which killed his heart; and yet he could not choose
But listen to it; how she had drove a trade,
How she had proved her self a common Jade;
And had the grincoms: sh'ad been married twice;
And how they died; and yet she kept her vice.
How she was toothed; and how her mouth was mended:
Then looking pale, just as the news was ended,
His spirits failed him: by degrees he sunk,
Down to the ground; and then steps in this punk,
To bid him welcome home: but having strived
To over come his passion, he revived:
He turned about, and spying her, he broke
His grieved mind, and to her this he spoke:
Away, thou sordid witch! do come to me
To add a weight unto my misery?
Thou hate full hag! have not undonne me quite?
I for thy sake am like a child of night!
Thousorceresse! the cause of all my strife;
Thou liv'st (though dead) nor widow, maid, nor wife.
It Is known thou art a common trull; thy name
Is blazed by time, poor I must bear the shame.
Thou do increase my torments! as for mirth
It Is banished quite; thou art my hell on earth.
Go feind of darkness (none like thee I know
For hel-bred vileness) to thy place below.
Who can deny thou'art an incarnate Devil?
Out of my sight, I Am overpre'st with evil!
The house being dispossessed, yet, still his grief
Swelled over the brink; nor could he find relief
In this distress: yet secretly he groaned!
With trickling tears, thus he his case bemoaned.
Time, stand'st thou still? shake, shake thy sand apace
Drive on with fury, I may end my race:
Grant me this boon, and place will then agree:
Or let me know my date of misery.
Will Sea, nor Land, nor person end my strife?
Nor Foul, nor Beast of prey once take my life?
I cannot call it pity: no, it is spleen,
To let me ling er thus! my sorrow's seen;
Yet not lamented. Death is grown a stranger,
If he would come once, I should be quit from danger.
Death, armethy self with strength; it is but a blow:
The gentle grave has made my bed below.
I fear tho'art bribed, my adversaries may
Have time to laugh, ere thou take me away,
Am I not worth a strok? or am I grown
Tco stale a bit: for thee to swallow down?
I must be thine; come, ease me of this curse!
The longer here I live, I am the worse!
My suing makes thee coy to show thy face;
But those that seek thee not thou do embrace:
They dye but once, but every day a death
Thou have for me; yet still I draw my breath.
I dye with grief! but this I truly find
Th'more deaths I dye, the more there are behind.
Dying I went, and dying I came hither!
Strike not so often, but do it altogether.
Thus said, he stopped; grief did arrest his tongue.
Blame not my Muse, for staying by 'imsolong.
SECT. 47. Of a man that fell to decay in the World, through his excess; and
how his wife turned Hackney, and he a Pander.
A Man that carried breadth to raise his name,
(Time made him drop quite from the wings of fame)
He led the world awhile, and made a dust:
(Some think because he did the Courtiers trust
Made him stand by) in time a good estate
Was lent, and spent; he lived at such a rate,
That men admired; and he had a wife,
For diet, and apparel was at strife
T'exceed her betters: she must have a fan,
Her gowns of silk, her costly rings, her man
To wait upon her: in this lofty strain
She laid it on, nor did she mind the maine.
Of alteration she did never think,
She Would have her will, her purse still full of chink.
She had a beauty, she too well did know it,
She scorns to keep it up: in love she will show it
Unto the world: and some for gold may use it.
Should she be nigardly, she must abuse it
(As she conceives) she keeps her private trading,
To help at need; her husbands trade is fading.
Nature (she thinks) is feign to take direction,
To limb her parts, and work by her complexion.
Now he is urged to pay what he does owe;
Creditors come thick; debts come in but slow.
He strives a time, with all that he can do,
He cannot choose, but he must break in two.
His shop's shut up, goods gone, but where is the man?
He Is stepped aside: but find him if you can.
Let time betray him, I will never reveal him;
My Teltale Muse is bound now to conceal him.
To sum up what he owed is but in vain,
(Unless there were some hopes the debts to gain)
Or show the parcels, or to name the men
He owed it to, (they will never trust again.)
Or of their meetings, how they cur'st such debtors,
And how they vowed to put his shanks in fetters
If ere they caught him: how they went about
To sue the Statute of a Bankrupt out:
What debts were due to him, how few were good,
How those lamented that engaged stood
For such as he; how he at last was found,
Or how he offered eighteen pence in the pound:
The time he lay in prison, or the need
That he was in; how they at last agreed:
How he was changed, the creepers that he had,
Or how his mind, was every whit as bad;
How he was slighted, now he was so poor,
And how he scorned every man before.
I Will pass them all: my Muse was going hence,
She Is turned again to make you recompense.
Now in this time, his wife has found a way
That they may live as merry as the day;
If he will consent; her beauty has been seen,
By one of note; and like a demy-queene
He does respect her; she is come to know
Her worth at large, nor will she look so low
As he has done: now time has blazed her fame,
She Will venture broken ware, and trade with shame.
Upon return she runs her tail ashore,
Yet deals by retaile as she did before.
There Is one will venture with her, that has tried
How she will truck, he will not be denied.
If he can get the cuckold to consent,
And keep the door, he will give him good content.
He shall not break again, nor ever be
Constrained to suffer any misery:
He Will give him money, pay his rent beside,
Bear all his charges, only he must hide
His foul offense: he must be blind, or wink
When ere he comes, and into corners slinke
Till such an hour: that Pimp does know his time,
He Will nor be seen till they have done the crime.
The children call him father --
Hush not a word, perhaps the man is great
And stored with wealth, and has a lofty seat,
And loves his lust; or being serpent wise,
He Will take advantage, then he will tyrannize.
Though he be great, if goodness be forgotten,
'Twill make him and his name the sooner rotten.
If he have wealth, it is but an empty thing,
Nor will it save him from that fearful sting
Of sin and death: if honor it is he would have,
Can any honor keep men from the grave?
Though he be set alost, yet down he must,
And be e're long laid level with the dust:
Or if he loves his lust, the sooner he
May fall by 't, and the shame and misery
Will dog him to his end! his soul will bleed!
Oh! then he will meet one that is great indeed.
Though he be wise to raise a horrid evil,
And crush a truth; it is the soul murdering devil
That helps him in it: oh heaven, blast that arm,
That takes a cause to do the guiltless harm!
Such tyrants that rebel against the laws,
They can but snarle, for God cuts off their claws.
Our laws do cut lascivious persons down;
Not cob-web laws, that men of great renown
May break by force; they are not made for flies;
The Rich, the Noble, if they do despise
The force of them; shall quickly feel the smart:
They are no scarcrowes, but they will pierce the heart.
Me thinks the example of a gracious king
Might draw men's hearts from this accursed thing.
So chaste, soloving to his Royal Queen,
In any age no sweeter pattern seen.
Who would but follow! (Lord preserve his life)
Was ever Prince more faithful to a wife?
Oh, let this pattern keep us all in awe!
Who has such power? who yields more to the law?
All men can judge, in this I do not flatter:
If any Critic does, it is no matter.
You Cynick brood, should I (for fear of you)
Hide truth that is plain? let Princes have their due.
Here I could dwell, but love constraines my will
To leave his praises to an abler quill.
But if the practice of so sweet a Prince
Will not prevail, such sinners to convince;
Then let his Scepter fall upon all those,
Let them be numbered with his hateful foes?
My Muse is only bent against this sin;
If by her chidings she can any win
From hel's wide mouth, and keep some back from thence
Good words will serve, to make a recompense.
She tries her skill, and bears the pain, and cost;
If she prevail not, it is but labor lost.
The med'cin's sharp, the Patients must endure.
A desperate wound must have a desperate cure.
But to return back to the Imp again,
(My Muse is full, and overcharged with pain
To vent her mind:) me thinks I spy him yonder,
It should be he, he looks so like a pander;
It Is he, it is he, now I will break my mind,
Call Satyrs too, and pay him in his kind.
Thou fowlbred vassal I was there any age
That ever brought thy like upon the stage?
Do sell thy self, and put to sale thy name?
What is thy gain, but never dying shame?
Thou pawnst thy soul and all; do think to dwell
For ever here? oh! who shall fill up hell
But shameless vermin! these thy hateful crimes
Shallmake thy name the canker of the times.
Thy wife's a whore; thou art consenting to it,
The guilt will catch thee, with a curse to do it.
I never knew a villain in my life
Before, that was a pander to his wife.
Whores will increase, if they can be so hid,
And speed as well as I. O. B. N. did.
Speak, does she play the whore by thy command?
Or art thou forct in fear of her to stand?
Or is it for maintenance? or else the care
Thou have to pack off rotten broken ware?
Art thou bewitched? or low of stature borne
That she must raise thee higher by the horn?
Art thou no cuckold, in thy dull conceit,
Unless thou bearst upon thy back the weight
To make her common? or have thou a mind
To follow whores, and pay her in her kind?
That makes but hell the hotter; is it not true?
Except thou turn, hellfire is thy due?
There thou will meet thy sin, and thou shall see,
The devil will commit a rape on thee.
Thou lt curse thy wife, if hell once grasp that whore,
Cerberus will like a Pander keep the door.
Such sinners stay not long, the earth denies
Them room to tread on; away the air flies,
And leaves them breath less; hell her fee will crave;
The earth is vexed to afford such Imps a grave!
Where sin makes way, death is invited thither,
They are acquainted, and they go together.
Thy customers will fail, leave thee accursed,
Then thou will break worse than thou did at first.
Thou Wilt be but sport for boys, and scorn for all,
And who will then be grieved at thy fall?
They Will point and say, this Pimp of late did swagger,
And roar about, but now he is grown a beggar.
He wants his capons, pigeons, choice of wine,
And suits of silk, he is bare, and like to pine.
And when the whore with shame is turned thus off,
(Old and diseased.) she will be the common scoff:
She Will slily wander up and down the street,
And trade for three pence: if she can but meet
Some simple gull that is newly grown in date,
She Will rise to six pence; or a higher rate.
She cannot work but only with her tail,
And when her truck for three pence once does fail,
Perhaps she will use her hands, and learn to palter,
And end her days in Bridewell, or a halter.
But if you both enjoy your pleasures here,
And suck the sweet of sin, being free from fear,
And spend your days in pomp, and that you have
Enough to build a Record over your grave;
Alas! what is it besides your living shame?
Then who are winners? reckon not the game
Before it is played. Some died in state, we know,
That had their graves in flaming hell below.
They took their leaves of pleasures, and they go
From painted joys, into eternal woe.
Leave sin in time (and do your best endeavor
To purge your souls) or sin will sink you ever.
Time calls away (adieu) I think you're vexed,
I Will speak more freely when I meet you next.
SECT. 48. Of a black impudent Slut that more a dressing of fair hair on her
head, and black patches on her wrinkled tallow-face; and her reply answered.
WHat is this Imp that trades in borrowed ware?
She Is black like darkness, trimmed with morning hair,
Speak, art not thou a hateful bird of night?
Or art a Viper? or with seeming light
Do think to gull the world, to increase thy hire?
Thou can not cozen nature: thy desire
Is fruitless, vain; thine black was known to be,
Like Cypress shade; the borrow'd's light like thee.
But pr'y thee tell me, is thine own out-worn,
Being often over-heat? or only shorn,
Because 'twas black' or else because the gray
Was ming led with it? thou did change't away
For private reasons, 'cause it ever told
The truth of thee, in saying thou were told;
And thou would still be young, and that betrayed thee:
Thou should have don't before time had bewrayed thee,
Did thou disdain what nature did bestow
On thee as dowry? did thou never know
'Twas nearest thy complexion? was it not strange
To leave thy own and take the worst in change?
Mubh like a snake oregrown with age, and then
Thou Would cast thy skin, and so grow fresh again.
But could thou change thy skin, then thou might pass
For current ware, though thou art nasty trash;
But then all must be changed, thy theeth, thine eyes,
Thy wrincles must be filled, and that which lies
Forsaked of the blood, must be renewed:
Thy veins must show themselves; all must be viewed,
If this were done, thou might be kept for store,
Then who durst take thee for a common whore?
Besides, thy name must quite be changed too,
(Though It be a trick, as queans do use to do)
Or else for Names-sake, thou must bear the stain,
And none will speak to thee but in disdain.
These are but words of course; nor can it be
Time should consent to paint a hide for thee.
Suite with thy self, cast off thy purcha'st' hair,
Wear what is thine own; if Nature leaves thee bare,
Hide still thy head; leave off thy lust and pride,
Ot thou wilt be wondered at when thou art spi'de.
Nay, more I say, the patches on thy face
Do show thy folly, speak to thy disgrace.
What, do thou think them to be ornaments?
Or that they are like to further thy intents?
Or vile desires? thy furrowed cheeks are yellow;
Thy beetle brows are colored just like tallow.
The graceless crew, and all the roaring Sparks,
Know black, and yellow, are not beauties marks.
I am afraid (but take it as a wipe)
Thy patches show that thou art rotten ripe.
Pull off thy playsters, for they cover scabbs,
Which are the marks (often times) of lust full drabbs.
Who taught thee't? was it a witch, a whore or devil?
For such are forward'st in all kind of evil.
(The poisoning witch that did to Tiburne march,
Was held the first, that brought up yellow starch)
Did Turne-bull street first find it? tell me then
Is It not a hide-shame made to poison men?
Or did the trulls of Shore-ditch find it first?
To trap poor gulls? speak who? if any durst.
It is conceived 'twas used at first by those,
To hide the grincomes, or a pocky nofc.
What serv'st thou for? but to disgrace the age
Or t'make a pupper, t'act the suries rage?
Thou Had better buy some painting, there is some made,
Both red, and white, by one that drives the trade:
It Is very cheap; and common whores may have it;
And being cheap, the Gallants will not crave it:
It Is very stiff: the worst is in the close,
It Is tempered with the droppings of her nose.
Thou must not use it cold, for so it is ill:
First warm thy self in Bride-well at the mill,
Or at the hemp-block, and thy grain being rough,
Will drink it in; so done, it is dainty stuff.
I would have help thee to it, had thou not vex't;
Casheere thy spots, and when I meet thee next,
I Will tell thee where it is sold. Thy black within
Is worse than that; which are the spotts of sin,
But these do represent thee to the level
Of eyes, and thoughts, to be a female devil.
Thou art not like to hell; for this I know,
Thy face is full of springs, thou burn'st below;
But yet it is strange, although the water's higher,
And constant runs it cannot quench the fire!
Hold her, she is mad my friends; pray come not near her,
Her chapps doewag, she will speak, stand still and hear her
Is Bedlam broke? or art thou now grown mad?
You saucy jack! am I? am I so bad
As thou would make me? no, I scorn thy prate,
Sir, stay your clack, your boldness I do hate.
Thou Art either mad, or drunk, I Will pawn my life,
Or else thou would not sow nor stir up strife,
Thou Art both I see; Tom simple's mad or mellow:
A drunken man is still the busiest fellow
The earth affords; had thou not lost thy wits,
I for a need could show some Bedlam fits
To make thee wild; but modesty restraines me:
Am I a whore? who is it that disdaines me?
What though I wear a dressing on my head
Of other hair? I did not rob the dead,
Nor borrow it for time: the truth I Will tell,
'T was given me by one that loved me well:
If he were here my part he would quickly take,
And make thee run: I we are it for his sake.
All helps that nature can to give content.
May we not use?, this is my ornament.
Thou do not like my looks; then keep away
Till I send for thee; time may come I may
Take just revenge; but till thy brains are settled
I will not do it; then, faith I Will have thee nettl'd.
Thou railst against the patches on my face
Which are by wiser judged to be a grace.
I Would have you know, you idle prating fool,
I did not go to learn at shore-ditch school;
Nor yet at Clarken-well, but at the Court
Where Ladies often, and gallants do resort
To learn new fassions: there thou do abuse
What Ladies with my self, and gallants use:
If 'twere so bad as thou would make it, then
It would not be esteemed amongst gentlemen.
Thou durst not for thy life speak half so much
To courtly gallants; nor to any such
That are of Noble birth: thy rude proceeding
Does show, thou never did taste of gentle breeding.
Abuse a gentlewoman! my fingersitch!
Is spark, or Lady, devil, whore, or witch?
Say It if thou dare: for they first found it out,
Therefore'tis lawful: Why should any doubt?
Whatere I do I have examples for it:
What matter is it though threed-bare fools abhor it
What thou have said, I swear I Will make thee prove it:
But for the Law, it is known I do npt love it.
Nor will I rare my self so low; the prize
Is not worth winning! hanged it is all but lies:
Go, get thee gone, I pay for rent and diet:
What, in my chamber can I not be quiet?
Pray mistress hackney, cool your grease a little,
A gentlewoman rail! you learnd at spittle.
I am not mad (in giving you your due)
(Nor yet a fool) I speak but that that is true.
Thy false attire does but spread thy name,
Thy patches do not hide, but note thy shame:
Thy haire's a token, given by a friend,
That, and thy patches, mark thee like a fiend,
Thy recknings hald, which shows thou art a wench,
Whose face is Negro-like, whose head speaks French,
If Ladies use it, can they set thee free
From death? or hell? or any misery?
Will gallants plead, and say it is no sin?
Let loosers prate, say, did thou ever win
Respect from any by it? examples do
Bespeake a hell, and make thee guilty too.
I cannot think, that Courtiers are such sotts
To borrow heads, or trim themselves with spotts,
Unless they are old, or by mischance grown bare;
Or t'hide some faults: 'twill help such crazy ware.
I will not answer what thy vip'rous tongue
Has muttered out, though thou have done me wrong.
Is It not too much that thou so long have bin
A prostitute? and do thou now begin
T'rake hell afresh, because thy old sin leaves thee
Against thy will? till death of life bereaves thee,
Who can expect thy change? hell longs to greet thee
Adieu; take heed, the devil comes to meet thee.
SECT. 49. Of a Band that hired a Maid, and not proving to her expectation,
she accuses her of theft.
A modest maid that had a comely face,
And all her parts well suited with such grace
As freed her from defect; so was her mind
Enricht with virtue, few she came behind.
Her fortunes were but poor, being meanly bred:
Of means sh'had little store, her friends were dead
To service she must go, no other way
She has to live, unless she would go astray;
But that she hated. As she went abroad
To seek a place, she met a common bawd,
Who did salute her thus:
What ailes my pretty maid to look so sad?
What, all amort? fie, this is too too bad!
Pluck up thy heart, and chide away thy folly:
Tho'lt spoil thy face, if thou grow'st melancholy.
You Are fatherlosse, it is true, but what of that?
Cast of thy dumps, for care will kill a cat.
Come, dwell with me, I Will be to thee a mother,
I Will thee maintain, thou needst not care for other;
I Will give thee so much wages, thou shall find it
Twice doubled too; hold, here is a piece to bind it.
This harmless soul mistrusting nothing less
Than what she most intended; to express
Her thankfulness, she did receive the gold,
(Yet craving pardon that she was so bold)
And soon consented; thought her self so blessed,
That Fate could never alter nor molest
Her happiness. Then home with her she went,
And spent some time in civil merriment.
The mistress and the maid so well agreed,
With good discourse, and scripture too for need
The bawd could use: and little work to do,
The maid liked that; her fate was costly too.
But yet e're long, finding what house she kept,
What guests came in by night, what vermin crept
About in holes; and how they feared the watch,
How she was tempted, how they strived to catch
Her at advantage; she resolved at length
(Fearing she should be tempted past her strength)
To leave her promised hopes; she valued more
Her honesty, than all ill gotten store.
Her eyes dropped pearly tears, her heart did ache,
Which curbed her tongue awhile, at last she spoke:
Mistress:
'Pray free me now, my mind can never bear
Such impious crimes, I daily see and hear
I took you for my friend, you are my foe,
To seek my ruin thus; pray let me go.
Are these your proffered favors? let not me
Share any of them: truth, and honesty
Shall be my portion: let my punishment
Be public made, if ever I consent
To such allurements: how my soul does hate' em!
I Am ashamed to think on it, much more to relate them.
A bawdy house! I scorn't! will it not be said,
There goes the Bawd, and yonder comes her maid?
It is a place of note, I must confess:
Let Bawds be noted more: I noted less.
Have I not watched all night to attend a knave,
And selve a whore? ah, what a place I have!
I see your end was (when you were so free
With shows of love) to make a whore of me.
Time shall consume, ere I will once endeaver
To buy my shame, or sell my soul for ever.
Here, take your earnest; how was I deceived
With flattering words! I was of sense bereaved
By your enchantments: never fool was fonder;
I did not think to serve nor Bawd, nor Pander.
With that the choler of the Bawd did rise,
Her rage grew hot, the sparklings of her eyes
Like bals of wildefire did present a wonder:
So much of lightning! yet there comes no thunder.
Like furious fire that can find no vent,
Striving for freedom, still the more it is pent;
So was she swelled; her spleen being mixed with gall,
Which feign she would vent, yet could not speak at all.
Her looks were pale with envy; as she stands
Moving her jaws, and trembling with her hands.
Her silence vexed her more, she grew more cursed;
Guilt seizes on her: she must vent, or burst.
Then turning to the maid, and as she spied her
Disgorg'd her spleen, but yet it fell beside her.
Like roaring Megg discharged, she shakes the ground;
Or like an empty hogshead, gives more sound
For being worthless: thus she does begin:
This it is to take a paultry beggar in:
Thou beggars brat! what, what hail fellow now?
You saucie baggidge! go, you dirty sow!
I took thee up (because thy friends were dead)
Of charity: and now thou giddy-head,
Dostslight my love? you scorn to take a turn,
Thou nothing know, yet nothing thou will learn.
Thou may do worsc, thou simple fool, thou gull,
I Would laugh to see thee turn a Tinkers trull.
Who'd be so troubled with such lazy sluts?
They Are good for nothing, but to mind their guts.
Will you be gone? I vow I Will have thee banged,
Thou draggle-taile! and then go and be hanged.
But stay you queen, there is something else behind,
And that I think which will not please your mind.
Nay, neverstare, nor put it off with pishes;
Thou'st lost and melted me ten pewter dishes;
And broke my China-ware; thou paultry elfe;
Thou Wilt never be worth an earthen dish thy self.
Who burnt my gorget minion? wast not you?
For that alone a whipping is thy due.
Thou pilf'ring jade, I lately lost two rings,
With handkerchiefs, and diverse other things:
Who had'em but thy self? I Will swear they are gone:
It Is plain thou'st stole them, strangers there came none,
Nay, do not cry, for crying will not free thee:
Confess thy faults, and fetch'em, let me see thee.
But if thou do refuse, or once deny it,
I Will shame thee quite; the Sessions, that shall try it.
Thou arrant thief, I miss a silver bowl;
Thou have that too, I dare to pawn my soul:
How should it else be gone, but by thy hands?
Thou cozening drab! how like a fool she stands!
You Will be no whore, fie, fie, you do abhor it;
A thief thou wilt be; may I not hang thee for it?
Thy looks speak guilty, and this truth relating,
Has cooled thy haughty mind, and spoyld thy prating.
So said, she stopped: this guiltless maid's in fear;
Her grief breaks sorth, and now and then a tear
Glides down her cheeks: nor would she have it spied;
As't falls, still with her handkerchiefe it is dried.
She turned her face, and did bewail her wrong;
Feign she would speak, but anguish staid her tongue.
Sometimes she thought the justness of her cause
Would bear her out, but then the rigorous laws
Would dash her hopes; the cause must there proceed
By evidence; not as it is indeed.
She Is confident the Bawd will swear a lie:
What hope's there, but the innocent must dye?
Yet gaining strength, she spoke (for truth breeds trust)
Why should I think the Gods will prove unjust
To quit the guilty? bring the innocent
Upon the stage, to suffer punishment?
Astrea still remains, to ease my mind;
Though Poets feign so, Justice is not blind.
Why am I vexed? why, why am I so sad?
I am accused for what I never had.
If Justice miss the mark, I can but dye;
My virtue lives; thus far resolved am I.
Then turning to the bawd, she thus replied:
I Am not the first that ever was belied
By shameless bawds; you raise an ill report
Against my life, but Virtue is my fort.
Had I but seen your baudry, and been mute,
Or bent my self to be a prostitute,
All had been hushed; your handkerchiefs and rings,
Your silver bowl with sundry other things
Had never been stolen: nor are they; you are cursed,
Because I would not yield; but do your worst.
I Will set you out in colors, and I Will show
To all the world no more than what I know.
The Constable and Watchmen found your Imps,
Your crew of harlots, and your par-boyld Pimps;
And some they took to Bridewell; but the rest
Flew out like owls to find another nest.
Yet they were over-taken in their flight,
Some housd in Wood-street though they flew by night;
One in the Poultry, though against his will;
Some to the Fleer, and there they tarry still.
A handsome girl you saw, and needs you would buy her;
Then like a hackney put her out to hier.
Your house is Sodom-like, and yet withal,
It seems again to be an Hospital.
The foul stained bratts that sinned there, and endured
Their punishments, come thither to be cured.
Some want their sight, some hearing, some their smell,
Some cannot speak the language plain of hell.
Some out of date, some tattered, want a fleece,
Some want a nose, and others but a piece.
These are the scholars of your Vaulting school:
And'cause I would not prove my self a fool
To damn my soul; youl'd prove me now a theife.
I fear you not; for I shall find releife.
When you shall bear your shame; I pray begin,
Prefer your bill, put your indictment in.
Now all this while the bawd amazed stood,
And looked much like a piece of rotten wood:
She sweats with envy, but her heart was cold;
And wondered that the maid could be so bold.
Her fingers itcht, and yet she durst not fight,
She growl'd, and snarl'd, but yet she could not bite.
Her words she bore in mind, which vexed her heart;
She Would feign indite her, but she feared the cart.
Now she resolves to prosecute the maid,
But then she thinks her bawdry'll be bewraid.
Still when her spleen did press her on to do it,
Shame stops the suit, she had no mind unto it.
Now she'ld proceed, but that she is kept in awe
With horrid guilt; not does she love the law.
Then thus she spoke:
Come, be not vexed, I spoke these words to try thee,
They Are worse than devils that will once belly thee.
To say the truth (I Will speak what is thy due)
Thou have been honest, careful, just, and true.
Speak well of me, fear not, for I protest,
Where ere thou art, I Will never thee molest.
Take what is thine, go, make no more ado.
The bawd departs, and glad she is escaped so too:
Muse, dog her not, but let me rest my pen:
For at the Sessions, you may meet again.
SECT. 50. The Confession of a theiving Whore, at the time of her Execution.
I Heard of late there was a Hackney jade,
And for her need, she would use a theiving trade:
She escaped a while, but vengeance did assault her,
Brought her at last in the compass of an halter.
Her life was vile; shame forced her to confess it,
Guilt broke the way, and thus she did express it:
When I was young (my bringing up was rude)
My friends did think, that which the multitude
Did most approve of, that must needs be best;
I had my will, and so lived like a beast.
I mocked at goodness; though my father spide it,
He Would fawn, and laugh; my mother too would hide it.
Ill company at last causd me to prove
A prostitute: good nature mixed with love
'Twasnam'd with us; the father from the son
I didintice, till both were quite undonne.
I often robbed the father of his child,
And cursed the mother, though she was most mild.
I drew the husband from his loving wife:
That being done, I sowed betwixt them strife.
And servants from their Masters I did keep;
We spent their goods whilst they were fast a sleep:
I made them steal, cheat, pilfer, and purloine:
How e're it came, if I could get but coin,
I never cared; or any man that came
Which brought but money, I nere ask't his name,
Nor what he was, his life, nor where he dwelt:
He had his will when I his money felt.
If any one had a good mind to play
A game in love, and yet was loath to pay;
I Would pick his pockets; money, or a watch,
Or any thing of worth that I could catch,
Was ali mine own: but he would never reveal ir,
(For fear of shame) though he knew I did steal it.
If any one had spent on me his stock,
Forrecompence, I paid him with a mock:
And cursed him too; then with a railing scoff
I sent him packing: thus I cast him off.
When trading failed, I had a trick as ill,
I Would cut a purse, or steal, for I had skill
In all those ways: at last the foul disease
Had brought me low, and I could find no ease.
It grieved my heart, I could no longer sin.
As I was wont: such case then I was in!
Yet I resolved to take what e're was brought
By highway theives, or cut-purses: I taught
Them how to do it: house-breakers, or the rest:
Who e're was most expert, was my chief guest.
The cheating crew, did make me their receiver,
For whoredom, theft, and for a false deceiver
None went beyond me. I am brought this day
To suffer for it, and I my life must pay.
Take warning all by me, avoid those crimes,
You that are guilty; oh! repent betimes?
Sin will but cheat you, flatteringly 'twill woo you,
Like Crocodiles, it will at last undo you.
Now for my sins I fear I must go fry
With Iesaebel, in flames eternally,
My conscience tells me, what is my sinful hire.
Drive, drive away, me thinks I feel hell fire.
But after this she staid a little space:
Then as she drew the cloth down over her face,
Said, world, adieu! with thee I leave my stain:
Oh! I shall never see the light again!
The pain, the shame, the anguish of my heart
Thus said; the car-man drew away the cart
Upon command, but left his load behind:
I cannot think the halter eased her mind.
Of all her gains, sh'ad nothing lest to pay
For bur'ing of her corpse: but by the way
Her grave is made: the hangman put her in it,
And here her Epitaph is put in Print.
Her Epitaph.
Here lies a monster of the Female kind;
So serpent-like! her venom's mixed with shame:
Yetlike a mole she turned; fur she was blind:
Or like a dragon, but she was too tame.
Some part from woman, more from beasts had she.
She was most foul, and died upon a tree.
SECT. 51. Of a Prodigal Man that run out of all, and how his wife turned
whore.
A Simple man, that was both poor and proud,
That strained himself beyond what was allowed
By his estate: his raverne meetings cost
More than he got: his time being daily lost:
With costly suits, with rich and dainty fare
His wife and he did live still free from care:
He to grow fearelesse often did charge his brain
With Claret, Sack, the fruits of France and Spain.
Having the dropsy, he could not quench his thirst,
He strained so long, till at the last he burst.
His calling cast him up, and his estate
Denied him bread, being overruled by Fate.
He saw his folly, and he was perplexed:
But 'twas too late, alas! in vain he vexed!
His former ways grew hateful in his sight:
His heart grew heavy, but his wife turned light,
Lascivious Goat! she will hold up her port:
And any Ape that will to her resort,
Finds entertainment: yet he still is kind,
And charms her often, but cannot change her mind.
She scorns him: he gives her nor clothes, nor diet:
She Will have a place, where she may live at quiet:
She being gone, his mind does him importune
To go beyond sea, and to seek his Fortune.
Away he went; but yet in three years time
Came back with hope this whore had purged her crime.
At first, by chance he met her in the street,
(Wrapped in a bag, perfumed with civet sweet,)
Saluted her; discourst things that were past:
H'was glad to see her; there came by at last
A Gentleman (it seems) her name he knew,
He Would give her wine, acquaintance to renew.
She left her husband, giving him this reason,
She Would talk with him; but at a fitter season.
Poor man! he is dry, yet cannot with her drink:
Another must, how such a whore does stinck!
He lets 'em go; was it not a simple swain?
His wife is proved to be a whore in grain.
SECT. 52. Of a Whore proving with child, that laid it to many to get money.
A pampered trull that made a trade of sin,
She had a trap which she caught wood cocks in.
Her carriage showed that she was void of grace;
Her riches all were sum'd up in her face.
She had a husband that did cloak her shame,
A seasoned Cuckold; feign I Would tell his name
If 'twere worth naming; but to let him pass
A parboiled Rams-head, or the Devils Ass.
This strumpet had been chaffring with her ware;
If she could trade, with whom she did not care:
Nor did she stand with all, for present pay,
(Such wholesale dealers, often give some day
For their return) and many had been buying
Her stale breathed ware; and sundry more were trying
To drive the bargain: customers she had,
Some kept their day, some broke it, some ran mad,
Some paid her weekly, those were rare, and strange,
Some always paid her when the Moon did change,
Some half a year, as they at first did barter:
But most agreed to pay within the quarter.
This trading made her swell, and she grew proud,
Her belly swelled, alas! I speak too loud:
She Is rig'd and fraught, her keel is large and big:
She wallows out, much like a sow with pig,
Amongst her customers: she gives a bill
To everyone, and then they know her will;
What ware she has enclosed in her boat,
And how she will truck, it is all within her note:
In trading mit they shall themselves enthrall,
It will not vent, and so 'twill break them all.
They all dislik't, and showed it by their looks:
But being run so far into her books,
They Are in distress: the principal with use
She Will make them pay: this is a foul abuse!
Each one must take it all, if not a part,
And every one is gald, and vexed at the heart.'
To take this ware none of them will agree;
Yet know it to be a quick commodity.
The case is clear, and yet in doubt it stands;
Though it be quick, 'twill lie upon their hands:
They all compound; her chapmen give her fleeces,
Some five, some ten, of some sh'has twenty pieces:
So they agreed (or else it had been tried)
And they are feign to pay old scores beside.
Here Is subtle traffic, though this whore be pressed,
I'dehave her art concealed from all the rest;
But let her shame be known, that all may say
This whore put sin to use, and had her pay.
Let those that traffic with her be content
To bear the shame, the loss, the punishment,
And ever after bend their care to strive
To Avoid such gulfes, which swallow men alive.
SECT. 53. Of a man that was sick for another man's wife.
A harmless man a journey undertook,
His country, and his wife a time forsook
To seek his own beyond the Sea; and when
He had obtained it, home he came again.
But e're he had accomplished his intent,
There fell at home a shameful accident:
A man fell sick of lust, it grew so strong
He must have cure, or live he could not long:
But who must help him, but this poor man's wife.
She, only she it is must restore his life.
A man, said I? a brute, a bull, a bore.
He Is sick to have a woman turn a whore.
H'has wife, and children, but he will not own them,
He Is sick, and looks, as if he had not known them.
His wife and friends must now reveal his mind
To her, to try, if she will be so kind
To entertain the motion, grant his suite
To save his life; and be his prostitute.
Often she was urged; but she at first denied:
Her tender fear judged if he should have died,
'T had been her sin; then she at last consented
Unto his lust; the goat was then contented.
Thou brat of Sodom! how can thou but think
Thy shame will make thy name for ever stink!
Thou might have bent thy heat (thou filthy gull)
Upon a cow, as Pasiph'e, on the bull.
Me thinks a halter might have given thee ease!
It Is present cure for such a hot disease.
It would have raised the heat, and placed the fire
Close to thy ear, and quenched thy foul desire.
Had thou no mind to it? wast restrained by fear?
What pity 'twas the hangman was not there!
This Rascal's now restored and does delight
In's new-made whore; and she affects the sight
Of rustic Jack: they on each other fawn,
He sells his goods, and she lays hers to pawn,
To bear their charges at their meeting places;
And every day they see each others faces.
If she repent, he will swear he will make her known,
Then she is constant; now the whore's his own.
They give themselves to dally, sport, and revell,
Their words and works make pastime for the devil.
Is Cupid guilty? then I Will make a rod,
(And lime the twigs) to whip this apish god.
His wife that gave consent to this at first,
And beat the bargain, thinks her self accursed.
She wooed her to assuage his hellish heat,
She Is punished for it: she has no bread to eat.
His feigned friends, that were as panders to him,
Do grieve with shame! their counsel did undo him
But now this man's returned; he is at the door,
And little thinks his wife is turned a whore.
He Is now come home, and thinks himself much blessed,
His wife grows big, great joy is here expressed!
A son is borne; the birth is in the prime,
But yet it came two months before the time,
But he never counted time; (he had no fear)
For he had bought no Almanac that year.
'Twas christened, put to nurse, nor was it known,
By him, or others, but that 'twas his own.
Yet shortly after, though it was concealed,
Time was ashamed on it: so it was revealed.
Shame forced her to to confess; and then she did
Disclose her whoredom, though before 'twas hid.
Had you but seen the tears that he did vent
When this he heard, and found his goods were spent,
It would have moved your hearts: he could not speak,
He Is swelled with grief, as if his heart would break!
Do travells breed such fruit? is this my pains
To bring forth shame? he inwardly complains.
How shall I show my face! how shall I stand
Against reproach! or tarry in this Land!
My pulses work, my spirits do rebel;
My forhead's hard, my horns begin to swell!
This child's my shame, it is guiltless, who'd disdain it?
I got it not, and yet I must maintain it:
When I went hence, how poor was I! but thou
In proving light, have made me poorer now,
My comfort and my riches, was my wife:
But failing! now, I Am weary of my life!
To ease his grief, he thought to make that slave
A dread to all; but then this shameless knave
Slinks out of sight: his house had cast him out,
His goods are gone, he sneaks and sharks about,
Sends threats and scoffs to him, which made him stagger;
He left his suit, for Jack was grown a beggar.
Then staying here a time with discontent,
He took his luggadge and away he went.
Time, place, earth, sea, do all the best you can;
How e're she speeds, show favor to the man!
SECT. 54. Of a dunghill whore, and a pander; how they abused a man of worth;
and how they suffered shame at last.
THere did appear a monster in our time,
Who traveled long, at last brought forth a crime
Unknown to any age: nor did it end her:
She was a female of the common gender,
Perverse, and proud, malicious, envious, cursed,
An Infidel; I should have named that first.
Gross ignorance did run along betwixt,
And Atheism was with all distempers mix't;
She learnd of none but of the murdering devil;
The wit she had, was only to do evil.
She did not know but Pluto was her maker:
And her descent was from a dunghil-raker.
Her fathers Castle, freed her from the Law,
Being wal'd with mud, thatch't with a trusse of straw.
'Twas seven foot in height, judge you the strength:
Six foot in breadth, but full nine foot in length.
So Negro-like her face appeared in hew,
But that the black was too much mix't with blew,
Her snout grew double, both the currents great;
Where streams ran down still to assuage the heat.
Her eyes were charged with bullets; and her tongue
By statute measure, was a nail too long.
Her lips kept at a distance very often,
(To those that had a mind) she kissed as soft
As hedge-hoggs bristles: and her teeth stood out
Beyond the palest' affront her daring snout.
Her limbs did al agree; being thick and large,
They did contribute to each others charge;
Her pride lay in her joints, they would not bend:
This is her picture; who can her commend?
A ragged imp, that had a Newgate face,
That suited with her; and as free from grace
As she could be; you would think none were so bad:
But here is a villain having twice run mad,
Grows mad again: and does embrace this whore,
Both are more shameless than they were before,
Two second devils could not be more vild;
At last this pander got this queen with child.
They raked the dunghils to invent a plot
Who now should keep it, seeing is was got.
They pitched upon a man (for they were bold)
Should do it, or else they would fleece him of his gold.
This man's a man of worth, of honest name,
Of comely person; goodness, truth, and fame
Had made him known: a man so well beloved,
So free from pride, from passion, seldom moved
With vain applause! so constant in his mind,
So just, so free, that you shall seldom find
A man so qualified! This Jade comes to him,
And speaks him fair, thinking then to woo him,
(How fair do you mean? 'pray offer me no wrong;
Can one speak fair, with so foul a tongue?)
And draw him on to give her such a sum
Of money (thought she, ere that he will come
To open shame; he will yield to fee at large.)
I am with child, I lay it to your charge.
But if you will not give me money store,
(Now you have tempted me to be your whore)
I Will make you answer't in another place:
I Have witness that will swear to your disgrace.
This modest man's amazed, but (yet not mute,)
Replying, said; from whence wilt raise thy suit?
From hell below? or from thy hell within?
Thou Wilt be the mother of a hell-borne sin.
Thou shameless Imp! you are from the devil sent
With hels broad seal, to vex the innocent!
Thou know I Am guiltless, do thou raise this strife,
To spoil my name that is better than my life?
Oh, hateful crime! what will thou damn thy soul?
And set thy hand to that black Doomsday roll?
Thou'st played the whore, it is bad; worse will thou do?
To swear a lie, thou will be perjured too.
Do, spit thy gall, I will not fear a jot;
He yield unto, what justice shall allot!
Nor will I give the money, I will never
Support a whore (how have I loathed 'em ever.)
Should I seem guilty, when my soul is free?
Mark but the end, the shame will fall on thee.
Justice will search the truth; and thou shall find,
That sin and shame, will pay thee in thy kind.
This nasty harlot, hearing his reply,
Said; have I been your sweet? and now must I
Be forced to fly for succor to the laws?
'Faith, you shall know, that I will prove my cause
To be so just, that all upon the Bench,
Shall credit me. I am no simple wench.
Had you but given me coin l'de never have tried it:
You Will be undone, alas! you must abide it!
The loss of credit, with an empty purse;
How e're you slight it, it is the greatest curse.
One fifty pounds had drawn me to have staid it;
You Will wish ere long, O! that I had but paid it!
When you shall lay at stake your wealth, your name,
Ten fifty pounds then, will not hide your shame.
I see't's in vain for me to use expressions,
I Will speak my mind more freely at the Sessions.
Away went she, to have this man indicted:
The pander swears, that he will see her righted:
They get their tales by heart; they laugh, and say,
Hanged, there is no fear, but we shall have the day:
The Bill is drawn; but now they make their moanes
Until her father sells his marrow-bones,
They have no money nor to pay the Clerk,
Nor would he trust'em; (one thing more pray mark,
Then hear the trial) see how they were fitted:
The time, the place, where he this act committed,
Or where he gave the gold they had forgot,
Till'twas too late, the difference spoiled their plot,
The Indictment. R. B.
Thou standst indicted of a fact most vilde,
For having known, and got A. H. with child,
For having of her body carnalluse;
If this be true, it is a foul abuse.
Denying her relief, thou make her go,
To beg her bread. Art guilty, yea or no?
Not guilty.
They both are sworn, the truth now to express,
All, but no more: they think of nothing less.
The first begins, I had a hapless chance!
I went to service, thinking to advance
My fortunes in the world: I met this man,
He flatt'red me, and gave me gifts; I can
Relate his words for need; but to be shorr,
He took me home, and there he had the sport:
I proved with child, went to him, he would not own me,
But looked, and spoke, as if he had not known me.
Yet gave me money, having staid there long:
But charged me strictly still to hold my tongue:
Poor I! was silent, till the coin was spent;
Then need enforced me, and to him I went:
And made my moan in gentle terms, and mild
TO allow me money, and to keep the child:
But he would do neither, like a peevish knave;
Prav show me justice: that is all I crave.
The Pander now begins, to tell his tale,
But faltring in it, his color changed pale.
The Jury saw it, and the Judge did view him;
He called the Keeper, and the Keeper knew him;
He had been thrice in prison, whipped, and seared,
And shoulder-markt beside; he quakt, and feared
His shameful plot; the hangman by him stood
To singe his face, or pickle him in wood.
They were examined jointly, and apart,
Where, when, the manner, (Judges have an art
To find delinquents) how it came about,
What money she received; and the doubt
Was out of doubt, their words did not agree,
The Plaintiff's sound, but the Defendant's free.
His honest name at first did give a light,
The difference in persons showed 'twas spite.
These perjured vermin, sentence have received;
(How often are sinners, by themselves deceived!)
A public whipping first they must abide;
They have a cart, but yet they must not ride:
The horse is led, they cannot lose their way,
They did before; by sin they went astray.
They Would company good store, the Beadles mind
(Though he is in office) is to go behind.
His overseers keep him still in sight,
And for his work (poor man) he is paid with spite!
So many teachers? who can give content
To all of them, and yet be innocent?
One does desire favor for the Whore,
Another prays that he would lash her more.
As some do wish him then to pay the slave,
Some moved with pity, still do mercy crave.
Their faces had no blood, what they did lack,
The Beadle searched, and sound it on the back.
They loathed lane-ends and gutters, (for this trash)
As well they know there they must have the lash.
The Beadle's charged, upon his charge he stands;
The ease they had was resting sor their hands.
This punishment being past; another time,
They must be mounted up, to blaze this crime,
Upon a scaffold in the market place,
And t'over-looke it; 'twas a simple grace
To be preferred so quickly, and so high!
Yet this preferment came by perjury.
They thrust their heads through windows, but a gin
Does share them so, they cannot pull them in;
Nor could they creep quite out; a cruel spite:
They could not sit, nor could they stand upright.
They had this place by law; no wrong I Will do them,
For they had writing did confirm it to them;
Lest time should make it void, t'confirme it better,
The hangman sealed it, with a red-hor letter.
They paid no fine, they should have done it is true,
Where Is nothing to be had, Kings lose their due.
But growing careless in this high estate,
Both fish and flesh, was at as great a rate
As 'twas before; complaint was made, (I find)
The deeds were torn, the seals were left behind,
They Are took away. (Some, that with pride were stung,
Had got the place, but none that kept it long)
By steps of stone they rise as much in height,
And had more neck-room, but not quite so light.
I leave 'em there, but if they rise again,
And vex the hangman, putting him to pain
He Will use a trick, to keep them ever down,
If ere he catch them one mile out of Town,
He Will give them both less neck-room then before;
If thus they fall once, they will rise no more.
SECT. 54. Diverse means prescribed to cure the soul disease of lust, suting
with all conditions of persons.
THe Medicines that must cure this foul disease
According to my skill (if readers please
To gather patience to digest the rest,
They Will prize the remedies, being here expressed.
I Will show in order: Moral and Divine,
With Natural helps, as tempers do incline,
So must they be appl'd. Thou must begin,
First, to consider, it is a hateful sin,
That heaven still has cursed, the actors thence
Are banished; for a shameful recompense,
As most unclean; it is against thy life,
Thy soul, thy health, thy substance, friends, and wife,
(If thou have any) and the curse, and shame,
With wrath and guilt, will prey upon thy name.
Earth will not hold thee long; while here thou art,
Thou do but for a hel-hound play thy part.
Thou cut'st thy time short; for thy raging lust
Infects thy bones, thy flesh; brings thee to dust
Before thou art aware; men's hate is bred
To thee alive; they will loath thee being dead.
When heaven, and earth disclaimes thee, hell will take
Thee for her own, where thou thy bed must make
In burning flames: repent, repent in time,
Or sin will fill thy bones, being laid in slime.
Deny occasions, that would tempt thee to it;
Think on thy end, and then thou can not do it.
Subdue the rise of lust; thy sin will be
Slave like kept in captivity by thee.
Observe what others by their lusts have gained;
Have they not been disgraced, plagued, punished, pained?
Those painted pleasures, blasted in the bloom,
Fore-run a horrid night! the day of Doom
Will show thee to the world. Oh! watch and pray!
Or last, and hell, will hurry thee away:
Keep down thy pampered flesh with fasting: then
Thou will forsake such beasts, and live with men.
Mind still the presence of the glorious God;
Submit to him in love, but fear his rod,
Make bargain with thy eyes, never to behold
Fair, wanton objects: rather view the mold,
From which thy flesh was framed: (nor have thou trust)
While here thou stayst, thou art but living dust.
Think every grief, distress, disease, or painc,
Is sent to rank thy life among the slain.
Thou may be taken in the cursed act,
(As Zimri was) and damned for the fact.
Shun idleness; if thou art not employed
In honest ways, the Devil will divide
Thy heart, thy strength, and draw thee to his will,
To pleasure him in any thing that is ill.
Thy leisure gives thee leave; (thou wilt work the faster,
If Nature spur thee on) a cruel master
He Will prove at last; when thou should reap thy gains,
What can expect, but torment for thy pains?
Beware of drunkenness; else that will breed
And kindle fuel; then this shameful deed
Will hatch it self: when thou have drowned thy brains,
The fog of lust will then possess thy reins:
They Are near of kin; there is no cause of wonder,
That evil partners are not far a sunder.
The time draws on, when drunkenness, and lust
Shall have their hell together; is it not just
That hell should draw them dry? or is it not fit,
That witty mad men lose not sense, but wit?
Avoydill custom: it is no easy thing
To change a habit: he is a true bred King
That conquers but himself. Sin will be stronger,
And as the evening shadow grows still longer,
So custom spreds it self. This one thing know,
Thou'st age enough to match with fiends below.
If thou be married, it is the breach of truth
Betwixt thee, and the partner of thy youth,
Which curses will requite: 'twill be a blot
To thee and thine, for ever; and thy lot
Will be the like, or worse; such men do find
Lex talionis (paid home in their kind.)
If thou art single, and thy lust prove strong,
Prevent the worst by Marriage: tarrying long
May force the floods to overflow the banks;
Then men grow fearelesse, fit for hellish pranks
This sin is never single; it must be
Joined with another in adultery:
As though the guilty threatening to rebel,
Breathed out disdain, to go alone to hell.
He bears the double sin: though they agreed
A little time to sin; this shame full deed,
When done, 'twill breed them everlasting odds:
They Are painted roses which do turn to rods.
Look on the imperfections of a whore;
Some in her person, but she has worse, and more
In disposition: if thou have but wit,
This thing alone may 'swage thy frenzy fit,
But if thou have no skill, or art in doubt,
Bring her to me, I Will help to find 'emout.
But if thy lust exceed in strength, being great,
Starve it with hunger; and assuage the heat,
With fair cool water; drink nor wine, nor beer,
Till thou have purged thy soul, and made all clear.
Refuse no counsel, let it pierce thy heart,
And welcome a reproof though it seems smart
To thee: it is wholesome company with such
That hate this vice, and love good; for there is much
Good gotten by them; they have no poisoned breath;
In life like such as thou would have at death.
Give up thy self to Christ: then thou may say
You Are not thine own: thou can not go astray.
To join with harlots, for thy soul's bespoken,
The marriage day is set; his love's the token
Of thy eternal good. He Will ever keep
Thee from those vermin that about thee creep.
Here Is profit, pleasure, everlasting gain,
Which with consent will banish all thy pain.
View heavens glory; fixing still thine eyes
With confidence, to pierce the lofty skies:
And look beyond thy sense; and silence reason;
Note well the beauty; take the blessed season
To raise thy heart; see what reward those find
That were not foiled with lust, or womankind.
But when thou look, take this advise of mine,
Thinc eyes, thy heart, thy ends must be Divine.
Then turn thine eyes tow'ards hell, where thou may see
The plagues, the torments, and the misery
That hel-hounds do endure: and that will make
Thy raging lust grow tame, thy heart will ache,
To think the swallowing of a blasted pleasure
Should gender wrath, endless in weight and measure.
The potion's mingled, those that drink that cup
Their streams of lust will soon be dried up.
Their dainty pallats thirst, the insatiate whore,
With roaring Tom, shall act that sin no more.
Their moystur's gone; but there is the greater fire
Mix still with brimstone; that is the whorish hire.
There are no beauties; no, nor light to see
Except t'be shame, and sins deformity.
They dwell with devils; and their inward room
Is burning hell, their prison, and their tomb.
What if thou should when none of these will take,
Destroy a member? some for heavens sake
Have done as much ('it is better thou should cast
One part away, than lose thy self at last,
Mistake me not, I do not prompt thee to it;
If former means prevail, thou may not do it.)
To save his soul who is it that would not use
A certain cure? pray here my pen excuse.
There Is nothing else, except time dos afford
Fresh remedies: (being ancient) he is stored
With cures both old and new: the sinner old,
Will leave his lust, or that him, 'cause he is cold.
For physic helps, those that profess that Art
Can show thee, which will calm thy boiling heart,
If that should miss (I think this will not fail)
Live like a begging Friar in a jayle.
Stone walls, and iron grates are very good
To temper thee, and qualify thy blood.
But if it be a woman, she must shun
Her liberty, work hard, not like a Nun,
To stitch a gorget; but to turn a mill,
Or draw a wheelbarrow, though against her will:
There are appointed places, among the rest;
(If I may judge) the Bridewels are the best.
And let the whip lie always in her sight.
Let blew-cote beadles lock her up at night,
And call her early up, let time be inch't,
And of her labor let her not be pinch't.
There Is one thing more, which I am loath to name,
'Twill strange Just, but 'twill prefer thy shame.
Probatum est, it is nothing but a rope,
Made fast and loose, it is all the hangmans hope,
Thy hope, thy pleasure, with thy life will end;
It Is then too late to say thou will amend.
The hangman's still in haste, the carmans pay
Will not avail to tarry half a day.
The Priest will pray, but he is never long:
He has it ready: when he holds his tongue
The pangs of death come on thee; when thy face
Is covered ore, oh! what a fearful cale
Art thou in then; the men in post will ride,
But when they come and find thee dead, fast tide
Unto a halters end; the people gone,
To Gregory, and thy grave you are left alone.
But where abides thy soul? alas! who can know?
I fear 'twill be confined to dwell below.
Remember what I say, read over this book:
Perhaps thou may in reading love to look
Upon thine own estate: (learn to be wise)
It Is sharp, but wholesome, 'twill not blast thine eyes.
If 'twill but turn thy heart, 'twill quit the cost,
Or strengthen any, it is not labor lost.
The guiltless, and the convert shall for me
Go uncontrolled. Then let my Muse pass free.
Read it with patience; take what is thy due.
I he are the whispring of a bawdy crew:
I needs must answer them? Or they will abuse
My harmless meaning, and my freeborn Muse.
SECT. 56. The supposed railing objections, imprecations of the filthy brood,
against the Author, and the Book.
A Bawdy knot being met, and having found
The Nights Search trenching in their common ground,
Began to grumble; first the Bawd did speak.
^ A busy fool, whose brains are sunk, or weak,
Has writ a book; 'twas principally made
To shame us all, and overthrow our trade.
I heard a gallant speak, as if it came
Post with a whip, in Tom a' Bedlams name.
It Is armed with fury, every line spits fire;
I wish a halter were the Authors hire!
Pand. I Have bought the book, I heard 'twas new come out,
I have it here to put you out of doubt:
He rails, he frets, with biting jeers in scoff,
Keeps much ado, yet comes but poorly off:
He writes of whipping, pillering, and carting,
Burning, curses, hanging too at parting.

Bawd. Let Us see the book, had thou so little wit:
To buy such trash? I Will serve thee now as fit;
One part shall serve to stop the mustard pot,
I Will burn the rest; and that shall be its lot.
A fool and's money quickly part! I see
That thou art vexed; wilt be revenged on me?

Whore. Pray mistress let it lie to keep all clean,
'Twill serve for waste: you know well what I mean.
One of my friends shall write to his disgrace,
To show his wit, and in some public place
Cast out a libell, that the world may know
His wit is blasted, only wit in show!

Pand. I Am vexed to hear you! did I buy this book
To have it burnt or tore? great pains I took
To find it out; pray, blame me not to frown
To see it spoiled; it cost me half a crown:
But bear your shares, we will keep't to shame this sinner,
Make it our recreation after dinner,
To laugh at's folly; then 'twill serve to light
Tobacco for us every winters night.

Bawd. Thou simple fool! do think I Will have it lse
Within my house, our trading to discry?
Some feathered goose may see it, and with a fright
Forsake the house, and take a further flight:
Pray burn it, burn it; if that ass were here
That made the book, we'ld burn him to, or tear
His skin from's flesh, then he should know how well
The place and persons do resemble hell:
But it is no matter, none that loves the sport
Of Venus, or attends at Cupids Court,
Will e're regard it, but to laugh and jest
At his course wit: I value not the rest.

Who. If I may judge, I think he has been crossed
In his desire, he has a beauty lost;
Or else his stock is spent, and being poor,
He cannot pass so freely to his whore
As formerly he did; and now in rage
He for her sake brings all upon the stage.
Or being old, his vigor is abated;
What he loved once, he would make all think he hated
Thus ab initio; now he writes to strive
(When all things fail) to keep his name alive.
Could he have known our private ways, or been
Our Secretary, if he had not seen
The windings of the clew, or touched the sore,
If he by practice had not known't before?
Or else he wanting natural affections,
Would have sweet nature follow his drections.
He has been in some service overcharged;
The mark was hot; and being now enlarged
From Bedlam, Newgate, or Chirurg'ons hands.
He cannot feel the ground on which he stands,
I have been bred to this; it is my course,
I Would better be a whore than to do worse.

Bawd. I am grown old, nor can I now take pains.
This is my trade, which brings me constant gains.
Should I forsake it now? then call me fool;
I have not lived so long, to goo to school
To such a haire-braind coxcombe: no, I will
Bear up delight, drink, and be merry still.
He Would make us think, if flesh and blood rebel,
There is no help, but we must go to hell.
We know that many with those faults are tainted,
Yet some were goddesses, and some were Sainted.
Why should I fear, but I as well may speed?
The Queen of Love I never did exceed.

Pand. I came to town thinking to be a groom,
But when I came another had the room
That I was to supply: and having spent;
My time, my means, being in discontent
I took this honest course to gain relief;
There Is none can say I am a rogue or thief:
And yet (forsooth) here is one has undertook
To prove us thieves, and sentence passed, nor book
Will he allow, which arrant thieves have had.
Why do I speak? this peevish fellow's mad!

Pimp. I have been brought up in a gentile way,
To drink, to swear, to whore, to dice and play:
I sold my lands, and spent my whole estate,
What should I do, being thus unfortunate?
I am a man that do attend those Lasses
That feed me full; I drink in boules and glasses?
They give me coin, and cloths, with them I find
Such dainty bits as satisfy my mind:
Let shame attend this idiot! let his pen
Be silenced, forced to blot out this again.

SECT. 57. The railing Objections of an impious crew, answered.
YOu brood of darkness, that do hate the light,
And breath out venom, railing, cursing, spite
Against the Author, and his searching Muse,
You shame your selves, you cannot him abuse.
The Bawd that is parboiled, or the Whore that is stewed,
The rotten Pander, and the Pimp that su'd
To have his Muse quite silent, hear the reply;
Your breath's unwholesome, pray come not too nigh:
But you are powdered (that me thinks is well)
To qualify the stink, and 'swage the smell.
I do confess the book was made to fright,
And shame your rabble, that true subjects might
Be warned by your example, hate your crew;
If I be mad, I Am only mad to you.
If I would hide your shame, your humors feed,
Or act such baseness, I were mad indeed.
What gallant's that, that does these lines oppose?
Does he speak plain? or snuffle in the nose?
Or are his sinews lost? or only shrunk?
Or has he been at flats? and being sunk,
Blows fume into his brains? his words may please
Your fretting fancies, but not give you ease.
Is not his face half roasted? is it not rich
With Rubies, Pearls, and Saphires? none of which
Will pass for gold, to satisfy his whore;
Although his face be rich, his purse is poor.
Or does his face seem covered over with tallow?
Or has disease died it into a yellow?
How opens he his jaws? has he his hair?
Or is he mop'd a new with borrowed ware?
I fear it is not safe with him to sup,
Nor is it wholesome e're to taste his cup:
I know the earth does bear such loathsome men,
What their mouth's take in, runs through th'nose again;
Butlet him pass. Except the Bawd does turn,
What e're she wish, I fear she will hang or burn.
The Pander got of late a greater share
For keeping of the door, that he could spare
Money to buy this book, but now it is cast;
Bawd, Pander, Whore have sentence on it past;
Butlet me speak a word, it is but a breath,
If it must die, let it be pressed to death.
What libeller is this the whore would have
Write to disgrace the Author? let me crave
To know what place he lives in? let his name
Be known, that all may blaze abroad his shame.
There are a crew that do cast libels forth
Against the State; to slander men of worth
They bend their frothy wits; but time may make
Them bear their shame, the rest may warning take.
The Pander's vexed, put to your helping hands,
Pay for the book; for as the case now stands,
You must not burn it; you may laugh, it is true,
But's fellows are alive to laugh at you.
Make it your sport, jeere on, you need not say,
'Twill shame an ass, or fright a goose away.
But if you burn it ('twill not clear the score)
It is a sign that you were burned before.
You suit with hell, alas! what need my pen
Compare you to it? I Would turn you back again,
If you would be ruled: but oh! it is in vain;
The hope I have, is to cut short your train.
Your claws I know are sharp, but is it well
That you should go to sharpen them in hell?
Touch not my flesh, it is dame natures frame
That was made up with dust, and to the same
E're long it must return, and so must you,
And every one receive what is just and due.
You prize the bad, all good men you detest,
As devils do, you count the worst the best.
Alas! my wit is low (I must confess)
That little which I have, serves me to guess
What path goes down to death. Though I am poor,
I never spent my means upon a whore.
It was for no ones sake that I did bring
Your vices on the stage, but that the sting
Might show it self to all. Nor is it age;
I am but entered on the middle stage
Of winged time: what God and nature lent
Me for a time, shall not be basely spent.
My mind, my will I labored still to fever
From your cursed snares; Lord! let me do so ever!
As for my name, whether that live or die,
Let me be blessed with thee eternally.
It was my working Genius, and my Muse
That sound your windings; I did never use
To haunt your hideous cells; I never durst
To venture there where all are shamed, some cursed.
If I have lanc'd the fore, brought you to light,
'Twas not experience made me hit so right.
Nor am I void of nature, no; nor been
In Bedlam, nor in prison, but have seen
The misery of others! and I find
My own condition futing to my mind.
As for the bawd, is it excuse, that she
Has been accustomed to her bawdery?
Oh! horrid gains! what ever it brought in
To any one, that drives a trade with sin,
Waits still its turn, to make return in hell;
And keeps exchange, where Devils rage and swell.
She scorns to take advise, she thinks all such
As Heathens honored, (for they did as much)
Will countenance her sin: ill partners do
Bring wrath the sooner, and increase it too;
And let the Pander that did change his place,
See how he is cheated: for he left all grace,
Behind him there; thoug he had suffered, loss
His expectation; and been further crossed,
In loss of time, and money; yet amends
Might have been made: this is a way that tends
To crosle his hopes for ever: he will know,
Except he change his course, 'twill bring him low.
What is (...) but a theife? God, his own soul
He robs (...) once; all goodness he 'll control;
It is his place to steal away men's wealth;
He and the whore, do rob them of their health.
There is no straight to bring a man to sin;
But he that is hatched for hell and will begin,
Makes every lust bear twins: and he must share
The more with grief, drink all the cup of care.
A book shall lie before him, to decide
All scruples, doubts, when e're his cause is tried.
He counts me foolish: so I am: I Will say
No more to him, but leave him to that day.
The Pimp that has been so gentile; and bred
Up at a lofty rate; he being led
Un to his ruin, seems to carry't fair,
Until the jaws of death, and black despair
Do seize upon him; setting still his love
'Pon all that is vile, and blasted from above.
He makes himself unhappy! being poor,
He sels himself, who sold his land before.
Fortune was blind indeed, to make him Pimp,
And steel his face, to attend so base an imp.
Let him drink off his cup, his glass or boule,
Though he grows fat in body, his poor soul
Is starved within him! and he will find withal,
His draughts are like to wormwood mixed with gall,
His money and his clothes, of which he brags,
The One melts away, the other turns to rags.
What are his morsels? can he have them still?
He Will sur fet with them: having once his fill,
He spewes them up again: then he shall sit
At sorrows table, but not eat a bit.
The rot will take the whores, like silly sheep,
Within few years; then he shall drink so deep
In that that is worse than ratsbane, that his trust
Shall die before hand, then drop down he must.
As for the book, 'twould gain no love from me
If it did tend to please such fools as he,
If happy gales blow on it, it may survive
When they are dead, to keep their shame alive.
Nor shall my pen be silent, till this crew
Shall mend, or end, and so adieu, adieu.
SECT. 58. The charge to the Muse, at the entrance into her travels.
GO now, my Muse, (although thou can not sing
Equal with those that charm the wanton spring)
Walk over the golden hiss, the silver vales,
And charm the curled groves to hear thy tales.
And let the cristall brooks, the pearled streams
Stay in their course, to listen to thy theames.
A tree that has no sap, a vale that is grown
Barren with time, orraging floods may frown
Upon thee in thy progress; never care:
Thou have my blessing, how soere thou fare.
Nay, never whine, because thy fathers name
Is not advanced upon the wings of Fame;
Thy worth is never the lesle: though some disdain thee,
Be not dismayed; the rest will entertain thee.
Beware the Critic: for his shallow brain
Drops venom on his tongue: he strives to stain
The best of best end evors; never be
Discouraged, though Memus carp at thee.
Zoilus his checks are vain, though envy have
Against thy coming, dug for thee a grave,
It Is for herself: speak thou the truth, I charge thee;
Though malice chain thee up, time will enlarge thee.
To hatch their own disgrace, this brood do sit:
They gain the Serpents sting, but not his wit.
Me thinks this might suffice! it is my will
That thou should try the world, I Will own thee still.
Though churlish time of the sudden, will not praise thee,
Time may grow gentle, then perhaps't will raise thee.
Thy melancholy sister's gone before:
She was regarded, though she was but poor,
And lamed at going forth: she has endured
A racking torture, she'i ere long be cured.
She is my first borne: that does make her boast:
But thou art better dressed; I love thee most.
Thy portion too is more; much care I took
To make thee fit for service: do not look
To be preferred at home: but yet, if men
Will not receive thee, come to me again.
Thou may in time obtain a place at Court;
Thou will not flatter there: some may make sport
From what is merry in thee: but they will
Soon change their tunes, if they have been as Ill
As those which thou have found; but those that are
Wise, sober, modest, bending still their care
To serve the King of Kings: Oh! call them blessed!
And let them be as patterns to the rest.
Thou need'st not doubt but diverse in the City
Will cloth thee in thy travels: show thee pity
In thy distress: for thou to them shall show
Such things, as one of many never did know.
They Will nurse thee up; and when they press thee out,
They Will spread thy name upon the posts about.
And if with Country gallants thou do choose
To serve awhile, because thou bring'st them news,
They Will bid thee welcome: thou may find some there
Which thou did in thy Night, long search for here.
Salute the Poets kindly, let them find
Thou did not aim at them; 'twas not thy mind
To stain their names: but those who with their wills
Are factors to advance lusts viler ils.
Never look thou for favor or releif
From any Bawd, Pimp, Pander, Whore, or Theif;
They Will hurt thee if they can, but take no care;
The gallows, or the whip will be their share,
When praise is thine: their causes must be tried.
Come, never whimper, law is on thy side.
Thou have a guard of worthies; none shall wrong
Thy innocence, fear nothing, pass along.
When thou do meet with such, who having spent
Their time in sin, yet hell-ward still are bent,
Strike home and spare not; quickly settle to it:
And if they'are vexed, say thou art pre'st to do it.
If any change their minds, their ways, their ends,
Seeing the shame; embrace them and be friends.
I know this is thy aim, (thy mind is easd)
Though thou be angry, thou wilt be quickly pleased.
If thou can keep back any from this vice,
Who else might have been lost; they will raise thy price
Above all expectation: then thy fire
Will shine, as well as warm: look thou no higher.
So, now thou have thy Charge: and we must part:
Farewell dear SMuse! nor does it grieve my heart,
To part upon these terms. I know e're long
Thou Wilt change thy Mourning to a pleasant song.
Let all that hear, or see thee passing by,
Wish thee all good success! and so wish I.
FINIS.
To his worthy friend, the Author of the Nights Search.
WHen I had found thy drift, in this thy Night,
Which is to bring such vassals to the light
As undermine the world; how by thy pen
The living dye, the dead to live again;
Thy various Searching; and thy lofty strains,
Thy quaint expressions; how thy knowing brains
Set out their sins: thy witty useful parts,
Thy honest end; how thou do cast thy darts,
That Hell Hounds fall before thee: how the times
May see and hate the vileness of those crimes
That are unmasked by thee; thy Muse went in,
Yet thou did never know that cursed sin.
Complaints and grief are kept alive so rare
That I am forced to weep and bear a share.
I thought to praise thee, but again thought I
'T will but disgrace thy worth and industry.
But with this reason did my thoughts agree,
'T will be my honor if I write of thee!
'T will be my pride if these low lines of mine
May be thought worthy to be bound with thine.
Though I come late, let me this favor find,
That I may wait upon thy Muse behind.
Thou have not robbed the dead, nor do thou strive
To scrape a line from any man alive.
Invention's rich in thee; for I find still
Thy Genius is too nimble for thy quill.
Thou do not rub thy brains a day or two
To hatch a fancy, as some others do:
Nor blot out often, what thou once do write:
It Is worth the trusting what thou do indite.
I would have read thy searching Muse throughout,
Had it been mean: but to resolve the doubt,
It Is worthy to be studied: every page
May teach a lesson to this puny age.
So much I found as pleased me; for the rest,
I Will read and study it, when once'tis pressed.
Thy praise will live, though pride and envy burst,
And all the infernal troop that are accursed,
Spit fire at thee: wisemen all know well
They envy thee because thou do excel.
Tho: Philips.

To the Author on his exact description of the Night-walkers of our time.
I Lately walked your round, took full survey
Of all, (all being worth notice) in my way:
Observed the order of your scouts, how fast
The silly dotrels to their ruin haste,
How the delinquents met your lash, and how
Those that escaped, had in conceit enough
Sense of your scourge: which being so severe,
Made them less wicked, not for love, but fear.
Thus English Juvenal, thy whip does good,
Not gently laying on, but fetching blood.
For our depraved times, and manners too,
Wanted too long a Censor like to you.
Which can with your mere frowns make all men shun
At once the sin, and the temptation:
But how the Roysters of the time will rage,
When they shall see th'abuses of our age
Reformed! and they for their supply, must be
Enforced to travel France and Italy,
To find their overthrow; when all they gain,
Is but a sad experience of their pain.
Me thinks I see the mincing Dames approve
Thy quaint description of their wicked love:
And with unusual tears repent those times,
That wronged their husbands by their shameful crimes.
The sharking Pander will deplore the state
Of his lewd conversation; and will hate
His servile drudgerie; and wish he were
Again some Serving-man, to quasse and swear;
Or what ills else to act, which might obtain
His Mistress favor, or his Masters gain:
To wait upon some chambermaid, which he
Knows well his Master keeps at liverie,
Which may ingratiate to his willing ear
His service, and for that esteem him dear.
Sometimes he might content his Mistress too,
And for her sake, more than his Master do.
And this were better far, and lesser ill,
Than to be slave unto a Wantons will:
And after all, to be reproached for it thus,
For serving an incarnat Incubus.
The rampant Doxie now the twilight fears,
Nor (as her usual wont) abroad appears:
The plodding Cheat's reclaimed, and rather will
Work hard all year, than one week at the Mill.
Thus in the worst of times, it is to be thought,
Thou have a general reformation wrought.
And yet, if there be any dare persist
In their lewd courses, like the Sensualist;
They, even they, thy fancies will admire,
And praise the tartness of thy fiercer ire.
For if that any of their Order be,
By thy advice, fallen from the liverie,
Though they themselves do their lewd ways retain,
Yet with their praise will they applaud thy pain.
And as the Usurer did the Preacher fee,
That none at length might use that trade but he,
So will these Hackney Strumpets with their crew,
All that they can, strive now to honor you.
How can this work of thine then choose but sell,
When they, against whom it is writ, say, it is done well?
What now shall I commend in thee? let all
Who view this copy, praise the original.
'Twould be absurd, thy wit, or Art to praise,
Or with our garlands to adorn thy Bays:
Let thine ownelines (and not some others) be
The perspective, by which we may ken thee.
And surely 'twere but labor lost, to write
(What thine own works make publish to the sight)
Thy merits and thy praise, let the world then
Believe Fames trumpet is become thy pen.
But yet behind thy back I dare be bold,
Some secret truths concerning thee, unfold:
And to acquaint the world, there is in thee
The choyser seeds of honored poesy:
Cleantbes-like, each day thou do apply
Thy self unto thy task with industry;
And when the night draws near, thy waking mind
Does something (worthy of our wonder) find
Whereon to contemplate; how many now
Dream their whole time away, and nothing do
They dare record; yet at those hours, when sleep
The most part of the world in rest does keep,
Thou art not idle; but have done far more
By night, than many all their days before.
Heaven gave thy soul wings, that she still might be
Soaring aloft unto her Hierarchy:
Not that with them thou should thy pillow stuff,
And so give nature more than what is enough.
Thou have withdrawn times curtairs, and have shown
Those hidden truths, which he may blush to own.
O how in every page might learned men
Descrie the rare conceits flow from thy pen!
I have perused it thoroughly, and confess
I were quite stupid, should I wonder less.
Go onwards, worthy Sir, and as it is fit,
Make all the world to wonder at your wit.
That as you have this piece composed, to please
Your self, let others it enjoy, which ease
And idle hours have fostered: that it may
Remain your monument at your dying day.
Haec quorsum premis? ut percant quis talia condit?
Edere si non vis omnibus, ede tibi.
C. G. Interioris Templi,


