

THE HISTORY OF THE WARS BETVVEENE THE TVRKES AND THE PERSIANS.

Written in Italian by Iohn-Thomas Minadoi, and translated into English by
ABRAHAM HARTVVELL.

Containing the description of all such matters, as pertain to the Religion,
to the Forces to the Government, and to the Countries of the kingdom of the
Persians.

Together with the Argument of every Book, and a new Geographicall Map of
all those Territories.

A Table containing a declaration as well of diverse new and Barbarous Names and
Terms used in this History, as also how they were called in ancient times.

And last of all, a Letter of the Authors, wherein is discoursed, what City
it was in the old time, which is now called Tauris, and is so often mentioned
in this History.



Imprinted at London by John Wolf 1595.

Faults escaped in the printing.
Folio Line Read 16 13 make his coming 76 24 to pay his Capigi and
Ianissaries withal for lxxxv. Maidini 97 28 Mustaffa with all his troops, 133
24 governor of Nassiuan, 147 7 ran all headlong and as it were 167 14
confirmed in Aleppo by the 207 21 brought into Teflis with so great quiet 217 6
toward Heri, 233 20 Cicala Bassa, 239 27 that all the Chans 30 being with all
31 accompanied by all his said Army. 303 31 far to pleasure him, 327 18 dant
and fertile:

To the most Gracious and Reverend Father in God, JOHN by the providence of
God, Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, Primate and Metropolitan of all England,
and one of the Lords of her Majesty's most honorable Privy Council.
MOst Reverend and my singular good Lord, May it please your Grace with
honorable favor to accept of this paper-Present, which by starts I have drawn
out of Italian into English. Sundry reasons there were that at the first, about
three years ago, moved me to begin the translation thereof, but because they
are such as concern matter of estate, where withal I list not to meddle for
fear of burning my fingers, I thought it good rather to conceal them, then in
printe to publish them. The only occasion, that caused me after so long time
having laid it aside, to take it up again and finish the same, was the grave
judgment of Sr. Moile Finche a right worshipful knight in Kent, who this last
Summer being with you at your Manner of Beakesbourne, upon speech then had
about the great preparations of the Turk against Christendom, and the huge
victories that he had achieved upon his enemies that sought to weaken him, did
very highly commend this book, and the Author thereof: whose eloquence
although my english pen cannot possibly reach and express, yet is it truly
and faithfully done in as plain and significant Terms as I could: whereuntoo
I was once minded to have added certain aduertisementes and collections, as
well out of the old ancient writers both sacred and profane, that have
written of the most stately and magnificent Empire of the Medes and Persians in
times past, as also out of Leunclaius and others, that have lately written of
the modern and present estate thereof, which has scarce a shadow of the
antique government, wherewith it was then ruled and governed. But that matter
grew to be so long, that I gave over my purpose therein, least the volume
should have waxen too great. I was also minded to have inserted into this
Treatise, a certain Prophecy touching the Catastrophe of the Turkish kingdom,
which Antonius Torquatus of Ferrara did deliver to Matthias king of Hungary in
the year of our Lord 1480. De Regnorum Europae Mutationibus. But because he
does peremptorily set down, that the Turks shall fall into the hands of the
Christians about the years 1594. and 1595. and that the house of the Ottomans
shall utterly decay in their thirteenth or fourteenth king, and that it shall
not exceed that number, nor pass the year of our Lord 1596: He shall pardon
me, if I do not believe him, nor commend his credit to future posterity. For
(with great grief it must be uttered) we see all things go so quite
contrary to this prognosticon, and the power of the Turks grow so huge and
infinite; and their enemies so divided and weakened, that unless God come
down as it were out of an Engine, to protect the Gospel of his Son Jesus
Christ, and the Professors thereof, I fear greatly that the half Moon which
now rules and reigns almost over all the East, will grow to the full, and
breed such an Inundation as will utterly drown al Christendom in the West.
God for his mercies sake rebate her Horns with the glorious shine of his
brightest Son. The hours, that I have employed in writing this translation,
were stolen from your Graces grauer businesses whereon I should have attended:
And therefore no man can by any right challenge the same from you, nor I in
duty offer it to any other but to your Grace, whose wholly I am and must be,
and of whom I may truly and justly say as Oedipus says in Sophocles. (...).

The Lord God long maintain your Grace in all honor and health under the most
blessed government of our most happy and renowned Queen ELIZABETH, for the
continuance of the peace of this Church of England, and comfort of all those
that are bound to honor and love you. At Lambehith, this New-yeares-day 1595.

Your Graces most humble Servant at commandment, Abraham Hartwell.

The Authors Epistle to the Reader.
ALthough Strabo do write, that the writings touching matters of Persia, had
always but small credit even until his time: and therefore it may seem
likely, that I, who have taken upon me to write such things as have happened
in those cu^^ries within the space of nine years, ought greatly to fear lest
these my writings should have the very same success, that they had: yet I
have thought it necessary to advertise the reader, that for that respect I did
not surcease, or refuse to publish this my history, (though indeed for diverse
other wantes and defectes it may seem peradventure not so worthy to appear
before the learned persons of this present age:) But rather, even for the self
same cause, it may rest assured, that without manifest wrong and injury it
cannot be despised or discredited. For if those former Historiographers (if
algates they were ever worthy of that name) have deserved, that little credit
should be yielded unto them: this default was imputed unto them not for any
despite or reproach, but in justice and in reason: because (as Strabo himself
says) they loving more to delight then to profit, inserted many fictions and
many fables in the truth and purity of the History. And so the things that
happened in deed, being mingled and confused with such as were cogged and
fained, they that read them, could not be so truly informed of those adventures
and actions, as they desired, and peradventure as they had great need at that
time to be instructed in. But I have written this history, with a full and
sound resolution, never to decline from the truth, and not to suffer, that upon
any occasion whatsoever, any thing should be discoursed therein, but that
which either I my self have seen, or possibly could understand to be true.
Wherein, although I have found many difficulties and used great labors,
(as well through the ignorance of the people, who being not able to tell me any
other name of the Cittyes, of the cuntries, of the fields, of the Rivers, and
of the hills, but only the barbarous names of them, they made the certain
knowledge of those places, wherein these battles were foughten, to be very
difficult unto me: As also because it was very requisite, that I should have an
eye to the sever all qualities of diverse nations, who are sometimes given to
lying, and by whom many things are wont to be spoken, and many things
concealed, for their own particular respects.) Notwithstanding I have
endeavored by all the best means I possibly could, to discharge my duty
therein, ouercomming these and such other difficulties, with continual
conference among diverse men in diverse places, to the end I might find them
agree together in their reports, and expecting withal, that Time it self
would at last bring forth the truth. Neither did I ever content my self with
the first or second advertisement delivered unto me, but always justified the
first with the last, by conferring together the testimonies of both sides. And
lastly, without regard of danger, of expenses, or of labor, I have informed my
self of every particularity, that possibly I could, by such men, as were
esteemed no liers, but men of great authority, who were present for the most
part at al these actions. Which purpose and resolution of mine, was greatly
favored and assisted by three private and extraordinary means. First, by the
credit and authority of Theodoro Balbj, and Giouanni Michele, being then the
right honorable Consulles in Soria for the Venetian Senate, two most noble,
prudent, and valorouse subjects of the State of Venice: who most magnificently
without sparing of any costs did favor me herein, and in all my other
studies, where, unto I applied my self in those countries. Secondly by the
familiar conversation which I had with one Christoforo de Buonj, chief
Interpreter to the said most honorable Lords, a person of great valor, well
frended and beloved among those nations, and above all, of singular faith and
dexterity. Thirdly, by my knowledge in Physic, which I was not squemish to
practice among those people, to the end I might the better, and without
ministering any suspicion to any man, enter into their most secret and important
aduertisementes: and so by this means to purchase familiarity in the
principal howses of those Cities, wherein for the space of almost seven whole
years together, I lived and was entertained. And of thus much it shall be even
sufficient to have advertised the readers, who without any other Apology or
justification of mine, mayrest contented and satisfied with my desire, which
has been to represent unto the world Accidents, that have happened so far
off, so strange, and so important, that thereby they may reap great profit
both in peace and war. Which satisfaction if I shall obtain of their
gratitude, I shall think my self to have gained enough, in lieu of all the
trauelles, of all the dangers, and of all the expenses, that I have sustained,
and I shall rest assured that I have not been an unfruitful labourer herein.

The First Book.
The Argument.
The causes that moved the Author to write this History.

The Original of this war.

The causes of the same war.

Aidere beheaded.

Ismahel the king uses great cruelties, publishes a new Religion, and
spreads ab^^ad a speech that he would pass into Babylonia.

Amurath resolves to move war against Persia.

Periaconcona beheaded.

New stirs in Persia, whereof Vctres Bassa aduerti seth Amurath: who thereby is
confirm in his opinion to make this war.

Consultations at Constantinople, of the manner how to manage this war.

Amurath will not in person go with the Army: but choseth Mustaffa Bassa to be
his General: who passes to Chalcedon, and from thence to Erzirum, where he
mustereth and surueigheth his Army, and then departs for Siruan.

Mustaffa a truth at Char^^ goes under the Mountains of Chi^lder, and there
encampeth himself artificially.

The King of Persia sends Soldiers against the Turks: and over them he
makes (...) the Sultan his General.

Tocomac comes toward Chars; he finds out his Spies, and being deceived by
his Spies, he does confidently assault the Turks.

At the first, Tocomac does happily overcome the Turks, but afterward he was
discomfited, and saved himself by the opportunity of the night.

The particular of the Victory.

Manucchiar the Georgian yields himself to Mustaffa, and is interteined by
him.

The wars between the Turks and Persians.
I Write the sundry successes of the war between Amurat king of Turkey, and
Mahamet by surname caled Codabanda king of Persia, both of them among the
Barbarians being most mighty and most warlike Princes. A war not only long
and bloody, but also very commodious and of great opportunity to the Christian
Commonwealth: for that it has granted The war in Persia commodious for the
state of Christendom.
leisure to the Champions of Christ to refresh and increase their forces, being
now much weakened by wars both Foreign and Civil. A matter in truth rather
divine then humane, there being now newly arisen among the Turks, fresh hopes
of victories, by means whereof (contrary to the custom of such contentions)
the wrath of these two Princes was drawn in length, which if they had been
converted against Europe, might have made our state most troublesome and
turbulent. These successes and all the rest, that together with the like
motions have come to pass, sometimes intermingling among them the privy
treacheries of the Tartarians, sometimes the oppressions of the people of
Drusia, and sometimes also the insolences of the Arabians, I here take in hand
to describe, being thereunto moved, principally upon two occasions. The one is,
for that they all seem to me of themselves very worthy to be known both of
the men that live at this The causes that move the author to write this
history.
day, and also of those that shall come after us: neither have I as yet seen
any man that has made any full or true report thereof Which notwithstanding I
hope shall be herein performed by my myself who have been entertained almost
seven whole years (during the said wars) partly in Soria, partly in
Constantinople, and by occasion of my practice in Physic, have been
familiarly conversant with many Bassaes, Ambassadors, and other great men,
as well Persians as Turks, that have been agentes and dealers in these
affairs. The other is, for that I do verily persuade my self, that I shall
breed great profit and delight to all nations Christian by the reading of
this history, wherein they shall understand how mighty the forces are of these
two enemies of the name of Christ; and in what terms they stand even at this
day: by means of which knowledge it may peradventure fall out, that our
Christian Princes will be encouraged to take up arms against the Barbarians,
under whose government so many famous and potent nations are already reduced.
A loss (to say the truth) very great, and not to be thought-of without
shedding of tears, that whereas a people so renowned for their Nobility, and
glorious in all ages for wisdom and science, did in times past govern so
many nations, as though they were Lords of the whole world: Now being either
driven from their proper Colonies, from their own houses, from their
domestical confines, they go wandering up and down poor, and needy of other
men's help: Orels being brought into a most vile kind of servitude, some serve
as sclaues, and some yield obedience to the enemies of Christ in such sort,
that even in Greece it self, the very name of Greece is quite extinguished,
and al because it was departed from the bosom of the Catholic Church. But let
not this my history take his beginning at these quarrels and complaints, which
peradventure to some men's humors would seem the more unpleasant, in that they
would prove more necessary to be set down in this respect: And therefore my
conceit is rather, that in mentioning such things as are nearer to our
remembrance, I should begin at the death of old Tamas the most famous king
of Persia, and withal discourse upon the state and condition of that kingdom
whilst it remained in the successors of the said Tamas, videlicet Ismahel and
Mahamet, his sons: for that by this very brief narration, every man shall
manifestly see the true occasions of this war, and so we shall avoid the
inserting of any superfluous replication in the contexture of this our history.

I say then, that Tamas after the wars, which he valorously waged with
Soliman the first of that name, and the eleventh Emperor of the Turks, at
such time as the said Tamas did drive Soliman out of Tauris (being of old
called Ecbathana, the very same, wherein Herodotus writes, that the kings
richesses and treasures were then kept, and not Terua as P. Giouius would have
it) a City which the same Turkish Emperor had sacked, and having concluded a
peace, wherein it was agreed that the Castle Cheiseri, by A peace between
Tamas and Soliman, and the conditions thereof.
the Turks called Chars, and by Ptolomee (as a man may resonably conjecture)
Corso, being in this great change reduced by Soliman, into a fort, should be
razed: he withdrew himself to the government of his own kingdom. Under whom
the Persian Empire flourished in sacred and redoubted laws, the people
demeaned themselves after the best manner they could, abundance of collections
came plentifully in, the Rentes of his chambers increased wonderfully, Arms,
Arts and Sciences did happily prosper, and were highly esteemed: neither was
there any more fear that Soliman would renew the wars, as one that had
altogether bent his thoughts another way. When as after a few years, wherein
both Soliman and his son Selim, which after him had enjoyed that damned
Soliman and Selim dead.

Tamas dies.

Tamas leaves eleven children.


foelicity of his Empire, departed out of this life, Tamas also himself died in
the year 1576, the xj. day of May, having left behind him eleven children, one
called Mahamet the eldest, who passed his life a while in Heri, (in times past
called Aria,) and afterward in Siras, (of old called Persepolis) by the
appointment of his father, being now waxen proud for his issue of many sons.
Another named Ismahel his second son, who for the fierceness of his courage
was banished into a Castle, called by the Persians Cahaca, situate between
Casbin (otherwise called Arsacia) and Tauris. The third, who had to name
Aidere, was kept in the custody of Zalchan, Piry Mahamet, Acta Hussain, and
other of his kinsfolks, by occasion of the mother of the said Aidere, all
being chief Capitaines in the coast of Istigelu. Other eight children there
were partly by the same mother partly by other women, whose names were Mamut,
Solimano, Mustaffa, Emanguli, Alichan, Amet, Abrahin, and Ismahel the younger.

This Tamas, before he dyed, did solemnly appoint by his will, that his son
Ismahel the elder should be set Tamas his last will.
in the kingdom: who although, because he was younger then Mahamet, could not
be his lawful successor, yet did he yield great hope of his most excellent
wit, and singular virtues: insomuch that he seemed to promise every man an
happy government, and sufficient ability to defend himself against his
enemies, were they never so fierce and warlike. Ismahel, after that he was
confined by his father Tamas into the eastel of Cahaca, had ever sought to show
himself superior to his brother in the Art milirarie: and although he gave
himself by secret industry to learn the precepts of the Turkish law (a
thing which if it had been publicly known, would alone have been enough to
have barred him from succession of the kingdom:) yet had he always endeavored
himself to be The simulation of Ismahel.
an open enemy to the Turks, and thereupon with his often invasions (which was
the cause of his imprisonment) whiles the peace held between Tamas and
Soliman, he was so bold as now and then, contrary to his fathers commandment
to assault the Territory of Erzirum and beyond all honesty to spoil the
towns and castelles of that region withhis sudden incursions. By means
whereof he made show of his great valor to all people, but principally to his
father Tamas, who although in outward show he seemed greatly to mislike those
his youthful heates, yet was he daily confirmed in the opinion, that he carried
of him, to name him his successor, thinking verily that of so great a dignity
he would prove himself either altogether, or at lest more worthy then his
brother Mahamet. Which Mahamet (to speak the truth) as well for the disease Why
Mahamet was called by surname Codabanda.
of his eyes, whereby for his surname he was called Codabanda, as also for the
manner of his life altogether given to that ease, which is proper to such as
are studious and quietly minded, never showed himself sufficient to sway the
burden of the Empire,, and to bridle the fierceness of his enemies: yea and he
protested himself that he Mahamet lo ueth not the charge of a king.
did utterly abhor so great a weight, and those so many cares, as are wont to
follow so ample and so many-partied a kingdom. And yet for all that did not
Mahamet remain altogether depryued of all the whole favor of his father:
for so much as Abas Mirize, the middlemost Abas Mirize Mahamets son, in Her
of his sons, was confirmed in the City of Heri, (where he was before
borne,) and honored with the title of the Vizier of that remote and abundant
Cuntry: yea and Tamas himself had established Emir Hamze, the eldest of Emir
Hamze Mahamets son.
Mahamets sons, in some great dignity, if death, though some what tardee,
yet not altogether unlooked for, had not by preventing him, bereaved him of his
life, and taken from them all hope of greater matters.

King Tamas then being thus dead, the said Ismahel was called by the Sultans,
for the execution of his fathers will, Ismahel called to Casbin to be crowned
king of Persia.
to Casbin, that he might (as he ought) be saluted and proclaimed king. But
while the Posts (whom the Turks call Volacchi) ran with these great aduerty
sementes to Ismahel, there arose a stir within the City of Casbin, or rather
within the palace of the king, where remained at Stirs in Casbin.
that time Periaconcona, a woman in years elder then all those her brethren,
the sons of Tamas, who was niece to Sahamal the Georgian on her mothers side,
being sister to Sahamal, Periaconcona, sister to Mahamet, Aidere and Ismahel,
yet elder in years then they.
and wife to the said Tamas, of whom also was borne the young Mustaffa, being
one of the eight sons above named. She having the care committed to her, and
other Sultan Councellers of estate, to see the last will and testament of the
dead king put in execution, was by sundry devises dyuersly attempted, that the
place might not be preserved for Ismahel, but unlawfully yielded to Aidere: who
whiles Tamas was sorest aflicted with his sickness, boldly The singular
boldness of Aidere.
entering into the chamber, where he lay, had adorned his forehead with his
fathers Crown, and in the sight of his old and weak parent, with an action
more rash then became his honesty, showed himself desirous of this ambitiouse
succession. And besides this error, (for the which he was presently and
sharply rebuked) after the death of Tamas, he with drew himself to his
sister, most instantly beseeching so desired a dignity at her hands: with
whom, as also with the rest of the Counselors of estate he had used so many
prayers and favors, that the enheritaunce Aidere procures to be made king be
fore Ismahel.
could not be any longer kept from him, but by the help of some secret deceit.
His sister durst not be so bold, as to move any important mittigatio^ of these
matters before the Counselors, neither would her heart suffer her to set
forward any action, that might be prejudicial to her brother Aidere: neither
could she tell how to permit so great an injury to be done to Ismahel, who was
chosen by his father into the succession. And therefore in this perplexity she
sought means to satisfy the ambitiouse The subtilty o Periaconcona to
entertayne Aidere.
youth being present, the right and reasons of Ismahel being absent, the honor
of her dead fathers will and testament, and the proffit of the kingdom. For
having consulted with all the Sultans, she resolved to yield, that Aidere,
being invested in his regal apparel, and settled in the great gallerie, should
attend the acclamation of the people, and be publicly installed, as though he
were elected king. And even thus did this unwise and bold youth suffer
himself to be led by the blind desires of gluttonous glory: who being set in
his majesty persuaded himself, that he should now see his friends and foes
obedient unto Aidere stalled king in Casbin.
him, and himself reverenced of all men, as king of the Empire. But to these
designementes so hasty and so prosperous, the successes that sprung from the
subtilty of those Counselors, and his dissembling Sister, were nothing
conformable: for that by their advise she took order, for the gates of the
Palace to be presently locked, leaving at every passage asure guarde, and
permitting that one narrow wicket only should remain open, and safely warded
with a company of most faithful and valorouse Captains, wholly devoted to
Tamas and Ismahel, who had strait charge also given them to suffer every man to
enter in, saving only the followers and keepers of Aidere. In this sort did
she think to entertain the young man, until such time as the nominated king
should arrive from Cahaca, and so put in execution what he thought best, for
the honor of himself, for the custodye of the kingdom, which fell to him by
inheritance, and for the general quiet of all Persia.

Thus then sat the young man Aidere, replenished with unwonted joys,
receiving honor from all the people of Casbin, saving only from his friends
and keepers. By means whereof, perceauing now the prohibition of them, and the
great stir of Zalchan his chiefest favorite, (who discovering the prepensed
deceit, and crying upon king Aidere, threatened the lady, the Sultans, and all
the rest that waited upon this fained succession, which was indeed ordained but
for a scorn and despite of him) he acknowledged this public derision, and
secretly together with all his misfortune, he abandoned his fresh-begun honors,
and of a king (as he presumed to be) he had the grace to Aidere acknoledging
his public derision, ssieth all fearful among certain women.
make himself a fugitive, and being become all fearful and sorrowful, with
all the force he could he withdrew himself closely among certain women of the
palace, hoping so to find some way to escape with his life.

In the mean time so greatly increased the cries and threatenings of the
friendly company of Istigelu (and now all of them had prepared themselves for
some dangerous and pernicious attempt against Persia) that the counselors,
with consent of the lady were enforced to take order, that to bereave these
tumultuous and seditious people of all their hope and courage, Aidere should be
deprived of his life. And so Sahamal the Georgian uncle to the young man, after
long search made for him, at last found him hidden among the weomen, and
without any stay, taking his head by the locks, cut it quite from his carcass:
Aidere beheadded by Sahamal his uncle.
and in the place, where Zalchan with the rest of unfortunate Aidere his
favorites stood crying and threatening, among the greatest medley and thickest
press of the proud conspirators, he flong the head all blouddy, and as it
were breathing for heat, crying out unto them, Behold there The head of
Aidere thrown among the conspirators.
your king, enjoy him at your pleasure. At this sudden and horrible spectacle
every man burned in rage and anger: neither did there want for the present time
many a rash head, that meditated most cruel reueng, and turbulent stirs: Yet
in the end when they perceived that the near succession of Ismahel was
inevitable, and the death of Aidere (that followed) irreuocable, every one
betook himself to his own private affairs, and at last divided themselves
one from another, and severally departing from the palace, some saved
themselves here, and some there, leauinge those courts and lodginges all in
quiet.

In the mean time was Tamas buried acording to their profane rites, and
Ismahel the successor arrived from Cahaca, who without any stir at all was
embraced by his sister, saluted by the Sultans, and reverenced of all men, as
the lawful heir of so great an Empire. But he, as soon as he began to sway
the regal scepter, and saw himself superior to all men in liberty and
authority, without any pity at all (swaruing therein from the Persian custom,
and imitating the Turkish manner) caused the heads of all his eight younger
breethren to be cut off, and with all used such f^nder diligence, that not
only all those which were near unto them in blood or affinity were bereaved
of their lives, but also all the favorites of the late slain Aidere, were
unhappily destroyed in that public slaughter, so that the streets of Casbin
were defiled Ismahel puts to death many kinsfolks and friends of his dead
brother Aidere.
with blood, and all the City resounded with mourninges and complaints. Which
unexpected cruelty, being altogether unworthy of so worthy-a-thought king, did
in such sort increase that opinion of great successes, which all the Persians
had conceived of the person of Ismahel, that there was not a man to be found,
which changed not his former hopes into new fears, and bitterly sorrowing for
the calling of such a Lord to rule over them, did not hate Every man bewaileth
the cruelty of the new king Ismahel.
this new fiercenes of his mind, and bewail so untimely and miserable a
massacre. But much greater and far more lamentable did these miseries grow,
as soon as certain speeches were published and spread of the king, That he
would change the religion, (if we may so call it:) and as soon as he commanded
openly, that whosoever desired to live under his standard, and loved to obey
his laws, should Ismahel publishes a new superstition.
detest the superstitious worships of Aly, the foolish and false prophet of the
Persians, and according to the impious custom of the Ottomans, observe and
mayntaine the impure and wicked rytes of Abubac, Osman, and others, that were
reverenced and honored by the Turks with a profane worship. So that by this
great nouelty, quite contrary to the late public and famous acts of Ismahel,
and altogether repugnant to their hope, whereby they expected glorious matters
from him, to the general benefit of Persia, the minds of all men were so
afflicted, that the country never felt greater trouble, nor ever endured a New
public griefs and new deaths happening by occasion of Ismahel.
more dangerous and uncouth a change: by means whereof, and by force of this
public Edict of the new king, (whether he did it because he was in love with
this wicked worship, and had learned this abomination rather then any other, as
we said before: or whether he did it to revoke his neighbors the
Mesopotamians, the Babilonians, and Assyrians, under his banners:) many of his
profane priests, many of the Governors of his friendly and subject Cities,
being too much inflamed with the former superstition, were driven into exile,
many put in prison, some had their eyes plucked out, (among whom was the
Califfe of Casbin) and not a few others in sundry sorts deprived The Califfe
of Casbin depryued of his eyes by the commandment of Ismahel.
of their lives: yea many Ladies, joined in blood with Ismahel himself, and
diverse others of his kinsfolks, to whom neither sex, nor age, nor innocence
could be a sufficient defense, did endure sundry torments and strange
calamities.

In this so great an innovation, and among these tumultes, there went abroad
with all, an universal rumor, not only among the Cities of Persia, but in
the regions of the Turks also, (Fame the publisher of evil, rather then of
good newer, arriving even to the City of Constantinople) that with all these
disorders, Ismahel sought to put in order A rumor spread that Ismahel would
pass to Babylon with an army.
a great number of such soldiers, as favored this new proclaimed vanity, and
passing with them to the city of Babylon, now called Bagdat, there, to the
imitation of Soliman, would receive the Crown of the Empire at the hand of
him, that (who soever he was) he should find to be the successor of their great
Califfe, and in the cheifest place among their unclean priests. In this
diverse variety of matters, and in so great nouelty of euentes, beyond all
common expectation, whiles there increased rather fears of new motions, then
ensued hopes of ancient quietness, by the help of the aforenamed Lady
Periaconcona, (who as the kings greatest favorite suruiued all the rest) he
was suddenly bereaved of his life: whether it were that this his death
happened by occasion of certain amorous practices of Ismahel himself, or
whether his sister had cuningly conueighed poison into some electuary prepared
for him: or (as some more probably do King Ismahel suddenly perished, and the
manner of his death.
affirm) that his said sister having privately conspyred with Calil-chan,
Emir-chan, Piry Mahamet, Curchi Bassi, being al at that time captains of great
account, and as it were Presidentes of the kingdom, had brought them in,
apparelled in women's weeds and gowns, and that they strangled him, at such
time as Ismahel had privately withdrawn himself among his paramoures.
Howsoever it was, sufficient it is, that by the help of the said
Periaconcona, the 24. day of November being S. Katherins even, in the year of
our salvation 1577. this king, being generally termed by his people a
seditious man and a contemner of the law, was suddenly taken out of this
world, to the exceeding joy of all those Nations, that by his death thought
they should remain freede from great and manifold troubles.

Ismahel being thus dead, the Lady began presently to Periaconcona parleeth
with the captains of Persia.
parlee with all those Sultans, that were the ministers of this fraudulent
death, and told them, that as they had given advise, for the greater benefit of
all Persia, that Ismahel should be depryued both of his kingdom and life: and
that as yet it was not known, who should worthily succeed in that Crown,
which now remained in their hands, forasmuch as the king, that dead is, has
left no issue behind him: so it touched them very near to take upon them the
protection thereof, and preserving the majesty of the Scepter, the liberties
of the people, and the peace of the subject Cities, strongly to defend and
deeply to settle the safety of that nation, which only possesses the true
orders of the elect disciples of crafty and wicked Mahamet. There were at that
time many governors and Capitaines assembled in Casbin: and every one of them
had withdrawn himself thither, for the accomplishment of his own private
designementes, these gaping after the mutations of the world. Emir-Chan he
burned in ambitious desires, and hoped by the means of a match, to be
concluded with a sister of Periaconcona, (who was already greatly inclyning to
him) that he should be exalted to the sovereign degree of all Persia. Mirize
Salinas, chief among the Sultans, of that court, he hoped on the other side to
advance into the estate, either Mahamet brother to the dead king, or else Hamze
the eldest son of the said Mahamet Codabanda: and by bestowing upon him his
daughter to be his wife, (as afterward he did) so to increase the glory of
his house. Others there were that hoped they should be able to draw Abas out of
Heri, and to create him king of the Empire. There was also one of the Tutors of
the infant Tamas, who waited likewise for some opportunity to settle Tamas in
the kingdom, and so by means of his greatness to exalt himself to the
sovereign Title of chief captain among his fellows. Neither did there want
a number of others, that secretly watched to usurp any occasion that might be
presented unto them. How be it in this so great variety of thoughts, The
answer of the Captains to Periaconcona,
the Sultans answered the Lady with one consent, and promised her in most
liberal terms all the protection, that their forces could afforde, or their
wepons procure: and yet did every one of them both in action and word clerkly
dissemble their several imaginations where unto they myrid was as prove and
deady, as their heart was cunning to conceal them closely. And in this sort
were ended those great noueltyes which arose (I know not upon what occasion)
and were brought in by this ambitious king.

In the mean space, which was one year seven months and six days of king
Ismahels reign, Amurat the new successor also of his father Selim, who was now
wakened at the death of old renowned Tamas, and at the rumor spread abroad of
the desire which Ismahel had to pass to Babylon, and at the fresh report of
this new published superstition, and had thoroughly learned of all sides, what
harm this late inconstant and variable king had wrought in Persia, what
dissentions he had raised, and how hardly all the Provinces of the Persian
Empire had endured those strange calamities, and so hoped in himself either in
Ismahels life time, or after his death to succeed him, for that heareby
occasion might be ministered unto him to take up Amurat at the stirs in
Persia, enters into mind to make war upon them.
arms against Persia, and matter suggested to put in execution his
unmeasurable desires of some new conquestes: which desires had always made
both him and other his predecessors not only suspected, but also terrible and
fearful as well to his friends as to his enemies: for as much as there is an
ancient custom, which is grown as it were to be a law among the Ottoman
kings, that those Emperors cannot challenge their due honors in their life
time, nor An ancient custom of the Turks.
their proud monuments after their death, (which are so durable, as at this day
they remain equal with Aeternitie,) unless they attempt some great and
ambitious actions and enterpryses, and unless they perform some exployte,
that may be conformable to their majesty. Amurat Amurat intentive to the
matters of Persia.
therefore bending all his cogitations to these great stirs, would not direct
his mind any other way, or move war against any other nation, until he might
first see what issue these marvelous innouations would bring forth which in
the succession that followed, and namely in the person of Mahamet now king,
simed to be more pregnant and perseuerant, then ever they were before, and
ministered to Amurat new occasions of victorious and strange hopes, for that
as soon as Ismahel departed out of this life, by the aforenamed Mirize Salmas,
(being in dignity the chief man among the Sultans, though in blood and
nobility inferior to them all) after many letters dispatched too and fro,
Mahamet Codabanda was at last assured, how with all quietness of mind and
security of person he might come and take possession of the kingdom. He was
also certyfied by the same Salmas of the whole conspiracy plotted against his
Brother to put him to death, and likewise made acquainted how the fraudulent
lady with the Sultans had capitally consulted against him, and how she
favoring Emir-chan and Abas Mirize of Heart, her nephew and his son, more then
became her, did little regard the due and rightful succession of him being her
brother. And for these causes did Mahamet greatly bear himself bold of the
faith and diligence of Mirize Salmas: and had withal no small desire to see
his eldest son Hamze Mirize, advanced to some such sovereign dignity, as he
saw was due to the lively hope, that every man perceived to bein him, in
regard of his virtue and prudence, for managing the common wealth, and
dispatch of matters of war: wherein also he showed himself to his father
very jealous and suspicious, least some other man should usurp upon him that
honor and authority which so properly appertayned unto him. And thereupon did
Mahamet in the end resolve with himself, not to leave the kingdom in the
hands of private persons, not in the lightness of an inconstat woman, who by
the occurrents sent him from his counselor, was detected to be an vnshamefaced
queen, and are bellious conspirator against her own blood, where with she had
now twice defiled her self, without any pity or remorse of conscience. And
therefore he wrote back again, that he was minded to take the rightful
succession upon him: Mahamet Codabanda resolves to come and be crowned King.
that (God so favoring, ayding and assisting him) he would enforce himself
to profit Persia, to prove a more thankful and commodious a member to the
common wealth, then his dead brother: and that for the same purpose he was
putting himself on his journey: with strait charge notwithstanding, that
Mirize Salmas, to make his cunning seem the more acceptable, should before his
entrance within the gates of Casbin present him with the mischeeuous head of
Periaconcona, a woman (in respect of the scorn exercysed against young Aidere,
and of the treacherous death practiced and executed upon his brother, and of
the perucise imaginations which she conceived to cause the succession to fall
into other men's hands, and of the prodigal familiarity which she had with
some of the Sultans,) well worthy of a thousand deaths. Secreatly did Mirize
Salmas put in execution whatsoever Mahamet had privately enjoined him, so that
by his means he was presently and solemnly proclaimed king of Persia. And
afterward having gathered together many squadrons of men, wholly devoted to
the blood and name of Mahamet, the same Mirize Salmas put himself on his way
to meet him, carrying the head of that audacious and manlike virago upon the
top of a lence* Periaconcona beheadded.
with her hair dispersed, and some other uncouth behauiours that moved terror
to the beholders. From which novelties (one mischeife as it were huding upon
the neck of another) there sprongvp diverse inward hatreds, sundry tumultuous
seditions, and many civil wars, insomuch that the king for his part being
continually solicited New stirs and mischeefes in Persia.
by Mirize Salmas, (the cheifest and dearest favorite he had,) sought by all
means to take revenge of those treacherous companions and accomplices of his
brothers death, who on the other side did even burn in immoderate desires to
advance their own private estates, and withal their might opposed themselves
against his power and authority, whereby the state of Persia began to fall into
greater inconveniences, and of these novelties to reap new losses. Sahamal the
Georgian, (he that by the appointment of his niece Periaconcona, and of the
conspiring Sultans, was the minister of Aidere his death,) as soon as he heard
of the misfortune of his niece, fled to Sahamal the Georgian flies from Casbin
into the mountayne^.
his places of rest in his mountain of Bruz, fearing greatly the wrath of this
new Lord. Leuentogli likewise one of the Lords of Georgia, who by reason of
these accidents, which happened to his brother at his own peril, did
reposesmall confidence in the Persian protection, understanding Leuentogli
desirous of innovation.
the flight of Sahamal, being very near unto him both in country and blood,
estranged himself so far from his old love and ancient devotion, that he
seemed to desire some new innovation. The Nations also that were neighbors to
the Turks, and the people of Media The people of Seruan evil affected
toward the new king.
Atropatia, where Seruan is at this day, remained malcontent at the same of
this new king, and in the end it appeared that Persia under this fresh
successor, through many murations, was fallen into a most notable misery, and
the state thereof more weakened then ever it was wont to be.

Of all these late successes, as well as of the former intelligences, was Amurat
aduertysed from diverse parts, but specially and particularly Vstref the Bassa
of the City of Van, a city according to Strabo situate in Armenia the
greater, upon the Lake Actamar (sometimes called Palus Vstress the Bassa of Van
aduertyseth Amurat of the stirs in Persia.
Mantiana,) sent him most perfect information of all these stirs in Persia,
discoursing unto him of the death of Ismahel, the consultations of the Sultans,
the treacheries and death of Periaconcona, the broils between the king and
the Sultans, the nature of the new king being diseased in his eyes, little
esteemed by his subjects, besotted in his affections towades his three sons,
(at whose hands he foresaw notwithstanding, that he should receive many
injuries and troubles,) the facility to overrule the chief Governors of the
Georgiani, and the people of Atropatia, otherwise called Seruan, which were
evil affected toward the new king: and to be brief whatsoever had in truth
succeeded in Persia, and might inflame the mind of Ottoman to convert his
forces against an enemy of small counsel and much cnofusion: adding thereunto,
that never was there greater opportunity to overcome that king then now was
offered, and that in any case he should not let slip such an occasion, as the
Ottoman kings never had before to obtain so certain and so famous victoryes,
with so great glory and felicity in these enterpryses.

Amurat, whose ears had along time been filled with those stirs, that
Ismahel had raised, and whose cogitations were wholly bent to mark what would
be the issues thereof, lived with a mind altogether inflamed with an
unmeasurable desire of the news, and as soon as to his own natural
inclynation, and to other men's reports, there was added also this information
of Vstres, (who peradventure had that charge particularly enioined him) he
settled himself more deeply in his former conceytes, vz: to prove his forces
in subduing a king of an ancient time, dissenting and estraunged from the law
of Mahamet, a Amurat is confirmed in his opinion to make war.
contemner of his majesty, and to be short, his only corriuall and odious
competitor in all the East: and therewithal began to call to his remembarnce,
how Selim father to his grandfather, and Soliman his grandsyre would have taken
this enterprise to heart, recording privately to himself how they being
captains of most mighty armies, went themselves in person, fought with the
Persian kings, sacked and took many of their Cities, and reduced their
bordering enemies into very strait terms. But no one thing did more inflame
the Turkish Emperor, then did so rare an occasion which he thought was now
offered unto him, to have for his enemy a king not well practysed in feats of
war, besotted and confounded in affection and conceyttowardes his children, and
weakened through the dissension of his subjects: he measured and weighed his
own forces, he considered the peace which his people had enjoyed from the
taking of Goletta, even until this time: he collected the infinite number of
his vassalles as well horsemen as footmen, he surueighed the rentes of his
customs, his means to find money, his engynes of war (wherein he did far
surpass the Persians,) the cities of his enemy laid all open, and without
any defense of fire or by such like instruments of death: and in brief when he
had called to mind whatsoever he durst attempt and promise to himself, he did
more and more resolve with himself to take the occasion that was now offered
him to begin this war. For the compassing of which his purpose he was greatly
favored by the present state Amurat in peace with the Christian Princes.
of Christendom, at that time being wholly in league and amity with him: and
the peace yet continuing that the Emperor had made with him: and the rather,
because Amurat in peace with the Christian Princes.
he was verily persuaded that he should not have any disturbance by the
Catholic king, who no doubt would grant him a truce by reason of his wars
in Flanders, wherewith he perceived he was shrewdly occupied, (which truce
afterward ensued by occasion of the kingdom of Portugal.) The State of Venice
also observing that faith and promise, which with public capitulations, they
had faithfully established in concluding a peace, after that singular victory,
which they had obtained near to the Islandes Echinades against the Turkish
Fleet. And to be short the Turk assured himself that he should not any way
suffer any annoiance or impedimenr by any prince of Europe.

In this general tranquillity and common peace with the Potentates of
Christendom, did Amurat with more security and bouldnes discourse with him
self about the broaching of this war in Persia: and at last not fynding any
thing contrary to his designementes, he resohied to have a treaty with those
chief Bassaes called Visiers that use to sit at the Court gate, and to take
sound advise with those Amurat takes counsel of his Visiers.
that had the universal government of the whole Empire in their hands,
whether it were better upon this present occasion to begin the prepensed war,
or if they thought this opportunity not to be so fit, then to lay it aside, and
to convert their forces and counselles against the common wealth of
Christendom. So impiously and so barbarously is this Empire managed; that
whenever there is any treaty to attempt any enterprise for the aduauncing
thereof, it is lawful to violate any truce and to break promise: whereupon
although this war could not be moved either against the Persians, or against
the Princes Catholic, without breach of their promised says, (altogether
counterfetting and pretending capitulations of peace, leagues and oaths that
ought to be inviolable:) yet in the manifold consultations, that passed among
these Visiers, there was not a man found that had any consideration or made any
account of that defect: but every one of them (as their manner is in all
things) preferring violence before reason, thought it Turks make no account
of breaking Promise.
convenient to set forward the wicked desire of their Lord, without any godly
or honest respect at all. And among the rest, Mahamet the Vizier, being
cheifest in Mahamet the Vizier advises to make war.
authority, experience, and years of government, was of advice that it would
prove a more easy and less dangerous attempt to war with the Persians, then
with the christian princes: as well for that the civil dissentions lately sprung
up in the kingdom of Persia, and the condition of the new successor of the
Persian Empire in his government and war, promised all fortunate victory: as
also for that to wage battle against the Christian Princes, was not to make
that Prince only his enemy against whom he should fight, (whose forces
notwithstanding, be what Prince soever he may be, have ever been most
terrible, some by sea and some by land) but it was to bid battle to all the
Potentates of Christendom at once; those potentates (I say) that not many
years before had discomfited a fleet of 300. Galleys and mo, and awhile after
that, had put to flight another fleet either as great as it, or not much
inferior, and peradventure was still able The general conclusion of them all.
to perform, whatsoever they desired. In these consultations and other like
discourses, in the end they al agreed, that it would be much better to make war
in Asia against darts, against swords, against Cities either lying open or
slenderly fenced, then in Europe, against lightninges and fyres, against bows
and arrows, against devouring flames, against strong places fortifyed with
munition and instruments of death. And if there were any difficulty at all
therein, there were but two only that seemed to be of any weight: one was the
great distance Two difficulties found in the resolution to make war.
and rough passage of those places, through which they were to lead their
horses, their Cammells, their artillery and their men, every man knowing that
the Country of Georgia is compassed round about with very roughe mountains
and thick woods, where the enemy uses all good opportunity to lay ambushes, and
to work treason against such as pass that way: another difficulty was money,
Sinan Bassa among the rest offering to their considerations, that if a man
would conquer a new country, it was necessary for the mayntenaunce of the
conquest to erect Castelles and Fortresses, which being leaft to the defense of
valiant soldiers would require large stipends, without which every souldyer
willingly forsakes his charge. Saving these two difficulties (which The
difficulties answered.
notwithstanding were not greatly debated, but in answer thereof as much
spoken by the king himself as was thought sufficient) every man thought the
conquest of the kingdom of the Cheselbas to be the playnest and easyest, and
promised to themselves undoubted victory of it. But above all other Mustaffa
Bassa, he that reduced the Mustaffa Bassa the infamous, has great hope in this
war.
I Will of Cyprus under the Ottoman power, infamous for the cruel, barbarous and
unjust death of Marcantonio Bragadino the stout and valorous Captain of
Famagosta, whose name shall never dye in the tongues and minds of all ages,
he (I say) with exceeding audacitie set out great hopes of glorious conquestes
not concealing the virtues of the Latins, and the perilles passed in the wars
of the said Islande, and particularly in the expugnation of the City,
preferring the arms, forces, and valor of the Latins before the valor,
forces, and arms of the Georgiani and the Persians: and in brief assuring
more certain Mustaffa prefer th the valor of the Latins before the valor
of the Georgians and Persians.
hope of this war in Asia, then of any other that could possibly be raised in
Europe. And in this sort were the first discourses and originalles of these
motions in the East, begun and practiced: whereby all men may see that neither
zeal of religion, nor any injury received from the Persian Kings, but only
the ambitious desire of Amurat to subdue a kingdom, both in his own conceyte
and also by other men's relation ill governed by an effeminate and sottish king,
and through civil dissension brought into great danger, was the first
provocation of making Discord dangerous to a common wealth.
this war: and thereby may all Catholics learn, that there is nothing more
pernitions to the Christian Common wealth, then civil discord.

When they had thus concluded upon this resolution to make war in Persia,
there arose new consultations touching the manner thereof, and upon what coast
they should begin their journey, that so they might expect the more honorable
success: which point Amurat did Amurat protests to the Visiers, that of this
war he would both reap profit and honor.
greatly urge, protesting before al his Visiers, that he would not enter into a
war, unless he were in great hope to bear away the promised victory. Many
were the propositions and opinions of the Visiers: and many questions did the
king propound, whereunto he himself did readily answer. On the one side some
thought, that it would be very convenient to send the Army to Babylon, and from
The opinion of some touching the manner of the war.
thence to Syras, (in old time called Persepolis) famous for the pray that
Alexander took there, (as Q. Curtius writes,) and by that way to attempt the
conquest of all Persia. Others were of a contrary mind, and did give advice,
The opinion of others.
that the Army should be sent by direct course to Tauris, there to erect
strong fortresses, and to take possession of all the country subject round
about. It is reported also, that some there were that thought it better to send
two several A third opinion.
Armies from both the places above mentioned, that so bringing the enemy into a
strait, they might enforce him to retire, and to yield unto them whatsoever
they should demand. But Amurat durst not repose such confidence The
deliberation of Amurat.
in his own forces, as to think that with his battles divided and so
weakened, he should be able to overcome that enemy, who had always fought most
valiantly against the monstrous and courageous Armies of his forefathers, not
without some fear also of the ancient virtue of the Persian people, whereof
Fame has ever resounded an immortal and glorious report. Neither did he make
slender account of the Georgiani, the most antique tributaries and confederates
of the Persians, by whose only assaults his Army could not but suffer many
inconveniences and sundry trauelles: for so much as if they should assail his
battles behind or on both sides, and the Persians should set upon his
forefront, though they were many in number and fenced with artillery, yet being
ill planted, and in such difficulty as they could not use their Artillery, it
would be a very easy matter to defeat them. And therefore he did firmly
resolve with himself to send one only Army, and with united forces to seek
the overthrow of his enemy. And thus preferring his strong hope to conquer the
country of Siruan in Georgia, and the chief Cities of Media the Great,
before the difficulty of making war upon the coast of Siras, reposing great
confidence in the notable help that was promised him by the Cumani in Tartaria
called Precopenfes, he confirmed his counselors the Bassaes in the same
opinion: and withal discovered a matter, which to all of them but especially
to Sinan seemed most strange, namely that he was determined not to go in person
with his Army about this enterprise, but was minded to send one Amurat goes
not in person to this war, and the reasons why.
of his worthiest Captains in his steed. The respects that held Amurat from
going himself with the Army, were many: but principally the Falling
sickness, wherewith he was troubled: the zeal he did bear to the kingdom,
fearing greatly (and that not without good cause) least his son being in
favor with the people might peradventure untimely be advanced before him: and
the danger that he suspected at the hands of the Christian Potentates.

While they were thus in parlee about this expedition, and Sinan, Mustaffa, and
some other Visiers made means to be sent as Vicegerentes and sovereign
ministers of their Lords designement, he dispatched away sundry posts and
light-horsemen with order to the Bassaes, Governors, of Van, of Babilan, of
Erzirum, in the borders of Cappadocia and Armenia the greatter, that they
should by often Order given by Amurat to the borderers to annoy Persia.
inroades spoil the towns and castelles of the Cheselbas, and every way do
them what harm they could, Which was presently put in execution by them all,
and specially by the above named Vstref Bassa of Van, who besides Vstref does
much harm to the borderers.
the burning of diverse towns, brought many a soul into slavery, and in the
countries as well Tributary as subject to the Persians, made many incursions,
and wrought much annoyance.

Through these and other like injuries their minds were greatly incensed with
anger, and their wrathful hearts filled with a most ardent desire of revenge:
and whiles with shame enough they romed up and down daily, sharpening their
hatred as it were against a whetstone, in the year 1577. the abouenamed
Mustaffa was Mustaffa elected General of the Turkish Camp against the
Persians.

A. 1577.


elected General of the Turkish Camp, provision was made ready for him, and
authority given him to prepare whatsoever was needful. So messages were sent,
and commandment given, over all the countries heareafter named, that all the
Bassaes, Sangiacchi, Agaes, Spahini, Gianissaries, and soldiers of all sorts,
that were bound by their perpetual annuitees to go to war, should take their
journey in the beginning of the spring to the City of Erzirum, (which if it be
any of the old cities, it is very likely to be Simbra mentioned by Ptolomee)
there to be ready for the charge that should be enjoined them by their new
General: who having his dispatch from Constantinople, and passing to Chalcedon
(which Herodotus in respect Mustaffa at Chalcedon.
of the founders error calls Blind and now is named Scutari,) through the
countries of Amasia and of Siuas, (the one being the native soil of Strabo,
and the other in old time called Sebastopolis), he arrived in Erzirum in the
very beginning of Summer, and there stayed Mustaffa at Erzirum.
till such time as all his people, corn, artillery and other necessary
provision were gathered together, and at last departed for Struan, having first
taken an universal and diligent surueigh of all his Army: whereby
distinguishing The muster of the army in Erzirum.
the sound and strong from the sick and feeble, the armed from the unarmed,
and the courageous from the cowards, weighing in equal balance his own
forces, he might assuredly know what to look for at their hands. Then he
divided his troops: and first in order were mustred the people of Mesopotamia,
to the number of xij. thousand, (their Captain being well checked by the
General The A^es^ potamians.
for bringing so few this year) all of them for the most part Archers, not of
any great courage, and accustomed to the use of the Scimitarre. The second were
the Assyrians and Babilonians, watered with Euphrates and Tigris, The Assyrians
and Babilonians.
coming from the very confines of Balsara, (in old time called Teredon,) in
number no more then xiiij. thousand horsemen, yet all armed with sword and
darte, after the manner of their neighbors the Mesopotamians. The third in
order were the Sorians, a people more rich in apparel The Sorian.
then stout in armor, and rather alluring their enemies with the goodly show
of their spoils then terrible to them, being ij. thousand in number, all of
them being very cunning to vault and turn themselves round about in fighting.
Then were mustred the men of Siuas, of Amasia, of Maras, of Bursia, of Angori,
and other places comprehended under the name of Natolia, (where in times past
were The Natolians.
the Magnesians, the Bithynians, the Phrygians, those of Pontus and Lydia,) to
the number of x. thousand, hardy people and well armed, but for the most part
archers on horsbacke. There came next after them those of Jury, and Palestina,
upon swift coursers, continual darters and archers, more ready for flight and
spoil, then for fight and foil, The Jews and Philistims.
poor in apparel and virtue, to the number of one thousand. The Cilicians
succeeded them, now inhabiting Caramania, to the number of iiij. thousand,
armed with Scimitarre, battle axe, and bow, a hard and rough nation, The
Caramanians.
given to spoil and robbery. Then followed the glory and hope of all the
Camp, the people of Grecia, The Grecians.
soldiers full of frank courage, armed with arcubush and sword, mounted upon
good and valiant horses to the number of 10000. And after them the familiar and
faithful guard of the General, iij. thousand Gianissaries of Constantinople
with arcubush on the shoulder and sword by The Constantinopolites.
the side. Under the standard of Beyran Bassa, were likewise mustred the people
of the City and jurisdiction of Erzirum levied out of those places, where in
times The men of Erzirum.
past the Cappadoces bordering upon the Armenians did inhabit, to the number
of iiij. thousand: soldiers accustomed to braules and battelles, and first in
the field to meet their enemies, armed with sword and arcubush, darts or
Indian Canes, and yet all of them on horseback. Every troop had their
several Captains, who notwithstanding were changed at the Generalles
pleasure: whose names serving to no purpose we will quite leave out, the rather
to avoid the tediousnes of the reader, being not acquaynted with barbarous
terms. Voluntary men little inferior to the number of stipendaries but better
armed.


These were then the squadrons of such soldiers as were stipendiaries to the
Turkish king, to the number of whom those which went as voluntary adventurers
were little inferior, yet better armed peradventure and more hardy to fight: so
that there were found in this surueigh about a hundred and ten thousand
horsemen. Neither Places that sent no soldiers this year to the wars of
Persia.
was there any stirred out of Arabia Felix, out of AEgipt, out of Hungary, out
of Africa, or out of other places remore, or situate upon the sea coasts: as
also those Provinces, that had sent the squadrons before mentioned, were not
leaft destitute of their ordinary guards and garnisons, 500. pieces of small
artillary with Mustaffa
no nor without a great multitude of idle persons: yea and Damasco, which in
old time carried the name and price for matters of war, kept back their band
of Gianissaries being Arcubusiers, to take their ease at home under the
standerds of their own captains. Mustaffa brought with 500. pieces of small
Artillary with Mustaffa.
him five hundred pieces of small Shot, as well for safety of his army, as
also for service in defending such fortresses and castelles, as he should be
enforced to erect in the new-conquered countries. He had also of the king many
loades of money for his soldiers pay: with further Many loades of money.
order and direction to use the chamber of Aleppo and of other Cities, if he
should stand in need. He caused likewise to be brought from the provinces
aforenamed, by imposition of Tenthes for grain, and taskes for carriage Taxes
and Tenthes for corn and carriage.
of camells (which they call Nosul and Auaris) an exceeding great quantity of
corn: which he made to be transported in Galleys by the great sea (in times
past called Pontus Euxinus) to the haven of Trapezuntia, or Trabizonda, under
the general conduct of Aly-Vcchiali, that for the ease of the army it might so
be conueighed from Trabizonda; Trabizonda but 4. small days journey distant
from Erzirum.
to Erzirum, being but only four days journey distant from thence. He had
also gathered together a great number of Pioners and Myners: and to be short
having taken order for all things that he thought might be necessary for the
war, he departed in comely manner and seemly a^ray from Erzirum, and in the
end of eight Mustaffa departs from Erzirum to the ruins of Chars.
days arrived at the ruins of Chars, where among good pasture and abundance
of come fruit and wa^^^ herested himself. And being surprised with an
excessive rain, which falling in great quantity made new pooles and brooks,
and being mixed with storms, and tempesturous An excessive rain.
winds rent his tents asunder, and wrought great harm both to men and cattle,
he was compelled to stay in that place three whole days together not without
some inconvenience, by means whereof many fell sick and were Somefall sick.
constrained to abandon the army. From Chars he departed with all his people
that were not hindered with sickness, Mustaffa departs from Chars.

The mountains of Chielder.


and took up his lodging that eueninge under certain mountanes (now called
Chielder) being in mine opinion the hills of Periardo, and because he was
advertised, that the Persians were in the field to make battle with him, being
now passed beyond their own borders, which were so set out by Soliman in the
peace concluded with Tamas, (as before we have said,) and doubting least
peradventure they might encounter him, where he little looked for them: he
thought it best for the more security of his host to pitch his Tents in such
a place as he might well discover them, and yet not be assaulted at unawares.
And therefore he planted himself in the plain, and gave order, that Beyran
the Bassa of Erzirum should take possession The artificial manner of
encamping, which Mustaffa used.
of a certain hill that was on the right hand, and Dreuis the Bassa of
Caraemit should keep another hill that stood on the left hand and with them
Osman Bassa, Mahamet Bassa, Mutassade Bassa being adventurers, with many others
as well of the kings stipendiaries as voluntary men, should like wise pitch
their Tents upon the same hills, in such sort as they making as it were two
Cornettes or wings to the camp, might discover the coming of every man, and
he himself being shadowed with the two hills might be perceived of no man.

But whiles all these things with such military preparations were made ready
by Amurat: the new king of The King of Persia moved by the fame of this
expedition made against him, dissembleth his hatted toward the Sultans.
Persia, who was yet scarce settled in his kingdom, being stirred up by the
same of these motions, resolved with himself to send men against the Turks
for defense of his state, and was content for the time to dissemble his
conceived and hatred, which he bare to some of the Captains of Persia and of
Georgia, and to make some apparent show that he was reconciled with them, for
that without them he could not promise himself any form of an army or
defense: and for all the hurley-burley, wherewith his kingdom was troubled, and
for all the disorders whereintoo both the Sultans and people were fallen, yet
he wrought so thoroughly, that all the Captains of account took upon them the
protection of his honor and kingdom. And so Tocomac a Sultan; the Chan and
governor of Reiuan, being elected general of this expedition, Tocomac
general of the Persians.
a soldier very famous and well known to the Turks for the many embassades,
wherein he served often times to Selim and Amurat, and in Persia deemed to be a
man of singular virtue, he gave him in charge, that gathering together Order
given by king Mahamet to Tocomac.
the greatest number of men he could out of Atropatia, out of Media the
greater, and other places near to the Turks, he should seek all the means
he was able to stop their passage into Georgia and Media Atropatia, And
Commandment given over all Persia, to gather men against the Turk.

The places whence the soldiers were gathered.


thereupon Edictes and precepts were sent out to all the cities of the
kingdom, and principally to Amadan, to Genge, to Taiuris, to Nassiuan, to
Marant, to Ardeuil, to Soffian, to Carachach, to Turcomania, to Giaunt, and to
many other places on this side and beyond Casbin, that all the Chans, Sultans,
and soldiers whatsoever, should come ready pressed to follow the commandementes
of their new General. Many there came that were obedient to the kings
proclamation, but many there were that would The disobedience of many.
not stir a foot, for their obstinacy in the broiles begun, and for the
suspicion which they had of unlooked for mischeefes: wherefore the king
remained greatly discontented, and much grieved at this first disobedience of
his subjects, and clearly perceived how much better it had been for him to
have lived in peace and amity with Amurat: how be it to make the best of the
matter he was enforced to take this defense upon him, as also for the
satisfaction of the subjects of Georgia, (which desired the same with earnest
request by certain ambassadors sent Ambassadors from Georgia.
particularly from Daut-Chan for that purpose) to salve his own honor and the
succession of Emir Hamze his eldest son. And therefore with those few, which
for the love of justice were met together in those parts, being not above
twenty thousand, Tocomac was dispatched The army of the Persians ^x. thousand
and no more.
about his business, hoping that the enemies army (wherein he heard say the king
in person was not) might be such, as with these his small forces it were not
impossible for him to oppress them in some narrow straites, where the
multitude commonly uses rather to be: in confusion and perplexity, then ready
and able to help one another. These xx. thousand were all horsemen, armed with
Scimitarre and bow with some Arcubuses among and (which is The manner how the
Persians are armed and their conditions.
wont to stand this nation in great steed) they were furnished with very syne
and well tempeted Armor, but specially courageous they were and resolute, and
made more hardy by the virtue and valor of their Captain. And therefore with
all their provision necessary for victual and fight, keeping the way of Tauris
and Genge, Tocomac with his host comes toward Chars.
they came to the turning of Chars, where they were aduertysed that their
enemies army was passed.

They were now arrived within a days journey near to Chielder, when they were
resolved to send quick and faithful spies (...) might bring them certain
news of the (...), condition, and number of the Turkish soldiers: Tocomac
sends spies,
who (...) thither even at the very time that the Turks were encamping
themselves between the two hills, whereupon the two Bassaes Beyran and Dreuis
with their people had already pitched their Tents. The Persian spies
discovered the Turkish host aloft, and persuaded themselves that there were
not any other battle The error of the Persian spies.
then those which they saw upon the two high hills: whereof with all the speed
they could they returned news to Tocomac, who at ease had followed these his
spies a far off. When Tocomac understood their information; agreeing with
his former conceit, which he brought from Casbin of the number of his enemies:
peradventure also persuading himself, that if a greater army were to come out
of the borders, the same might now be at Chars, and these only troops sent
before to discover the country: he became very bold and foole-hardy through
too much desire of glory, and determined with himself to go and assault them:
and having discovered his Tocomac falls into the same error that the spies
did.
enemies tents, he was thoroughly confirmed in his former opinion, and the
spies relation, and with so much the more confidence went forward to assail
them. But Beyran and Dreuis, who quickly from the hill had perceived Tocomac
comes boldly to assail his enemies.
the Persians coming in the plain against them, although they knew them to be
full of courage, yet reposing great confidence in their fellow battle, (which
did not show it self,) with all speed mounted upon their horses, and ran to
meet them: and in the foresaid plains under Chielder within one hour after
noone, they joined a most bloody battle: wherein there were slain at last
seven Turkish Sangiacchi, with a very great number of soldiers, both
stipendiaries and voluntary, without any apparent loss at all among the
Persians, who closing themselves The Persians obtain a happy and fortunate
victory.
together, in great heat and all bee-bloudied in the battle, did prosecute
their happy and fortunate victory.

But General Mustaffa, who perceived all that had passed, and stayed waiting
till the fight was at hottest and the medley at the thickest, that so the
flight of his enemies might breed the greater disorder: and seeing at length
that Mustaffa is moved against the Persian conquerors, and succoureth his own
people.
his people could no longer endure the fury of their enemies rage, (even as
though it had lightened and thondred, and as though the earth had been shaken,)
with such cries and exclamations, as the Turks use in their assaults for the
more terror of the enemy, exciting his army, he ran as it were headlong upon
his adversaries, and with greater cruelty renewed the terrible battle. The
Persians did The Persians endure the assault.
courageously sustain this unexpected and fearful assault, and seeing the
night now very near approaching, rather then they would suffer the disgrace of
a shameful and ignominious discomfiture, with inexplicable signs of valor,
in that little time of daylight that was leaft them, they continued their
manifold slaughters, until at last being The Persians retire through the
benefit of the night.
favored with the darkness of the night, they resolved to withdraw themselves
with as little loss as possibly they might. Mustaffa neither could nor durst
any longer pursue them, but was constrained by night to return to Mustaffa
returns to his rentes.
his pauiglions. The Persians for their parts did with all diligence dispatch
men in post, to the King being at Casbin, The Persians news to Casbin.
aduertysing him as well of the success of the battle, as also of the greatness
of the Turkish army, and likewise what they were determined to do that they
might annoy it: By the Turks also there were presented to Mustaffa Mustaffa
sends posts with news of the battle to Amurat.

5000. heads, and 3000. Persians alive presented to general Mustaffa.


(who had already sent away Posts to Amurat,) five thousand heads, which by
their color, countenance, and beardes be wrayed themselves to be Persians,
and 3000. Persians alive. Mustaffa did greatly rejoice at the victory, and to
make it seem the greater, (seeking by all means to conceal his own losses,
and mynding to make the issue more dreadful, that so he might raise a greater
terror by the fame that should thereof arrive to the enemy,) he caused the
heads of those three thousand The art of Mustaffa his cruelty.
that were brought before him alive, to be presently cut from their shoulders,
and using a most strange Art to breed terror in the Persian, he gave order,
that of those A bulwark made of heads.
heads there should be framed a bulwark in those fields, for a most horrible
and uncouth spectacle.

The same day, that Mustaffa the Turkish Captain employed himself about this
barbarous and cruel work, there came unto him certain messengers from
Manucchiar Ambassadors from Manucchiar the Georgiano.
the younger son of the Georgian widow, called Dedesmit, who being brought into
his pauiglio^, told him, that with his good favor and license Manucchiar their
Lord and master came to salute him, and to offer himself unto him as his
obedient and deuored servant. At which news Mustaffa redoubling his joy, gave
commandment, that all the Bassaes and Capitaines of the host, with all
solemn pomp, with trumpettes, drommes, peales of Artillery, and with all
other signs of magnificall and joyful entertainment should go forth to meet
the said Manucchiar, and to accompany him to his presence: which they did
accordingly, and encountering him with all signs of honor, Manucchiar
honorably received by Mustaffa.
conducted him with an infinite train to the great pauiglion of Mustaffa, who
also caused him to be saluted again with an other peale of ordinance and
Arquebuseshot, and with a second reply of trumpets and drums. Manucchiar
dismounted from his horse, and (although against his will) he beheald the
strange and uncouth pile of heads all pale and filthy to look on, and indeed
imagined what the matter meant, all which Mustaffa himself discoursed at large
unto him from point to point: notwithstanding before all other things, having
done his The speech of Manucchiar.
due reverence to the said Mustaffa, and according to his degree placed
himself next to his side, after he had presented him with such gifts as his
country yielded, he gave him to understand, That for the honor and
estimation which he bare to the Turkish valor, he was always devoted to the
house of the Ottomans: and as he had oftentimes desired to spend his goods and
life in their service, so at this present being moved by his ancient desire,
allured by the strange fame of this victorious and wonderful army, and stirred
up by a particular fantasy to learn the paynefull and hard precepts of Art
Military under such a Captain, being a master of other captains, he offered
him all devotion and service, more then ever he had done heretofore: and
himself, having nothing in the world more dear unto him, consecrated his own
life to his commandementes, desyring that the same might be employed in the
conflictes of war, under his banners, among warriers and soldiers of same
and renown, and therefore he besought, him, that he would accept of him in
the name of Amurat, whose obedient vassal he vowed himself to remain for
ever. Mustaffa did graciously receive all this discourse of Manucchiar, and
having showed him again the pyle of heads, together with his The answer of
Mustaffa.
battelles, armor and provision of war, told him, That as all these forces are
the gift of god, who always favored the righteous counselles of the Ottoman
kings (an impudent speech too bold and unbridled) in such sort, that they
lord it over all the world, even to the astonishment of all that live in the
world at this day: so had he for his part chosen the better part in coming
now to yield himself and to submit his obedience to his king although it had
been good if he had do one it before. And as concerning the desire which he
had to be his companion and fellow in these warlicke affairs, he did very
friendly accept of his coming, and promised him all good entertainment and
assured safety. And so in exchange of the presents which he brought him, he
apparelled him in cloth of gold, honored him with a battell-axe and target,
wrought with gold and ammell: and never permitted him to go from his pauiglion
without a train of his slaves.

But to the end that from things unknown, and principles not understood, the
course of my history proceed no further, for that in certain strange and
important successes, the readers will be desirous to know the several nations,
scituations, Cities, rivers, mountains, counties, Dukedomes, kingdoms and
provinces: it shall not be amiss in a distinct book by it self to declare,
what these enemies are, against whom the Turks make war, and to describe
what and how great forces they have, what kingdom they possess, what
provinces are subject unto the^, their worship or religion, their kind of
government, their wepons, their manner of fight, their form of battle, their
revenues, their expenses, and to be short whatsoever else shall be necessary
to be known, and so with greater perspicuity to proceed in the continuation
of our interrupted history.

The end of the first book.
The Second Book.
The Argument.
The birth of Mahamet and his proceedinges.

The Testament and Death of Mahamet.

The Original of the Persian and Turkish Sects.

The errors of Iouius and others, touching the Original of the Name of Soffito
or Soffi.

The increase of the Persian kingdom.

The Geographicall description of the kingdom of the Persians, first
universally and then particularly.

The Geographicall description of Georgia.

The Historiography of them both.

The Orders of Dignities or Offices in the Persian Religion.

The Orders of Dignities or Offices in the Persian government.

The Persian Soldiers.

The Arms and weapons of the Persian Soldiers.

Their horses: and the manner of Ordering their Armies.

The Surueigh of the Persian Armies.

The revenues of that kingdom.

The E^penses of the same.

The causes of the declination of that Empire.

Certain aduertisementes of the Author to the Reado^^.

THE SECOND BOOK.
MAhamet, or (as some call him) Mahomet was borne in the year of our salvation
593. or (as others write) 567. of Abdalla, the son of Abdel Mutalep, who had
also an other son called Abutalep, father to Aly, all of them among the
Arabians of a very base and poor estate: which Mahamet by good hap being
married to Cadige, (or as some Cadige the wife of Mahamet.
term her) Hadige, a woman of noble parentage and notable wealth, and by her
having had a daughter called Fattime, who afterward was the wife of the
aforesaid Aly, departed into Egypt, with rich wares and important merchandises,
where withal his wife had furnished him. And being ambitious to know many
things, and to fit his humor, which he perceived in himself to be given to
matters of fame and of glorious report, he entered into strict familiarity with
one Sergio, a fugitive of Christendom, Sergio a fugitive of Christendom.
of whom learning many particulars of the holy testament, he disgested them in
his mind, and was in good hope by means of the great authority, that he had
already purchased at home with his fortunate marriage, to cause the simple
people there to believe him of his own credit, and thereupon persuaded
himself, or rather was confirmed in the wicked opinion which he had conceived,
that he might usurp the name of a Prophet or Divine. And so being assisted by
diverse lewd and ungodly persons, he began to give out the report that he was a
worker of miracles and a favorite of God himself, and besides the
counterfeting of a cloud, which (as Sergio and The suttlenes of Mahamet to
cause himself to be held a Saint.
other fautors of his shameless lies most falsely feyned) did continually cover
him, he made a show to the world of dissembled abstinence, hipocriticall
solitarines, and ambitious contempt of wordly riches, inuenting also certain
superstitious prayers, and false visitations of an Angel, and to be short a
number of other lying and enormous miracles. By means of all which things
having gotten the credit to be a devout person, a Saint, a Prophet, (being
assisted by the temporal authority which he had obtained with his riches and
his wives kindred) he made that fickle and miserable nation subject to his
wicked law: and among other filthy and unrighteous orders, which are scattered
in the Alcoran, and other books of Certain Injunctions ge^en by Mahamet, as
it were for a law.
treacherous inu^ntion, this was most singular, which he imposed unto them
touching the manner of praying, covering all his wickedness with an honorable
kind of prayer, made to that one God, whom this people being but lately
revolted to these idolles and monstrous lies did little understand. This prayer
he appointed should be A prayer invented by Mahamet, common both to the
Persians and to the Turks, and to all those that profess Mahamet.
thus. In the name of the religious and merciful God. Praised be the soueraign
Lord of the worlds, the pitiful, the merciful, the Lord of the day of
judgment. Thee we serve: from thee we look for help: show unto us the right
way, that which thou have showed to the prophets, not that, for which thou art
angry with the wicked, Amen. And commanded that it should be said five times a
day, namely, in the morning, at noone, at Evening, at night, and at two of the
clock after midnight: and that in saying thereof this order following should
be precisely observed. The Fachi, that is to say, he that has the charge of
the ceremonies, being somewhat before all the rest, when they are assembled
together, prescribes unto them all, the manner and pronuntiation of the
prayer, not only by falling down flat upon the ground with his face and
raising himself up again, but also by singing and crying out himself,
causing all the rest even as it were in the same moment to do the like.
Mahamet was the man, that where soever he was himself, performed the office of
Mahamet was priest and Prince.
Fachi: and all those that in other places did order the prayers did represent
Mahamet, though indeed they were far inferior unto him. For he was the
chief man not only in the Church (which they call Moschea,) but also in the
Court of judgment: so that he had both temporal and spiritual authority, (as
we may say,) if so be it be lawful to such impure and fifthy institutions to
apply the religious and holy terms which are proper to our most pure and
sacred profession. The others were chief in the Moschea, but yet were subject
and obedient to their Governor and king: so that at this day besides the king,
the Bassa, and the Sangiaceo, which are the Temporal Magistrates in the court,
there are the Musti, the Fachi, and such like, which are the principal
ministers in the Moschea, and in the law.

By means of these leaud Institutions, the filthy and leacherous wretch,
having obtained the name of a Wise man and a Prophet, persuaded his wife
Cadige, by whom he had gotten all his state and wealth, that by the
commandment of God, it was necessary for him to marry with eight other women,
meaning under the color of a divine Oracle to satisfy his beastly lusts. His
credulous wife granted unto him that which he required at her hands, and so
in profane uptialles he satisfied his unclean Mahames is married to 8. other
concubines.
desires with eight other wives or Concubines: among whom of greatest account
were Aisse the daughter of Abubacher, Ofesa the daughter of Omar, and Fara the
daughter of Ottom ^^ by whose means he assured his temporal authority over
the people, and soundly rooted his new inventions in their minds. But (as it is
the property of all flesh) at the last he was brought to his end in the sixty
and third year, or (as some say) in the sixtieth year of his age, having
reigned about thirty, or (as others write,) The death of Mahamet.
about five and twenty years: and whiles he was sick, to the end that his
treacherous orders should not cease, but specially that his new-deuised manner
of prayer should not be left, he appointed Abubacher his second father in
Abubacher left successor to Mahamet.
law, for him and in his steed to keep the first and chief place in the
Mos^hea at Me^ra. With great silence although with as great marvel, was this
determination of Mahamet tolerated: but particularly as great grief had Aly
and his hinse folks to hear these news, supposing that the succession should
rather have belonged to Aly, being both Nephew and Son^e in Law to Mahamet.
Yet did Abu^^cher exercise the dignity appointed unto him, without any strife
or contention for the same, until the death of Mahamet: and then Aly with his
kindred, no longer fea^^^g the false Prophet deceased openly made challenge
thereunto. At whose first demand it seemed that Abubacher was some what
willing to have yielded, making a show that he would do it to gratify such
persons, as sued for Aly (being a man more worthy, for his neerenesse in blood
for his agility in body, and for his valor in Arms) rather then for that he
was resolved to surrender to another the honor, that Mahamet had granted to
him. But afterward having secretly understood the minds of some that were
more mighty then his adversaries, who counseled him in any case not to spoil
himself of the honor which he had obtained, he began openly to resist Aly, and
to use not only reasons, but force also against him: so that he established
himself in the said Succession. Which Aly, for that he would not disturb the
new-deuised sect, did brook better then it was thought he could, although at
last in recompense of this his tolleration, being forsaken of all his friends
and fautors, he and his wife Fattime were also spoiled of all the substance
that was left unto them by his Uncle: Abubacher vouching for Aly driven out by
Abubacher, and spoiled of all his substance.
a reason of this his cruelty, That the enheritance of riches belongs unto
him, to whom the Charge of the Law and of Wisdom belongs: and That he
being adjudged lawful heir of the Wisdom, ought also to inherit the
riches. Leaving it (as it were) for an Ordinance to the people, That a Prophet
cannot separate his substance from his dignities and knowledge: but whosoever
is left heir of a man's wisdom, is also to be taken for the heir of a man's
wealth. Whereupon diverse wise men Books written by those first wise men.
of that age took occasion to write books, and therein disputed, whether a
Prophet might have authority to make one and the self same person, the heir
of his learning and of his riches. Howbeit this Aly lived so long, that he saw
the death of his predecessors Abubacher, Omar, and Ottoman, Aly succeeds in
the dignity of Mahamet.
and after their decease he himself also succeeded in the Dignity, which till
then they had usurped upon him. For conservation whereof he was compelled to
make battle with Maui Lord of Damafco, over whom with great glory he gained
the victory, and so ever after to his immortal praise and commendation he
exercised that Office. At the last he died also, (leaving behind him the report
Aly dies: leaves behind him a good report.
of a magnanimous, variant and just Prince,) and was buried with two of his
Sons Hassan and Ossain, in Cafe, a place with in two days journey near unto
Babylon: among Two sons of Aly burie^ in Cafe.
whose Successors was always thoroughly observed, whatsoever Mahamet had
commanded to be observed for a Law.

And although the East was divided into diverse and sundry States and
Gouernementes of many persons, yet notwithstanding the superstition of Mahamet,
was with all conformity mainetained by them all neither was there heard either
of any schism, or insurrection, or weighty dissension among that people: but
for all the inequality of those countries and dominions this opinion continued
equal and uniform. At what time, even on a sudden and beyond all expectation,
there arose a superstition in the minds of certain Mahometanes, which in few
years being sown and scattred over all Asia, did breed a great contention and
war among those nations, that, being before united together by Mahometes
devise, seemed to be more then friends and in league one with an other. Of this
nouelty one Sexchiuni, or (more distinctly to express The author of the
Persian superstition.
his name) one Siec Giunet was the author, who under the name of Sofi and of
Siec, (that is to say, of a wiseman and an author of Religion,) or rather,
under the pretense of holiness began to persuade the people, being by nature
inconstant and superstitious. That those three first Successors of Mahamet,
were unjust and unlawful usurpers of the dignity, That modest and just Ali
only ought to be named the lawful Successor. That he alone ought to be
called-vpon in their prayers for help, and that by all possible means all
honors should be yielded and rendered to him, and taken from those three first,
as from persons that were undoubtedly damned and altogether reprobate. With
many arguments did Giunet approve his Invention, and at last persuaded many
thereunto that began very readily to follow him as the head and founder of so
new a verity: Whereupon by the appointment of this new master they did all with
one conformity use this form of Prayer, Cursed be Abubacher, Omar, and
Ottoman, and God be favorable The new prayer of the Persians.
to Aly, and well pleased with him. From the time of this invention forwards,
the Sepulcher of Aly and his sons in Cafe grew in great credit, and the
followers of The sepulcher of Aly held in great reverence.
this new superstition began every year to visit it, in all respects even
after the same sort, that the Turks do visit the Sepulcher of the three first
Successors: Yea the very kings of Persia themselves used to be crowned and
girte with their sword in Cafe near unto Babylon, (as it is said before,)
where ever after, their great Calife was wont to keep his residence, as being
the man that represented Aly, and occupied the chief room of their filthy and
damnable Priesthood.

Upon this occasion it is not amiss to advertise the Reader, how false that
rumor has been and is, whereby it is noysed abroad, that the kings of Persia
performed these ceremonies in Babylon. The cause of which falsehood was, for
that Case lying near unto Babylon, and being a very little place, as
resembling rather a village then a town, or a City, the people reported that
all these things were done in Babylon that famous City: no otherwise then as
Strabo writes to have happened about the overthrow that Darius had when he
lost the Empire. Which overthrow although it was at a little village called
Gaugamela, (that is to say, the Cammelles house) yet the writers and people do
say, that it was at Arbella, a notable City near to the said place called
Gaugamela. Whereupon it is not much from the purpose to note also, how greatly
they are deceived, that think Arbella to be that which is now called Tauris,
whereas Strabo does plainly say that Arbella lies in the Country of Babylon
which is Assyria, and it is very manifest, that Tauris is in the Country of
Media. By this brief narration it appears that Paulus Giouius The error of
P. Giouius.
has erred, where he writes that the superstition of the Persians did begin
in Persia at the very same time, that the heresy of Luther was sown in
Germany: and where he makes one Arduelle, who was also called Aidere, to be
the author of the Persian Faction: whereas he is notably deceived both in
respect of the time, and also of the person: of the time, for that it sprang up
before the publication of Luthers religion: and of the person likewise, for
that Arduelle was not the first inuentor thereof, (as he says) but Giunet
Siec, called also the Sofi, as shall be declared a little after. The Turks in
the mean time, by reason of this new devised nouelty, thinking themselves to
be of a sound and sincere opinion, did always call themselves Sunni, (that is
to say, men of a good faith) and on the other side they called the Persians
Rafadi, that is to say, men of a false faith and going-astray, only because
they forsook those first successors of Mahamet, Abubacher, Omar and Ottoman,
whom they believe to be the lawful heirs of that chief dignity. And in this
sort began the Persian superstition, and not (as some think) from the The
error of many.
diverse interpretations of the Alcoran, much less from the execution of the
law of Aly. For as touching the Aleoran, they do all expound it after one and
the self same manner: and as for Aly, he never framed any law, but only
confirmed that which he found already ordained by Mahamet their only
lawmakers. Besides that the Turks do reverence Aly together with the other
three Abubacher, Omar and Ottoman, as him that was also a successor to Mahamet:
But the Persians, although indeed they worship Aly, yet for all that they do
not only not reverence the other three, but curse them and hate them as
impious and damned persons.

Afterward the Persians were called Cheselbas, of a certain red mark which
they carried on their heads, The Persians called Cheselbas.
by an ordinance that was instituted for the same by Arduelle, who was esteemed
a very holy man. Which name was confirmed afterward in the succession of
Ismahel, The name of Sofi renewed in Ismahel.
who renewed the name of Sofi, being first usurped by Giunet, for his invention
of the superstition that was spread abroad by him: and so continuing the said
name of Sofi even until our age, among the people of Asia, who by the forces
of Alexander were in old time subdued with The ancient Sofiti subdued by
Alexander the great.
a number of other nations, that were famous in those days (if Quintus Curtius
may be believed) for the value of their iewelles, for the beauty of their
bodies, and for the excellency of their dogs. Of this name Sofi, and Sofiti
many particularities we could rehearse, if we were not afraid to depart from
our matter now in hand; and therefore differring them till some other
occasions, it shall be sufficient to repeat, and with diligence to note, that
the first man which merited this name was Giunet, who, because he found out
this notable sect, obtained the name not only of Siec, but also of Sofi,
although in deed he had not gotten the name of Saha, and that because he gave
his mind rather to matters of learning and study, then to matters of Arms and
government. After whose example there succeeded three other, who were content
to be called by the name of Siec, but not of Sofi, until that after The
succession of the Persian Kings.
the^ there succeeded Ismahel, who contemning the name of Siec was called Saha,
that is to say, King, and did in such sort enlarge the bounds of his kingdom,
that, in respect of his greatness, men will hardely believe at this day the
intolerable oppressions, which those Provinces in truth have suffered and
endured. And herein is Paulus Giouius The error of P. Giouius.
found to have erred also where he writes, that this Ismahel was the first of
all the Persian kings that merited the name of Sofi, which indeed he did
rather renew in his own person, having received the same from Giunet, the
first author of the damnable superstition, who first took that Title upon him.

This Persian superstition was first brought in by Siec Giunet the Sofi,
afterward maintained by Siec Sederdin, and The names of the Successors in the
kingdom of Persia.
after him by Siec Giunet the second, then, by Siec Aider (called by Giouius,
Arduelle,) and at last so increased and emenlarged by Ismahel the Saha and
Sofi, that under his government Persia seemed to envy the glory of Cyrus and
Darius. After the death of Ismahel it descended to Tamas, who reigned with
less felicity then his father did, being many a time and often greatly
damnifyed by Soliman, and after Tamas succeeded Aidere the second, who reigned
but for certain days and hours, as the History sets it down: and then
followed Ismahel, who troubled all the Cities of his kingdom with manifold
hurley-burlies: and last of all the king that now is, being more unfortunate
and unhappy then all the rest. And even as Giunet, founder of this sect, being
a man that was esteemed to be wise and holy, did renew the name of Sofiti,
which for many ages past had been extinguished in Asia, and in other his
successors Sederdin, Giunet the second, and Aidere Sisopi, who were contented
only with the bare name of Siec: so was it again reuyued in the sprouting
glory of Ismahel, who did so largely dilate the confines of his kingdom, that
it seemed he had (as it were) founded it anew: and yet afterward, it was
suppressed again in his successors Tamas, Aidere, Ismahel and Mahamet, who
leauinge the names of Sofiti and Siec retained only the Title of Saha. In this
sort, began increased and declined, the kingdom of the Persians, who were
followers of the division and superstition of the false law of Mahamet.

What the occasions were, why in so short a space, so famous and redoubted a
kingdom began to declyne, it shall be declared hereafter: for that it is now
time to proceed in the narration of more important matters, beginning at the
Geographicall description of the kingdom it self: wherein it shall behoue the
reader to walk with good circumspection, because the confynes thereof are set
down neither so ample and large as they were in the time of Ismahel, nor less
then they were at such time as these wars were moved. For Ismahel had in such
sort enlarged the limits of his Empire by his new devised superstition, The
changes of the Persian state.
that he had not only stretched them on the East beyond Aria, and on the
South upon the red sea in the Golfe of Persia, but on the West also he had made
the Georgiani tributaries, subdued the Armenians, the Mesopotamians, the
Babilonians, the Assyrians, and threatened that he would Lord it even to the
confynes of Europe. But this so notable felicity of his continued no long time,
because both he himself was dispossessed by those that were mightier then he
was, and after his death, Tamas was so straightly shut up, even into the
innermost places of his kingdom, that it were but a small matter for writers
to describe the compass and quantity of that which was left. For being
depryued of Bithynia, of Mesopotamia, of Armenia, and of Assyria, the poor
Persians had much adoo to retain the people of Georgia and Atropatia at their
commandment and devotion: but avoiding the outrages and incursions of the
Turks, they were enforced to transport their Regal seat to Casbin, and to
forsake Tauris the ancient Palace not only of these princes, but also of all
the other kings of those provinces.

And therefore setting aside the first felicity, and large compass of this
kingdom, (the memory whereof can serve to no other purpose then to bewail so
great a decay, and to teach us that we ought not to put too much confidence in
wordly riches, nor wax proud in the great authority of rule and government:)
measuring the state of this realm, as it was when these wars began, we say,
that for the North part, beginning at the very uttermost East of the sea of
Baccu, and coasting all that Sea, and then The North part of the Persian
kingdom.
entering into Seruan and Georgia even unto Mengrelli, and so a little lower
unto Chars, lying in the champaine country under the mountains of Periardi
called Chielder, where also is erected a Castle called Childerum for defense
of the borders, you have the description of all that the Persians possess on
that side. From thence drawing a line by the East, and rolling the same over
the Lake Actamar, and over The West.
Coy in the champeine of Caldaran, and then carrying the same line toward the
South to the City of Salmas, and a little higher toward Seresul, even to the
channel of Euphrates, there is comprehended all the West part of this
kingdom. From the channel of the said river, where The South.
the Bassora lies, coasting all along that side of the sea, even until the
mountains Techisnandan, and more toward the East to the kingdom of
Candahar, and there making an end of that compass, all the South part of this
present Empire is figured. The East whereof is included The East.
between the borders of Corassan, and of the Tartarian Iesselbas, even from
the City of Samarcante on the east part of the Casptan Sea, otherwise called
the sea of Baccu.

The compass appears to be very great and of importance, comprehending in
it many provinces, not only famous in our times, but also much more glorious
in the days of those Ancients: for that in the West is included with the
country of Georgia, part of Turcomania, and of Cussestan: in the North,
Seruania, the country of Gheilan; and Massandran: in the East, Candahar,
Corassan, and Heri: and in the South, all the kingdom of Fars, (the chief
City whereof is Siras,) with Caramania the Desert. In the very middle and
Center of this Circle are the Territories of Casbin, Cassan, and Hispahan. So
that in The provinces of the Persian kingdom.
the beginning of this war, the King of Persia ruled over all these
provinces, Georgia sometime called Iberia, Seruania, otherwise called
Atropatia, Tauris with the territories belonging unto it called in times past
Media the Great, Gheilan or Gely, Masandran or Hircania: and more inward
Parthia, Aria, Candahar or Peripaniso, Farsi or Persia, and part of Cussestan
in old time called Assyria. All these provinces in times past subdued by the
Macedonians, the Graecians, and Barbarians, wasted by so many mutations and
States, and outrages of Armies, have also lost their ancient names, and
according to the several languages therein used, have had diverse and sundry
appellations, which (as a man may probably conjecture) are in truth those, that
are last named. Of all which provinces, Anania, Pius the second of happy
memory, Negro the Venetian, and some other late Geographers have been so bold
as to write many things, rather fabulous then true; after the example and
imitation of those that are so greatly reprehended by Strabo and Thucydides:
and therefore avoiding the danger of lying, and laying also a side for this
time, the History of things Natural, Miraculous, and Poetical, (for of
Poetical matters especially, the particular Geography of Danaeus reports) we
will only speak of such things, as will serve our turn for the better
knowledge of the State and condition of this kingdom.

Tamas had under him, (and so he left the kingdom to Ismahel, in whose time
and by whose means these wars were raised) threescore and ten
Gouernementes, all bearing the Titles of Sultans and Chan: so that in his whole
Empire, he had seauentie Cities of such state and condition, as they deserved
to have a Governor of the same dignity, that the Bassa is with the Turks, as
shall be declared in the exposition of Names. Now what they were, it would be a
very hard matter precisely to know; yet some of them we have learned; and the
principal thereof peradventure were, Sumachi, Sechi, Eres, Seruan, Derbent,
Caracach, The Cities of the kingdom of Persia.
Ardouil, Tauris, Reiuan, Genge, Hispahan, Masandran, Gheilan, Heri, Cassam,
Siras, Starabat, Chilmisnar, Candahar, Iesed, Sapanec, Sultania, Bargo, Cum,
Coran, Seua, Casbin, and others, all which have Jurisdiction over many Villages
and Towns, from whence there are leauied many men of war. Hispahan only
has in her government twelve Sultanes: Casbin three Sultanes and the king:
Heri three also and Abas Mirize: Candahar three, and Rustan Mirize. Of all
these places to make an exquisite description Geographicall, to tell the
Mountains, the Rivers, the Champaines, the Distances, the Situations, the
Altitudes of the Pole, and such other particularities, it would not be an
enterprise fit for our handling, except we would insert many lies therein, (as
a number of writers have heretofore done:) and therefore, seeing neither the
battles of the Turk have entered into those parts, nor any thing happened in
them that requires any great diligence of discourse, Let that little be
sufficient, which we have already touched in this History by occasion of Abas
Mirize, and of the Turcomanni: and returning to Georgia, to Seruan, and to
Media the Great, with a piece of Armenia, we will use our best diligence, even
as need shall require, and our informations will serve us.

Georgia then is that province, which in ancient time The prouin^c of Georgia.
was called Iberia, which on the West is bounded upon Colchis, at this day
called Mengrellia: on the East upon Media Atropatia, at this day called (as we
said before) Seruan: on the North upon Albania, now called Zuiria: and on the
South upon Armenia the Greater, now called Turcomania, whereof it does also
possess a part, so that Iberia and part of Armenia is comprehended under this
name of Georgia. It is for the most part full of hills, woods, rocks, and
ruynes: and has abundance of silks, fruits, wild beasts, and Faulcons. It
is watered with many famous rivers, (and so was even in the time of Strabo) but
principally with the river Cirus, whose gulf opens in that country, and is
joined with Araxis. The river Araxis springs out of the hill Taurus, in that
part, where The river Araxis.
Periardo is situate, on the side of the hill Abo, and so running by East even
to the confynes of Seruan, windeth it self toward the west by the North,
where it is joined with Cirus, and then passes to Artaxata a city of the
Armenians, right against a place, which is very famous in this war, called
Reiuan, and so watring Armenia, and coursing all along the plain of Araxis,
(which peradventure is the champaine called Caldarana,) discharges it self
into the Caspian Sea, at this day called the sea of Corazun, and of Baccu, on
the one side by south leaving Armenia, and on the other side by North leaving
Seruania, whose chief City is Eres, which is so famous in this book; as in
fit place it shall be showed. It is a river very deep and large: but yet at this
present it contains not those meruails; that Herodotus reports of it, as
also it is very hard to understand that which Quintus Curtius writes touching
the course thereof, and that which Natalis Comes has left written of it in his
history. Cirus likewise springs out of the same hill Taurus, and yet in
Armenia, and so descending into the Champaines and plains of Georgia, The
river Cirus.
charging it self, and being greatly increased with other rivers, it is joined
with Araxis, and so makes his issue also into the Caspian sea. This river the
inhabitants of the country at this day call by the name of Ser in their own
language, but the Turks call it Chiur: the other River both the one nation and
the other do uniformly call Arasse. In that part of the land, where Araxis
insinuates it self between Media Atropatia, and Armenia, it receaueth into
it diverse Rivers that spring out of the hills of the said region of Armenia,
among which is Canac, very The river Canac.
famous in this history, which making (as it were) almost an Island, a little
on this side of the City Eres, unites it self in the Channel with Araxis,
as in his place shall be showed.

This Province is in habited by sundry Earls, Dukes, and Lords, as well in the
plain and champaine, as also in the rough and mountain country; and these
inhabitants are for the most part Christians, (and yet obseruers of the rytes
and schisms of the Graecians,) stout people, strong of complexion, and
obstinate in their opinions. The principal Potentates of this Province,
(besides many others that enjoy whole Counties and diverse Lordships) are the
Widow and her Sons, Manucchiar and Alessandro: the Sons of Lauassap
deceased, David and Simon: Leuentogli, who by his countrymen is called
Schender, and by us Alessandro, surnamed the Great: Giusuf the Son of Gori:
old Sahamal, of whom we made mention before, when we wrote of the death of
Aidere: and the sixth is Basacchiuc.

Sahamal keeps his government between the territory Sahamal the Georgian
and his state.
of Siruan, and of Alessandro, by nation rather an Alano, then a Georgiano, and
has one Son, which succeeded after him, when Osman Bassa deprived him of his
life for his treason that was discovered, whereof shall be spoken in place
convenient. He dwells in a rough and high mountain, by the Turks called
Brus, whose top is covered The mountain Brus.
continually with white and hoarie snowes: he is in religion, by his own
choice, a Soffian, although by nature a Georgian: he is in money poor, but in
shaking a lance and shooting a darte very valorouse: few cities, or rather no
one place worthy the name of a city does he possess, but certain Villages
and some base Towns he has: and the people that is subject to him is
altogether a fauage people, and given to robbery and flight.

Giusuf is in deed by country, by nation, and by religion Giusuf the Georgian
and his state.
a Georgian, although touching his religion he has altogether abandoned the
name of Christ, and having voluntarily revolted to the Turks, has changed
his Grecian Faith into another religion, that among all wicked religions is
most impiouse. He has his place at Gori, and his territory lies on the West
bordering upon Basacchiuc, divided from him by the Lake of Esecchia, and on
the East upon the County of Derbent. He being brought into a narrow straight
by Osman Bassa on the one side, and by the whole Camp on Teflis side, resolved
himself to yield to the Turks, as in fit opportunity shall be declared.

The Widows younger Son called Manucchiar, is he that came to yield his
obedience to Mustaffa, as we have The widow of Georgia and her state.
told you before, and the elder is named Alessandro, of whom we shall speak
sufficiently when we come to describe his misery. She holds many ^ownes, but
has put her elder Son in possession, and left unto him the universal care
and charge of her whole estate, which afterward was fraudulently taken from him
by Amurat and by his younger brother Manucchiar. Her territory lies in the
confines of Chars on the West, and the State of the two brothers Simon and
David on the East, watered with a River by the Turks called Chiur, which
perhaps may be some branch of Cirus: The palace of this Dominion is
Altunchala, so called in Turkish, and in our language may be interpreted the
Golden-Castell: there is besides, a very commodious and remarkable place
called Clisca, and also Carachala, so termed by the Turks, and signifying in
our tongue the Obscure or Blacke-Castell: and diverse other Jurisdictions both
of Towns and Castles. This palace as well on the side of Teflis, as on the
side of Chars is compassed with the rough mountains of Periardo, and with
horrible thick woods, very fit for treacherous ambushes, and in all respects
most dangerous for an Army: But Altunchala it self lies in the midst,
being (as it were) most cunningly defended by nature.

There follow, as ye go toward the East, rather in Armenia Lauassap the
Georgian and his state.
then in Iberia, the places that sometimes belo^ged to Lauassap, but now
enjoyed by the two brethren David and Simon, of their fathers valor and of
their fathers estate, both by nature and by virtue the rightful heirs,
although Simon and David.
in truth they had greatly desyled themselves with a beastly change of their
religion, whereby they did wonderfully obscure their glory, being otherwise
worthy of singular commendation: and principally Simon, who by his knowledge in
Art military, and by his learning in matters of Poesy and Philosophy had
merited the grace and familiarity of Ismahel the Son of Tamas, whiles he was
in captivity in Persia, of whom we shall have occasion to speak hereafter in
due time. But what virtue could there be in them glorious and renowned, which
was not obscured by this soul fault committed by them both? it being the
occasion why the one and the other were not only deprived of their goods,
their State, and their honor, but also that they abandoned wholly the most
sacred and glorious name of Christ. For Lauassap their father being dead, who
by his last will and testament left Simon his The history of the two breethren
Simon and David.
Son to be his Successor in the kingdom, not only because he was the elder
in years but also because he excelled his brother in valor, David, being of
an intolerable nature, greatly envying his brothers succession, and
ouergreedie of glory and rule, began to seek means how to drive Simon out of
his State, and with force and Arms to arrive to that place, whereunto neither
the will of his father, nor the laws of nature could bring him. And therefore
withdrawing himself into the field, being followed by a kind of people
desirous of Novelties, and rather loving seditions and tumultes, then easy
peace and quiet rest, he began to take up those rentes; which his brother did
yearly expect from such places as lawfully were subject unto him, converting
to his own use whatsoever he could by any means most unhonestly usurp: and
by these spoils making his followers and soldiers more bounden unto him, he
did in such sort increase his squadrous, that being waxen very terrible to all
Georgia, he put his brother Simon also in a marvelous great fear: who having
understood his malignant and mischievous intent, and having none other means
to mainetaine and defend himself, fled for help to Tamas king of Persia, and
opening unto him his great necessity, requested succors at his hands. Tamas
was nothing slow to gratify Simon herein, but dispatching four thousand
horsemen under the conduct of one of his own captains, sent him into Georgia,
with special order, that he should take David alive, and bring him into
Persia, in case he would not change his religion, and so be settled in that
State as his lawful subject, and not as a francke tributarie, such as he was
before. Which if he would be content to do, then the king commanded his
Captain to seize upon Simon, and in case he would not change his faith, to
bring him away with him, and substitute David in his place: but in case Simon
should be ready and willing to do as his brother had done, then should he be
caused to put the matter in execution, and so be confirmed in his possession,
and David should be brought, as we have said before, to Casbin. The Persian
Captain departed into Georgia, and without any stir, or any delay he took
David, and in the name of Tamas made unto him the former offer, whereunto he
did straight way consent, and so forsaking his religion, and changing holy
Baptism for Circumcision, David denies Christ and becomes a Persian.
he did most impiously consecrate himself a voluntary sacrifice to false
Mahomet, and (which is most horrible and fearful to write) renounced the
Savior of the world. Then did the Persian Captain seize also upon Simon, and
told him, that to gratify him, he was come into Georgia at the commandment of
Tamas, that all things were performed which he required, and that he had taken
his enemy-brother prisoner. Howbeit that he must not think to enjoy that
kingdom under the protection of Tamas, unless he would change his faith, and
become an obseruant of the same prophet and of the same law, whereof king
Tamas is a champion and defender: and therefore he must resolve himself so to
do, otherwise his brother David should be settled in his place, who had already
very voluntarily chosen that part,

Most bitterly did Simon bewail the fall of his brother, and being now more
settled and constant, then ever he was, in the most sacred and holy faith of
Christ, he surrendered up his earthly kingdom, because he would not loose the
kingdom of heaven, which he hoped for, and of a King became a prisoner, being
betrayed by those very persons, whom he had called to be his defenders. After
that Daut-Chan (for so was David now called) had mumbled up with his unclean
mouth, the wonted and usual blasphemies of the Persians, being circumcised,
and app^rrelled in the habit of a Barbarian, he was in the name of Tamas
enstalled, not by the term of King or Duke, but of the Chan of Teflis, and all
the other places, heareafter mentioned: And poor Simon was carried away to
Tamas, by whom, for all the many instances and earnest requests, that were
made unto him to become a Persian, yet could he not be removed from the
foundation of his native faith, and therefore was sent into the Castle or Rock
of Cahaea, wherein banished Ismahel, the son of Tamas lived, who afterward
was king, as before is declared. And so contented himself rather to remain in
temporal prison, then to change his first Christian religion (wherein
notwithstanding he was a Schismatike,) and to prepare for himself perpetual
chains, and blind and eternal captivity in hell for ever. By this success of
Simon we may easyly learn An aduertisment not to trust the promises and helps
of the Barbarians.
how dangerous a thing it is, to draw the Barbarians into our states and
gouernements for our defense and help: for that we see most manifestly, there
is no one thing more doubtful, more uncertain, or more impious, then their
faith or promises, and that to spoil other men of The promises of the
Barbarians deceauable.
their states, they will not stick most impudently to venture upon any wicked
enterprise.

But following the description of those places, that belonged to the father of
these two unhappy heirs, we say, The places subject to Lauassap.
that the Cities subject unto him, were principally Teflis, Lory, Tomanis,
Chieres, Giurgi-Chala and many other towns and villages. But the chief
palace of all was ever at Teflis, and near thereunto even at this day are to
be seen the sepulchers of the kings of this part of Georgia. It is a place
very strong by situation, watered with a small river, which descending from
certain hills near thereaboutes rometh along this coast and enters into his
neighbor Araxis. This small river the Turks call Chiur, supposing
peradventure that it is some branch of the River Cirus, the graund waterer of
all this region. On the side of Armenia, Valleys and narrow cuttes in the
mountains of Tomanis.
toward the South coast, where Tomanis stands, there are many very narrow
lanes in the mountains, and very deep valleys, wherein the foresaid river
Araxis with most outrageous turninges and windinges, and his many rushing
downefals among the rocks does even be-deafe a man's ears, and with his most
violent roming in and out does drown and ouerwhelme, whosoever by miserable
chance falls down headlong from the tops of those narrow passages which
are upon the mountains. And upon the creastes of the said mountains, on the
side of Woods and old dark Forrestes.
the said narrow passage, there grow most hideous woods and antique
forests full of Cerri: trees like Poplers carrying mast fit for hogs.
Beeches and Pynetrees, where the horror of darkness, and silence which is
oftentimes interrupted, only by the whistlinge of winds, or by the cry of
some wild beast, do make the poor passengers most terribly afraid. On the
Weste side there are most difficult passages on the rocks of Periardo, Hard
passages.
which makes both the borders of this country, and the borders of the Widows
country also most dangerous and full of a thousand annoyances: and there
likewise the river Araxis with his crooked courses in the low and deep
valleys, makes a most narrow and perrillous passage for any man. On the North
side is the roughe and noisome mountain of Caucasus: and by that coaste the
Turks could not possibly get any entrance into this Region, until they had
conquered the City of Derbent. So that on all these three sides, by which the
Ottomans might make their way into that country, that is to say, by Colchos,
by Periardo, and by Armenia, Nature defended the land from foreign and strange
nations, as though she had foreseen this calamity and tempest of the Turkish
fury, and of her own bounty and benignity supplied those wantes of Art, which
were in that people, who was utterly ignorant in casting of Gunnes; and in the
use Strabo makes mention of the passages into Georgia.
of such like engines. Of these straites of Georgia as also of the four
entrances before named, it seems that Strabo makes manifest mention in his
second book, where he also writes, that Pompeius, and Canidius, did use two
of these passages to enter with their Armies into this Pompeius and Canidius
used these straites.

The Turks sought to occupy all the 4. entrances into Georgia.


province. But in this present war the Turks sought to use them all four at
one time: by the way of Colchos, sending their fleet on the great sea into the
Channel of the river Fasis: by the coast of the Albanians leading Abdilcherai
the Tartarian into Seruan: and by these two straites carrying all their Army,
as in fit places it shall be set down.

As ye walk toward the North, on this side of the lake Essecchia, (which
perhaps is the marish called Lychnitis) Basacchiuc the Georgian and his state.
there stands the City Basacchiuc, with certain other Towns and Cities,
for a long time subject to Basacchiuc being a Lord of that name. Who was
allwaies more rusticall and uncivil then all the rest, as one that dwelt far
out of the ordinary ways, by which the Turkish Army made their journey, and
by that means never endured the like troubles and inconveniences that others
did: so that in all these stirs and hurly-burlies among his neighbors,
withdrawing himself into these fortes made and framed by nature, he sat as it
were in a watchtower to behold the accidents of this doubtful war. Which
rest certainly he had not so quietly enjoyed, if the Tartarians had not failed
in their promises made to Amurat: whose Breach of promise in the Tartaria^s,
dammageable to the Turk.
breach of promise did in deed frustrate and thwa^t many important enterprises
and singular conquestes, that Ofman the Bassa had plotted in those quarters.

Now the Son of Leuent, called by the inhabitants Leuentogli the Georgian
and his State.
there, Schender, and by us Alessandro surnamed the Great, and brother of
(...), has his state between Reiuan and Siruan, wide of Tomanis, and though
it be accounted among the Georgian States, yet is it situate rather in Armenia
the Greater in the borders of Atropaiia, then in I^eria. This man in steed of
arms has continually used prayers and presents, and as he that more then all
the rest lay open to the passage through Siruan, and dwelt near to Reiuan and
Teflis, he was likewise subject to the Persian fury: yet for all that he
handled the matter so well with the Turks on the other side, that by his rich
and liberal gifts, in steed of arms and wepons, even in the greatest heates
of this war, he kept himself equally untouched and free from the violence
both of his foes and friends. His chief palace is Zaghen, fruitful of silks,
he has also Grin, and diverse other villages and towns: he surpasses at this
day all the rest of his neighbor Georgians in riches and money, and The
Cities of Leuentogli.
enloyeth withal greater tranquillity and quiet then they all. He was in times
past greatest affected to the Crown of Persia, but since the time, that Tamas
sought by unjust and unlawful means to depryue him of his state, and in his
rowme to substitute his brother Ixis, (who being become a Persian, and having
given himself to Tamas and to Satan, like a wicked wretch, gaped after it
above all things in the world,) he then began to repose small confidence in
the Persian succors, and resolving with himself to remain a Neuter, he
followed the camps of the conquerours, and favored the Ensigns and name of
those that were mightiest. And in this case stands the state of Georgia at
this day.

But the country of Siruan, which on the West is joined The country of Siruan.
with this Province, (whereof we will make but a brief discourse,) has also
on the North side the Albanians, and a little beyond them some wandering and
vagabound Tartarians called Pericorschi, between Caueasus and the river Volga,
whereupon it may be that the Tartarians are comprehended under the name of the
Volcenses: on the East it has the lake (if with Polycletes we may so term
it,) or rather (as other call it) the sea of Corazan: on the South side
Armenia, and more toward the South and Polycletes callesh the Caspian sea by
the name of a lake.
southeast Media the greater. The Metropoliticall city of Siruan is Sumachia,
situate between Derbent and Eres: and as Derbent lies in the way for the
Scythians, so does Eres make way for the Armenians and Medes to enter into
Sumachia.

Derbent.

Eres.


the country that is subject to the said City. All Atropatia, was subject to
the Persian King, and was obedient to him, being induced thereunto first by
Aydere, and afterward by Ismahel Sofi, saving only that it seemed the people
of Derbent did ordinarily love rather the fame and renown of the Turks, then
the government of their native Prince, sticking also to the ancient religion
which Aidere shook, and Ismahel subverted. The whole country is fruitful,
and watered with Araxis and Cirus, and Atropati^ is fruitful.
other rivers that are famous even in antique writers: and principally Eres,
which yielded in times past great store of those fine white silks, commonly
termed by the marchantes Mamodean silks, whereof at this day there is not to
be found, no not a very small quantity, by reason Eres made Mamodean Silks.
of the monstrous ruins and overthrows, that have happened in those
countries. The king of Persia maintained in Derbent and Eres, after the
natural Lord was driven out of them by Ismahel, certain governors with the
title of Sultans: and in the City of Sumachia one only Governor with the
title of Chan, who ruled both over Sechi, and also over the other Cities that
were subject to that jurisdiction. But Derbent, as we have already written,
eue^ as Sechi a city of Siruan.
it was the last city on that side which was subdued by the Sofi, and made
more resistance, then all the rest, in receiving the superstition of the Sofiti
or Cheselbas, insomuch that Aidere left his carcass under her walls: even so,
though at the last it was overcome, yet did it always remain most
affectionate to the first faith and opinion that it held, when the law of
Mahomet had not yet tasted of the Schism of the Sofians: howbeit, it could
never find opportunity to receive the Turkish captains into her, and so
utterly shake-of all obedience to the Cheselbas.

Between Seruan and Tauris is situate the country of Caracach, fertile and
rich in corn and cattle, very commodious Caracach.
for the feeding of Beasts, in situation not greatly subject to winds, by
reason that it lies rather allow then aloft, but yet pleasant and temperate:
and it seems that this country on that side, bordereth upon the Atropatians
and the Medians, where the City of Tauris stands, even at the roots of the
mountain Orontes, which according to Straboes opinion is a portion of Taurus.
The mountain Orontes, The mountain Taurus
Of this City we have sufficiently spoken in this History, and much more
largely in the Letter, which in manner of an Appendix we have added in the end
of this work, for the more manifest declaration of our opinion touching the
recognition of this place: the reading whereof may peradventure more distinctly
express the Geography of these countries. And now taking this City of Tauris
for the middell, or (as it were) the Center in a circle, we will also use it
for an object in all the considerations, which very briefly we shall here ser
down. All those that come from Van or from the Lake of Vastan, and make their
voyage toward Media, do arrive at Tauris, The voyage from Van (...) Taurus.
traveling always by East, or by East and by North, being nine days journey
or thereabouts, and leaving Coy, Merent, and Soffian. And this was the way that
Osman Bassa, and Ferat Bassa kept when they went with their Army to this city,
and which Angiolello also held, when he was in Persia,, as is manifest to be
read in Ramusius. Besides this The viage from Reiuan to Tauris.
way, there is also another coming from Reiuan, from whence as ye travel by a
direct line (as it were) by East, leaving Nassiuan and Chiulfall, you shall
arrive at Tauris, within the space of nine or ten days journey of an
ordinary carriers pace: and therefore Ferat Bassa, the first time that he was
general, attempted this way beginning at Reiuan, which he made a Fortress.
Above Nassiuan, and Chiulfall is Seruan, and the country of Caracach which
Nassiuan.

Chiulfall.

Siruan.


(I know not whether it be true or no) they say the Turk goes about to
strengthen with fortes, and to subdue, as he has begun. From Tauris toward
the south by west stands Salmas, and on the south Siras in Persia, and on
Salmas.

Siras.

Casbin.


the South by east Casbin, distant from Tauris about eight or nine days
journey, (as says Barbaro and Angiolello) with certain other cities among,
whereof there is sufficient mention made by us in the history, and therefore we
will not stand here to repeat them. More toward the East is Cassan, and
further beyond is Hispahan, four and twenty Cassan.

Hispahan.

Heri.

Corazan.

Ieselbas.


days journey distant from Tauris. Then follows Heri, and Corazan, and the
Ieselbas, who were so troublesome to Ismahel, that by their means he was
overcome and put to flight by Selim.

In Armenia the Great there are diverse Lakes, whereof the greatest according to
Strabo his opinion, is the lake Lakes in Armenia the Great.

The Lake Martiano or Actamar The Lake Arasseno or Tospite.


Martiano, called by the inhabitants there Actamar, and by us the sea of
Vastan. Next to this is the Lake Arasseno, called Tospite and Toeti, which
breaks and teareth apparel asunder, as Strabo writes: and through this
river does Tigris run with such violence and swiftnes, that it does not
mingle his waters with the lake. Above the lake of Actamar are the champaines
of Caldaran, famous for The Caldaran Champaines
the battelles between Selim and Ismahel. But not to stand long in repeating
such things as are written by us and others upon other occasions, it shall be
well to descend to those particulars, which as they have not been hitherto
precisely described by any man that I know, so may they bring unto us more
certain knowledge of this Empire.

There is resident in Casbin their profane Priest called The chief Priest of
Casbin called Mustaed-Dini.
Mustaed-Dini that is to say, the chief of the law, who is as the Mufti among
the Turks: and in the other subject Cities are certain peculiar Heads,
obedient to this chief Priest: who notwithstanding are not chosen or displaced
at his pleasure, as our Bishops and prelates are by our most holy Pope, the
true Viccar of God and pastor of the holy Catholic Church; but by the King
himself, who, (as we have said before) should be not only a king, but also a
Priest, even as Aly and Mahamet were. Howbeit for avoiding of greater trouble,
he grants that favor and puts over that burden from himself unto
others, to whose judgments he also refers himself; whenever there is
any consultation or treaty touching their law and obstinate religion. Under
the Mustaed-Dini are the Califes, and these are they that execute their daily
service in their Moschees or Temples. The chief of these The Califes,
Califes is he that puts the Home upon the kings head, when he is first in
thronized: A ceremony now performed in Casbin, because the Turks for bad it
to be performed in Cafe near unto Babylon, where also in times past (as we
have said before) the Persian kings were wont to girde themselves with their
sword. Those three Sultanes that remain at Casbin for the general government
of the The Sultans.
whole Empire, have their several distinct charges. One has the care of
matters of war over all the kingdom: and the other two gather up all the
revenues, and keep a diligent reckoning thereof: which two may be rather
called Treasurers then any thing else, such as the Turks call Deftardar. Next
unto them there are at Casbin two great The Deftardari.

The Mordari


Chauncellours, whom the Persians call Mordar, whose office is to write all
the orders, Commandments, and letters concerning the government of the
kingdom: one of them keeps the Seal, and the other the pen. There is also
in Casbin the magistracy of Judges, exercised The Gaddi.
by two persons, whom the Turks call Caddi, and whereof in Constantinople
there are wont to be three, as also the number of Sultanes there is greater
then in Casbin. And these two Judges do make aunsweare and give sentence in
matters of controversy and civil quarrels. For as touching criminal causes
they have no further authority, but only to frame examinations of witnesses,
and to make declaration thereof, which they call Sigil: and this Sigil they
deliver up into the hands of the Sultane that is governor of the city or of
the Empire, and he causes execution to be done according to custom. And even
as the chief city is thus ordered, so likewise all the other Cities have
the self same magistrates, but yet all at the kings disposition and
appointment: for in them also, besides the Chan, or Sultan, besides the Mustaed
Dini, and the Calife, there are the Caddi, the M^rdari, and the Desiardari,
which exercise the same authority within their private gouernementes, as the
others do^ over the whole state. This is then the order of the States of the
kingdom: First the Saha, The order of the Persian dignities.
then the Mirize and Mirize, the Chan and Sultan, the Mordar, the Def^ardar,
the Caddi, the Mustaed-Dini, and the Calife. The king keeps also for the guard
of his Palacegate certain orders of soldiers whereof the most noble and
greatest in number are those that the Persians call Curchi, which are as it
were the Kings gentlemen, being six thousand, all of them divided under
several captains: which Captains also do yield obedience to their general
Captain called Curchi Bassa, a person always of great authority. The other
next unto this is the order of the The kings Curchi.
Esahul to the number of seven hundred, distinguished also under particular
Captains, after the manner of the Curchi, and the captain of those captains
is called Esahul Bassi. There want not diverse other services besides The kings
Esahul.
these, which do not deserve in this place to be nombred. And this is the
state of Persia.

But as concerning the state of their wars and warfare, The state of the men
of war in Persia.
it cannot be precysely and particularly descrybed, neither in respect of
their forces, nor of their weapons, nor of the manner of their fight: and yet
will we set down that little which we know for certain. The soldiers of
this kingdom would in truth be very many and terrible, if al those places,
which we have comprised within the compass thereof, as they are accounted, so
they were indeed obedient to this crown, and if also all those fables could be
verified of it, that are dyuersly reported by diverse writers, of so many
horsemen and so many footmen. But for so much as not only the Tributaries, but
also the very natural subjects do not send in their ordinary and due aids
and succors, hereupon it springs that in all their occasions their forces
prove so weak, and their Armies of a very small number. Of the discordes and
divisions in Georgia, which have now been tried by long experience to have been
no less hurtful to them selves, then to the Persians, we have already spoken
as much as may suffice: and now we will speak of some others, beginning with
Amet-Chan, who has a long time been Lord of Gheilan. This man, although he
were of hability to have yielded singular aid to this crown, (it being the
general Amet-Chan.
opinion of all men, that he could gather together xx. thousand horse) yet
could he never be induced to serve in war, but rather enjoying a base and
infamous life, he is become both vile to himself, and unprofitable and
hateful even to his neighbors and kinsfolks. For which cause king Tamas,
when he was free from the Turkish Amet-Chan imprisoned by Tamas and enlarged
by Mahamet.
wars, employed all his forces against him, and followed him so hardly, that
in the end he took him prisoner, and so kept him till he dyed, which was for
the space of xv. years. But as soon as the now king Mahamet was inthronized in
his kingdom, being carried away with a vain and foolish pity, he delivered
him out of prison, hoping (like an unwise man as he was) that this most
covetous and suspicious wretch would have proved courteous, and kind toward
him, which was a thing quyte contrary to his nature and disposition. And
behold, neither thoseuerity of Tamas, nor the lenity of Codabanda, could ever
persuade him to change his mind: for in the greatest dangers of this present
war he could never tynde in his heart to apply himself to the performance of
any noble act, that was not only worthy of his great forces, but also
especially required by the present necessities.

The like treachery showed Rustan Mirize, the king of Rustan Mirize.
Candahar, and son to a brother of king Tamas, who neither for neerenesse of
blood, nor for common honor, nor for the estimation and reputation of his own
superstition, could ever be wrought to pity the calamities of Persian: and yet
the kingdom of Candahar was very well hable to gather about xxv. thousand
horse: Neither may his excuses avail him, that he alleged touching the far
distance of his country: For if distaunce of place was no hinderaunce to the
enemy to bring his Armies even to Tauris, to annoy the Persians: Less reason
had Rustan Mirize to withdraw his ready forces from defending his friends, the
journey from Constantinople to Tauris being no shorter, then it is thither
from Candahar.

Like unto these was, and still is Emir-Miran the Lord of Jest, a hard man, and
very obstinate in coueteousnesse, Emir-Miran.
who does not only not send any voluntary aid, but also refuses to pay
those tributes which by covenant and composition he is bound to send: And yet
is he able to yield four or five thousand horse of great valor in war.

The Lord of Lar also, called Ebrain-Chan, famous for Ebrain-Chan.
his mightiness, although in times past he has always helped the common
forces with his private succors, yet at this day he utterly denies both the
one and the other, and threateneth rather to suppress all Estates, then to
advance and increase any that belong to this crown.

But above all the rest, me thinks that Abas Mirize this kings son is most
impious and wicked, who not only Abas Mirize.
would never favor his fathers enterprises against the cruel enemies of the
common liberty, but also has sought by all means possible to drive both his
brethren and his father out of the State, and to enter himself into the
succession and government of this divided and troubled kingdom. So that under
his Jurisdiction there are idly fed eighteen thousand horse, which would
prove very stout and strong in war, if they wanted not discipline.

In Cussestan, those Arabians that were wont to be ready for any service to the
Persian kings, have yielded themselves Cussestan.
to the Turks, and often times work great annoyances to the Persians by their
sudden incursions. But within the very bowels of the kingdom, the Turcoman
nation, that would have been a great strength to these Turcomania.
forces, if they would have joined with them, Behold, how it has not failed to
procure many overthrows to this kingdom: a great part whereof we have
described in the fourth book of this history. The kingdom of Seruan also is
in such sort spoiled and decayed, that the cities Seruan.
of Sumachia, Eres, Sechi, Derbent and others, out of which there was wont to
be levied a good reasonable number of people, as also Reiuan, Teflis, and
other countries of Georgia and Armenia, are not able to yield any succors in
the time of war: so that the Crown of Persia being deprived of such and so
many helps, is at this day constrained to wage war with very slender forces,
which very briefly shall be here set down.

Out of Hispahan, and the territory thereof, (to reckon their Stipendiaries to
the uttermost) they leauie eight The forces of the Persian kingdom, whose
service may be used.
thousand soldiers on horseback: out of Bargo, two thousand: out of Cassan,
four thousand: out of Seua, one thousand: out of Sultania, one thousand: out
of Casbin, twelve thousand: out of Ardouil, one thousand: out of Siras eight
thousand: out of Tauris four thousand: out of Cum and Cuohiue-Tauris two
thousand: out of Genge and the rest of Georgia, four thousand. Besides these
they may hire others, when their occasions do so require, and they have always
volu^tary soldiers, and that in some good number so that the greatest Army
that they can possibly gather, will hardly amount to threescore thousand horse:
(always provided that every city aforenamed do send in their Stipendiarie
Soldiers according to their duty.) Whereas if all the other Capitaines, that
are noted above to be obstinate and rebellious, would agree and concur in one
unity, they might make an host of an hundred and thirty or an hundred and
forty thousand persons or thereaboutes.

Their Soldiers are armed for the most part with Scimitarre, The weapons of
the Persian soldiers.
Lance, and Darte, but specially, the Scimitarre is most familiar unto them,
and all the Persians do make a singular profession and use of it: although
there want not among them some that can handle the Arcubuse also, the exercise
whereof has of late years grown more familiar and usual, then it was in the
time of Ismahel, and in the first years of the reign of king Tamas. For their
own defense they are armed with good Corselets, and strong helmets, many of
them able to keep out an Arcubuseshot, much more to daunt the force of a
Darte: Some of their horses also are armed with very good Armor, most finely
and soundly tempered. And these their horses are The Persian horses very good.
of a singular virtue, equal with those of the old time, which (as Strobe
writes) were accustomed to be fed and brought up in Armenia for their kings
use. Swift in course, fierce in battle, long breathed and very docible. When
they are vns^dled, gentle and mild, but when they are armed, warlike, hardy,
and manageable, even at the pleasure of the Ryder: so that it is no marvel,
if one of them have been sold for a thousand or a thousand and three hundred
Duckates.
Cocchini.

Those that follow and attend the exercises of war are for the most part men
of noble me^, and thereupon it comes, The Persians valorous and noble
soldiers.
that they are more hardy and valiant to foil then to fly. And being
compared with the Turkish people, (who for the most part are very ^ascalles, of
vile race, ready to fly and to rauine) they are by good right very worthy to
be highly esteemed. The Persians are great deceivers, full of crafty
Stratagemes, unconstant, and breakers of their word: (a vice that seems to
have been always proper to the Barbarians.) Never content with any man's
government, and lovers of novelties, wherein Persia was The Persians given to
novelty*
always noted particularly and specially to have offended. For testimony
whereof we may vouch those ancient poysoninges and wicked treacheries, which
were plotted not only by Subjects against their kings, but also by children
against their natural father: which name (as Justinius writes) was in so small
estimation with those fifty sons of Artaxerxes, that with one consent they
all conspired upon a most wicked pretense to murder their father, The impiety
of the sons of Artaxerxes the Persian king.
without that any one of them, either in regard of his Fatherly Majesty, or
reverence to his age, or natural piety, did attempt to prohibit so great an
iniquity. An Act (as it seems) very well marked by the Sofian kings, who as
we may read of Vngher, Mahamut and others, and (as it is written in this
History) the Children with the Father, the Father with the Children, and the
Children one with an other, have learned it by course, and daily do practice
it to destroy one another and so weakening their own forces, do make
themselves spectacles of infamy to all the world.

The people of Persia are afraid of Artillery beyond The reason why the
Persians do not use Artillary or Canons.
measure, and yet sometimes they have not been afraid with sudden assaults
to assail their enemies trenches, and lodginges in their Camps. And although
they be so timorous and fearful of that Engine, and know of what moment it is
in a battle: yet have they not hitherto received the use thereof, being rather
obstinate in their blind ambitious conceit, that it is a sin and shame to
exercise so cruel a weapon against mankind, then ignorant how to make it, or
destitute of matter to cast it.

The manner of ordering their battle is after the fashion The order o their
battle.
of a horn or of the Moon, as a man may call it, and in open battle their
Squadrons are ordered on this sort. In the right horn or wing, by ancient
custom were The right wing.
placed those troops that were guyded by the captains of Istigelu, which is
now called the Traitors line, by reason of Zalchan and the rest, that were so
ready and resolute in the conspiracy, which was made in the favor of Aidere,
whereof we have already written in this history. In the left cornet or wing
were placed the people that were The least wing.
led by the captains Zambeluzes, who vaunt of their ancient descent from
Damasco, and from the Tacaluzes, a nation never greatly esteemed for any valor
or knowledge that they had in warfare. In the body of the battle was appointed
the kings guard, who was always accustomed to The body of the battle.
be present at war with his Armies, although this king partly by reason of
the infirmity of his eyes, and partly for the dissentions in his kingdom durst
not venture to go in person, but in his steed sent Prince Amze, a valorous and
good warrier. In the midst of the battle also, about the King, went the
people of Ausares, which are pressed out of Persia, all of them accounted very
warrelike, and more valiant then all the rest. Neither would it be greatly
amiss to think that from hence were those troops fetched in times past,
which Xerxes was wont to term by that proud title Immortal, the immortal
soldiers. The Rere-ward was kept by those that descended from Calirchan, The
Rere-ward.
which were never as yet depryued of that honor, for the good deserts that
Calirchan showed to Ismahel, when he strained himself, to pass with a mighty
Army even into Cafe, to perform the Regal Ceremonies at his Coronation, and
yet for all that never stirred the ordinary guarde of Casbin. The people of
Caribdiler and Chiaperis The Vaunt-Guarde.
made-vp the Vaunt-Guarde, accounted also to be men of good sort and very
warlike, because they have always showed themselves ready in any occasions or
troubles of war, and performed their parts very valiantly. And this was the
manner of ordering their battelles in late times.

Touching the revenues of this kingdom, the common opinion is, that in the
days of King Tamas the The Reue^ues of the kingdom of Persia in the days of
king Tamas.
crown did yearly receive into the Chamber of Casbin, four or five millions
of gold, which afterward he caused to be worth eight millions, by a sudden
enhaunsing of the value of his coin, giving in commandment by most severe
Edictes, that over all his Empire, for a certain space, all the money that he
had received, should be taken and accounted for as much more as it was worth,
and accordingly made pay to his soldiers and Sultans, and all other that were
in his pay. Which example (meethinkes) was well followed by Amurat the now-king
of The practice of the Persian and Turkish kings, in enhaunsing and abasing the
value of their moneis.
the Turks, who receiving at the City of Cairo the Cechino of gold for xliii.
Maidini, he put it out again in Constantinople, to pay his Capigi and
Ianissaries, withal lxxxv. Maidini, commanding that it should be of that value
over all the City, and countries subject unto it. But in the days of this
king of Persia, the revenues of this crown are thought to be so much
diminished, that it is the opinion The revenues of Persia at this day.
of all men, they amount to little more then two millions in all. Neither is
there to be found in him that industry and providence which was in Tamas, and
though it were, yet peradventure it would not be regarded by his subjects: and
it seems that the occasion of this decay is the loss of so many countries as
Soliman conquered, and particularly Mesopotamia, and Assyria, besides Erzirum
and the Tributes that are denied by the people of Georgia, and by other nations
of this kingdom. Next after this kind of revenue, which is paid in ready
money, and collected into the Chamber of Casbin from among the Cities that are
subject unto it: (although all the country, that was possessed by these
kings, were not appointed by division to the payment of a certain number of
soldiers, as the Turk uses to do in those Countries that he subdueth:) yet
is there a great sort of towns and villages which Certain lands assigned for
the payment of the Persian soldiers.
are very Feudataries to the croune of Persia, and are so many that they supply
a part of the pay that is due to the horsemen above mentioned, to four
thousand of the Curchi of Casbin, and to the Esahul aforenamed. Among all the
revenues that are gathered out of the Cities subject The greatest revenues com
out of Tauris, Cassan and Hispahan.
to Casbin, the greatest were always paid out of Tauris, Cassan, and
Hispahan, all Cities of great traffike, where the merchandise of Europe and
all Asia do arrive. And these are the revenues of this Crown.

The expenses briefly are these. The threescore and The expenses of the
Persian kingdom.
ten Sultanes, that serve in the government of the subject Cities, are paid
in ready money out of the Chamber of Casbin, with a stipend of three thousand,
four thousand, or five thousand Cecchins a piece. The two thousand Curchi,
that remain to be paid for their attendance, (who have no lands assigned to
them for their pay, as the four thousand abouenamed have) do also receive
their ordinary wages out of the kings Chamber, from a hundred and threescore,
to two hundred Cecchins a man. From thence also are defraied the stipends for
the magistracyes of the Judges, not only of Casbin but of all the whole
empire, and all the Treasurers likewise. Whereof some have a thousand, some five
hundred, and some a thousand and five hundred Cecchins yearly. The Garnisons
of certain Fortes, as of Elegy near to Nassiuan, Guuergi-Chalassi,
Cahaca-Calassi and such like, consisting some of a Fortes that have need of
ordinary Garrisons.
thousand and five hundred persons, some of a thousand, and some of five
hundred, are paid with these Revenues, and every Soldier of them receives
for his pay five Cecchins a month little more or less. I do not here reckon
the expenses that go out for the pay of other base Offices, of his household,
of the Queen, of the Prince, of his Children, of the Temples called their
Moschees, of the buildinges, of the gardens, and such like: and so I leave you
to make an account, how much remains over and above, for the king to put up
in his purse yearly.

And now having respect to the order of those things, which I propounded to my
self to treate-of, there rests nothing else, but only briefly to consider
the occasions, whereby it is come to pass, that a kingdom so meruelously
increased is so suddenly decreased and decayed. The occasions of the
declination of the Persian kingdom.
And we think the principal occasions thereof were three. The first, because
the enemy did in very short space wax very strong and mighty, by the great
conquestes that he made both by sea and by land: by means whereof it fell out
that those calamities and assaults, wherewith Persia was at sundry times
dyuersly afflicted and traveled, did always prove very grievous and mortal
unto it. The second because the empire of Persia had no fenced cities, that
were able to hold out or maintain themselves: and if there were any, as Van
was one, it was because they knew not how to find the means, either to
maintain, or to recover themselves: And who knows not, that the country
lying open, without any resistance, not only the huge forces of the Turk, but
also far less forces had been able to work these mischeefes, yea and far
greater then these are. The third, is the conquest of all Arts that the Turk
has made in the winning and subduing of so many christian cities, which are
replenished with all kind of diligent study and art. By which conquests the
Turk has not only learned to use his wonted and native weapons after a more
mortal and deadly manner: but also has invented new, to the great
astonishment and te^rour of his enemy, who has not only neglected to make use
of foreign instructions, and to learn the true means, to increase his own
forces, but (as it were) contemning all other men's wits; has thought
himself alone able to teach and instruct others. And this is that haultinesse
and ambitious conceit of the Persian, who in this present misery of his own,
vaunteth and braggeth of great matters, though all the world can see nothing
but most unhappy euentes in all his wars. The fourth is the concord and
celerity of the Turk, whereby he has attempted whatsoever he would, and has
obtained whatsoever he attempted: yea and oftentimes, before the Persians could
take their Armor, he has taken their countries. The fifte, which is the root
and fosterer of all the rest, has always been the discord and dissension in
the kingdom of Persia, and the keeping alive of so many brethren or nephews of
the king at once: and not only the keeping of them alive, but also the
maintaining of them in authority, in government, and in majesty. For hereby it
came to pass that all counselles and execution of counsels were divided,
Armies weakened, Captains minds suspended, and inclyning to diverse parties,
and to be brief there followed a mere confusion of all things. It is in deed
a barbarous and inhumaine thing for one brother to dye his crown and Scepter
with the blood of another, and oftentimes of so many of his breethren, and out
of all doubt it is a very hard and cruel position, that a man shall not be
able to rule without the making away of his dearest friends: But yet on the
other side it cannot be but too much negligence and lenity, to permit that
breethren and children, being of special ambition waxen over proud in their
own conceytes by reason of their princely gouernementes and authorities,
should stirre-vp arms one against another, and in the mean while scarce leave
any means for the poor king to escape with his life: who being by his own
blood made (even as it were) a rebel to the honor and quiet of the kingdom,
must needs reduce his empire into a most unhappy state. Both these kinds of
gouernementes, are in extremities, and therefore infected with vice and
barbarism, and not to be exercised by any man. And although Cornelius Tacitus
says, that Great enterpryses, which are recompensed with the proffit and
safety of the Commonwealth, may have some iniquity or unlawfulness in them:
notwithstanding every Christian prince ought by all means to avoid them, and
to establish the quietness of his kingdom, neither with too great cruelty,
nor with excessive lenity, in which two points all the Barbarian kings do
ordniarily offend. An advertisement to the reader.


I had here made an end of this book, had there not been brought unto me
certain books, some written in French and some in the Latin tongue, some with
the title of commentaries, and some of an History, under the names of diverse
Authors more Poetical then Historical, as faras I can gather: in which
books having found many wantes, as well concerning matters of the Persian and
Turkish opinions about their lying religion, as also touching the recognition
of certain ancient cities, the times wherein things have happened, the
actions themselves, the voyages of the armies, and many other particularities,
I thought it my duty to admonish all those, that after this our age shall
happen to read those books and this history, that they walk very
circumspectly in reading such writings. And especially let them take great
heed, that they do not believe these things following: namely, That the Turks
follow Aly, and the Persians follow Omar and Abubacher: for the matter is quite
contrary. Likewise, that Scutar was in old time Chrysopolis, whereas it is a
most clear case that it was Chalcedon, the founders whereof were termed
blind, because they did not see what error they committed in buylding a City
there, and leauinge the place where Constantinople now stands, as far
excelling the situation of Chalcedon, as gold excels lead. Also that Esrum
or Erzirum, as it should be called, is a city of Assyria, whereas indeed it is
not a city of Assyria, but of Cappadocia, if we speak properly. That Seruan
is the ancient Media, it being in truth Atropatia. That Osman Bassa took
Teflis, Mustaffa himself being there in person with all his host, and not (as
one of them says) Citra memorabile damnum, without any memorable loss, no,
not with any loss at all, because he found it empty. That Mustaffa, poisoned
himself voluntarily, which he did not indeed, but fell into an Apoplexy. And
many other such tales, whereof it is not now convenient to make any particular
confutation. And therefore passing them over, we will prosecute our former
order of this History.

The end of the second Book.
The Third Book.
The Argument.
The Turkish Army departs for Teflis. and comes to Archichelech.

A reuiew of the Army, and the number of those that wanted in the Army.

It comes to Triala. It wins a Castle.

It takes Teflis, and fortifieth it, and then departs for Seruan.

The Sorians forsake the Army of Mustaffa, and in their return home to Aleppo
they are assailed and discomfited by the Georgians.

The Ambassadors of Leuentogli entertained by Mustaffa.

Leuentogli himself also entertained.

Seclis a City under Seruania, yielded to Mustaffa.

A Dearth in the Turkish Army.

Victuallers go out for provision of Corn and Victualles, but they are
discomfited and utterly destroyed by the Persians.

Mustaffa with all his Army goes to fight with his enemies, and foyleth them
miserably.

Diverse disturbances and losses in the Turkish Army, by passing over the River
Canac.

A wonderful kind of ^oorde found out.

The Turks being refreshed from diverse annoyances, arrive at Eres in Ser^^^.

Mustaffa fortifieth Eres, and leaves Caitas Bassa in it.

Mustaffa departs, and leaves Osman Bassa, as General and Vizier in
Sumachia.

The people of Derbent yield themselves to Osman Bassa.

Mustaffa returns home: is in the country of Leuent, comes to Teflis, and
there leaves succors and a ga^^ison.

Mustaffa departs thence, in his journey he endu^eth great cold, and losses
in his Army, through the cunning stratagemes of the Georgiani, and namely
Hassain Bey discomfited.

Mustaffa at Altunchala receives the Widow and her other Son Alessandro.

He goes to Clisca, and so to Erzirum.

He sends both the Sons of the Widow to Constantinople.

Abdilcherai the Tartarian Captain comes to succor Osman Bassa.

Ares-Chan withdraws himself to the River Canac, and is discomfited by
Abdilcherai.

Genge sacked.

The Tartarians pitche their Tents in certain champeines and there take their
ease.

Caitas Bassa and his people utterly destroyed by the Persian Prince.

The Tartarians also destroyed by the same Prince.

Abdilcherai taken alive and sent to Casbin.

Osman Bassa flies from Sumachia to Demir-Capi.

Sumachia destroyed by the Persian Prince, and the people of Sechi also
chastised.

Abdilcherai at Casbin falls in love with the Queen: he is discovered, and
both he and the Queen slain by the Sultans.

Osman Bassa takes to wise the daughter of Sahamal the Georgian. He
discovers the treacheries of his Father in Law: he puts him to death, and
causes his country to be destroyed.

Aly-Vechiali returns from Mengrellia to Constantinople, and reports what
he has done in his Navigations.

THE THIRD BOOK.
AFter the solemn entertaynment of the Georgian Manucchiar, General Mustaffa
had given order over all his Camp, that the next morning they should remove
from those mountains. And now was every man bucklinge himself to accomplish
the Captains commandment, when as there happened very obscure and dark
storms that covered the heavens (as it were) with night and terror, and being
turned into rain and wind, casting out flashing fyres, and scouring the air
with terrible lightnings, did freshly afflict the Turkish army. Which rain
continued so vehement A notable rain.
for the space of four days together, that it seemed the heavens were melted
into waters: by means whereof it came to pass that out of the dead carcasses,
and heads before mentioned, there issued a most horrible stink, so that
partly thereby, and partly by the mire, and other filth of the Cammells,
Mules, and horses, they spoiled their armor, their apparel, their devises,
their plumes, their pauillions, and all things else that was of any worth, yea
all their bravery and beauty, and in the bodies of the people there arose
diverse diseases and infirmities, though not very pestilent, but breeding rather
annoyance then death to the Turks. But at last the heavens having ceased the
rain, the lightning, the blustering and the storms, and the Sun having
cleared all the air, Mustaffa raised The Turkish army remoueth toward Teflis.
his camp to pass toward Teflis: and because the ground was still very
moist and slabby, with the rain that had fallen in such abundance, the
Camells, that carried the heauiest burdens could not go onwardes, and the
horses that drew the artillery, were subject to the same difficulty, and so the
army could not that day pass any further then the plains where the lake
called Chielder Giol stands, which (if the distance of places, and the
nouelty of names The Lake called Chielder-Giol.
do not deceive us) may well be thought to be that, whence Euphrates takes his
beginning. And there they stayed to dry and trim their apparel, their
weapons, and their harness, and to yield to their sick and wounded soldiers
their due and deserved refreshing.

The Turks removing from thence the next day about noone arrived at a Castle
called Archichelec, sometimes belonging to the Georgiani, but conquered by
Soliman The Turks at Archichelec.
in his late wars against Tamas, and ever sithence possessed by the Turks.
Here Mustaffa taking fit occasion of this friendly castle, and having
commodity of pasture and opportunity of fair wether, (by reason of the loss
which happened unto him in the last battle, and the necessity of continual
traveling through his enemies cuntry) resolved to take a surueigh of all his
army, wherein having ranged them in due order, and marshalled them A surueigh
of the army.
with exquisite diligence, he found his number diminished, as well by means of
his late battle, as also of the forenamed infirmities, by forty thousand
persons or there aboutes. 40000, persons wanting in the Turkish Army.
Of which number, there was not a few that fled away from the host, and being
weary with following so rough and perrillous a journey, closely and by night
departed from the Camp, and returned into their own cities, to take their
ease at home. From hence the Army departed, and lodged the next night near to
a vile and filthy marish, called by the Turks Peruana-Giol, which we may well
call, The Lake of Slaves: and the next day at The Turks at the lake called
Peruana Giol.

The Turks at Triala.


Triala, where there are to be seen at this day the ruins of a great City
and of many churches, whereof some being repaired and restored by godly men,
are still maintained and kept by catholic priests according to the holy
customs of Rome. The relics of those happy and religious The praises of
those Christian forces that took the holy City.
forces, that with so great and faithful zeal passed the seas and mountains,
and with the Sacred sign of the triumphant cross, (being displaied in the
winds upon their victorious Ensigns,) perced through these barbarous nations,
even to the borders of the Leuant. Blessed and happy souls, that prepared for
your selves so fruytefull deaths, and with so great glory purchased at one
time both kingdoms upon earth, and the kingdom of heaven. Very well worthy
are you, that as in the heavens you are entertained and praised by those souls
that are Citizens thereof, so here upon earth you should be commended and
celebrated by the hautie verses of so grave and worthy a writer. Rejoice and
live in Gods name eternally, and The praise of Torquato.

Tasso.


pray unto that sovereign bounty, that into the hearts of his mighty champions
he would inspire that enterprise, that is so greatly desired of all men, and
the longer it is delayed and slowed, the more difficult and perrillous it will
prove.

The next day the Turks ascended the high and craggy mountain, that stands
upon Teflis, from the top whereof descending the day following, the seized
upon a Castle of the Georgiani, called by the Turks Giurgi-Chala, Giurgi Chala
possessed by the Turks.
and by us the Georgian Castle: and departing from thence, and making their
next abode in certain plains, the day following they came in good time nere
to the river that runs by Teflis. But in this iourny, from the place, where
the surueigh of the Camp was made, even to this River, there happened diverse
and sundry slaughters of certain soldiers, that separating themselves from
the army, being driven thereuntoo by hunger, went to get some victuals, for
themselves and their beasts: for that diverse Captains of Georgia, as Giusuf,
Daut, and (as some say) The ambush of the Georgiani.
Alessandro the eldest son of the widow, having gathered together a number
of their own country soldiers, had secretly followed the Turkish army, and
as men that were acquainted with all the ways of that regio^, they stood
watching in such places as the victuallers should passethrough, and suddenly
setting upon them, spoiled them at once both of their goods and life. And this
happened as often as there were either footmen or horsemen, (without any
notice given thereof to their general, who had granted them certain sure
soldiers to guide them,) that being persuaded thereuntoo by hunger, diuyded
them selves from the custody and safe keeping of the rest of the host.

Mustaffa found the rock or castle of Teflis empty, and Mustaffa at Teflis.
without any inhabitant at all, for that Daut (of whom even now we made
mention) running away as soon as he heard of the coming of the Turks, and
betaking himself to the fields, sought means to provide better for himself
that way, then he could have done, if he had stayed still in the Forte, and so
should have been constrained of necessitye to have remained prisoner.
Whereupon Mustaffa, rather then he would vtrerly raze it, resolved to restore
the old and weak walls thereof, and to make them stronger, that they might
endure the sound and shaking of the Artillary, wherewithal he meant to
strengthen Mustaffa fortifieth the walls of Teflis.
it: which resolution he put in execution, and placed (...) so pleased him, was
ready to do him reverence, and by word of mouth to promise him that
devotion, which he had always borne in his mind to the Ottoman kings. With
merry countenance did Mustaffa behold these Mustaffa cheerfully entertaineth
the embassa dors.
Ambassadors, and most cheerfully heard their offered obedience: and thereupon
presently sent them back and willed the^ to cause Leuentogli to come, for that
his friendship should be dear and acceptable to him. The Christian ambassadors
went to fetch their Lord, for whose welcome the Turkish General took order
with all the Captains of his army, that they should show the greatest signs
of joy that might be: which was with all solemnity accordingly performed, and
his coming celebrated with all tokens of favor and kindness. And after he had
presented those precious and rare gifts that he brought with him, he offered
his obedience to Captain Mustaffa, with the most Leuentogli to Mustaffa.
earnest and lively speeches that he could possibly devise, calling Amurat his
Lord, and showing that he took it in ill part, that Mustaffa passed not
through his territory, where he might have enioied all manner of commodities,
abundance of corn, and other helps necessary for his army: yet for his better
satisfaction, he would look for him at his return from Siruan, being in the
mean time most ready to bestow all that he had for the service of the
Ottomans: telling him moreover, that for so much as in many just and lawful
respects he could not possibly wait on him into Siruan, yet he would
accompany him always in mind, and would pray to the creator of all things for
his prosperity and all happy success. And so eftsoons Mustaffa receaueth
Leuentogli, and promises to pass through his territories at his return.
praying him to return by his Cities, he took his leave. Mustaffa received
his presents courteously, and in exchange thereof bestowed upon him a
Battell-Axe, a Targat, and some apparel of cloth of gold, and gave him his
answer in very magnificall and grave terms, and in the end promised the
Christian Duke, that in his return he would pass through his country, and
so dismissed him: with special commandment, that his departure should be
honored in the same sort, as he was entertained at his coming.

The Turkish Army followed-on their begone journey toward Siruan: and in
the space of twelve days, after their departure from Teflis, traueiling
always thorough low and moorish ways, that were intricate by reason of
reeds and mire, they arrived in the confines of the Medians, otherwise called
the Siruanians, near to the river of Canac, where of in the desoription of
Georgia, Armenia, and Atropatia, we made but a short, and yet a plain Mustaffa
and his host at the river Canac.
and manifest mention. Somewhat on this side of the same river, the Turks
ascended a little higher, being very weary with the long journey that they had
made, and rested themselves one whole day, in which time the Subjects of the
City of Sechi bordering upon the Siruanians and The subjects of Sechi come
to offer themselves to the captain.
the Georgiani, four days journey distant from Sumachia, came to offer
themselves to Mustaffa, as vassalles and subjects to the Turk: All which were
gladly entertained, and some of the chief of them apparelled in silks and
gold, and honored with great magnificence, and in the end had all protection
promised unto them.

The Turkish Army, as I have told ye, was all foreweatied with the continual
journey of twelve days together: but yet far more afflicted with hunger,
having The hunger of the Turkish Army.
not found in those parts so much as one wild beast, whereby they might quench
their desire of meat; so that there was not a man among them, but sought
means to get some store of victuaile, especially when they understood, that
Mustaffa was resolved to pass over Canac, and enter into a new country,
unknown to them all, and where they knew not what hope to conceive of finding
any substance fit for them. And whiles they were enquiring among themselves,
who was able to conduct them into any place where they might find relief,
behold, there were certain Persians taken, (whether they were there by
chance, or brought thither for some Stratageme, I The Persian spies taken.
know not,) who being demanded where they might have corn and meat to slake
the hunger of the Army, after much resistaunce, and at the last told them,
that not The intelligence that the spies gave for vittaile.
far from the Camp, after they had passed certain marshes, where Canac
discharges it self, and runs into Araxis, they should find many fields,
full of rise and corn in the blade, and a little farther, certain fat heardes
of cattle feeding, that would be sufficient to satisfy the appetites of all
their people. Of this news was Mustaffa certified, and although he greatly
doubted the treacheries of his enemies, and the subtleties of the Persians, yet
to gratify his soldiers, and to make them the more willing to follow him in
his passage to Siruan, he licensed every Mustaffa lycenceth every man that
would go for corn and other necessaries.
man, that had any desire thereunto, to go and provide them selves of
victuails, and so suffered all that would, to go freely. When the Captain had
granted them this license, many Spahini, many Zaini, and some Sangiacchi also,
sent diverse me^ to fetch this provision of corn and cattle. And there went
for that purpose about ten Ten thousand servile persons go for victuaile.
thousand servile persons, with many Camels, horses, and mules to carry the
pray.

But the success fell out quite contrary to their designementes: for Tocomac,
Alyculi-Chan, Emanguli-Chan, Serap-Chan, and all the rest of the Soldiers,
that escaped out of the overthrow given them by Mustaffa in the plains of
Chielder, (after they had with all diligence made report to their king at
Casbin of the issue of this battle in those champaines) having gathered
together so many of their people, as were left them, able to endure the
difficulties of warfare, and having recovered such places as they thought safe
and friendly for them, did always lie in awaite to know the marching and
passing of the Turkish Army. And at last, being certainly infourmed by the
inhabitants of Reiuan and Georgia, what way they kept, and that of necessity
they must needs arrive at the banks of Canac, they began to devise some
notable Stratageme, whereby they might revenge the great boldness of their The
Persian Captains take counsel how to annoy the Turks.
enemies, and make this their entry into Siruan very dangerous and
dammageable to them. And yet having neither courage nor force sufficient to
assault the whole Army, they resolved with themselves, (as men that had
stomach enough to attempt great matters,) to stay in privy ambush at some fit
place, till some band of the Turkish Army should arrive, where the pray of
corn and cattle might allure some of them to descend into those fields to
relieve their common necessities: and so they sent out diverse The stratageme of
the Persians.
men, who fayning that they went about their own businesses, made show as
though they had suddeinly and at unawares lighted upon the Turkish Camp, and
revealed unto them, as a great secret, what a good pray was hardby them. And
so withdrawing themselves out of the way, they stayed privily to watch, when
the Turks would send their victuailers to fetch away the corn and cattle:
when as, within the space of three only days, it so fell out that the
foresaid ten thousand servile persons arrived at the place, where they had no
sooner begun to charge themselves with their pray, but they were surprised by
the Persians, and saving a very few, that were nimble at flight, they were all
slain, and left both their pray and their lives The ten thousand victuailers
shame by the Persians.
behind them. The noise of their cry, and the thunder of their Gunnes was
heard in the Turkish host, which made Mustaffa to imagine, that the matter was
fallen out, even as in deed it was, and therefore presently mounting on
horseback, and raising his whole Army, every man desirous of revenge, ran
with bridle on the horse-necke to succor the poor people that were already
slain. And although Mustaffa runs with all his host to succor the
victuailers.
the Turks came not in so good time, as to yield them any aid, yet came they
very fitly to surprise the Persians, who beyond all honesty and duty were
ouer-busie in loading themselves, and carrying away the pray that they had
recovered.

The place, where the corn was gathered, was as it were almost an Islande,
watered with two rivers, Araxis, and Canac, which with a little compass
fetched-about, discharges it self with a very deep channel into Araxis. On
the side of Araxis, which was the left side of the Turkish host, Dreuis Bassa
kept one wing: on the side of Canac, The order of Mustaffa his battle.
being the right side, did Beyran Bassa hold another wing: and Mustaffa
himself led the middle of the battle. which if the Persians would not have
encountered, then should they have been constrained to have run and drowned
themselves either in Canac, or in Araxis. As Soon then as the Persian Captains
had descried Mustaffa with all his forces making have toward them, and saw
such a multitude of soldiers, of ensigns, of spears, and of fyreworkes, and
with all remembered the late overthrow in the Champaines of Chielder, then
began they to beethinke themselves how much better it had been for them to
The Persians repent their long aboade.
have used more speed in departing out of that Demy-Island, and so with
sudden dispatch avoiding their enemies forces to have contented themselves
with the late slaughter of those sclauish and servile people, and not to have
stayed for so unequal and importunate assault. And being excited thereunto by
a certain intrinsicall and native virtue, they discoursed among themselves,
whether it were better for them to fly, or with so great disaduauntage to
join battle with them, and rather to die with an honorable death, then to
live with reproache of a shameful flight. At the last, whiles every man was
thus tossed Great thoughts that troubled the Persians.

The Persians resolve to abandon the fight, and to fly.


with the tempests of thoughts, they resolved utterly to preserve themselves
for the state of Persia, and to continue their lives for the great and weighty
affairs of that kingdom: deeming it rather to be a point of high wisdom,
then of shame, not to lay open their security and the honor of their public
and private causes, to most certain and undoubted losses, and miserable issues.

But in taking their prepensed flight they discovered Difficulties in taking
their flight.
new difficulties: for that they were in such sort straightened within the
said Demy-Island, as they had none other ground left, but only that, which
beyond their expectations the Turks had already possessed, and so being
greatly perplexed with these troubles, every man began to betake themselves to
their own private conceits. Tocomac and Emir-Chan, with other Capitanes of
the army were the first that turned their backs, and some by wading, The
Persian Capitaines save themselves by passing the tiues.
and some by swimming passed over Canac, being greatly helped by the valor
and agilitie of their aduenturous and gallant horses. The example of these
Capitaines moved many other to do the like, though with a contrary fortune:
for that their horses being out of breath and windlesse, there remained a great
number of them drowned in the waters. At which fearful spectacle, The
Persians drowned in the River.
others being amassed, even as it were in a headlong rage and fury, perceiving
that if they should fly, vnavoydeable death was present before their eyes,
settled all their trust in resisting, and reposing all their hope even in
despair, they showed unspeakable acts of valor in fighting. But what can one
do against a hundred? For they also without any great adoo were all destroyed,
though with luck and fame far unlike their fellows. But what helps The
Persians in fight show great signs of valor.
Fame in such a medley, where the names of those are not known, that either
fight manfully or fly effeminately? Others at last resolved to yield
themselves without drawing sword or bending bow, imagining that by so doing
they might recover themselves, together with such spoils and riches, as they
had, whatsoever they were. But what benefit can gold and precious stones be to
a few in the tumult and confusion of many conquerours, who being given rather
to unjust ravening then to upright piety, Conquerours do but little regard
their promises, being given to spoil.

The Demye Island made the perpetual grave of a courageous and warlike people.


do but hardly make account of their promises, much less to be liberal of
that which they have not promised? In this sort did the Persian army rest
discomfited and destroyed: and so this Demy-Island being first stained with the
blood of the enemy, and afterward with the slaughter of the neighbor and
proper inhabitant, was the perpetual sepulcher of a courageous and warlike
people.

The Persian Capitaines fled away in great sorrow and affliction for their
unexpected overthrow, and knowing now assuredly whether the designementes of
the Turks tended, who were already turned toward Siruan, they resolved in as
ill plight as they were, to return home to their places of abode, which they
had forsaken, and to certify the king in Casbin thereof with all speed, to the
end that (if he could) he should send such provision as might be sufficient to
annoy the enemies army: whereof (as Emir Sultan a Merchant of Azemia, of great
traffike, of a very sincere mind and affection, and a man of free speech; being
my very familiar friend, has often times confessed unto me in Aleppo) Tocomac
failed not to write unto his king, that there was slain of the Turks a great
number: and so meaning to excuse his late overthrow, and to make his loss to
seem more tolerable, he made show of a great slaughter of the Turks in this
second battle also: although in very deed, with the miserable and total
destruction of his own slender Army, the loss of the Turks in this fight
did not exceed the number of three thousand besides The loss of the Turks
in this battle.
the slaughter of ten thousand victuailers. And when this certificat was made
to the King, every one of the said Persian Capitaines, with the license of
Tocomac departed The Persians withdraw themselves to their several
gouernementes.
to their several gouernementes, as Emanguli-Chan to Genge, Serap-Chan to
Nassiuan, Tocomac himself to Reiuan, and all the rest to other Cities, to the
government whereof by the commandment of the king they were before appointed,
and so remained in expectation of new warrantes from Casbin.

In the mean while the Turks had retired themselves again to their Tents,
from whence by occasion of this unexpected battle they were suddenly raised,
and now was Mustaffa with all his troop arrived at the banks of the river
Canac on the same side, where he must begin to pass over, as before is
mentioned. For being minded to go up to the City of Eres, which first of all
offreth it self to your sight, when ye travel on that side to Sumachia, there
was no remedy but he must needs pass over the foresaid water of Canac: a
thing very displeasant to the whole Army, and yet could not be avoided, if he
would execute the commandementes of his king. And therefore (fall out
whatsoever could fall) making strayte proclamation over all the host, that
every man should Mustaffa commands all his host to pass over the River
Canac.
be ready the next day to wade over the river, he prepared himself for that
passage. At this proclamation suddenly all his people arose in a tumult, with
great pride ran before the General, with injurious terms reproved his
folly and inhumanity, protested utter danger to The soldiers in a tumult
threaten General Mustaffa.
himself, and universal confusion to the whole army, and to be brief, prayed
him that he would surcease from proceeding any further, unless he would
replenish the whole camp with carcasses and spoils. But neither could their
threatenings nor yet their entreaties any thing move the resolute mind of the
General, who gave them none other answer but this: That so had Amurat
appointed: that The answer of Mustaffa to his soldiers
if all the rest should show themselves unwilling to obey their sovereign, he
would not, and in duty thought he could not do the like, but in truth would
be the first man to attempt and perform that which all they so abhorred and
reproved: That not in Idleness and ease, but in great pain and difficult
enterprises true soldiers are discovered, who ought never to be afraid of
changing brittle life with everlasting honor, nor to avoid death, if it
should happen, for the service of their King. And for his own part he did most
earnestly pray them, that after he had attempted the passage of the water, if
any thing happened to him otherwise the^ well and to be alive, then he might be
carried dead to the other side of the river, to the end that if he could not
execute the commandment of his King, whiles he was alive, yet he might
perform the same at least, when he was but a speechless and a lyfelesse
carcass: and for making too great an account of his own life, the desire of
his King might not in any sort be defrauded. Diverse and sundry murmurs and
whisperings followed upon this speech of the General, who notwithstanding the
next morning (imitating therein the example of Alexander, in making his army to
pass over Tigris, if we may believe Quintus Curtius,) did first of all wade
over Lib. 4.

Mustaffa first of all wadeth over the deep River Canac.


the deep and swift river himself, and presently after him waded over all the
Bassaes of the Camp, and with them all their slaves: by whose example the rest
also at the last were induced to do the like, and so continued till by the
darkness of the night their passage was interrupted: which was the occasion,
why more then half the Nighti was the occasion that more then half the host
went not over.
army could not get over, besides that their public treasure and artillary
were yet also on this side of the water. But this passage being attempted with
very great tumult and disorder, and no regard had to the places that were
wadeable, it came to pass, that about eight thousand persons, 8000. Turks
drowned in wading over the river of Canac.
being carried away by the violence of the river, were miserably drowned, with
the great outcry of all the host. The like happened also to many mules,
cammelles and Sumpter-horses, upon whose backs diverse persons being mounted,
because they were desirous to pass dry over the water, were likewise headlong
overwhelmed therein.

With great complaints and blasphemous cursinges was the whole night spent on
this side Canac, and every man being even desperate knew not what to do to
avoid that dangerous passage, whose fear and grief the example of their
unfortunate fellows that were drowned did greatly increase: And no doubt some
pestilent sedition had ensued thereupon, that would have bredde much harm to
the Turkish affairs, if by the death and overthrow of those that were drowned,
there had not been discovered a shallow Forde, that assured safe passage to
those that were left: wherein they were much more happy then their former
fellows, in that their delay had wrought them great ease. For in the passage,
which the people made that followed Mustaffa, the grauel of the bottom of the
river being raised and removed by the heavy hooues of the cattle, was driven
down along the said water to a place, where by great good hap there was also
a Foorde, and there gathering it self together in a heap, had in such sort
raised the depth of the channel, that it made as it were a shelfe for their
commodious passage, so A marvelous kind of Foord.
that the remnant of the people, carriages, and artillary passing over the
same, there was not so much as one man that perished. And in this manner did
the Turkish people pass over Canac, and upon the banks thereof did they rest
themselves that day, and the next, and there made stay till the whole army was
mustred and set in order. From thence removing themselves all together, not
having any means at all to find victuailes either for themselves or for their
beasts, they encamped the day following in certain barren champaines, where
there was neither corn nor cattle, neither could they learn that in those
quarters there were any villages at all. By means whereof the hunger of their
beasts increasing greatly, (a thing affirmed by diverse faithful and The
calamities of the Turkish host,
credible soldiers that were present in those calamities) they were
constrained to give to their horses and mules the leaves and stalks of very
dry and withered reeds, and such other like things of no sustenaunce at all.
And the men themselves were feign to satisfy their hunger with those uttermost
relics, that they went up and down piking and gathering out of those poor
victuailles, which now by corruption were abominable to man's nature. There was
not a man in the whole army, but perceived that it was high time to rid
himself of these inconveniences: howbeit to return backward was odious to
them all, in respect of the present famine, and to go on forward was more
terrible unto them, in respect of the great fear that they had, to continue
some longer time in these commenced miseries. Notwithstanding needs must they
follow the fortune of their captains: among whom Mustaffa the next morning,
before all the rest, set himself forward on his determined journey. He had
not long marched onward, but there was discovered good store of sundry plants,
and near unto them a very large plain all green and flourishing, and
garnished with many trees: by the only sight whereof every man was refreshed
for the hope of good harbor, and hastened their paces somewhat more then
ordinary, until they were entered into those champaines, being abundantly
fertile in all kind of corn and fruits, that could be desired of hungry man
and horse. In this place did every man satisfy his appetite The Turks
refreshed with victuaile, and other commodities.
with meat and his body with rest, and forgot in part the calamities and
damages that were ouerpassed: and the next morning with willing minds they
were all ready to follow Mustaffa, who removing his camp, and leading it still
through the fruitful and pleasant fields, abounding in all things necessary
for man's sustentation, arrived at the city of Eres, being (as we have before
declared) The Turks at Eres in Siruan.
the chief city in that coast of Siruan, as you travail from Georgia.

This city of Eres was forsaken by a great number of Eres abandened by the
Persians.
her inhabitants, as soon as it was noysed that the Turks were come to
Canac, and they all followed the Standards of Samir Ghan, Governor of the said
city, being allured there unto by the example of Ares-Chan, (whom also a
good while before the Persian king had trusted with the government of the
city of Sumachia, and as soon as he likewise heard that Mustaffa was come to
Canac, he Samir-Chan: and Ares Chan Persian Governors withdraw themselves
into the mountains.
abandoned his own city, and withdrew himself into the mountain, as a sure
and safe place,) There did Samir Chan remain with him, and other the
Governors of Sechi, and other places of the said Province, all of them,
jointly together, attending the end of these great novelties. So that the
entry of the Turks into Eres, was not by The entry of the Turks into Eres
not disturbed by the enemy, nor enriched by spoil and victory.
the enemies sword in any sort disturbed, nor yet with any spoils, that were
found therein, any thing enriched, for that the people had carried away with
them all the best things they had, and every man endeavored in the common loss
of his country, to keep and preserve his private goods at the least, and his
own proper life. Two and Mustaffa remains in Eres 22. days.
twenty days did Mustaffa remain under Eres: in all which time, although
somewhat long, there was not one man that felt any inconvenience in any matter
of sort, but during those days employed himself to the erecting of a
Fortress within the said city: upon whose walls were Eres fortifyed and
fenced by Mustaffa.
placed two hundred pieces of shot, and for the custody thereof was appointed
Caitas Bassa, one of the voluntary Captains, with five thousand soldiers.

In this mean time, for that the city of Sumachia, now called Sumachi, stood
not far distant from thence, it being the Metropoliticall city of that
Province, and of great account, because it stands upon the way that leads
to the city of Derbent, now called Demircapi, but in times past Alexandria,)
Mustaffa commanded Osman Bassa, one also of the voluntary Captains, as before
we have Mustaffa appoints Osman bassa to keep Sumachia and Derbent.
noted, to possess that city with ten thousand men, under the title of
Vizier, and Governor General of Siruan: Giving him further in charge, that in
any case he should clear the passage to Derbent abouesaid, and so give
present advertisement to the Tarrarians of his arrival, who without all doubt
having passed through Colchis, could not choose but by this time be arrived in
those quarters, at the least: for so had they promised to Amurath, with all
faith and fidelity. Osmen departed to Sumachia accordingly, and had friendly
entertainment of those that remained Osman Bassa friendly ent^tayned at
Sumachia.
there, and were determined to commit their lives to the fury of the
conquerers: so that he did presently surprise the city, entreating all the
inhabitants in friendly manner, without doing or suffering any outrage to be done
upon them. Which usage being understood by the Alessandrians, (a people that by
natural in clination, in ceremonies, in worship, and in observation of that
their religion, lived not as Persians in deed, but subject to the Persians,
and principally to Mustaffa Sultan, the governor of that city, and yet for
all that being of the Turkish belief:) they sent presently to offer themselves
to Osman, beseeching The Alexandrians yield themselves to the Turks.
him to receive them into his protection, and in all occasions to defend them
from the Persians.

Of all these matters Mustaffa had advertisement before he departed from Eres:
from which place, (after he had finished his Fortress, his Garrisons, and all
his Rampires, being infourmed of these good aduenturds, follioited there unto
by the Giannizzars and the people of Grecia, and somewhat enforced so to do by
the season of the year which was unfit for so long a voyage as was yet behind,
and persuading himself that he should leave his affairs there in good and
reasonable state) with great confidence he departed, and turned his course to
wards the country of Leuentogli, otherwise called Alexander the Great, as he
had Mustaffa departs from Eres.
entreated him to do in his late passage to Siruan: and having traueiled a long
journey, he lodged at the foot of a certain mountain, where he wanted no
kind of good victuailes: And from thence sent Engines and Pioners to make a
bridge over Canac, that his Army might passe-ouer A bridge built upon Canac to
pass over.
without any danger. On the hither side of the river they took up their
lodginges: and from that place Mustaffa sent to give notice of his arrival to
Sahamal, the inhabitant and Lord of the mountain of Brus, (whereof we have
heretofore made often mention:) who presently came to yield himself as vassal
to the Turks, and being Sahamal yields himself to Mustaffa.
entertained with his accustomed pomp, and rewarded with apparel, sword,
battell-Axe and Target all guilt, he took his leave and returned to his old
withdrawing places of the mountain.

After that Sahamal was gone, Mustaffa departed also, and traveled forward by
night, because he would not loose the opportunity of fair wether: but so it
happened through ill guiding, that he lost his way, and knew not whither he
went, being conducted through rough ways, Mustaffa by night loses his way.
and uneasy and difficult passages, whereby he was enforced to set up his
tents, and wait for daylight: which rising very clear did manifest unto them,
that they were now entered into the countries of Leuentogli. And therefore he
caused proclamation to be made fourthwith over all his Mustaffa in the country
of Leuent.
army, that upon pain of death no man should be so hardy; as to molest or
disquiet any of the subjects of Alessandro, but to have good respect unto
them, and to entreat them with all curtesy. The day following he still
continued his journey in the said country of Schender, where he wanted no
victuailles, and the rather for that the same day there arrived from Zaghen
certain ambassadors of Alessandro, The ambassadors of Leuentogli with relief
and presents received by General Mustaffa.
with great abundance of cattle, of corn, of fruits, and of other relief,
which was sent by him for a present to the General, with a solemn excuse that
he came not himself, because the infirmity of his body would not suffer him.
Wherewithal Mustaffa rested satisfied, and leaving the cittye of Zaghen on the
right hand, he caused the messengers of Alessandro to guide him, and so took
his way toward Teflis: and by them was so directly conducted, that within the
space of three days, without either hunger or thirst, or any other
inconvenience of his army, they brought him to Teflis, from whence they
returned Mustaffa at Teflis.
homewards, being well contented for their pains by Mustaffa.

But those that he had left at Teflis before for the custody thereof, he found
so miserably plagued with famyne, that they were constrained to eat Cattes and
Dogs, and The famine of the sould^ers left in the Castle of Teflis.
Sheep skins, and such like unwonted and strange things. Many of them also
he found sick, and some dead, by reason that they could not obtain license of
Mahamet Bassa their captain to go out of the castle to provide victuaile, for
fear of the enemies. By whose providence such care was taken for their corn,
fruit, and cattle, that, although those of Teflis had issued outfor that
purpose, yet was it all preserved in very safe and secure places without any
danger. Which thing was credibly certifyed to me not by one alone, but by many
of the Georgians, with whom I was familiarly acquainted both in respect of my
traffic with them, and also of my practice in physic. But Mustaffa
refreshed and relicued them all with words, with money and with meat, and gave
them plenty of all Mustaffa releeueth them with meat, money and words.
things, And after he had remained there two days, he raised his army, and
put himself in the way toward the champaines that were subject to the said
city, to put all to sword and fire, as indeed he did. Only the sepulchers
(wherein rested the bones and ashes of Simons progenitors, and near whereunto
he took up his first lodging) were leaft unhurt and untouched, by the Turkish
fury. The day following they traveled over rough and ragged mountains full of
a thousand difficulties, which were the more increased by wonderful great
snowes that were fallen, by means whereof, together with diverse other
annoyances, many soldiers, horses, cammelles and mules did perish. In this
distress they continued two Great snowes breed many annoiances to the Turks.
whole days, during which time all the people were fallen into such a
disorder, that forgetting the fear of their enemies country, without any
regard or respect, every man took up his several lodging aparte, and one on
this side, and another on that side shrouded himself, where The Turks
dispersed by cold weather.
he might find either some thick bushe, or some small cottage, or some quiet
valley to shelter him from the wind, from the snow, and from the storms.

But certain Georgian captains (and peradventure even the same, that had
before so evil entreated the people of Soria,) having sent out scouts to watch
the Turkish army from time to time, and being thoroughly certifyed of The
Georgiansly in wait for the Turks.
the disorder wherein it was, did join themselves together, and in the right
approached near unto it, secreatly, quietly and boldly searching out some
opportunity, how they might cool the burning desires of their enemies blood.
In the end having observed Hossain Bey, my good friend and Hossain Bey the
authors friend.
acquaintance, among many others the son of fruitful Giambulat, (I term him
fruitful, for that in one night Fruitful G^ambulat that saw 86. children
alive at once that were his heirs.
there were borne unto him 7. children by diverse women, and he himself saw at
on time alive fourscore and six heirs of his own body begotten,) that he
had withdrawn himself alone under certain mountains to defend himself from
the storm and the wind: they were persuaded that this was a sit occasion to
gain them some spoils: and having assaulted him, they slew all his slaves,
and all his squadrons of soldiers, took a great booty of many Hossain Bey
assaulted by the Georgians, and greatly discomfited.
loades of money and apparel, led away with them all his horses, and
whatsoever else they could find, and scarce gave him any leisure to save
himself, by flying into the Tents of Beiran Bassa. And it may be that he had
also remained for a pray to the Georgians, had it not been for Hala Bey,
captain of the Zaini and Spahini of Aleppo, an old man as any among the
Turks, of an extraordinary Hala Bey the authors friend.
bounty, of a sincere mind, of free speech, and well exercysed in feats of
Arms, from whom I liberally received many particularities of these things
that I have written. This man being wakened by the noise, and raising the
people of Beyran Bassa, ran out himself to meet Hossain Bey, and showed him
the way to escape as before. And Hossain Bey escapes to the tents of Beyran
Bassa.
upon this rising of the Turks, the Georgiani retired themselves with their
gotten pray, and so the rest had leisure to withdraw themselves together into
more sure and safe places.

The next morning the Camp removed, and in the evening came to a castle
called Ghiurchala, where it stayed a whole day to make provision of victuaile,
which was attempted by sending many of their slaves abroad into the fields,
conducted by the men of the said castle. In the mean while, there arrived
certain ambassadors from one that was then called the nephew of Simon,
signifying The nephewe of Simon veeldeth himself faynedly to Mustaffa.
to Mustaffa, that (if it would stand with his good pleasure) their lord would
come to salute him, and to offer himself unto him as his vassaile. whereof
Mustaffa was very glad, and declaring unto them that his coming should be very
acceptable unto him, he sent them back again with presents and courteous
words. But although he was expected all that day, yet made he not his
appearance, and indeed all those that were sent out into the fields for
relief, were miserably hacked in pieces, to the great grief of Mustaffa,
thinking himself too much abused by those fained ambassadors, who in truth
proved to be cunning and crafty spies, rather then ambassadors.

From this place the army departed with great hunger, over diverse uneasy hills
and rough places of the Georgianj, Hunger among the Turks.
where they were feign oftentimes to rest themselves, and at last came to the
confynes of the widows territory, upon the feast day of the Turks Ramadan.
In the entrance whereof they must needs pass through a narrow strait between
certain mountains, where the river crankleth The strait of the mountains of
Georgia, watered by Araxis.
it self with a thousand tourninges and windinges about the low valley: A very
difficult place and indeed so narrow, that no more then one man alone could
pass through it. Between this strait, and a very thick and hilly wood, they
lodged upon the banks of the said river, and from thence the next morning they
removed, and trauelledouer very steep mountains, and woody Forrestes, over
ice and snow more hard then marble-pauemente, and over other hanging rocks,
in such miserable sort that many camelles, mules and horses, as well for
carriage Misery of the Turks.
as for saddle, fell down headlong into the whirlepittes of the river to their
utter spoil. Through this ruinous cragges, and diverse other miseryes they
iournyed all the next day, and after that, another day also as miserable and
dammageable to the Army as the former: but Their misery continued.
at last being shrewdly spoiled and ill handled by hunger, foiled and
slaughtered by their enemies, and afflicted with the hard season and situation
of the place, they arrived within the territories that lay under Altunchala,
the widows The Turks relieved at Altunchala.
Palace, where they had all manner of desired relief, for all the miseries
that they had endured since their departure from Chiurchala until this place,
being the space of six days, which ordinarily, if it had been a common
traveled way, would have been performed in one only days journey.

The Widow with her elder son Alessandro, came down from the Castle, and
went to the pauillion of Mustaffa, The widow and her son Alessandro come to
Mustaffa.
offering him diverse presents, and promising unto him all faithful obedience.
Mustaffa received her courteously, and declared unto her the good
entertaynement, that he gave to her younger son Manucchiar, that went with him
to Siruan, who being there present showed evident token thereof to his mother.
Mustaffa, (dissembling for the present time his privy displeasure, that he
bare the widows son Alessandro) embraced him courteously, and prayed her that
she would be pleased to leave him also there with him, for that it should
turn to both their contentmentes, signifying further unto her, that he would
send both her sons to Constantinople to Amurath, with letters of credence for
their yielded obedience, for their favor showed to his army in giving them so
secure passage, and so many helps, and lastly for their good deserts, the
rather that by the said Sultan they might be honorably entertained, and
enriched with honors and dignities. The Widow, although her mind was
herewithall sore troubled and perplexed, yet outwardly in her countenance
showed her self to be pleased, and seemed courteously to yield, what she was of
necessity constrained to grant: as well because Mustaffa had one of her sons
already in The Widow leaves both her sons in Mustaffaes hands.
possession, as also for that her self and her whole state were now in his
power, and as it were at his devotion: and therefore leaving both her sons
behind her, she returned to her Castle.

Mustaffa, after he had stayed in that place with his army two whole days
without feeling the want of any thing departed thence toward Chars, and so did
all the rest, who having now no fear of the enemy, as being in a sure and
friendly country, divided themselves into several companyes, by fiues, by
twenties, by fiftyes in a troop, as every man thought it best and conuenyent.
The first day they lodged at Clisca in the widows country, where they wanted
no manner of necessaries, The Turks at Clisca
but had most plentiful abundance of all things. From thence they took
their next lodging under certain rough mountains by which they traveled two
whole days through many difficulties, where some of them also dyed for cold.
Then they came to Messeardachan sometimes belonging to the Georgianj, but now
to the Turks: and Some dye for cold.
so to Biucardacan, belonging also to the Turks, where they kept the feast of
Ramadan, which till now they could not celebrate. And from thence to Olti a
Castle also of the Turks, where the Sangiacco, that governs those The
Turks at Olti.
quarters is resident, a country very fertile in all things, well situated,
and very convenient for these and greater passages. From Olti by the way of
Neneruan in two days they arrived at Hassanchalasi, a Castle likewise of the
The Turks at Hassanchalasi.
Turks, called also Passin, and from thence afterward they The Turks in their
return at Erzirum.

The army discharged by Mustaffa to winter themselves.


came to Erzirum, with the great reioicing of the whole army, which was there
presently discharged by Mustaffa, without any numbering or mustring at all, and
so they returned all home into their own countries.

But Mustaffa settled himself in Erzirum, dispatching Poastes with letters of
plentiful aduertysementes to the king touching all things that had passed,
but yet in such sort that he magnifyed his own exploites without measure: and
among diverse other news, that were scarce Mustaffa magnifyeth his own
exploites to Amurath.
true, which he wrote, one was, That Teflis, which he had taken, was in
greatness and beauty equal unto Damasco, besides the situation that was
exceeding strong. He certifyed him also of the battelles that he had with the
Persians: the obedience that he received of the Georgiani, and the Siruanians:
the stirs and insurrections of the people of Constantinople and of Greece:
the Fortress built at Eres: the garrisons of soldiers left in that City with
Caitas Bassa, and in Sumachia with Osman Bassa: the offers of the Alexandrians:
and in brief whatsoever else had passed, and whatsoever he had taken from the
enemy. Neither did he fail to propound to Amurath his opinion, what he
thought convenient to be attempted the next year, for the strengthening of
those places that he had already conquered, and for preparing the way to new
enterpryses. And principally he put him in mind of a fortify cation to A
fortification to be at Chars.
be made at Chars, a place very fit for any passage to Georgia or Armenia, by
situation fruitful and commodious both for men and cattle. And withal he
sent unto the The widows son sent to K. Amurath.
said king, the widows two sons Manucchiar and Alessandro, signifying that
they would be always ready to perform whatsoever it should please him to
command them, and that he had received in their country all good
entertainemente and friendly welcome not omitting for all that, to declare his
opinion, that Manucchiar was a meeter manne for the government then Alessandro
for that Manucchiar had showed greater valor, and was more willing and ready
to serve him then his brother: and the rather because it was a general
opinion, that Alessandro had his hand in those treasons and mischeefes which
happened to the victuailers and to the Sorians in Georgia. Greatly did the king
commend the diligence and virtue of Mustaffa, and pleased himself highly with
this conceit, that of these pretty beginnings there might grow mighty
conquestes and singular successes to the enlargement of his Empire, and hoped
that by this means he should be able to su^passe the glory of his
predecessors, and the more his thoughts were occupied about these wars, the
less did he trouble himself with thinking how to annoy Europe with his forces.

But now it is high time to return to the narration of the accidents that
happened in Siruan, where (we told Caitas Bassa at Eres, and Osman Bassa at
Sumachia in garrison.
you) Caitas Bassa was leaft at Eres, and Osman Bassa at Sumachia, with
express order, that Osman should call the Tartarians to his aid: the
Tartarians, (I say,) that having leaft the Fennes of Meotis, and the
vnmountable shores of the Black Sea, passed over the rocks upon Colchis, and
1 The Tartaia^s near unto Siruan attending the commandment of the Turks.
surueighed the frosen cragges of Caucasus, were now arrived in the confynes of
Siruan, and there stayed, attending the commandemente of the Turks, to inuyte
them to spoil and victory. Among the Tartarian Precopenses, there was one
Abdilcherai, a Captain of great valor and Abdilcherai the Tartarian Captain
a fair young man, and of noble blood.
fame, a young man of comely countenance and well set of person, who,
according to the faithful promise of Tatar-Chan (surnamed Mahamet) given to
Amurath, brought with him about thirty thousand soldiers, his subjects, with
a full resolution to attempt whatsoever any Turkish captain should command him
in the name of Amurath. And therefore Osman called him, and invited him to
succor the forces of his king, and to further these beginnings Osman calls
Abdilcherai and adu^ seth him what to do.
of his glory, and these his conquestes, or rather these magnificall and famous
terms of victory. He advised him withal, that as soon as he had arrived in
the country of Siruan, before he passed any further, he should send
aduertisementes of his arrival there, by two or three several letters
dispatched by two or three several messengers for the more security, to the
end that he might be again informed what course he should take, to make his
coming more profitable and more glorious. All which was not only thoroughly
understood, but also most diligently put in execution by Abdilcherai, and
therefore having entered the Iron gates, where Derbent stands, (which by the
Turks at this day is called Demircapi, and signifies, The The Tartarians at
Demircapi.
Gates of Iron,) and from thence passing on into the country of Siruan, there
he stayed, and gave advertisement thereof to Osman, as he was appointed.

Now in the mean time, that Mustaffa having subdued Sumachia and Eres, was
departed out of the confynes of Ares-Chan the Persian and other captatus seek
to annoy the Turks.
Siruaa, Ares-Chan (who after was governor of Sumachia,) and other Governors
of that region, of whom we made mention before, hearing the news of the
departure of the Turkish General, were determined to return to their forsaken
country, and to find some means, whereby they might in part (at the least)
revenge the great injuries, wherewith Ares-Chan was most grievously offended
and damnifyed, and so with victory either of spoil or of slaughter upon Osman
Bassa, to gain honor and commendation with the Persian king, by the public
shame and confusion of his enemies. For in deed great was his anger and wrath,
when he beheld his own City remain for a pray to the enemy, and was not
hable by any outward act, to show any sign of his grief. And so having
passed under Sumaohia, (not far from which place he had put to the sword some
few victuailers of Osmans, that more boldly then wisely had issued out of the
city,) and being with all his people encamped in certain fresh fields, a
little on this side of the said Sumachia: I know not how, but he was so well
favored by good fortune, The spies or messengers of the Tartan ans taken by
the encamped Persians.
that he surprysed certain spies or messengers, sent from Abdilcherai, who
first went to carry the news to Osman, of the arrival of the Tartarian
Captain, and according to the order taken between them, to know his
pleasure, what should be put in execution. These Tartarians were brought before
Ares-Chan, who after much torture disclosed the letters that they carried:
which the Persian The Tartaria^ spies disclose their letters to Ares-Chan.
captain read, and considering the great number of the Tartarians that were
come, (for the letters made mention of thirty thousand) he was utterly
resolved not to stay any longer in those quarters, but presently raised his
Camp, and retired toward Canac, meaning from thence to certify the Persian
king of all these novelties, and upon Ares-Chan retireth to Canac searing the
coming of the Tartarians.
the banks of the said river to encampe himself, attending an answer from
his said king.

But Abdilcherai, who had now sent out his second, and his third spies, caused
Osman Bassa by some other means to understand of his arrival, who then very well
perceived that the sudden and unlooked for departure of Ares-Chan could not
be upon any other occasion, but upon knowledge of the coming of so great an
host: but when he saw that the first spies never came, which Abdilcherai
accused in his second letters, he was more then assured thereof. Howbeit The
Tartarians at Sumachia, in consultation with Osman.
the Tartarian captain was called to Sumachia, where sitting in consultation
with Osman, they fell to agreement that Abdilcherai should pass Canac, and so
onwardeeuen unto Genge the country of Emanguli-Chan, to destroy and wast his
fields, his towns and his Cities, bringing away with him, men, cattle and
corn, and enriching his arrival by all the most terrible and strange means
he could. The Barbarian captain longed to see the time that he might stain
his darts and sword in the blood of his enemies entrails, and to charge
himself with the expected pray: and therefore presently departed, and with
poasting iourneyes passed over Canac, where Ares-Chan was as yet encamped, and
assaulting him in furious All the Persian army of Ares-Chan discomfited by the
Tartarians and Ares-Chan himself hanged.
manner, (without allowing him any time of defense,) like a ravening and
devouring flame, discomfited all his host, and taking him alive, sent him to
Sumachia to the garrisons of Osman, who forthwith caused him to be hanged by
the neck out of a lodging in the same Diuano or Council house, where he had
heretofore sitten as Governor.

From thence, wading over the river, and coursing a little above Genge, he
found Emanguli-Chan, among certain valleys, with his wife, all his family and
a great part of the nobility of Genge, hunting the wild-boare, and suddenly
put him to flight, took from him his wife, all the Ladies, and many slaves,
and slew many of the rest, that unawares were brought thither to see such
disport. And after road on to Genge, and yielded it wholly to the fury, Genge
sacked
licentiousness, lust, and wickedness of his soldiers, who left no manner of
inhumanitie or cruelty unattempted, but satisfied all their most immoderate
and barbarous affections, that natural fierceness, or present occasion could
minister unto them. And so being laden with spoils, satiated with blood, and
weary with the slaughter of their enemies, they returned merrily toward
Siruan, and passing again over Canac, they came on the hither side of Eres
into certain low champaines, environed about with hills, and there having
pitched their tents, The Tartarians encamped in certain fields on the hither
side of Canac, fall to sleep.
without any fear they settled themselves to sleep, and with rest to repair
their fore-wearied senses.

In this meane-while, and long before these actions, were the news come into
Persia of the battles that happened in the plains of Chielder, and in the
Demi-Islande between Canac and Araxis: Whereupon the Persian king, who neither
would nor could go himself in person, having gathered new forces, had
dispatched Emirhamze Emirhamze the Persian Kings eldest son, at Siruan.
Mirize his eldest son with twelve thousand soldiers to pass into Siruan,
to see what hurtes the enemy had done, to attempt the revenge of the
forepassed injuries, but especially and above all to punish the villainy of
those of Sechi, and other Cities of Siruan, that voluntarily, and not induced
thereunto by any necessity, had yielded themselves to follow the Religion of
the Turks. The Persian Prince had now removed from Casbin, accompanied with
his mother Begum, who would needs follow Begum the Persian Prin ces mother
follows him in his Army to Siruan.
her beloved son, and had taken his journey toward Siruan, under the
guiding and government of Mirize Salmas, chief of the Sultanes, and had
already left behind him the country of Ardouil and Caracach: when he was
certified of the aduertisements come from Ares-Chan, touching the arrival of
Abdilcherai with his populous hoaste of Tartarians, and thereby was stricken in
a great quandarie, and almost without comfort. But yet his fear was not so
great, as it could stay his ambitious and burning desires of revenge and glory,
but rather enflamed with a fresh anger for the great boldness of the Tartarians,
and set on fire with an unquenchable thirst of revenge, he was encouraged
more then ever he was, to prosecute his intended enterprise: and so came to
Siruan, still leading people with him from such places as he trauelledthrough,
and hastening his journey came to Eres, long before the king his father did
think he would. Very fit and convenient was this his notable celerity: for
that Caitas The Persian Prince suddenly arrived at Eres.
Bassa had boldly issued out of the Fortress, and went spoiling all the
country about, carrying away with him what pray soever he met withal, and
committing such other insolences, as hungry soldiers beyond all honesty, use
to do in strange and fruitful countries. But when he was in the midst of
his spoils, and least feared his enemies forces, he was suddenly encountered
and assaulted by the said Prince, without having any means to escape Caitas
Bassa assaulted by the Persian Prince.

A bloody battle.

Caitas Bassa and all his people slain.


his fury: so that in this extremity and necessity, which brought Caitas to a
sudden death, there followed a bloody battle, wherein although the small number
of the Turks showed many effects of valor, yet in the fight they were all
destroyed with their captain, who together with his life abandoned the world,
the Fortress, and the spoils, and left the country free, that was committed
to his custody. Which the Persian Duke having once again gotten Eres recovered
by the Persians.
into his possession, he took away the two hundred pieces of shot, that were
left in the Forte by Mustaffa, and presently sent them to Casbin to his father.

Mightily did courage increase, and hardines quicken in the Persian Prince by
this good success, and therefore leaving his mother in Eres, he followed on
his journey toward Sumachia: but in passing by the way where the Begum left
at Eres.
Tartarians were encamped, and in descending the hills, that environed the
plain, he discovered their tents that were there pitched: whereupon he stood
in great doubt The Persian prince disconereth the encamped Tartarians.
what to attempt, whether by venturing upon so populous an host to prove the
perrill of battle, or yielding to so great a danger to return back into
Persia. Too great a shame he thought it to return, and rather then he would
with ignominy refuse so good an occasion offered him, he did choose with honor
to endaunger himself to the most manifest perrill of his life: and therefore
descending the hill, and drawing nigh to the pauilions of the enemy, he
perceived that all the army was laid down, enjoying their quiet rest and
sleep, and their horses, some couched and some standing, but all of them void
of saddles or horsemen. Whereupon without any stay, setting spurs to his
horse he pricked forward with all his host, and in all have and terrible
manner ran to assault the Tartarians, who were now both buried in their spoils
and sleep: and having slain their first watch, and their second, although with
some loss, among the tumultuary soldiers he made an universal confusion,
and common slaughter, putting some The Tartarians destroyed and Abdilcherai
taken alive by the Persian Prince.
to flight, killing others, and taking diverse of them Captives. Among whom was
their Captain Abdilcherai, who was taken alive and sent to the king in Casbin,
under good and sure custody.

After these victories, the Persian Prince scoured to Sumachia, and compassed
the City round-about, wherein The Persian Prince under Sumachia threateneth
Osman.
the new Turkish Captain Osman sat as Governor, to the great reproach of
Persia: and there encamping himself, sent word to Osman, that if he would
yield himself, he would let him go with his life and goods: but otherwise if
he would stand-out obstinate, and not yield up the city, which unjustly he
possessed, he should be compelled to surrender it by force, and his life
withal. Osman, that knew nothing of the Tartarians overthrow, but hoped, that
entertaining his enemies with fair words and goodly promises, the Tartarians
might in the mean space return, and hew them all to pieces, gave the said
Prince a most courteous aunsweare, saying that he was Osman answers the
threats of the Prince.
very ready to yield up the City, but withal entreated him that he would
make stay but for three only days, and grant him time to put all his things
in readiness, that so he might freely depart, as it pleased the prince in
courtesy to offer him. The Persian Prince was very glad to receive such an
aunsweare, and well knowing the overthrow which he gave to the enemy, did
verily persuade himself that Osman frankly, and with a true and constant mind
had made this promise: and therefore expected that what the Turk had offered
should be performed. But Osman not meaning to commit himself to the faith of
his enemy, though he was utterly resolved to withdraw himself into some
stronger place, yet was he very curious to find means to escape into those
safer refuges, and not to come within the fingers of the prince. And therefore
somewhat before the assigned term of the three days appointed, seeing that the
Tartarians whom he looked for, did not appear, he resolved to save himself by
secreat flight: because he was sure, that if he should remain in Sumachia,
he had good reason to fear the inhabitants themselves would betray him, and
that if he should yield himself to the Prince, he might be by him also easily
deceived. And thereupon determined with himself, by the help of the dark
night, and a difficult way, (though Osman determines to sly se^reathe by a
coue^t way over the mountains,
very covert by reason of the high cragges and bushie places of the mountains
near to Sumachia) to take his flight, and withdraw himself to Demircapi, as
he had already promised to the Alessandrians. And so he iourneyed over the
said mountains with great secrecy and silence, leading away with him
whatsoever either in the time of peace or of war he hadlaid up in store, and
without any danger or threate of the enemy he escaped safely to the Osman
flying from Sumachia, seapeth to Demircapi.
said City of Derbent. On the morning the inhabitants of Sumachia, without any
stay opened the gates of the city to the Persian Duke, who seeing their
infidelity, that they were not only ready to give entertainment to Osman, but
also to help him to escape without giving to the prince any inckling of his
departure, did put in execution the effects of his wrath and indignation which
even in Casbin he had conceived in his mind against them: and The Persian
Prince punnisheth the inhabitants of Sumachia with diverse kinds of tortures
and deaths.

The Persian Prince deliberateth whether he should return home or go forward
to Derbent.


with great cruelty did punish the miserable and unfortunate Commons of the
City, making their houses even with the ground, destroying both the old and
new walls thereof, and bringing the whole land to naught, that sometime was so
desired a receipt of the Turks. But when he should depart from thence, he was
in a great deliberation with himself whether he should pass on to Derbent, or
return into Persia. The city well fenced, the cold time of winter, and the
long voyage that he should have had homeward, persuaded the Prince to lay
aside the enterprise of Demircapi, and so he made choice to return to Casbin.
But first for all that, he determined to make his retire by the people of Eres
and of Sechi, and upon them The people of Sechi and Eres punnished.
as upon rebels to inflict deserved punnishment. For the effecting of which
his purpose, he made his present repair thither, and spared neither sex,
norage, nor any condition, but though the persons were unequal, yet was the
punishment equal to all. And after the execution of this his revenge and
indignation, he with his foresaid mother Begum, and with his army, though
somewhat diminished and endamaged, yet victorious and triumphant turned home to
Casbin.

Young Abdilcherai the Tartarian, was kept within the kings Serraglio in good
and safe lodgings, neither did Abdilcherai prisoner in Casbin well entertained.
he in this his captivity find want of any thing, but agreeably to his calling
he was appointed a very tolerable and easy imprisonment: which day by day was
in such sort enlarged, that he seemed to live not as a prisoner or captive, but
rather as a companion of those of the court, and as it were in apparent
liberty: by which occasion, having insinuated himself into the love of Begum
the kings wife, Abdilcherai the prisoner enamored, and beloved of Queen Begum.
he spent his time in courting of her, and she again in courting of him in all
secreat and covert manner. These mutual affections proceeded in such sort,
and these interchaungeable favors discovered themselves so openly, that in the
Serraglio and over all the City, there was a rife report, how shameless Begum
had participated her bed and The report of the loose life of Begum the Persian
kings wife.
herselie with the Tartarian prisoner. Howbeit neither the king nor the prince
knew any thing of it: but the king perceauing that the young gentleman was
generally commended to be valiant and courteous, began to think of a matter,
which might easily fall out to be a very great commodity and help to himself.
For the king favoring these good qualities, being conioined with proportion of
The deep consideration of Mahamet the Persian King.
body and nobility of birth, (because he noysed himself to be the brother of
Tatar-Chan) persuaded himself verily, that it could not but prove a meruellous
benefit to him, if in steed of a captive he should make him his kinsman, and
give him his daughter to wife. Whereby (he was in good hope) there might grow
such an amity and union between the Tartarian Precopenses, and himself, as
they would not only refuse from thenceforth to favor Amurath in these wars,
but also that they would be enemies unto him, and in the favor of Persia
turn their arms and affections against him. Very considerate assuredly was
this cogitation of the king: but yet did it greatly The Kings purpose does not
please the Sultans of Casbin.
displease the Sultans of Casbin: who either because some of them was a suitor
to the said daughter, or because they did naturally hate the Tartarian Nation,
or else because they had a mischeeuous conceit of the loves of Begum, did all
their endeauours to turn the king from so strange a purpose, and used all the
art that possible they could devise, to cancel out of his mind that
detestable opinion, as they thought. Howbeit they could nothing prevail either
with their eloquence or other their cunning devises: but the king was now upon
the point to make a conclusion of the marriage, when as the Sultans entering
into the Serraglio with a company of their people, and finding Abdilcherai
slain in the Serraglio of Casbin, by the Sultans.
there the unfortunate Tartarian, ran him through the body, cutting of first
his privy members, and flapping them upon his mouth after a most barbarous and
filthy manner. It is reported that Queen Begum likewise was then also murdered
by them, but (how soever it came to pass) it is a clear case, that the death
of the Tartarian Duke was procured in the manner above mentioned, and that the
poor lady never after that day, saw the light of the son. Which whether it
was put in execution by the appointment of her husband, who had been
advertised of all things that had happened, or that the Sultanes wrought it
for the public interest: they know best, that have had the means to insinuate
themselves into the innermost places of the Realm: For unto our knowledge
never came there any other report touching the particulars thereof.

Upon the death of this Tartarian there sprung-vp many Upon these murders there
arose many calamities in Persia.
civil dissentions in Persia, and so thereupon followed also the banishment of
some, the flight of others, and sundry miseries, that lighted upon many. And
the great hopes whereby the king was moved to desire the marriage, were
changed into most turbulent and troublesome passions, and dangerous
calamities, that threatened the utter confusion of the Persian affairs, to the
singular benefit and commodity of Amurath. And yet for all these strange
accidents, the king ceased not to prepare new forces for the next year, and
as much as in him lay to quiet all tumultuous disorders, brideling his own
private affections, and the motions of his son Emirhamze Mirize, and
procuring at last a perfect unity, which he thought most necessary to
continue the defense of his kingdom. And these were the stirs that happened in
the Persian and Tartarian affairs the first year, being the year of our
salvation, 1578.

But Osman Bassa being in Demir-Capi, after the return of the Persian Prince
to Casbin, continually employed himself in laying platfourmes for the
enlarging of the conquestes already begone, and for the assuring of those places
under the government of Amurath. Among other occasions, that he took for the
better establishing of his own matters, one was the friendship that he entered
with Sahamal, Lord of the mountain of Brus, of whom I have more then once
made mention before. With this man did Osman practice many tokens of good will,
and he again interchangeably toward Osman, whereupon there Osman practices
friendship with Sahamal the Georgian.
arose a faithful friendship between them, if not thoroughly and inwardly, yet
at the least in outward appearance: whereunto in short time there was added a
straight knot of alliance, for that Osman took to wife a daughter of the said
Sahamal, and having celebrated the marriage, he Osman marries a daughter of
Sahamals.
thought he was sure of all sides, and could not desire greater signs of the
sincerity of his love. But soon after, grounding himself upon reasonable
conjectures, he took a suspicion that Sahamal, for all his inward and outward
practices of friendship toward him, might notwithstanding receive some secret
order from the Persian king to betray him, and to deliver the City from the
Turkish oppression, and so reduce all the Province, as before it was, to his
ancient devotion. Among other occasions, whereby Osman was moved and induced
to suspect it, (al being of great force and importance,) the speeches of his
wife (being Sahamals daughter) gave him greatest cause. For she being ravished
with the valor, riches, and magnanimity of her husband, would not conceal
any thing from him, that she knew was devised against his life, but freely
uttered by word of mouth unto him, that her father having reconciled himself
to the Persian king, did continue his confederacy and friendship with him, and
that letters went between them of great matters, and particularly of the
affairs of Siruan. By this discovery Osman Bassa grew into a great suspicion,
that Sahamal should deceitfully practice his death, and persuaded himself
verily, that the friendship, the mutual offices of love between them, and the
marriage that was made, were wholly direrected to that end. This advertisement
Osman kept secreat to himself, and made show to his wife that he kept no such
reckoning of it, as in deed he did, and ought to do, being a matter of so
great importance: But yet in his heart resolved to keep it in store to his
benefit: in such sort, that not only the devise which Sahamal had imagined
against him was quite frustrated and avoided, but also Sahamal himself was
punnished with deserved death. And therefore Osman caused Sahamal to come to
him, and thereby feasting him, courting him, and entertaining him, as it became
him to use his beloved father in law, and by many other apparent and confident
behauiours, he made Sahamal strongly presume, that he might take opportunity to
put in execution those designementes, for effecting whereof he had thus
procured the friendship and alliance of Osman. But Osman prevented the intent of
Sahamal. For having invited him (according to the custom) to come and
celebrate with him certain of their solemn feasts, he made the most valorous
and trusty of his esquadrons acquainted with his determination, and enjoined
them, that as soon as Sahamal was entered into his court, even in the very
dismounting from his horse, they should all fall upon him, cut of his head, and
put all his retinue to Sahamal beheaded by the appointment of Osman at
Demir-Capi.

The country of Sahamal wasted by Osmans people.

The Persian king bewayleth the deatls of old Sahamal.


the edge of the sword. Old Sahamal failed not to come accordingly, being
invited by his son in-law and daughter to the solemn feasts, and in his
lighting from his horse all was performed that Osman had commanded: and
forthwith there were dispatched two thousand horsemen to spoil and sack all
the lands, and country of the said Georgian Lord, to the great marvel and
astonishment both of far and near. The news thereof came to Casbin, even to
the kings ears, who took the matter very grievously, and began to foresee,
that the conquering of that country would prove very difficult, and so feared
greatly that the Province of Siruan would remain still in the Turks hands.
And this was the end of the stirs in Siruan the first year: and so the
winter comming-on very sharply every man ceased from battle and forraging,
forsaking the forrestes and the fields, and attended wholly to the
conservation of such things, as they had already conquered.

And now by this time all these aduertisementes were arrived at Constantinople,
and Amurath had received all the particular intelligences of all things that
had happened. Also Ali-Vcchiali, who in the port of Trebizonda had discharged
Ali-Vcchiali builds a Castle in Colchis.
his appointed carriage, was now returned to Constantinople, and made relation
of his sailing into Colchis, declaring how he had built a Castle in the
Territory of Tatiano, in the confines of Iurello, and that he had strengthened
and enlarged those borders in Georgia on that side also: insomuch as these
beginnings seemed to Amurath, to be of great importance: the success whereof
in the continuance of the history, we will describe unto you in the books that
follow.

The end of the third book.
The Fourth Book.
The Argument.
The deliberations of Amurath, what enterprise he should take in hand.

He resolves thereon, and sends out new Commissions.

He causes Manucchiar to be circumcized, and delivers his brother Alessandro
into his custody.

In Persia, Emanguli-Chan makes new offers to the king.

Simon makes request to the Persian king.

The causes, why Simon changes his Religion.

Simon is dispatched by the Persian to annoy the Turks in Georgia.

The new assembly of the Turkish Army.

The Insurrection of the Soldiers.

Chars fortified by Mustaffa.

Mustaffa falls into new cogitations for the succors of Teflis.

Hassan is sent by him into Georgia, where there happens a battle full of
loss to the Turks.

The Georgians do assail the Turks a fresh.

Alyculi Chan is taken prisoner.

Victorious Hassan succoureth Teflis, and returns.

The Stratagemes of Simon.

Hassan deceives Alyculi Chan,

Simon being also deceived, and all in a rage, utterly destroys the Turks.

Hassan arriueth at Chars.

Alyculi emprisoned at Erzirum.

Abas Mirize accused of rebellion by Salmas, who had made the eldest Persian
Prince his Son in law.

Mustaffa discharged of his General ship.

A comparison between Sinan and Mustaffa.

Si^an accuses Mustaffa.

Two Deftardari or Treasurers of Mustaffa emprisoned.

The death of Mahamet the chief Vizier, and the manner of his death.

Sinan elected the chief Vizier.

Mustaffa and his two Treasurers released.

Sinan elected General.

The Persian king sends Ambassadors to Constantinople.

The conditions of Peace.

The arrival of the Ambassador Maxut Chan at Constantinople.

His speech to Amurath.

The Persian king at Tauris.

The leauie of Soldiers in Persia.

The consultations of the Persians.

The Turcomannes follow the Persians.

Tocomac chosen to go with an Army in to Georgia.

The treaty of Peace with Amurath at Constantinople.

Maxut Chan made Treasurer or Chamberleine of Tauris.

Maxut-Chan accused by Emir-Chan.

Maxut Chan flies out of Persia, and runs to the Turks.

Maxut-Chan at Constantinople.

THE FOVRTH BOOK.
As Soon as Amurath was certifyed by the letters of Mustaffa, of all that which
had happened since his departure, until his return to Erzirum, and
understood the battelles that followed, the obedience that was yielded by the
Georgianj, the conquering of cities, the building of new Fortes, and to be
short so good a beginning of so desired an enterprise. Of these prosperouse
successes, which by Mustaffa were described to be far greater then in'deed
they were, (having given order, that Alessandro and Manucchiar, who The conside
rations of Amurath.
were sent unto him by Mustaffa, should be safely kept with all good
entertainment,) he began to cast many devises in his head touching such
matters, as were to be attempted the next year. And especially there arose at
one instant many and sundry considerations in his mind, which told him that the
manner of sending his army to a new resting place might be altered diverse
ways, and so amiddest so many doubts he remained in a mammering what to do.
On the one side he was of opinion, that it must needs be necessary to pass
again into Siruan, and to recover those Cities that were first conquered by
Mustaffa, and after subdued again by the Persians. For by that means it would
come to pass, that the country of Siruan should remain quietly under the
government of Amurath, and so the great trauells, the troublesome voyages, the
hard conquestes, the blood already spilled, the dangerous perrilles, and the
losses of the next year should not altogether be frustrate. But this opinion
of his, he himself (even of himself) changed, as it is reported, for the
great hope that he had in the aid that was promised him by Tatar-Chan, who did
faithfully assure both him and Osman, that he would ouerrunne that region anew,
and set forward those notable designementes that he had intended, and gave his
word to do great matters in his service. In respect of this hope (which
notwithstanding fell-out to be but vain, through the default of Tatar-Chan, as
in place it shall be showed) he laid Siruan aside, and committed the defense
thereof to the false promises of the Tartarian, and to the valor of Osman:
consulting with himself, whether it were not expedient to send his army in a
strait course to Tauris, and to find means that there might be erected in
that City a Fortress, which being well fenced with artillary and arcubuse,
and strengthened with the virtue of valourous soldiers, should never be subdued
by the power of Persia. And so bringing this his purpose to effect, without
the other difficulties, (which if the war should fall out to be long, he
must needs endure) there might remain in his possession all the country that
lies between Tauris and Erzirum. The easiness and speed, wherewith this his
purpose might be brought to effect, did favor his conceit in this point
wonderfully: for there was no man but thought that the Forte might be built in
very few days, and every man persuaded him that it was an easy matter for so
great an host not only to pierce into Tauris, but also to pass whether
soever he would desire. This his designement was of great weight and
importance, neither did there want some that privily and familiarly did advise
him, that it was to be preferred before the rest, and comforted the king to go
forward withal, by promising prosperous success therein.

But albeit that Amurath had his mind enkindled with ambitious desires and
lusts, burning after glory, and being pricked on with sharp spurs of
Avarice, longed to carry away the victory over his enemies lands:
Notwithstanding, laying aside all his foresaid consultations, as being too
eager and importunate, and weighing his affairs in a more upright balance, he
deemed it better to prefer the safety of his Army, the honor of this war,
and the certainty of victory, before the doubtful speed in attempting the
enterprise: and in the end he did resolutely conclude with himself, that he had
rather (though but slowly) overcome and triumph over his enemies, then (too
soon with shame) to forsake and abandon his designements begun: and therefore
did fully determine first to assure and strengthen his own borders, to lay
open the ways that were shut against him with woods and bushes, to confirm
his conquests that were as yet but doubtful, to discover all secret and
treacherous ambushments, and to make the voyage plain and open: rather then to
run headlong with uncertain conceits into another man's country, and to
conquer places, that were far of, fenced and defended not only by mighty
enemies, but also by Nature it self. In this his resolution he was confirmed
by the state of the Georgiani, whom he perceived as yet not to be reduced to
such assured obedience, as he durst altogether trust them: and in particular he
feared the treachery of Daut, and more then that, the coming of Simon. For by
these occasions it might fall out, that his Army going to Tauris, might be
assailed on the one side by the Georgiani, and on the other side by the
Persians, and so brought into very great miseries. And this misfortune might
happen unto him, as often as he should have occasion to send new supplies to
the Fortress.

By these deliberations, and with this resolution Amurath being moved, he did
absolutely signify to Mustaffa by writing, that it was his pleasure, that
against the next spring he should prepare all such provision, as he thought
necessary for the buylding of certain Fortes in the ways that lead from
Erzirum into Georgia, to the end, that having made all those ways safe and
secure, and brought that people into due obedience, the next year he might
employ his courage to more noble and haughty enterprises. Hereupon Mustaffa
presently directed out his precepts to the Cities of Aleppo, of Damasco, of
Caraemit, and Mustaffa sends outcommaundement for a new Army.
to all the other places of Soria and Mesopotamia, that they should take-vp
cunning workmasters, Pioners, and other such persons, to the number of twenty
thousand: And likewise wrote to all the Countries specified in the first Book,
that all their Soldiers, (yea, and in greater number then they were the last
year) should be in a readiness the next Spring, to return to the war:
Whereof he caused the rumor to be spread even as far as Egypt. He commanded
likewise, that they should make collection of the Taxes and Tenthes, and that
in greater quantity, then it was the year before: and made such provision of
Money from the Chambres of Aleppo, and other places, as he thought necessary
for these purposes.

In this mean while at Constantinople, the two Georgian Alessandro and
Manucchiar a^ Constan^^ nople.
Brethren, the Widows sons, who (as we told you before) were sent by
Mustaffa to Amurath, expected the end why they were come to the Court. As
touching Alessandro, he persuaded himself that no wrong should ever be done
unto him, to whom by the course of his age the government of his kingdom
belonged, or rather who already was put in possession thereof by his Mother:
and besides that, was in a great hope, that some means should be devised how he
might be established and confirmed therein after a more sure and safe manner, and
that Manucchiar, his brother, should be honored with some other Office worthy
the magnificence of Amurath. Wherein although he had some little kind of doubt
that troubled him: yet did he ever carry a constant resolution, that he would
not in any case change his Religion, nor stain his conscience with so foul
and infamous a blot. On the other side, Manucchiar the younger Brother, who the
last year had followed the Camp of Mustaffa, and had showed some good tokens
of manhood, with an express kind of Military virtue, that he might the rather
enter into the government of his Mothers State, induced thereunto by the
flattering desire of Rule, was utterly resolved with himself to do any thing,
so that he might not live as a private soldier, but rather to take from his
brother his birthright and enheritance, and with the utter loss of his
countrie-Religion wherein he was borne, to purchase a vile and base kingdom,
yea, and rather then he would live inferior in dignity to his brother, he
would make himself the slave of Amurath, and the Devil. Neither is their
opinion false peradventure, that think this agreement and conspiracy to have
been secretelie contrived between him and Mustaffa, utterly to disgrace and
overthrow his Brother. Hereupon they were both examined, which of them would be
content to submit himself to the Religion of Mahamet: whereunto Manucchiar
answered, that he would so do, and being become the vassal of so great an
Emperor, would desire Manucchiar consents to change his Religion.
no other thing, but to manage his own State in his service, and under his
protection. Whereas on the other side Alessandro, although he should be
deprived of his State, which already he had begun to govern, yet Alessandro
remains constant in Christian Religion.
would he not consent to the vile and infamous change of his Religion, but
remaining constant in his former faith, he only desired, that as a private
soldier, and bereaved of that inheritance, whereof Nature and God had caused
him to be borne the lawful successor, he might not be denied at the least to
go and live in his own native Country, and so to be buried near unto the
Ashes of his predecessors: promising withal, at all times; all obedience to
Amurath, and love to his brother. The Turkish king willed Manucchiar therein to
do as he himself thought good. For that for his own part, he did greatly
fear, least Alessandro by some treachery might deprive him of his life; and
so succeeding in his former place, might make that State more rebellious then
ever it was before. Howbeit, for so much as Manucchiar consented unto it, he was
also to content himself withal, and to commit the custody of that State to
such care, as Manucchiar should take for the preservation of himself.
Hereupon Manucchiar was circumcised, Manucchiar circumcised, and named
Mustaffa.
and had the name of Mustaffa given him, with the title of Bassa and Governor
of Altunchala, and of all his Mothers and Brothers Countries: (for the which
there were great signs of joy over all the Serraglio,) and he being thus
created a Turk, had his Brother Alessandro committed unto him, and they both
returned into their own Region.

But in Prrsia, in the palace of Casbin, many consultations were had in this
mean time. For Emanguli Chan, governor of Genge, perceiving himself to be in
great danger of loosing his beloved and honorable government, by means of the
late sack and spoil of his City made by the Tartarian, and taking occasion
of those plottes that were daily in contriuing to send people into the
confines of Siruan: to the end that Osman Fassa should not intend his new
works, and withal (if it were possible) should be hunted out of Demir Capi, and
out of all that province, he purposed with himself to make an offer to King
Mahamet, The offer of Emanguli-Chan.
that he should bind himself upon pain of his head, to defend Siruan, and not
suffer Osman to attempt any new buildings or further conquestes in that
Region: and therein wrought so much with the King, that his request was not
denied him. Whereupon the charge of the government of Genge, and guarding the
Province of Siruan from the forces of Osman, was frankly committed unto him.
Neither were his offers extended any further: For the Persian King knew well
enough, that if the Tartarians or the General Mustaffa should come thither,
he should stand in need of greater provision and stronger defenses. And
therefore he gave order to Emir-Chan, governor of Tauris, to Tocomac Governor
of Reiuan, to Serap-Chan governor of Massiuan, and to diverse other Captains
that were nearest, that at every instance and request of Emanguli-Chan, they
should be ready (if need so required) with their power to resist either the
Tartarians or the Turks, when they should enter into the country of Siruan.
Neither did Emanguli forget to Emanguli inviteth the son of Sahamal the
Georgian to ioinc with him.
solicit the son of Sahamal, who succeeded in the Lordship of Brus, that he
would join himself with him, and they two together would take occasion to
revenge the grievous losses that they had received of the Turkish army, and
especially to chastise Osman Bassa, as he deserved for the death of Sahamal
his father. Howbeit the said son would not by any means endaunger himself,
neither durst in any wise show himself an open enemy and persecutor of the
Turks, but was content to bear the loss of his father in such sort, as he
thought most behoouefull for the preservation of his own estate,

And this was the provision that was made for the security of that Province,
concerning which, every man almost was of opinion, that Mustaffa should not
return thither again, but they knew well that he should chiefly be
employed about the strengthening and assuring of the conquestes of Georgia: and
therefore there was no further provision made there. But the King turned all
his The Persian king minds to send men toward Teflis in Georgia.
counsels and cogitations to send people toward Teflis, for he knew of a
certentie, that either all the Turkish Army or else some great band of it
should come to bring succors thither, or else it must needs come to pass,
that the Fort should fall again into the hands of the Georgiani. About this
matter was the King very busy and intentive, when as Simon the Georgian, who
was sometimes imprisoned Simon the Georgian.
at Cahaca (of whom we made mention before) and being thoroughly informed of
all things that had happened, thought with himself that hereby he might take
opportunity to obtain at the Kings hand such help as he had long desired,
and purchase those honors that he had long expected, For he deemed it a very
likely and reasonable matter, for the King to desire and wish with all his
heart, that he (carrying the name of a famous Captain, and thoroughly
acquainted with all the advantages, that might be taken in Georgia, to the great
loss and anoyance of the Turks) would offer himself to go into that province
and there gathering his soldiers together with a sovereign authority over
all that people, to defend those cities that were yet untouched, far better
than his brother Dant could do, and in another manner a sort (than he also
could) to trouble and offend the Turks, which must needs come that way to
succor Teflis. Neither did he protract the time long, after he was entered
into this cogitation, but with convenient speed dispatched his supplication to
the King, Simon makes a request to the Persian King.
wherein he declared his request, and reproouing his brother for his cowardice
and flight, promised to perform great matters himself.

This Simon in the time that he remained prisoner at Cahaca, The familiarity
between Ismahel and Simon.
entered strait familiarity with Ismahel (late son to King Tamas deceased) who,
as we told you before, was sent thither by his father to be safely kept: and
in this mutual familiarity there passed such enterchangeble offices of love
between them, that as Ismahel showed himself loving and affectionate to the
conditions of Simon, so much did Simon for his part show himself dutiful and
devoted to the virtues and magnanimity of Ismahel: whereby there arose an
extraordinary love of the one toward the other: which continued in such sort,
that Simon (I know not by what sophistry deluded or by what flattery enticed)
was persuaded by the Persian prince to forsake his religion, and to follow that
barbarous Simon induced to change his religion, and the reasons why.
superstition. What might be the reasons that were able to change the mind of
Simon, being before so constant, and so well instructed in the Greek-Christian
faith (for the maintaining whereof he had chosen to live deprived of his
liberty and estate.) it can not be so precisely declared: but it seems,
there were three principal and powerful respects, that wrought this
unexpected novelty in him Namely, the perpetual imprisonment, which he knew
he could not avoid, as long as he continued of that mind: the friendship of
Ismahel (friendship I say, that oftentimes changes men's natures, much more
their opinions:) and thirdly the great honors that Prince Ismahel did daily
promise him, whenever it should happen that he were named The powe of
friendship.
King. While they were thus mutually affected one toward another, it happened
that King Tamas died, and Ismahel being accompanied from Cahaca to Casbin, was
with meruellous pomp saluted King of all his father dominions. Among all the
rest, whom the King full dearly beloved, he could not forget, but preserve
in memory the virtue and fame of Simon, who was already according to the Kings
pleasure circumcised, and made a Mohammedan, yea, and in such sort did he
remember him, that he was most desirous to bestow greater honors and
rewards upon him than he himself could request. But sudden and unexpected
death lighting upon, before he was aware of it was the occasion why Simon
remained without any advancement, and yet so greatly contented, as his
recovered The diverse cogitations of Simon.
liberty could breed contentment in him. Notwithstanding among the many
varieties of his thoughts did Simon long time wander, being after the death of
Ismahel shreudlie destracted in his mind, coursing and discoursing with himself
whether it were better for him, either to remain still in Casbin and to stay
the coming of the new King, or else to resolve upon departure, and so to
return to his forsaken faith, and wasted Cities. But in the end, after many
consultations, he concluded that it should be more safe and commendable,
considering the state of his affairs, to stay for the new King, and under his
protection and favor to find some means, that he might berestored to the
dignity and rule that was usurped upon him, rather than to fly away alone, and
(having no stay to lean upon) to seek for quarrels and contentions with his
brother, yea and peradventure to purchase himself a bitter death. And
therefore he did willingly maintain himself in Casbin, looking and hoping,
that the change of his schism (for so it is rather to be accounted than a
religion) his imprisonment endured, his liberty recovered, his fame of great
valor, his present necessity, his devotion and obedience to the king
manifestly declared, should deserve at the new kings hands some honor and
reward, or at least, if it would please him to commit any charge of the war
in Georgia to his care, a constant and assured protection of him. And therefore
when Mahamet was now established in his kingdom, and was certified of the
loss of Teflis, Simon besought him of lawful leave, to return under his
protection into his own ill-defended country, offering himself withal to
venture upon any peril or travel whatsoever, and promising that he would
never either fear any great enterprise, or avoid any base exployt, so that he
might know he might do good service to Mahamet. With great satisfaction did the
King consent to the requests of Simon, and named him the Chan Simon named (by
the Persian king) the Chan of all his kingdom.
of all that kingdom, which he possessed before by the name of a Christian:
and with all diligence was he sent with Alicul^-Chan into Georgia, for the
endammaging of the Turkish Army, and defense of his neighbor Cities. And to
them both were delivered certain pieces of Artillery, that were taken at the
rock or Castle of Eres, Artillarie appointed for Simon and Alicull Chan.
when Caitas Bassa was slain, (as in the book next going before we have told
you) and besides the Artillery, there were assigned unto them five thousand
Horsemen, that were leauied out of the Cities, bordering upon the one and the
other Media. Simon afterward coming to Georgia, where he was greatly
welcomed and honored, pressed about three thousand Soldiers out of all
Simon presses soldiers in Georgia.
those countries, both of his own and of his neighbors, signifying unto them
all, (though with a false and impious excuse,) that he was now become a
Persian, not because he Simons excuse, why he changed his faith.
preferred the faith and law of Mahamet before Christian Religion, but only
because he might be delivered of his imprisonment, and employ his forces in
the service of our Savior and only Prophet Christ Jesus, and so by that
means also maintain his own estate. And in this order were the affairs of
Georgia assured and strengthened, after the best manner that might be.

But now was the new season of the spring in beginning, and every man prepared
himself to the discontinued travels of the wars begun. And now were there
met together in Erzirum, out of all the woonted provinces, all the The meeting
together of a new army at Erzirum.
soldiers: and withal were gathered together all the Engines, all the Moneys,
all the provision of corn, Barley, and Rise, and all other things necessary
for the sustenaunce of Cattle and Soldiers. Egypt also had sent thither her
squadronst Egypt sends soldiers, whereof scarce the one half came to
Erzirum.
whereof notwithstanding little more than the one half arrived at Erzirum,
partly by reason of the sandy wilder nesse, through which they must needs
pass, as they came toward Soria from Memphis, where now Cair stands: and
partly by reason of the pestiferous maladies, which they Pestilent sick nesses
in So^^a.
found in the City of Aleppo, and places here thereunto, where besides
Carbuncles, Iaundisses, and black botch^s, there reigned also a venomous and
contagious Fever, that replenished the City with great terror, lamentation,
and This Army equal with the first.
death. So that this Army at Erzirum, was equal with the first: and thereupon
Mustaffa taking due survey thereof, determined to remove, and to journey
toward Chars* And so holding on his way to Hassen-Chalasi, he came in
Mustaffa at Chars.
twelve days to Chars, not perceiving so much as one small word awry in any of
his Soldiers. And forasmuch as here they must rest, and put themselves in
defense, by fortifying with walls, and compassing with ditches the ruinated
City of Chars, which must be done in the best manner that might be, and with as
great speed as was possible, there was no reremedie, but besides the Pioners and
Engyners (that were brought for that purpose) there must be set to work many
Spaoglani, many slaves, and some Ianizzaries also. But it was not presently put
in execution, as the necessity required. For all these kind of people suddenly
made an insurrection, The soudiers in a tumult against the General.
and in a tumult began with bitter protestations to let the General
understand, that their stipends, wherewith it pleased the Sultan to favor
them, were not bestowed upon them, to employ their forces and virtues in works
so vise and so far from the Art of war but only with their swords and other
weapons to exercise that force and hardiness, for which they were esteemed
worthy of that honor. The General gave them their answer again in very
haughty terms, and although he knew well enough, that the smallest sum of
money that he should have bestowed among them, would soon have quieted them,
yet would he not yield one jot to their inciuility, but using al means of
authority and terror, he brought them to work as much as he desired. And so
within the space of 23. days, the towers and walls were erected, the ditches
dug, the bathes builded, the a%tillery disposed in order upon the walls and
the water In the space of 23. days Chars fensed.
brought round about it, either from some branch of Eufrates, or from some other
river (not much less famous than Enfrates) that springs out of the mountain
Periardo. Many inconveniences happened in the Army, while they were busy
about this work, and namely upon the xxv. day of August, when they had almost
even finished the whole building, the soldiers endured a most sudden cold, by
reason of much snow that then fell in great abundance. But so vehement it
was not, that it could not be borne, Snowes at Chars in August.
but every man was the rather forward to execute any commandment, that
according to the pleasure of Amurah should be enjoined them by Mustaffa, all
of them being generally of opinion, that the only repairing and building of
Chars was but a small matter, in regard of so great an Army gathered together
with so great diligence, no doubt for some greater and further purpose.

For the accomplishing of this fortification now there remained nothing to
do, it being fully finished, and therefore now it was time to attempt some
new enterprises: Whereupon the General resolved to send succors into
Georgia to the fort of Teflis, without which it was most certain that the
Fortress would be yielded to the Georgians. For this purpose he must needs
take one of these courses, either to choose some valiant Captain that should
go The consultations of general Mustaffa touching Teflis.
thither, or else to go himself in person, with all his Army, about so great
an enterprise as that was. In which cogitation he remained very doubtful,
casting in his mind on the one side a certain fear, that if he went not with
all his army, some mishappe might light upon the Captain that should go in
his steed, and on the other side bethinking himself, that if he should go
thither with all his people, he should hardly satisfy Amurah, whom he had
already made to believe, that he had sudued all the Georgians and reduced all
that province to his obedience and devotion. Notwithstanding in this his
ambiguity, the desire that he had to preserve his credit with Amurath,
prevailed, and he thought that it would be as sufficient to send succors
thither by a Captain accompanied with twenty thousand chosen soldiers, as to
go himself with all his camp: being of opinion, that in the straites of
Tomanis and other places, so huge a multitude might give occasion to their
enemies rather of pray than of fear, and might breed to their own forces
rather lettes and impedimentes, than any favor or help. Wherein he was highly
commended of all men, though thereby with the King in particular he lost his
credit, to whom he had heretofore made so goodly promises, that he well hoped,
without sending any such preparation thither, to have received of that people
much greater obedience.

Now forasmuch as it was very needful to fortify and Hassan Bassa of Damasco,
chosen General for the succouring of Teflis, with 20000. soldiers.
strengthen that place, he made choice of Hassan the Bassa of Damasco, son to
that Mahamet that was the principal Visior of the Court, as famous as any that
ever had any government in the Ottoman Empire, a man no less fair in face
and countenance, than valourous and venturous in sudden and important cases,
and to him he delivered between eighteen and twenty thousand soldiers, some of
Greece, some of Damasco, and some of Caraemit: joining in company with him one
Resuan-Bassa, Captain of certain Adventurers (comprehended Resuan Bassa
Captain of certain Adventurers.
in the forsaid number) that voluntarily offered themselves to follow the
forces of Hassan: and assigned unto him likewise forty thousand Ducats, and
many loades of Meal, Rise, and Barley, with other things necessary both
40000. Ducats carried to Teflis.
for diet, and for war: and so set him forward for Teflis.

This Hassan carried a haughty mind, with high thoughts agreeable to his
magnanimity, and did determine with him self to loose all that he had, yea,
and his veric life withal, rather tha^ he should not bring these succors within
the walls of Teflis. But when he was now come to the famous strait of Tomanis,
and passed the ruins of other treacherous places, he arrived at a dangerous
passage (without perceiving any footing of an enemy) where the woods on the one
side, deep valleys and craggy rocks on the other side, would make any man
astonished that should come thither: and, behold, even on a sudden, the Persiaus,
together with the Georgians, under the conduct of Aliculi-Chan and of Simon, at
unawares set upon the army of Hassan, and joined battle with them. For
Aliculi-Chan Allculs-chan and Simon.
and Simon-Bech (as we told you before) being sent into Georgia, and having
therabouts gathered soldiers together to the number of 8000. did still remain
for the most part in the borders of Teflis and Tomanis, waiting for some
opportunity to annoy, either those of the Fort of Teflis, if happily they
should at any time issue forth, or else the other that should come to succor
them. Howbeit the famine, wherewith they were afflicted at that time, could A
noy some fami^ ^n Teflis.
not work so much upon them, as induce them to issue out of the fortress,
and so the Persians could find no opportunity to do them any harm as they
desired: but having continual advertisement, that Mustaffa had sent succors to
the^ being thus besieged, they stayed there, and watched, to hear on what side
any news would appear from them. At the last they understood by certain spies,
that they kept the way of Tomanis and that Hassan Bassa with twenty thousand
men was coming to this aid. This news caused them foorthi with to seatter
themselves among the woods, all along the length of the said strait, hoping
from thence to assail the Turks, and overthrowing them headlong into the deep
valley, to bereave them both of their goods and life.

But Hassan, who had not so much care of any thing, as he had to avoid that
grieuoas danger, choserather to make The wariness of Hassan.
his ^o urny through the woods, and eschuothe ambushes and trecheries that his
enemies might lay for him, and so minister means to his people to escape the
peril of that headlong overthrow. And therefore in steed of leaving the wood on
his left hand, he entered within it, to discover all the wiles that might be
plotted against him, and so did al his soldiers with him, and thereupon began
the battle. Wherein they fought with a thousand windings and turnings in and
out, through The battle, wherein there was a great slaughter of the Turks.
a thousand crooked paths, and doubtful cranks, in a most confused Medley,
till there ensued thereupon a great slaughter of the Turks: who being not
accustomed to this kind of fight, nor acquainted with the situation of the
place, were in the skirmish driven so far, that down they fell, and not being
able to recover themselves, were presently slain. In this confusion, among
others that were ill handled, was Mustaffa Bey of Caisar, a place in Caramania,
who lost his banner, being taken away from him by the Georgians, having also
his Standerd bearer thrust through, and all his horses surprised, which he had
caused to be lead out on the right hand, and done many mischiefs with them. And
in this manner did they pass the straites of Tomamis.

Now although they were not very far from Teflis, yet would they needs make stay
nere to the said straits, and faining that they would favor and rest their men
and their cattle, The Turkiss^ stratageme
(and peradventure meaning to nourish a foolish opinion of fear in the minds
oftheir enemies) they waited to see whether they would come again to trouble
them a fresh or no. Hassan Bassa burned, til he might perform some famous and
notable act, thinking with himself that he had received a great ignominy, in
suffering his enemies being in number so far inferior unto him, to escape from
him and remembering that in such places sleights and stratagems are more
auailable than open forces, he took advice, that a band of the soldiers of
Greece with a certain troop of the Aduenturiers, under the conduct of
Resuan-Bassa, should lay themselves in ambushment within the thickest shades of
the strait, and so being hidden, should diligently watch every stir of the
enemy. Two days together did the Turks remain there thus divided asunder,
and were now resolved the third day to remove from thence, and not to stay any
longer from conducting their succors to Teflis: when as Aliculi-Chan and Simon
Bech (vainly imagining that this stay of the Turks was for fear they had of
the Persians) with all their The Georgians assault again the Turkish Army.
people freshly, but boldly, and foolishly returned and gave a new onset upon
the flancke of Hassans Squadrons, who forth with raising all his soldiers,
and giving a sign to Resuan and the rest that lay in ambush, with all speed
compassed-in his enemies, and straightning their wings on both sides, took
some of them alive, hacked some in pieces, and put all the rest to flight.
Among others that were taken alive, Aliculi-Chan taken alive.
Aliculi-Chan (the Persian Captain) who ouer-rashlie ran even upon the face of
Hassan, with all his band, that continually followed him, was taken prisoner,
and so fell into the hands of Hassan. Who victoriously and joyfully arrived at
Teflis, the next day following, being the very I^: day Hassan victoriously
arrived at Teflis.
after his departure from Chars: where having passed over the river, and entered
the fortress he found among the poor besieged souls many miseries, by
occasion whereof some had died, and some were yet sick. For they were so
plagued A great famine in the sieged city of Teflis.
with famine, that they had not only devoured their horses of small price, but
they had also eaten the very skins of the same horses, of Muttons, and of
dogs, and had passed away the time in most miserable wants. But Hassan did
comfort them all with the news of victory, and more with the relief that he
brought the^, distributing to every one of them gifts and good words, and
exhorting them all to persevere in the service of the King, whose honor was
never more then now to be respected: For that it is no less commendation for a
man to preserve and keep a conquered country in the midst of the enemy and the
enemies forces, then it is at first to conquer it. And for as much as all the
soldiers of the Fort did with one voice request Hassan, that he would appoint
them a new Captain, because they did all mislike Mahamet-Bassa, who the last
year was left by the General in that Forte: Hassan removed the said Mahamet,
and put in his place Amet Bassa Aggibeogli. And when he had filled up the
places of the dead soldiers with a new supply, he took his leave, and
recommended the charge and custody of the Fort to their trust and virtue.

Hassan passed over the river with all his people, and put Hassan returns
from Teflis.
himself on the way back again toward Tomanis, so that he came to the very
strayt, without any trouble or impediment of his enemies. But being come to the
mouth of the strait, he was advertised by his Scoutes, that it was shut up The
entry of the strait fenced with Artislarie.
with very strong trenches of Artillery, and defended with a great number of
soldiers. And these were they that remained alive in the last skirmishes (that
we told you of) when Hassan martched toward Teflis. For Simon thinking (as in
deed it fell out) that Hassan should return back by the same way of Tomanis
could not find any better means to repress his boldness, to revenge the
losses of his own people and to redeem the prisoner Alieuli-Chan, but this,
Namely, thus to shut up the mouth of the Strait, hoping thereby, that the
Turks being enforced to run upon the artillery, so laid for defense of the
said strait, should be all consumed and utterly destroyed. But Hassan as soon as
he understood that the passage was ^^th it sort shut up by Simon, Hassan
seeks to avoid the great danger of the strait.
sought means to make his iourny some other way, and declyning that great
danger to frustrate and delude the ambushes and stratagems of Simon. Whiles he
remained thus doubtful in himself, discoursing many conceits in his mind:
Alyculi-Chan, who would not have been squemish to have committed any villainy,
so that he might thereby purchase his liberty out of prison, made offer to
Hassan, that he would show him a safe and a short cut, whereby he should not
only eschew the prepared mischief, but also avoid all assaults of his
enemies: but yet upon this condition that Hassan should Hassan promises to set
Aliculi-Chan the Persian at liberty.
promise him to set him at liberty. The Turkish Bassa did not stick in large
manner to promise Alyculi his liberty, although indeed he did not perform his
promise to him afterward, which (to say the truth) did not a little obscure the
glory of his actions: And therefore bending his iourny toward the right hand,
he was guided by Aliculi-Chan through strange and uncouth ways out of those
woods and dangers, not meeting with so much as the sword of one enemy. The
Persian Duke put the Turk in mind of his promise for his liberty, but al in
vain: For the Turk dissembling the wicked intention, whereby he was induced to
give him his word, pretended Hassan breaks his promise.
with great and deep sighs, that he was very sorry he could not perform, as much
as his intent was to do for him: because it lay not in his power to set any
man at liberty, that in battle was taken prisoner by the soldiers and vassals
of A murath and yet for a noble and magnifical pledge he gave him his faith,
that so far as his entreaties and favors with captain Mustaffa could
prevail, he would not suffer him to receive any wrong, but would use all the
most earnest means he could to procure him al liberty, and return to his own
cuntry.

In this mean while, Simon perceiving that the Turks were removed from those
places that were near unto the straire, could not persuade himself that they
were returned to Teflis, but imagined that they had taken this new way. And
being afterward certified that it was so indeed, and informed of the truth
thereof by his faithful spies, he ran all headlong and as it was desperate
to meet with that so happy Army. And burning in anger and all inflamed with
rage for this great fortune of the Turks, cursing and blaspheming the heavens,
he arrived upon the tail of the Turkish host, which with unmeasurable sury
Angry Simon destroys the tail of Hassans army
he did wholly destroy and discomfit, leading away with him all the people all
the horses, and all the treasure of Mahamet Bassa, which was brought from
Teflis, and all the treasure of Hassan Bassa likewise: putting to death and
taking prisoners the slaves and vessals of both the Captains, and shedding the
blood of many other soldiers. Among who^ although he sought greedily and
diligently for Aliculi-Chan, of purpose to deliver him, yet could he not find
him, for that he was committed to the charge and safe custody of a Turkish
captain in the front of the Army. After which medley, there Abondant snowes.
fell again great store of snowes, so that the cold thereof, biting and
nipping the wounds of such as had, valiantly fought in the battle, the
greatest part of them perished.

Hassan followed on his voyage, and being come to Chars in the space of eight
days after his departure from Hassan come to Chars,
Teflis, he presented Aliculi to Mustaffa, declaring unto him the battles that
happened his succors performed at Teflis the dangers that he had passed, and the
great losses that he recerued in his return: and the Turks say, that he did not
fail most instantly to deal for the liberty of Aliculi, which notwithstanding
I leave to the judgment of those that can judge more profoundly, than I with
truth and credit can write, I my self being one of those, that do verily
beleene, He can not keep his faith with man, that denies his faith to God.
Suffices it, that poor unhappy Aliculi by commandment Aliculi-Chan
imprisoned at Erzirum.
of Mustaffa was carried away to Erzirum, and there committed to prison in the
Castle* And this was the end of the stirs of the year 1579.

Mustaffa returned to the said City of Erzirum with all his Army, which was
presently also by him discharged. And afterward he sent aduertisementes of all
these successes to the Court to Amurath, recounting unto him the deserts of
Hassan as well for the succouring of Teflis, as also for the taking of Captain
Aliculi-Chan. And forasmuch as the last year the said General had persuaded
Amurah, that the province of Georgia, and the people thereof were reduced under
his obedience: to the end that he should not marvel at so many losses and so
many battles, and thereby doubt of some lying and false information, he
declared unto him, that all these difficulties were not raised by the natural
and homebred Georgians, who the last year had promised him al due obedience,
but by two certain Captains, Simon and Aliculi, sent out of Persia, who had
moved all these stirs, prepared all these dangers, and laid all these
ambushes, although one of them now remained with him in prison, a worthy
punishment for his malapert temerity. The king sent by two of his Capigi (or
Gentlemen Hushers) to Hassan, a battle-axe al gilt, and setful of jewels, a
Target of Amurath honoreth Hassan.
gold and pearl, and a garment of cloth of gold, in reward of his noble
enterprises achieved, commending him eat lie for his virtue and valor: and
with great delight did he read-ouer all that Mustaffa had written unto him,
giving order withal, that Aliculi should be kept, where he was, in diligent
and safe custody.

The King of Persia lying at Casbin was advertised of all these successes,
which being added to his new thoughts touching his sonat Heri, whereof Mirize
Salmas had informed him, did greatly molest him. For on the one side, the
evident dangers, wherein all Georgia stood, did shrewdly trouble him,
considering that the Stratageme so well devised by Simon had no better
success, and the Turks had now made themselves thoroughly acquainted with all
those passages, in the difficulty and roughnes whereof consisted al his hope of
defense: and moreover understanding that the Widows sons were become vassals to
the Turk, which course Leuentogl^ also propounded to himself, as one that was
greatly inclined to be in confederacy with the Ottamans: and to be brief,
perceiving that all the Georgian Captains had settled themselves under the
standards of Amurath, he could not but fear greatly, that his enemies would
begin to pierce into the noble cities of Medili the greater, yea and
peradventure even unto Tauris before any of the rest. On the other side, he was
as it were with a worm inwardly consumed, for the news that were brought him
by his Vizier Mirize Salmas, of the evident suspicion, which he told him, that
his Abas Mirize suspected of rebellion against his father, by Mirize Salmas the
chief Sultan of Casbin Mirize Salmas having ma le the Persia^ prince his son in
law advanced his estate.
son Abas Mirize of Heri, should (like a rebel and an ambitious youth) go about
to proclaim himself king of the Persian empire, to the great ignominy of his
father, and of Emirhamze his eldest son, who only was worthy to be named his
successor in that crown.

This Mirize Salmas, according to his longing desire, had married a daughter of
his to the said Emirhamze with the consent of the king his father: but yet not
content with that great honor, he ceased not continually with ambitious devices
to seek out means, how he might make the Persian estate free from all other
Seignuries, and bring it to that pass as it might wholly remain to his son,
undivided and entire, from the participation of his brethren. And therefore
little regarding the perilles that might happen from the Turks, and blinded
with the desire of his own greatness, he went about to turn the King against
Abas Mirize, either to take him and commit him to prison, or at least to leave
him void of all authority to command. And the better to persuade the king
thereunto (being a man very credulous and nothing considerate, but putting more
confidence in him than in any The Persian king very credulous and inconsiderate
other) he began to discourse, that Abas Mirize his son had not greatly
respected him in diverse occasions, declaring unto him, that sundry times he
had very rashly scorned his commandments, and because he would not show
himself obedient and inferior unto him, he would not send so much as one
soldier toward this war against the Turks; Objections against Abas Mirize*
and in fine he had caused himself not only to be called king of Heri, but
he had also given it out, that he meant to claim the succession in the
kingdom. And that therefore it was necessary to feel the mind of the young
youth, and to establish the tranquillity and quiet of the Empire: to the end
that if these stirs against the Turks went forwards, Abas Mirize should not
be so hardy, as in the greatest heat of war to raise sudden tumults, and to
make himself Lord of that, which by right appertained to Emirhamze. Of these
complaints he gave the king diverse evident prooffs, which both in respect of
the love that he bare to Emirhamze, and also of the faith that he gave to his
Vizier, carried a great sway with him in his mind, especially they being
accompanied with the crafty packing of the said Vizier, who as he was very
cunning in such practices of himself, so did he make them much more
effectual with the effeminate king by the means of diverse Ladies and other
occasions that were The Persian king effeminate.
familiar and usual with him. But the most evident prooffe of all was this,
that the said Vizier informed the king, that whereas both by letters and
commandments he had summoned the governors of Sasuar, Coran, and other places
subject to the jurisdiction of Heri, to come to Casbin, and so to pass with
Emirhamze to Siruan, yet never a one of them would stir a foot, answering, that
they were enjoined so to do by Abas Mirize their lord. This evidence was the
most principal occasion, why every thing that Mirize Salmas alleged, was
believed by the King, and why he did continually bethink himself, how he might
find opportunity to repress the boldness of his disobedient son. And yet
notwithstanding al these difficulties being otherwise persuaded by his most
loyal and faithful Sultans, he did not fayl to temper these his internal
motions, and to tame these unruly affections of his mind: and remaining
resolute in his important cogitations against the Turks, to prepare such
provision, which should be sufficient to inhibit their passage to Tauris, if
they had had any purpose so to do. Upon which resolution arresting himself, he
never ceased til he had furnished all those provisions, whereof a little
hereafter we will make mention, for that it is very convenient first to
prosecute the history of those things that were reported of Mustaffa.

He being returned (as we told you) to Erzirum, after so many external stirs
and troubles, was surprised by certain more intrinsecal, and domestical
quarrels at home: for many grievous complaints were there made of him to
Amurath, Mustaffa discharged of his Generalship, and called home to
Constantinople.
whereupon the said king was induced to take from him the charge of the
Generalship, and to call him to the court to give account of his actions.
Neither did this thing happen unto him without just cause, for that he had
before raised a great discontentme^t in the mind of Amurath, by sending so much
The occasion of the deprivation of Mustaffa from his Generalship.
people to the succors of Teflis, whereby he coniectured that the affairs of
Georgia were not in such security, as Mustaffa had already informed him they
were. Moreover he had also greatly displeased all the soldiers of his army,
who thought themselves to be much deceived by him* for that now this second
year, with so much adoo, he had gathered together such a number o^armed men,
and made so great provision with such a charge and expenses to their Lord,
and with such a trouble of all the whole empire, and yet had not any worthy or
notable enterprise to perform, whereby either the glory of Amurath might
receive increase among his enemies, or the soldiers themselves might be
contented with some good booty, or for any other action of importance.
Whereupon they were all in an uproar, and accused him of improuidence and
prodigality, in that he had no regard of the wealth and subjects of his king.
With these accusations did they the more odiously tax and reprove Mustaffa,
for that in the space of two years, wherein they had followed his wars, they
never receuedfro^ him any small sign of courtesy, no not so much as the smallest
reward: but always like a tyra^t, he did reserve to his own use althose
presents and tokens of gratification, which by order from the king were due to
all the soldiers, to encourage them that they might the more lustily
co^tinuein this war. These and such other complaints that were made of
Mustaffa, although they were of some moment, yet would the king never have
construed them so hardly against him, as for the same he would have bin induced
to deprive him of his place: and without all doubt they had been utterly
cancelled by reason of the great favors which Amurath did bear unto him, it
the envy which Sinan. Bassa did carry toward him, being now exasperated by
ancient and inveterate hatred, had not ministered strength and force to all
these accusations, and set (as it were) an edge upon Amurath to do what he did.

This Sinan was a most ancient enemy to Mustaffa, and thought himself to be his
match in all things. For if Mustaffa A comparison of Sinan Bassa and Mustaffa,
two ancien adversaries.
had brought the Island of Cyprus into the power of the Turks within the space of
so many months, Sinan had also in very few days subdued La Goletta in Africa.
And if Mustaffa were a man of great courage, and reverend for his years, Sinan
would be his equal both in the one and the other: yea and Sinan would not
stick to think himself to be his better (which indeed was supposed to be the
original of these bitter indignations) for that in the enterprise of Giamen,
where Arabia Felix is, Sinan himself did an exployt, which Mustaffa neither
durst nor was able, nor yet knew how to put in execution, and Sinan alone
carried away the glory and entire honor of that famous victory and important
conquest. And ever after wards there was nourished between them a thousand
dissentions, so that the one of them did always show himself aemulous and
adversary to the other both in act and speech, as occasions fell out. At the
last happens this opportunity for Sinan, to declare unto the King how the
matters of Mustaffa were but slenderly grounded, and taking occasion of the
complaint of so many against him, he caused a great number of the to frame
their supplication to the king, which he for his part did in most m^lignant
manner enforce, and exaggerate against Mustaffa, accusing him; that this second
year he had manifestly showed Sinan accuses Mustaffa
himself to have gone into the war, not as a worthy Captain, and one that
was desirous of noble and honorable enterprises, but as a man greedy to make
merchandise of blood and of his soldiers paye^s employing the most liberal
provision of corn and money, not as rewards for wel-deseruing men, nor to the
foundation of such fabrikes as were needful, and might have been builded
therewithal, but only to his own proper gain, and to enrich himself with
his peoples losses, to the great shame of the king, and endommagement of the
public treasury: adding hereunto, that if those things which have been
executed by the said Mustaffa, were rightly serched, it would be found, that he
had pretermitted many good opportunities, that he had attempted many things in
vain, and generally that he had not done any good either to the king, or to
his soldiers, but only to himself. Whom rather than they would follow again
as their Captain, all his people being in an uproar, showed themselves ready
and willing to adventure themselves in any other far greater labor, that by
their Lord and king should be commanded them. These and other such like
complaints, which the king heard of Mustaffa, of who^ (as we told you before)
he had already conceived a hard opinion, because he perceived that the
affairs of Georgia were not in any great security, were the occasion why
Amurath was resolved to put him from his place. Whereunto he did the more easily
condescend, because he did always think it very dangerous to suffer one and
the self same General to be any long time the minister of so great an
enterprise, and Captain of so many Squadrons: and besides, that he always
deemed it to be a small honor to him, if he should still employ but only one
man, and that it would be greater honor to him, to show that he had variety of
subjects, that were worthy of so great a charge. And therefore being desirous
to find out the truth of that, which was reported unto him touching Mustaffa,
he sent for him to the Court, causing also two of his Deftardari or Treasurers
to be brought with him, that Mustaffa his two Treasurers brought to the Court.
they migh show the accounts of such moneys as he had received and laid out,
and to be short, give up an account of whole office. Mustaffa came to
Constantinople accordingly, where the two Deftardari were committed to safe
custody: and he in the mean while, using the mighty and potent mediation of
diverse Ladies, labored by all possible means, that Amurath might be persuaded
to admit him to his presence Ladies m^ighty mediators with Amurath.
and to receive his honorable and rich presents: wherwithall the wrath and
indignation of all angry hearts is wont to he appeased and extinguished,
especially among the Barbarians, in whom Covetousness subdueth human reason
and justice, and does in such impious manner overrule the Mahometical Empires,
and principally the empire of the Turks, that there remains not so much A
detestation of the Turkish government.
as the shadow of such a virtue, but it is altogether governed only by mere
Tyranny. Further than this, was there no proceeding against Mustaffa, but yet
he was never admitted to those honors, which in recompense of such actions as
he had performed both in peace and in war, for the service of the Ottomans,
he persuaded himself were due unto him.

In the time that Mustaffa remained General at Erzirum, there departed out of
this life Mahamet the principal Vizier, who by a fraudulent and treacherous
mad fool, while The death of Mahamet, the principal Viceroy.
he sat to give audience in an open place, within his own house, was
suddenly, and to the common astonishment of all the company, stroke through
the body with a sharp Gangiara or (as we call it) a dagger. And after him dyed
likewise of an infirmity Agmat Bassa, who succeeded in the place of Mahamet
that was slain, so that the said sovereign dignity by rightful succession
was due to Mu^staffa. But yet he was not thought worthy of it by him that
might and ought to have gratified him therewithal, as we shall declare unto
you a little hereafter, because I take it to be very convenient, in this place
to insert the death of the said Mahamet the Vizier: as a matter very notable
and famous in those days, and for an example of such, as administer justice in
such great offices, worthy to be registered not in one only, but in a thousand
and a thousand histories.

This foresaid Mahamet, in his greatest managing of the universal government
of that empire, for certain causes and respects, that seemed to him reasonable
(whether they The occasions and manner of the strange death of Vic-Reoy Mahamet.
were so or no, the curious searchers of al particulars can tell) had deprived a
certain soldier of Constantinople of his yearly stipend, which with many
labors and dangers he had gotten to maintain himself withal, which stipend
he had bestowed upon another, who^ the said Mahamet either for friendship, or
for bribe, or for desert had made capable of it: and so, that other poor soul
remained in misery, and in deed altogether deprived of all means to sustain
his life. To which miserable estate seeing himself now brought, and not guilty
to himself of any fault that he had committed, worthy of so great punishment,
he determined with himself to revenge the injury with the blood of Mahamet the
Bassa, and to bereave him of his life, that had bereued him of his ho non and
living. And because he could not have any fit means to put this his designment
in execution, unless he might compass some familiarity with Mahamet, by
haunting his house, and conuersing domestically with him (for otherwise he
could not be permitted to come near him, that inioyeth that barbarous estate,
by reason of the guarde of slaves, that keep the person of the Vizier) he
resolved to apparel himself like an Eremit, which the Turks call Dreuis, and to
present himself every morning before Mahamet to ask him his alms. And so he
did, counterfeiting withal a certain kind of folly and lightness of mind, to
the end he might make the people believe, that the same had happened unto him
through the grief which he had conceived for his money and his honor taken
from him by the Vizier. For in deed principally and above al other things,
those that take upon them the life of a Dreuis, do count erfet a certain kind
of worldly foolishnes and a contempt of all earthly things, whereby the
variable and ignorant people is brought into a belief, that they are enamored
and inspired only with heavenly cogitations. Mahamet, not only the first time,
but also at all other times that the counter-feit Eremite did present himself
before him, caused him to be comforted with his good alms, and as it were with
a kind of private stipend enjoined him, that every morning he should come unto
him into the Diuano, and there together with othous (appointed for the same
purpose) he should say his devout A custom ^ the Barbaririans.
prayers, and singing praises to their wicked prophet, entreat God for his
salvation For it is the oustome of all the Noble men, that at the ordinary
hours of saluting (or rather blaspheming) God, all their impious and profane
priests assemble themselves in the Diuani, which are made ready for them, and
there all together the Infidel wretches do mumble up with their unclean
months those their wicked blasphemies, whereby they do irritate and provoke
the bounty and Majesty of God. By this means did the Eremite insimate
himself into very great familiarity, and this his practice endured so long;
that the counterfeit fool went in and out of the Diuano at his pleasure,
without that ever any man gain said either his going in, or his coming out and
daily he sat in the presence of the Vizier, and so having said his prayers
and taken his alms in quiet and welcome manner, with all reverence departed.
At the a^^s^, when the crafty Beggar thought that his time was come, wherein he
might very fitly execute his purpose, without any fear of death, or of torment
(which sometimes is more grievous and terrible than death itself) having
vtte^tie resolved with himself most willingly to die, so that he might
satisfy the desire of revenge, which privily he had fostered in his heart:
having put a very sharp Gangiara secretly in one of his sleeves, he went
according to his custom to require his alms, with an assured resolution (when
he had said his prayers, and reached out his hand to receive his wonted alms)
speedily to charge upon the Vizier, and with his sharp weapon once or twice to
strike him to the heart. According to the accustomed manner, was the counterfeit
Priest (for who would ever have feared so long a designment and so traitorous
and fraudulent a mischief at his hands:) brought into the Diuano, where
Mahamet the Vizier sat within his house for public audience and after the
vsuallmaner, before any of the suitors, that atte^ded for answers and dispatch
of their business, did suspect any such deceit, he was admitted here unto
Mahamet, and sitting right against him, according to his old wont poured out
those maledictions which those barbarians do use to mu^ble up in their vain
prayers: which being finished, whiles the Vizier of simplicity reached unto him
his wonted alms, the traitorous fool in steed of receiving it, drew out his
dagger with great speed, and thrust it once or twice into his breast, whereby
there gushed out both his blood and his life. And thereupon all the sta^ders by,
astonished with the stra^genes of the fact, ran in unto him, and saw this
strange spectacle the old hoary Vizier al soyled in his own blood, and deadly
pale, breathing forth his last gasp, and yielding up his miserable ghost.
Presently did they bind the mischievous Dreuis with strong cords and by and by
did the rumor thereof fly to the kings ears, who suspecting that some of the
chief Governors, that they might mount into that high dignity, had provoked
the traitor to do this detestable act, would needs understand of the
traitorous Murderer, what occasion had mooded him thus to betray his Vizier.
Who answered him again, that he did it to deliver the City of Constantinople
from the tyranny of him, by whom he was undeservedly deprived of the stipende
that he had demerited, and of the honor that he had achieved. But when the
King could receive no other answer from him, the Rebel was delivered into the
hands of the slaves belonging to the dead Vizier, and so put to death with
unspeakable torments.

And thus died Mahamet, and a little while after, Agmat also died of sickness (as
is aforesaid) so that it was Mustaffa his course to succeed in that chief
room: for he was the third in the order of the Bassas. But, although he did
use all the possible Mustaffa not thought worthy of the room of the chief
Vizier.
means he could, that the said charge (being due unto him) might be bestowed
upon him, yet would not the King grace him so much as to grant it him under
seal, although in effect he made him sit as a Vizier, and all matters of state
were brought unto him as the chief Vizier: but in his steed the seal was sent
to Sinan-Bassa, who was now made General, and was on his way toward Teflis,
as in due place it shall Sinan chosen the chief Vizier.
be showed Greatly was Mustaffa discontented here withal, and much grieved at
this injustice of Amurath, neither was he altogether void of fear, least some
other strange accident should light upon him. Howbeit notwithstanding all these
malecontentments, he did not fail to purge himself thoroughly of the
accusations laid against him, and caused also Mustaffa and his two Treasurers
quit.
his two Defterdari to be enlarged, after their innocencio was made known,
which whether it were so known to be indeed, or whether it was made to seem so
by the means of his presents and of gold which amongst the barbarous and
corrupt people is wont to make vile matters to appear noble, and to cover and
co^ceal al soul and dishonest practices, I will not define.

After the depriving of Mustaffa from the charge of the Generalship. Amurath
was enforced to elect a new General as well for the preservation of Chars and
Teflis, as also to reduce the enemy to some good conditions of peace, for
which purpose finding Sinan to be a fit man, as one that ever showed himself
an envious imitator of Mustaffa, and one that peradventure would be glad to
receive such a dignity, yea, and perhaps one that by some secret service had
induced the King to make choice of him, he nominated the said Sinan Sinan
chosen General.
to be General for this expedition, and to him he gave the sovereign authority
to command, and to set in order all those preparations, which he thought
necessary for such enterprises, as he should think good to attempt in this his
first year. But Sinan although by reason of this great favor he grew haughty
and glorious, yet did he not fore slow to discourse thoroughly with himself
upon all his designmentes, and namely besides the succouring of Teflis, he
determined to The purposes of General Sinan.
build a Fortat Tomanis, to assure the ways that lead thither from Chars, and
withal to attempt all the means he could to induce the Persia^ king to send
Ambassadors for peace, with such conditions as should be acceptable to Amurath.
With these and such like discourses did he busy himself, whiles he was making
preparation to pass toward Erzirum.

Of all these changes and alterations the Persian king was advertised, who
employed himself, (as we told you before) in preparing for the disturbance of
his enemies, and to minister also matter himself of some attempts that he
likewise intended. And being certified (whether by the means of Sinan or of
any other, the certenty is not yet come unto us) that this new Turkish General
was a man greatly given to cogitations, how this war might be quieted, and
these wrathful broiles reduced to a good peace whiles he was setting al things
in order and areadines to send me into Georgia, and to gather an army for the
defense of his cities, he be thought himself that it was very convenient to put
this matter in execution, being exhorted thereunto by Leuentogli, who although
he had been injured by the Persians, yet he could not but think it a dangerous
thing to have these wars so near him: and being likewise hartened in it by
his Vizier Mirize Salmas, who was more intentive toward the unjust suppressing
of Abas Mirize of Heri, then he was for any sufficient reparations or due
provisions for this war, he resolved to send The Persian king resolves to
send Ambassadors to Constantinople.

Maxut-Chan dispatched as Ambassador.


Ambassadors to Constantinople to demand peace of Amurath. And deeming
Maxut-Chan to be a man very fit for that purpose he made choice of him to
perform that business, adjoining unto him for an Assistant an old Priest
belonging to the said L^uentagli, as one that was a common friend to both
parties, and very desirous of this quietness. And so he dispatched Maxut-Chan,
with charge that he should go to Maxut-chan to Sinan.
Sinan, and of him receive guides, to conduct him to Constantinople with
letters unto the king: and that he should, as much as lay in him, labor for
the pacifying of all these troubles, and in any case conclude upon it, so that
Amurath would be Conditions of peace offered by the Persian king.
contented with Chars and Teflis. And thus being departed from Casbin, keeping
the way of Sultania, Zanga, Miana, Turcoman and Tauris, leaving on his right
hand Chiulfal, Nassiuan, Reiuan and by Coy and Van, where the Bassa appointed
him one to guide him, he arrived at Chars. It is generally known, and I have in
particular understood, how great the joy was, which the Turks conceived of the
coming of this Ambassador, and how Cicala-Bassa did with all diligence
dispatch certain posts to the court with these good news. From Chars the
said Ambassador was sent by the way of Hassan-Chalasi to Erzirum, and from
thence with new guides he went toward Amazia. But when he came to Siuas, there
he found General Sinan encamped, gathering together his Army from the cities
above named, to lead them with him to the execution of his designements.

The Persian Ambassador entourmed Sinan of all that, whereof he had to treat
with the Turkish king on the behalf The speech of the Ambassador to Sinan
of his king Mahamet: and labored earnestly to persuade him of the honesty of
the request, and the equity of the cause, declaring unto him, that as under
the law of Mahomet their common Prophet, both the nations are conjoined
together, so that they ought with one unity and special concord defend and
increase their Names, by subduing the Christian people, who professing to
worship the true God and the true Prophet, do possess the most noble Cities of
Europe: so was it a matter very inconvenient to contend among themselves, and
seek to overthrow, yea and utterly to destroy one another: it being a thing
quite contrary to that union, which should be among people of one and the
self same religion: it being also rather the property of brute and savage
beasts tha^ of men, to drive and expulse out of their native nest, those that
are the followers and worshippers of one and the self same Prophet. And
although among so much people, and in such breadth and largenes of cuntries there
be found peradventure some sign of contrariety, and some small show of
difference, yet for all that the matter is not so great, as that it should
deserve such troublesome stirs, and kindle such ardent indignations, whereby he
that is of greatest power should be moved to enter into another man's cuntries,
and endommage his neighbors. And that therefore he did hope to obtain at the
hands of Amurath this desited peace, if he had no other cause wherewith he did
find himself agreeued, as in troth there was not, no nor ever was there any
such thought toward him. Wherefore he besought him, that he would conueigh
him with trusty guides to Amurath, to the end, that, if it were possible, they
might not suffer these bloody wars to go forwards, at the report whereof,
the most remote Nations of the East, yea and of all the whole world did
rejoice, and stood waiting attentively to see what would be the issue of them.

Sinan entertained the Ambassador after the best manner, Sinan receives the
Ambassador.
that the rudeness of his nature would permit him: and thinking with
himself, that not only the losses and disadvantage of the Persian king, but
also the very fame of his valor in matters of war, had wrought in the minds
of his enemies this resolution, to come and demand peace (which he procured
afterward) he determined to pleasure the Ambassador in the request which he
made unto him for the conueighing of him to the Court: and accompanying him
with a sure conuoy to send him to Constantinople: And wrote to Amurath in his
letters all that which (he thought) was fit to be demanded, representing unto
him what great and important matters (he hoped) might now be obtained, and
raising in him wonderful expectation of all happy success, rather than
motioning unto him any fear or suspicion of any vain treaty. But before he
dismissed the said Ambassador, he thought it good to advise him, not to go to
Amurath without resolution to offer him some great good conditions, and to
yield unto him all those lands Admenitio^s of Sinan to Maxut-chan the
Ambassador.
and all that country, which he with the valor of his Subjects and with
Arms had conquered, by ouercomming the forces of his enemies, by passing
through the most hard and difficult ways, by climing the rough and
craggierockes, by vvading over the most violent rivers, that are in all Media
and Iberia: For he knew the mind of Amurath very well, that he was
resolved in himself, not to yield so much as one hand breadth of that ground
which his subjects had valiantly and worthyly won with the sword.

This demand did greatly trouble Maxut-Chan, so that he began to fancy within
himself, that he should not be able Maxut-chan fearerh that he shall not
conclude any thing.
to conclude any thing, and (if the said Ambassadors son did not tell us a lie,
who diverse times did most familiarly discourse with us upon every
particularitie, whiles we visited him in Aleppo) he was in a peradventure to
return into Persia again, and not to pass over to Constantinople.
Notwithstanding considering better with himself what belonged to his duty,
and doubting that this protestation might be but an ambitious demand of Sinan
himself, and hoping to r^ceaue more reasonable conditions of peace from the
mouth of the Turkish king and also to the end his own king might be the better
certified, that he had not failed fully to perform his duty in so weighty a
business, he gave large words to Sinan, and made him believe that he had order
and authority from Mahamat (his Lord) to conclude, what he thought best and
most convenient, for the matter of peace. And so the Ambassador departed, with
a safe company from Sinas, and keeping on the way of Caisar, leaving both
Conia and Angori, he arrived at Isnic (in old time called Nicea) a city situate
near unto the Moore, anciently called As^dnia, Maxut-chan the Ambassador come
to Constantinople.
and from thence came to Scutar, passing over that little gulf which joins
those two seas together, and so was conducted to Constantinople.

In the mean time the Persian King withdrew himself out of Casbin, and upon
the rumor of the Turkish nouelries meant also himself to give out a noise of
some important The Persian king stirs and makes famous preparations.
matters which he likewise intended. Whereupon by his Royal commandment he
called all the Chans, Gouernouts of his Subject Cities, together with all their
military fo^cus to Tauris, and he himself with the Prince Emirhamze passed into
Sultania, and having there visited certain of his Ancestors sepulchers, he
went to Zanga, from thence to Miana, and then leaving Giurgi Chalassi on his
left hand, and Ardou^l on his right hand, he came to the place called Turcoman,
from whence afterward in four days space he arrived at Tauris. There he
assembled together all his people, The Persian King at Tauris.

The assembly of the Persian soldiers The consultations of the Persian king.


which came running in most obediently at his commandment, and there also had
many consultations what he were best to do, For as yet he did not assuredly
know, what Sinan meant to attempt, and therefore began to cast in his head
diverse doubts, but all uncertain, and as it were in the dark: but yet in the
end, among a thousand ambiguities, he resolved with himself to send soldiers
into Georgia toward the coaste of Teflis, where it was of necessity that
succors should be sent to those of the Fort: and withal determined also
himself to go forth with all his Army from Tauris to Caracach, a place very
commodious and near to guarde both Tauris and Siruan, being situate even in
the midst between the one and the other, and there to expect theremouing of
Sinan: whose ambitious nature the king knowing, did think it would fall out,
that to surmount Mustaffa in glory, he would have enterprised to run even upon
Tauris, and to attempt some strange matter in those quarters. And so resting in
this determination he caused sufficient provision to be made of corn, and of
al other things needful Provision of necessaries.
for the nourishment of cattle and men.

Among all the rest, that followed the kings Army, a good company of the
Turcoman Nation came unto him also this The Turcoma^ Nation follows the Army
of the Persian King.
year: so that the Persian host was very great and sufficient, and able to
attempt any famous enterprise. But when it came to the point, that he should
send some of his Captains into Georgia, he meant not to make choice of any
other for that purpose, but only of those, which by reason of their experience
in those cuntries, and near neighborhood to the Georgiani, both could and by
duty were bound the rather to aid their neighbors, and endommage their
enemies. And yet he made choice of Tocomac, and the rest, that hitherto in this
war had fought those battles, which before we have described, and commanded
them, that gathering their Tocomac eelected to go with an army into Georgia.
people together, they should depart into Georgia, and there joining themselves
with Simon they should work the greatest annoyance to the Turkish army that
possible they could not failing continually to advertise him of their
successes, and of the Turks purposes: of whom if they should learn either by
the report of spies, or by any other means, that they would pass to Tauris,
they should not sail to pursue them, to the end they might join together with
him, and so encounter their enemies Army. All these Captains were most
resolute men and most perfect in all military exercises, and being warned by
the captivity of Alyculi-Chan, they walked much more circumspectly and with the
greater aduisement, but yet full of a thousand desires to attempt some great
matter. They led with them about ten thousand persons, which being, joined with
the people of Georgia, amouunted to the number of thirteen thousand: who
presently 3^000. Persiand Georgians,
as soon as they understood of Sinans arrival at Erzirum, put themselves on
their way toward Teflis. And to the end the Turks should not hear any news
of them, they kept that way, which as yet was not discovered by the enemies,
saving only by the Tartarian spoylers and robbers, and that was the way of
Genge, which is situate in a certain The situation of the city of ^enge.
Champayne, wherein there are neither Cities nor towns, but such as were
either their friends, or their subjects, or their confederates, neither are
there either any treacherous or rebellious people between it and Tauris. And thus
the Persians being arrived at Genge, sent word thereof to Simon, giving The
Persians at Genge advertise Simon what he should do.
him withal to understand, that as soon as he perceaueth the Turks to be
removed from Chars, he must send them a watch word, for that they were ready
to perform great matters in his behalf, and keeping on the way of Grin, they
would come and ioyn themselves with him, and so being united together, they would
cause the Turks to feel the disturbances and annoyances which were prepared for
them.

But now was the Persian Ambassador incountred and received in Constantinople
with all due kind of honor, and The Persian Ambassador brought before King
Amurath.
after certain days brought into do his embassage: wherein (as I understood by
many credible persons whiles I was in Constantinople, and afterward it was
confirmed in by Aleppo the said Ambassadors son, when rebelling against his
king, and entertained by the Turk, he was placed in the government of the said
City of Aleppo) among other things, whereupon he did most eloquently discourse
with the king, he framed The speech of the Ambassador.
his speech in such sort, that it was sufficient to dissuade and withdraw him
from this war, delivering unto him all those reasons, that might have relation
thereunto, and telling him, that his King Mahamet, who had but lately succeeded
with great glory in the happy kingdom of Persia, was always greatly
grieved at these troubles of the wars, which if he thought he could pacify
with the shedding of his blood and the spending of his life, he would not have
spared either the one or the other, and would also most willingly have tried
all the remedies for it, that possibly he could. For he did at the first
consider with himself how contrary it was to the merciful nature of their
common Prophet Mahamet to nourish contention and much more to cause the
public spilling of the blood of his nations. Secondly he did manifestly
perceive, how inconvenient a thing it was, that war should succeed so
suddenly upon a peace, which was so royally and with so many sworre
Capitulations concluded between Tamas and Soliman: after which peace Arms
should never have been raised, but upon some great quarrel and offense that
should be offered. For certain it was, that the soul of him, who in his life
time was so ready and willing to swear to peace and amity, was now for the
violating and breach thereof much grieved and offended in that happy life (he
might better have said in Hell) and was now also accused for the same before
God by the elect souls of Persia. And yet at his first coming to the kingdom
his Majesty might well perceive, how greatly Persia rejoiced at his
happiness, having made public declaration thereof, by sending unto him an
Embassage to that purpose by Sultan Tocomac, whereby he might manifestly
perceive the good mind, and the maintenance of good faith and peace, on the
behalf of the Persian kings. And although in the short time of the reign of
ambitious Ismahell there was some rumor raised, that he meant to go into
Babylonia, and some such like news: yet it was but a youthly part, and an
effect of that heat, which is commonly proper to such persons, as being kept a
long while in strait prison, cannot use their liberty with moderate terms, and
as they ought, and therefore he had received due punishment for it by his
sudden and unexpected death. But the king that now is, above all other embraced
amity with his Majesty, and did earnestly desire not only, that he might not
make war against him, but also that he might find favor to be linked in
friendship and love with him, and so they two together might prosecute the
noble and worthy enterprises against the Christian Nations: which war could
not be but just and honest, for that it tended to the enlargement of their
native religion, and to the suppression of the enemies and rebels to their own
Prophet Mahamet. And that therefore his Majesty would be pleased to temper and
quench his anger conceived, which had incensed him to take Arms against a king
that was so friendly to him: and not to disturb the peace of so many cities,
that were nere unto him not only in situation but also in religion, and more
kind unto him, then all the rest of the Nations in the world.

The King dismissed the Ambassador without any other resolution at al: but only
gave order; that whatsoever he had The order, which Amurath gave touching the
Persian Ambassador.
to discourse touching this peace, he should communicate it with his Vizier.
Many were the courses and discourses that happened in this business: for that
the Turk required all those Cities and Countries, which till that time he had
conquered with the sword: and the Ambassador on the The demands of the
Turkish King, for the conclusion of a peace.
otherside had no warrant from his king to yield any more than was contained
within Georgia, on this side the river Araxis, which has been so often
mentioned heretofore. Whereupon the said Ambassador could not but remain in
great fear, least he should be suspected for a spy, and so be ill entreated:
where withal he did find himself too manifestly charged by the speech that
the Vizier used toward him. But having no further warrant, than is abouesaid,
he knew not whereupon to resolve himself, or how he might remedy the evident
danger of imprisonment or of some other smister accident, and so find means
to be licensed to return. In the end, when he perceived himself straightened to
The resolution of Maxut-Chan with himself,
the grant of these demands, receiving also some threatenings withal, he
determined with himself to enlarge his speeches with the Vizier in diverse and
sundry particularities, and to give him good hope, that he should be able to
persuade with his king Mahamet, the yelding up of so much as Amurath had and
did demand. And the rather to make the Turks believe that he should obtain the
same, they say, that he discoursed with Mustaffa and the other Visiers upon the
late stirs, by occasion whereof the Persia^ king was called to Heri, about the
foresaid suspicion, raised against Abas Mirize his son: and withal declared
unto the Turks, with what facility, upon his return into Persia, he would
acquaint the king with this demand, and so induce him to be contented with it:
But whatsoever was then concluded betwixt them, (for in this point Maxut-Chan
himself did always forbear to tell the truth either to me, or to any other,
with whom he was familiar. And it is a very dangerous matter for an
Historiographer to write diffusedly and at random of matters so secret, for
that in such extrauagations he may easily slip into a lie: the greatest monster
and absurdity, that can be in one that writes an history) certain it is,
that Maxut-Chan was friendly and without any outrage sent from Con stantinople
to Chars, where Sinan was then with his army, and commission was given to
Sinan, that without delay, and with all fidelity he should cause the Persian to
be accompanied Maxut sent without any outrage to Chars.
to Van, and from thence into Persia, wheresoever the said Ambassador did
especially desire: all which was undoubtedly performed, as shall be set down in
due place.

And now it is time to return to Sinan, who from Siuai had sent the said
Ambassador to the Court, and being departed Sinan in Erzirum sur^e^gheth all
^is people, and ^rouisions or war.
from thence, arrived at the last in Erzirum, where he took a survey of al his
soldiers, of al his corn, of al his munition, and to be brief, of all that
which was necessary for this expedition: and when the fit season was come,
wherein all those preparations were brought to their ripeness, he withdrew
himself from Erzirum with all his Army, and keeping on the way to
Hassan-Chalasi, he went toward Chars, from whence he had dispatched the
Persian Ambassador into Persia, as we have told you, being very sorry and
greatly discontented that no other conclusion could be wrought.

At the last Maxut-Chan arrived in Persia before the King, to whom he reported
all that which happened in this his Embassage: Maxut-Chan tells the K. what he
had done.
the sum whereof was, that the Turkish king would not otherwise condescend to
any condition of peace, unless there might be yielded unto him all the whole
cuntry of Siruan, even as far as Demir-Capi inclusiuely, presuming that all
that country belonged unto him, which he had already gotten and conquered by
his famous battles. Neither did old Maxut forbear to tell him, that being
grown into great suspicion with the Turkish King, that he was come thither
rather to spy how matters went, than to treat upon any agreement of peace,
and not knowing by what other means to avoid the manifest danger of
imprisonment or death, but only by large offers and promises, he was feign to
give Amurath to understand, that he was able to obtain of his Lord and master
as much as Amurath demanded; but yet for all that, it now lay in his Majesty's
power, either to cause the said conclusion to be performed or not. The king for
the present time remained very well satisfied with that which Maxut had done,
and willed it should be signified unto him, that he should require some reward of
his travel and trouble, for he was minded to requite him for it. Maxut
requested nothing in The Persian king seems contented with the travel of
Maxut, and means to reward him.
particular, but referred all to the liberality and bounty of his king, who
presently and without any delay bestowed upon him the government of a
certain small place nere unto Reuan, which notwithstanding, with the Kings
favor he refused, desiring some greater reward, that might make him
recompense for his great expenses Wherein it pleased the King to favor him,
and gave unto him the charge of the chamber of Tauris, naming him the
Maxut-chan made Chamberlain of Tauris by the kings grant
Chamberlain, or as the Turks call it, the Defterdar of that rich and large
City.

But because one Emir-Chan, an ancient enemy and persecutor of Maxut-Chan, sat
in Tauris as chief Governor, (whom the Persians call Chan, and the Turks
Bassa) he was not well pleased with this new office, though very honorable and
of good importance, and yet without the displeasure and anger of his king he
could not refuse it: whereof not withstanding he perceived he could have but
small joy, in respect that he could not endure the neighbourhead of Emir-Chan,
from whom he greatly feared some pernicious treachery. And therefore he
resolved with himself to forsake Tauris, and to leave a Vicegerent, there in
his steed, and to withdraw himself to certain lands of his own, about two
small days journey distant from Salmas toward Tauris, (the village or
country, term it whether ye will, is called Cassangich, a pleasant and
delightful place, and the ancient inheritance Maxut-Chan forsakes Tauris, and
withdraws himself to Cassangich.
of Maxut-Chan) and there he meant to pass away the time, till it came into
the Kings mind to dispose otherwise of him, as he should think good. But
Emir-Chan, who still nourished the antike poison of his anger and hatred
against him, being not able to omit this occasion, which he thought to be most
fit to bring him into disgrace with the king, caused the king to understand,
that Maxut was not contented most impudently to refuse the first office
bestowed upon him, but now also in contempt of his gifts and rewards,
Emir-Chan accuses Maxut-chan
he had abandoned Tauris, and substituted in his place a most vile person, to
represent the kings Majesty, and to manage his treasure: and that he himself
remained absent, far from that city and the Court there; having withdrawn
himself into the confines of Turkey, no doubt for some mischievous intent,
either to yield himself unto them, or else to have intelligence with them
touching this war, and peradventure he was guilty to himself, that he could not
commit a greater error, the^ he had already committed, by offering Siruan to the
Turkish king, and making promise of so large conditions. For the Emperor
Ottoman might well make as importune and unreasonable demands as he thought
good, and might always well hope to obtain al good conditions of peace, but
Maxut-Chan having done all this to rid himself out of the Turks hands; and
having had such a safe and sure conuoy to guide him, it could be no otherwise
but that he had discovered himself to be very familiar and partial on the
Turks side, and a rebel to his own king. And that therefore it were good to make
trial of his inclination, and so peradventure avoid some great change, tending
to the loss and dommage of Persia.

Very grievously did the king take this refusal, that Maxut King Mahamet
displeased with Maxut-chan.
had made of these his rewards, and this his retire to Cassangich did put in
his head a shadow of that suspicion which Emir-Chan had motioned unto him, and
withal weighing in himself the foresaid reasons and considerations of
Emir-Chan, he was the more confirmed in his hard conceit against Maxut, and in
the end was persuaded to call him before himself, and (if he could not by any
other means, then) by torments and torture to understand the truth of matters
how they went. And therefore he commanded Emir-Chan, that secretly he should The
king appointed Emir-Chan to bring Maxut-chan to him.
send for him, and bring him before him Exceeding great was the joy of
Emir-Chan, when he saw that the king did not only go about upon his request to
punish his enemy, but also that it was to be done by his own hands: and
thereupon he thought long til he had brought this shame upon Maxut-Chan, who
having already heard some inklings and privy whisperings of that which
Emir-Chan intended, had utterly resolved with himself to do any thing, rather
than he would suffer himself to be delivered into the kings hands. And therefore
when there came unto him from Emir-Chan, xv. sellowes for that purpose, who in
the kings name summoned him to the court, without making any show that he
took the matter otherwise then well, he entertained the^ courteously, and made
them great cheer, bestowing upon them both words and meats most bountefully.
But they being overcome with sleep, which crept upon them by reason of the
good cheer, which they took more liberally then they should The servants of
Emir-chan let down into a well by Maxut-chan, and there covered.
have done, were straightly bound, and with long cords hanged and let down into a
deep well, and there shut up and secretly covered. And he himself, presently
gathering together the most precious things that he had in his house, his gold,
his silver, his jewels, and his richest apparel, and setting his wives, his
daughters, his sons, his brethren and his Neuewes on horsback, and to be short,
remoouing with him al his family, in the evening (for the day was not yet shut
in) he put himself on the Maxut-chan flies out of Persia, and goes to the
Turks.

Maxut-chan at Salmas.

Maxut-chan at Van.


way toward Salmas, where the next day he arrived in very good time, and was
there friendly entertained by the Turkish Bassa, and from him conueighed to
Van, where he was also courteously welcomed by Bassa Cicala, and afterward
with an honorable company of men, and large favors of letters he was set on his
way toward Erzirum to General Sinan: who being very glad of his coming;
wrote by him to Amurath, and so sent him unto him with all diligence. And this
was in effect the end of this first enterparlance of peace.

What after wards became of Maxut-Chan, upon his arriual at Constantinople, it
shall be declared in due time and place, Maxut at Constantinople.
for that it is now requisite to return, where we left, to speak of Sinan, who
(as we told you before) by the way of Hassan-Chalasi was come to Chars, and had
dispatched away Maxut-Chan, who was sent unto him from the king into Persia.

The end of the fourth Book.
The Fifth Book.
The Argument.
Sinan stays eight days at Chars, and departs for Teflis.

Talogli and Homar are assaulted by Simon, by whom they are discomfited and
Homar is slain.

Sinan succoureth Teflis.

The Georgians and the Persians expect the Turks to assault them.

They assault be Turks and discomfit them.

Sinan with all his Camp goes against the Persians, who do vtrerly refuse to
^oine battle with him.

Sinan goes to Chielder, and mustreth his Army.

He is mocked of his soldiers.

Sinan returns to Chars where he stays a month, and then returns to
Erzirum: and so is called to Constantinople.

Ebrain-chan the new Ambassador of Persia comes to Sinan.

The Ambassador at Constatinople with Sinan.

Solenine feasts for the circumcision of the Ottoman Prince.

Ebrain-Chan is sent prisoner to ^rzirum.

Amurath commits the succors for Teflis to Mahamet the Bassa, who with
twenty five thousand persons departs in the latter end of August from
Erzirum.

Mustaffa the Georgian joy neth with Mahamet at Archelech.

The Georgians and the Persians send to defy the Turks, and to bid them to
battle

Mahamet the Bassa refuses the Battle.

The Turks pass over the river, and are assaulted by their enemies, and
shamefullie discomsited.

The Turks being so discomfited, retire themselves to Teflis.

Mahamet the Bassa makes a public oration to his soldiers at Teflis.

Mahamet leauieth a task among his soldiers and so departs.

A disorder in the departure among the Curdi.

At Altunchala a counterfeit Counsel-house called to betray Mustaffa, who
wounds the Lieutenant of Mahamet, the Bassa of Caraemit, and Mamet himself.

Amurah being angry at these misfortunes; reproves the Bassas of his court for
their improuidence and folly and particularly finds himself grieved with
Sinan, who makes a proud and an arrogant answer to the king: Whereupon he is
banished from the Court, and Sciaus the Bassa, son in law to the King is
chosen chief Vizier in the room of Sinan.

THE FIFTH BOOK.
SInan remained at Chars eight days, during which time, he surueighed again
all his soldiers, and al his corn, and Sinan at Chars 8. days.
the^ set himself on his way toward Tomanis, with resolution there to build a
Fort, as I told you before. He passed by Archelech, and left behind him Peruana
Giol and Triala, and in the end arrived at Sinan receives news that he is
chosen chief Vizier by the King.
Tomanis; where, a little before he came thither, was arrived also the
Capigilarchechaiasi from the Court, bringing with him the seal and the writ,
whereby the king had named him to be chief Vizier. For which good news all the
Bassas in the army showed great signs of rejoicing.

At Tomanis he consulted with all his chief Bassas, touching his designment for
the Fort that was to be made, and every Great rain at Tomanis.
one of them delivered diverse Models of it: but none of them all could be put
in execution, by reason of the rain, which fell so largely, so abundantly, and
so continually, that the soldiers had neither leisure nor means to employ
themselves in that work, and especially because Sinan did greatly fear, that
the enemy taking the opportunity of this rain, of the strait, and of the
building, might peradventure assault the army, and finding it out of order and
in ill plight, might greatly endommage it. This rain continued falling for
the space of eight days, in all which time neither did beam of the Sun break
out, nor the sky clear: Howbeit waxing at the last somewhat lightsome, Sinan
determined to remove from thence, and to carry onwards his succors to Teflis.

As Soon as the Army was raised, and presently after they had passed the strait
of Tomanis, Talogli the Aga or Captain of the Ianizzaries of Damasco, and
Homar the Sangiacco or Lord of Saffetto, who had always hitherto kept company
Talogli and Homar go out to fetch in corn and cattle,
together in the Army, because they were neighbors, whiles they dwelt at
Saffetto and Damasco, had now also determined to go together to seek their
fortune. For they had received privy intelligence, that hard by a little out
of the way there was good store of corn and cattle, and thereupon they
resolved to fetch in that booty. And so gathering together a company of
soldiers, to the number of two thousand, who were all very desirous of some
refreshing, because they were insome necessity for corn, they went out for
this pray. But Simon-Chan, who having advertised the Persians of the departure
of Sinan from Chars, and joined himself unto them, had withdrawn himself to
follow the The preparation of Sinan
Army a far off, and had divided his soldiers into such places, where there
was either corn, or water, or any such like thing, that might allure the
Turks to scatter themselves from the Camp: As Soon as he was aware of them,
that they had carelessly run out to lay hold on this desired booty, being Simon
assaulteth Talogli and Homar.
accompanied with his own people, and a few other Persians, he fell upon the^,
and hewed the^ al to pieces, scarle leaving the Aga of the Ianizzaries any
leisure to fly, who being aided by the swiftnes of his horse (or whether he
were in the front marching before all the rest, I know not) put himself to
flight, and so escaped with his life. In so much as the Sangiacco Homar the
Sangiacco slain, and all his people discomfited.
above named and all the rest were there slain, and in brief there escaped nor
one, but only the foresaid Aga.

Sinan pursued on his journey, and in the space of two days came to Teflis,
where presently he gathered together all the chief of his Army, and calling
also into the Diuano the Capilarche^a^asi, he began to take order, that every
man upon his oath should depose the truth, touching the greatness of that
cuntry. And all this was, but only to make it evidently appear, that the
information which Mustaffa had given to the Sinan enquireth of the greatness of
Teflis, to the reproach of Mustaffa.
king, that Teflis was a city lik to Damasco, was utterly untrue, for that
Teflis was but a small piece of ground, containing but a few houses, and few
inhabitants in them, and not only unequal to Damasco, but also unworthy in any
sort to be compared unto it, for that it did far surpass Teflis in all things,
as well for riches and bigness, as for multitude of people. At the same time also
he distributed his treasure, and the Sinan succo^reth the Fort at Teflis.
suecors which he brought, among the soldiers of the sort, comforting them
with good speeches, and with lusty and lively promises of great matters. And
foramuch as all the soldiers there made great complaints against the Bassa,
that was their Captain in the fortress, Sinan caused an information, or (as
the Turks call it) a Teflis to be framed against him, and having found him
guilty that he had converted the soldiers pay to his own use, he condemned him
in restitution thereof, and discharging him immediately from his office, he did
substitute in his place Giusuf Bey, one of the Georgian Lords, who for Guisuf
Bey, the Runegat put in trust with the keeping of Teflis fort.
the ancient enmity between him and Simon had yielded him self to the Turks,
and was by them so welcomed, that Sinan trusted him with the oustody of that
fort, which with so many dangers had been maintained and defended till that day.

When this was done, Sinan departed from thence with all his army, and while he
was upon his departure there arrived Ambassadors from Leuentogli lord of Zaghen
(of whom we have oftentimes made mention before) who were very well welcome
Ambassadors from Leuentogli to Sina^.
to Sinan, especially for that as well by their relation, as also by the
testimony of the soldiers of Teflis themselves, he had bin certified how much
good Leuentogli had done unto the^, by sending to the fort vittails, money, and
whatsoever else he had that might be commodious for them in that their continual
necessity, Which in truth was so great, that it was an occasion of spreaidng
abroad a general fame, whereby it was reported, that the said Fort was yielded
by the Turks to the Georgiani, yea and the rumor of it passed even into Italy.
But The rumor proved false that Teflis was yielded.
it was all false: For notwithstanding so great penury of all things, and so
great a siege, yet was the Fort still maintained and held in the possession of
those fortunate people: Which was afterward the matter and occasion of
continuing those motions and mutations, which after fell out so commodious to
the state of Christendom. The Ambassadors excused their Lord, for not coming
himself in person, to do reverence to Sinan, for that his sickness and certain
other private respects did hinder him from doing that, which he both desired,
and also ought to have done. All which was most acceptable to Sinan, who in
sign thereof caused the Ambassadors of Leuentogli, to be apparelled in cloth of
gold, and Sinan honoreth the Ambassadors.
sent unto himself a battel-axe and sword all gilt and set with jewels,
promising unto him great matters, and with gallant words declaring unto him his
exceeding affection of love and confederacy with him. Yea and some say, that
Sinan sent letters to Alesiandro himself, wherein he made a motion unto him for
some treaty of peace, telling him, that he being a friend both to the Turks
and to the Persians, ought to try all the means he could to pacify these
troubles, and to reconcile the minds of the two kings. But in truth what was
done in so secret a matter, I could never yet learn any certenty to write:
and therefore without any further speech of it, we will prosecute the progress
of Sinans army.

The day following, Sinan and his army passed the strait of Tomanis, and then
came before him Mutafsade Bassa, borne in Mutafsade to General Sina^.
Aleppo, and now governor of the same city (who^ I had oftentimes in cure)
declaring unto him, that not far from them there was great store of corn and
cattle, and no body to keep the same, but only a few Georgia^s, and therefore
it would be well if he would send for the said p^aie, whereof (yea though it had
been much greater,) his Army stood in such need. Sinan did carry a good
affection to Mutafsade, and therefore was easily induced to send for the
booty: but because he was in some fear, that if he should not send out a
good Sinan appoints 10000. soldiers to go with Mutafsade.
Company of Soldiers for it, there might have happened to his vittailers some
accustomed mishap, and being principally moved with the fresh remembrance of
the sinister accident that lighted upon Talogli and Homar, he gave order, that
to fetch in this Corn and Cattle there should go out ten thousand horsemen
and their servants: among whom was also the said Mutafsade, as Captain of them
^ll.

Now Tocomac, Simon, and other Persian Captains had The Georgia^s and the
Persians watch for the Turks, to set upon them.
gathered themselves together, and stood waiting and watching, when any band of
the Turkish Soldiers should come down for these reliefes of Corn, and hiding
themselves in certain treacherous valleis near unto them, expected occasion,
wherein they might make some notable discovery of themselves. Whereupon the
foresaid Soldiers being come, according to the appointment of Sinan, to
fetch away these vit^aises, and being arrived at the place where they were,
they began to load their beasts withal: and whiles they were most delighted
with the sweetness of their pray, and had now charged almost all their Mules
and horses with that which it most pleased every man to choose, the hidden
Persians, all on a sudden, issued The Persians set upon the Turks.
out of their treacherous valley and entered among them. But Mutafsade, as soon
as he discovered the Persians in so great number, and in so good time to come
upon the^, foreseeing Mutafsade s^ieth first of al.
the universal slaughter of all his people, was the first man that fled, and
with an unhappy sign of ill luck, he left the rest, that either would not,
or could not save themselves by flight, to the fury of their enemies: who
pursuing their desired victory, hewed in pieces seven thousand of them, and
some they carried away alive, leading with them their Mules and horses laden
with their 7000. Turks hewn in pieces Mutafsade brings news to Sina^ of
the discomsiture.
stolen booty* Mutafsade was the first that broughtto Sinan the unhappy news
of the Persians treachery, and after him the slaughter that followed, was also
reported unto him by the fugitives that escaped by flight. And thereupon Sinan
dispatched away the Bassa of Caramania, and a great band of Soldiers with him,
with commandment that in what place soever, and in what sort soever he found
them, he should join battle with them. And these squadrons of forerunners
being gone before, he him self presently, raising all his camp, withal speed
followed the said Bassa of Caramania. But neither the one nor the other Sinan
with all his Camp remoueth to set upon the Persians.
arrived in time, for the Persians immediately after the foresaid victory,
without any staying, having recovered their pray, had withdrawn themselves
between the Mountains into certain secure places, which were known only to
such, as by daily experience had p^rfectlie learned the diverse and difficult
passages of Georgia. The army of Sinan marched on for the space of some miles,
till they ascended a certain hill from whence they discovered the Persians,
who having disposed of their pray in the places before named: were now returned
to pursue the army and to watch some fresh occasioni of new battle. As soon
as the Persians deserved the whole army, they were The Persians refuse to join
battle, and retire to their safe places.
afraid to mere with them, yea and feared also least Sinan would descend
from the hill, and so assault them to their exceeding great loss. For they did
well remember, what dangers and losses Mustaffa had prociued unto them when
they too boldly and carelessely had suffered themselves to be induced to carry
for him, with so great a multitude and so many fires, in the Champaines of
Chieldern and therefore they took a better course for their own security, and
so resolved to return back into their strong places within the mountain. And
yet they could not be so quit lo^^ this their retire, don't that the Turks who
following Sinan were now descended to pursue them, (...) some few of them, and
destroyed about fifty or threescore of the^ whose heads in sign of triumph
they carried a good part of their way upon the point of their spears: and
alive they took not in all above threescore and ten.

At the last Sinan with all his host passed these trecheries Sinan being at
Triala with all his army, understands that the King of Persia with a very
great army is coming against him.
of his enemies, and came to Triala, where he understood by diverse inhabitants
of those villages, that of sundry Persians and Georgia^s also which had
traveled that way, they had secretly learned, how the king of Persia, in his
own person, with an exceeding great army being departed out of Tauris, was
coming to meet the Turkish host, and to bid it battle: and that his
purpose was, that the 4 captains which were co^bined together with Simon,
keeping on their way toward Georgia, should set upon the hinder part of the
Turkish army, and at the very same instant, he himself with his Sinan
proclameth, that all his army should make ready to go to Ta^^^.
forces would set upon the forefront. At this news he made present proclamation
through al his army, that all the heavy cariages, and such as were unprofitable
for battle should be sent before toward Ardachan, and that every man should
put himself in order and readiness with armo^ and munition for the u^age to
(...), ^hither he himself ^ (...) and to meet with the king his enemy. In the
mean whole ((...) (...)
it is reported by many as well Persias as Turks.) ^^e dispatched certain V^^achi
or posts to the Persian king being at (...) to entreat him, that he wuld send
over some Ambassador, for a peac, thinking with himself (as some do conicture)
by these means he should remove out of the Kings mind, his resolution to come
and assail him, if any such meaning he had. The proclamation was put in
execution according to his appointment, and having sent away the said Sinan
with his army in the plains of Chielder.
cariages and heavy burdens toward Ardachan, he himself with certain loads
of corn and vittels, (so many only as were sufficient for the voyage)
descended into the open and large plains of Chielder, where presently he
mustred al his people that carried weapons, and gave notice, that before he
would settle himself toward Tauris, he meant to make The order of the Army.
^^iall of the readiness and nimblenes of al his army, and to set forth such a
show, as though they joined battle with their enemies: which presently the next
morning without any further delay he put in execution accordingly. For first he
set forward five hundred pieces of final artiliery, placing the^ in good order
after the manner of a large trench, and after this shot, three rows of
Ianizzaries, and behind them he took up his own place. Then followed all the
army which he parted into two great and wide wings, which after the fashion of
a moon compassed about a great deal of ground entermingling also here and
there some footmen, with his horsemen, and some harcubuses among his darts and
lances. Behind all the army were placed all the cariages which were requisite for
the urgent necessity of vittaile, and behind the cariages went the Arrie
reward conducted by two Bassaes with viii. thousandmen. The army being thus
ordered and disposed, he sent out some few Turks, to Sinan makes three
shows with his army and exercises it with sighting and s^irmishing
show themselves upon the top of certain hills, and as though they had bin
enemies, that came to seize upon his army, he presently caused al his artillery
to be discharged, and commanded every man to b^irmish, and to bestir himself,
after the same manner and altogether with the same kind of behavior, as if
their enemy were present before them. And so the tempest of the Harguebuzes
being over passed, the lances or Indian canes discharged, and the exceeding
thick storm of arrows ceased, there did shine round about on all sides, such
a brightness of swords, helmets, and brest-plates, yielding forth great
lightnings and as it were fiery beams, that it enkindled the minds of them
all to battle: and then again the drums and trumpets made such a noise, the
Ensigns, creasts, liueries, and devises were so turned and tossed and the air
so replenished with several colors of blewe and yellowe, and to be brief
there was such a medly of al things, as though it had been the turmoile of a
very battle indeed. After a while he caused the retrait to be sounded, and
then setting all his army in order again, there was such another like show
commanded the second time, and after that the third also: which indeed was
performed rather with the scorn Sinan derided by his Soldiers.
and derision of all his soldiers, who thought it to be as it were but
children play, then that any commendation did indeed arise thereby to ambitious
Sinan.

When these counterfeit shows of war were finished, yet did he not got
forwards toward Tauris, as he had appointed, but remained eight days in those
plains of Chielder, at which time there arrived out of Persia Aider the Aga, as
Ambassador from the King, who was entertained by the general with great joy.
Diverse and sundry things did this Ambassador propounde, which were likewise
propounded by The King of Persia offers Chars upon condition of peace.
Maxut-Chan: but the conclusion of alwas, that the king of Persia would
voluntarily relinquish Chars and Teflis, and remain (as he did before) in
amity with Am^rath: and therefore he des^ied Sinan that he would not fail to
conclude of a peace because he himself had commandment to return back into
Persia, Sinan promised to deal with Amurath for this peace, if king Mahamet
would send a new ambassador to Constantinople. Upon which conclusion Sinan
promises to entreat a peace: and rerequireth a new ambassador.
the said Aider returned into Persia, and being accompanied with sure guids
arrived at (...) before this king to who^ he declared what things he had seen,
and what promises he had received of Sinan, and withal exhorted the king to
send a new ambassador to the Turkish Court, causing him first to enter
covenants with Sinan (as he had promised,) for so it would be an easy matter
to procure a good and speedy resolution. After this, when the public rumor
was found to be false, that was spread abroad of the coming of the Persian
king, Sinan in steed of going to Tauris, resolved to go to Chars and so to
return into his confederate Countries. At Chars he remained a whole month, in
Sinan returns to Chars and there remai neth in Idleness a whole month.

Sinan reproved by his soldiers.


very mere and absolute idleness, with the general marvel and murmur of his
soldiers, who indeed were astonished, when they perceived they were come out,
not to fight, not to pass into their enemies Country, not to make any
conquest by war, but to be Idle and to play, to the great damage and expenses
of their Kings Revenues, and the disturbance of his whole kingdom.

At the last he departed from Chars, for that it was now winter, and the frosts
and shows ^ound about the^ wrought Sinan departs from Chars to return to
Erzirum.
his soldiers unaccustomed miseries. In Hassa-Chalassi they celebrated their
most solemn feasts, and afterward with all his Army he withdrew himself to
Erzirum from whence he did presently ^^^misse every man to go and winter in
his own Country and he himself remained still in the said City. From this
place he sent diligent information, as well at the departure of the
Capigilarohecaiasi, as also by certain Volacehi dispatched away by post, of
the Sinan (...) advertisement to the court, of all that had happened.
succors that he left at Teflis, of the losses that he received by his
enemies, of all that wherein he had found Mustaffa an arrant her, of the
coming of the Persian ambassador, of the promise made unto him touching a new
ambassador, and to be short of al his whole actions. And besides all these
Narrations, he advertised the king that the enterprise of Persia was a very
hard, long, and difficult matter, and such a one, as there needed another kind
of preparation, Sinan reports the enterprise of Persia to be very hard.
then as yet was appointed for it, and that if Amunath did desire to subdue and
overcome Persia, it was then very necessary, that he should speak with him at
large, and discourse upon many particularities, which neither might he commit
to paper, neither could they be declared by pen, without exceeding great
tediousnes: and in this point Sinan makes ernest request to go to
Constantinople.
he did write very much, and showed himself to be very petemptorie. And again,
besides these first Velacahi, he dispatched also new messe^gers, to be very
instant and importunate with Amurath for his return to Constantinople,
continually telling him, that it was not possible for him to signify by
writing, what he purposed to report unto him by word of mouth, for the easy
accomplishme^t of his co^menced en terprize. Nothing in the world did Sina^
hate more the^ this war: and for the appeasing thereof he did not omit to
att^pt Sinan abhors the wars in Persia, and desires that they were turned
against the Christians.
possible means, having his mind altogether be^^ against the affairs of the
christians in Europe, and for y^ diuerting of these wars from the east into
some other quarters, he used and practiced continually a thousand devises. At
the last he wrought so much, be entreated so much, he writ so many letters, and
solicited the matter so ernestly, that the king was Sinan called to
Constantinople.
persuaded to se^d for him to Constantinople as soon as ever he was certified of
the ari^al of the new ambassador from Persia, of whom Sinan had before
advertised him. For among the difficulties, which Sinan had propounded to
Amurath, he was resolved upon this conclusion that it would be convenient
either to receive the new ambassador of Persia, if he came with honorable
conditions, and so to grow to a peace, or if the ambassador came not, or if
after his coming they could not agree upon the peace, then to put
^brain-Chan the new Ambassador of Persia comes to Sina^.
in execution those his conceits and designements, whereof he must needs in
particular talk with him by word of mouth. The promised ambassador, called
Ebrain-Chan, a man of great eloquence, and in Persia esteemed to be of great
valor came to Sinan accordingly: whereof Sinan presently gave intelligence to
Amurath, beseeching him again, that he would permit him to come to
Constantinople.

Sinan obtained his desire, and having secretly sent forth Sinan goes to
Constantinople and sits in his place of vicier
of his Statio^s certain succors to Teflis, which came unto the^ in very fit
time, he went himself to the court where he attended the universal government
of the whole empire. But at his first coming to the presence of the king,
(wherein he never discoursed with him upon any thing but only of the coming
of the Persian ambassador) the conditions were established, which they had to
require, for the reducing of the Capitulations of this peace to a good end.
After which agreement the ambassador being now come, and most magnificently
receauet in Constantinople was brought in who with magnifical and glorious
speeches Ebrain-Chan speaks with the king and exhorts him ^o peace.
endeavored to persuade Amurath, that his king had a most ardent desire to be
reconciled and to join his forces with him, and that for this purpose he was
now specially come thither and withal, that if he also would answer him with
the like mind, there would ensue thereof the greatest unity and friendship,
that ever was between the Mahometans, since the time that their great Propher
had delivered to the The answer of Amurath to the ambassador Ebrain-Chan.
world that wicked law of theirs. Amurath caused answer to be given him, that
he should talk with his Vizier, and with him treat of all the matter touching
the peace: and so he was by the king entertained and dismissed, both at one
time.

In the mean time, the Turk had resolved to call to Constantinople, his eldest
son Mahamet, who was to succeed him in the Empire, and to circumcise him
according to the custom of the Barbarians, following therein the inueterate
Law of the Hebrews. And for this purpose from all the provinces of
Christendom, by messengers dispatched in post, were the catholic Princes
solemnly invited to Ambassadors of diverse princes come to Constantinople.

The Venetians send Giacomo-Soranzo to Constantinople.


the feasts, that upon this occasion were prepared. According to this their
inuiting there came thither ambassadors out of many countries of Europe with
great gifts and presents in token of peace and confederacy. And among the
rest the Venetians sent thither one Giacomo Soranzo, who by the great
satisfaction, which he made to the king and all those of his court, revived the
amity and friendship, which flourished between the king and that Senate.

In the great market place of Constantinople, which the Feasts at the
circumcision of Prince Ottoman.
Turks call At Maidan, there were round about in all places erected certain
high Scaffoldes: where the multitude should sit to behold the pleasant fight,
of firewoorkes, of bankets, of musikes, of wrastlings, and of whatsoever else,
was there to be showed for the declaration of so great a joy. The king
himself was present at the said triumphs in a certain Palace, (situate in the
most open place of all that large and broad street,) where within a great
lowpe or window alost, all closed about and covered above with plancks and
boords, through the transparent holes and lattises thereof, not being seen of
any body, in the company of his wife, he discovered and beheld al things that
were there performed. All the ambassadors had their scaffolds prepared and
furnished, and the Persian ambassador had his so affold also sever all to
himself, but yet with a f^rre different intent and respect then the rest is
for that the other ambassadors were honored and regarded, as it was convenient
and agreeable to their degrees and estates, and received such entertainment as
might he showed at such a kind of Barbarons spectacles but the Persian, by
reason of the scorns and injuries done unto him, did not only not rejoice at
the said feasts and triumphs, but also ministered himself great matter of
laughter and sport to the beholders. For among sundry other wrongs and
outrages, that by the commandment of. Amurath were done to the Persian nation
by hauging up certain counterfect pictures of Persians made of ^a^hes and
sticks, and then burning them, and in many scornful sorts abusing them: the
king, for the great disdain that he had taken against Ebrain-Chan, as one that
not o^ndescending to the conditions of peace which he expected, not yielding
any more then Maxut-Chan and Aidere Ag^ had done before, seemed to have come as
a spy to mark the Turkish affairs, or to mock King Amurath, rather then to
put in execution any good matter, that he had to spacific the minds of the two
mighty princes commanded that the said ambassador, under sure and trusty
(...) in should be led prisoner to Erzirum, until further order were taken
with Ebrain-Chan sent prisoner to Erzirum.
him.

How be it Sinan for all this remained still in his office of Chief Vis^^d, and
attended the public government of the kingdom, without any intermission,
until such time, as those matters fell out, which in place convenient shall
Sinan advises Amurath to send a garrison to Van: and succor to Teflis, under
some good Captain.
be declared unto you: for that now it is time to return to Teflis and Chars
where we left, which two places without further succors must needs fall into
the enemies hands. For Sinan being now gone to Constantinople, and the
soldiers being besieged in Teflis, and having received none other relief,
but only that little, which in the beginning of the spring Sinan had secretly
caused to be conveyed unto them; and which would scarce be sufficient for all
that year, so that (it is to be thought) they were in very great necessity,
there was no remedy, this other year, whiles Sinan remained at the court, but
to send some new succors unto the^, and the rather for that it was not possible
to meet with so good an occasion to send them any help, as he found before his
departure from Erzirum. In this great necessity therefore he did boldly and
freely counsel the king, to send a new garrison of soldiers to Van, to the end
that no Persians should pass on this side Van to endamage those countries:
and next, that under the conduct of some fit Captain he would send some
succors to Teflis. Upon which point the king asked Sinan his opinion, and
willed him to be think himself of one, to whom this expedition might be
committed. Sinan propounded diverse and sundry persons unto him: but none of
them pleased Amurath who was minded to bestow this charge upon Mahamet the
Bassa, Nephew to Mustaffa Bassa, and in that respect ^^uied and hated by Sinan,
whom, albeit he told the king that he was not a fit man for such a service,
yet would he need ^^ emploie him in this supply, as it were in despite, and
de^ision of the advice, which Sinan gave him. And therefore he sent this
Mahamet to Erzirum, with the title of the Bassa of that Province, displacing
from thence Kesuan Bassa the Governor Amurath commits the succors of Teflis
to Mahamet Bassa.
of that Region, and withal added thereunto the honor and dignity of the
Captaineship over the army for Teflis. Presently upon this resolution
commandment was given to the Bassa of Caraemit, called Hassa the Eunuke, to
Mustaffa sometime called by the name of Manucchiar the Georgian, who (as we
told you before) exchanged his Native religion with the Turkish superstition,
to all the Sangiacchi, the Curdi, and all the soldiers of Erzirum, that
reducing themselves under the Standerd of Mahamet Bassa, they should follow
him to Teflis, and obey him in all things that he should command them.
Whereupon there assembled together out of all the said places about five and
twenty 25000. men follow Mahamet Bassa to Teflis for succor thereof.
thousand persons, and treasure sufficient was appointed for the relief of the
Soldiers in the besieged fort, together with Corn and all other necessary
provisions for them, so that every thing was put in readiness for this
enterprise, in such large and liberal manner, that it might abundantly have
sufficed. Commandment likewise was given to the Bassa of Al^ppo, and to the
Bassa of Maras, that with all their soldiers, which they had in pay, they
should repair to Van, and there abide till winter. These two Bassaes performed
the Kings commandment, and were not disturbed nor molested in any sort by the
enemy. Mahamet the Bassa also performed it likewise, together with all his
Soldiers above named, but yet with a far different and contrary fortune for
that there happened unto him diverse grievous and pernicious accidents, which
made this enterprise unfortunate and miserable, whereof it is now fit time to
discourse in prosecuting the due course of our history.

In the end of August Mahamet the Bassa departed from Erzirum, with the Bassa
of Caraemit, all the Sangiacchi, the Mahamet Bassa the General departs from
Erzirum.
Curdi, and all the soldiers subject to his government, carrying also with
him money, corn, and all other necessary munition. At the end of eight days
he arrived at Chars, and from thence passed to Archelech, being in the mean
time neither assailed nor disturbed by any enemy. At Archelech he found
Mustaffa Bassa, the Widows Son, and al his soldiers Mustaffa the Georgian
comes to Archelech to meet with Mahamet Bassa going for Teflis.
belonging unto him, who excusing himself with lively reasons for that he came
not to meet with him at Erzirum according to his duty, was most joyfully
entertained, and honored by Mahamet with Cloth of Gold, and Sword and Target
all guilte, and withal admonished to continue obedient and subject to Amurath,
not failing to conduct him with his garrison appointed for Teflis, and to
choose that way, which he thought to be the shortest, the safest, and the most
commodious for them: for that some were of opinion that it would be less
danger to travel by the way of Tomanis, and some other by the way of his
country. Wherein after many discourses Mustaffa did readily resolve him, that
the easiest and shortest way lay through his own country, as being also the
safest in his opinion. The counsel of Mustaffa pleased Mahamet greatly, who
made choice of him to be the guide of his army, reposing himself wholly upon
his good advise, and so they departed together from thence toward Teflis,
passing through By the advice of Mustaffa General Mahamet resolves to go to
Teflis through the Widows country.
Altunchala and Carachala, both belonging now to the said Georgian, but in
times past to the Widow his mother: abounding with all things necessary for
the sustenance of man: neither were they ever disturbed by the enemies forces.
From these quarters they went forward to a Castle called Gori, sometimes
appertaining to the Georgiani, and governed by a brother of that Giusuf who had
yielded himself to the Turks, but now by reason of that brothers death it is
fallen into the hands of the Turks: from which place they discovered in
certain fields a great army of Georgians, mingled with Persians, but yet
apparrelled after the manner of Georgia.

These were those Captains of Persia with Simon-Chan, so often mentioned
heertofore: who were sent from the Persia^ king, (as in diverse years before
they also were) to succor and aid the Georgian forces. For the king thought,
that they were sufficient enough to perform that business, understanding, that
the Turks had sent no greater army thither: and so by their good help there
might peradventure ensue a quiet end and pacification of al these troubles. And
therefore staying himself in Tauris, he had sent the aforenamed Captains into
Georgia, who keeping on the way of The Persians counterfeit their apparel, to
the end the means of a peace should not be disturbed.
Genge and of Grin had secretly conjoined themselves with Simon, and dissembled
and counterfeited their apparel only because the means of peace should not
be disturbed, and their king accounted a falsifier of his faith, who under the
veil of a treaty upon truce and amity, whiles Amurath attended nothing else
but to succor and defend his conquered Countries, without any annoyance or
disturba^ce to any other places, went about to procure the slaughter and
overthrow of the Turks. These then, as soon as they saw the Turkish army, and
perceived that they themselves were also descried by them, sent swift haraulds
unto the^ to bid them battle, and the Georgians and Persians de^ie the Turks to
the fight.
with haughty and injurious words to defy them to fight.

Mahamet Bassa, who had no other desire, but only to bring his succors safe to
Teflis, received this defiance with great grief of mind, and having dismissed
the hearaulds, Mahamet Bassa refuses battle.
he went about in the best manner he could, to delay the execution of this
their prouocatio^ to battle. That evening he was favored in his purpose by
very great and continual rain, which covertly excused his delay and fear,
every man thinking that it proceeded rather upon some reasonable and just
impediment then upon his cowardice. But the next morning, when the sun shined
bright upon the face of the earth without any cloud at all, the Georgians and
the Persians, having united themselves, and waxen more resolute then ever they
were, drew near to the Turkish army, and followed it while it marched. And so
both the armies kept in sight one of another, without any act at al or motion
of war, until about four howrs and a half before night, at what time the
Turks arrived near to a river, that separated the one army from the other.
Mahamet and Mustaffa fell into consultation between themselves, whether they
should pass over the river, before night, or else without any further travel
to stay on this side of the water until the next morning. Mustaffa the
Georgian advised him to stay and not to go over fearing lest they could not
possibly be so ready, and have all their Mustaffa ad^isoth not to pass the
river
company together on the other side, so soon, but that their enemies would be
first upon them, and finding the camp in disarray and confusion would greatly
annoy them. Notwith standing Mahamet disliked this advise of Mustaffa, having
taken a strong conceit, even upon the very first discovery of Mustaffa
misliketh the Georgians advise.
the enemy that there was some intelligence and agreement between Mustaffa and
the Persians, and that maliciously to that end he had persuaded him to come
that way, and not by the way of Tomanis: and therefore Mahamet thinking if there
were any deceit intended and plotted between Mustaffa and his enemies, to set
it in some confusion and disturbance, would not in any case follow the counsel
of the Georgian, to stay that night on this side of the river but commanded
that with all the greatest speed that might be all his soldiers with their
Casenda and their Nosul, that is with their Mahamet commands to pass the
river presently.
treasure and Corn should pass over, to the end that before night they might
land on the other side of the water in some good place, to the scorn and
derision of their enemies. The Checaia or the Lieutenant of Mahamet Bassa, a
bold young man and a hardy, was the first that went over, and after him the
carriages of money, and of corn, and then all the whole Army with very great
speed; Some drowned in the river.
although some of the confused multitude were drowned in the waters, being
rather over trodden with the horses and camels, then brought to their deaths
either by the swiftnes of the waters course, or by the depth of the Channel.
For indeed neither the one nor the other could possibly be the cause or
occasion of this mischaunce.

As Soon as the Georgiani perceived, that the Turks had passed the River,
without any staying til they might settle Georgians and Persians set upon
Mahamet Bassa.
themselves in any good order, in great haste and fury they ran to encounter
them, and presently assailed them, whiles they were all in a confusion and out
of array, by means whereof the Turks durst not almost sustain their furious
assault. And yet was there not in them such baseness of courage, but that they
turned their faces, and joined battle with the^, wherein within a very short
time you might see the banks of the River in many places be sprinkled with
the Turkish blood, and many carcases of the Turks The Turks discomfited by
the Persia^s and Georgians.
here and there scattered, without any appearance at all of any loss among the
Georgians and the Persians, that could be perceived. Among those that fell in
this slaughter, there were a number of Sangiacchi, Curdi, and certain
Mesopotamians: whereby it was manifestly discovered, that if the Turkish
Squadrons had not used the greater valor, out of all question they had been
all miserably destroyed: with the rest of the Sangiacchi, Curdi, and
Mesopotamians fearing and coniecturing by the overthrow of their own The
Turks fly from the battle.
the loss also of the others, they turned their backs, and put themselves to
flight: the like did the remnant also of Caraemit, and after them at the last
all the whole Army. And because the Georgians, foreseeing this their flight,
had made a great wing, and turning themselves upon their enemies on the lands
side, had left them no passage to fly, but sought by all means to drive them
back again into the River, the fugitive cowards could not choose, but eue^ in
their flight receive very great hurt intermingled with shame. Which
notwithstanding some of the^ desiring to avoid, thought it less harm to cast
themselves into The Turks in their flight greatly damnified.
the river, and so escape (though hardly) with their lives, or else with
desperation to be drowned in the waters. Great was their shame, great was
their confusion, but greatest was their loss, for that in the heat of the
ba^tell, the Kings money and the Corn was taken in pray by the Georgians and
Persians, every man saving (only) so much The treasure and corn taken from the
Turks.
for himself, as he could secretly hide upon his own body, or convey by the
means of some trusty slave, which by the help of their swift horses, was
preserved rather by fortune then by valor.

In this manner were the Turks handled who being thus Mahamet Bassa being
discomfited gathers together his scattered soldiers.
discomfited, and wounded, full of shame and dishonor, and spoiled of all
their relief, the next morning gathered themselves together again, one with
another cursing the heavens, their king, and their adverse fortune, some of
the^ also threatening that Georgian rinegate, as though all this mischief had
happened through his treachery and secret intelligence with the enemy.
Notwithstanding, when they found that they had still remaning so much money,
and other easements, as might suffice to comfort the afflicted minds of the
soldiers besieged in the forte, they re solued to go onwardes to Teflis, and
the day following they made so good speed in their journey, that for all the
difficulties of the ways, which travelers do commonly find in those quarters,
they arrived there in the evening. Greatly were all the soldiers of the fort
astonished when they saw the Turks, whom they had so long expected, arrived in
such bad order and so il furnished, and were wonderfully grieved at this common
loss: by reason where of they were all in a great confusion and protested to
Mahamet, that they would abandon the defense of that country, if they had not
necessary provision made for the^: yea their protestations were so The besieged
soldiers in Teslis protest to Mahamet Bassa, that they will aba^don the sort.
vehement, and their mutiny so tumultuous, that thereby was confirmed a
certain general rumor which was already raised upon this unfortunate
battle, that Teflis was recovered by the Georgians, the report whereof came
also into Italy, as a thing most certain and true, and yet proved to be but a
lie. Besides which loss of the foresaid soldiers and provision, certain
other mischiefs were also like to ensue, which every reasonable man would
expecte upon so happy and fortunate a success but that they were met withal.
For Mahamet after he had with large promises pacified and mitigated their first
furies and insolences, presently in the morning he caused a Diuano to be
called within the castle, where having the multitude of the Sangiacchi, the
Bassaes, the Zaini, the Spahini, and the Giannizzaries gathered together, he
spoke unto them in this manner.

Forasmuch as it has pleased GOD, that so great The oration of Mahamet Bassa
in the Castle of Teflis.
and so important an occasion of victory, which was offered unto us for the
exaltation and glory of every one of ^^, is now fallen out so infortunately
that it has not only not ministered unto us any matter of triumphing over our
enemies, as we should have done, but rather it has made them (I know not
how) to carry away from us both the triumph, and also our Armor, our Horses,
our slaves, and our spoils: yea and the remembrance wheof does most grievously
trouble and afflict me,) our Sultans money, and our public munition and
sorces, solemnly delivered to our conducte, is now become a bootye and pray
unto them: that the honor which might have made every one of us to be famous
among Noble and valourous Soldiers, is now fallen from our foreheades, and to
our great detriment does adorn the heads of Strangers, or rather of our
enemies: And that notwithstanding all this, we are now come to these
courageous Soldiers, which with their great labor and valor have defended
this forte even in the midst of their enemies weapons and treacheries, and to
whom we should yield that aid and relief, which the virtue of every one of
their minds does deserve, and which king Amurath had put in our hands to bring
hither unto the^: there is now no remedy but to resolve upon some good means
that we fall not wholly into the utter disgrace of our Lord and King, and that
is to maintain these soldiers in the custody and defense of this forte, and
though it be with all our own wants and al our own dishonors, to comfort these
that have so long time looked for us, and so well deserved all manner of
relief. We cannot excuse our selves, that our enemies were better then we,
either in number or instruments of war: (for both in the one and the other we
were far beyond the^) neitheryet can, we say, that they set upon us by night,
or at unawares:) for when we saw their number, their weapons, their horses, and
finally their approach, and their manner of assault, yet we would needs pass
over the River, and join battle with them: which we now know has fallen
out very lamentable to us, because we were more ready to take our flight
then to endure the fight, and to use our feet then to occupy our hands.) And
therefore it is very requisite, as well to satisfy the rigor of Justice, as to
perform the duty of Soldiers, that we suffer not our Lord and King to
loose his Money which he trusted into our hands, and which is gone from us,
not by greater strength nor by any treacherous stratagem of our enemies, but
through our own too-too importunate fear, and too base a regard of our
lives, before which it was the duty of every one of us to have preferred the
care of our honor. For if by fighting and courageously sustayning the
assaults of our enemies, though they had been stronger and better armed then
we, this misfortune had happened unto us, and that we could in any sort have
represented to the King and the world an honorable and bloody battle, we
should not now have had any need to seek means, how to repair this loss,
and to restore the thing that violently was taken from us by such as were more
mighty then our selves, and these honorable soldiers also should more easily
have digested with us this lamentable calamity. But we have lost that money,
and in very deed, having (as it were) willingly bestowed it upon the Georgians
and Persians to redeem our lives and to save us from their fury, we are
bound to repay it, or else for ever hereafter to be challenged as lawful
debtors to the King for it. And therefore, my good friends and companions, if
you will take a good course, let every one of us without any further
consultation put his hand to his private purse (if he have not foolishly cast
that also into the hands of his ravenous enemy) and with our own money let
us succor the necessity of these men, and have regard to the honor of our
King. So shall we make our flight less blame-worthie, we shall justify our
actions the more honestly, and (that which is of greatest importance) we shall
the better pacific the wrath of King Amurath, which most justly he might
conceive against us. I my self, before you al, am most ready to disburse four
thousand Ducats toward it: if it please you al to follow me accordingly;
we shall deliver these Soldiers from their great necessity, and acquit our
selves from the intricate bonds of most troublesome displeasures.

A man might there have seen a thousand countenances changed a thousand manner
of ways: for one softly whispered many a curse and shame upon the King, upon
Mahamet, upon God: another denied to disburse any thing, another determined
privily to steal away, and some practiced one thing and some another, but in
the end every man was induced to follow the purpose and example of Mahamet: and
there upon having made a purse according to every man's ability, there was
collected thirty thousand Ducats among them. Presently after this, word was
The Turks make a purse among themselves in Teflis of 30000. dukats.
sent to Leuentogli at Zaghen, that he should send the^ grain, Muttons and
other necessary provisions, that they might the better continue the defense of
the Fort.

Two only days did they remain in Teflis, and then having changed such
soldiers as desired to be dismissed, Mahamet departs from Teflis.
and having also appointed for that government Homar Bassa in the rowme of
Giusuf, that was in it before, Mahamet departed. But before his departure,
consultation was had whether they should keep the way of Tomanis, or the
other through the Country of the Georgian Mustaffa: and in the end they
resolved, that it was better Mahamet goueth order to pass the river to return
by the way of Tomanis.
to keep the way of Tomanis, and thereupon order was taken that they should
all pass over the river, for that they were determined to go that way. The
Sangiacchi Curdi were the first that went over, and had already pitched their
tents upon the further side of the water, (when Mahamet began to revoke his
former order, and sent the^ word that they should return, because he was now
determined Mahamet reuoketh his order: but is not obeyed by the Curdi.
to leave the way of Tomanis, and to go back by the same way that he came, by
Carachala and Altunchala. All the Sa^giacchi were in a great rage at this
message, being already exceedingly grieved as well for the loss of their
friends as also for disbursing their Money, and in plain and express terms,
sent him answer that they were accustomed to war, and to great exploites
fit for men and not for boys: and that these mutabilities seemed to them to
be rather childrens play then manly resolutions: and as for themselves, that
they were not minded to change their journey, but as they had already
separated themselves, so would they go forwards, and follow on their voyage.
Very hotely and earnestly did Mahamet entreat them to return back, but no
means could he find to revoke them from their obstinate purpose, but forwards
they went the same way and arrived The Curdi come to Chars long before Mahamet
Bassa.
at Chars, long before Mahamet, who was much grieved at the^ and greatly
reproved their disobedience. But when he perceived he could not otherwise do,
he with the Bassa of Caraemit and the Bassa of Altunchala put themselves on
their Journey, even in the same ways, wherein they had received their
shameful and ignominious discomfiture.

At the last Mahamet arrived at Altun-Chala. And for Mahamet at Altunchala.
as much as partly by his own earnest desire, partly through the secret
provocation of the other chief Bassaes, he was urged to seek some means, how
he might revenge the treasons and losses, which the Georgians had wrought and
brought upon them, yea even with the death of Mustaffa, who was now suspected
of all men. Mahamet and the rest thinking (as we told you before) that
Mustaffa had had some pri^ie intelligence with them, and that they together had
plotted this treachery: Or at the least (for that was thought to be the
principal intent of Mahamet) forasmuch as he was minded by this means to
make Amurath believe, that in truth all the mischiefs that lighted upon them,
did not happen through their cowardice, but through the treacherous treasons,
and malicious aduises of the Georgian, and so make their received losses seem
more worrhie of excuse, and their flight more pardonable he devised with
himself how to find out such an artificial plot, as without any stir he
might bring to effect what he had intended. And that which he had Mahamet
deuiseth how to betray Mustaffa the Georgian in Altunchala.
in his mind was this: To call a Diuano under his own Pauilion, faining that
he had received some commandment from the Court, and then having caused
Mustaffa to come into that rowme, whiles the said commandment should bed in
reading, to cause his Checaia or Lieuetenant with those chief of his band
that stood about him, to fall upon him and presently Mahamet calls a fained
counsel.
cut off his head. So Mahamet called the said Diuano, wherein there sat with
him the Bassa Eunuke of Caraemit, certain Sangiacchi subject to the
Jurisdiction of Erzirum the Capigi Bassi (that is, the chief Gentleman usher)
and the Checaia of the said Mahamet: with all whom upon the Law of a solemn
oath he had communicated his intended deceyte. The Georgian Mustaffa was
called accordingly, who, both because he was beloved of more then one, and also
because he used all diligence and forecast, and specially because even in the
army he had perceived some privy whisperings of such a matter, knew full well,
that all this was devised against him, and imagined that the conspiracy had
been far greater then indeed it was: whereupon he also prepared for his
own defense. And touching his going to the Diuano, he thought he might not
deny so to do, least by his absence he should be condemned for contumacy, and
so he himself should make himself guilty and culpable of the fault, that
(peradventure not without reason) was imputed unto him, and thereby leave his
cities for a pray to their enemies. But seeing that he must needs go, he
devised a very safe and sure means, how he might escape the hands of the
Turks, and peradventure to the great dommage of Mahamet and example of the
beholders, give a taste of his own virtue and valor. And therefore having
chosen Mustaffa the Georgian prepares his guard to dese^d himself from Mahamet.
out fifty of his most faithful Soldiers, he gave them to understand, that
there was no remedy but they must needs follow him to the Diuano, that was
appointed with in the Pauilion of Mahamet, and being come thither they must
there stay ready and attentive, to the end that at his first and one only
call, they should all suddenly and forceably rush into the pauilion with their
weapons, and rather then any wrong should be done unto him, they should
exercise their strength against the Turks without exception of any person.
They being by nature very great enemies to the Turkish blood, and
understanding full well what he had said unto them, settled themselves to put it
in execution, and having gathered unto them other of their own faithful and
trusty friends also, they set Mustaffa Mustaffa the Georgian at the tent of
the Diuano.
before them and so followed him even to the Pauilion of Mahamet. Mustaffa
entered into the Diuano, and standing upon his feet required Mahamet to tell
him what he had to say to him: who presently caused the cou^terfaite
commandment to be read, whereunto he gave an attentive ear. But when the
other Sangiacchi and Bassaes The custom of the Turks, when the Kings
commandments are in reading, to stand up.
began to sit down (for it is the manner of the Turks whenever any of the
Kings commandementes are in reading, always to stand up, and not to sit
down until it be fully read,) the Georgian took his leave, promising that
he would ever be ready, not only to perform that order of the King, but
whatsoever else he should command, how hard and difficult so ever it were.
While he was retiring out of the Pauilion, the Capigi Bassi (or gentleman
Mustaffa cries out and wounds Mahamets Lieuetenant.
Usher) of Mahamet Bassa, came unto him, and plucking him by the sleeue of his
garment, (adding deeds also to his words,) willed him to sit down. When
Mustaffa felt himself plucked by the sleeue, he cried out aloud, and drew his
sword: wherewith he stroke Mahamets Checaia that was right against him, and
with his left hand having raught his roll from his pate, with his right hand,
Mahamets lieuetenant dies, being cut in sunder down to the stomach.
suddenly, to the great astonishment of all that were present, at one only
blow, he parted his head, his neck and his breast in twain, even to his
very stomach, so that he died (a strange spectacle to behold) being thus
cut in sunder, with his two shoulders hanging down upon their several sides.
After this first he redoubled his second stroke, and aimed at the head of
the Eunuk Bassa, but it being Mustaffa cutteth of the ear of the Bassa of
Caraemit.
defended by the writhen Rolls of his Turbant, it slipped down by his ear,
and besides a piece of his said Turbant carried his ear quite away, with a
little also of his flesh of his check. Then being all enraged, and eagerly
enflamed with desire of revenge he did set upon Mahamet Bassa Mustaffa wou^
death Mahamet with five mortal wouds
(who being now alin a confusion was risen at this tumult) and wounded him with
five mortal wounds: two whereof notwithstanding, being the deepest and the
sorest, although they brought him even to the extreme point of death, yet by
cunning hand were healed. At the cry of this Rinegate Georgian all his people
had run in together: upon whose confused tumult and the fear that Mustaffa
through his fury had put into them, the Camp was raised and every man with
all speed departing from thence, set himself Mahamet being wounded ret) red
to Chars with his people.
on his way toward Chars, whither also were brought the two wounded Bassaes,
and the rest, that were ill handled and greatly scarred with these sudden and
uncouth stirs.

Mustaffa sent present information to the King, of all that was practiced and
wrought against him, finding himself Mustaffa aduertiseth king Amurath of all that had happened.
greatly greened at the false suspicion that Mahamet had conceived of him, to
his great dishonor: wherein he did so cunningly write, and so much dissemble,
by shadowing the truth with lying and cogging, that he persuaded the King to
show him a manifest token of his good liking and contentment, by sending unto
him both cloth of gold, and a battle Axe all guilt. Mahamet also,
entermingling here and there; with all the art that possibly he could
devise, all hateful and injurious terms, sent large aduert Mahamet also
informs the King how matters had fallen out.
sements of all the misfortunes that had happened, and aggrauated to the King
both the treacheries of Mustaffa, and also the slender security of those ways
and countries.

As Soon as King Amurath understood the calamity of his soul^ilers, the loss
of his money, the great dishonor of his people, and the apparent danger,
wherein the Fort of Teflis stood, when it was like to be abandoned: being
Amurath being angry reprooueth the Bassaes of the Court.
all inflamed with rage and anger, he called unto him the Bassaes of his
Court, among whom sat as chief the proud and haughty Sinan, and rated them
all diverse and sundry ways, reproouing their lewd counsel, and recounting
the losses that he had received, as though they had happened through their
defaultes, and especially Sinan, the principal occasion of all these
mischiefs, who like an improu^dent fool would needs relinguish the charge of
his Army, and like a King sit idle at Constantinople, standing (as it were)
at some public triumph, to behold and hear the miseries and misfortunes of
others. Sinan Sinan answers the king proudly and arrogantly.
could do no less, but make answer to the wrathful King, yet not with
such mildness and modesty, as in so sinister an occasion he should
peradventure have done, but rather in all proud and arrogant manner, without
any reverence or regard, he told him plainly, That as the last year,
(being the fifth year of this war) whiles he was ready and prepared to
return to Constantinople, the succors were brought into Teflis so with great
quiet and ease, that even his own subjects (much less his enemies) scarce
knew of it, the Persians and the Georgians in the mean Succors brought to
Teflis, without any thing else worth the writing.
time occupying their minds about any other thing rather then about this,
(whereof we have not in deed made any mention at all in his due place, for that
there fell out nothing worthy to be written, saving that the said supply of
money and corn (undoubtedly to the just commendation of Sina^) was so safely
and warely co^ducted to Teflis, that neither the Turks made any preparation of
soldiers for the conuoy of it, nor yet the enemies had any suspision of such a
matter, neither was there any show of battle or contention about it.) Even so
it would have fallen out this year also, if the King had put his advise in
execution, as much as he despised and contemned it: For he did then give him to
understand that Mahamet Bassa could not be a fit man for the leading of those
succors, especially to such a station or place, and that it was very necessary
to have chose^ in his rowm, some other person of valor, of worth, and of
wisdom: but seeing he would needs make choice of the same Mahamet, he was not
now to blame any other for this error, but only himself. And touching his
coming to Constantinople, it was a thing long before thought to be very
needful, not only for his advise how the matter of peace might be brought
to some good pass, but also because (if that treaty came not to the desired
issue,) then he had to talk with him, how he might easily compass the
overthrow of his enemy: which matter as yet he had no fit time to declare
unto him, but was now most ready to reveal it, if it would so please him.
Wonderfully was Amurath grieved with this his answer, when he considered
Amurath grievously offended with Sinan.
that a slave of his own, should thus reproach him with a matter that was so
odious, and so manifestly touched his folly and improuidence: notwithstanding
he dissembled his coffeehouse conceived against him, and was very desirous
to know of him, what that secret and important matter was, which he had to
reveal unto him, for the easy compassing of this commenced enterprise: and
therefore after he had framed him a glosing reply, he commanded Sinan to
display all his conceits, and to disclose those his devises, which he had to
utter. All the rest of the Bassaes held their peace, and every one of them,
omitting the ouersights of Sina^, were content also to omit the occasion of
answering the king, al of the^ being wholly bent against him and joined with the
king (as it were) in disdain and scorn of his arrogancy, who for a brief of
al his aduises propounded these two things. First, his counsel was, that
they should not proceed in this war as they had hithereto done, that is to
say, by seeking with fortes and fortresses The first advise of Sinan.
to hold and keep their enemies countries. For (as in the very beginning of
this war, whiles consultation was had in what manner and sort it should be
made, he had expressly protested) he did manifestly foresee, that their Casende
or treasuries were not able to yield such store of money, as was sufficient for
the maintenance of necessary garrisons, and so the error of Mustaffa (that
now is dead) was evidently convinced, who so obstinately had persuaded such a
dangerous and difficult manner of warfare. His second advise was, that the true
means to bring these The second advise of Sinan.
stirs to a wishid end consisted especially in the resolution of the king
himself, whom if it would please but to remove a little from Constantinople,
for three or four days iourneys only, and to pass either into Caraemit, or
into Aleppo, or at least into Amasia, he might assuredly promise to himself
all speedy and honorable victory* for at the only name of his remove,
either the Persians would not stand too obstinately upon conditions of peace,
but would easily come to any agreement, or else he might continue his wars, and
so obtain great co^quests. These were the reasons that Sinan propounded
whereof it seems no other thing followed but only an envious affection of
the king against him, quite contrary to the conceit which before he had of
him, and (which was a matter of greater importance) a further Women are of great
might with Amurath
suspicion (fostered by these mighty Ladies,) that Sinan had thus counseled
the king himself to go in person from Constantinople, not for any good that
could arise by his departur, but only that so he might find means for the
Prince his Son to make himself King and drive out Sinan discharged from the
^ Court and Constantinople, and banished to Marmara for ever.
his father. This suspicio^ was in such fort nourished in the mind of Amurath,
especially being assured of the great affection which the prince carried
toward Sinan, that he was enforced to ridd him out of his sight, and to
deprive him of al charge, driving him presently out of the court and out of
Constantinople, and banishing him into Damotica, a place near to Andrinopolis:
from whence afterterwarde, through special favor which by humble supplication
he obtained, he was sent into Marmara a little beyond Siliurea, where he yet
lives. And into his place of Visiership was assumed Sciaus Bassa, the Kings
Son in Sciaus the chief Vizier, and his manners.
law, by country an Hungarian, a man very gracious of countenance, and of
honorable judgment, but above all the men in the world, a seller of Justice
and benefits, and yet a great friend to the peace with Christian Princes which
Sinan did so wickedlie malign.

In the mean time the Persian captains had withdrawn themselves to their
places of Residence, and by very The Persians at their places of residence
speedy Posts had imparted to their King their obtained victories, and so
every man for this season had made an end of those great stirs that were raised
in the years. 1580. 1581. and a good part of 1582. wherein also followed the
election of a new general, who notwithstanding went not forward in his
troublesome business, until the beginning The 5. 6. and 7. year of this war
of the year, 1583. as in the next book we will declare unto you.

The end of the fifth Book.
The Sixth Book.
The Argument.
The Persian King resolves to ride to Heri, against his son Abas.

Emir-Chan promises the King to defend his Territories from the Turks

The Governor of Sasuar beheaded.

The King attempteth to get his Son Abas into his hands.

Abas writes to his Father, and the Tenor of his Letters.

The two Persian Princes reconcile themselves one to the other.

Salmas accused and beheaded.

The Persian King, and the Prince his Son return to Casbin.

Ferat chosen General of the Turkish Army.

Ferat repaireth Aggia Chalasi, and Reiuan.

Tocomac seeks means to be revenged of the injuries of the Turks.

Ferat returns to Chars, and causes a Sangiacco of the Curdi to be beheaded

Manucchiar the Georgian beheadeth the Messengers and Gentlemen-ushers of
Amurath and deuideth the Treasure between himself, and his cousin Simon.

Hassan goes to succor Teflis.

Ferat is at Erzirum, and dismisseth his Army.

The Persian King is affraide of new stirs, and comes to Tauris with a
great Army.

General Ferat gathers a new Army at Chars* he goes to Lory: he passes
to the streites of Tomanis and cut^eth down the woods.

Daut Chan yields himself to the Turks.

Simon goes to assault Resuan the Bassa: he has his horse slain under him
and is strangely delivered from extreme danger.

Tomanis de^ended by Hassan.

A great dearth in the army of Ferat.

Ferat is threatened by his Soldiers.

Ferat goes to Clisca, and means to fortify it.

Resuan is hardly entreated by the Soldiers, who also threaten their General
again.

The Generals life is saved by Amurath the Bassa of Caramania.

A most confused tumult in the Army, and Ferat the General is enforced
shamefully to yield to his Soldiers, and returns to Erzirum.

The Original occasion and manner of the escape of Alyculi-Chan.

The Persian king dismisseth all his Soldiers, that he had gathered together.

Emir-Chan is imprisoned, and having his eyes put out, by the kings appoinment,
he dies miserably in prison.

New displeasures arise among the Turcomannes for the death of Emir-Chan.

Amurath conceiueth great hope of the valor of Osman the Bassa.

Sciaus writes to the Tartarian of the coming of Osman to Constantinople.

Osman with four thousand soldiers puts himself in the way to
Constantinople.

Osman is assaulted by the Tartarians, but Osman over comes them.

Osman puts the Tartarian king to death, and appoints his brother to be
his successor.

Osman departs from Caffa by Galleys, and arriueth at Constantinople.

Osman is chosen chief Vizier in the rowme of Sciaus, and General in the
rowme of Ferat.

Osman departs from Constantinople, and goes to Erzirum.

Osman gathers a greater army, then all those that have been hitherto
gathered in these wars, besides the Soldiers of Egypt and Damasco, who did
not go with Osman.

The sixth Book.
AFter that these victorious Warriers, laden with spoils and diverse of their
Enemies The Persians rejoice and are full of good hopes.
ensigns, were with great joy received at home in Persia, at the last to the
greater comfort of the Persians, the discord also that fell out between Mahamet
Bassa, and Mustaffa the Georgian was declared unto the^, whereat they did no
less rejoice, then they did before fortheir obtained victories. And every man
thought with himself that this news might greatly further the matter of
peace, or at least if that came not to the wished end, yet it might hinder the
Turks from passing to any place that was near unto them, and might also
keep them occupied, is Teflis had hitherto done, in such places as are far
distant from their Royal Cities. Which conjecture of theirs might very well
be grounded upon a reasonable foundation, as well because the injury was very
great, that Mustaffa had done to Mahamet the General of the Turkish Camp, as
also for that the Territories of the said Mustaffa were no less replenished
with places most fit for treacheries and ambushes, then the Territories of
Sinion. In these and such like good hopes remained the Persians; when by the
way of Georgia there came tydinges to them that Sinan was displaced from his
Office of Generalshippe, and therefore the Turks must of necessity send
forth some new Captain, if they were minded still to The Persians are sorry
for displacing of Sinan.
continue this war. With great grief of mind did the Persians receive this
advertisement, knowingful well how much Sinan was inclined to peace, and how
deadly he hated the continuance of these long and troublesome contentions. The
Persians grieved at the indignity done to their Ambassador.
But much more greiuous was it unto them, when they understood withal, how
their treaties of peace were all in vain, and how besides those indignities
that so dishonestlie were offered to the Persian Nation at Constantinople,
their Ambassador was also at the last sent prisoner to Erzirum. And yet
notwithstanding all these sorry news the Persians changed not their former
hopes, but verily persuaded themselves that these discords, and the outrages
committed upon the Turks by Manucchiar, might happily The Persians are still
in good hope.
hinder their enterprise, which this year they minded to attempt to the great
preiudise of Nassiuan, and Tauris: For they imagined, that seeing their new
General must needs be sent as far as from Constantinople, the new year
could not serve their turn to any other purpoce, but only to succor Teflis,
and to revenge the shame received by the outrageous fury of Manucchiar. In
which point they discoursed also with themselves, that even in that respect
Manucchiar and Simon would make a league together, as well because they were
neighbors in Territory, and were likely both of them to run one and the self
same course of fortune, as also (yea and so much the rather) because Manucchiar
having taken to wife a sister of Simons, they could dono less in these
innouations but join themselves together, and one of them be a protector and
defender of the other, and so uniting their forces together they should be able
to annoy al such, as should be sent to conueigh new succors to Teflis.

Upon these occasions the Persian King, perceiving that Mahamet the Persian
King resolves to ride to Heri against his son Abas Mirize.
he could not have a fitter opportunity to employe himself against Abas Mirize
his some, determined with himself to leave the matters of this side of his
kingdom in their present state, and to march toward Heri, whereunto he was
earnestly solicited by his elder son Emirhamze Mirize, but principally by
Mirize Salmas his Vizier, whom his said son in law did likewise daily animate
to this resolution, and could not well brook that any other thing should be
in speech, but only this, And therefore seeing there was no other remedy, but
that the king must needs satisfy the request of these mightte entercessers,
and also establish all things in as good security as possibly he might
(besides the great confidence and trust which he reposed as we told you, in his
cosins the Georgia^s) he called unto him Emir-Chan being at that time the
Governor of Tauris, and opened The speech of the Persian king to Emir-Chan.
unto him the resolution which he had to ride into Heri, declaring unto him
withal, that he meant not to take this viage upon him, and quite to leave at
randon all these his Cities that were so near and commodious for the fury of
the Turks, but he would set a trusty guard to keep them, and make choice of
such a person to attend them, as should be able to yield him a good account
of them, whenever the Turks should adventure to endammage those countries.
And for so much as Emanguli-Chan had taken upon him the charge to defend Siruan,
and not to suffer that Osman Bassa should proceed any further in his
conquestes there, but to keep him strait and to restrain him within the
narrow bounds and holds of Demir-Capi, he had found out also another person
that had promised him, whenever occasion required to gather an army
together, and to use all other good means to resist the Turks, if they should
at any time seek to annoy these borders of Tauris, Nassiuan, Reiuan, and such
lik. And further signified unto him, That he was minded to discharge him of the
Office that he had, namely the Gouernourshippe of Tauris, and would substitute
in his place the man that had so readily offered himself to this service,
bestowing upon him the name and title of the Governor over Reiuan and
Nassiuan, and over all the other places and Captains in those quarters. But if
Emir-Chan himself would promise the like, and besides other helps, would use
also the service of the mighty Turcoman Nation when need should so require,
he would not only suffer him still to inioic his charge, but also, not
harkening to the promises of the other man, he would honor him further, with
the dignity of Captain General against the Turkish Army.

A long time did Emir-Chan remain in suspense hereat, not knowing whereupon to
resolve himself. For on the one Emir-Chan wondereth at the speech of his King.
side, he knew that he had many adversaries and co^petitors, who no doubt would
very boldly have made the like offer to the king, of purpose to oppress him,
and to hoist him out of his possessed dignity: and on the other side he saw
the promise was very difficult, for he understood full well what great power the
Turkish Army had, against which he could not promise to make any resistance,
no nor to look them in the face, with so slender and weak provisions as he
had. Nevertheless, he being deceived as well as the rest with those common
hopes, that whiles the King himself might be busied about the winning of Heri,
the Turks neither could nor would attend any other thing, but only to
revenge the injuries of the Georgians, to chastise those troublesome and
treacherous people, and to succor Teflis: courageously at last promised the
King that he would not suffer the Turks, no not so much as to approach, either
to Reiuan or Nassiuan, but would maintain Emir-Cham promises the king to
guard his Frontirs from the Turks fury.
and keep him and his lands safe and untouched from any of their forces. And
if it should fall out that through some extra-vagant or extraordinary
resolution of the Turkish Captains, the enemies should come into those
borders, he would then gather together the Turcomans and all their
confederates, and so employ his whole power and forces against them, to the
end, that such injuries should not be attempted, at the least without revenge.

This resolution being concluded, King Mahamet set King Mahamet with an
army of 20000 persons rides toward Heri.
himself forwards toward Casbin, with an Army of twenty thousand persons,
and leaving on his left hand Gheilan and the Caspian sea, and on his right
hand Siras and Cassan, and beyond all that, even upon the coast of the said
Sea Massandran, Saru, Pangiazar, and Cul^at, by the way of Terrachan,
Imamadulasis, Cur, Sembran, Bestan, and Dagman, he arrived at the City of
Sasuar, being on that sid the chief of all the Cities that are subject to the
jurisdiction Mahamet at Sasuar.
of Heri. Now the governor of this City had fortified himself, by keeping
the gates locked, and maintaining a vigilant guarde about it, hoping that
delaying the King and so avoiding his first assault, he might also
peradventure persuade him, that this his coming was not necessary, and purge
himself before him of any accusation or fault, wherewith all he might be
charged. But this his designement, though indeed both just and reasonable could
not fall out according to his desire. For Mirize Salmas, who in the delay of
this their besieging, had continually among other surmises, entermingled also
some fear and suspicion of Novelties, did still solicit and hasten the
enterprise, and himself encouraging the Soldiers thereunto, with ladders,
with ropes, with The governor of Sas^^ar beheaded by the Kings commandment.
timber, and with other engines did so much, that in a short time the Guarde
of the City was taken, and the Gates opened to the King, who swarming in with
all his Army, left no leisure for Chan the Governor to escape, but presently
caused him to be beheaded, although he alleged a thousand excuses for
himself, and objected a thousand accusations against the seditious The
Governor of Sasuar beheaded by the kings commandment.
Vizier. The King after this departed from Sasuar, and joining unto him all the
strength of the cities of Nisaur, Massiat, Tursis, Turbat, Giem, Malan, and
Coran, having also put to death certain captains and Sultans, that were
accused by the Vizier to be Confederates in the rebellion of his Son, he
arrived atlast at the desired City of Heri. Very strong is this City by
situation, compassed about with a good wall, and watered with deep channells of
running springes, conueighed into it by Tamerlane their Founder or Restorer: so
that the winning thereof could not but King Mahamet at Heri.

The Situation of Heri.


prove very long and difficult: especially because there were in it many
valiant Captains, all envious enemies to Mirize-Salmas, and ready to attempt
any notable enterprise, for the defense of themselves and of their Lord.
As Soon as the King had discovered The winning of Heri difficult.
the said City, he felt a rising in his mind the diverse affections of
grief, and of piety: and indeed greater was the grief which he conceived,
in respect of the business that he went about, then his piety was. For he
grieved woonderfullye at his own unhappiness and miserye, that he should
cause such a one to be borne into the light of the world, as in steed of
maintaining his Fathers honor, and joining his forces with the forces of his
Father to the destruction of his Enemies, should rather be a means for his
arrant enemies to enter King Mahamet soroweth his unhappy and evil fortune.
into his confederate Countries, and he himself prove the very overthrow
of him, from whom he received his being, and present dignitye. It grieved him
likewise and that with affectionate passions, to remember the blood of his
subjects, that had heretofore been spilt upon so strange an occasion: yea
and scarcelye durst he enter into cogitation with himself, thence forward
to shed any more of the blood of his peoples. Nevertheless, with all these
his conceits and unhappy fortune, being more and more solicited by the
Vizier, he attempted to understand (if he could) the mind of his Son,
and Mahamet seeks to get his Son Abas into his hands.

Abas writes to the king his father.

The tenor of the letters of Abas Mirize.


(if it might be possible) to get him into his hands.

But the City of Heri was well fenced, (as we have said) and therefore it must
needs require the spending of many days, before it could be obtained: which
Abas-Mirize knowing full well, thought it good in the mean time to write
diverse letters to his Father and his Brother, wherein he besought them, that
they would make known unto him the occasions of this their stir. For if
desire of rule had moved them to desire the deprivation of him being their
Son and Brother, from the honor which he lawfully possessed, and which his
Father himself had procured for him, they ought to abandon that imagination,
and not to seek the disturbance of their peace, for that he was always to
spend his wealth, and his blood together with his estate, in their service,
and acknowledged his Father to be his good Father and King, who rather then
he: should pursue this resolution, should be encouraged to increase his
Dominion over his neighbors the Indians and Bactriaus, which would be more
honorable and profitable for that Empire, and much more commodious for all
Persia: And if they were not induced heereunto for this cause, but by a desire
to revenge some trespass that he had committed in prejudice either of the
Crown of Persia, or his Fathers honor, he was most ready to submit himself
to any amends, and with all reason to yield unto them the kingdom, yea the
world, and even his own life also, the rather to satisfy their minds with a
more full contentation.

With twice and thrice reading over, were these affectionate and reverent
letters considered and digested, and at last both the Brother and the father,
perceiving in the^ such liberality of words, and being over come with
pity, or (if not with pity yet) with great admiration and contentment, they
determined to put the matter in practice, and moderating their wicked desires
of blood, ruin and death, to attempt the reducing of the young man's mind to
some good pass. Whereupon they wrote back King Mahamet the father and
Emirhamze the Prince writ back to Abas.
unto him, That no greedy desire to usurp his government (An affection that
was only raised in the g^utt^no^^ mind of profane Salmas) had induced them
to make so great a voyage, to trouble so much the people, and to shed such
abundance of blood. For rather then they would deprive him of that
government, they would be ready to bestow upon him new benefits and
honors of greater esteem. But only his disobedience and impudenci^, in that
he caused himself to be called the King of all The accusations against Abas
Mirize.
Persia, and would not send so much as one Captain to aid them against the
Turks, these were the causes, why they proceeded to these great
inconveniences: because they thought it their duty to root up such wicked
and obstinate desires out of their kingdom, and in Persia to preserve an
universal obedience and common tranquili^ie among their subjects.

The youngman, when he understood the accusations that were laid against him,
was greatly comforted, and hoped to make it manifest before al men, how the
king and his Abas hops well, and writes back to his father and his brother.
brother were misinformed in these particularities and therefore incontinently
did write back again unto them, That if they would inuiolably promise, not to
put to death, nor do any outrage: to any his ambassadors, he would sendvn to
the^ such evident matter, and so clear informatio^ touching those his
accusations, as they should not only plainly perceive there was never any such
kind of thought in him, but also that he had always desired and labored the
contrary: and peradventure he should open unto the^ such a matter, as in
respect of other men and not of himself, would cause their coming to prove
profitable and commodious to all the kingdom of Persia. Whereupon they both
The promises that paised friendly between the Princes.
promised all good entertainment, and were now become very desirous to
understand, what those strange novelties should be: and so when they had
yielded their consent, and with solemn oath had offered to receive the said
ambassadors with all friendly courtesy and regard: Abas sent unto them two of
his chief counselors, men of good account and reverence both for their
years and wisdom, with commandment, That they should declare, how all
these stirs did arise from none other man, but only from the Vizier
Mirize-Salmas: who as he had already labored this dangerous plot against
Abas-Mirize the kings own son, so (if this his designment should be brought to
pass) he would not stick to do the like against the King himself, to
satisfy the greedy and ambitious desire which he had to place his Son in
law Emir-hamze in the sovereign seat, and himself to be the man, that (as
Lieutenant to the King) should command the whole Empire. Which
notwithstanding they were to reveal without any blame or accusation of
Emir-Hamze, and to make it known to his old father, that never any such
conceits or affections were kindled in the Prince, but that he was also unawares
induced thereunto by the craft and suttlety of malignant Salmas.

The two Ambassadors came accordingly, and The excuses of the ambassadors in
the behalf of Abas Mirize.
after many speeches, in the end, swearing (according to their custom) by the
Creator that spread out the Air, that founded the earth upon the deepes, that
adorned the heaven with stars, that powered abroad the water, that made the
fire, and briefly of nothing brought forth all things: swearing by the head
of their vain Master Aly, and by the false religion of their impious Prophet
Mahamet: swearing by their children, by their wives, by their own souls, That
such peruers thoughts never entered The Ambassadors of the King and the Prince
are received.
into the head of Abas-Mirize: They alleged many testimonies and evident
proofs, that most loyally and faithfully, in all due time, as well when he was
advanced to the sovereign degree of a king, as also in his battles against the
Turks, his Son had always caused devout prayers and supplications to be
made to God for his prosperitye, neither ever desired to hear any other but
happy and fortunate success of him. They brought with them a thousand and a
thousand Precepts and Royal Letters, which the young man had caused to be
written, as occasions required, to the Governors that were his Subjects for
the government of the state, wherein he never named himself the King of
Persia, but only your King and Governor of Heri. They prayed the King also
that he would cause a diligent process (which the Turks call a Teftis) to
be framed against his Son, and if there should be found in him any sign
or shadow of so wicked a suspicion, that then he would take from him his
estate and liberty.For they would remain as hostages The Ambassadors
accusations against Mirize Salma.
for him. But when all this should be done, and Abas-Mirize should be found
altogether free from these unjust and impious calumniations, then (falling even
to the earth and kissing it,) they besought him and coniured him, that he
would not leave the matter thus imperfect, to the prejudice of his blood: but
returning to his counselor, he would likewise take information, upon what
mind or consideration it was well known that he had advised the King to take
upon him this unorderly and dangerous viage. For without doubt he should
find nothing in him but malignant, ambitious, and wicked affections, and such
as even deserved, that with his blood there should be revenged all the blood of
those, which till that hour had been brought to their unworthy and
undeserved death. And forasmuch as there remained one only difficulty to be
cancelled and cleared, whereof the Vizier had informed the king, touching a
commandment that was given by Abas-Mirize to the governors that were under
him, as namely to the governor of Sasuar and of other places, that they should
not go to the war against the Turks: they confessed in truth, that such an
order was taken indeed, but not to that unjust and slanderous end, as it was
related to the king by the Vizier, but only in respect of the wars, that
were reported to be begun in those quarters by the Tartarian Iesselbas, who by
diverse into ades having robbed the Cities, the Towns, and the Fields of Heri,
had put such a fear in young Abas-Mirize and all his Counselors, that they
durst not emptye their Cities of their guardes and forces, and thereupon (as
they should find it true, if they would enquire thereof) the said Governors
were commanded that they should not go to the war against the Turks, but that
they should expect further direction, whereof they should have notice, if they
should be called for. And that all this was signified by writing to the Vizier
himself, but that he of a malignant mind had concealed the same: only to
try, if in these common troubles he could bring it to pass, that Abas-Mirize
and the king might be bereaved of their lives, and Emir-hamze succeed in their
place, and so he himself remain the Super-intendent of his son in law, and
Moderator of rather the Tyrant of that happy and famous kingdom. Which (they
said) they made known unto him, not because they thought Emir-hamze to be
acquainted with so treacheious a train, (for they knew very well, how greatly
in imitation of his Fathers piety, he hated dissension among kinsefolkes, and
shedding of blood) but only because it was throughlye discovered to be the
most unlawful and unreasonable desire of the wicked traitor Mirize-Salmas.

Very grave and strange cogitations did these ancient Orators raise in the
minds of the two Princes: and Mahamet the Father, being by nature credulous
and inconstant beyond measure, began to make great construction of their
speeches, and deeply to consider of their so earnest and important requests,
whose offers also seemed The offers of the Ambassadors accepted by the King and
the Prince.
unto him so upright and equal, that he could not choose but accept thereof.
And therefore calling unto him the Governors, the Captains, the Judges and
Treasurers of all the Cities that were subject to Heri, he demanded of them,
how and in what sort they esteemed of Abas-Mirize, and how and in what degree
of honor he desired to be esteemed of them. And of them all he received an
uniform answer, that they held him for their Lord, as the Lieutenant to the
king of Cas-bin, and that he himself did alwais desire so to be taken and
thoughtof. And every of them brought in diverse Letters, Precepts, and Orders,
wherein he never caused himself to be honored with any other title, but
only, your king of Heri. He demanded further, whether those tumults of
wars were indeed attempted by the Tartarian Iesselbas or no: whereof he
received also a large and solemn information, that so it was, to the great
detriment of all those territories. And thus the king was thoroughly persuaded
of the innocence of his son, King Mahamet persuaded of the innocence of his
Son.
who before was noted unto him by his Vizier to be an obstinate rebel. Upon
which occasion only, although he might justly have put his Vizier to death,
as one that had been the cause of the slaughters that happened, and of the
blood of so many valorous Captains that was shed so injuriously: yet because
he would be better informed of the truth of the accusations laid against him
by the Ambassadors of Heri, the rather to ridd himself from so important and
so just a fear: and because he doubted also peradventure, least there had
been some conspiracy plotted against him between the Vizier and Emir-hamze:
he resolved to make a curious and diligent inquisition thereof. And therefore
first of all, in great secrecy, calling unto him Emir-hamze, and demanding of
him by all fair means, how and wherefore King Mahamet tries the Princes
mind.
he had advised and procured this journey against Abas-Mirize, Son to himself
and Brother to him, whereas indeed he had found him innocent of al those
crimes that were laid to his charge: he received answer from the Prince that
he had no other certeyntie of the pretended ill behavior of his brother, but
only that which proceeded from the great credit that he always bare
toward his Father in Law Mirize Salmas, to whom, as to a Vizier, and as to
his Father in Law, and as to a Protector of All the mischiefs light upon
Salmas the Vizier.
the Kingdom, and finally as to a person that had been tried in a thousand
matters to be true and trusty, he had always yielded assured credence, in
all such matters, as daily were in speech between them. Insomuch that he
discharged the whole Tempest of all these mischiefs upon the Vizier, Touching
whom the King made diligent inquisition as well among those of the Court as of
the Army, and thereby found very strange and unexpected Novelties. For
there was not a man almost, that did not accuse him, for a seditious man,
Mirize Salmas accused by all.
for a Cruel man, for an unjust man, and for a Tyrant, and to be brief that
did not make him guilty of very heinous crimes, and in particular for the
accusation laid against him by the Ambassadors of Heri, they all declared,
that in truth he was always made acquaynted with the true occasions, which
did restrain the Governors subject to Abas Mirize (from going to the War
against the Turks,) but that he most malioiously had concealed the same, of
purpose only to hatch such a strange and dangerous stir; in hope to advance
his own estate by the destruction of others. And so at last Mirize Salmas was
detected for guilty, and rewarded with that punishment, which he desired
unjustly to convert upon others. For the King, who had now found such
impiety in him, as besides that he had caused many Sultans of account to be
unjustly and unworthily put to death, he also went about to procure, that the
Father should defyle himself with the blood of his own Son, (a thing so
odious both to the King himself and all his kingdom, as ever any cruel
Action could possibly be,) the King (I say) could not suffer this
impiety, but acknowledging a fresh the innocence of the one, and the guylte
of the other, the one he delivered and embraced as his Son, the other he
auaunted out of his presence, and punishing him as an impious person, he
caused his head to be cut from his Carcass. In this Mirize Salmas beheaded
by the Kings order.
manner, the ambitious Vizier, as though he had voluntarily gone to his own
death, turned all these angers and tumultes against himself, and with his
own destruction pacified the dissentions and hatredes that were fostered in
the two Princes minds. And Emirhamze, when he had now discovered the
wickedness of his Father in Law, took it also in very good part that he
was deprived both of his state and life. And so the two brethren being
reconcyled together, and K. Mahamer with the Prince returns to Casbin.
the Son to the Father, after that Abas Mirize had again promised his wished
obedience (which he afterward willingly performed,) King Mahamet returned
with the Prince toward Casbin, where by reason of sudden and unexpected
news he had now along time been looked for and desired.

Amurath, through the roughe speeches, and unlucky prognostications of Sinan,
was more and more settled in his purpose to continue this War, hopinge that
he would cause all the threatteninge of Sinan to be but vain, and to reap
so much the more glory by his happy success in such an enterprise, as it
should fall out contrary to the common opinion of all men. And thereupon began
to bethink himself whom he might choose for his General, and to him not
only to commit such a charge, but also to communicate all his devises. Till
that time, Osman Bassa was appointed be the man, but Amurath thinking that
Osman might prove more serviceable in Siruan, and thereby the better assure
and establish the conquest of that Region, durst not so soon remove him from
thence. Among the Bassaes of the Court there was one Ferat, a man of ripe
years, but yet fierce of courage, tough in opinion, in counsel as hardy as
might beseeeme his age, ready for all sodeine and strange adventures, but above
all a vassal most devoted to the King, and happily he had performed some good
office, why he was the rather now called forth by Amurath to this service. Of
this man at the last he Ferat a Bassa of the Court.
was resolved to make choice to be the Captain of his Army. And therefore
he called him to him, and communicated with him all his privy dessignements
and secret devises necessary for this war, encouraging him to take pains,
to fight battles, to obtain victories, and to do all things else agreeable
to so worthy an enterprise. Very willingly did Ferat accept of this new
Office, Ferat Bassa elected general of the Army in Sinans place.
and thought himself to be highly favored by the King, and so disposed
himself to perform the same, so far as he could employ his strength, his
wit and his diligence therein* and thereupon made him a large promise, that he
would put in execution, whatsoever should be offered unto him either by
occasion, or by his Royal commandment. Which although the King should not
have urged any further, but only to assure the passage to Teflis, and all
Georgia, and principally to destroy the country of Mustaffa the Georgian, who
had so audaciouslie injured the Lieutenant of Amurath and set his whole Army
in confusion, yet being certified by Maxut-Chan the Rebel of Persia, and
being advertised by his subject Bassaes that remained near to Tauris, how
King Mahamet was departed, or atleast was upon the point of departing to Heri,
to Amurath deliberateth what should be done toward this expedition of Ferat.
try his Sons mind, he changed his purpose, and deliberating the matter
with himself, he commanded Ferat to employ all his Force and diligence to
erect a Fabrike at Reiuan, a place belonging to Tocomac, and to assure the
passage that leads from Chars to Raiuan. For so they should be revenged of
many treacheries and damages which they had received by Tocomac, and the way
to the City of Tauris should be made open, to the great glory of Amurath.
He advised Ferat also, that although he knew very well, it were his duty
to chastize Mustaffa the Georgian for his rash attempt against Mahamet Bassa,
being then his General: yet he thought it better, that he should dissemble
and conceal his ill opinion of him, and (if it might be possible) to work
so, as he might conueigh the treasure and succors to Teflis. For by this
means, the passage being made safe and secure, without any more Fortresses or
Fabrikes, all Georgia would be subdued, and the next year they might attempt
the enterprise of Tauris.

Very highly did Ferat commend the devises of Amurath, and showed himself
ready for any attempt. And now was the time come, wherein it behooued them
to set on foot these their important dessignements: and therefore in the
beginning of the year 1583. commaundedements were sent out of all the Cities
of the Empire, Commandment sent out for the expedition of General Ferat.
which were wont to make their appearance at these wars, that upon fresh
summons they should be ready to return against the Persians, and to put in
execution, that which should be enjoined the^ by their new captain: the Fame
whereof flew as far as to Tripoli in Soria, to Damasco, to Aleppo, to all
Jury, to Palestina, to Mesopotamia, to Babylonia, to Balsara, to Siuas, to
Maras, to all Bithynia, to Cappadocia, to Cilicia, to Armenia, and to all the
Sangiacchi and Curdi of them, yea and beyond Constantinople, to the borders of
Hungary, and of Greece, and to be brief to all their subject Regions, that
were wont to come to this War. All which sent their The Provinces sent their
soldiers and provision this year.
Captains and Soldiers accordingly, all ready and willing to perform the
pleasure of their Lord. And so at the last, General Ferat departing from
Constantinople, and passing to Chalcedon by the way of Amasia, and of Siuas,
he came to Erzirum, where he took a veiw of all his Soldiers, all his
Pioners, his Buylders, his Ferat departs from Constantinople, and by Calcedon
and Ciuas comes to Erzirum.
Treasure, his provision of Corn, his Munitions of War, and leading with him
the ordinary Number of Artillarie, he gathered altogether under his Standerd.
Afterward in due time he removed from Erzirum, and in the space of eight
days arrived at Chars: (in which his journey he used the service of the
rebel Maxut-Chan, as his Guide, who in the Turkish language is called a
Calaus:) and from Chars he set Ferat being guided by the rebel Maxut-Cha^
arriueth at Chars.
himself on his way toward Reiuan. Three days before he came to Reiuan,
of certain ruins of an old and sleep Castle, which the Turks called
Aggia-Chalasi, he erected a new Fortress, and left in it Ferat repayreth
Aggia-Chala.
a Garrison of four hundred Soldiers, together with a Sangiaccho and certain
pieces of Ordinance, and then went to Reiuan.

This Country lies near to a Mountain, whose top reaching above the
clouldes, seems to touch Ferat at Reiuan, and the description of the
situation thereof.
the heavens, and is continually charged with snow and y^e. At the foot of
this heigh and stark mountain there lie fair fields abounding with Corn
and Cattle, and watered with diverse brooks, that falling down from a lofte
discharged themselves into Araxis. It is distant from Tauris, eight or nine
days journey: between which two places are situate Nassiuan, Chiulfall,
Marant, and Soffian, all enriched with goodly Gardens and pleasant Greenes:
but in the way many craggie mountains to be clymed, and sundry hard
passages either for Army or Traveler. A Consultation touching the principal
place where the Fort should be erected.
It has upon the coast toward the North, Teflis, upon the South the
playnes of Caldaran: and a little higher toward the Tropike of Capricorn,
Van and the Marciana Marish.

Here then did Ferat Bassa encampe himself with all his Army, and taking the advice of his chief Captains, where he should build the Forte, they all
with one consent advised him to seize upon the houses and Gardens of T^comao,
and to enuiron them with Ditches, with Walls, and with Ordinance for defense,
and in the midst as it were in a Center within the Walls to erecte a high
Castle, which on every side round about might discover both the hills and
the playnes, and being well fensed with store of good Ordenance might threaten
destruction and ruin to all those that durst attempt to endammage them. And so
they enclosed the gardens with walls accordingly, and having dug ditches
round about The forte of Reiuan 750. yardes about Within the space of 15.
days the works at Reiuan, the diches and all were finished.
them, they conveyed water into them from a certain river, that came down
from the hills and ran into Araxis, and in this manner within the space of
fifteen days they finished the Fort.

It was a great affliction to Tocomac thus to loose his own Country, yea and
so much the more grievous it was unto him, because it happened so suddenly and
as it were unlooked for: he himself, presently as soon as he understood that
the Turkish Army was coming toward that coast, having withdrawn himself
and his men of war out of the City, and leaving the impotent to the mercy of
the Conquerors, seeking by all means to be revenged, if not altogether, yet
at the least in some part of this great injury. And therefore he wrote to the
King in Corazan, he wrote Tocomac seeks means to revenge the loss of his
own city by annoying of Ferat.
to Emir-Chan in Tauris, he wrote to Simon in Georgia, he gathered soldiers
out of the villages, and used all his possible endeavor to make himself meet
and able to annoy the enemies Army. But neither from Georgia could he
receive any help, because they were too-much troubled with hindering any
succors to be brought for the relief of the beseeged in Teflis, (as in due
place it shall be declared:) Neither from Tauris was he relieved with so much
as one Soldier: either because Emir-Chan would not, or could not stir, or
else because he had some secret intelligence with General Ferat, not to
disturb him in this his Fabrike. And so Tocomac could not have the luck to be
favored with any poor aid, that might at the least have mittigated the
bitterness of his grief. And therefore being not able to do any thing, but
only with those few Soldiers which he had, to lay some privy Tocomac
neuerceaseth to annoy the Turks.
ambushes for the Turks, he never ceased to sley sometimes a hundred of them,
sometimes a hundredth and fifty, and sometimes more, and in that manner to cool
the heat of his heart, which swelled with the burning desires of revenge. And
the better to ease his stomach, which was infected with the poison of hatred
against Emir-Chan, Tocomac ha teth Emir-Chan.
who sitting still as it were to behold his miseries, would not so much as
shake a sword to annoye these spoiling Turks, and thereby perform his
promise made to the King, he spared not to dispatch certain horse men to the
said King in Corazan, and by ^loquent letters to amplify the vileness and
cowardice of Emir-Chan, discou^ring unto him some shadow of suspicion, and
intermingling with all some causes of jealousy to be conceived in his Tocomac
ac cuseth Emir-Chan to the King.
mind, that Emir-Chan had some secret intelligence with the Turkish General.
And to be short he omitted no occasion, whereby he might any way qualify the
grief that he had taken for the loss of his City.

The Turkish Captain at last departed from his new Forte, and returned to
Chars, and for the custody of the said Ferat departs from Reiuan.
Fortress he appointed there as Captain Sinan Bassa, son to that Cicala,
who by misfortune was lately taken prisoner, whiles with great fame he scowred
and wasted the Bassa Cicala lest for the custody of Reiuan.
Tyrrhene Sea. And therefore this his Son (who was afterward cured and
healed by me of a certain disease that he had at Aleppo) partly for the
goodlinesse of his person, and partly for the hope that he raised of his
valor, was Bassa Cicala cured by the author at Aleppo.
so greatly favored by Selim the late Tyrant of Constantinople, and the
arrant Enemy of the Italian name, that having scarce passed the flower of his
youth, in which age he was dearly beloved of him, he, was created the Aga or
Captain of the Giamizaries, and after this his first degree of honor sent to
be governor of certain Cities, and in the end having been employed in
diverse tumults, and perible of warress, he was now appointed Captain and
Famous Giambulat, 8000. Soldiers at Reiuan.
Keeper of this Forte, together with Ossan Bey, Son to the late famous
Eliambu^at, before mentioned. With these two Captains; but yet under the sole
government of Bassa Elicabi only, and with the company of eight thousand
Soldiers; partlye (...) and partlye, Natural Subjects, and with the Munition
above rehe^rsed this Forte was stir engthened and this Garrison of Soldiers,
without expecting any yearly succors to be brought them by and Army to even
of themselves, in several troops of three hundred together in a company,
were always (...) appointed times to go and fetch their pay at the City of
Enzr^^^ and afterward at Aloppo, and other Cities of S^ria. A which they also
continue to do even to this day. And so with these said Soldiers, and with
good store of Art^haries artificially distributed upon the new wall, Fora^ left
the Forte, hand ^as (...) have ^ased withdrewe, himself to Chars, passing by
the way of Aggia-Ghalasi, and performing his journey (...) days space.

Where when he was arrived, there arose very great and strange news. For
there was fodainely brought F^rat by the way of (...) Chalasi in ten daues
returns to Chars A Sangiacco Curdo beheaded as a Rebel by Ferat.
before the said General, ^ Sangiaedo Cutdo, with his hands, bound behind
him all pale and astonished with foare whose beade without any more a do he
caused to be cut from him car^ase publishing to the rest that he was a ^ole
and a rebel. Which whether it were so or no ^^^ whether this sudden and
ynexpected death lighted upon him in respect of some other displeasure, they
know best, (if it be lawful at the least to know it) that are the curious
searchers of such particularities.

At the execution whereof there was a rumor raised of a far greater importance.
For by many reporters there was brought to the ears of the General a great
feign of a wonderful novelty, namely, that Mustaffa the Georgian, to A
woonderful strange novelty brought to the ears of Ferat.
whom (...) had sent thirty thousand Duckates from Constantinople by two of his
Capigi and two Ch^aus or N^n^io^s, to the end that with a T^io^spe of his
(Subjects he should carry them to Teflis for the relief of those in the
Porue, was ^^^dde, and being now become a rebel to the Turkish King, had
left the Fortress in manifest (...) to yield, if by some other means it
were not relieved. Great was the mar^el, the grief, and the anger, that For^^
conceived upon Mustaffa secketh means to be informed cleerelie of the
misfortune.
these news, and minding to have a full certaintye thereon, he called unto
him all such as were the Messengers of this misfortune, and of them received a
clear and an express information of every particular: so that in brief he
was generallye certified that Mustaffa, the two Capigi and the Chiaus having
put themselves on their iourneye toward Teflis with the treasure, assisted
with the company of five hundred of his Soldiers, in the midway had met with
his Cousin Simon, by whom, after he had settled himself to make some long
discourse with him, he was sharply reproved, that so profanely he had
abandoned the sacred name of Christ that he was not only content to live in
Turkish impiety but also that he d^^st impugn the champions and Simon the
Georgian exhorts his Cousin Manucchiar to return to his former says.
desendor of the Christian faith, and that he would become a s^aue to another
for a filthy superstition and impiety, raised and sown with venerous and
pestilent doctrine by a Profane and heathen Prophet, that is dead, abandoning
and forsaking the religion of that God, which is the only true and one God,
in Trinitye. And that with these and such like speeches, which very eloquently
and with great zeal flowed from the mouth of Simon, he was persuaded to
relinquish that infamous and wicked slavery, and in any fit occasion that
God, (who is most merciful toward sinners and offenders) should minister
unto him, to revenge the oppression, that Amurath had used toward him, and
openly to declare to the whole world, that he scorned and renounced the
Diabolical pompes and infernal riches of the Tyrant, thereby disclosing
himself to be indeed of great courage and a true Christian. His cousin not
ceasing in the mean time to repeat often unto him, That God would not fail
in peculiar and familiar manner to take knowledge of his Actions, and to favor
them, yea and at all times to send unto him all happy and wished success:
whereas on the contrary side, if he would not resolve with himself so to do,
he might well be assured, that after many labors and travels, which he
should endure for the service of Amurath, he should obtain none other
recompense, but a hard and infamous captiuitle and in the endesome fraudulent
and treacherous death. Upon which words Mustaffa being The Capigi and the
Chiaus beheaded by Manucchiar.

Manuc chiar and Simon divide the treasure between them and confederat
themselves together.


thoroughly moved, he caused the two Capigi and the Chiaus to be apprehended,
and presently beheaded and so Simon and he, besides the band of their
kindred having solemnly vowed a perpetual confederacy and strict frindship
to be inuiolablie kept between them* divided the treasure, and withdrowe
themselves to their wonted passages, there to annoy and endomage, whosoever
should be sent for the soccouring of Teflis.

These and such other particularities when Ferat understood, being all in a
furye, and inflamed with rage, he did Ferat sw^^reth that he will destroy all the country of Manucchiar.

Hassan Bassa chosen to carry the succors to Teflis.

15000. Soldiers assigned to Hassan. with the relief.


swear that he would not return to Erzirum, until all the Country of
Mustaffa were put to fire and sword: but yet in the mean time he bechought
himself that urgent necessity did shrewdly urge him to send convenient
strength to the place that was in danger: and for that purpose made choice of
Hassan Bassa, who already in the last year of the Generall-shippe of Mustaffa
had very courageously conueighed the said succors and taken Alyculi-Chan
prisoner. To him therefore did the General assign fourtye thousand Duckates,
with other provision necessary for that enterprise, and for surety appointed
him fifteen thousand persons of the best choice and valor in all the Army.
In ten days space Hassan Bassa went and came from Teflis: In whose iourneye
too and fro, In 10. days Hassan goes and comes with the succors.

The Georgians annoy the people of Hassan Bassa.

Resuan Bassa chosen Captain to en domwage the country of Manucchiar: The
harms done by R^suan.


the Georgians made many skitmishes with them, wherein there were slain of
the Turks sometimes ten, and sometimes twenty, and sometimes their mules and
sometimes their horses were taken from them, but no matter at all of any great
moment.

After this, the General elected one Resuan Bassa to be Captain of six
thousand Soldiers to go to Altu^^hala, Carachala, and other places and
villages of Mustaffa the late rinegato, now become a rebel to the Turks, and
relapsed to the obstinate religion of the Greeks. Which R^suan, witho^ any
long stay, ouerr anne all his Territorye, but an his towns and his lands, and
committed uncouth outrages, even upon the poor insensible trees. Resuan
brought home with him many Captive souls, with much Corn and Cattle, and to
be brief wheresoever he (...), he wasted and destroyed like a Tempest,
whatsoever was before him: and if in any place he seemed to be any thing
favorable, and his fury pacified, it was because Ferat at Arda-Chan.
there was no resistance made by any upon whom he might exercise his forces.
The General was now also retired to Ardachan, and thither came Resuan to
meet him with his foresaid booty. But because there remained nothing else to
be done in those quarters, and the winter persuaded their return, they
removed from Ardachan, and by the way of Olti retired to Erzirum: from whence
Ferat by the way of Olti returns to Erzirum, and dismisseth his Army.

Hassan Bassa rewarded by the king.


all the soldiers were licensed to depart to their several places of aboade:
and an Arz or Memorial sent to the King of all the Actions that had been
performed, and principally of the good enterprise of Hassan Bassa, who for the
same was now also once again honored by the King with cloth of gold, and a
battle axe and Target al guilt. And this end had the troubles of the year
1583. of man's salvation, being the seventh year of this war.

All the rest of the year 1583. the General wintered at Erzirum, and
afterward sent out his ordenary commandementes over all his accustomed Cities,
to summon the soldiers against the next spring of the year 1584. appointing
the taxes and tenthes to be somewhat greater then they were wont to be, and
gathering together a greater number of pi^ners and enginers the^ ever had been
gathered heretofore, and withal published a rumor abroad that they should
go to Nassiuan, and there do great matters. At the report whereof the
Persians were Ferat spreads a rumor that he would go to Nassiuan.
much moved, and began to cast many things in their heads about in. Glad
they were for the union and amitye lately concluded betweeen the two Cos^^s
Simon and Manucchiar: (for now being again reclaimed and become a Champion of
his former says, we may call him no longer Mustaffa, the name that he had given
him by Amurath at his Circumcision, but Manucchiar, whereby he was Christened
by the Priests at his Baptism.) The estate and expectations of the Persians,
upon occasions that fell out.
And they well hoped, that by the diligence of them both, the way of Tomanis
would be sufficiently kept and guarded, or at the least that which they were
not able to do, the rest of the Persian Captains would perform for their
parts.

But above all others the king who was now arrived at King Mahamet fears
some new matter.
Casbin, and had understood the confirmation of the unhappy success at
Reiuan, and the new preparations of the Turks, began to think upon further
matters, and entered into many discourses with himself, all entermingled with a
very great fear of some strange alterations. The fabrik erected the last year
at Reiuan aforesaid, and the repair of the castle called Aggia-Chalasi, had
persuaded him, that the Turks this year would pass to Tauris, or at least as
the report was to Nassiuan, and build new fortresses in those borders. Which
thing the king neither would nor could endure by any means, for that it might
prove a shrewd introduction to the ruin of Persia, and to the bringinge down
of so mighty an Empire. And therefore he retained still those Forces which
he brought home with him, and out of all the Cities that were Subject unto
him he caused as many more to come as he could, commanding Mahamet the
Persian king gathers a great army.

The Persian king at Tauris.


withal, that all the Chaus upon pain of Death should follow him to
Tauris, and so not long after the arrival of Ferat Bassa at Erzirum, he also
arrived at Tauris, being withal obedience accompanied be all his said Army.

This unexpected coming of the Persian to Tauris, as it engendered expectation
of very good success in the The coming of the Persia^ king to Tauris
breeds great conceits
minds of all men, insomuch as the voice went over all Italye, that the
Persian meant to have marvelous conflicts with the Turk, whereat Christendom
did not a little rejoice for the good hope that it bred of some happy event in
prejudice of the Turks: so Ferat Bassa being certified thereof, before he
proceeded any further, being thereunto advised by Maxut-Chan his Guide, (as
afterward he confessed at Aleppo) he thought good to advertise Amurath of the
matter declaring unto him, That his desire was to go to Nassiuan, and there to
build a fortress according to his commandment, (a work in his opinion
very necessary, to make the passage for Tauris safe and secure.) But
for so much as he had received intelligence by trustye Soldiers, that the
Persian king was removed to Tauris with a very huge Army, and was utterly
resolved to come and encounter him, he thought it his duetye not to put in
execution his foresaid determination, Ferat writes to Amurath.
without the Kings express commandment, Amurath presently wrote back unto
him, that if it were so as he had written, he should employ himself about
nothing else, but to quiet the passage of Tomanis and Lori, to the end that the
next year following there should be no need to send any new Army, to
convey the succors, but some small band might be sufficient, as traveling
Amurath writes again to Ferat, not o go to Nassiuan but to Lori and Tomanis
in Georgia.
through a country, that were at amity and confederatye with them. Which order
Amurath did the more willingly set down, for that he saw the rebellion of
Manucchair; and knew fullwell, that the Fort of Teflis by reason of his
Treacheries should have more need now, then ever it had, to be sustained
and relieved. Yet not withstanding Ferat would not publish this new
commandment, but caused the rumor to be confirmed (more A stratagenic
wrought by the Turks upon a false rumor.
then he did before) that he would go to Nassiuan, of purpose to feed the
opinion, that the Persians had formerly conceived in their minds of his going
thither, and so eluding them he might without any disturbance of the enemy
attend the building of the Forts, which he had intended for the quieting of the
most dangerous passages of Lori and Tomanis.

Ferat having concluded upon this resolution, and gathered together his people
with all things been sla^^e for his purpose, removed at last with his Army
from ^^oirum General Ferat at Chars, where he staieth for his Army ten day.
toward Chars, where he arrived by the way of Hassan-Chalassi, not meeting
with any annoiance or hinder and at al, and there he stayed the space of tend
ayes, to the end that all his companies of Soldiers and heap of provision
might beenewlie survey ghed. And then departing from Chars, he iournied low
and Lori, and presently dispatched Ferat departs from Chars, sends out
Hassan Bassa as a forerunner before him.
Hassan Bassa with five thousand valiant light horsemen to scour the
Country, and passing even to Tomanis to return him news, of all that he
should see or hear in those quarters, and to bring home his Captives with
him, that he might the better make diligent ^^^tie of the affairs of
Georgia^s. This commandment of the General Hassan performed duetifully, and
making haste on his journey passed to Lori, and from Lori to Tomanis, and
speedily scoured over all the woods, opening and (...) closing all the
passages ^ounde about without any becosion ^^^stred unto him ed give assay of
his vald^^^ (...) Co^^^^ thieves slane by Hassan.
at the last having me^e with (...) ^^ss^chi, (which we may term Robbers by
the high way) he flewe them aland setting their heads on the top pes of their
Lances, he made his return toward Lori. Where having stayed (...) whole day,
they discovered from thence aid he whole Turkish Army, with a great and
fearful show coming and approaching toward them. Whereupon Hassan went to
meet the General, and to report unto him the excursio^ that he had made,
declaring withal, that he had not encountered any other but only certain
Cassachi, whose heads he might behold upon their Lances, for that he
thought it not necessary to bring them alive, because they were altogether
ignorant of the Georgian and Persian affairs, and therefore were not able to
deliver any information thereof at all. And so they arrived altogether General
Ferat at Lori. The Situation of Lori.
at Lori aforesaid, and there encamped themselves. This place did sometime
belong to Simon, well strengthened with a high Castle, compassed about with
very deep ditchess and a thick wall almost a (...), but at this present
somewhat weeakened can i^ wasted by time. It is distant from Teflis two days
journey of a Cariers place. General Ferat selzed upon it, and having restored
the walls in such places The walls of Lori repaired. 7000 soldiers in Lori.
Aly Bassa of Greece captain of Lori.
as they had most need of reparations, and strengthened all the breachies, he
planted therein seven or eight thousand persons, of the Sangiacchi, the
Giannizari, the Spahini and the Zaini, and for the guide or Captain over them
he appointed Aly Bassa of Greece, and upon the Castle and the Walls he
distributed two hundred pieces of small ordenance. All these provisions 200.
pieces of ordinance in Lori.

Feratgoeth to Tomanis. Order to fortify Saitan-Chalasi near adioining


being made he went to Tomanie, leaving order with the said Aly Bassa, that
when he thought he ^hight take fine opportunity, he should not fail to
fortyfie Saitan-Chalasi, about ten miles distant from Lori, and to place
therein a convenient garrison of Soldiers and Artillarie.

Four days long were they going to Fomanis for the General would needs make
it four days journey, being ordinarily but one days work from the one
place to the other, to the end that those fields being very rich of Corn,
of fruit, and of Cattle should every where be wasted and burned by his
spoiling (...), and that the Country Inhabitants besides their other losses
should also endure the loss of their Rents. Now Tomanis in times The state of
Tomanis.
past was also a Castle, whither Simon used often times to make his repair:
and when the heat of these Wars began, the Georgians themselves were in a
consultation to raze it, to the end that it should not be surprised
Consultations about the erecting of a fort at Tomanis.
by the Turks, and thereby that benefitte should redounde to them, which it
could not yield unto the Georgians, for their want of Ordenance. And here was
great advise taken, how and where the Forte should be erected for the
defense of the country, But after many discourses at last it was concluded,
that a Castle should be builte not in that place but a little furthers and
that for this reason, because Tomanis standing ^^ good long way on this side
the Strait, if they should build the Forte there, then could they not make
that passage safe and (...) and therefore it was needful for them to proceed
further even to the very much of it and there to plant the Fortiesse And so the
Army marched forward a certain few Miles, until being arrived at the very
issue of the narrow passage, they found the Ruins A Ca^tell an mor^g the
woo^^.
of another casted, and near there unto they stayed themselves. This stoepe
head long Castle was compassed round about with a very thick wood of beeches
pineaples and other trees, which hindered all discovery of anything (...) off,
so that it was not co^^nien^ to found such a Castle there from whence their
Ordinance could neither avail them to whom the defense thereof should be
committed, nor e^dommage those that should come to offend it. And therefore
the General commanded, that (...) with uncouth outrage should fell the The
thick woods cut down and made open
the (...), and with sha^pe instruments ^ewe down the Pyneapples, the Fy^^es,
the Beeches and the Elmes, and making way through thick and thin, should
lay it out for a broad street and an open Champayne, that before (...) the
(...) for a thousand dangerous treacheries. In very short space (...) the
trees laid along on the ground, the place made light some and open, and a very
commodious situation prepared for the foundation of a Castle. The plot of the
old ruyned Castle was compassed The compass of the walls of Tomanis.
about with a wall of a thousand and sea^^ to hundred yard (...), and in the
(...) thereof was (...) a To^re (...) of a strong keep fundrie lodginges and
than the (...) and two hundred (...) of Ordinance (...) upon the (...) we
Walls.

(...) Certain vittellers sent abroad but not heard of again.
(...) they did not as yet show (...) Hassan Bassa goes out to assure the way
for the return of the vittelers.
(...) well provided of Cattle, and other rich and plentiful booties, which
was a great relief to all the Soldiers. Afterward the General sent Resuan,
being now the Re^uan Bassa goes to Teflis with succors with twenty
thousand persons.
Bassa of Natolia, and the Bassa of Caraemit to conueigh the succors to
Teflis, with tweentie thousand persons in their company, the most choosen and
best armed in all the host, who marching all closely together in the direct
way, within one days space arrived at the said Fort, wherein they placed
their Garrison, and changing the Governor thereof, substituted in his rowme
one Bagli Bassa left for governor at Teflis.
Bagli, being then, upon this occasion only, called a Bassa.

Whiles Resuan lay thus encamped under Teflis, Daut-Chan the brother of Simon,
who (as we told you in the beginning of this war) at the coming of
Mustaffa into Daut-Chan. yields him self to the Turks.
Georgia, had fled out of Teflis and abandoned the Castle, came now with all
his Family to offer himself for a subject and a devoted vassal to Amurath,
promissing that he would follow the Turkish Army, and employe all his forces
and all his wits in the service thereof: and therefore besought him, that he
would vouchsafe to cause him to be received with all good entertainment,
being now come with a trusty and assured hope to find peace and safety
among their weapons, and under their law and religion to enjoy a quiet and
peaceable life. Resuan entertained them all with great promises, and large
assurances of all good success, according to their desires and necessities.

In the mean while news were brought to Simon, that Simon advertised of the
going of R^suan to Teflis
General Ferat, staying at the straytes of Tomanis withal his Army, had sent
Resuan Bassa to succor Teflis, and withal it was told him by certain false
and lying Spies that Resuan was gone, not with twenty thousand persons, Simon
deluded by the liing spies means to assail Resuan.
but with a far less number of people, then indeed he was. At which good
news he took courage to encounter Resuan, and setting upon him to join a
bloudye and mortal battle with him. Which his resolution he caused
presentlye to be put in practice: for without any further delay, being
accompanied with four thousand Georgians, partly Subjects of his own, Simon
with 4000. Soldiers goes to encounter Resuan Bassa.
and partly of Manu^chiar, with all speed possible he w^nte against Resuan.
But whiles Simon was going thithe^wardes, General Ferat (either because he was
falsely informed that there were a greater number of Georgian Soldiers, or
else because without any other advertisement, he was of himself affraide that
the Enemies Army The Bassaes of Caramania and Maras di^patched for aid.
was bigger then it was) had already by chaunc^ dispatched away the two
Bassaes of Caramania and of Maras with ten thousand persons, to the end that
joining themselves with the Soldiers of Resuan, they should be so much the
safer and stronger at all adventures. Now Simon came upon Resuan, being
encamped with six thousand Soldiers only at the root of a certain Hill, on
the backeside whereof were all the rest of his people, near to a certain
water, and presently made an assault upon him. The Soldiers, behind the
Hill, being aware of Simons approach, were ready all at once with their
weapons to annoy Simon, who now was exceeding sorry for his error in believing
the false news, and repenting himself, that he had assaulted his Enemies,
he perceived that he was undone. But Simon repents that he went to set
upon Resuan.
when he saw, that ^y ^light he could not but increase his grief, and make
the issue more lamen^able and miserable, with those few Soldiers which he
had, he endured the fury of the populous Army of Resuan, and on both sides
there was joined a most cruel Battle: Wherein on the one side you might
have seen a strange and vn-vsuall valor, and on the other a tumultuous
super-fluitie of a multitude, that in the encounter were rather sore wounded,
then able A cruel battle between the Turks and the Georgia^s.
to carry away the Victory: Howbeit in the end the huge number of the Turkish
swords and Spears did overcome the small number of the Georgians, and the
Barbarian fires and Artillarie did bring the Christian forces to an unhappy
estate. But Simon himself, whose Horse in the Medley was quite thrust
thorough, Simons horse thrust though
fell down headlong to the ground, and his guilt Torbant with his Golden
Horn from his Head, and in his fall was very near to have been taken
prisoner. Which misfortune, as it happened to his Lieutenaunt and to his
General, and to many other his followers, so must it needs also have lighted
upon him, if he had not been relieved by an unexpected and An unexpected
chance delivers Simon from present destruction.
(as it were a marvelous favor. For whiles the battle was even at the greate^^
heat between them, Resuan discovered the two Bassaes of Caramania and Maras,
who (as we told you) were newly sent by General Ferat to succor him, but both
by the said Resuan, and also by the rest of the Turkish army were indeed
thought to be Persians. Whereupon they were incontinently surprised with a
sudden fear insomuch that all of them waxing fainte and hanging in suspense,
the victory, which before was ^ure their own, became now very doubtful, and
the Turks themselves feared, that they should be the loosers. In this
suspense and doubtfulnes of mind, the battle also was intermitted, and by
those very frinds, which were sent thither to further this enterprise, it was
unawares disturbed whereby the Georgians and specially Simon, whose estate was
almost desperate) took the opportunity and benefit to escape and save
themselves, and to leave behind them many infallible signs of their valor
among the Turks: of who^ many remained there slain, many wounded, and many
replenished with very great marvel and unexpected fear. Thus escaped Simon,
and thus remained Resuan, who after that he had discovered his welwilling
Bassaes Simon escapes out of the Turks hands.
approaching nearer toward him, and knew them particularly to be his
Confederates and Furderers, could not be quiet with himself for the escape
of Simon, who without all doubt had been utterly overthrown and all his
people, if as he feared great harm, by the coming of the two Bassaes, so he
had expected that help which he should have expected. For without any
further trouble or difficulty, all the Forces of the Georgians had either
been taken prisoners, or miserably destroyed. But poor Simon saved himself
in the places near therabouts, which he knew by their situation to be very
safe and secure, and there began a fresh to be grieved at the false
information that he had received by the lying spies touching his Armies,
bewayling the deaths and captivity Simon thanketh God for preservation of his
life.
of his subjects, and yielding thanks to God for the preservation of his life
and liberty.

The Turks in this mean time were come to Tomanis, withal iollitie and
triumph, drawing the standards of Simon all along the ground, and bearing
many heads of the Georgians upon their Lances to the great joy of General
Resuan at Tomanis again.
F^rat, to whom also there were delivered all the prisoners taken in the
battle, and impious Da^t-Chan, likewise presented, who having in times past
abandoned his first faith was become a Persian, and now again despising the
vain and wicked woorshippe of the Persians, had yielded himself for a pray to
the impure filthiness of the Turks, and made himself a voluntary slave to
Amurath

The season of the year was now so far spente, that Fear of winter
approaching.
every man began to fear the winter approaching, and therefore the General
determined to remove from those parts, and to withdraw himself into some
safer places: and so having set in Order all the Garrisons of the new Forte,
in such sort as we told you before, he appointed Hassan le^t as Bassa at
Tomanis with 8000.
Hassan to be the Bassa of Tomanis, and left with him eight thousand
soldiers, which he had chosen out of the rest, for that enterprise.

Very deeply in his mind had Ferat layed-vp the oultrage committed by
Mustaffa the Georgian, (being now returned to his old name of Manucchiar,) in
taking away the Kings treasure, and killing the two Capigi and the Chiaus:
neither could he find any rest, nor time to ease his stomach being all
inflamed and boiling with anger for the same. And therefore he resolved with
himself not to return to Chars or Erzirum, unless he had first passed into
the countries of the said Georgian, and by annoying the same in the cruelest
manner he could, revenged the intolerable injuries that were received. In
three days he arrived at Triala, where all the Turkish Army encamped
themselves, and where they endured a very strange Ferat arriueth at Triala.

A dearth such as was never heard of among the Army.


and unwonted dearth and scarsitie of all things, and principally the want of
ordinary, vittailes grew so excessive, that after the rate of the Venetian
Staio or Bushel, they paid five hundred Duckates for every five Bushels and
a half (which amounts to the measure of a Sorian Macuc^) to the universal
calamitye of the whole Army, Barley also was happily sold at a higher price,
as Hala Bey (of whom I made mention before) did for a truth give me to
understand, and confirmed it by the testimony of diverse others.

From this place the General was minded to go on forwards, toward the
country of Manucchiar: but whiles he was upon the raising of his tents, one
Ueis, being then the Bassa of Alepp^, Bassa Veis comes before General Ferat,
and speaks to him.
came against him, and advertised him, that it was not good now to spend the
time in wandering about those countries, for that there were three very great
enemies, which were confederate together, to make this enterprise very
difficult, and almost impossible and desperate. One was the season of the year,
being now full of snows, frosts, and tempests, which in those Regions are
continually noisome to travelers. Another was the want and scarsity of all
things necessary for vittaile, without which no doubt the Army would make an
insurrection, and abandon all the enterprises that should be attempted, and so
in the greatest heat of their labors, their designements being put in practice,
should be hindered and interrupted. And the third was the people of Georgia, who
peradventure might find opportunity to procure the joint help of the Persians
in their favor, and by a common uniting of themselves together, to work some
notable Ferat reprooueth Veis the Bassa.
mischief against their army. But Ferat did most sharply rebuke the Bassa,
and reproved him with bitter terms, telling him flatly, that he well perceived
he was broughtvp among mountains and villages, and of a villein (as he was)
advanced to the honor of a Bassa, upon some od conceit and foolish importunity:
and that therefore he should not have presumed so much as to think it lawful
for him, so impudently and shamelesly to come and give him such aduertisments:
but rather it had been his duty to have held his peace, and to harken to the
commandments of his betters, and superiors, yielding himself obedient and
devoted to perform the same with all his power. With this rebuke the General
passed on to Archelech: in all which passage he destroyed and in a manner burnt
up all the plat country, though indeed Ferat at Archelech.
it were in amity and confederacy with the Turks. But the inhabitants of
Archelech had withdrawn themselves into the mountain, abandoning the City,
the Castles, and Villages, and leaving them open to the fury of the army, to
the great astonishment and marvel of al men, who thought that they being
subjects, rather then they should fly into the mountains, should have run
with all joy and gladness to salute the victorious Captain, and to admire the
armies, the devises, the forces and the ensigns of their good friend the
General.

In Archelech Ferat encamped and stayed the space of four days, among the
rockie crags, and in a barren soil, where neither cattle nor The miseries of
the Tu^kish Armi^.
men had any store of necessary sustenance, but rather every man en dured
unspeakable miseries. Howbeit forfower whole days the soldiers were content
to bear this great calamity. But in the end thereof, the fall of a huge snow
being added to these extremities did so great ly increase their griefs, that
all the Giannizzaries and Spaoglin^ of Constantinople arose in a tumult, and
coming before Ferat, in despiteful and contemptuous manner, with very haughty
and resolute terms they said unto him. And how long shall we endure this thy
The soldiers being in a tumult speak despitefully to the general.
tedious and insolent government? where is the due commiseration that thou
ought to bear toward the vassels of our sovereign Lord, thou rustical
and unreasonable captain? Do thou think happily, that we keep with our
harlots, as thou do, under thy sumptuous pauilions, all fat and in good
plight with delicate viandes, whiles others li^e in misery? Do thou
believe, that we have, as thou have, our dainty Sugers, spices, and conserues,
whereby to restore us in the common calamities of others? And that we have at
command our neat and precious wines, which thou minglest with thy clear and
pleasant waters, partly provided for thee by the Art of the cunning Doctors,
and partly brought unto thee from far places? From this day foreward, it will
be no longer endured, that so much people should continue in this famine and
cold lying upon the hard ground, and afflicted with nakedness and many other
inconveniences: and therefore get thy self up, and return toward Erzirum: or
else we shall be enforced to do that, which will breed more displeasure to thee,
then to any man else.

The general, being in a great agony and confusion within himself, presently
caused a Di^ano to be assembled, wherein it was concluded, that they should all
send their strong sumpter horses toward Ardachan, and all Ferat promises the
spoil of Manucchiar his countries.
follow him into ye widows cou^tr^y, whither he had appointed to go, only to
make an Inrode to give the^ occasion of spoil and booty, and to refresh the
minds of the^ al, that were afflicted with the miseries both past and present.
At the commandment of the general they al readely obeyed, as well because he
promised them a speedy vioage as also for that every man desired the sack of
Altun-Chala, and other the territories of Manucchiar: and therefore they al
very willingly followed the Standerdes of Ferat, who holding on his iourneye
through certain low valleys, between the high and difficult mountains
(which could be none other but the Rocks of Periardo) and being continually
accompanied with a very great dearth and scarsitie, brought his Army to
Clisca, a place belonging to the said Manucchiar, but now quite abandoned and
forsaken by all the inhabitants, who at the only voice of the Generalles
coming, having gotten together all the best stuff General Ferat at Clisca.
that they had, together with their wives, their children, and al their dearest
jewels, were departed from thence, and removed into remote and safe places,
till the furye of the victor should be ouerpassed. In the fields near unto
this The army refreshed with plenty of vittailes.
place there was good store of Rye, Barley, and other corn wherewith they
might quench the hunger of the Cattle, yea and the soldiers themselves
through the abounda^ce of fruit and flesh were greatly comforted and
refreshed. So that the General being encouraged by these commodities, and
hoping that the whole Army would take it well to stay a while in such good
ease, determined with himself to erect a new Forte in the place, and to
strengthen it with Armor and Soldiers: and with this resolution The General
commands that Clisca should be fortified.
gave commandment to Resuan Bassa, that he should go up to the tower, and in
the top thereof plant a banner, with a proclamation and public report, that
he would fence that Fortress, and in the name of Amurath Fortify it, as
other Fortes were wont to be. Resuan being accompanied with the Bassa of
Caramania, who was al so called Amurath, executed the commandment of the
General, in the top of the Tower planted one or two Banners accordingly,
whereat as soon as the Soldiers espied them, the forenamed Giannizzaries and
the Spaoglani, sodainelye took great indignation, because they thought
themselves to be too much abused by their captain, and thereupon arising
again all in an uproar, replenished with fury and confused in tumult, with
great despite and rage, they ran up to take down the Banners that were
planted upon the Fort, and taking them in their hands, they struck the said
Resuan Bassa once or twice about the pate withal, discharging a thousand
injurious Resuan Bassa ill handled by the soldiers.
and reprochful words upon him, and sharply rebuking him. And then returning
to the General, who was now also come thither himself to countenance the
Action of Resuan, and from that high place the better to behold the situation
thereof, with gestures full of contempt and disdain, reuiling him with many
shameful and scornful terms, they protested unto him, That they were not
come to the Wars to exercise the occupation of Masons The soldiers revile
General Ferat.
and Dawbers, and to be employed in such vile and dishonorable offices, but
only to Manage their weapons, and thereby to demerite their ordinary wages,
and to purchase to themselves glory and renown at their Kings hands. And
therefore, if he loved his head, and would not shortly see those Arms
turned against him, which hitherto had been the Reuengers of the enemies
injuries, he should resolve with himself to leave these new Buildinges* and
these unseasonable designementes, and giving place to the contrary season of
the year, he should have due care of their common desires and necessities.
And whiles they were thus talking unto him, there was one more bold then the
rest and beyond his duty, that did not stick to assault the General, and to
threaten him, that he would The soldiers in a tumult threaten the General.

Amurath the Bassa of Caramania saves the Generals li^e.


wreake his fury upon him, and chastife him with impious hands and cruel blows
withal. But the forenamed Bassa of Caramania was ready to lend the General
his own Horse, and so rescuing him from the rage and tumulte of the Soldiers
to conduct him to his Pauilion. Howbeit Ferat was pursued by the tumultuous
Soldiers, and sharply accused again for the stay that he had made there,
and for not resolving presently to remove from thence: yea and after they had
often repeated their contumelious speeches, and reprochful villainies against
him, they uttered also at the last their manifest and express protestations,
that if the next morning he did not remove The express protestations of the
Soldiers against the General.
from those Quarters, without all fail, he should loose his life for it.
Ferat, who could not abide to yield to them, that should of duty have been
ready and obedient at every beck that he should make, seeking by all means
(notwithstanding all this stir) to stay there for so long time, as would
be sufficient to build a Forte, that would be so noisome and injurious to
Manucchiar, could do no less but answer The answer of General^ Ferat to
the Soldiers.
these Protestations, telling them, that he made no account of their
threatening him with his life, which he had always offered as ready for any
service of Amurath his King: But if they had no care to serve their Soueraig^e
in this ^ewe Building, they might go their ways: for as for himself, he was
utterly minded to obey his Lord, in whatsoever he had commanded him, for
the honor of whom A reply to the answer.
every man ought to think his life very well bestowed. Upon this answer
there followed diverse railinges, and curses against the king, against the
General, against them all: and in a most confused tumulte, that was raised,
every man betook himself to his weapons, A most confused uproar, and
manifest common fear.
and in every corner there were heard grommellings, and whisperinges, full o^
wrath and fierceness, so that there was great fear of some dangerous
conflict, but greater was the suspicion of the Generals life. For now every
man had withdrawn himself to the guarding of such things as he esteemed most
dearly, when as sodainelye and in a trice they saw the pauilions of the
Captains and of all the Bassaes fall down to the ground, all the cords
thereof being cut by the wrathful soldiers, and as it were in a Moment all
the Muttons and other Cattle, which the General and Bassaes led with them All
the cords of the tents suddenly cut.
for their ordinary use, were seized upon, and guarded with all diligence
possible. And so far off was it, that any man durst challenge or revenge
this their rashness, that they themselves returning a fresh upon their
Captain, being now all in a maze and frightfull fear, they repeated the
third time the protestations which they had twyse already made unto him, that
if he would not remove from those Countries, and turn his Iourneye toward
Erzirum, without all fail those Valleys and Fields The last protestations to
the General.
should become the Sepulchers of the Bassaes, and those Hills should retain
an eternal memo^ie of so famous a day.

The General might have done with this people whatsoever he had listed, if
with a little lib^rallitye he had bestowed but a small Quantitye of Money
among them: but being loath to show, even the least token of a grateful
mind toward them, he was enforced to perform their proud and arrogant
demaundes, and to his great shame to obey them, whom he might have made
General Ferat shamefully obeieth his soldiers.
obedient to him, rather with mildness then with rigor. And therefore the
Captain was constrained to yield and obey his Soulders, and to avoid their
despitefull and sharp threats, to his exceeding great reproach, even as they
had commanded, to remove from those quarters. The first day he arrived at
Ardachan, with Ferat at Ardachan.
the very great annoyance and trouble of all the soldiers: for whereas the
journey was wont to be two days work ordinarily, as well in respect of the
long way, as also of the passage over a very rough and difficult mountain,
the General would needs have it dispatched in one only day, the rather
thereby to afflicte and grieve the Soldiers. But for this his revenge he
received even the self same day his due reward, for that the Chariots,
wherein his women rode were conveyed away, together with their Eunuchs that
were their keepers: some say, by the Georgians, that in those woods and
cragges of the General Ferat his women stolen away from him.
mountain lay in ambushe, waiting for some such occasion: and others say, by
the Giannizzaries, who altogether to dishonor the Captain, wrought him this
injury. Great was the reproach which Ferat received, not only in the Army,
but also, yea and far greater at Constantinople, when these news were known
there: so that he was continually replenished and inflamed with shame: and yet
notwithstanding all this his wrath and ardent indignation, he was compelled to
endure the loss of his dearest Jewels, and in case as he was to journey
toward The shame of General Ferat
Erzirum.

In Ardachan he took a surueigh of his Army, and A muster at Ardachan.
before he commanded any remove, he gave them all leave to depart,
himself afterward arriving at Erzirum, hated of all his Soldiers, enuyed by
Veis Bassa and Ferat at Erzirum.
others the Captains of the host, defamed for the loss of his women, and
fallen into the disgrace of every man. But no less then the rest, was the
Turkish king discontented with him, for two very mighty and weighty
considerations. First, for that he was notable to make any vaunt of King
Amurath discontented with Ferat.
any action that he had done in revenge of the exceeding great injury of the
Georgian: neither was it possible for him to learn the way how to behave
himself toward the soldiers, that they might become obedient and friendly
unto him. Secondly for that without any care, he had suffered Alyculi-Chan to
escape away: about whose flight he could not choose but have some intelligence
and conference, as being the only man, that in all the strange haps which
happened in the former years of this war had continually celebrated and
renewed the fresh memory of his serviceable actions. For Ferar, who (as we told
you before) by the new order, which he received from the Court, was to divert
his journey from Nassiuan, to the straites and narrow passages of Georgia,
being desirous to be thoroughly informed in all those ways, that with most
ease might lead him into those places, and withal to be acquainted with all
those difficult and perilous corners, where the Georgians were wont to hide
themselves in ambushes, and prepare their treacheries, resolved with himself
(in the second year when he removed from Erzirum) to take Alyculi-Chan The
Original, of the escape of Alyculi-Chan, late prisoner in Erzirum.
out of prison, who was apprehended by Hassan Bassa, and caused to be
imprisoned by General Mustaffa, (as it is above written in the fourth book.)
This Alycul Chan did Ferat purpose to use as (...) guide and counselor in this
voyage, and to ^ake his addise in such difficult resolutio^s, as might happen
unto him in those narrow straites, and thereby to avoid the perils, that are
ordinarily found in every cornet of those Regions. And therefore he carried him
with him, under a certain guard (whatsoever it was afterward) of his most
faithful vassels, and caused him to be well entreated, by yelding unto him the
benefit and enjoying of whatsoever he needed. At the last they arrived in
Georgia, at the streits of Tomanis, where we told you the forenamed Castle was
erected, and from thence he escaped secretly into Parsia. The manner of his
escape is diversely reported. For some say, that Ferat upon this condition
brought him from Erzirum, The manner of the escape of Alyculi-Chanthe Persian.
to set him at liberty whenever he should yield him any good advise in this
voyage: and that when he had so done, for the discharge of his promise (which
notwithstanding is a hard matter to believe in a Turkish Infidel:) he
gratified him with his liberty. Others say, that Ferat for the exceeding great
bribes, which he had taken of Alyouli, granted him opportunity to escape. But
what bribs or rewards could a poor prisoner give, that was spoiled of al his
substance in the battle, and left scareable to sustain himself. And to be
brief, others some say, that this escape was made neither for reward of money,
nor discharge of promise, but by the only vigilance of Alyouli himself, and
the sleepines of his keepers, and that watching the opportunity of the night,
which is a friend to all scapes, he started away. But whether this or that
were the manner of his escape, in fine he was then delivered from the Turkish
captivity, and returned into Persia, to Alyculi Chan flies again into Persia.
the performing of those enterprises, which shall be told you, when we shall
come to their fit times in this our History, for that now it is not amiss to
declare a certain particularitie, that happened before some of these actions
that we have already described, and that indeed may not be passed over in
silence, and that is, the execution of the commandments that Ferat gave to
Aly Bassa, before he departed from Georgia.

This Aly, who (as we told you) remained in the Fort at Lory, found his
opportunity to issue out of the Fortress, and descending down a certain
hill, at the foot whereof there was a Castle called Saitan-Chalasi, The
Castle of Satan f^^ined.
(which in our language may be interpreted the Castle of the Devil:) with
great diligence he fortified the same: He left therein fifty pieces of
Artillery, and a thousand men, under the charge of a Sangiacco, and so quieted
the passages from forte to forte* in such sort, as all the ways The ways of
Reiuan, Tomanis, Lory and Teflis made secure.
from Reiuan to Chars, and from Chars to Teflis were made easy and safe, and
so all the enemies treacheries were discovered, and all their means taken
away, whereby they might be able to plot any new.

In this mean time, the King of Persia, who (as we told you before) was
arrived at Tauris with althose his forces, perceiving that the Turks had
changed their purpose King Mahamet licenseth all his soldiers of Tauris to
depart home.
from Nassiuan to Georgia, so that there was no further need to employ his
Army against them in defense of Tauris or Nassiua^, at the last resolved with
himself to license his soul diers to depart, which he had brought thither with
him for the repressing of those public stirs: and to apply himself to more
private reuenges. For calling Emir-Chan unto him, whom he had lately left for
governor of Tauris, and General King Mahamet quarrelleth with Emir-Chan the
Governor of Tauris.
over all the Cities and Captains above named he enquired of him the occasion,
why he performed not the great promises which he had made unto him before his
depa^tur to Heri, and did not his endeavor to hinder the Turkish fabrik at
Reiua^, or atleast why he went not out with other soldiers appointed for that
purpose, and namely with the Turcomannes (as he had promised) to revenge so
great an injury, and in the best manner he could to endomage the Turkish
forces. For if there had been none other promise to bind him, yet that had
been the duty of every Persian Captain, much more had it been his part,
who had tied himself thereunto by a solemn promise. Sundry excuses did
Emir-Chan allege for his manifest defaulte, and principallye the speedy
departure of the Turkish Army for that in so short a time, as the enemies
Army stayed under Reiuan, he had not leisure enough Excuses alleged by
EmirChan.
to call together either the Turcomannes, or the other Soldiers for that
service: but for himself, he was always most ready to employ all his power
and his life therein. These and other like excuses Emir-Chan alleged to
discharge himself from the burden of the Crime, which the King and the
Sultans had laid upon him. But the king perceiving too manifestly, that there
was no excuse sufficient to acquit Emir-Chan from so grievous a fault, and
adding also peradventure to these indignities, some ancient hatred, which he
had taken of old, and retained against Emir-Chan, ever since the death of
Ismahel, determined with himself to bereave him of his sight, and so
commanded, that with a hot burning Iron, applied to the eyes of the wicked
Chan, all the humor that maintained his sight should be dried up, and
afterward being thus blinded King Mahamet commands that EmirChan should
have his eyes put out.

EmirChan being blinded dies miserably in prison.


and despoiled of all his goods he should be shut up in close prison: which
accordinglye without any further delay was put in execution, and was the
occasion, that within the space of a few months he died miserably in prisone.

Thus was Persia deprived of a famous and courageous man, and among other her
losses she felt this also to be of that moment, as although it were of it
self of some importance, yet in respect of the circumstances it was exceeding
great. For the Turcoman Nation, who among other Captains, (from whence Persia
received her protection and dignities) made great account of Emir-Chan, and by
him was greatly honored, at this death of his became The Turcoma^ Nation
greatly offended for the death of EmirChan their captain
highly offended, and were notably discontended, yea, and their indignation
increased so at the last that being become rebellious and an utter enemy to
that Crown, they did absolutely deny their forces to the public defense
thereof. This their wrath and anger was also much more aggrauated, when they
heard that the King had bestowed the rowme of Emir-Chan, upon Alyculi the
fugitive, New discontentments of of the Turcomannes.
who was escaped out of prison from Ferat, as is above showed. Which Alyculi,
although in respect of the great perilles, wherein he had been, deserved all
preferment, yet for that he was an ancient Enemy to certain Turcoman
Captains, they could not in any wise endure that he should be exalted to so
great an honor. And therefore they waxed more disdainefull and ill affected
toward the king, and thereby the Persians forces became the more The Persian
forces weakened.
weakened and divided. And these were the events of this season of the year.
1584. An end whereof we made, at the return of Ferat Bassa the General to
Erzirum, whose successes also do now call upon us, after we have thus
briefly described the novelties of Persia.

From Erziram he sent a large advertisement to Amurath of all things that had
happened, and besoughte him to command what should be attempted at the next
Ferat informs the king of that which had happened this year.
Spring. But besides the information of Ferat, there wanted not many other
that did the like also, although in another manner. For the King was
advertised, and that in an odious sort, of all the whole proceedings of Ferat,
the escape of Alyculi-Chan, the shameful loss of his women, his quarrels with
the Giannizzaries, the disorders Others inform the king more Particularly of
the ouersightes of Ferat.
that fell out, through his want of wisdom, among all the Bassaes of the
whole Camp, especially his enimity with Veis Bassa, who by the king himself
was thought to be a man of valor and prudence, and to be short all the
particulars of the actions, that had not altogether so honorably been
performed in that year: which in truth of themselves only were causes
sufficient to induce the king to remove the said Ferat from the Office that
he exercised. To these occasions there were also added sundry other private
respects. For ever since the departure of Ferat out of Erzirum to build the
Fortresses Osman Bassa thought by Amurath to be a worthy Captain.
at Lory and Tomanis, Amurath had it still in his head the next year following
to attempt the enterprise of Tauris, and therein to make trial of the most
famous Captains that he had: thinking with himself, that the estate of
Reiuan and Chars being so safely settled, there was no reason any longer to
delay or slack the passage to Tauris and thereby to stir up through all
the world a famous report of great exploytes, and a glory correspondent to
so dangerous an attempt. Now among the Captains, whom Amurath esteemed to
be worthy men, to whom he might with trust commit this enterprise, he bethought
himself of Osman Bassa who (we told you) was left at Sumachia in Siruan by
General Mustaffa, the first year of this war, and whose journey to
Demir-Capi we described afterward, together with such other matters as he
performed against Ares-Chan and Sahamal, in assuring the Conquest of that
City. The good opinion, that Amurath had thus conceived of Osman, did spring
and arise in his head, not only for the exploits done by him, which we have
sufficiently above declared, but also, yea and much the rather, for that he
maintained so great an Army, in a Country so far distant, without any
expenses at al to the king, having now a good while leauied the Soldiers
Stipendes upon the lands and territories of that Region, and still exercised
a kind of government and sovereignty over those places. Of all which his
good proceedings, Osman caused intelligence to be sent to the Court sundry
times in the year, discoursing upon the State of all things, and how
without any help of the Tartarians, who since the death of Adilcherai never
came to assist him, he had assured and confirmed the Conquest for ever. By
these means, and by other Amurath has great hope of the valor of Osman Bassa.
favors which Osman had about the king, there was fostered in the mind of
Amurath a wonderful good opinion of him, but although (as we have said) ever
since the departure of Ferat out of Erzirum the second year, he was thoroughly
persuaded of the virtue of Osman, yet was he not resolved (as then) to call
upon him, for that he was hindered by the Novelties that arose in Georgia, and
stayed by a kind of hope, that he had conceived of some better establishment
in the affaiers of Siruan. And now having settled all those borders, in such
sort as we have described, and opened the passage in manner aforesaid, he
thought it good to stay no longer, but resolved with himself to cut of al
further delay, and to cause him to come to him, to Constantinople: and for that
purpose, before, that Ferat was arrived at Erziru^, the king had disparched
certain Capigi and Chiaus to call this famous warrior unto him: and thereupon,
Certain messengers and gentlemen vshers dispatched to call Osman to
Constantinople.
in the next spring, they began to make provision of new attempts and new
Captains.

But there wanted not some, that went about to hinder both his coming and also
these dissignements that were of great importance. At that time by reason of
the death of the three Visiers before named, and the banishment of Sinan above
also declared, there had succeeded in the place of the chief Vizier, Sciaus
Bassa, son in law to Amurath, next unto whom it was Osmans course to sit in the
order of those Bassaes, that were advanced to that honor. But Sciaus, who
rather for the comeliness of his person, and alliance with the king, then for
any other thing was mounted to those high rowmes, did greatly fear, least
partly for his experience in matters of war, and particularly for the good
affection and trust which the king did bear to Osman, at this his coming to
Constantinople he might persuade the king to what he listed: and so
peradventure it might fall out, that he would take from him the chiefest
office, and get the universal government of the whole Empire, where by so great
wealth was to be gained and purchased. And Sciaus endeauoreth to hinder the
coming of Osman Bassa to the Court in his place.
therefore he had every date new stinges arising in his mind, and sundry
cogitations how he might rid himself of these fears, and find means to
avoid his coming to the Court. And because it was a very dangerous matter
openly to attempt the same, and might peradventure be an easy means to make
him forgo his life, he thought it better to make trial of a more commodious
and trusty mean. This Sciaus, in consideration of many gifts and rewards,
which the Cuman Tartarian had often bestowed upon him, had continually
endeavored to clear him before the king of diverse accusations, which Osman by
his letters was wont to lay to his charge, and for all his ouersights to
allege such reasons in his behalf, as if they did not persuade Amurath to be
altogether kind and courteous toward him, yet at the least not to carry a
malicious and envious conceit against him. And so far had he proceeded in
countenancing and favoring the Tartarian, that Freindship between Sciaus the
Vizier, and the Cuman Tartarian.
there was established and confirmed an enterchaungeable amity and mutual
confederacy between them: but besides this their reciprocal friendship, there
quickened in the heart of Sciaus a certain assured imagination, that the said
Tartarian king would use all the ways and means possible, to hinder the
coming of Osman to Constantinople, if he were but made acquainted with his
coming. And therefore Sciaus, as soon as he understood the certain
resolution of Amurath, to call Osman to the Court, before he saw the Chiaus and
the Capigi dispatched, which went with the Kings commandment to fetch him,
secretly wrote to the Cuman Tartar, who lay encamped near to the haven of
Caffa upon the Moore of Moeotis, certifying him that Osman was to come to the
Court: and Sciaus writes to the Tartar of Osmans coming to the Court.
that therefore he would call to mind how great an enemy he had been to
him, and how much he had endeavored by letters to Amurath, to turn all his
hatred and displeasure against him: and withal, that if he was able to do so
much by letters, as if Sciaus had not defended him with very reasonable
excuses, the king had executed his wrathfall mind upon him to his great loss
and detrimente, he should then imagine with himself, what Osman would be
able to do, when he should come in person to the presence of Amurath, and
without any mediator determine between themselves of all matters, whatsoever
they should think to be convenient for the common quiet. These and
peraduentur worse were the letters, which Sciaus wrote to the Tartar, which
ministered matter enough unto him, to encourage him to his barbarous and cruel
designement: and having fully resolved with himself, not to suffer so
pernicious an enemy of his own to arrive at Constantinople, and also to rid
his mind of so great a fear, and especially perceiving that Sciaus, in whose
breast he reposed all his hope and all his protection, did so greatly fear his
coming, he commanded, that twelve thousand soldiers, chaungnig their weapons
and apparel, should go and lie in await for Osman, in the borders between
Colchis and Iberia, toward The order, which the Tartarian takes to prohibit
Osma^s coming to Constantinople.
the Tartarian Nomades, and so making an assault upon him, to bereeue him of
his life, hoping that such an outrage either could not or would not be imputed
to his procurement, but rather either to the Tartar Nomades, or to the
Mengrellians, or to the Georgians, or to the Moscouites, or to the Thieves by
the high way: and to be short, rather to any body else then to him. The
commandments of the Tartar king were put in practice by them accordingly,
The Tartarian Soldiers ride to the enterprise against Osman
and without any further stay they joined themselves all together, and so rode
toward the place appointed.

The, Volacchi, and the Capigi, which were sent from the king, were now come to
Osman, who readily had put himself on his way toward Constantinople, having
left behind Osman departs from Derbent, and leaves two Bassaes in it and at
Sumachia.
him at Derbent, and at Sumachia two Bassaes, which he thought to be the most
sufficient men and the best of all those that were in Siruania: having also
appointed very good orders in the same, and an assured establishment of all
those Countries and places, which Mustaffa first had subdued* and he himself
afterward had maintained and kept under the obedience of Amurath. He had also
made good provision for the naughty and dangerous passages, through which he
was to journey, by chosing out four Osman se^teth forward with 4000.
soldiers.
thousand soldiers, which he had tried in diverse battles, and brought up (as
a man may say) under his own custody and military discipline: by means of
whose valor he was in good hope he might pass safely through the treacheries
of the Albanians, and the populous Squadrons as well of the Tartarians as of the
Mengrellians: so that he persuaded himself to be safe and sure from all
danger and fear. And to be short, he was not troubled with any other care
(as those which were nearest of counsel with him, had told me a thousand times)
but only the exceeding desire, wherein he lived, that he might be able to
revenge the wrong, which the Cuman Tartar had done to Amurath Osman desires
to be revenged on the Cuman Tartarian.
and to him, by failing in his promises that he had made unto them, and
omitting to send any more soldiers into Media for these appointed enterprises.

Thus departed he from Derbent or Demircapi, as we may call it, and coasting
along the rocks of Caucasus, (Caucasus I say, that in all seasons of the year
is all white and hoarie The journey of Osman Bassa.
with continual snowes,) Leaving on his left hand Media, Iberia, and Colchis,
and on his right hand the two famous rivers of Tanais, and Volga, even as his
entrance into the first shores of the Euxine sea, he was by the abouenamed
twelve thousand Tartarians, being apparrelled like Osman assaulted and fought
withal by the 12000. Tartarians apparrelled like Cassachi.
the Cassachi or Thieves that kept by the high ways, suddenly assailed and
fought withal. But, like a huge rock lying open to tempests and waves,
standing fast and immovable in it self, resists the thundrings and
rushings of the vaste and fearful billows, so stood Osman sound and firm
and courageously sustained this treacherous assault, neither was there any
in all his band, that to avoid this unexpected onset, resolved to fly upon
it: but al of them, turning their bold countenances against the rebellious
multitude of those Traitorous Squadrons, The Tartaria^s at first show great
valor, but afterward withdraw themselves.
endured the shock of the Assailants, who (as indeed it is their custom in
the beginning to use great force, but afterward lightly to languish and
withdraw themselves) finding so stout a resistaunce in those few, which they
thought with their only looks and shoutinges to have put to flight, became
very sorrowful and fowlye discontented. Howbeit for so much as they were the
Assailants The Tartaria^s discontented.
themselves, they could not resolve to fly, and shamefully to abandon their
duties, in pursuing so unequal a battle: Whereunto the Soldiers of Osman
were already in such sort inflamed, and he himself also so enkindled, Great
loss of the Tartarians.
that with a very small loss of his own, and in a very short space of
time, he saw the great discomfiture of them. Whereby taking fresh force as it
were at this conflicte, and sweetened in the taste of victory and blood, they
were also encouraged and revived, that the battle The Tartarians destroyed
and put to slight.
was not abandoned by them, until partly by taking a number of the Tartarians
as prisoners, partly hewing others in pieces, and partly driving a many of
them to shameful flight, they had obtained a most happy victory, and found
themselves not only free from this deep danger, but also Conquerors and
Reuengers of an injury so fraudulently contrived against them. By the
Prisoners that were taken in sundry sorts, and by means of diverse torments
which he put them too, he was informed that The prisoners reveal the
treachery plotted against Osman.
for the fear which their king had conceived, least when he came to
constantinople he would procure his destruction from Amurath, he was come down
with this Army to seek his death. As Soon as Osman had received certain
intelligence of this treason of the Tartar, having caused a perfect process to
be made of it, together with the dispositions of the said Tartariaen
prisoners, he sent Osman aduertiseth Amurath of every particular.
the same by the shortest, safest, and easiest ways that he could devise to
Amurath at Constantinople. Which process accompanied also with his Letters,
wherein he gave advertisement of the treacheries most unjustly contrived
against him, and of the battle that ensued thereupon, provoking and inflaming
him to revenge so grievous an injury, and so wicked a rebellion. Amurath
having received these reports, according as the necessity of the matter
required, secretly and resolutly took order, that certain Galleyes should
be sent to the haven of Caffa, to fetch Osman Bassa, and with all that there
Amurath takes order that galleys should be sent to Caffa.

Amurath writes to Osman to flay the Tartarian King and to substitute his
Brother in his rowme.


should be conueighed thither a brother of the said Tartar, commanding
Osman by Letters that he should put to death the Cuman Traitor, and substitute
this his Brother in his place, to the end he might serve for an example to
all men, that such wicked and mischievous offenses do never pass without due
punishment.

But that we may the better understand, why this Cuman Brother was at this
time so ready for this business, it shall be well in brief to set down some of
the particulars that may open the light of this truth. Among other pote^t
Princes, that cowardly and basely yielding to the Ottoman power do lead a very
vile and troublesome life under them, the Kings of the Cuman Tartarians called
Precopensi did also submit themselves, and governed those peoples that were
subject unto them, according to the wicked and damnable pleasures of the
Ottomans whom they served. Among the rest of these Cuman Kings this present
King, who being wholly devoted unto them, was placed in this kingdom, besides
the slaughter of his parents had himself also endured diverse and sundry
afflictions, so that he greatly feared to be removed from that government and
committed to prison. And therefore this his The purpose of the Tartars brother,
to bereave him of his state.
brother, who as we told you was now so ready for this action, as one that for
the constitution of his body, and for the guiftes of his mind, being adorned
with the knowledge of Astrologye and Philosophy, was better esteemed by the
Subjects, then his brother now raining was, (for that by reason of his
excessive tributes, and besides his tributs, of his Ordinary bribes that he
often bestowed at the Court, he was become most odious to his Subjects, from
whom he sucked those Revenues and presents) this his brother (I say) being
ravished with the conceit of himself, and persuaded by the comfortable
words of his best friends, resolved to pass to Constantinople: and although
he were younger in years, and naked and bare of money and wealth, whereby he
might have obtained that, which he hoped for, over his Brother: yet trusting
upon the common voice and report of the people, from whom he had carried
with him very earnest supplications and intercessions to the Ottoman king, and
also relying greatly upon his own eloquence, and other virtues whereby he
thought he was able to purchase the favor of the king, he imagined it to be a
reasonable suit and easy to be granted, to require that thing of Amurath
which age and riches had denied him: that is to say, that he would drive his
Brother out of the kingdom, and to substitute him in his place. And thus went
the good young man to the court, where having bestowed a few small presents,
he did not stick to show himself to be a suitor for the nowme of his
Brother: who having had intelligence before, of his going to Constantinople,
had presentlye written to his Ambassadors there, that they The remedy that
the Tartar king used against his brother.
should not regard any expenses, they should not omit any duty or entreaty,
they should not forget any Art or diligence, to retain him still established in
his possessed dig nitye, and to procure his foolish and audatious Brother to be
clapped up in some place, where he might not disturb him in his kingdom. And so
whiles the one labored with the power Money among corupt people can do all
things.
of his tongue, and by means thereof conjoined with the other ornaments of his
mind hoped to have become his Brothers superior, the Agentes of the other did
not cease to employ also the force of their guiftes and Stratagems: and in the
end it fell out, that neither learning nor beauty of person, nor good report,
could prevail so much for the one as rich presents and crafty deceites
legitimated by gold, could do for the other, notwithstanding a number of
filthy vices that were in him. (And what is it, that money cannot do among
covetous people at this day, if it be bestowed in measure and in time, and
distributed in fit occasions? The young man was committed prisoner, and sent
by safe watch to Gogna, sometimes called Iconium a City of Licaonia, and his
Brother still confirmed in his possessed kingdom. With great patience did the
unhappy young man remain at Gogna, apparelled like an Eremit, and in that his
captivity lived a life altogether conformable to his miserye, and (as al men
justified it unto me, at my passage through that City, The author in Gogna
had intelligence of the Tartarian youngma^
when I went to Constantinople) by his continual and treacherous execrations,
and a kind of external innocencye, he made show that he was void of all
hope or ambitious desire to be brought to a kingdom, (...) thought, the matter
was now no longer to be foreslowed but that it was very expediente to
attempt the Osman advises the enter prise of Tauris, and shows the manner
how.
famous enterprise of Tauris, and by erecting a Forte in that City to raise a
terror over al Persia, and a glorirous renown of their mighty conquestes,
among the Nations of Europe. For it was already well known what the
Georgians were able to do, the people whereof had already partly of their own
voluntary motion, and partly enforced by necessity and fear, yielded their
dutiful obedience: and although Mustaffa had rebelled and returned to his
former liberty and native Religion, yet he might peradventure by this time
repent himself thereof: neither was there any cause at all to fear the
treacheries of one, that being without any train to follow him, and of
himself very poor: would rather seek to save himself in his obscure and
base villages, and to keep his pitiful holds within the mountains: neither
could be able to endure the sound of their victors, much less be so hardy
as to assault the victoreis. So that all things now were open, neither was
there any fear of any novelty arising, but that the journey to Tauris might
resolutely be performed: for the accomplishment whereof he thought that either
the same Army, or at the most a very little greater would suffize, so that it
were of the choicest soldiers.

By reason of one of the letters, which Sciaus Bassa had A letter of Sciaus
that was found is the cause why he was dismissed from his chief Visiership.
written to the Cuman Tartar, and was found I know not how, Amurath had
deprived the said Sciaus from the office of the chief Vizier, and banished
him from the Court, so that he lived afterward about Calcedone, upon the
borders of Asia toward Constantinople, in a certain Serraglio or close
Palace, that ye had there builte for his own pleasure and recreation. And in
the rowme of this his son in law, he had appointed Osman to be chief Vizier
in the rank of the Bassaes of the Osman Bassa chief Vizier,
Court: and not contented to have committed so great a trust unto him, he
nominated him also the General and Sovereign Captain in the enterprise of
Tauris.

Such power and force has virtue, that even from the very skomme of the
rascal sort, and out of the rustical route of Mountain Peasauntes (which
notwithstanding cannot be truly justified of this Osman) it does oftentimes
in this variable world draw diverse men into Princes Courts, and advance
them to the highest dignities. This Osmans father was a Circassian borne, who
in the common loss and conquest of his country, was one of those, that to
escape the slaughtering sword The offspring of Osman Bassa.
of Selim, submitted themselves to the Turkish yoke, and afterward fighting
in defense thereof, he overcame the Aethtopians, and thereby obtained
immortal renown. Of these his virtues he left the said Osman his heir,
who being brought up in abundance of all things, and trained up in the
Art of warrefare, became very courageous and skillful therein: and at last,
from a private Soldier was called to the highest dignities of so great an
Empire, and from thence to the chiefest place of authority in the Army of the
East, and to be short, was at one instante created a Counselor and General
of Ottoman. Great was the joy that Osman conceived hereat, and great Osman
chosen General of the Army to go to Tauris.
was the desire that he had to make himself worthy of so honorable
favors: and the greater confidence that he perceived Amarath had reposed in
him, the more eagerly was he spurred on to do any thing possible whereby he
might show himself to have deserved the same. And therefore aduising with
himself, that forasmuch as there must be a greater Army now Levied, then
there was in the former years, and so sent into very far Countries, it was
also necessary for him the sooner to send out his aduertisementes into all his
subject Provinces, and he himself by his own example to provoke the other
Captains and Soldiers thereunto, he determined even in winter (thought it were
as yet somewhat troublesome,) to pass to Chalcedon, and from thence to Angori,
to Amasia, to Siuas, and in those territories to drive out the The diligence of
Osman Bassa.
time, until he might understand, that all his soldiers, which were summoned
were gathered together. But because upon this his great speed, it might fall out
peradventure, that his enemies also would begin to prepare a greater number
of Soldiers, if they should understand for certain, that Osman had appointed
all these preparations for Tauris: he thought it a better policy (for so it
pleased Amurath also: to spread a rumor abroad, that A fained rumor of
going to Nassiuan.
they must go for Nassiuan, whither Ferat Bassa had given out speech that he
should have gone the last year before: to the end that the Persians, being so
beguiled, should not regard the gathering of so mighty an Army, as they
would have done, if they should have heard of their passage to Tauris.

And so this General cosening Rumor touching Nassiuan, was published abroad,
not only through all the Cities subject to the Turk, but the fame thereof flew
also even The Persian jealous of Tauris.
into the Countries of the Persians, who notwithstanding being very jealous of
the City of Tauris, and fearing that the matter would fall out, as indeed
afterward it did, ceased not to make curious and diligent enquiry about it.
And although the indignity and disgrace, that was offered to his Ambassador,
dissuaded him from sending any other for treaty of peace, yet to spy out the
secrets of the Turks, and to understand certainly whether their intent were
to pass to Nassiuan or to Tauris, he could do no less but dispatch diverse
Chiaus or Messengers to Osman, and by making a show that he meant in very deed
to feel his mind touching conditions of peace, to try whether he could learn
and discover the truth or The Persian cannot come to any certain knowledge of
the designement of Osman Bassa.
no. But by all the means, and by all the cunning that he could possibly use,
he could never find out any certain knowledge thereof: so that there still
remained in him many doubtful and confused cogitations, which were engendered
and fostered by some careless and simple reporters, that Osman had given out
speech for the enterprise of Nassiuan.

And now according to the commandment gone out through all the Cities of the
Empire, the Soldiers of all sorts began to flock together: and all those
that either were desirous to be established in their former charges and
gouernementes of Cities, or sought ambitiously to be honored with some Office
and dignity, made repair Osman gathers together a huge treasure by presents.
unto him as unto a king and Sovereign moderator of the Ottoman Empire,
presenting him with very large and liberal guiftes. Whereby his estate was so
greatly enriched, that through these means he had gathered together a huge
heap of infinite treasure. And so entertaining them with all affable courtesy,
and also with promising both rewards and honors to all that would follow
him in his purposed voyage, he leauied a wonderful great number of Men and
Moneys. But now was the time come, that called him away to go toward
Erzirum, where he was greatly expected by his huge army there assembled
together, and notwithstanding the great dearth Great dearth in Erzirum. The
greatest Army that ever was gathered was this.

The soldiers of Egypt and Damasco went not with Osman.


of all things belonging to vittel, that commonly reigns in those quarters,
yet he was enforced to make his iourny to that city, where he arrived about
the latter end of the Month of July, and there, with all possible speed taking
a view of his whole Army, and of all the provision necessary for so important
and famous an enterprise, he dailye labored to hasten his departure. In the
said city of Erzirum were met together all the soldiers of the Provinces
that were wont to send help, but yet in a greater number, then ever was
gathered by any General before, for that every man forsook and abandoned his
own private business, and upon assured hopes of new rewards and unwonted honors,
they were al induced to follow the fame of, their new Vizier. Only the
people of Egypt and Damasco were busied with other more private Quarrels, where
of because they are both of great importance, and also fell out at this very
instant, it will not be amiss to make some brief rehearsal, for a manifest,
and evident example hereafter, how great harm and mischief the diversity of
opinions, and dissension of neighbors does breed among all sorts of men.

The end of the Sixth Book.
The Seventh Book
The Argument.
HAssan the Bassa of Cairo in Egypt is called to the Court.

Ebrain the Bassa, chosen to be the Kings son in Law, is sent to Caireo in the
rowme of Hassan.

Hassan in the company of the Master of the Kings horse goes to
Constantinople.

He is committed to prison, and spoiled of all his wealth.

At the instant suite of the Queen, Hassan is set at liberty.

Ebrain is called to Constantinople to finish the marriage.

Ebrain comes with an Army of twelve thousand horse.

The Ofspringe, religion, customs, Territories, and weapons of the Drusians.

Three of the chief Lords of the Drusians come to meet Ebrain.

Serafadin also comes to Ebrain.

Serafadin being accused by his three enemies, speaks in his own defense.

Serafadin is committed to prison.

Manogli stands obstinate and refuses to come to Ebrain, but writes his
letters unto him.

Ebrain resolves to burn the country of Manogli.

Veis the Bassa with his son the Sangiacco of Jerusalem discomfited by the
Drusians.

Gomeda is sent to Manogli, but returns without speeding in his Message.

Aly the Bassa goes to Manogli and speedeth.

Manogli sends his Mother to Ebrain.

Gomeda goes again to Manogli, and returns with a very rich present.

Gomeda goes once again to Manogli, and returns with new presents.

Andera belonging to Manogli is sacked, and nineteen other towns burnt.

Three hundred and fifty persons belonging to Manogli, hewn in pieces.

The Matademo or chief Agent of Manogli, is slayed quick.

The Soldiers of Serafadin slain.

The Soldiers of the Turkish Galleys sack all the Sea coast of Serafodin and
Manogli.

Aly Carsusogli buieth the Title of a Bassa with a hundred thousand Ducats.

Mansurogli laid in chains, and sent to the Galleys.

The territory of Mansurogli is sacked.

Ebrain is joyfully received into Constantinople.

Ebrain gives great presents to the Sultan.

Quarrels between the Arabians, and the Sangiacco of Ierusalent.

The Subassi of Bethlehem is slayed quick, by appointment of the Sangiacco.

Osman the Bassa is in a readiness to depart from Erzirum, with speech given
out, that he would not go to Tauris, but to Nassiuan.

The seventh Book.
AMurath had heertofore taken Hassan the Eunuch out of the Hassan-Bassa the
Queen's Eunuch, sent to Cair, to be Bassa there
Serraglio, from the charge that he had there, to serve in the Queen's Court,
and had sent him as Bassa to Cair in Egypt: in whose favor, for recompense
of his continual service employed in het behalf, the Queen had obtained this
great Office, which besides the honor belonging unto it, was also very
beneficial and profitable unto him, as in deed it is to any other person,
whose good hap it is to be advanced thereunto: the riches and multitude of
people inhabiting therein being so great, that it seems not to be one City,
but rather that it contains within the large Circuit of it, a number Cair
seems to be many Cities rather then one.
of Cities. This man being coueteous of money, and desirous to handle the
matter in such sort, as this place of government might yield him so great
benefit, that he should little need to seek for any more such grauntes at
the kings hands, by all manner of means, as well indirectly as directly,
sought to oppress all the whole Nation, and spared neither any state nor age,
nor sex, but by all importunities and undue courses, he would wring and
extorte rewards and bribes from every man. By which his sinister and corrupt
dealing, he had now made himself so odious and intolerable unto them, that
there was not a man, but would choose to do any thing possible, rather then
to remain under these his continual tyrannies. And in the end, when it was
plainly perceived, The Tyranny of the Eunuch
that neither Religion, nor Love, nor Justice, nor Reason, could remove his
coueteous mind from his usual cruelties and rapine, a great number of such
(as were most vexed and molested by this new Tyrant,) began daily, in close
and quiet manner to go to Constantinople, and make humble petitions to the
king, that he would be pleased to displace so cruel and unjust a wretch, as
thought it lawful for him to drink up the blood of their poor families,
without any cause or offense at all. Neither were these complaints made once
or twice by one or two alone, but oftentimes and by many several persons: so
that generally in the Court, there was no talk of any thing else, but only
of the villainies and mischiefs, that were reported of the Eunuch. At the last,
Amurath seeing that these public exclamations went daily so far, that it
was now a shame for him to let them go any further without due punishment,
he resolved with himself to call him to the Court, and having sent unto The
Eunuch Bassa of Cair, called home to the Court by Amurath.
him certain Capigi and Chiaus, he admonished him sondrie times to return
home. But the Eunuch, whom it highly grieved to forsake so fit an occasion
of enriching himself, did still delay his return, and began to allege
newe-coyned excuses for his longer stay. Which when Amurath understood,
thinking rather that he was mocked thereby, and peradventure also entering into
some suspicion of some public alteration in those quarters, with a new devise
he determined to provide for so great a disorder, and by punishing the
mischievous Amurath desires to pacify the complaints of the Egyptians.
nature of the coueteous Eunuch, in some part at the least to satisfy the
people that were in a mutiny, and to pacify their pitiful exclamations and
complaints.

There satte at that time among the chief Bassaes of the Court, one Ebrain,
by Nation a Sclauonian, and of Ebrain, a Bassa of the Court.
a place called Chianichie, a short days journey distante from Ragusa, a
yoonge man of the age of two and thirty years or thereaboutes, of very fair
conditions, and of reasonable judgment, upon whom Amurath him self had
heretofore determined to bestow his own daughter for his wife and to make him
his son in law. Whereof before this time there had been diverse treaties and
speeches. And therefore now being minded to remove Amurath pur poseth to
bestow his daughter upon Ebrain, for his wife.
the Eunuch from his Office, and to satisfy the City, and having no other
person, to whom he thought he might better commit that trust, and being
also willing withal, to minister occasion to his said son in law to make
money and enriche himself, he was resolved to send him as General Syndic and
sovereign Judge into Egypt, giving him in particular charge, that he Amurath
s^ndeth means for Ebrain to enrich himself, by sending him as Bassa and
Syndic to Cair
should remember how wickedlie his predecessor had dealt before him, so that
all the whole Territories of that huge and large City, were come up even unto
the Court, to exclaim against his Tyranny and coueteousnesse. And so this
new Bassa took his journey toward Egypt, although there ran before him a
great rumor of his coming, and of the great authority, wherewith he was
sent. At which report as The Egyptians joyful, and the Eunuch sorrowful for
the coming of Ebrain.
the Egyptians rested content and joyful: so the Eunuch waxed very sad and
sorrowful: and did verily persuade himself, that this alteration could not
but engender some strange issue and effect against him. Which opinion did so
much the more deeply settle it self in his mind, for that he did not know one
trusty person in all Egypt, of whom he might hope for any help and
protection, in case that Ebrain Bassa should drive him to any streighte.
Whereupon aduising with himself to provide better for his own affaiers, and
safety of his life, he was resolved not to stay for the arrival of the
Vizier, but departing out of Egypt, with great care and circumspection, he
traveled toward Constantinople, in hope to appease the kings wrath, or at
least by the mediation of bribes and by the intercession of the Queen, to
find him of a more mild and placable disposition, then he should find
Ebrain, who without doubt would not have spared any extremity or cruelty, to
bereave him both of his goods, and also of his life. Thus the crafty Eunuch
departed from Egypt, and put himself on his iourny toward Constantinople,
using great diligence and care, that he might not meet The Eunuch hops to
pacify the king by his going to the court.

The Eunuch departs from Cair.


with Ebrain, who being already certified by many Egyptians of the escape of
Hassan, gave speedye advertisement thereof to Amurath at Constantinople, to the
end he might take such order as was convenient. Amurath hearing this, and
hearing withal, that he kept not the highway, that leads ordinarilye from
Memphis into Thracia, feared least he might fly to strange Princes, and
particularly suspected, that being arrived in Soria, he would pass into
Persia to the Soffian king, and so work Amurath fears that the Eunuch would
fly to strange Princes.
him double and treble dommage, as one that had already gathered a huge
treasure, and having lived in the Court, knew the most secret affairs thereof
and learned althe privy devises and fashions of the Serraglio. Whereupon with
all diligence he dispatched his Imbrahur Bassi (whom we may call the Master
of his horse) with fortye of his Capigi, all Gentlemen vshers, and Officers of
the most secret and nearest rowmes about him, with charge and commandment,
that if he met with him, he should bring him alive to the Court, using all the
assistaunce Imbrahur Bassi dispatched by Amurath to meet with the Eunuch.
and aid of his people, that might be requisite, and for that purpose
delivered unto him very effectual and large letters, written after the best
manner that is used in the Court. The kings Messenger with his appointed train
departed, and without any extraordinary enquiry after the Eunuch, he found
him in Soria, encamped in the plains of the Apameans, near to the city now
called Aman, but in times past Apamea, the Principal City of that Countreye,
where the River Orontes with his pleasant course waters the green and
beautiful hills, and from thence running along to the Walls Imbrahur Bassa
finds the Eunuch in the champaines of Apamea.
of Antiochia, discharges it self afterward into the Siriac Sea, near unto
Seleucia Pieria, which now they call Soldin. As Soon as the Eunuch understood
of the coming of the Imbrahur, he gave order unto his guard of slaves, which in
great number with spears and Arcubuses did ordinarily keep his pauilion,
that they should not grant entertainment into his Tent, to any other but only
to the Imbrahur himself, and in all rigorous manner to keep the rest of the
Capigi from coming in. This order was given in very good time. For as soon as
the Kings Officer had discovered the Tents of the fugitive Bassa, in all haste
he ran toward the same, and seeking out the greatest among them, went
presently thither to enter into it with all his followers. But the slaves
being in Armor opposed themselves against them, and permitting the Imbrahur
to pass into the pauilion, entertained the rest of his train without. The
Imbrahur read unto him the commandment which he had from the king to bring
him to the Court, and instantly moved him that without any resistaunce he
would quietlye go with him. But the cunning Eunuch, Behold (quoth he) how
without any calling of the king, or conducting by you I come of my self, and
am assured that I shall find not only pardon and pity, but also special
favor and grace in the sight of my Lord. For the wicked treacheries of my
false accusers cannot abuse the vprighte and mild nature of the king, to the
prejudice of me, being an Innocent. And so they went all together The Eunuch
and the Imbrahur go together to Constantinople.
toward Constantinople, keeping the high way of Antiochia, of Heraclea, of
Gogna, and of Nicaea.

The politic and crafty Eunuch had in this mean time dispatched diverse posts
with letters to the Sultan Ladies, certifieng them of his coming, and
principally beseeching the Queen, to protect him, and to purg the kings mind
from all affection of anger and in dignation that he might have conceived
against him: and so he arrived at Chalcedon. As Soon as the king understood of
his arrival, he caused all the treasure which he had The Eunuch at Chalcedon
gathered, to be taken from him, withal the rest of his private substance,
and the same to be carried into the great store house, and himself to be
shut up in prison within the seven Toweres: Where after he had woorne
out many days, wherein he still feared some deadly blow, he received from
the Queen an unexpected advertisement, that he should be of good cheer,
and quiet himself for that his wealth had already excused his life, and that
she hoped in very short time to get him restored also to his liberty:
which indeed she brought to pass. For she her self made earnest petition to
her husband, that forasmuch as he had bereaved her Eunuch of all his goods,
he would at the least deliver him out of prison, and restore him unto her.
This request of the Queen was granted accordinglye* but all the treasure
that he had unjustly The Eunuch set at liberty.
scraped together out of the Families of Egypt, remained still among the
Gold and other jewels of the king.

But Ebrain Bassa, according to his new commission was now arrived in Egypt,
and in short space, by far more sinistre devises, then the Eunuch before him
had used, besides the annual and Ordinarye Revenue, of that Province,
amounting yearly to the sum of six hundred thousand Cecchini, he had got
together an infinite heap of riches, that was able only of Ebrain called to
Constantinople to accomplish the intended msriage.
it self to make him worthy of his promised wife. And therefore he was
called home to the Court, to accomplish the intended Marriage. With this comman
dement to return to Constantinople, he received also in charg, that he should
make his iourny through the people of Drusia, and such as he should find
truly obedient unto him, he should confirm them in their due obedience Order
given to Ebrain to surucie, and subdue the Drusians.
and make them pay their ancient duties: but such as were disobedient, he
should quite root them out and destroy them: and from every one of them, as well
friends as enemies in any case, to take away their Arcubuses, and al other kind
of wepons whatsoever. Ebrain presently put this commandment in execution, and
having leauied the foresaid treasure, put together all his own private riches
that he had gathered in the time of his government, and raised good store of
Soldiers in that province, he took with him especially thirteen Sangiacchi,
that were ordinarily accustomed to sit as assistauntes Ebrain departs from
Cair with 13. Sangracchi.
in the ruling of those populous Territories of Cair, under the government of
the Vizier, the king or the Bassa of that Country, If ye list so to term him:
and so set him self on his iourneye toward Gasa, passing over those waste
and huge wildernesses of Sand, that lie between Memphis and Gaza, and are a
great part of Arabia Deserta. From Gaza joining the Sangiaccho thereof with
him, he went to Jerusalem, and from thence causing the Sangiaccho there also
to follow his train, he iournied by Saffetto, by Lezium, by Naplos, (called
in times paste Samaria) still taking with him the Sangiacchi of all those
places, and at the last turned himself toward Damasco, so that before he
joined with the band of Ebrain in the way of Damasco.
Damasco, he had gotten together eighteen Sangiacchi, with all their
Squadrons of Soldiers and Slaves. Besides these, he had also his own private
Court, which was wonderful populouse, and two hundred Ianizzaries of
Constantinople, whom the king would needs have him to take with him at his
departure from the Court: so that in sum, he had an Army, almost of twelve
thousand horsemen, From Damasco there were come to meet him, even as far as
Jerusalem, all the Ianizzaries of that City, under Ebrain with an army of
about 12000. horse.
the Conduct of their Aga, or Captain, and all the Zaini and the Spahini, and
the other soldiers that were under the government of that Bassa, who at that
time was one Veis, mentioned before in the troubles of General Ferat, in the
last book: al which were no more in number there, but only two thousand
persons. There came from Aleppo Aly Bassa, being then out of Office (whom the
Turks call Mosul: that is to say discharged or dismissed) and a Company of
two hundred Slaves with him. Ebrain also sent for Giaffer Bassa, being at
that time the Eunuch or Captain of Tripoli, a crafty man, and cruel of
Nature: but he being enflamed with the fame of Osman Bassa, who loved him
very well, would not in any case obey the commandment of Ebrain. There
came to him besides by the way of Sidonia, which they now call Seida, the Aza
of the Ianizzaries of Cyprus, with all the band of that desolate and destroyed
Isle: which Captain was transported over in the Galleys, that by the kings
appointment were sent to fetch Ebrain: who being now made strong with all
these Soldiers, had purposed the utter ruin of the disobediente Drusians, and
the purchase of his own glory by triumphing over them. But because this my
History shall not proceed under unknown names, we are to declare, who these
Drusians are, for whom there are now so great preparations made by the new
Captain, and of whom the king is so suspicious and doubtful.

The Drusians are by Nation and Offspring, Frenchmen, the Relics of those,
that with devout minds The Drusian people, what they are.
did in times past fight those memorable and Christian battles in Jury, and
recovered the holy Sepulcher of Christ: and being afterward subdued partly
by the plague, and partly by the fury of the Barbarians, mingled their seed
with the Circumcised Nation, and so together with their authority and
commanding, lost also their first faith and religion: so that having
extinguished their former sacred knowledge, they grew into a hatred of the
Turkish superstition, and abhorred the Circumcision of the other, and betook
themselves Isman the prophet of the Drusians.
to a new Prophet, well knowine and beloved among them, called Isman. The true
and right Drusians do live uncircumcised, neither do they forbear wine, The
Drusians are not circumcised, they drink wine liberally, and take their own
daughters to their wives.
which the Turks are forbidden. They make it lawful for themselves, without
any conscience or respect, to take their own daughters to their wives: So that
(if it be true which Aristotle writes, That among certain brute beasts
there is a kind of respect observed in blood) coupling themselves together
by these profane and filthy Marriages, they live more beastly, then the very
brute creatures. And as by their prophet and their factions they would needs
be separated from the Turkish sect, so in Dominion and government they have
sought by all means to be different from them: for notwithstanding all the
chaunges and troubles of the Turkish Tyrants, yet have they always been
subject to their own Natural Princes, which by aunciente descent had the rule
over them, and would never admit any Captain or Governor of the Ottomans
to be within the Countries, The Drusians would never admit any Turkish
Governor.
which they possessed. They are a people very warrelike, stout, obstinate,
bold, undaunted, and religious obseruers of their law, although indeed some
of their chief Rulers, to save their lives, have been enforced to follow the
pleasure of those that were mightier then themselves, by reason of their The
weapons of the Drusians.
dissension with their neighbors. In battle they use especially the Arcubuse
and the Scimitarre: and yet some of them at this day do serve with Lances
and Darts. They are apparrelled like the Eastern people, with a Turbante on
their head: and breeches they never wear, but in steed thereof they cover
those parts with their Coat, which reaches down to their knees in length,
by buttening it up before. They are also accustomed to gross and Mountain
Meats. They inhabit all the Country that is environed within the confines of
Ioppa above Caesarea in Palestina, and within the Rivers of Orontes and
Iordane, stretching it self even The Country which the Drusians inhabit.
to the plain of Damasco, near to the hills that compass it about, upon
the coast of Mount Libanus.

They were all in times paste good friends, and confederate together in love
and concord, so that they were in those days greatly esteemed: but now,
being set in a confusion through greediness, and couetuousnesse, they are
divided among them selves, and one of them contrary and enemy to the other,
but especially and principally at this day, there are five chief Captains
There are at this day five Captains or chief rulers among the Drusians.
or Heads of them, which they call Emir, One of them is named Ebneman, whom
the Turks call Manogli: Another Serafadin: the third Mahamet Ebnemansur, (the
Turks call him Mansurogli:) the forth Ebnefrec, by the Turks termed
Feracogli, and by the Moors surnamed Acra, which we may interpret Scuruy or
Scald,) and the fifth, Ali Ebne-Carfus by the Turks called Ali-Carfusogly. Under
these, who indeed carry the title and auctority of an Emir, that is to say
King or Chief, there are diverse others, whom the Drusians themselves call
Macademi, that are either Deputies to the Emirs, or else their Factors or
Agentes, or both: among whom, in this alteration of matters, which we
intend to write of, Gomeda and Mendel were two very famous persons, who kept
their residence, the one in Baruti, and the other in Tripoli for Mansurogli,
and called themselves Emirs, rather for flattery then of any duty, for that
they were indeed no other but the Macademi of the said Emir-Mahamet
Ebnemansur.

Ebneman, he inhabited the Mountains and fields, that are contained under the
Jurisdictions of Caesarea, of Ptolemaida, Ebneman or Manogli.
of Tyrus, and of Sidonia: the inhabitants at this day call those places,
Cheiserie, Acca, Sur, Seid^, all of them, (as far as I could see, when I
traveled in Pilgrimage to the holy sepulcher of Christ) being desolate
Countries and utterly destroyed, and has his residence for the most part
upon the hill, in Andera. He is very mighty in men and Armor, and since
the time that by treachery and treason his Father was murdered by Mustaffa
then Bassa of Damasco, he has been a deadly Enemy to the Turkish name.

Ebnemansur enjoys all the Territory contained with in Baruto and Anafe, and
keeps his residence upon the Ebnemansur or Ma^surogli
hill in Gazir. He, being driven thereunto through the controversies that he
had with Ebnesuip, sometimes the Emino or Customer of the Kay at Tripoli, and
with Ebneman aforenamed, yielded himself as a pray to the Turks, and was made
the Sangiacco of Laodicea, called Lizza, having also the charge of the Custom
house of Tripoli committed unto him, where afterward Gomeda remained for him:
But at the reasonable and honorable requests of Giouanni Michaele, sent as
Consul by the Senate of Venice into Soria, and by me in this History,
oftentimes but not worthelie enough mentioned (for I was the means and
practiser for the said Consul, though unworthy I were for such business) the
said office was taken from him, whiles he was prisoner in Constantinople, in
the year. 1586.

Serafadin keeps his state between Ebneman, and Seferadin.
Ebnemansur: being in good league and confederate with the first, and at
mortal enimitie with the second. He is the weakest of all the rest in forces
and revenues.

Ebnefrec inhabiteth that part of Libanus, that is Ebnefrec or Feracogli.
toward the East, and runs down even to the foot of Libanus, joining
upon the plains of Bacca. Of which plains, together with the City (called by
the inhabitants there, Balbech, and by some thought to be Caesarea Philippi.)
Emir Aly Ebnecarfus EbneCarfus or Carfusogli
was ever the Lord and owner, who also in this change of Fortune, bought the
Title of a Bassa; and would needs submit himself wholly to the service of
the Turks. And here along runs the vale, that is so famous among the
Physicians, and Poets, between Lib anus and Anti-Libanus, The vale between
Libanus and anti-Libanus famous among Physicians.

Ior and Dan, the two heads of Jordan.


where also are to be seen the Lakes of Orontes and of Jordan, called Ior and
Dan.

Ebnefrec, Ebnecarfus and Ebnemansur, were always great friends, but now
especially at the coming of Ebrain Bassa, they showed themselves, more
straightly confederated together: Serafadin and Manogli were ever opposite
against them: so that the one side procuring the overthrow and mischief of
the other; they have utterly lost their strength, and have no means left
them to defend themselves from the Ottoman forces. Now as soon as the news
came among them, that Ebrain the Vizier being departed from Cair would come
into Soria, to subdue the Drusians, the three confederats above named, of
purpose to turn all the mischief upon Ebneman and Serafadin their enemies,
resolved to go and meet with the Bassa to show themselves subject and devoted
to king Amurath, to carry with them large and liberal bribes, and by accusing
Serafadin and Ebneman of infidelity, of disobedience, and of rebellion, to
entreat their utter destruction and overthrow. And so having packed The three
Drusian Emirs go to meet Ebrain as far as Jerusalem with a great train.
up together great store of money, cloth of silk, cloth of Woollen, and cloth
of Gold, with many loades of other silks and things of exceeding value, every
of the three being accompanied, one with some two thousand, and another with
some three thousand, put themselves on their iourny toward Ebrain, and met
him at Jerusalem, where he was already arrived. This their coming Ebrain
Bassa took in wonderful good part, and very courteously accepted those
rich and great presents which they brought him, and perceiving such offers of
their fidelity and obedience: and such accusations of the two Drusian Ebrain
expects good success over the Drusians, by their discord among themselves.
Captains their enemies, he began to be in good hope of his intended
enterprise. Neither did he forslow to use most sweet speeches unto them,
promising due rewards to every one of them and putting them in great
expectation that he would increase their honor, and enlarge their estates. By
which liberal promises they being now become bold and venturous, began in
more sharp, and bitter manner to accuse their two enemies. Which thing did the
more highlye please Ehrain for that he plainly perceived, that nothing could
more easily compass their overthrow, then this their discord. And therefore
most readily he promised them, not only that he would procure the
destruction of those their enemies, as rebels to the Turk, but also that he
would make themselves the Means and Ministers of their own revenge and
chastisement. And thus being all accompanied and joined together, they came by
the way of Damasco to the Champaigne of Bocca beforenamed, and in those plains
encamped themselves. This was in the month of Iulie and in the The Army of
Ebrain in the plains of ^occa increased to the number of 20000. horse
year of man's redemption. 1585. And the whole Army, that was with Ebrain,
reconing also the Soldiers of the three Emirs, was about the number of twenty
thousand horsemen strong.

In this place there came people out of all quarters, with presents to honor
the Vizier, to whom he likewise yielded such favors and reliefes, as his
coueteous nature could afford them. Among the rest, Giouanni Michaele,
mentioned a little before, Giouanni Michaele the Veaetian Co^ful ^eadeth
Chtistoforo de Buoni his interpreter to visit Ebrain the Vizier with
honorable presence.
sent Christoforo de Buoni his Interpreter to salute the said Bassa, who
again for his part showed diverse signs and tokens of the Love and Reverence
that he carried toward the Venetian estate. And for that the said
Christoforo de Buoni was of the same Nation and language that Ebrain was off,
both of them being Sclauonians, and of Ragusi, he esteemed of him so dearly,
that he would needs retain him still, with him as his familiar Companion,
during all the time, that he remained in Soria, about the subduing From
Christofero de Buoni the Author all the particulars of the Drusian people.

Ebrain by letters inuiteth Seseradin and Manogli.


of the Drusians. By which means I attained to the precise and faithful
knowledge of all the proceedings in Drusia.

From these plains also, Ebrain presently sent Letters to Serafadin, and to
Ebneman, whereby he invited them to come unto him, and declare themselves to
be Subjects and obediente to the Sultan, to the end he might make
intercession on their behaulfes for all such honorable favor as they desired:
but if they would not come, then they must be assured, that they should be
deprived both of their estates and of these lives. Manogli would not come by
any means: But Serafadin being poor both in wealth and in forces, and sarre
more weak then Manogli, resolved to come, hoping that by his presents he
might rid himself of all trouble, for that he had heard of the fortunate
success that had hitherto happened to the three Emirs, who (as all the world
thought) had made the kings Champion their great friend and protector. And
therefore having packed up together diverse loades of silks, great store of
Money, and many clothes of good value and beautye, he carried them with him
to honor the new Duke, by whose Letters he was so largely invited. He
caused also diverse of his Subjects to go with him, and at last arrived at
the Pauilion of Ebrain with his rich presents, having first commanded all
those, that had accompanied him thither, to sequester themselves from him. The
guiftes were readilye received, and Serafadin in the presents of Ebrain.

The speech of Serasadin.

The accusetio^ of Serasadi.

His desence.


the speech of Serafadin heard with great attention, which in effect tended to
no other end, but only to persuade the Vizier, that he had always been
devoted and a vassal to Amurath, and that he had carried a continual desire
to be employed in any service for him, and that now being led by the same
affection, and assured by the friendly and courteous offers made him in his
letters, he was come to show himself unto him to be the same man, and
proffered him whatsoever lay in his slender power to perform. Ebrain made no
answer to any of his speeches, but only asked him the cause, why he lived
continually in discord and bralles with the three Emirs (who also sat at that
time in the same Pauilion.) Whereunto Serafadin answered, that never any Act
proceeded from him, that might be the cause of any quarrels or dissentio^s, but
al sprung from those three, who, because they were more mighty the^ he, did
continually work him great disquiet, and oppress him intollerably: so that
if he had at any time taken up arms against them, he had done it al simply in
his own defense, and only to withstand their insolent molestations, and not
because he was desirous of wars and dissentions, for that he did principally
love peace with all men, but specially and the rather with those that were his
neighbors. Heerat the three conspirators arose, and by their grim looks
bewraying their minds full of hatred, they told him, that he was ever the
occasion of all the bralles. For that by his continual disquieting of those
quarters, those hills, those champeignes, and those havens of the sea, he had
procured a perpetual loss and hinderance to the customs of the Sultan, (whose
officer Ebnemansur was.) Adding withal, that at this New accusations of
Serafadin.
day his insolency was grown so great that from any other coasts or maritimal
places, there durst not any strange vessel ariue at those Ports of Sidonia, of
Tyrus and of Berito, nor any merchant or mercha^dize pass over the plains: But
as though those countries were a pray and spoil to the theeus of Arabia, they
were generally avoided of al trauelers both by land and sea. Serafadin would
gladly have replied in defense of himself, by saying that neither Baruto, nor
Seida nor Sur were under his jurisdiction, but in troth partly under the
authority of Manogli, and partly under the tyranny of Ebnemansur. But Ebrain
prevented him, and surcharging him with many injurious words, commanded the
Captain of the two hundred Ianizzaries of Constantinople, to take him into his
custody, and so being placed in a rotten Tente, Serafadin by the commandment
of Ebrain imprisoned.
that was appointed for him, he was every night from thence forward put in
the Stocks and in chains and guarded with a trusty guard of Ianizzaries.

In this mean time, came the answer of Manogli, who wrote back to Ebrain
Bassa, in this manner. To the Lord of Lords, Sovereign above the great ones,
the mighty, the Noble Captain, Cousin to the Graund The letter of Manogli to
Ebrain Bassa.
Lord, and the worthiest among the elect of the prophet Mahamet, the Noble and
famous Lord, Ebrain Bassa. God give good success to his haughty enterprises,
and prosperity in all his honor. I do wish (even as thou do lovingly
inuit and exhort me) that I might come before thee, and follow thee, and
serve thee always, in any occasion, that it may happen thee to stand in need
of my help. For I know that thou would rest assured of the reuernce that I
bear toward the Lord, and of the most fervent desire, wherein I live, to
serve him, and to employ both my substance and my life in his service. Whereof I
have also given some testimony, though but small, in the mannaging of the
Customs, that I have received. Wherein I have always so carried my self,
that I am not his Debtor of one Aspro. A thing iwis, that Ebnemansur (who is
now with thee) has not done. For although by his coming to meet thee, even
as far as Jerusalem, he would make a show of his sidelitie, yet does he
usurp more then two hundred thousand Duckates of the kings, which he does
most unjustly detain from him of his customs. But my hard fortune will not
grant me the favor, that I may come unto thee. For there are at this present
with thee three of mine enemies, who (I know well) being not contented to have
always disquieted and troubled my estate, do now seek to bring me into so
great hatred with thy heart, that if thou had me in thy hands, without
any consideration thou would bereave me of my life. And I am assured, that
this sending for me, does import no other thing but only a desire that thou
have to imprison me, and so to kill me. For I know, how much thou art given
to great enterprises. Besides this, my coming is also hindered by mine ancient
oath, that I took, when being as yet but a child, I saw mine own father, so
villanously betrayed by the murdering sword of Mustaffa, being at that time
the Bassa of Damasco: who under the color of unfeigned freindship, got him into
his hands, and traiterousslie stroke of his head. For in truth I carry the
image of my fathers reverend head, al pale, and yet as it were brething,
imprinted in my mind, which oftentimes presents it self to me, as well
sleeping in the darkness of the night, as also waking in the light of the day,
and talking with me, calls to my remembrance the infidelity of that
murdering Tyrant, and exhorts me to keep my self alooffe, from the hands
of the mighty. And therefore I neither can, nor may obey thy requests, and in
that respect it grioueth me, that I shall seem disobedient unto thee, being
in any other action, and in all my cogitations, wholly addicted to do any
service, not only to thee, who art most worthy to be reverenced of far
greater persons then I am, but also to every the least Vassal of Amuraths.
Thou will pardon me, I hope, and thou shall well perceive, that if there be any
thing near me, that may be acceptable to thee, all that I have whatsoever,
though in respect of thy self it may seem vile and base, yet is it thine, and
is now reserved wholly for thee and not for me. Farewell, and command me, and
hold me excused, upon these just causes, which thou hear, for my being so
backward in coming to honor thee, as my duty requires. The letter was
subscribed in this manner. The Poor and the least amongst the sclaues of the
Graund Lord: The Son of Man.

When Ebrain had read this letter, coniecturing thereby the constant opinion of
Ebne-Man, that by no means he would willingly come within his power, he
resolved Ebrain resolves to destroy the cuntry of Ebne-Man.
himself to go upon him with all his Army, and by burning his Towns, and
threatening him in all terrible manner, either by force or by slight to get him
into his hands, and in case he could not at last bring that to pass, then at
least to try, whether he could draw from him as many arcubuses, and as great
gifts and tributes, as possibly he might. And therefore he raised all his
Camp, and turned himself toward the country of Manogli, and leaving no
place unattempted, he burned and destroyed four and twenty Towns that were
subject unto him, and 24. towns of Manoglies burned by Ebrain the Vizier.
so mounting up certain rocks of Libanus, upon the top of a large hill, (that
stands over Andara, and other places belonging to Manogli,) he encamped
himself. But whiles the army of Ebrain was thus marching forward, Veis
Bassa, with a great part of his people and his son the Sangiacco of
Jerusalem, with his soldiers likewise, being in all to the number of a
thousand and five hundred persons, were leaft behind in the champaines of
Bocca, and (as it were a Rereward) had separated themselves from the rest of
the army. But whiles they were busy in raising their Tents, by a very great
band of the Drusians of the faction of Manogli, that by unusual and unknown
ways descending down upon them, found the said Bassa, and his son, with all
the foresaid soldiers even upon the point of departing, they were furiously
assaulted, and with the first tempest of arcubuses, and sudden blows of their
swords, Veis Bassa with the Sangracco his son discomfi^ed by the Dru sians.
they were so annoyed and terrified, that their enemies continuing their
present victory, became the Lords of the pauilions, the wealth, and the
armor of the Turks, and leading away with them their horses and their
carriages, in all terrible and stout manner they put to death about five
hundred persons, and scarce gave any leisure to escape, either to the Bassa the
father, or to the Sangiacco the son, who fled straight to Jerusalem, and
never returned again to Ebrain: but Veis followed the army, and was thought
worthy to be pitied of all men, and especially of Ebrain, who promised him
great rewards and honors at the Kings hands for his service.

Upon the hill aforesaid, the Vizier continued four and twenty days
together, with abundance of all things necessary for victuaill: during all
which time he attended nothing else, but to try all devises, how he might draw
money and presents from Ebne-Man, or how he might train him into his hands.
For the compassing whereof, he dispatched Gomeda the Agent or Factor of Gomeda
goes by commandment of Ebram to demand Arcubuses of Manogli.
Ebnemansur, to the said Ebne-Man, being in Andera: and sent word by him, that
for as much as he would not give creadit to the promise that was made him, nor
adventure himself to come into the hands of his friend, he should send unto
him all the Arcubuses he had. For the Sultans pleasure was, that his people
which went not to the wars in his service, should not be furnished with so
great store of weapons, to the danger of their neighbors, and of the
subjects themselves. With great grief of mind did Ebne-Man behold the said
Gomeda, as the man whom he well knew to be the Factor of his deadly enemy, but
yet durst not in any sort do him any injury, nor give him any reproach. But
when he heard the demand for the Arcubuses, he answered him, that all his
people and weapons were dispersed abroad over his Territory, so that he could
not tell what Arcubuses to send him. And so Gomeda returned without any
answer, that good was. Which when Aly the Bassa of Aleppo before named,
understood, he offered himself to the Vizier, that he would Aly Bassa goes to
Manogli.
go unto him, and that to good purpose. Many reasons did Aly Bassa use, to
persuade the wary Drusian, that he would come and yield his obedience to
Ebrain, swearing that no manner of outrage should be done unto him, and
promising him great and honorable favors. But never could he remove the sound
and provident mind of Ebne-Man, or win him to yield himself into the hands
of a man whom he thought to be so murderous: which when he had found to be more
then certain, then did he labor to persuade him, at the least, that he would
send Ebrain a good number of arcubuses, and withal some honorable presents in
sign of the reverence that he did bear toward him, and of his obedience to
Amurath: wherein although he found the mind of the Drusirn to be as yet
somewhat hard, as a man that would give neither little nor much, knowing that
all would be but cast away in the wind, yet at the last he brought him so
about, that he was content so The present that Manogli sends to Ebrain, by
the hand of Aly Bassa.
to far pleasure him, as to send a present to Ebrain. And thereupon gave him
three hundred and twenty arcubuses, twenty packes of Andarine silks, and
fifty thousand Duckates, to carry to the Turkish Bassa for a gift, and to
reconcile him unto him. For the better effecting whereof, and that he might be
rid of him, the next morning he Manogli sends his mother to Ebrain in his
steed.
sent his own mother before him, who in the behalf of her son, did perform
a very worthy message, excusing him, as well in respect of his enemies that
sat there so near unto him, as also in regard of his oath, which he had
solemnlie sworn, that he would never commit himself again into the hands of
a Turk. For the which she alleged very good testimony of the deceitful and
lying promises of Mustaffa, being then the Bassa, or rather the Tirant of
Damasco, by whose hands she herself saw her own husband so barbarously
murdered: and therefore she besought him, that he would accept of the gifts
which were sent him, and therewithal a mind and heart most ready to serve and
obey the king in all occasions: and that he would hold him excused, and allow
his excuses to be lawful, for that they were both just and reasonable. The
Turk replied upon her, that although she had found so foul a fault and
offense in Mustaffa, who, under the assurance of his promise and fidelity,
betrayed her husband, yet for all that, she ought not to fear any such wicked
or infamous action, at his hands, who made profession of an honorable person,
and a Soldier of his word: and so by oath protesting all faithful and
constant friendship toward him, he cast a white veil about her neck, and put
another upon himself, and a third Ebrain promises faith and peace to the
Mother, to the end she should fetch Manogli.
he gave the woman in her hands, willing her to report to her son the oaths
he had made, and to carry him that veil, and bring him with her, for he
should not be otherwise handled, but like a friend, and a brother. The
peaceable old woman went her way accordingly, but she neither could nor would
go about to alter the purpose of her ^o^ne, so that she returned to Ebrain an
answer not greatly pleasing him, and therefore he licenced her to depart.

After which time, he sought more then ever he did before, to get the stubburne
Emir into his hands, or at least to draw from him more presents and weapons,
without regard of any shame, thinking every thing lawful that came into his
mind, whatsoever. And therefore once again Gomeda returns to Manogli.
he sent the crafty and malignant Gomeda, to exhort him, that upon the faith
and promise which he had given him, he would come unto him. But for all the
crafty and lying speeches, that the treacherous messenger could cunningly use,
he could obtain nothing at his hands, but words only. Which when he
perceived, and yet not minded to return altogether in vain, and without any
profit, by the appointment of Ebrain himself, he told him, that forasmuch as he
was not willing to go, yet he should be contented at least, in his presence to
peruse the Accounts of those Monopolies, that he had managed for the King in
times past, to the end that if they should be found to be paid and discharged,
then he should rid the Turkish Captain from those mountains, and so remayn in
quiet. Manogli understanding this fraudulent request, which in the end tended
to no other purpose, but only to get some money, and some presents, determined
therein to satisfy Gomeda, with an express condition notwithstanding, that he
should cause Ebrain to depart out of those quarters, and that he should not
return any more to request any thing of him. Which he very largely and
liberally promised, only desiring him, that because he should not have any
occasion to send again any others unto him, he would also give him a good
quantity of Arcubuses, and thereby make the Vizier fully contented and well
appaied. And so he gave him fifty thousand A new present of Ebne-Man to Ebrain.
Ducats more, and four hundred and four score Arcubuses, with a thousand
Goats, a hundred and fifty Camels, a hundred and fifty Buffes, a thousand
Oxen, and two hundred Weathers. With this rich and honorable present came
Gomeda to Ebrain, and declared unto him, that this he had gotten from him, upon
promise that he should not molest the Drusian any more. For which the Vizier
did greatly reprove Gomeda, telling him that if he Ebrain reproseth Gomeda
did not show himself a more diligent and faithful executor of his
commandments, he would not be well pleased with him, and that he would make
every man know, what a weighty matter it is for men to take upon them so
inordinate, and so dangerous a liberty. And for the greater despite both to
the one and the other of them, Ebrain would needs have Gomeda himself to
return again to trouble the Drusian. Whereunto although he went in great
fear, least some great mischief might happen to him by the hands of Manogli,
yet was there no remedy, but needs he must follow the command of him, who was
able to take from him both his honor, and his life. And therefore to avoid the
greater danger, and to pleasure him, he made no great scruple to belie himself,
and to become infamous in the sight of the Drusian. As soon as Manogli saw
Gomeda, thinking with himself Gomeda again goes to Manogli.
that he came to him again about his wonted requests, he was greatly troubled
in his mind, and had almost prenented his arrival with a dart, which the
angry Drusian was minded, and even at the very point to throw at him, for the
great desire he had to rid him out of his sight but that refraining his anger,
least it might peradventure have bred more dangerous effects, he quenched his
choler with ignominious words and deadly threats: protesting at last, that the
time would come, wherein he would recover at his hands, whatsoever he had now
taken from him by the means of so wrongful and so wicked a treachery.
Notwithstanding Gomeda could do no less but accomplish the effect of his
fraudulent requests, and so wrought with him in deed, that he drew from the
Emir, four burdens The new present that Ebneman sedet to Ebrain.
more of Arcubuses, ten swords, and ten guylt Gangiares or daggers,
certain silver beltes, ten packes of silk, and some few pence: Causing him
withal to protest unto him, that he would never suffer himself to be
persuaded to come again unto him: for if he did, he should be enforced to
deprive him of his life, happen afterward what might happen of it.

With extreme joy and triumph did Ebrain the Vizier see all this present, and
thinking now with himself, that he had gotten a sufficient booty of him, he
determined to raise his Army, and to sack all the rest of the Country that
was subject to Manogli, not leaving any part of it sound of untouched. And
therefore sending certain forerunners before him to discover the Country, and
to provide some commodious place to pytch his Tents, (the Captain of whom was
the Emir-Ebnefrec, otherwise called Acra the Scuruie) he raised his Camp, and
marched on the other side of the Mountain: and passing by Andera, which was the
place of residence where Manogli remained, he commanded Andera sacked.
that it should be sacked and burnt: which was put in execution accordingly,
with unspeakable effects of cruelty, committing all things to fire and sword.
After this, the Turks ouerran all the Country, and in two days space burnt
and destroyed nineteen Towns besides, carrying away with them whatsoever they
could find worthy 19. Towns burnt.
of spoil.

After all this sacking and rasing, the Vizier with all his Army mounted up to
the large top of a Mountain, which was also near to Andara, and from thence
sent a thousand messe^gers to Ebne-Man, to try whether he would yet be
persuaded to come unto him. But neither all these siers, nor all their
entreaties, nor their terrifying, nor their myldnesse could ever move Manogli
to commit himself into his hands, but still more stoutely and constantly
resolved to avoid most certain death. And therefore the Vizier, not contented
to have burned and destroyed the Country, to have drawn so much treasure from
the Drusian, and to have plotted so many treacheries against him, bethought
himself in the end to satisfy his inward affection to cruelty and revenge,
with the slaughter of his miserable people. And having understood by a Spy,
that the Captain of Andara, being one of the Factors of Ebnefrec or Feracogli
goes to inuit the Macademo of Manogli.
Manogli, with three hundred and fifty persons was ascended up to a certain
hill into a safe and secure place, he sent Ebnefrec to entice him, and to tell
him, that seeing his Emir Manogli would not come and yield himself, he should
come unto him, and assuredly, if he did so, in despite of Manogli he would make
him a Sangiacco of some of those places, which he most desired. The ambitious
and vnheedy Macademo suffered himself to be easily persuaded with this most
malicious lie, and being accompanied with his three hundred and fifty
followers, went with the said Ebnefrec toward the Vizier. And because the
voice was given out, that there were no more Arcubuses in all the Country of
Manogli, the Macademo commanded all his men, that laying aside their
Arcubuses, they should arm themselves only with their swords, and their
bows; And so going before them, walking still on the right side of the Emir
Aora, thereby to give him his due honor. (For it is the custom of the
Mahometanes, The custom of the Mahometans in their ceremonies and c^uilitie.
and of all the East, and peradventure it was so also among the Ancients, that
the more honorable place is on the leaft side, as that which is (as it were)
upon the sword of his fellow whom he walks withal, and the less honorable
is the right side, as being subject to the blow of the weapon, and ready to be
stricken.) At the last he arrived at the Pauilion of Ebrain, having first caused
his foresaid men to stay behind in a certain valley, two or three miles distant
from the Tents. Ebrain would not so much as see the Macademo, although both in
respect of the nimhlenes of his person, and also the fierceness of his looks,
he was worthy to be seen, but commanded that he should be safely kept in a
several place from Serafadin: and in the mean time having called to counsel
the Emirs, and Aly the Bassa of Aleppo, to devise some wyle, whereby they might
put to death those three hundred and fifty, with as little loss of their own
soldiers as possibly might be, it was concluded, that the foresaid Ebnefrec
should lead them into a certain Vineyard, and afterward at unawares set upon
them, and having so brought them to a strait, hew them in pieces, and cut them
off: for having no Arcubuses, they could work but small hurt to his soldiers.
Acra went like a common butcher, and conducted the Acra like a common hangman.
poor wretches into the appointed vineyard and while they waited for their
Captain, and expected some great reward, because they had so confidently
believed their promises, they were sodeinly environed with the Army of Ebrain,
the Sangiacchi making a wing on the one side, and the Iannizzaries on the
other: who being become greedy of the blood of those miserable souls, having
brought them into a narrow compass, fell upon them with their Arcubuses and
their spears, and suffering not The 350. soldiers of the Macademo, slain.
one of them to escape, most cruelly slew them all. The unhappy wretches
defended themselves the best they could, with their arrows, with their
swords, with their hands, and with their bodies, but all to no purpose, for
they were all destroyed in this common and miserable slaughter. Of the Turks
there were none stain, but only three Iannizzaries, one of their Vlu Bassi,
and some of the subjects of the two Emirs, Ebnefrec and Ebnecarfus, who were
mistaken and thought to be their enemies, for that wearing the same kind of
apparel, which the other soldiers of the Macademo did wear, they could not be
distinguished in the medley the one from the other. Through which
incircumspection no doubt there had been slain a great number more, but that
they were advised every man to put a vine leaf in his Turbant, that so being
dis^^^^ed The advice of the Drusians.
from their enemies, they might be preserved, and as the slaughter light upon
the rest.

As soon as this massacre was finished, Ebrain would have the death of the
Macademo to follow, and causing Ebrain commands that the Macademo should be
said quick.
him to be brought before him, he commanded that without any delay he should
be stripped, and flayed quick. The Macademo stoutely vpbraided Ebrain with his
promise, and his oath, and among diverse speeches, that some^^lies smiling, and
sometimes threatening he uttered whiles they stripped him: Cut me off (quoth he)
my members, and first (...) them into the (...) of that infamous Ebrains wife,
put them afterward into the mouth of himself. For so (I trow) he will be
contented and satisfied with my flesh. And pursuing his threats, he spoke thus
to those, that were to be the executioners of his dolorous death. It is your
great good fortune in deed (quoth he) that with such violence, and so needless
deformity ye are now resolved to drink up my blood, and to take my life from
me. For I do not think that any of you all, either had bin hable or durst, man
to man, to draw one drop of my blood from me, no not to have endured my
countenance. But go to, proceed in your wicked and insatiable desire, and
follow the impious commandments of your Vizier: for in the end there will
light also upon you, the worthy punishment of this villainous fact. With these
and diverse other speeches, which the Macademo thundered out of his inflamed
breast, the miserable wretch (having been too credulous) was stripped, and three
great slashes made on his back, where they began to flea him, he in the mean
time not ceassing to blaspheme The Macademo is in fleaing.
their Religion, and to curse their King, and their false Prophet also. And
then the barbarous soldiers, pursuing their cruel action, made certain other
gashes upon his breast, and upon his stomach, and so drawing his skin
downward, they could not bring it to his Nauel, before he was dead, with most
dolorous pains.

After this, the Vizier caused Ebne Serafadin to be called into his pauilion,
who (as we told you before) was by his commandment delivered into the custody
of the Captain of the Iannizzaries of the Court, and gave charge withal, that
whiles Serafadin was in his Tent with him, all his men, that came with him,
should be put to death. According to his appointment it was done, and when
Serafadin was brought before the Vizier, all his soldiers, which might be
about a hundred and fifty, were miserably hewn in pieces, and order given
that Serafadin should be returned again to his chains, and all his Country
wasted and spoiled. This commandment all the soldiers The country of
Serafadin wasted.
were ready enough to put in execution, and besides the booties that they
took, they brought away also a hundred and four score heads of the people
that were subject to the said Emir.

Whiles this wasting by fire, and this slaughter by sword was in hand, the
Vizier dispatched Posts to Sidonia, where the forenamed Galleys were at road,
by whom he sent commandment, that disbarking iiij* thousand soldiers, The
soldiers of the Galleys sack the Sea coast of the Drusians.
they should sack all those Countries, even as far as Caesarea in Palaestine,
sparing neither age, nor sex, nor any condition of persons whatsoever. Which
likewise was presently done, and three thousand souls brought captives, great
booties made of diverse rich marchandizes, many Towns burnt, sundry Castles
ruynated and made even with the ground, and to be short, all the whole country
of Serafadin and Manogli utterly desolated. But Serafadin himself was afterward
sent to Damasco, with all his wealth, money, and presents, under the guard and
custody of Bassa Veis, and Bassa Aly: who brought all things thither safe and
sound, and so from thence to Tripoli, where on a certain plain between the
land and the sea, they encamped themselves, and stayed there, waiting for the
arriual of the Vizier with his Galleys.

Ebrain the Vizier, was now in a readiness to depart and to return to
Constantinople, where he was expected by the King, as well for the greediness
of his gold, as for the accomplishment of the Marriage. But bethinking himself,
that whatsoever hither to he had don, would be accounted either little or
nothing, unless he provided in some sort for the quiet of those peoples under
the Turkish obedience, he determined to nominate one of the three Emirs, that
accompanied him to Jerusalem, to be the Bassa of all those regions. Now the
Emir Aly Ebnecarfus being the richest and the most obedient of them all, he
thought good to commit that charge unto him, and honored him with that
dignity. Neither did he this without a bribe or reward, but for the price of a
hundred thousand Cecchini, The Emir Aly with 100000. pieces of gold buieth the
title of the Bassa or Bocca, and General over the Drusians.

Ebrain at Damasco.


which the Emir Aly presently paid unto him, to make him seem the more worthy
of so great an honor. And therefore he apparrelled him in cloth of gold, he
gave him a mase and a sword all guilt, and delivered unto him the kings
commission, causing him withal to swear faith and obedience to Amurath. And
so having (at least to the show) set in order the affairs of those mountains,
he determined to return to Damasco.

There he continued for the space of twelve days, where he ceased not to draw
money and bribes from diverse persons, by most unreasonable shifts: and at last
having no further to do in those parts, he turned himself toward Gazir and
Baruto, two places under the government of Ebrain at Gazir and Baruto.
Ebne-Mansur, where he arrived with all his army, and found that the Galleys,
which had left the Port of Sidonia, were now in the haven of Baruto,
accordingly as he had before commanded. Now upon a certain hill above Baruto,
near unto the sea (called by the inhabitants San Botro) he placed himself,
and pitched his own Tent only and none other, having caused his great
pauilion, and all the rest of his best and goodly things, which he meant to
carry with him to Constantinople, to be conueighed and laid up in his
Galleys, and shrouded himself only in a very narrow and base tent. Thither he
called Ebnemansur unto him, and in pleasant manner signified unto him, that now
it was time for him to make payment and satisfaction of the debt, which he
ought the king his Lord, of a hundred and three score thousand duckattes for
the custom of Tripoli and Baruto: for that he could not stay any longer in
those quarters, but was constrained to return to Constantinople: and thither
he knew not how he might well go, unless he carried with him the discharge of
that debt. Ebne-Mansur made answer that it could not be long, before his
Macademies would come with his moneys, and then the next day after, certainly
and without all delay he would disburse it. Ebrain who knew that all this was
but a lie, determined to cause him to be put in the Galleys, and because he
could not carry the money to his king, yet at the least to bring him his
debtor. But in putting this his determination to effect and execution, he was
affraide, of some insurrection among the people, as well because he was within
the territories of the said Ebne-Mansur, as also because he saw him greatly
beloved and favored by Ebne-Frec and Ebne-Carfus. And therefore he thought it
better policy, by concealing this his purpose, to show him in his outward
actions all good countenance, and by subtle devises and treachery to take him
prisoner. And thereupon told him, (like a deceitful and lying companion) that
for as much as he Ebrain beguileth Mansurogli.
was to stay there for his business, that night and the next day, he was
resolved to make a road into the country of Manogli, and prayed him to do him
the favor, that he would be contented to be his guide: and for that purpose
when he should send for him at midnight, that he would come unto him closely and
quietly, because he was minded to depart without any stir, only with five
hundred persons in his company. The Mahamet verily believed the matter, that so
it was, and withal was in good hope by that means to find some way to escape
out of his hands. Whereupon, being called up at midnight, he readily conueighed
himself into the pauilion of Ebrain, who presently charging him most
shamefully with many abominable and foul terms, caused a chain to be cast
about his neck and his arms, and commanded him Mansurogli in chains sent to
the Galleys.
to be carried into the Galleys. The fifty men which he had appointed to be
ready armed, he sent forthwith to Baruto, to fetch Mendel alive unto him, who
was by the common people intytled with the name of an Emir, but in deed was no
other then a simple Macademo to Ebne-Mansur: willing them also, upon a sudden
to sack all the whole country of Ebne-Mansur. Whereby there was leauied so
rich a pray, and so great a booty gathered, that it was a marvel to all men.
For besides money and silver, The country of Mansurogli destroyed.
whereof there was a very huge sum, the store of clothes of silk and gold was
such and so great, that it was worthy for a great Prince, and not fit for such
a Mountainerusticall Lord as this was.

Having conueighed all this into his Galleys, he sailed to Tripoli, where he
found Serafadin in the custody of the two Bassaes above named: and having
stayed there some few days, wherein he committed sundry villainous and
abominable robberies, he caused the said Serafadin to be put into the
Galleys, with all his silks and his other wealth, and so departed for
Constantinople. When he entered Serafadin put into the Galleys.
into the channel of the city, accompanied with four and twenty Galleys,
encountered and rece^^ed by a wonderful troop of kinsfolks and friends, and
saluted with Ebrain received into Constantinople.
an honorable peale of Artillary out of the Serraglio, I was also my self at
Constantinople, where I had good means to see the bountiful and beautiful
presents, which the spoiling Bassa gave the Turkish king. The sum whereof,
The liberal presents given by Ebrain to the Turkish king.
(besides the yearly revenue of Cair, amounting to six hundred thousand
Cecchini,) was a Million of gold: threescore horses most richly garnished, of
singular beauty, and particularly of the Arabian race: a live Elephant, and a
live Giraffle: (which is a beast like a Cammell and a Panther,) two very great
Crocodiles dead: a chair of gold and precious stones: a Casket also beset with
precious stones and gold: many packes of most fine clothes, woollen, and silks:
certain other clothes with fringe of gold and silver, and the Barbarian
cut-work: most fine linen of Alexandria, and all the Arcubuses, taken from the
Drusians.

But now returning to the place from whence I was carried into these
digressions, I say again, that excepting the soulders of Egypt, and those of
Damasco and Jury, all the rest of the souldierie, that was bound to these
enterprises, was raised with their new General Osman Bassa, as we told you
before. And the multitude of them that came both to Siuas and to Erzirum was so
great, that never was there seen a greatter in all the occasions that happened
about these wars, as in the book following shall be showed unto you. For now
having made mention of the Sangiacco of Jerusalem, it will not be amiss to
declare the feats of Arms, that passed between him and the Arabians of
Palestine before Ebrain the Vizier came into those quarters.

In the confynes of Sodom, and in the places that lie not only between the
Lake Asphaltites and Damasco, but also in the plains, and in the valleies of
Jericho and of Samaria, and in other places about Bethlehem, Emaus, Bethany,
Bethphage, Capharnaum, Nazaret, Leuir, Betsaid, Naplos, and other towns of
name thereaboutes, there do haunt and live sundry Arabian captains, who
spreading themselves even as far as Rama and Ioppa, overrun all the The
Arabians of lurie, Samaria and Galilie, thieves and robbers.
countries there round about, and continually commit diverse outrages, as well
against the said Cities, as also upon the goods and wealth not only of the
Inhabitants there, but also of Strangers: yea and their insolency oftentimes
grows so great, that they dare assault the fenced Cities, besides the
spoiling of poor traueilers, that by reason of their business have occasion
to pass from one city to another. They handle a spear well, and are
perpetual shooters, but Armor of defense, they have none at all. The horses,
which they ride, are very swifte to run, and spare of diet: they are very
bold in pilling and theeuing. Neither could I my self escape their hands,
when I traueiled to the holy City, to worship the great Sepulcher of our
Lord. These Arabians having had intelligence before hand, that the foresaid
ambitious yongman, was appointed the Sangiaccho in Jerusalem, and that he was
in mind to raise all the Sangiacchoes there aboutes, and joining himself with
them, and his Father the Bassa of Damas^^, to work some great annoyance to
their Liberty, and to put diverse of the^ to death; resolved with themselves,
not to stay in any case, till he and his confederacy were ready, but rather by
making sundry invasions upon him, even The Arabians purpose to fight with the
Sangiacco of Jerusalem.
to the very City of Jerusalem, to provoke him to come out into the field.
And to induce him so to do, they conspired with a certain Subassi of
Bethlehem, who was their friend, that he should encourage and embolden the
Sangiaccho thereunto, by promising him great success and fortunate euentes.
The ambitious youth, being moved with the persuasions of the Subassi, of whom
he made good reckoning, and being shrewdly provoked by their insolences,
resolved with himself to issue out of the city into the open field: and
therevppon having armed a hundred of his Vassalles, and raised all the horsemen
that were under his government to the number of six hundred, he made a road
toward Jericho, sending before to defy them to battle. The Arabians came
accordingly, and against the Arcubuses of the Soldiers of the Sangiaccho,
opposing their Indian Canes and their Arrows, ouer-whelming him withal as it
were a flood, they wrought him great mischief. And in the very nicke, even
while the bartell was at the hoattest, the traitorous conspirator the Subassi
fled toward Bethlehem, and leaft the soldiers of Jerusalem in the hands of
the Arabians, The Subassi of Bethlem flies.

The Sa^giacco discomfited by the Arabians.


who put them all for the most part to the edge of the sword, and scarcely gave
any liberty to the Sangiacco to save himself by flight. The Sangiacco was
certainly informed of this fraud of the dissembling Subassi, and to revenge
himself upon him, he began also to practice deceit with him, faining that he
would once more try his forces against the same Arabians, insomuch that he
caused the Subassi to arm himself and to come unto him, without show of any
suspicion, that he went about any mischief against him: But when he came to
him, he took him alive, and in most ^olorous manner caused him presently to be
fleaed The Subassi of Bethlehem flayed quick by the Sangiacco.
quick. Such end had these youthly and sudden stirs of Jury, by occasion
whereof, as being thereunto induced in a reasonable respect, we were constrained
with a due digression, to run out a little from our first course of the
affairs of Persia. And now staying upon the same, we will return to Osman
Bassa, who being now come to Erzirum, and there having taken a muster of all
his soldiers, was Osman in a readiness to depart from Erziru, with a speech to
go to Nassiuan.
in a readiness to depart for Tauris, with a speech notwithstanding given out
and published altogether for Nassiuan. Of whom, seeing we are now to continue
our History, without any intermission, we will reserve to make further
narration in the next be o^e following: to the intent that the declaration of
so famous and so important actions, be not in any wise interrupted by any other
thing whatsoever.

The end of the seventh book.
The Eight Book.
The Argument.
Osman departs from Erzirum with his Army, which is so great that is seems
to be many men's powers united together.

Osman dismisseth forty thousand Soldiers out of his Army, as being
superfluous and needelesse.

Osman takes a review of his Army: departs from the Caldaranes, and in
steed of going to Nassiuan, turns toward Tauris: whereupon the Soldiers
of Greece and Constantinople are angry with him, but he appeaseth them mildely
with fair speeches and some small quantity of money.

Osman passes on to Coy, to Marant, and to Soffian, and deseryeth Tauris.

The Vauward of Osman is assaulted and overthrown by the Persian Prince.

The Army of the Persian Prince.

The Army of the Persian king.

Osman sends out a new Company against the Prince in revenge of the
discomfiture given to his Vauwarde: whereupon follows a bloody battle, which
was parted by reason of the night.

Alyculi assayleth the Turkish Army, and retyreth again.

Alyculi assayleth it a fresh in the night time, and returns not into the
City Tauris, but withdraws himself into the tents of the Persian king.

The Persians that guard the gates of Tauris, fight with a rascal band of the
Turkish Army.

The Persians retire themselves into the City, and in the turninges of their
streets and places under the ground, they work great mischief upon the
Turks that followed them into the City.

A description of the situation of Tauris.

Osman makes choice of certain gardens for a plot to build a Fort in.

The Fort is finished in the space of six and thirty days.

Certain Turks are found strangled in a bathe within Tauris, and Osman
commands that the City of Tauris should be sacked: whereupon there does
ensue most miserable and horrible spectacles, and a mortal battle.

The Persian Herauldes return to provoke the Turks to a fresh battle.

The ordering of both the Armies.

Most bloody battles between them both.

The Bassa of Trebisonda, and the Bassa of Caraemit, with certain Sangiacchi
are slain.

The Bassa of Garamania taken prisoner.

Osman is at the point of death, by reason of a grievous disease.

Giaffer Eunucho the Bassa is chosen General, and governor of Tauris.

The Taurisians recover the spoil that was taken from them in Tauris.

Osman the Bassa, Vizier and General dies at Sancazan.

The overthrow of the Persians.

The muster of the Army at Van.

Teflis is succored quietly without any trouble or hinderance.

Maxut-Chan is named the Bassa of Aleppo.

A Letter sent from the Camp to Aly the Bassa of Aleppo.

THE EIGHT BOOK.
OSman, the General of the Turkish camp, departed out of the City of Erzirum,
about the eleventh of August, Osman departs from Erzirum.
in the year 1585. using the Rebel Maxut-Chan for the guide of his Army:
which although it was in deed at that time very great, both for men and
cattle, yet it appeared every day to become more populous, and daily new
Soldiers were discovered in it, though they were but vagarantes, and of small
valor. The occasion whereof was, not only the multitude of warrants sent
abroad through all the subject Cities, but also the affection that every man
did bear to the fame and renown of Osman, unto whom, as well for his valor,
whereof all men carried a good opinion, as also for his sovereign authority,
whereby he ruled as Chief Vizier, but especially for the confidence, which
(was well known) the King reposed in him, they all ran by heaps with most
willing minds: And he wisely cherishing and Osman entertaineth all that come.
fostering them in their good forwardness, entertained them all with fair
promises, and hope of rewards. Insomuch, that the General had gathered
together about a hundred and fifty thousand horsemen, some serving with bows,
some with battel-axe or sword, some with Arcubuse, 150000. horsemen.
some with lances, some stipendiaries, and other some voluntaries. And besides
these, so great a multitude of servile people, of craftes-men, of pioners, of
cariers, of Judges, of Treasurers, of Clerks, of Collectors, and of all sorts
of men: So great abundance of Camels, of Mules, and of Horses, and to be
brief, so huge an assembly, that it would make a man believe, it was not the
power of one King alone, but rather the forces of many Kings united The Army
of Osman seems to be the sorces of many kings united together.
and confederate together. Osman therefore perceauing that he had gathered too
great a number of people, and too huge an Army, and that it might fall out so
great a multitude should want vittaile, persuading himself that his provisions
could not suffice the common necessity, neither fearing his enemies forces so
greatly, that he needed to lead so populous an host against them, he determined
to discharge a great number of such as he thought to be most weak, and least
apt to endure travel, and to sell them their desired liberty at a good price.
And the common fame is, that by this occasion out of that first number he drew
out about forty thousand persons, who with liberal 40000. me^ taken out of
the Army, and returned home.
and large brybes, accordingly as every man's estate would bear it, redeeming
the ordinary perils of the wars, returned home to their own dwellings. And
so there remained in the Army of Osman, the number of 180000. persons in the
army of Osman.
a hundred and four score thousand persons, or there aboutes.

The General, accompanied with this multitude, departed from Erzirum, and
moved toward Tauris, still continuing (for all that) the speech for Nassiuan.
But scarce were there two days passed, when diverse soldiers of The soldiers
of Greece and Constantinople complain to Osman.
Grecia and Constantinople, presented themselves before him, and vpbrayded him
with matter of great improuidence, telling him, that they began already to
feel the intolerable penury of victual, by wanting the same day their
ordinary allowance of Corn for their horses: so that if in the very
beginning, and (as it were) in the entrance of so long a journey, they felt
such a want, they could not tell with what judgment or discretion he meant to
lead so great a company so far as Nassiuan, nor by what cunning conceit he
had presumed to sustain so great an Army in the service of their Lord. Osman
quietly Osman myldly pacifieth the soldiers that were in a mutiny.
heard their complaints, and presently provided for them, by causing such store
of Barley to be distributed among them all as they desired, and severely
punishing the Officers, that had the charge for allowance of Corn, who most
couetously began to make merchandise of the common provision, by converting it
to their own private uses. And having thus quieted their troubled minds, he
followed on his journey, and by the way of Hassan-Chalassi, and of Chars, he
arrived upon the Caldarane plains, a famous place for the memorable battles,
that were there fought between Selim and Ismahel, the father of Tamas,
surnamed the Soffi. In these plains he took a general reuiew of all his Army,
wherein there wanted a number, A reuiew of the Army.
that by reason of sickness, and diverse other infirmities, being not hable to
continue the journey, were enforced to stay behind, some in one place, and some
in another. From these plains he afterward removed, and turned his Osman
departs from the Caldaran plains.
course, not to Nassiuan, as still hitherto he had constantly kept the speech
he would do, but now to Tauris.

As Soon as the Soldiers of Greece and Constantinople heard this sodein
alteration of the Journey, they were in a The soldiers of Greece and
Constantinople, in pride and anger co^plain of Osman.
great rage, and coming again before the General; spoke thus unto him. And
what are we, thou villain, thou Turk, thou dolt, whom thou handlestin this
sort? We are neither oxen nor sheep of the mountains, for the leading of whom
thou think thou art come out: neither can we brook these thy lies and
deceiptes. If thou have publicly professed to lead us to Nassiuan, and by
that speech have trained us from the furdest bounds of Grecia: to what end now,
after thou have wearied us so much, do thou deceive us with such vanities,
and prolong our journey, and set before us such strange and important dangers,
as our minds never once thought on? But if this was thy first purpose and
intent, and that now not foolishly nor by chance, but upon premeditation and
good advise, thou changest thine opinion, why did thou dismiss so many
soldiers, that might have made the Army more terrible and the stronger for
thy enterprise of Tauris? Do thou think, that by suffering others to redeem
their liberties, and so to increase thy riches, thou shall set our lives to
sale, and so make us slaves to the Persians? At these arrogant speeches Osman
was in a great confusion, and when he saw his good meaning, and the earnest
desire he had to satisfy the Majesty and honor of his King, to be taken in
so evil part, and these men so highly offended at him, he was sore troubled,
and began to reuolue many and sundry cogitations within himself, what he were
best to do. And although he could in deed have readily used the sharpest and
the hardest provisions and remedies for it, that in such occasions are
ordinarily applied, yet very prudently and upon good advise he forbear so to
do, The wisdom of Osman Bassa.
and instead of rigor and punishment, he resolved to work by entreatie, by
admonition, by lenity, and by guiftes: and by revealing to the Capt^^^ and
Chief of the rest, that were so ready to rage, the nece^^^^^e of the rumor
The speech of Osman to pacify the soldiers, that were in an uproar.
that was given out for Nassiuan, myldlie and featlie to pacify them all.
Whereupon having caused many of the said seditious persons to come before him,
he first persuaded them, That the former speech for Nassiuan was not raised at
all by him, Nor that he was minded at that time to go to Tauris, but all that
was done, he had done to fulfill the commandment of the Sultan, who had
charged him so to do, to the end they might lessen, yea, and peradventure
wholly frustrate the sharp forces and conflicts, which otherwise they might
have found on the Persians side, if the speech had bin given out at the first
for Tauris, and so leisure and time given to their enemies to prepare
themselves, and to come and encounter with them in order and well appointed.
For the avoiding whereof, and that all glorious success and joyful victory
might happen unto them, even with the least inconvenience to the Army that
might be imagined, the King so commanded, and so would he have it: who, of his
Princely nature did not only not delight in the harms and troubles of his
vassals, but also thought nothing to be more grievous, or ignominious to him,
then their loss and hinderance. And therefore they for their parts also ought
willingly to accomplish his good pleasure: for so should they still preserve
that great opinion, which both the King, and all the Nations of the world had
conceived of their valor, and fidelity. Neither needed they to fear, that
the soldiers, which were dismissed, might enfeeble or weaken the Army: for
that they were not only sufficient to pierce into Tauris, and to open the way
even upon their enemies, but also the Persians would not endure their looks:
and that those, which were discharged, had purged The soldiers well quieted.
the host of all cowardice, and left nothing in it, but virtue and courage. By
this mild answer of the Vizier, the tumultuous soldiers were sufficiently
pacified: but much better appayed and contented they were, as soon Osman
distributeth a certain little quantity of money among them.
as he put his hand to the common purse, and bestowed among them all a certain
small quantity of Moneis; for by this gentleness of nature, all their
stomakes were overcome, and they became so willing, and so courageous, that now
they durst venture, not only to Tauris, but also to Casbin, yea, even to the
farthest parts of all the kingdom of the Persians.

These importunate and inconsiderate outrages being thus appeased and quenched,
the General turned himself Osman turns toward Coy.
with all his army toward Coy, being a city situate beyond Van, and in the
midst between Tauris and the Martian More, subject to the Turks, where the
appetites both of the soldiers and also of their cattle were satisfied with
all things which they could desire. From Osman arriueth at Merant.
Coy he passed to Marant, a city subject to the Persians, very plentiful and
fruitful also in all things, that are wont to be acceptable to man and beast.
From thence he leaned Osman leans toward Soffian.
down toward Soffian, a little ground, subject likewise to the Persians, but
in all kind of fruits most abundant fertile: and from this place they began
to discover They discover Tauris.
Tauris. Great was the joy of the whole Camp, but principally the soldiers of
Greece and Constantinople, when they saw themselves to have passed so far,
without feeling any annoiance of the enemy, did highly commend the advice of
the Captain, or rather of the king, in changing the rumor of Nassiuan for
Tauris, and did think verily, that this their great quiet did happen unto
them, because the Persians were wholly occupied about Nassiuan: in so much that
every man now being waxen more courageous, and replenished with joy, without
any fear at all, proudly plotted to themselves, nothing but sackings,
pillings, The Turkish soldiers make account of sackinges and robberies etc.
taking of prisoners, rauishments, robberries, and all those insolent and
dishonest actions, that use rashly to proceed from the greedy affections of
these barbarous victors. But the chief of these were those of the Vauward, who
being desirous of a bootye, and to discover the enemies country round about
them, descended The Vauward of the Turks.
down toward certain gardens, full of all sorts of trees, springes and
fruits, and having refreshed their appetites with the water and other meats,
they withdrew themselves to a certain little river, near to a bridge called
The bridge of salt water, and there stayed with pleasure, attending The Vauward
at the bridge of Saltwater assaulted by the Persians.
the arrival of their fellow-army. But even whiles they were thus enjoying the
water, the fruits, the shade, and the green grass, besides all their
expectation, they were suddenly assaulted and very shrewdly handled by the
Persians.

This was Emir Hamze, the eldest son of king Mahamet, who being accompanied
with ten thousand soldiers, Emirhamze M^rize, the Persian Prince, with 10000.
soldiers.
had craftily hidden himself, watching till some of the ennemies bands should
come down to those resting places, that he might set upon them. For he was
thus come forth against the Turks, whiles his blind father was enca^ped about
twelve miles beyond the city of Tauris, The Persian King beyond Tauris with
50000. soldiers.
with a fifty thousand persons or thereaboutes. In Tauris was Alyculi-Chan the
Governor of it, and with him four thousand soldiers. A greater Army then
this the Persian king could not possibly leauie, and the principal
Aliculi-Chan in Tauris with 4000.
occasion thereof was, the death of Emir-Chan; for which all the nation of the
Turcomannes being waxen rebellious The occasion why the Persians could not
gather a greatter army against the Turks.
and disobedient, would not by any means be brought to defend that City,
which was now committed to the government of Alyculi-Chan their capital
enemy. From Gheilan and from Hery there came not so much as one soldier, to
relieve the necessities of Persia. So that the King could scarsely gather
together these threescore and four thousand men, who by reason of the
uncertainty 64000. soldiers the whole force of the Persians.
of the Turks rumor for Nassiuan and for Tauris, were plonged into a thousand
disquiets, and scant had leisure enough to be ready all at Tauris at the
arrival of their enemies. With these forces the Persian had no stomach, so
suddenly to go and set upon the Turkish Army in open battle, and to adventure
themselves upon their Artillary: but sought in deed by all the means he could,
first to annoy him with as little loss to himself as possibly he might, and
so by attempting his forces, to make trial of every way, how he might in
diverse and sundry sorts weaken and endamage him. And yet afterward he
wished, that he had been assaulted, when being certified of the infirmity of
General Osman, and advertised of the sundry losses that he had received at
his arrival to Tauris, and in other conflictes, which shall be told you
hereafter, he thought he might have recovered the spoils that had been taken
in the sacked and desolate City. But the Bersian Prince, thus at unawares set
upon the Vauwarde of the Turks, who being greedy of their victuailes, and
desirous to discover their enemies country, had turned themselves upon the
gardens of Soffian. This assault, and the The Persian Prince assayleth and
discomfiteth the Turkish Vauward at once.
discomfiture of the said Vauward was done at once: for such was the speed, so
haughty was the courage of the Prince, and so great the astonishment and
strangenes of the case, that as it had been a lightning, and (as a man might
well say) without any resistanee, he ouerran all the said band of the Turks,
and dispersed them, putting to the sword about seven thousand persons of all
sorts. 7000. Turks slain.
Which being done, he withdrew himself back toward his fathers Tents,
leading away with him, horses, slaves, and much apparel, besides sundry
standerdes and Turkish drommes, that were brought after him.

Osman had intelligence of this discomfiture, and fourth-with caused his Army
to be raised, and dispatched Sinan Osman makes a new expedition against the
Persian Prince.
Bassa son to the late Cicala, and Mahamet the Bassa of Caraemet, with diverse
other Adventurers, in all to the number of fourteen thousand, to the end they
should follow the prince abouementioned. These then ran amain to pursue the
kings son, who had already sent news to his father of this his first action
by certain swift horsemen, and so quick they were in their marching, that they
ouertooke the yongman, who like a joyful victor was iournying toward his
fathers Camp. As Soon as the Prince saw the Turks so near him, and knew that
without a dangerous and shamfull flight, he could not avoid the battle,
courageously he turned his face upon them, and joined a most bloody conflict
with them. It was as yet two hours before night, when these sharp and A bloody
battle.
cruel skirmishes began, from which they ceased not, until night with her
darkness did bereave them of the use of their swords, and enforce both the one
side and the other The night ceasseth the battle.
to retire, which was done with the notable loss of the Turks, who being
far fewer in number then they were, and also shrewdly beaten and discomfited,
returned to their pauilions from whence they came. The like did the Persians
also, who were stained and imbrued much more with the blood of their enemies,
then with the spilling of their own. It is a common speech that in this second
battle, (which notwithstanding together with the first exploitis reckoned but
for one only) there wanted 6000. Turks slain.
six thousand Turks, and that there would have followed a general slaughter
of them all, if night had not interrupted so uncouth an action, well worthy
(in truth) of a thousand day-lightes. So that hitherto the Turks have
sustained the loss of more then ten thousand soldiers, and yet scarce have
discovered or seen the City, which so greedely they longed for.

The next morning the Turkish Camp removed, and Aliculy-Chan assayleth the
Turkesh army, whiles they were encamping themselves.
approached within two miles of Tauris where they encamped. But whiles they were
about the setting up of their pauilions, Aliculy-Chan issuing out of the City
with all his guard above mentioned, and with all the inhabitants that were
able to fight and manage weapons, he set upon the face of the Vauward, being
now renewed, and with cunning tourninges and windinges so charged and seized
upon them, that with great shedding of blood he made them to retire, even to
the Visiers ward, from Alyculy-Chan reti reth again into the city.
whence when he espied the artillarie, he withdrew himself again to the
City, before he was annoyed or offended by any of them. The number of the
slain, and the confusion of the Turks was notable. For in a very small space
of time, the Vauward was put in a disaray, and almost 3000. Turks slain.
three thousand slain. But Alyculi being not contented with this, as soon as
the darkness of the night was come, Aliculy in the night issues out of the
City and assaulteth the Turks.

The Bassa of Maras slain by Aliculy.

Aliculy abandoneth the city of Tauris.


issued out the second time closely and covertly, and swiftly ran along all the
side of the enemies Army, that lay toward Tauris, and besides the death of the
Bassa of Maras, put all that band to great damage and destruction. And when he
had so done, without any stay he fled to the Kings Camp, and forsook the
defense of the sorrowful City. In this sort was the Turkish Captain welcomed
by the Taurisians, who gathering themselves to the gates as many of them as
remained within the City, well armed and consederate together, were now
prepared The Persians guard the gates of Tauris.
to make it a bloody entrance for the Turks, whenever they came. All the
whole night was spent in watching both on the one side and on the other,
neither could the flattering entisement of sleeep procure any quiet or rest to
the poor souls either of the Citizens or of the enemies: and yet there was
no motion of war on either side. But upon the break of day, a great band of
the servile sort of Turks, and of the rascal common rout, without The servile
people first go to the city to sack it.
any leave asked of the Captain, armed with corslets, with spears and with
swords, went to the town, with resolute minds to sack it, and to enrich
their own private estate with the spoils and pillage of that welthie City.
And now were they come to the guarded gates, where contrary to their
expectation they found a terrible rescue, Slaughter in the gates.
and were enforced to join a hard and mortal medley, wherein the walls, the
entrance, yea all the ground thereabout was bathed with blood, and (as it were)
paued with weapons and carcases. And yet for all that, though the Persians
stood firm and stout at the arrival of this insolent and servile troop, at
the last they were constrained to yield the entrance, being overcome by the
multitude of them, that flowed in upon them like a flood, and retiring The
Taurisians yield the gates to the Turkish peole.
themselves into the city, which was now astonished and amassed on every side,
they fortified themselves in their houses under the ground, and in the corners
and winding tourninges of the streets: from whence, by their arrows, and some
few Arcubuscs, they did great scath to the Turks The Taurisians fortify
themselves in their vaultes, and in the corners of their streets.
that entered. Howbet the Persians were not able to kill and destroy so many of
their enemy people, but that at the last they were too mighty for them, and
wrought many grievous mischiefs and calamities in the woeful City. And so a
great number of this rascal people, which remained alive, returned to the
Turkish Camp, enriched with booties and slaves, leading away with them both
virgins The Turks return to the Camp with diverse prays and booties.
and children, and showing too manifest tokens of the poor oppressed City,
wherein the miserable women and impotent souls embracing and strayning their
domestical doors, and kissing their native soil, with prayers, with
mourninges, with complaints, bewailed their present misery, and feared also
worse and more deadly events. Osman, who was now made acquainted with these
calamities, and with this particular misaduenture, caused proclamation to be
published, that no man should be so hardy as to molest the Taurisians, those I
mean, which were naturally there borne: and in the mean time he himself
Osman vieweth the place where to encampe himself, and build a forte.
went round about the said City, viewing thoroughly the situation of it, and
surueighing the place, wherein he might both incampe himself safely, and also
with the better foundation and greater security erect a Castle or Forte of
defense of that conquered country.

Tauris is seated at the root of the hill Orontes, which The description of
the city of Tauris.
stands (as it were) over it upon the North side, distant from the shore of
the sea of Bachu, eight days journey or thereaboutes. It has Persia upon the
Southside, which leaving the Caspian mountains on the West, reaches out to
Great Media: and therefore the City is subject to winds, cold, and full of
snow, but of a very wholesome air: It abounds in all manner of things
necessary for man's life. It is enriched, as well by the perpetual concourse of
merchandises, that are brought thither from the countries of the Leuant, to be
conueighed into Soria and into the countries of Europe, as also of those that
come thither out of the Western parts, to be distributed over all the East.
It is very populous, so that it feeds almost two hundred thousand persons:
but yet open to the fury of every Army, without strength of walls, and
without bulwarks. It has a great number of houses under the ground: The
buyldinges, after the fashion of those that are buylt in the East, are of burnt
clay, and rather low then high. It has Springs, Gardens, and running waters.
And for all things it carried the name, as also of their Kings residence. Tamas
was the man that removed his seat from this City, and translated it to Casbin:
but still for all that, both before and sithence, although it has been
molested by the inroades and spoils of the Turkish Emperors, yet it has
always maintained it self in great estimation and renown.

Now of this City, Osman did diligently view the situation, and at the last
caused his Pauilions to be pitched The tents pitched on the south side.
upon the side that looks toward the South, commanding that all the rest of
this Soldiers should do the like, and that all the Workmen and Ditchers
should repair thither to begin the building of a Castle. On the same side
of Tauris, there was a garden, all flourishing and beautyfull, replenished with
a thousand sundry kinds of The most pleasant and beautiful garden of Tauris.
graftes, trees, and sweete-smelling plants, among which the Lilly, the
Hyacinth, the Gillyflower, the Rose, the Violet, the Flower gentle, and a
thousand other odoriferous flowers did yield a most pleasant and delectable
sight both to the Inhabitants and to Strangers. There were a thousand
Fountains, and a thousand brooks, and among them all, as the Father of them
all, a pretty River, which with his mild course and delight some noise,
divided the Garden from the ground of Tauris, and one only bridge for those to
pass over it, which for pleasure repaired out of Tauris to recreate themselves
in the shadows and walks of those greenes: whose beauty was so great, being
also made famous by reason of antiquity, that it was also called by the
country Inhabitants Sechis-Genet, which in our language is as much to say, as
Eight Paradises. The garden called the eight Paradises
This was in times past the standing house of their kings, whiles they kept
their residence in this City: and after they had withdrawn themselves from
thence, and translated their seat to Casbin, it became the habitation and
place of aboade for the Governors of Tauris, and namely Emir-Chan kept
altogether there, whiles he had the government of it. These gardens and
places Osman Osman chooses the gardens to build his fort in.
did choose to build his Castle in, whereof he gave the model himself, and
commanded that all the whole circuit of those Greenes should be enuyroned
with walls, and trenches dug round about them, to conveigh the water from
the foresaid River. And so the fabric was begun, with the greatest care
that possibly might be, the foundation of the embattelled walls laid, the
ditche dug, fourteen foot broad, and a man's height in depth, and in the
space of six and thirty days In 36. days the fabric finished.
wholly finished and brought to an end. The first day of building the Vizier
fell sick of a fever with a bloody flixe (as it was told me in Constantinople,
by one of the Physicians, that was always assistant at the cure) which
infirmity The sickness of the Visie^ Osman.
peradventure was the cause of the slownesse in building, and of many other
losses that afterward happened, as shall be declared unto you. In the said
space also of six and thirty days, there was distributed upon the walls
great store of Artillery, and within the Forte there were built diverse bathes,
lodginges, and such other housing necessary for Turkish uses.

Whiles this Fabric was in hand, there wanted not sundry Accidents, and
strange news, to fill the ears and minds of all men: which it shall be
necessary to report in order as they fell out. Five days after the buylding
of the Fort was begone, there came news into the Turkish camp, that within the
City of Tauris, in a certain baine, there were eight Iannizzaries, and diverse
Spaoglanj seen strangled: whereof the Zaini, Spahini, and Iannizzaries Turks
strangled in a bath within Tauris
being certified, went presently before the Vizier, declaring unto him, that
although he had over mildly given order, that the Taurisians should not be
molested or hurt, and that according to his pleasure, every man had used
modesty toward them, and obedience to him, yet the Taurisians themselves, who
should have remained in quiet and in awe, had most audaciously strangled in one
of their baynes eight Iannizzaries, and certain Spaoglanj, and that in their
judgment these injuries and insolences were not to be suffered. The Captain
was exceeding wroth at this most cruel and impious action, and without any
further delay commanded, that the whole Osman commands that the City of
Tauris should be sacked in the vilest manner.
City should be sacked, and that every man should do the worst, that possibly
he could, or might do to it. Here a man had need of a very learned and
eloquent pen, to describe the fierce and cruel execution of these men, who
handled the matter, not as though they would requite an injury, but rather
exercise an utter vengeance upon them, insomuch, as it would require great
force of wit, and readiness of tongue to declare it. For in troth, who is
hable either by writing, or by speech sufficiently and lively to The villainies
of the Turks in Tauris, while they sack it.
set forth the treachery, the covetousness, the wrath, the cruelty, the
impiety, the wickedness of these triumphing Turks? And on the other side, who
can express the criyng of Infants, the complaints and howlings of weomen, the
groanings of the wounded, the tears of parents, the prayers of old men, the
fears, the griefs, and to be brief, the misery of the Taurisians? There was
nothing but slaughter, pilling, rauishing, spoiling, and murdering: Virgins
deflowred, men-children defiled with horrible and unspeakable sins, yonglings
snatched out of their parents arms, houses laid even with the ground, and
burnt: riches and money carried away, and to be short, all things wasted and
ruynated. Neither were these mischiefs committed once only, but the second
followed worse then the first, and the third upon that, worse then the second:
so that it was a misery almost inexplicable, to behold that City, which was
so populous and so rich, The misery of the City of Tauris.
sometimes the Court and Palace of the Crown, and the honor of the Persian
Empire, now subject to the fury, to the rauine, to the cruelty of the Turks,
plonged in calamity, and utterly destroyed. With the spoil that was taken,
there were many thousands of Camels laden, and every man, besides the things
of greatest value, which Boys and girls carried away captives by the Turks.
they kept secretly, carried away with him some boy or some wench for his
captive.

The lamentable and sorrowful advertisement hereof was brought to the King of
Persia, who bewailed the misery of himself, and the destruction of others:
But the Persian prince beyond all the rest felt rising inwardly within himself
the most ardent affections of grief, of disdain, and of desperation, and being
utterly resolved to put any thing in execution, whereby he might be revenged of
so great a cruelty, and recover the pray that was taken The Persian Prince
commands 500. soldiers, to go and provoke the Turks to fight.
away, he exhorted his whole Army to put on the same resolution. And having
grounded and confirmed himself therein, he commanded, that five hundred of
his soldiers should ride out on hors-back, even to the very sight of their
enemies Tents, and provoke the Turks to battle. These soldiers so appointed
went accordingly, and made a gallant show of themselves, at the discovery
whereof, the Turks imagining, that the Persians were come in great number to
assault their Army: Order was given by the Vizier to Bassa Cicala, and the
Bassa of Caraemit, (the Osman appoints two Bassaes, to encounter and fight
with the Persians.
same two which were at first in the former blouddie conflict,) that with the
people of Grecia, and all the rest of their whole power, they should go to
encounter the enemy. They presently gave warning with the sound of their
Trompets, and straight way their standerdes were displaied: Under which there
were assembled about four and thirty thousand Soldiers strong, partly
stipendiaries, and partly voluntaries, and besides them a number of servile
people, men exercised in labor and perils, so that there were gathered
together in all well near forty 40000. Turks go to encounter the Persians,
and to fight with them.
thousand men. The five hundred Persians, with a marvelous cunning kind of
skirmishing, dallied with the Turkish soldiers, and drew them forward, for the
space of eight miles and more. And when they were brought to that point, being
now fore-wearied with the skirmish, they were lustely assaulted by the Persian
Prince, who with part of his Army, which might be to the number of about
twenty thousand persons, courageously and valiantly seized upon the two
Bassaes, between whom there was joined the deadliest and cruellest battle,
that ever was written of. Wherein the Persians having given a most A mortal and
cruel battle.
perilous onset upon the Turks, it was thought, that they would have been
contented with so luckie an encounter, and so to have retired. Which the Turks
foreseeing, and being not minded to return this second time, but with
victory, and a notable great conquest, they hardilie followed upon the
Persians, hoping to put them to flight, and to give them a blouddie and deadly
overthrow: But the Persians having quietly and easily endured their charge,
for a reasonable space, at the last made head upon them a fresh, and began a
new conflict with them. By the vehemence of this assault, the Bassa of Caraemit
above named, was put to flight, who being wholly dismayed and difcomfited, The
Bassa of Caraemit put to flight.
fled back to his Tents, with a manifest token of the unhappy issue in the
battle. The Bassa Cicala notwithstanding, sustained the fury of the Persians,
and valorously with great cunning and skill went about to harten the Army to
fight, and to do their best endeauours, showing his notable courage in every
respect. But when he perceived that in both the wings of his people there was
still great harm done in every moment of an hour, he advised with himself to
retire with the least danger that possibly he might. Wherein he could not so
warily Cicala Bassa flies also.
carry himself, but that his Squadrons were shrewdly beaten and discomfited,
and in the end, he was enforced in the sight of every man to withdraw himself
to the Army, and openly betake himself to flight. So that he also arrived at
the camp, altogether discomfited, without any Ensign, bereaved of three young
men, whom he loved very dearly, and without any of his horses which he had
caused to be lead with him, to have served his turn in time of need: and so
speak all in a word, he was quite overthrown, and (about) eight thousand of
his soldiers 8000. (...) slain.
slain. Great was the cowardice of the one, and great was the courage of the
other: whereby it may manifestly appear, how much more the Persians are
exercised and acquainted with the doubtful conflicts and perils of war, then
the Turks are.

With this so fortunate and happy event, the Persian Prince being somewhat
encouraged, he sent speedy Herauldes Heralds sent by the Persian Prince to
Osman.
to the sick Vizier, (whom he thought notwithstanding to have been in health)
giving him to understand, that if it pleased him to fight with him, he was
ready for him, and in what sort soever he would accept of battle, he would
make him good account of his valor, and cause him to know, not only that
Amurath had most injuriously and unjustly raised this war, but also that it
had been good for him not to have withstood his force and valiance. Osman
accepted his offer, but being not hable himself to go and answer the Prince in
person, hand to hand, Osman accepts the offer, but his sickness increases
mortally upon him.
by reason of his sickness, which every hour increased more mortally upon
him, he sent out all the Captains of his army. The Persian Prince remained
ten miles of there aboutes, distant from the Camp of Osman, and that upon
very good consideration, least peradventure in the heat and fury of the
battle, he might have been spoiled by the Artillarie: so that of necessity the
Turkish army must needs ride to encounter with him.

The Turkish Captains marched in this manner; The midst of the battle was
guided by the Bassa of Caraemit, The array and order of the Turkish soldiers.
and Sinan Cicala, with all the Soldiers of Assiria and Babylon: The left hand
was lead by the Bassa of Natolia, with the band of Graecia: And the right hand
was conducted by Amurath the Bassa of Caramania, with the people of Soria: to
the number in all of three score thousand, besides all those that were slain
in the two former conflicts, 60000. in the (...) army
and besides a great multitude of servile people, and diverse voluntary, and
sundry waged soldiers also, that were still within the City, busied about
their new pillages, and searching for hidden treasures, and other rich booties,
even in places under the ground, and in their Churches: and besides the trusty
guard of the Iannizzaries of Constantinople, with all the Artillarie, which was
left behind for the safeguard of the sick Vizier, and all the Tents.

Being thus ordered and divided, they confronted the Persian Prince, who was
himself in the midst of his The order of the Persians.
Army, and had placed all his people in very good order on all sides, having on
his one side, the soldiers of Persia and Hircania, and on his other side the
soldiers of Parthia and Atropatia, in all to the number of forty thousand. I
do not believe, that Ida the mountain, or Xanthus the 40000. in the Persians
army.
river by Troy, did ever see so terrible and bloody battles, as these were,
that were fought near to the Rivers and mountains of Tauris, by these
nations, who, though they be all in deed of Asia, yet (as Aristotle says) are
not very Terrible and bloody battles about Tauris.
martial. The Turks were in a fear least the Persians would have fetched a
great compass, and with all celerity and fury would have run to set upon
their tents, and the riches which they had laid up together in their
pauillions: and therefore at every motion of theirs they continually feared
this sudden outroade. Whereof they had such special care, that retiring
themselves as much as they might, and faining that they yielded and gave place
to the Persians, they withdrew so near to their Army, that they wanted but a
little from being brought even within the just leuill and mark of their
artillarie. Which when the Persians had espied, and perfectly discovered the
cunning and craft of the Turks, without any further dallying they began to
seize upon the maine body of the battle. And the Prince himself being entered
among the soldiers of the Bassa of Caraemit, who (as we told you a little
before) as General sustained the place of Osman, and pressing into the midst
of the battle, dispatched every man that came in his way, and having drawn out
the Bassa from among the rest, he smote of his head, and The Persian Prince
cutteth of the head of Mahamet the Bassa of Ca^emit.
gave it to one that waited upon him, to carry about upon the top of his
lance. The speechles head being openly discried, wrought a terror to the
Turks, and a courage in the Persians, who being imbrued with blood in the
battle, and remembering also the cruelty used upon the Taurisians, accounted
it an impiety to show any pity to their enemies, and a great point of
cowardice to foreslow the victory over them. Whereupon they entermingled
themselves more and more, and made a most confused, and general slaughter:
wherein besides the Bassa above named, The Bassa of Trebisonda, the Sangiacco
of Bursia, and 5. other Sangiacchi slain.
there died also the Bassa of Trabizonda, the Sangiacco of Bursia, with five
other Sangiacchi, and many other Chiaus, and diverse common soldiers taken
prisoners. It fell to the lot also of Amurath the Bassa of Caramania to be
taken prisoner, being (as they say) fallen into a Well or Amurath the Bassa of
Caramania taken alive in the fight.
ditch, whiles he was fighting: and to be short it is the common report, that
the number of those that were slain in this battle, amounted to twenty
thousand Turks. The night came upon them, and the Persians were now 20000.
Turks. slain.
somewhat too nigh to the Turkish Artillery, and therefore they resolved to
leave fighting, and as they were occasioned by the darkness of the night, to
withdraw themselves back to the pauilions of the king, the Princes father.

But now there were many days spent, wherein (as we told you before) the
fabric of the Fortress was fully finished. And after so many victories, and
so many losses, that fell out on both sides, the soldiers of Grecia and
Constantinople, being now wearied with seeing their friends and loving
fellows thus slain before their faces, The people of Gseece and
Constantinople procure their return home into their cuntries.
having also laid up safely in their own custody those prays and booties,
which they had gotten in the sack of the City, resolved with themselves to
procure their own departure, being partly moved thereunto by the violent and
sharp season of the winter, which was now coming upon them. And for that
purpose they came to the Vizier, who being already brought into a most
dangerous estate of his health, and waxen very faint through the abundant
issue of blood, that mortally flowed out of his belly, was (as a man might
say) in despair with himself to live any longer, and quite abandoned of all
Osman through sickness desperate to live any longer.
hope by his Physicians. And therefore they were feign by the mouth of such as
were trusty about him to represent unto him the necessity of their return:
and withal after many friendly and reverent entreaties, they caused also to be
signified unto him, that if he stood obstinate and unwilling to yield to their
request, and would needs stay dallying and spending the time in those quarters,
where there was no such need, they should be enforced to withdraw themselves
and forsake him. Osman, who had nothing else to do in those countries, but only
to leave at Tauris within the new fort for the custody thereof, some co^uenent
garriso^ of soldiers, did liberally promis to gratify the^ in their suit, and
to yield them al satisfaction, as they desired, by departing from thence the
next morning. And there fore for as much as he was now to remove, and before his
remove to leave such a garrison in the new fort, as might be sufficient to
maintain and defend it, until the next spring, wherein there should be some
new captain and fresh supplies sent thither for their succor, he concluded,
that Giaffer the Eunuch, being the^ the Bassa of Tripoli, who (as we told you
in the last book) would not follow the Giaffer the Bassa of Tripols in Soria,
chosen Governor of Tauris.
wars of Ebrain the Vizier, should be the keeper and governor of the said
Forte. And the rather to encourage him that he would take the charge upon him,
he gave him freely, for the space of three whole years, not only the office
and authority, but also the rentes and revenues of the Bassa of Caraemit, in
the place of him, whose head (we told you lately) the Persian Prince had cut
of: and withal honored him with the title of the Bassa of the Court, where
having finished his three years office of Caraemit, he was to go and sit among
the sovereign seats in the order and rank of the Visiers. The Eunuch, seeing
so fair and so nigh a way for him to mount to those high honors, readily
obeyed his pleasure, and presently dispatching his Lieutenaunt, (whom the
Turks call Checaia) for Caraemit, to the government of those countries in his
absence, with a hundred of his own subjects, he settled himself in the said
Fort, and afterward, besides his said subjects, there were delivered unto
him twelve thousand soldiers, some voluntaries and some stipendiaries,
furnished with all necessary provision, and sufficient 12000 soldiers
appointed to Giaffer the Eunuche to guard the fort.
for the war till the new spring. And when the custody of this Fortress was
thus ordered, and safely provided for, the Vizier departed according to his
promise made to the soldiers of Grecia and Constantinople, and the same
morning, which was the fourscore and seventh day after his departure from
Erzirum, he went to a place called Sancazan, seven miles distant from Tauris,
with an Osman Bassa at Sancazan.
intent in this his return, to take another course, then he took when he came
to that City.

They were now upon the point of their encamping (as the manner is) in a
confused disorder and hurley-burley, when those that were hindermost in the
army heard the neighing of horses, and the noise of drommes and trumpettes,
which when all the whole Camp understood (by the report of the first hearers
unto them that were foremost) they ran all headlong and disordered (as they
were) to the rescue on that side, where the report was that the noise of horses
and warlike instruments was heard. But while the Turks were thus intentiuely
busied on that side, to expect the arrival of their enemies, on the other side
without any sign or token of battle was the Persian Prince ready upon them
with eight and twenty thousand The Persian Prince assaileth the Turks, with
28000. persons.
persons in his company, who, (having discovered the Camelles, the horses, the
Mules, and other cariages, whereupon their booties, their spoils, and their
riches were laden which they had taken in Tauris, besides their corn and much
of their provision for victuaile, necessary for the sustenaunce of the army,)
had turned upon them, and with a provident and safe conuoy had taken for a
pray eighteen thousand of the Cammelles and Mules, well 18000. Camelles, and
mules laden with spoil, reskued by the Persians from the Turks.
laden with the said booties and other victuailes. The Prince sent away
presently six thousand of his soldiers for the safeguard of the cariages, that
they might lead them away in safety: and he himself with his two and twenty
thousand Persians entered into the Turkishe Army, who now to withstand his
assault, had converted their anger and fiercenes against him. It was a gallant
thing, and a terrible withal, to see what a mortal battle and what singular
prowess was showed, presently even in the forefront of the army. For in a
moment you might have seen the Tents and Pauillions turned up side down, and
their encamping lodgings replenished with carcases and blood, and victorious
death ranging in every corner. The Turks themselves, through unwonted
astonishment, became more attentive beholders of this affray, then their
enemies were, and to this day with great marvel do recounte the virtue and
valor of the Persians, who although they were so few in number, and
intermingled among so populous an army of warlick people, yet it seemed that
they couched their spears and brandished their swords over them, as though it
had thundered and lightened upon them, and were in deed rather like fatal
ministers, then human executioners of so general a slaughter. But these
mischeefes being already foreseen and too much feared by the trusty guard of
the Ianizzaries, and all of them doubting greatly least the Persians would
forcibly invade the very lodginges of the Vizier, it was commanded, not by
himself, (for he was now at the last gasp) The Vizier at the last gasp.
but by him who at that time had authority to command in his name, that without
any delay the artillary should be vnbarred, and by that means the valorous
conflict of these fierce soldiers was unequally parted. For the Artillary
wrought perchance greatter harm among the Turks The artillary workeh happily
more harm among the Turks, then among the Persians.
themselves, then it did among the Persians. For the medley and mingling of the
two nations which fought together, being all in a confusion and a
hurley-burley, the artillary entering among them without any exception or
distinction of persons, ouerthrewe both friends and foes. At the first
thondering noise whereof, the Prince was most ready and swift to fly, and all
that were with him, followed presently after him, so that the Turks which
remained behind were moreshrewdly afflicted then the Persians were, who by
flying away could not feel any damage, but the Turks must first be well
paid for their labor. The Graecians, the Constantinopolitanes, and those that
were of Natolia, pursued these fugitives, making a show as though they would
gladly have overtaken the stolen carriages, and recovered them again: but
they being already arrived in safety, and the night come upon them, they feared
to proceed any further, then they might easily return with the safegarde of
their lives. And therefore the Persians, though greatly wearied and weakened,
thus saved themselves, and the Turks also returned into their Tents, wholly
dismayed and discomfited, leaving too manifest a token of the sondrie
calamities which happened in these broiles, and the marvelous overthrow of
their whole army. So that there is no man but confesses, that in the battle
of Sancazan there were slain twenty 20000. Turks slain in fight at Sancazan.
thousand of the Ottoman soldiers, and that in this enterprise of Tauris,
there died by this time threescore thousand Turks with that small loss of
the Persian forces, which we have before described.

Among the rest, in the same place died also the Vizier Osman, General of the
late dreadful, but now desolate Army, not by wouuds, (as some write) nor by
any such Osman the Vizier and General dies at Saacazan.
like means, but being utterly consumed by the mortal and incurable disease of
an Ague and a Flix, (as we have told you before, and do now again testify
unto you, by the certain and undoubted report of those faithull Physicians,
which were about him,) whose death notwithstanding was kept secreate from the
whole Army, and every man thought verily, that it was but only the
continuance of his sickness, because the charriottes wherein he lay, were still
kept close, and in his name Cicala Bassa, (for so he had appointed by his will)
gave out aunsweres and commandementes The death of Osman disclosed to the
Persians by three oungmen.
to all the Army. But although it was thus concealed from the Turks, yet was
it disclosed to the Persians, by the means of three youngmen, who in the life
of Osman had the charge of his precious stones, of his jewels, and of his gold,
and now having gathered together, the best, the cheifest, and the fairest of
them, and also the goodliest and the fairest horses that the Vizier had, were
fled to the King of Persia, and revealed unto him the death of the General.
The coming of these youngmen was most acceptable both to the king and also to
the prince, as well for the jewels and gold, as also for the advertisement of
Osmans death: who reasoned among themselves, that it was not possible for so
great cowardice, and so dishonorable a kind of fighting and ordering of an Army
to proceed from the virtue and valor of Osman, of whom they had had too
manifest a trial and experience in times past: and therefore they were thereby
encouraged to put in practice some new and strange kinds of exploytes, and The
Persians encouraged to give the Turks a famous farewell.
by attempting the utter overthrow of the Turkish remnant, to give them an
honorable Farewell. And therevppon the Persian Prince, having gotten together
fourteen thousand men, went to follow the Turks, who had now raised their
Camp, and were removed to pitch their Tents near to a certain stream of
salt water, not far A brook between the two armies.
from Sancazan: where also the said Prince caused certain few Tents to be
pitched, about four or five miles distant from the Turkish Camp, the foresaid
brook running in the midst between the two Enemies armies. Now it was the
purpose of the Sofian Prince to have assailed the Turks in the morning, whiles
they were loading their cariages, hoping in that confusion to have wrought them
some notable mischief: but the Turks had caught a certain spy of his, who
revealed all unto them. And therefore they did neither arise so early in the
morning as their manner was, nor load their stuff, until such time as they
were all armed and on hors-back, trusting by that means to rebate and to quail
their enemies assaults. The Persians were greatly discontented, when they saw
this wary and unusual manner of the Turks raising of their Tents, and
perceived that some inkling had been given them of the purpose which they had
intended: And yet considering, that if they should loose this occasion, they
could not have any other good opportunity to annoy them, until the next
Spring: they utterly resolved to venture The Persians begin to assault the
Turks on the leftside, to avoid their Artillarie.
the assault: and having observed, that the Ranks of their Artillarie were on
the right side of the Army, they began to enter (in the sight of every man)
upon the left hand. But the Turks made a wing presently on that side, and so
uncovered and vnbarred their Artillarie against the assaylants, to their great
loss and danger. Howbeit they were so nymble and quick to shrowde themselves
under their Enemies army, and to avoid this mischievous tempest, that being
now come very near to the Turkish Squadrons, they must needs send out people
to encounter them, and join present battle with them. They were purposed
before, as soon as they saw the Turks begin to stir, to have brought them
toward their side, into a very filthy and deep Moore, which being then dry,
yet The purpose of the Persians, which afterward came to no good issue.
breathed fourth a most stinking and foggie air, neither was it doubted of, or
feared by any, but only by those that were acquainted withal, and borne there
aboutes: and so very boldly they went toward that place, entycing their
enemies to follow after them. But the Rebel Maxut-Chan, and with him that
other Traitor Daut-Chan, who had knowledge of this treachery, as being well
acquainted with those places, perceived the policy of the Enemy, and
particularly gave notice thereof to Cicala Bassa, who presently caused a great
compassing wing to be made, commanding them to set upon the Persians, and to
give them a continual charge. The commandment of the Captain was put in
execution, and so their forefront opened it self with very large and
spacious Cornets upon the Prince: who no sooner saw this kind of order, but by
and by he perceived, that his intended Stratageme was discovered. Whereupon
without any stay he began to retire, and called all his people after him. But
they could not be so ready and quick to fly, but that three thousand of them
remained behind, all miserably 3000. Persians overwhelmed in the mire.
styfled and ouer-trodden in the mire, with very little damage or loss of
the Turks. And this only battle, among the five that were fought under
Tauris, and in The only battle among five, most hurtful to the Persians.
those quarters, was it that was less hurtful to the Ottomans, then to the
Persians.

The Prince returned to the pauilions of the King his father, and told him the
whole action how it had fallen out, together with the departure of the Enemy:
And so the Turks came to Salmas, where the death of their Vizier was
published. From Salmas they went afterward to Van, where they took a surueigh
of their Army, and found A surueigh of the Army in Van.
wanting therein about four score and five thousand persons: and some say,
more. At Van all the soldiers were dismissed into their own countries, and
Cicala gave notice At Van the soldiers discharged.
to the King at Constantinople of all that had happened. I my self also was in
Constantinople at the same time, when the posts arrived, that brought word of
these great adventures. The Author at Constantinople.
First was published the death of Osman, for whom there were many signs of
very great sorrow: and together with his death were blazed the blouddie and
mortal actions that were performed, so that it seemed all the whole City was
greatly discomforted: and diverse times, in those few days, by sundry persons
in many places, and particularly in the house of Mahamet Bey, one of the
San-Giacchi of Cairo, my very great friend, I heard much railing upon the
King, many curses of this war, and infolent maledictions of these many
mischiefs. Then was dispersed the great fame of the new Fortress erected
News published in Constantinople.
in Tauris, of the sacking of that City, and of all the loss that happened
therein. And lastly there was a general Edict published in the Kings name, that
through all the Cities of his Empire, they should make solemn feasts, and
show other express tokens of mirth and rejoicing, which the Turks call Zine:
And thereupon all the Artificers in Constantinople, with diverse goodly and
sumptuous shows, Feasting in Constantinople.
with musical instruments, and bountiful banketting performed the Kings
royal commandments. There was also word sent to the Ambassadors of
Hungary, of The Christian Ambassadors refuse to rejoice for these victories.
France, of Venice, and of other countries, that they should do the like: But
they all answered with one accord, that it was never the custom of
Ambassadors to make any sign of rejoicing, but only when the King himself
in person returned from the like victories.

In the mean time, great consultation was at Van, how they might attempt to
send succors to Teflis in Georgia, Consultation in Van how to send succor to
Teflis.
whereof there was a rumor spread abroad, that it was yielded to the Georgians:
which in deed was a lie, as at an other time the like report was also. And
while they were thus in consideration of many matters, Daut-Chan, who to
deserve some reward at Amurathes hand, never ceased to remember and urge,
whatsoever might set forward the conceits of the Ottomans, offered himself to
perform this so important service, and could so well discourse upon the manner
how to bring it to pass, and to make the enterprise certain and secure, that
at the last, Cicala Succors appointed for Teflis, and delivered to Daut-Chan
the Rinegare.
Bassa delivered unto him thirty thousand Cecchini to carry to the Fort at
Teflis. Daut-Chan went and returned, and relieved those soldiers, without any
thing happening unto him in his voyage worthy the writing. And yet was this
service so well accepted by Amurath, that he honored the Rinegate with the
dignity of the Bassa of Maras, a City seated in the confines of Cappadocia
and Armenia, near Daut-Chan named by the king the Bassa of Maras.
to the river Euphrates, where also the same Daut governs, even at this
present day: although there was a speech delivered out by the same, that King
Amurath had caused him to be strangled, which was not true. Maxut-Chan also, he
that was the guide of the Turkish Army to Reiuan, and to Tauris, was honored
by the same King Maxut-Chan nominated by the King the Bassa of Aleppo.
with the great rich Office of the Bassa of Aleppo. Of whom, as also of his
children, and of his vassals, I have had very many particulars, both touching
this war, and matters of peace, wherein this man was a dealer. So that I have
not written (to my knowledge) any thing herein, which has not been certified
unto me, from persons of credit and authority, even of their own sight, for
that they were present and Agents themselves in these enterprises. Whereunto,
that such credit may be given, as an History deserves, I have thought good
in this place to translate a certain Letter, sent from the Sangiaccho of Aman,
to Aly the Bassa of Aleppa, who was with Ebrain, and so could not be at the
actions of Tauris. A Copy whereof was also sent to the Senate of Venice, by
Giouanni Michele, at that time Consul for that most honorable Common wealth,
of whom we have a little before made mention. It was written in the Arabike,
and being translated into our tongue, it was word for word in this manner.

To the rich and mighty among the rich and mighty, the A Letter written to
Aly the Bassa of Aleppo.
noble Lord of Lords, among honorable and great persons the honorable and
great person, the Lord Aly Bassa, Humble salutations, and long prosperity.
Your Lordship has given me to understand, that you desire to be advertised of
all that has happened this year between us and the Cheselbas: and I, now I
have good leisure to do it, will not fail readily so to do. So you shall
understand, that from Erzirum we came to Tauris in forty days: and the day
before we arrived at Tauris, at the Bridge of salt water, our Vanigard was
assaulted by the Son of the King of Persia, who quite discomfited it, and
gave us a great overthrow, with the death of almost five thousand of our men,
among whom Aly the Bey of Grecia was one. And because you would know the very
day, that we entered into Tauris: I do let you understand, that two days before
our feast, we entered into it in great number. Two days the City was kept
locked, because the Persians had gotten the gates, and in that time there was a
great fight both within and without the City, with the slaughter of our men
more then eight thousand, and little loss to the Persians. For Alycull-Chan
the Governor of the City, with the best of his people were ready to fly,
and abandon the defense of the City, who as he went out, met with the Bassa of
Maras, and flew him with many of our men. But afterward being scarred with the
Artillarie, that was set right upon him, he fled away, and all the rest of the
Cheselbas-Captaines, who upon that occasion also at the last retired with him.
You desire to know, how those of Tauris were entreated: and I tell you, that
three days after we were entered into it, and Alyculi-Chan fled with those
above named, order was given for the buylding of a Fortress in the midst of
the City, which was then all sacked, in such sort, as it was great pity to
see, and yet without any direction or commandment from the Vizier, although
in deed they have given out speeches, that it was by his appointment. The
Iannizaries and the Spahini of the Porta, took away all their goods and
household stuff, and twice afterward sacked it again: and the second time
they slew many of the inhabitants of Tauris, and found a great quantity of
stuff hidden under the ground, and sold their children for ten and twelve
Ducates apeece. The buylding of the Fort was finished in six and thirty days,
and twelve days before this Fabrik was finished, news came to the Vizier,
that the Persians, were coming to assault him: Whereupon he sent out the son
of Cicala, and Mahamet the Bassa of Caraemit, who from the topp of an hill
discovered the Persians that were coming, and so they descended into the
plain and joined battle with them. Wherein it seemed at the first that the
Persians would have taken their heels, but they returned upon our men, and
pursued them with slaughter to the number of four thousand Turks; and took
prisoners Sinan the Checaia or Lieutenant of Cicala, Chenan the Kings Chiaus or
Ambassador, and the Clerk of the Spahinj of the Porta. A few days before the
Fort was finished, the Vizier was certified again, that the Persians were
coming in a very great number to assault him, whereupon he began to set all
his Army in an order? but while he was busied there abouts, the Persians
arrived about noone, and setting upon our men, they faught such a battle from
that time till two hours within night, that it cannot be expressed, either
with tongue or pen. But as far as men's judgments can reach, it is verily
thought, that there may be about forty thousand of our men slain, with great
loss also of the Enemy. Among our men, the Bassa of Caraemit had his head
stricken off; Mura^ the Bassa of Caramania was taken alive in fight, being
fallen into a water, whiles he was in fighting: Mustaffa the Sangiaccho of
Bursia; and Schender the Bey of Grecia, and five other Sangiacch^ were hewn in
pieces, and the Bassa of Trebisonda also left his carcass in the field. In
very truth the battle was so great, that it cannot well and sufficiently be
described. Afterward, the Vizier being departed from Tauris, and arrived at
Sancazan, would needs stay there and pitch: But whiles they were drawing out
their Tents, and every man busy to encampe, the Prince of Persia was
discovered with a great number of soldiers: who seeing us in this plight,
hastened his pace, and between our Rereward and the Vizier, began battle upon
us. It was then an hour after daylight, and we had travailed all that night.
From that hour even until evening did this fight last, with such effusion of
blood, as is not credible, and the common opinion is, that we felt the loss of
more then twenty thousand persons: among whom there is slain poor Vstref the
Checaia, so well known unto you. Here also died the Vizier of his infirmity.
In the first battle the Spahini of the Porta, with certain of the Kings
Chiaus brought to the Vizier three hundred heads of Persians: but in the second
they made no great boast, for in deed both the one and the other was not
without great loss unto them. We removed from Sancazan, and were again
pursued by our enemies the Cheselbas, and yet without any fight between them
and us: saving only, two days after we were departed from them, they took
away from the tail of our Army, a great number of Camels and Mules, laden
with stuff, slaves, and munition, which although they were followed, yet could
not be recovered: but that Mahamet the Bassa of Siuas, with the soldiers of
the Porta, and of Caraemit, brought us a thousand heads of Persians, five
Drums, and one Ensign, besides that with our Artill^rie, they were hardly
entreated, and two of their Chans slain. We came afterward in a direct course
to Erzirum, without hearing any word at all of the Persians. And to the end you
may know how we have left Erzirum, I do further advertise you, that there are
remaining in it certain Spahini of the Porta, with certain Sardari and
Vlu-Bassi, and two Sangiacchi, the one of Bir, the other of Marra, who
afterward fled away both. There is least for the Sardar or General and
Captain of these in the Fort, Giaffer the Eunuche Bassa of Tripoli, to whom
the Vizier has also granted, that for three whole years together he shall be
Bassa of Caraemit, and afterward one of the Visiers of the Porta. There is
least also for them victuaile, and munition, and great store of Artillary. But
I may not omit to tell you, that in our Army we have endured such a dearth,
as we have been enforced to give our Camelles Biscot and Rise: and when that
failed us we gave them Packsaddles to eat, and after that pieces of wood
beaten into poulder, and at last me gave them the very earth. And this great
dearth endured even until we arrived at Van. And at Tauris we were of
necessity constrained, while the fortress was in building, to give our horses
their doung in very dry poulder, by reason whereof there followed a grievous
mortallitie of horses, Camelles, mules and men: and the stink, which grew of
this mortallitie was so great, that we were feign always every one of us to
carry half an Onion under our nose to au^yde it. Yet at last we are now
arrived at Erzirum, from whence we hope also shortly to be delivered, for that
every body had license to depart even from Van. God be with you. From Erzirum
the first day of the Moon of Mucaren.

By this Letter it may manifestly be perceived, that the number of Turks which
perished in this enterprise of Tauris, is peradventure greater then that which
we have written. And although there be therein discovered some kind of
diversity in the actions, otherwise then we have delivered them: yet ought no
man greatly to marvel thereat: for that it is a very easy matter to vary
in such a point, because the manner how, and the occasions why, yea, the very
proceedings of battles are many times not known to all men alike, especially
in so huge an Army, wherein the effects and issues can very hardly be
thoroughly known, much less the causes and occasions thereof.

The end of the eight Book.
The Ninth Book.
The Argument.
The Occasion of the Persians perplexed cogitations.

The Persians resolution to assault the Forte.

The Persians seek to be reconcyled with the Turcomannes.

The Turcomannes do deceitfully promise to help the Persians in their common
miseries.

The Persian king delivers his son Tamas to the Turcomannes.

The Turcomannes fly from the assault of the Forte, and call Tamas their king.

The Persian Prince pursues the fugitive Turcomannes.

The Persian Prince puts to death Mahamet-Chan, and Calife the Sultan: He
commits his own brother Tamas to prison, and withdraws himself to
Casbin, to gather a new Army.

Saitan-Chalasi abandoned by the Soldiers that were in it.

The Inhabitants of Chiulfall give tribute to the Bassa of Reiuan, and also to
Alycul^, whereby they preserve themselves in peace.

Cicala the Bassa at the request of Giaffer the Bassa minds to succor the
Forte.

Cicala fears the coming of the Persian king, and retyreth to Van.

King Amurath at Constantinople chooses Ferat the Bassa to be his General,
who had once already been General before Osman the Bassa.

Ferat goes to Siuas and so to Erzirum, where he meets with a very great
Army, which was in great distress by reason of a dearth.

Ferat passeth-on to Van, and there finds the Soldiers of Soria, Palestina,
Jury, and Mesopotamia.

The mustering of the whole Army.

The Turkish General has intelligence with certain traiterous and rebellious
Persians

The Persian Prince comes to Tauris

The causes, why the Prince would not attempt to assault the Forte.

The Persian Prince overthrows Zeinello, sacketh the City of Salmas, and
discomfiteth the Bassa of Reiuan.

A treaty for the exchange of the two Prisoners Ebrain-Chan and Amurath the
Bassa, but nothing concluded by it.

The subjects of Manogli do great harm in Soria.

Aly the Bassa is sent from Constantinople to Soria against the Drusians.

The Prince sets his Army in array, and goes to meet and endommage Ferat.

The Prince discovers the treason of the Rebels, and so retyreth.

The Forte is succored by Ferat, without any speech or word of any battle
from his enemies.

The Stratageme of Simon comes to no good issue.

Teflis is relieved with succors.

The Persian Prince comes to Genge, and is thrust through the body by one of
his own keepers.

THE NINTH BOOK.
But the Persians in the mean time, were all full of wrath and indignation for
the Fort that was builded by The troublesome cogitations of the the Persians.
their enemies. For on the one side they found themselves not only
disfurnished of artillarie, and of other engines to batter the walls down to
the ground, but also to be much fewer in number, then were sufficient and
requisite to resist the tempest of fires, which they knew they must endure in
assaulting those that should be environed within the Castle. And on the other
side, they reconed it too great a shame unto them, that the enemy having made
a Fort within their own natural City, should quietly rest there, and
insolently threaten them with daily oppression, and mischeeuous calamities in
time to come. And therefore being The determination of the Persians.
pricked on by glory, by virtue, and by very necessity, they determined even in
the sharpenes of winter, to gather fresh soldiers, and reducing the forces of
their army into a convenient order, with trenches of earth, to approach the
ditch, and to try if they could advance a countermure as high as their walls,
and so attain to the conquest thereof. But in the gathering together of their
new men they discovered new difficulties. For then they perceived manifestly,
that to hire soldiers either from Heri, or from Gheilan, it was denied them by
Abas and Amet-Chan: and that the Turcoman nation, which might have been the
readiest and nearest at such a need, for the late death of Emir-Chan, and for
the succession of Aliculi, were grown very contumacious: so that neither the
King nor the Prince, nor the presidents and governors of the kingdom could
tell on which side to turn them. At the last, foreseeing the safegarde of the
Common wealth, they determined to draw the Turcomani to a reconciliation,
hoping that if they should promise them any honest satisfaction for the wrong,
wherewith they challenged themselves grieved for the death of their captain,
they would become more tractable to do them service in their common
necessities. And therefore the king sent letters to the heads and captains of
those nations, and principally, to Mahamet-Chan, and to Calife the Sultan,
wherein declaring The Persian king by letters solliciteth the Turcomans. The
tenor of the kings Letters.
plainly unto them the peril of his honor, and the liberty of that whole
kingdom, he showed unto them that all his hope of ridding Persia from that
yoke, and setting free all those people, which in all ages heretofore had been
so faithful and friendly unto them, was reposed only in their aid and
assistance: and that their only Arms was hable not only to mainetaine, but
also to increase the renown of valor in the Persian nation: which estate, as
in years forepassed it wrought envy and terror even in the farthest and most
remote peoples of all Asia, so at this present, if it be not succored and
relieved, stands in terms to become a most miserable spectacle to all the
world. And that therefore, forgetting all things that are past, as being done
not to work any shame or scorn to their nation, but only for zeal and love
to the kingdom, they would demand such satisfaction as they would require: for
he would be ready to agree to any just request they should make. With these
and perhaps with more affectionate and passionate letters were the wrothfull
Turcomani enticed to the revenge of the injuries which they had received by the
Ottoman forces. To which Letters they were not a whit slack in framing an
answer, but readily wrote back, The answer of the Turcomanni, and their
crafty devises.
that they would come unto him, and put in execution, whatsoever for the common
necessity he should command.

Now they had already craftily concluded among themselves, that they would not
suffer any other to sit in the rank of their Captains in the rowme of
Emir-Chan lately deceased, but only the young Tamas the Kings third son.
Which conclusion they had plotted to themselves, with a resolute mind, to cause
him to be accepted for King at Casbin, in dispight of the king himself and of
the Prince Hamze, nothing regarding, that by this action far greater
seditions would arise in Persia, then euerwere yet heard of, but only being
wholly bent to revenge the sole death of one only Emir-Chan. So vile and so
base an account did they make of the honor of their natural King, and of
their ancient religion, that before such matters of so great respect and
importance, very audaciously (I will not say temerariously) they preferred
their own private revenge: and chose rather to become most bloody and cruel
against those, to whom they were allied in religion, in blood and in country,
then against their common enemies. With this malicious and fraudulent
reasolution, to the number of ten thousand, under the conduct of two
Captains Mahamet, Ten thousand Turcomans go to the Persian king
and Calife, they went to the king in all reverence, and offered all readiness
to be employed in the enterprise, whereunto they were called. The old
credulous king, not suspecting any mischief plotted by these rebels, was
greatly comforted at their coming. And although by some of his Sultanes, that
had felt some inkling of this conspiracy, he was advised to deal
circumspectly and warily with them, and especially not to trust them with any
secret, or to let any matter of importance to be in their defense: yet did he
think every hour to be a thousand, till he had made them satisfaction, hoping
thereby that if they had conceived any mischief in their minds, they would lay
it aside, and being pacified by his amiable and courteous entertainment, yield
themselves in very truth faithful and obedient unto him. And thereupon being
more constant then he was in this his imagination, whiles he bestowed good
words and gifts among them, at the last he demanded of them what Captain
they would nomi^ate in the rowme of Emir-Chan: promising unto them, and
peradventure (as some say) with an oath, that whomsoever they desired, if
possibly it might be, they stould be satisfied. Herevntoo the dissembling
Mahamet-Chan made answer, that their desire was principally to do him
pleasure and service: of whose bounty and good inclination they did so well
hope, as that he would not appoint any person but such a one, as should be
valourous, noble, and dear and acceptable unto them. The King stayed not from
giving them presently to understand, that so he had determined to do, and
frankly declared unto them, that finding Tamas his third son to be without
any charge, and being desirous to geeue them a Captain that might please them,
to the end they might rest more assured of the good will which he bare unto
them, and have a good ostage in pawn thereof, he had made choice of his
child Tamas to be the successor of Emir-Chan: and that if it so pleased them,
they might accept of him, and with one accord endeavor themselves to conquer
those odious walls of the Forte, which with so great ignominy and reproach of
all the Persian Nation was there erected by the Turks. As soon as
Mahamet-Chan heard the resolution of the king, who beesides all expectation
offered thus to gratify them, and voluntarily of himself, without any
suspicion at all, yielded them the means whereby they might put in execution
the work which they had maliciously contrived against the peace and liberty of
the kingdom: he became more ioconde then he was wont to be, and outwardly
showed himself ready, for whatsoever the King would command him: and yielded
also in the names of all the rest, large promises of fidelity and obedience, so
that the matter might be performed, for which he had now given his word*

The king, who longed to see the hour, wherein this assault should be begun,
as a matter no less desired by every man, then necessary for all; the more he
was advised and counseled by his Sultans and the Prince, not to deliver his
son Tamas into their hands: and the less they feared that the king would
have committed such an error, but rather believed verily, that the king would
have made the conspiracy, which they had revealed unto him, to be capital and
matter of treason in the Turcomanni:) the more resolute and unwise he was, and
therevppon very secretly, and (as it were) by stealth, as well to maintain his
promise made unto them, as also to set his Son in such security, as he
might not so easily be made away by his brother Hamze, or his brother Ahas, he
gave him into the hands of Mahamet-Chan, as chief of all the Turcomanni, who
to nourish The king delivers his son ramas to Mahamet-Chan.
the good opinion and credulity of the King, and to secure the Prince and the
Sultans, gave a lusty beginning, by the help of all his followers, with
trenches and Rampires to approach the Fort. Neither was there any great Great
hopes that move the Turcomans to assault the fort.
time consumed therein: For they had now almost made the farther side of their
ditch even with the enemies wall, and the ditch it self was also almost filled
up with earth, so that there wanted but little more labor to begin the desired
assault.

And now was there a great fame published over all the East, in what dangers
the new Fortress was upon Aduertisements sent into Italy.
these occasions, yea and aduertisementes were now sent into Italy, that it
was quite demolished, overthrown to the ground, and burnt by the Persians:
when as contrary to the common opinion* and contrary to the public
expectation, wherewith all the world was now replenished, that false and wicked
Traitor Mahamet-Chan, with all his Turcomanni, leading away with them the child
Tamas, departed in the night time and upon a sudden from The Rebellion of the
Turcomanni.
so noble and honorable an enterprise: and being utterly blinded with ardent
desire to put in execution his ill-hatched purpose, covertly and without any
noise removed from the besieged walls, and put himself on his way toward
Casbin, still terming Tamas, by the name of the king of Persia, and sundry
ways abusing and mocking the poor old king, and the Prince. Great was the
astonishment of the subject Cities, when they hard the new publication of this
unripe and unexpected young King. Great was the grief, that the old king
conceived of this dangerous rebellion. But very great was the sorrow that
afflicted the Prince, for these alterations of so great importance. Whereby not
only so honorable and so necessary an enterprise was quite abandoned, but
also there was put in hazard the preservation of his own dignity, the honor of
that Scepter, the peace and quiet of the Kingdom, and his succession to the
Crown which was due and appointed to him. Whereupon The Doubts of the Persian
Prince.
being wholly incensed with grief and anguish, he began to toss and retosse
a thousand devises in his head, that he might resolve what he were best to
attempt. To abandon the siege of the Forte, it grieved him above measure, and
to suffer so pernicious a rebellion to go forward it seemed also to be too
dangerous for the state of Persia. To provide for both these inconveniences at
one time, it was altogether impossible. And therefore for certain days he
stood wavering in a huge tempest of contrary thoughts: The determination of
the Prince.
but at the last being inwardly provoked with the prick of glory, and
encouraged by the chief Sultans of the Kingdom, he resolved to turn
himself against the Turcomanni, and by rooting out first these new springing
dangers, that might have been able, alone of themselves, to have impeached
every enterprise against the Turks to make the way more open for him to
compass the siege, and to begin the preparation of his Army for the next
Spring. And so having gotten togegether twelve thousand Soldiers, and raising
also a The Prince, with 12000 pursues the ^urcomans.
part even of the Kings ordinary Guarde to go with him, all courageous and
hardy, he set himself to follow the rebellious and fugitive Turcomannes,
and marching in a direct course toward Casbin, all the way as he passed, he
had always notice of the journey which they held. And being arrived at a
place called Califteza, a days journey on this side Casbin, he ouertooke
them, and joined battle with them. Wherein many: of them being sorry for
their wicked revenge, would not so much as stir their swords against the
Prince and many other also fled away for fear, and so he The tureomans
discon^ fited by the, Prince.
obtained his wished victory over them. The sedicious Mahamet-Chan was taken
prisoner, and by the commandment of Emirhamze presently beheaded: the
Mahamet-chan and Califo the Sultan beheaded.
like also was done to Calife the Sultan, and to diverse other Captains of this
pestilent conspiracy. Young Tamas also was taken prisoner, and by the
direction of the Prince himself, sent alive to the Castle of Cahaca. Tamas
imprisoned.
Five thousand Turcomanni there were, that being now the followers of
Mahamet, fled out of this battle toward Babylon by the way of Siras:
touching whom, the opinion of many was, that they should go to yield
themselves to Solomon being then the Bassa of that City, which also was
done, although repenting themselves afterward of their folly, they sought to
return into the favor of their king: But all in vain: so that being become
Rebels to the one, and suspected to the other, they did at one time loose
their Country, their Liberty, their honor, and the favor of all men, as
well friends as foes. The Persian Prince passed to Casbin, and staying The
Prince at Casbin.
there, he labored to gather together the dispersed Turcomanni, those
especially, that being moved with the honesty of the cause, would not
bear Arms in so unjust an action: And afterward to make an Army as great
as was possible, whereby he might be the better able, at his return to Tauris,
to attend the besieging and conquest of the Forte. And this was the end of
the Turcomanne stirs.

But the Turks in this mean time were busy about diverse matters. At
Constantinople, Amurath was busy about the election of his General* and the
Soldiers of those Saitan Chalasi relinquished by the garrison there.
Garrisons, that were placed in the Fortes upon the frontiers, they were also
attempting many things. Those of Saitan Chalasi, by the Kings direction
relinquished their Forte, because the King thought, that Lory a Fortress very
near thereunto, was sufficient for the defense of that quarter: and now that
there was a new charge for maintenance of Soldiers in the Forte of Tauris,
added to his other expenses, this might be very well spared. And hereupon there
was a lying rumor spread at Aleppo, that Lory was recovered by the Georgians.

The Bassa of Reiuan, more for covetousness then for any glory, being very angry
that the nation of the Chiulfalini The Bassa of Reiuan at Chiulfal.
did bring no presents unto him, seeing that Leuentogli had sent very rich
gifts to the Bassas of Van and of Teflis, settled himself against the Country of
Chiulfal, and made an inroad upon them to annoy the^, with a thousand five
hundred Harquebusiers. The Chiulfalini being advertised hereof, shut up their
gates, and stayed waiting for the coming of the Bassa, with purpose to pacify
him, by sending him some bountiful presents. Now Chiulfal is a place of some
ten thousand souls or thereabouts, situate in the frontiers between the
Armenians and the Atropatians, and yet within The situation of Chiulfal.
Armenia, three days journey distant from Tauris, inhabited by Christians
partly Armenians, partly Georgians: a people rather given to the trafique of
silks, and other sorts of wares, whereby it waxes rich and full of money,
than instructed in weapons and matters of war. It was always subject and
tributarie to the Scepters of Persia, and contrariwise, both by nature and
affection great enemy to the Turks. The Bassa thus went against them, and
being arrived at Chiulfal, he found it defended with good store of armed
soldiers, and the gates well and safely locked. Notwithstanding the Bassa was
entertained by their Ambassadors, who were already gone out to meet him with
their liberal presents, and to entreat him that he would accept of the peoples
good wills: Who if they had not heretofore brought unto him their voluntary
tributes, it was done for fear least they should have fallen into the
displeasure of their King: who no doubt if he should have understood any such
matter, would have been ready to destroy their country, and deprive The Bassa
of Reiuan returns from Chiulfal we^ pleased.
them of their liberries and lives. The Bassa who rather to make a booty, then
for any other cause had that inroad, receiving his presents, was well pleased
with their intertainment, allowed the excuses of the Chiulfalini, and returned
again to Reiuan.

Advertisement hereof did fly in all have to the Persian King, who imagining
that besides the paimente of these voluntary tributes some worse thing had
happened, dispatched away Alyculi Chan with three thousand Soldiers, and with
this direction, that if the Country were subdued by the Turks, he should
fight against it: And if it had voluntarily yielded it self unto them, he
should not only recover it, but also burn it, and bring away all the chief
men of the Country for prisoners and slaves. Alyculi went to Chiulfal, and
finding the matter to have passed as before is described, without using either
Aliculi* chan at Chiulfal.
sword or force, he perwaded them, that in sign of their obedience still
continued toward the Persian Prince, they would present him with greater and
more liberal gifts, then they did their enemy Bassa. The Chiulfalini were
very ready to perform what he required, and pleased him in fuch sort, that
he carried back very good tydinges of their fidelity and obedience to the
King. Whereby this miserable people in midst of Arms and Aliculi returns
from Chiulfal well pleased.
Squadrons of the Enemy, what with presents and what with lies, preserved
their liberties and their lives in safety.

Whiles the Chiulfalini were in this sort molested, Giaffer the Bassa of the
Forte, fearing least the Persian Prince would return with the Turcomanne
forces, and Giaffer the Bassa in a great fear.
with a mighty Army for the siege, perceiving himself every day to wax
weaker and weaker, by reason that many did secretelie and privily fly from
him, determined to send advertisement thereof to the Bassa Cicala at Van:
signifying to him by writing, that he feared greatly least if the Prince
should return with Soldiers to assault the Forte, he should of necessity be
enforced to yeeled it up unto him, because many were fled out of the
Fortress, many perished by sickness, and many also slain, whiles too
boldly and rashly they adventured to go abroad to provide victuals. And that
therefore he would take care, as he tendered the honor of his Sultan, to send
him succor, to the end that at the return of the Prince he might be able to
resist him and maintain himself. Adding moreover, that now at this time,
especially, this designment might easily be performed, because there were no
forces of the enemies in those quarters, saving only a few which remained about
the king, being twelve miles distant from Tauris. The Bassa Cicala, although he
had a great zeal and love to his own City, which is indeed the greatest
and most noble frontier town in all those countries, notwithstanding being
deeply moved by the importunity of the enterprise that was propounded unto
him, and very desirous to gain some credit of glory and renown with his
King, entertained and accepted the aduices of Giaffer, Cicala the Bassa of Van
goes to succor Tauris.
and getting him to Horse, with a train of three thousand Harquebufiers, and
good store of munition, he traveled toward Tauris. The Persian King being
advertised of this stir, sent out certain Spies to learn what way they
held, meaning to meet them, and to set upon them: But the Spies coming near
unto Salmas, were apprehended by the forerunners of Cicala, and being put to
torture, they revealed at the last, how their King was in Arms, and on his way
toward Sancazan. At this Cicala the Bassa in a great fear.
news Cicala was greatly astonished, as well for the danger, whereinto the
sorces and munition, which he had with him, were likely to fall, as also for
that by any loss, which his troops should sustain in this stir, the
Fortress of Van must needs be in great hazard to be lost, because he had
left in it but a very few persons, neither was there any Captain to command
them but only the Checaia his Lieutenant. And thereupon he determined to
relinquish this dangerous enterprise, Cicala the Bassa retireth to Van.
and to withdraw himself back, to the defense and preservation of the
City, that was committed to his trust and government. But although these
expected and desired succors, were not conueighed to the Fort accordingly,
yet had Giaffer as good fortune as he could vvish. For the preparations of
the Prince were so long and troublesome, and his return so much prolonged,
that there was time enough yielded unto the Turkish General, now newly
chosen, (as by and by shall be told you) to go into those quarters, and to
preserve all that, which the only expedition and celeritie of the enemy might
have put in great hazard, and almost have brought to a desperate case.

In the mean time, at the City of Constantinople, the King was in a great
doubt within himself, what he K. Amurath busied about the election of a new
General.
were best to resolve for the choice of a new Captain. On the one side Osman
the Bassa having by his last will and testament left Sinan Cicala to be his
successor, the many dangers he had run through in the quarrelles about
Tauris, and besides these his deserts, the great favors that Cicala had in
the Serraglio, did make the King greatly incline to this his election. On the
other side he heard of a certain public rumor spread among the Soldiers,
that they could not by any means endure, to have so young a Captain
appointed over them, giving out in plain terms, that every man might know
it, that they would not obey him, and that some dangerous disorder would ensue
upon it in matters touching the Army. Then was there also Ferat the Bassa, the
same man which once already had had that charge, before Osman had it: and he
showed himself very ambicious and desirous of this honor, and had of late
performed some honest and convenient office in the Serraglio, whereby the King
might take some liking of his person. Any other to make choice of, he had none,
so that in this consultation with himself, he was utterly unresolved what to
do. Yet in the end, because he was to provide in good time for his business,
he determined to make choice of Ferat, a man of great fidelity, of Ferat the
Bassa chosen General.
honorable valor, and already thoroughly instructed in all such points, as
were necessary for the brideling of such an Army. Him therefore he chose to
be Captain for the conducting of his succors to Tauris, and to him he
granted the ordinary authority to manage at his pleasure such affairs of
the Empire, as concerned this his iorurney.

Upon this resolution, general precepts were sent out to all Cities within
the Kingdom, and to the Bassas, the Sangiacchi, and other Governors and
Officers thereof, with special commandment, that all their soldiers,
together with their taxes, tenthes, munitions, victualles, Armor, Artificers,
and to be short all their necessary furniture and provision should be ready
and in order upon the first warning that should be sent unto them at the next
Spring. And direction was given to Ali-Vcchiali the Captain of the sea, that
he should arm fourteen Galleys for conduct of the Ianizzaries to Trebisonda,
and such other garrisons as were to be transported to Erzirum, and from thence
to be employed where the General should command. Great provision of money
was made, and in Soria (besides the ordinary sum that is bestowed upon the
yearly pay of Soldiers in Reiuan, in Erzirum, in Aggiachalasi, in Lory, in
Tomanis, in Teflis, and in Chars, which swallowe up all the revenue of that
Country, and also of the City of Tripoli, and amounts to the sum of six
hundred thousand Duckatets) The revenue of Soria 600000. ducats.
there was taken up in pressed, of private Merchantes in the City of Aleppo
only, the sum of three score thousand Cecchini, to be repayed unto them
with the first moneys that should be teceiued by the Officers of the Custom
A loan of 60000. Cecchini lent to the King by the Mercha^ts of Aleppo.
houses. A matter that moved an extraordinary grudging among the people, for
that it seemed a very strange and intolerable exaction to every man, besides
so many grieuances and impositions laid upon them for corn, for carriages,
for Pioners, and for workmen, to endure this burden also of lending their
money without any hope of restitution thereof. Yea and in deed every man did
greatly wonder, how they were thus ill advised, by this means to make it
known to the Christian Princes, what scarsitie and want of money they had. The
400. pieces of artillery with the General.
General had also with him four hundred pieces of Artillery: and did besides
so work the matter, that Maxut-Chan, who was now appointed the Bassa of
Aleppo, was granted unto him to be the guide of his Army, and Maxut-chan,
Guide of the Army.
that Cicala the Bassa of Van, being scarce his good friend was removed from
thence, and sent as Bassa to Babylon.

And thus he departed from Constantinople in the month of April, and by the
way of Chalcedon passing over Ferat deparreth from Constantinople.
the Sea into Asia, he came to Siuas, in truth, something later than he
should have done, by reason of the great plague, which at that time did
generally afflict and grieuouslie vex the City of Constantinople, besides
many other Tht plague at Constantinople.
occasions and executions that hindered his journey. Never was there so great a
number of Soldiers sent out of Greece and Hungary, as was this year: And yet
had he gathered them altogether, and mustered them before he departed from
Siuas, where he stayed so long, that it was now the latter end of the month
of Iulie, before he went thence. Neither was it the plague only that caused
this his stay (for the most part of the Turks make no more dayntie to avoid
the plague, then we use to eschew Exceeding dearth at Erzirum and Aleppo.
any gentle disease:) but another great cause of it was the exceeding dearth
of victuals in Erzirum, where there was neither grain nor corn sufficient for
the necessity of their Cattle and men: which dearth was also so great in
Aleppo, that a Venice-bushel of wheat was fold for a dozen Checchini.

At the latter end of those days, wherein Ferat made his abode in Siuas, and
was now ready to depart from thence, there came unto him certain posts
sent Advertisement from Giaffer the Bassa of Tauris, to General Ferat.
from Giaffer the Bassa of Tauris, by whom he was advertised, how the Persian
Prince was hourelie expected with a populous Army following him, and that if
he should foreslowe to send succors, and to prevent the coming of the
Prince, and so give him time and leisure to assault the Fortress, he was in
exceeding great fear, least the Prince might surprise the same. Upon this
advertisement Ferat presently removed, and hastened his journey in such
sort, that he was in Erzirum about the beginning of August: where he was
scarslie arrived, Ferat in Erzirum.
but suddenly being provoked thereunto by the report of the Princes coming,
which was daily more and more confirmed, he set himself toward Van. To
which place all the Soldiers of Aleppo, of Tripoli, of Damasco, of Jury, and
of Palestina were already gone by the way of Caraemit: for so they were
commanded to do, because they might avoid the City of Erzirum, from whence,
by reason of the great dearth Hassan the Bassa, gonernour thereof was removed,
and could not keep residence there, but withdrewe himself to Chars, where
he lay at greater ease and less charges. Ferat therefore made haste to Van,
where having gathered all his Ferat at Van.
Soldiers together, and made a reuision and new surueigh of all his Army,
he departed thence, and being presently come into the open and large
Champaynes, he marshalled them in such sort, as though he should have been
prepared to fight the Battle. Wherein he The marshalling of General Ferat
Army.
did imitate old Sinan the Bassa, who although he reaped small commendations
for these his fained battles, whereof he made show in the Champeynes of
Chielder, yet notwithstanding he showed great cunning and experience in
matter of war, for that he would be assured of the Art and discipline of
his Soldiers: without which, many Armies in numbers infinite and in Arms
terrible, have been defeated by few squadrons in number far fewer, and in Arms
less fearful, though in matter of War, and skill in fighting more cunning
and experienced.

And therefore for the Vaunt-garde of his Army he appointed the Bassa of
Mesopotamia, with all his soldiers: His Vauward.
a people watered on the one side with Tigris, and on the other side with
Euphrates, partly infected with the fearfulness of the Arabians, and partly
endued with the constancy of the Armenians: And of these, to the number of
twelve thousand. In the Rereward he set the Bassa of Damasco, Captain of a
Nation more famous than valiant, to the number of eight thousand: in which
reckoning The Rereward.
were all the people of Soria, of Palaestina, and of Iudaea, watered with
Jordan and Orontes. In the body of The body of the battle.
the battle he placed himself with the soldiers of Grecia, of Peloponnesus,
and of Bithynia to the number of eighteen thousand. In the right Cornet there
were marshalled The right Cornet.
the Bassaes of Cilicia, of Pontus, and of Cappadocia, and of all those places
that are comprised under the name of Caramania, and Natolia, with all those
peoples that are dwelling upon the coast of Pontus Euxinus, upon Sangario and
upon Maeander, to the number of twelve thousand. In The left Cornet.
the left Cornet the Bassas of Maras, of Erzirum and of Van made the Wing, with
the Soldiers of both the Armeniaes, and the Sangiacchi of the Curdi: watered
with the Lakes Tospite and Martiano, dwelling in the middle between the
Iberians and the Mesopotanians, on the one side frozen with the cold of
Taurus, and on the other side warmed with the prospecte of the South, in all to
the number of twelve thousand. This last Cornette was kept with a perpetual
watch by the Knight Marshall of the field, and the other was defended with a
continual The Marshall of the field Voluntary soldiers 20000 Master of the
Horse.
trench of artillery: And in them both were mustered the voluntary Soldiers,
that after so longwarre being greedy of spoil, and ambitious of glory, were
equally divided between them, to the number of twenty thousand. The Vaunt
guard went always a mile before the Army, with two thousand Horse, and four
companies of the readiest light Horsemen to the number of three thousand: and
before all these, four or six Forerunners or Spies on horseback. After the
Auauntgarde rode the Master of the Kings Horse, called the Imbrahur Bassi,
with four The Ianizzaries and the Solacchi.
hundred Ianizzaries. Next after them followed four hundred Solacchi, and
then four thousand Ianizzaries more, and presently after them, the Long-shot
wrought The Sciemete
in Algier and called Sciemete, being the ordinary and perpetual Guarde of
the General, who without any company The place of the General.
by his side, saving only his twelve footmen, came next upon them. And behind
him his Standerdes, his Drums, his Trumpettes, and the whole body of his The
carriages
Battle: between which and the Rere-vvarde follovved his huge carriages for
the necessary use of his Army, and on both sides the two great and large
Cornettes before described. The watch of the night, whether the Army were
martching or lodged, was committed The night-watch committed to the Bassas of
Cilicia and Caramania
to the trust of the Bassaes of Cilicia, and Natolia above named. And thus had
the General Ferat marshalled his Army, with further direction that they
should not hazard battle with the enemy, but upon certain hope that they
might shun and avoid such cruel and memorable slaughters, as the last
year under the unhappy government of Osman, had left heaps of dead
Carcasses almost even and level with the tops of hills: And vvithall he
failed not to comfort and encourage all such, as quaked in their hearts at
the remembrance of those mischances that they had seen or heard.

The General was greatly perplexed in his mind with continual fear, least
his enemies should come upon him with some sudden assault: and the fame also
that was spread before in Amasia and after confirmed in Erzirum, of the
arrival of the Prince Amze at Tauris, with such an Army, as was publikelie
reported, did every The General Ferat made acquainted with treacheries in
Persia.
moment increase his irksome cogitations. But on the other side, he reposed
great confidence in the conspiracy that was plotted against the life of the
Prince, with the priuitie of Alyculi-Chan the Protector and Champion of Abas
the Mirze of Heri: Who under color of accompanying the Prince to assist his
forces, had resolutelie concluded with himself, and absolutely promised Abas
(having also given intelligence thereof to the Turkish General) that he would
rid the Prince Amze of his life, or at least (which he thought might more
easily be brought to pass) in the sundry reuolutions and variable chances of
the battle at some time or other, to make him fall alive into the hands of
Ferat, and so to settle his Lord and Master Abas, in his estate. Upon these
treacheries Ferat grounding himself, began with greater confidence to dispose
his designementes, and somewhat less to fear the reports of the Fame, that
blazed abroad the huge preparations of Persia against him: which preparations
in truth, as by most wicked devices and malicious conspiracies they were
turned quite contrary from that end, whereunto the Prince Amze had
continually appointed them, so if they had been employed with such says and
fidelity, as so righteous a cause required: without all doubt the writers of
our time should have had in this four-skore and sixth year, matter enough to
show, and represent to the whole world such accidents as should be nothing
inferior to those of the year before going. And Persia should have seen some
revenge at the least, of those most mischievous injuries that it has received.
But forasmuch as rebellion and discord, those two infernal Ministers of the
Devil, have for the utter undoing and overthrow of the glory of Persia,
continually favored the Turkish Armies. No marvel it is, that the Persian
Nation cannot vaunt of any revenge, that they have taken of any one indignity
offered unto them by their enemies: and that our Writers cannot choose but
write of the true and undoubted victories of the Turks, and the bare shadows
of the Persian exploytes. Which notwithstanding (but all in vain) our
Christian Nations, even until this day, although they do see the manifest
prospering, and evident conquestes, which the Turks have had in diverse States
and Countries, yet do they easily believe, because they do most earnestly
desire them to be true. But we will not fail as truly as possibly we
may, to report, whatsoever we understand to have happened: that out of our
writings the Readers may take such advise, as out of such aduertisementes may
be gathered.

The Persian Prince arrived at Tauris with the greatest part of his Army,
about the twenty eighth of the Moon Regeb, which may be about the latter
end of Iulie: In which place every body thought verily he would have stayed,
and attended the conquest of the Forte: which now he might have utterly
destroyed with more The Persian Prince at Tauris.
ease than before he could have done, because the soldiers that were in it
were reduced to a very small number, and those that did remain were greatly
impaired by sundry inconveniences, and withal shrewdly terrified with the
expectation of the Princes arrival. Notwithstanding this common opinion, and
public conceit was utterly frustrated. For Amze did not only forbear to
attempt this expugnation, but he scarce tarried any while in the City of
Tauris. The cause of this his so doing, is diversely, yea and vainlie reported.
The Persians and all their adherentes say, that Prince took The cause why the
Prince attempteth not the winning of the Fort.
this course, not because he was not able immediately to besiege the Forte,
and easily to have gotten the victory over it, (for they did not stick very
gloriously to vaunt, that it was in his power so to do,) but only because
if he had taken and destroyed the Forte, then would the Turks have for borne
to come to Tauris, and so the Prince should have lost the opportunity of
joining battle with them, and plaguing the Turkish Army with such losses and
discomfitures, as he earnestly desired to afflict them withal: meaning
notwithstanding to destroy the Forte, after he should have satisfied his
longing to be revenged on his enemies Camp. Others cannot believe that the
Prince would relinquish so necessary and honorable enterprise for any such
respect: for they were of opinion, that Amze could not have had a more glorious
revenge, nor more grieuouslie endommaged his enemies, then by overthrowing that
Forte, which to the great danger and peril of the Persians was erected even
in the midst of them: yea that Forte, for the building and accomplishment
whereof, they had compassed all those mischiefs the last year. Another cause
also there is yielded of this his so doing: And that is, the infirmity which
the Prince knew to be in himself, as a man unacquainted with the dangerous
attemptes of a siege, very fearful of Artillery, and more corragious in any
other kind of battle, then these that are used to be foughten under the
walls of any place. But let it be that he was lead by either of these two
respects, it makes no great matter: The truth is, that Amze with all the
troops, which he brought with him (the number and order whereof shall be
shortly hereafter declared unto you) did scarce make any stay in Tauris. For he
had understood, that before the City of Salmas Zeinel the Bey, by nation a
Curdo, and by office the Bassa of that City, had encamped himself: whom he
determined suddenly to set upon, and chastise, not only for his rebellion,
whereby of a Persian he became a Turk, but also for many other his insolent
behauiours, which he had diverse times used against the liberties and
privileges of the Cities of Persia. This determination he put in execution,
and being accompanied with twelve thousand Soldiers, he rode to Salmas,
where finding Zeinell with all his people, he gave him the assault. Zeinell
was more ready to fly and make escape, then minded to fight or make rescues:
and his Forces also as ready to follow his example: who being more intentive
to save themselves, with their household stuff and other implementes to resist
their enemies, the more they sought by all means to preserve their lives, and
slip out of the Persians hands, the more they fell into the spoil, Zeinello
the Bassa discomfited by the persian Prince.
and were woonderfully ill entreated, so that the Bassa himself with a few
other fugitives, could hardly save themselves in the cloasest and darkest
corners thereaboutes. And in this sort was Zeinello and the City of Salmas,
that was committed to his charge, and defense, The city of Salmas also sacked
by him.
endommaged and left for a pray to the Conquerours: Who entering into their
streets, houses, and Temples, sacked and spoiled the same, exercising thereon
such cruelties and indignities, as partly the natural desires of soldiers
do use to practice, and partly such as the Turks themselves showed upon them
(as it were for an example how to do in the like case) in that miserable and
most unfortunate sacking of Tauris the last year. The like spoils did the
Persian Army make in all those quarters round about: and so would
peradventure have returned to Tauris, but that certain Spies arrived upon
them, who brought advertisement, how the Bassa of Reiuan, being issued out of
his Fortress with fifteen hundred Harquebusiers, had committed the like
outrages in the villages and fields thereaboutes, as the Prince had done about
Salmas. With this news Amze was greatly moved, and immediately raising all
his Army, he iourneyed even until night, toward Reiuan, and not far from
the City encountered the Bassa: The Bassa of Reiuan put to flight and
discomfited by the Prince.
who discovering his enemies forces a far off, began in great disorder to
fly and retire into his Fort, leaving the greatest part of his Souldies,
being nothing so speedy in flight as himself, to the fury of the Prince, who
slew them all, and exercised all mischief, that might be devised, and al
terrible manner of cruelty in those quarters.

But notwithstanding all these wrathful conflictes and broils of war, the
two famous Prisoners, Ebrain-Chan and Amurat the Bassa, of whom we have made
mention in the former books of this history, ceased not, by peaceable A
treaty to exchange the two prisoners Ebrain and Amurat.
enter course and treaty about their own liberties, to procure that they might
interchangeably be enlarged and restored to their own Lords. This practice
continued very hot for many days together, and at the last the Turks were
contented to enlarge Ebram-Chan, upon condition that Amurat also might be set
at liberty. But the offer was thought to be very unequal: For (say the
Persians) Ebrain-Chan, was emprisoned against all right, by the dishonorable
treachery and infidelity of Amurath, to the great contempt and utter
subversion of al laws, which toward Ambassadors ought most sacredlie and
religiously to be maintained in any cause whatsoever: and Ebrain-Chan ought
not in any respect to be kept in prison, but with most manifest injustice and
iniquity. Whereas on the other side Amurath the Bassa was lawfully taken
captive, and brought into thraldom, not by deceit of words, nor breach of
faith, but in plain battle, even with the danger of those that took him
prisoner, and to be short, agreeablie, and according to the laws of war,
and Enemy-Nations. And therefore so unequal and unproportionable an exchange
was not only utterly to be denied and rejected, but also unreasonable on
the Turks behalf to be offered. These sound and effectual reasons of the
Persians could not be answered, but either by money or by some other means
that The treaty of enlarging the two prisoners is in vain.
might supply the defeates of the Turks inaequalitie: Whereunto they would
never agree to yield, and so the two Captains remanyned still in prison as
thy did before.

At the very same time, in the confines of Tripolie, certain Drusians of the
territory of Manogli, who after the departure of Ebrain the Bassa were
quietly and peaceably retired to their own homes, began to raise new
stirs and troubles. Whereupon the Drusian Captains, that were carried
prisoners to Constantinople by Ebrain the Bassa, and were now upon the point
to be set at liberty, and to return to their woonted habitations; at the
report of these fresh troubles and tumultes, were again restrained, and clapped
up in close custody, and in great danger also to have lost their lives. Now
the rumor of these stirs was this: that Manogli perceauing all the Soldiers
and garrisons to be now departed, for the war of Persia, as we have told
you, and none other provision sent for the defense of those places, he
determined to issue out into the field, and not only to revenge the death of
his people, which unjustly, and by treachery they had suffered, but also to
lick himself whole, and by a kind of violent restitution to be recompensed
for all those bribes and presents, which with so many shifts and subtilties,
as before is declared, were extorted from him by the Messengers and Stratagemes
of Ebrain the Bassa. For which purpose, being issued out into the playnes and
Champeignes of Tripoli, The subjects of Manogli do great harm in So^ia.
and having first wasted and sacked all the territory of Ebnemansur and of his
other enemies, he forced all that Country with sudden invasions and inroades,
even very near to the Cities of Balbecke and Tripolie. As for the defense
and rescue of Balbech, Acra would not stir a foot, fearing belike least he
might be endaungered by the valor and resolution of Manogli, wherewith he
was very well acquainted. But for Tripoli, there were diverse Soldiers, that
remained in that City, and lived as it were in Idleness, which with a great
sum of money they had purchased at the hands of the covetous Officers of the
Sultan Emperor. And these soldiers began to bestirre themselves lustily.
In this number of idle mates was one Mamut Bey, sometime a Sangiaccho, but now
cassiered and put out of Office, who by means of his bribes having avoided to
serve in these wars of Persia, imagined with himself, that such a fit
occasion, whereby he might show himself willing and ready to repress the
insolent invasions of the Drusian, might make him deserve so well at the
Sultans hands, that he would bestow upon him the office of Customer in that
City, which so greatly he desired. And therefore he before any of the rest,
displaying his Standerd, and mustering all his bands of Soldiers, in so much
that he did not spare the very Caddi and the Deftardar (that is to say, the
Judge and Chamberlain of the Gittie) but made them to ride out with him, he
road to encounter the Drusians and to join battle with them, hoping either
to destroy them, or honorably to put them to flight: Or else (as others do
discourse of the matter) in deed not to meet with them at all, but only to
bear away the commendation, that he was ready with his weapons in his hand
for the public defense of the City, and custody of his Lords Countries.
These Soldiers of Tripolie were not far departed from their City, but the
Drusians presently confronted them, and with continual shot of Harquebusies
began to disorder and divide them. But the people of Tripolie, although indeed
somewhat negligently, yet did they continue the skirmish a great while, and
would peradventure also have endured the battle a longer time, but that in the
sight of all the Army, The Caddi of Tripoli slain by the Drusians.
to the general astonishment of them all, the Caddi or Judge of their City
was shot stark dead with a Piece, and fallen from his horse: Who as among all
other men that came out of the City should have been the last man that should
have entermedled in such like actions, so was he the first man that was slain
in the sight. At this spectacle there arose such a confused fear among the
Turks, that the Deftardar or Chamberlain of the City, without any longer
stay fled as fast as he could into Tripolie, and all the The Drusians bereave
the Sangiacco of his Standerd, and kill his standerd-bearer.
rest after him. The Sangiaccho also, who was the chiefest and busiest
instrument of raising these stirs, had his Standerde bearer slain, and his
Ensign taken away, with many other losses that happened besides among the
baser sort. Aduertisementes hereof was sent to Constantinople, and presently
thereupon, the Drusian Captains (as we told you before,) were again
restrained: Mendel, as a great confederate with Manogli, that had raised all
these troubles, and Mansurogli with his accomplices, as friends unto Acra, that
would yield no defense in so great a necessity. Howbeit the Turkish King
dispatched away Aly Bassa borne at Aleppo, with the Aly the Bassa sent from
Constantinople into Soria against the Drusians.
title of the Bassa of Damasco, and with authority to muster fresh Soldiers,
and so wholy to attend the utter subversion of Manogli. But coming
thither, he found no innovation at all, but his presence in that Country
served rather for a reconciliation and peace making amongst them, then for
moving any war against them. And in truth, if ever at any time there
were good cause to avoid new war, at this time of all other it was most
necessary to avoid it: because neither the common treasure, nor abundance of
victualles, nor the desire or readiness of the Soldier did yield any
courage to enterprise such troubles: Besides, the huge number of Locustes,
which were in such abundance over all the Country of Soria, that in the
memory of all the oldest men there living, never was there seen so great a
multitude of those Excrementes in those Quarters, did as a most horrible
specctacle mightily increase the universal fear of grievous calamities to
ensue thereupon.

Now the Persian Prince having made an end of those outroades and spoils,
which before we have mentioned, retired himself to Tauris, and toward his
Fathers Camp, gathered together all the rest of his Army, that was now
arrived. The Order, Number, and Condition whereof it is not amiss to
describe, in such manner and sort as I heard it reported at Aleppo, when I
made diligent and due inquiry of these nevves there. They reported, that what
with the Soldiers of Heri, the Turcomannes, and the bands of Gheilan, and
what with all the rest of the Army, sent from the Cities that were
subject and obedient to the King of Persia: The Prince had gathered forty
thousand Soldiers: whereof, notwithstanding The' Army of the Persian prince.
that I and others had some doubt and suspicion, yet was it commonly
maintained by conferences among the Turks and Persians, and by letters among
the Persian Merchantes, and afterward it was confirmed also to be true in
deed. From Heri, under the conduct of Alyeuli Chan, they say there came an
Army of eight thousand: From Ghetlan, under the government of a son of
Amet-Chans, they say there came feuen thousand The ordering of the Army of
Persia.
Horsemen: Of the Turcomannes there were gathered together about six thousand:
And all the rest leauied by the subject and obedient Cities of Persia, whereof
we have often made mention before. And besides all this multitude, the King
was guarded by his ordinary Guarde of Churehi and Esahul, whose number and
necessary provisions we have already described in the second book. The
company of Heri, with some part of the The order of the Persian prince to
annoy the Army of Ferat.
Turcomannes were dispatched by the Prince under the conduct of Alyculi-Chan,
to encounter the Turkish General: And the like order given to Emanguli-Chan,
who had the Soldiers of Media, and the borderers of Armenia, under his
government. Both these Captains had in special charge, that in the most
narrow and most deceitful places by the way they should meet and receive
their enemies Army, and work them the gretest mischief and loss that
possibly they could. All which, Amze did thus order and appoint, because he
thought by this means to weaken his enemies Forces, and then being so
weakened, to come upon them with a fresh bartell, and utterly to destroy them
at their arriual to Tauris.

Both the Captains departed accordingly, making show that they would with
all affection obey and accomplish the commandments of their Prince: But
never was there heard any service of moment put in execution by them. For
Alyculi went about to allege reasons and excuses, why they should surcease
from meeting with the Turks: and Emanguli being as yet utterly ignorant of the
wicked purposes and mischievous treacheries of Alyculi, followed also his
example. But these excuses and delays of these two Persian Captains, the
Turkish General took leisure, without any loss or hindrance at all, to
arrive at Tauris, and to place the expected succors within the Fort. At what
time, by good hap, but by what means I know not, the Prince was certified of
the malignant intent of Aliculi, and of the designementes, which many of the
Sultans had lately contrived together, to betray the Prince alive into the
hands of the Turkish Captain. Of which suspicion Amze Prince Amze retireth
for suspicion of rebellion.
being greatly affraide, he durst not only not trust himself to perform
those battelles that he had detremined to perform, but quite abandoning all
this noble and honorable enterprise, he wholly employed all his care and
study, for the safe custody of his own person, and so left the triumph of
the matter in the power of the Turks And thus those great hopes and
expectations, which the Persians had conceived of compassing very famous
exploytes against their enemies, did not only prove vain and come to no good
issue, but contrariwise by this discovery they were converted into most
dangerous disturbances, and all Persia thereby endured sundry alterations and
reuolutions of most important consequences. For both Aliculi-Chan and his
Accomplices were pursued by the Prince as Rebels and Traitors, and also Abas
Merize of Heri was manifestly discovered for a wicked and treacherous
contriuer of his brothers death. Whereupon the common mischiefs were increased
more then ever they were before, and the public calamities yielded greater
hopes to the Turks, then they had ever conceived and fostered in all this
war.

Besides these designementes, there were others also, that contrary to all
expectation came to the like unfortunate issue, laid and plotted by Simon in
Georgia, who by the direction of the Persian Prince had united together his
Neighbors the Georgians, for the accomplishing of most noble and honorable
enterprises. And the designements of Simon were these: That at such time, as he
thought most convenient for sending fresh succors unto Teflis in Georgia, The
plot of Simon the Georgian.
he meant himself in person, with the company of seven or eight thousand
Georgians, and with a number of horse-loades of money (if not true loades
indeed, yet seeming in appearance so to be) to present himself under the Fort
of Teflis: and to the Turkish Bassa, Governor of that Castle, to deliver a
counterfeit commandment wherein it should appear, that King Amurath did give
the Bassa to understand, that by Simon being now converted to the Turkish
Religion, he had sent fifty thousand Chechini, and other muntion for the
Soldiers: and that he had also given unto Simon full commission and authority
at his pleasure to manage and dispose of that Fort: and therefore that he
should entertain Simon and give him credence therein. This his defignement
Simon put in execution, hoping thereby without force of Arms and without any
other inconvenience to make himself Lord and Master of that Castle. But the
Turkish Bassa, although both the form, and the tenor, and the Seal of the
commandment were very like to the ordinary manner of the Court (wherein
Simon had used great care and diligence:) and although he thought it also
very likely to be true, because he was revolted to the Turkish religion, as
he had feigned in the counterfect commandment, and that for all these causes
he ought to receive and entertain Simon into the Fort: Yet Simon wanting one
special thing, which in such like cases is a matter of greatest importance, he
was deceived in his expectation, and with great shame and derision forced to
retire, and so to auovde the Artillery, that by the direction of the Bassa
rayned like a Tempest upon his Soldiers. Now the thing which Simon wanted,
was a certain token delivered Simon when his plot came to no good issue,
retireth with loss and shame.
to the Turkish Bassa, when he was first appointed Governor of that Castle:
For to every one that is left as Lieutenant in such Fortes, ordinarily in
this war, with all secrecy, and straitest conditions of allegiance and
fidelity, there is delivered a Counterfect of the Mark, which shall be used
by him, that the next year following shall be received with succors into the
Fort. Which being required of Simon by the Turkish Bassa, Simon knew not what
answer to make, and because he could not so do, he was disconered to be a
treacherous deceauer and for such a one was he presently pursued in such and
so eager manner as people included within a castle wall, could in so sudden an
occasion use against him. And in this sort, did all the designementes and hopes
of the Persians vanish to nothing, and the report published in Italy, and
particularly in Rome of the taking of this Fotte was quite dashed and found to
be false, for that the fortunate Turks remained in quiet possession of the
Countries which they had conquered.

When the Turkish General had placed his succors in the Castle of Tauris,
leaving for the custody thereof Giafter the Bassa with his former companies,
he returned toward General Ferat having succored the fort, returns toward
Erzirum.
Erzirum, having first caused a Fort to be erected at Chucchiue Tauris, a place
near unto Tauris: another at Coy, and a third at Cum, which sometimes
belonged to Ebrain-Chan now prisoner at Erzirum as we told you before. And in
every one of the said Fortes he left a necessary number of Soldiers, with
sufficient munition and maintenance for them. He sent also afterward to
Teflis in Georgia the succors, which they there had long expected and desired,
and without any hinderance or difficulty very willingly received, because
the counterfeyt Succors sent to Teflis.
of the Mark was well known unto them, which before to Simon was both
utterly unknown, and also greatly hurtful.

But the Persian Prince having hunted Alyouli-Chan out of the quarters of
Tauris, thought himself wholly delivered from the great fear of treason and
rebellion, wherein he lived; and therefore in as great haste as he could, he
put himself on his journey toward Genge. In which place having gathered
together a good number of Soldiers, he determined to remove thence, and to
stop the succors for Teflis, and so to procure the utter overthrow of the
conductors thereof. He had always found Emanguli-Chan to be both faithful
and wise, and in him he reposed an assured confidence for perfourming of any
enterprise that he had in his hand, and communicated with him every devise that
he had conceived in these wars. And therefore he made head and joined with
him, and lodging most familiarlie within his City, he stayed there for the
setting in order, and disposing of his foresaid designment, being very
desirous not to suffer this season to slip, without signification to the world
of some notable novelty which might be correspondent to the fame, that of
matters passed and performed the year before, was now spread and published
abroad over all the world. But when he was even at the very fairest to put
this his desire in execution, and when least of all he The Persian Prince
slain by the treason of one of his Eunuche^
feared any treachery or treason, upon a sudden in the night time, he was
miserably stricken through the body by an Eunuch of his, that guarded him:
and so the most re^plendent and bright shining lamp that ever was in Persia,
was utterly extinguished.

What was the occasion thereof and who procured his death, diverse and sundry are
the opinions of men. Some think that his brother Abas Mirize of Heri, who had
before conspired to cause him to be betrayed into the hands of the Turkish
General, had now by force of money and gifts persuaded the wicked Eunuch
thereunto. Others deem, that his own Father, being become very desirous to
see Abas settled in the kingdom, did procure his death: which notwithstanding
in mine opinion has no point of probability. Diverse others do reason the
matter diversely. But we, not only are not able to affirm the certain truth
of this accident, but also have scarce any heart to testify to the world, that
thus or thus in truth his death was procured. For we are not minded to set
down any discourse for a truth, in such matters as have happened in these
wars, since we returned and have remained in Italy: to the end that we
would not diminish that credit and good opinion, which we know our Readers
have justly given to all things hitherto written by us, as unto things that
we were most desirous to understand for certenties, by such good means, as we
have already named in our Epistle to the Readers. And we in the mean time will
expect that some other Writer will pursue these adventures in such sort as
shall seem best unto him. For touching our selves: being weary of the many
diversities which we daily hear by aduertisementes out of the East country,
we have had no heart at all, to describe, what has happened therein, in the
year fourscore and seventh. But by the favor of the Readers here we have
thought good to make a full point.

A Letter to the Worshipful SIGNOR MARIO CORRADO, Wherein is proved, that
Tauris is not Terua, as Iouius writes: nor Tigranoama, as Negro takes it: nor
Tigran^certa, as others do think: but Ecbathana, as Ortelius and Anania do
judge.
Worshipful Sir, I have always made that reckoning of your Worships counsels
and aduises, which your virtue deserves, and especially touching those matters
whereof it pleased you to advertise me, at such time as I was resident in this
City, and so kindly entertained therein with all courteous and bountiful
entertainment. For whatsoever I could possibly observe in the History of the
Wars between the Turks and Persians, both concerning words and also
concerning matters, I have endeavored by all means to reduce unto that note
which you delivered unto me, and have not failed as much as my skill could
reach, to put in execution all your good precepts and aduertisementes. Only
there remains in this history one thing which as yet is not thoroughly
justified: and that is, mine opinion touching the City of Tauris, which your
Worship by reason of your douhting thereof, made me suspect at the first, but
afterward it pleased you to allow and confirm to be the best and soundest.
And although I have freely and boldly set down, that Tauris is not Terua, as
Iouius writes, but Ecbathana, as many others both before and after Iouius do
take it: and although I find many reasons whereby I have been persuaded so
freely to auow it: Notwithstanding, when I considered that this was a matter of
great importance in this History, to entrreat of the true finding out and
acknowledgment of a City, for the conquest whereof, almost all these troubles
of wars were principally raised: to the end that all things might the more
plainly appear, I resolved to publish these my reasons, and particularly to
send the^ to your W. not only because you first encouraged me with lively
arguments to approve this particularity, being of it self a very important
matter, yea and the more importa^t in regard of the authority of such men as
are of the contrary opinion: but also because you were a great helper unto me
with your own private study to furnish me with so goodly a number of reasons
for the same. By twelve arguments therefore, me thinks I may certainly and
demonstratiuely reason, that Tauris cannot be the Terua of Ptolomey, but ought
indeed to be called the ancient Ecbathana.

My first reason is, because Strabo teaches us, that the Poole Mantian, or
Martian, or Margian (call it as ye will) that which is now termed the Poole
Actamar, is situate The first reason.
in the confines of great Armenia, and stretches even as far as the co^fines
of Media Atropatia. And in the twelfth book of his Geographie, it is
manifestly seen, that there is either very little or no quantity of
country or people at all between the Mantian Poole, and Media the greater.
The same may be collected out of Ptolomie, who (as it seems) does place the
forenamed Poole, rather in the entrance of Media the greater, than in the
latter end of great Armenia. Out of this certain truth I gather this
foundation. The Martian Poole is in the confines of the Medes and of the
Armenians: and therefore it must needs follow, that if Tauris should be
Terua, it must either be in the West, or in the. West Southwest, or in the West
Northwest, or else in the very Northwest of the said Poole: for in the South
or in the North I do not believe that any man does place it, and if he should
so do, he should commit an error, not only worthy of correction but also of
chastisement. But if Tauris be Ecbathana, it must either be in the East, or
in the East Southeast, or in the Southeast, or in the East Northeast, or else in
the very Northeast. For much less will any man be so bold as to place it in
the South, or in the North of the said Poole, and whosoever should so place
it, he should commit a double error. Terua indeed according to Iouius, and
according to that which the description of Ptolomey does infer, is (as a man
may say) in the very center and midst of great Armenia, and consequently it
must be in the West, or West Southwest, or West Northwest of the said pool.
Whereupon, if Tauris should be Terua, then should Tauris have the very self
same situation. But both sense and reason, yea and Iouius himself, and all
other do with one accord confess, that Tauris is in the East of the
forenamed Poole, and by a good quantity of ground distant from it. And
therefore it remains, that Tauris is not Terua: but Ecbathana being a good
way distant in the East of the said poole, a man may conclude, that the very
situation and ancient ruins of Ecbathana have yielded matter and stuff to
this new Tauris.

And so much the more likely, because all the Marchantes The second reason.
and soldiers that use the viage from Van to Tauris, and from Tauris to Van
(being a place situate as it were on the eastern banks of the Martian poole)
do uniformly testify, that in their traveling from Van to Tauris they have
their faces looking toward the East: and in their return from Tauris to Van
they have their faces turned toward the West: and that they pass through
certain valleys between certain mountains which peradventure may be the
tops of the Caspian mountain.

The like testimony is given by many of the soldiers that went to Tauris with
Osman. Besides whose testimony, the third reason*
we may also make a sound conjecture by the journey which that army made. For
the said army being gathered together at the city of Erziru^, (which out of
all doubt we must hold to be Simbra or Sinibra in Ptolomee) and by the way of
Hassan-Chalasi and Chars, passing by Euphrates, and leaving Araxis on the leaft
hand, it arrived at Van upon the Martian Poole. And from Van it came to the
champaines of Caldaran, and thence to Coy. From which place it passed
afterward to Merent, to Soffian (which peradventure may be the ancient Soffia
of the Medes) and so to Tauris. After that Tauris was sacked, and the Forte
erected there, the army returned to Van, and from Van by the wonted way to
Erzirum. Now do not I know, to what end all this people should go to Van and
to Coy, if Tauris were in the sight of Terua, which is on this side of Van,
five degrees or there abouts. For it had been much better for them by a direct
course to have passed from Chars to Terua, then first to go to Van, and then to
come to Chars, and so to Erzirum. Neither can Iouius be excused, in saying,
that in those days they had no such way. For he himself in the three and
thirtith book of his histories, (reciting the viage which Soliman made, at
such time as retiring from Tauris, which he had sacked, he iourneyed toward
Mesopotamia,) does expressly write, that Soliman in his return first arrived
at Coy, and to the Champaines of Caldaran. And a little after he adds, that
Tamas pursuing Soliman came to Tauris, and from Tauris to Coy and to the
Caldaran Champaines. By which voyages Iouius might easily perceive, that
Tauris, (which in his fourtinth book he situateth more toward the East then
Coy is, by the space of four score miles or thereabouts) by this means must be
in Media the Greater, where Ecbathana is: and that consequently it could not
be thought to be Terua, which by Ptolomee himself is placed on the west not
only of Coy, but also of the Margian Poole.

This opinion is also fortified and made manifest by The fourth reason.
the authority of Ptolomee, who places Terua for latitude in 78. degrees, and
the Martian Poole, 83. degrees. and so sets Terua more toward the west,
then that poole is, by four whole degrees. Howbeit if this Terua should be
Tauris, as Iouius will have it, then should it be on the east side of the said
Poole, not only 4. degrees but five or six degrees. By these self same
reasons me thinks that Negro is likewise convinced, who in his Geographie The
error of Negro and others.
does resolutely write, that Tauris is Tigranoama. And with Negro are those
also confuted, which say that Tauris is Tigranocerta. For Tigranocerta is by
Ptolomee situated on the West of Tigranoama, and Tigranoama on the west of the
Martian Poole, by the space of three whole degrees. Besides that Strabo
writes, that Tigranocerta was above the river of Euphrates, from which river
Tauris is distant more then twenty days journey of sumpter-horses.

Moreover another argument may be framed in this The fifth reason.
manner. From Tauris to Casbin at this day it is no more then nine days
iourny: and euey days journey may be reconed after five and twenty miles or
thereabouts: which besides that I can justify it with the greatest certainety,
that may be (next to a man's own sight) is also confirmed by Barbaro, and by
others according to Ramusius. Howbeit this journey could not be finished in so
few days, if Tauris were in the situation of Terua, considering that from
Terua only to the very entrance of the Martian Lake there fall out three
degrees, much more to Casbin which is in the midst of Media the Greater. For
unto Casbin the way would fall out to be far greater for number of miles, of
daies-iournies, and of degrees.

Those also that going from Tauris do travel in a direct The sixth reason
line toward the North, do clear this for a manifest truth. For they report,
that after a long journey, having first passed over certain mountains, they
do arrive upon the Southern side of the Caspian sea, even directly wherethose
havens of the sea of Tauris are, whereof Barbaro speaks. A thing that was
never read to have happened unto those, that traveling from Terua do go in a
directlyne toward the North: for they always leaft the said sea on their
right hand, and went into the very midst of the Isthmus, which is a narrow
piece of land situate between the Caspian and Euxine seas: as it may sensibly
be judged, by the right measure of Ptolomees Table, without any further
reading of other writers or information of traveling strangers.

The custom also, which the kings of Media observed The seventh reason.
in spending the Summer season at Ecbathana, as a City more cold, more
northern, and more subject to the winds, seems to me to be no small argument
for maintenance of mine opinion. For by that custom I do conjecture, that
Terua being one of the midland Cities of Armenia must needs be less cold,
and less subject to snowes and winds then Tauris is at this day. Whereof all
men do with one consent agree, that it is a cold, and a snowie City, and even
in the summer time subject to the continual blastes of the winds.

Next hereunto may be added the situation of Terua, The eight reason.
which in Ptolomee is placed between Euphrates and Araxis, and yet somewhat
distant from both the said rivers toward the South: which does manifestly
declare that Terua cannot be Tauris, because Tauris is not only at this day
beyond Araxis, but is also beyond the Caspian Sea, whereintoo Araxis does
discharge it self.

A man may also draw no sclender argument, from those that go from Tauris to
Ormus or Armuza, which we The ninth reason.
now call, the Island in the Persian sea, from whence they fetch their pearls
and other precious things, although in deed it be otherwise somewhat unhappily
seated by reason of the excessive heat that reigns therein. These travelers
leaving the Caspian mountains on their right hand, and not troubling
themselves either with climing over them, or with ferrying over Euphrates or
Tigris, and without touching either of Mesopotamia, or Babylonia, or tourning
to Van or to the Mantian Marish, do ascend vpwardes toward Siras in Persia,
and going as it were southward, they come at last to the Persian sea. So that
if Tauris were Terua, and so in the middle region of the greater Armenia, then
should they not need to go toward Siras, but they must of necessity pass over
the Caspian mountains, or ferrie over Euphrates or Tigris, or else travel the
rough Mesopotamia, or turn themselves toward the Mantian Marish, or toward
Babylonia.

With the like reason may a man confirm this to be true, by those that pass
from Bitlis, (a famous City in The tenth reason.
Armenia) to go to Tauris. For they must of necessity travel over the Caspian
mountains, and still to journey eastward, leaving behind them the Mantian
marish, the City of Coy, and the Caldaran champaines: which whether they be
the Champaines of Araxis, or some other near unto them, let other men use
their own judgment: for we can hardly certify the truth of that
particularitie. But if Tauris were Terua, which is in the midst of Great
Armenia, then should they not need to make this journey. For neither should
they travel so much toward the east, neither should they leave behind them
either Coy, or the Mantian Marish, or the Caldarane Champaines.

This opinion of mine is no less confirmed to be true, The leauenth reason.
by others also, that coming from the furthest parts of the East Indies, do
first arrive at Cassan a famous City of the Persian kings, and then travel to
Tauris, and from Tauris to Coy and to Van, making always about eight or nine
days journey toward the west: which could not be so, if Tauris were either
Terua, or Tigranoama, or Tigranocerta.

Like unto these reasons is that also which may be drawn The twelft reason.
from the journey that is usually made from Tauris to Babylonia. For as every
man does testify, and namely Angiolello in his viage lately made into Persia,
they travel by south southweast. Which is a manifest token, that Tauris is
just in the situation of Ecbathana and not of Terua. For whosoever trauelleth
from Terua to Babylonia, he must of force travel not by south southweast, but
by southeast.

These are the reasons, whereby I have been persuaded not to leave this
parcel of my history to remain in such doubt, but have taken upon me
resolutely to decide the same. Which although they be very pregnant and strong,
yet shall I account the better of them, if your W. will willingly accept of
them, and vouchsafe to continue the reading of this my letter, until you
understand also in what sort Iouius and his followers have on the other side
confirmed their opinion.

For three causes do they believe, that Tauris should The first argument of
Iouius and his followers.
be Terua. The first Argument is drawn from a very subtle consideration,
which they have, touching the similitude and likeness of the names of all those
places, whereof they do find that many ancient Cities do yet at this day
retain the first nomination, although by the alteration of speech it be
somewhat different from the same. As for example, the Turks call
Constantinople by the name of Stambul, which is a term borrowed from the
Grecians, who call this City Stimboli. And this term which the Graecians do
use, was first brought in whiles their Emperors reigned at what time the City
of Constantinople was called by excellency (...), that is to say, the City:
and such as went thither, or came from thence, used to say (even as we use also
at this day to say of Rome) We go to the City, we come from the City,
always using the term (...). Which Greek word, being corrupted by the common
people of Graecia, began first to be Stimpoli, and afterward being more
deformed and depraved by the Turks, it came to be Stanbul. The like may be
said of the City of Charsa, which Ptolomee calls Corsa: of Anguri, which in
old time was called Ancyra: of Euphrates and Araxis, the one being now called
Frat, and the other Arais: of Cesarea, which still is called Caisarie: of
Alexandria, which yet is called Schenderie: of Ioppa, which is called Iaffa: of
Antiochia, which is called Tachie: and of many others, among whom Terua may
also be nombred, which afterward with a small alteration of the word came to
be called Taruis, Teruis, and Tauris.

To this first argument, they added also a second. For The second argument.
they say, that those which travel from Amida, being at this day called
Caramita, the chief City of Mesopotamia, and go to Teruis, do pass over the
river Tigris: which river runeth from the one side of the Mantian Marish unto
the other side thereof with such swiftnes, that it is likened to an arrow, and
thereof it purchased the name of Tigris which it has at this day, (as Strabo
teaches us). Neither do they pass over any other River of fame there. And
that is a manifest token, that Tauris is in Armenia, even in the very situation
of Terua.

Besides these two reasons, they have also a third argument, The third argument
fortified upon the relation and report of those Armenians, that come to
Venice, to Rome, and to other parts of Christendom: from whom, it may be
peradventure, that Iouius took his information. For all these have given, and
at this day do give undoubted testimony, that Taruis is in truth in Armenia.
Which testimony, if it be true, then must it needs be concluded (say they)
that Taruis can be no other but Terua.

These three arguments I have not deemed to be so pregnant and sure, as that
they do deserve or enforce, that I should commit the truth of mine opinion to
the authority of Iouius. And therefore rather then I would yield unto them, I
have found out a most easy way to resolve them, and to answer them most
sufficiently.

Whereupon, concerning their first argument, I say, The answer to the first
argument.
that although the similitude of words do fall out well in many matters, yet
in many other it does greatly err, and may easily deceive us. For whosoever
should go about to recon up all the Cities, and all the Rivers, and all the
Mountains, and all the Provinces, he should find a great want and error in
the most part of them. And therefore we will allege some few of them, by
whose example a man may know the slender force of the reason that is drawn
from this similitude of words. And in truth what similitude has Damasco with
Siam? Jerusalem with Godz? Arsacia with Casbin? Persepolis with Siras? Bithinia
with Bursia? Calcedon with Scutar? Tyrus with Sur? Ptolemaida with Acri?
Derbent with Alexandria? Albania with Zuiria? Iberia with Gurgistan? Atropatia
with Siruan? Mesopotamia with Diarbech? Appamea with Aman? Seleucia Pieria with
Soldin? Anazarbo with Acsara? Arabia Faelix with Giamen? Cilicia with
Caramania? and many others the recital whereof would be troublesome and
tedious. And in deed, with great reason ought we to hold this for an uncertain
kind of argument, which is taken from the liknes of words. For those nations,
that have governed these regions have not always had one and the selfsame
regard in naming the places which they had subdued. But as in some of them they
have still retained their very proper names, although their language has made
them somewhat to differ: (as in some aforenamed may be seen, and as now of late
we have observed in Cipris, which yet they call Cupros.) So in some others
altogether forgetting their former names, they have called them by diverse
names, according to diverse occasions, and in diverse respects. Yea and Iouius
himself says, that Amida was called by the Turks Caramita, for the blacknes
of the earth: and we also, besides the observation of Iouius, do know that
Alexandria upon the Caspian Sea is now termed by the Turks Schenderia, (as it
should be called by the ancient name:) but because it is long and strait, it
came to be called Derbent, and because it has Iron Gates Demir-Capi. Likewise
for Casbin, or as the Persians term it Casuin, (let it be which of the
ancient Cities you will have it to be) it is notoriously known, that it was
so called because it was at the first a place, whereintoo they were wont to
banish or confine such persons, as for their offenses and misdemeanors had
deserved that chastisement. Which for that it was a place of punishment, it was
called by the Persians Casuin and Casbin, which in the Persian language
signifies Chastisement. The like I might say of the city of Aleppo, by the
Moors called Halip, which in our tongue signifies Milk (for the same Arabians
do say, that it was so called for the abundance of milk, which in the time
of the Patriarchs was yielded by the heardes and flocks of cattle in those
champaines). But because I have not that certain testimony hereof, which I
have of mine other examples, I will not make account to build any foundation
thereupon. And therefore next after those things that I have already noted, I
will set down also what I have observed touching the river, that enters into
the sea between Beryto and Tripoli. Which river, because it runs near unto
a Church, which was sometimes dedicated to Saint Jacob, is by the inhabitants
there called Mar Iacut, which is to say, the River of Jacob. Likewise the river
Orontes, which is nombred among the famous Rivers of Soria, (whose banks I
have viewed, even from his springing head to his maine channel, which is near
to Seleucia Pieria,) has among the Arabians and the Turks quite lost his
ancient name. And because it is very swift in his course, and has many
turninges and windings, (so that those which swim in it are oftentimes drowned
therein,) as though the poor river had in that respect the nature of a
murderer, therefore the Turks and the Moors have given it a name, that
signifies expressly, a murderer or traitor. And to the end that the truth
hereof may likewise be known in mountains also, I will not conceal that which
comes to my memory touching the mountain Bacras, which is also called Beilun.
This is a mountain, lying in the rank of the mountains that deuideth Soria
from Cilicia, (which how it was termed by ancient writers, I leave to other
men to judge). But by the Inhabitants there, it has been always, and is at
this day called Bacras, for none other reason or cause, but for that it is so
ragged, so eaten as it were, and in some parts, even in the grassie plottes of
it, so bald and so bare, that it resembles the head of one that is scuruie,
which by the Turks is called Bacras, and by the Moors Beilun: for so do the
Moors also call that mountain. Hereby then it does manifestly appear, that it
is no sound argument which is drawn from the likeness or similitude, that
ancient names have with the names of later times. For all places have not
reserved, and retained among the diversity of sundry languages their ancient
denominations: and so it seems to me that this first argument remains
sufficiently confuted. As also the second, which having no good and sound
root, may easily be overthrown.

Utterly false is that foundation, which the followers of Answer to the
second argument.
Iouius do use in that place where they say, that the river Tigris passes from
the one side of the Mantian Lake unto the other side thereof. For it woorketh
not that effect, which they speak of, in the Mantian Marish, but in the
Marish, that by Strabo is called Tospite, and Topiti, and Arassena. I will not
here allege the testimonies of later livers, as namely of Cicala himself
(the Bassa of Van) nor of a thousand and a thousand marchantes and soldiers,
but only the testimony of Strabo, whose authority cannot be refuted as a liar.
He, in the eleventh book of his Geography, thus writes. Armenia has also
great Lakes. One is the Mantian Lake, that is to say, Black and Green like
the Sea Water: and (as they say) it is the greatest Lake next to Mwotis. It
arriueth even unto Atropatia, and has diverse salt-springes. The other is the
Arassen Lake, called likewise Topiti: (for so it should be read, and not Toeti,
as some translate it.) This has Nitrum in it: and teareth and renteth a man's
apparel, and for that cause the water of it is not good to drink. The river
Tigris, departing from the mountain near unto Nifates, passes through this
Lake, without mingling of it self with the water thereof, by reason of his
swiftnes, whereof it has taken his name: for the Medians call an arrow Tigris.
It has fishes of many and diverse kinds, whereas the fishes of the lakes are
but of one kind only. Near to the utmost corner or Gulf of the Lake, this
river falling into a great deep, and running for a great space under the
ground, rises again near to Colonitis, and from thence courseth toward
Opis, and the walls of Semiramis, leaving the Cordiae^ns on the right hand.
All this did Strabo write, by the authority of Eratosthenes in his sixteenth
book: where he says also most plainly, that the said River Tigris does not
pass through the Mantian Marish, but through the Topiti. But no marvel it is,
that Iouius has conceived this error, considering how greatly he is also
deceived, when he will needs call Siras, Ciropolis: when likewise he says,
that in Cassan there is traffic for silks, and that this City stands in
Sultania, between the South and the West: and lastly, when he puts no
distinction or difference between the Zogdiani, the Bactrini, the Ariani, the
Margiani, and the Aracosi, but makes them all one. And therefore leaving these
considerations, it shall be sufficient for me to answer to their last
argument, which is drawn from the report of the Armenians, who say that Tauris
is situated in Armenia the great.

A reason (in very truth) very dangerous, very slipperie, Answer to the
third argument.
and very deceitful. And it seems to me to be altogether like to the
reason of those, who going about to prove, that the Amomu^ of Dioscorides, is
none other thing, but the Pes Columbinus (that is to say, the Pigeon Foot) of
Mount Libanon, do use the common word of the Sorians, which call that Plant
Hamana being in very deed nothing else but a kind of Pigeon foot. And in troth
what assured credit may be reposed in those Armenians, and in such kind of
people as are utterly unskillful in Geographie, who never read any author,
that had taught them the proper Terms of those provinces? Do we not see what
a confusion and mingle-mangle they make of the same regions? Do they not
precisely call one part of great Armenia, by the name of Gurgistan, only
because many Georgians inhabit there? And likewise on the other side, do they
not call one part of the great Media by the name of Armeni, because many
Armenians do at this day dwell dispersed here and there in diverse villages of
that country? But under the word Rumeli, which in our language signifies
Greece, how many places do the Turks entertertaine, which are quite out of
Greece? And with their Natolia and C^ramania do they not likewise confound and
(as it were) murder so many provinces, that it seems a matter impossible to
find out their ancient names? what man is he then, that if he had many other
means, and many other reasons to prove the truth for the certain
acknowledgement of sundry places, would report himself wholly and absolutely
to the relation of that people?

This is as much as I thought sufficient to answer the The conclusion.
reasons of Iouius, and to confirm mine own opinion. All which
notwithstanding, I do refer to your worshippes judgment, who as a most gentle
person, and a special friend to the truth, will make that accoumpt of my
reasons as they deserve. Which that you will do, I humbly beseech you, and so
heartily recommend my self unto you.

From Rouigo the 17. of August. 1587. Your worships most affectionate seruitor,
Iohn-Thomas Minadoi.

A Table, containing the declaration of the Names and words, used in this
History, as well Ancient, as Barbarous. Wherein the letter A. signifies the
Ancient: B. the Barbarous: P. the Persian: and T. the Turkish name or word.
A.
ACca and Acri, B. a Seacoast City in Soria. Ptolomaida. A. according to
Ortelius and Anania. Adena and Adana, B. a City in the confines of Cilicia,
Adana, and it may be, Nicopolis, A. Aga, B. a Captain, or Chief of his
company. Aggia-Chala, B. the Castle Deregrine, or the Castle of Strangers.
Aggiami, Look for Cheselbas, and the Persians. Aleppo, B. and Halep, B. look
for Halip. Alger, B. by Iouius is thought to be Iulia Cesarea, A. and by
Castaldo and others, to be the City of Cirtha in Africa. Altun-Chala, T. the
golden Castle, or Castle of gold: A place in the confines of great Armenia,
and Georgia. Amadan, B. a City of the Persians in Parthia. Aman, B. a City in
Soria, watered with the river Orontes. Apamea, A. Amasia, B. Castaldo thinks
it to be Cappadocia, A. and others take it to be in ancient times called
Amasia, A. Andera, or Andara, a Town in Drusia, where most exquisite Silks
are made. Andrinopoli, B. a principal City in Thracia, Adrianopolis, A.
Angori, B. a City in Cappadocia, which is a Region in Asia the lesser, and by
Bellonius thought to be Encyra, and Ancyra, A. in the peregrination of Saint
Paul. Antachie, B. a City in Soria, now decayed, but yet worth the sight, both
in respect of the situation and walls thereof, as also for the River that
runs by it. Antiochia, A. Arasse, B. a River that watreth the South part of
great Armenia, and almost divides it from Georgia. Araxis, A. Achlar, and
Ares, T. Arbella, B. a City in Assyria, according to Strabo, and Q. Curtius,
and by the error of some thought to be Taruis. Arcipelago, B. but in old time
called Mare Egaeum, A. a part of the Sea Mediterraneum, that seperateth Europe
from Asia. Ardachan, B. a City of the Turks in great Armenia. Ardouil, P. a
City in Media, the first Seat of the Persian Sect, wherein Giunet, Sederdin,
and other their successors, that were authors of the Persian superstition, did
reside and reign. Arz, T. a Supplication, a Request, or an Information.
At-Maidan, B. the high Street, or chief Market place in Constantinople.
B.
BAgdat, B. Laonicus calls it Bogdatis, and the Italians call it Baldacco, in
old time Babylon, A. Balbech, B. a City in Palaestina, which Bellonius takes
to be Caesarea Philippi, A. and so is it accounted in the peregrination of
Saint Paul. Balsara, and as Frederico writes it, Bassora, B. a City in the
channel of Euphrates, called by Castaldo, and others, Teredon, A. Bassa, T. a
Captain, a Governor, a chief Lord. Beglerbey, T. a great Lord. Bestan, P. a
City in Hircania. Bey, or Beg, or Bech, T. a chief man, or a Lord. Bir, which
some call Birta, B. a City upon Euphrates, in the confines of Soria. Bruz, B.
a Hill in Armenia; the creast of the Periardj Mountains. Brusia and Bursa, B.
in old time the chief Palace of Bithynia, and called in the old time Prusia,
A. But Ortelius unadvisedly thinks, that Bursa and Brusia is not a City, but
a whole Region. And herein also is Castaldo deceived, if our own sense have
not showed unto us one City in steed of another, or if we be not deceived in
deed in the very names of them.
C.
CAddi, T. a Judge. Cafe, B. a place within two days journey of Babylon, where
Aly and his children are buried. Caffa, B. Anania vset h no other name:
although in deed Caffa now was in old time called Theodosia, A. Cahaca, B. a
Town so called, situate between Casbin and Tauris. Cairo, B. a huge City in
Egypt, near whereunto are the famous Pyramides: whereby a man may easily
judge, that there was the most renowned city of Memphis. Ortelius thinks
that it is Babylon: but Ortelius himself sets down another Babylon in
another table of his, and places it in Assiria. So that he makes two Cities
of one name. Whereof notwithstanding it is no time now to dispute. Caissar, B.
a place in Cilicia, of no great reckoning, and without any note of antiquity.
Calaus, T. a Guide. Caldaran, B. the name of certain famous Champeynes. Perhaps
they may be the same Champeynes which Strabo called the Champeynes of Araxis.
Calife, P. a Priest, or Prelate. Canac, B. a River that divides a part of
Atropatia from Armenia. Candahar, P. a certain Kingdom. In old time
Peripaniso, A. Capigi, T. a gentleman Usher. Capigi-Bassi, T. the chief
gentleman Usher. Capigi-Larchecaiasi, T. the Lieutenant or chief Lord of the
gentlemen Vshers. Caracach, P. a Territory of the Persians in Media.
Carachala, T. the black Castle, it is in Armenia, but it belongs to the
Georgians. Caraemit, T. the black City. It is now the Metropoliticall City of
the Mesopotamians. Iouius and others call it Amida, A. Caramania and Caraman,
B. the black Region: It is commonly deemed to be Cilicia, A. Casbin and Casuin,
P. we may well interpret it: The place of punishment. And it is the City,
whether the palace of the Persian Empire was translated by Tamas, and called
Casbin, because those that for their punishment had deserved banishment, were
at the first banished thither. It is yet in Media the great, a little more
South then Tauris: So that a man may very well think it to be Arsacia, A. in
Strabo. Casenda, T. the common Treasure. Look Hasna. Cassachi, T. Robbers by
the high way. Cassan, B. a City in Parthia, very famous and rich. Ortelius
and the rest make no mention of it. Cassangic, B. a place belonging to
Maxut-Chan in Armenia. Cecchino, or Zecchino, a Venetian Duckate. Chala, and
Chalasi, B. a Town or a Castle. Chan, P. and also used in Tartaria, and is
the same that the Turks call a Bassa. Chars, B. peradventure it is that which
Ptolomie calls Corsa, A. Checaia, T. a Deputy or Agent. Cheiserie, B. we
think it to be Caesarea in Palaestina, A. a little from Ioppa. Ptolomie says
it is Caesarea, whereof Strabo makes mention. It has many notes of antiquity.
Cheselbas, B. a Red-Capp. It is a title given to the Persians: who are also
called the Soffians, the Cheselbas, the Persians, and the Aggiami. Look
Persians. Chianichie, B. a place near to Ragusa, very famous, because it was
the native Country of Ebrain Bassa, son in law to Amurath. Chiaus, T. a
Nuntio, or an Ambassador. Chielder-Giol, B. the Lake of Chielder: for Giol
signifies a lake: and it may be thought without any error to be the Poole of
Euphrates, A. Chielder Monte, B. the hills of Periardo. Chielebi, B. a
Gentleman. Chiulfal, B, a Town in Armenia, yet inhabited at this day by the
Georgians. Chiuri-Chala, B. a new Territory in Georgia, that is to say,
inhabited of old by the Georgians, but yet comprehended under Armenia. Clisca,
a Territory in Armenia, and in old time possessed by the Georgians, though now
in the hands of the Turks. Codabanda, P. Blind or weak of sight. Hodabanda
signifies the self same thing, but other writers erroniously pronounce it
Hodabende. Coran, B. a City in Parthia. Corfu, a late word: a famous Island,
called in old time Corcyra, A. and according to Ortelius, Corfinio, A. Coy, B.
a City in the borders of Armenia, and Media, between Van and Tauris. Culbat,
B. a City in Parthia. Cur, B. a City in Parthia. Curchi-Bassi, P. Captain of
the Curchi, who are the soldiers, that are appointed for the guard of the
Persian Kings Court. Curdi, B. a people which many think to be the Parthians,
A. But we cannot possibly think them to be so. wherein we agree with
Castaldo. Curzolari, B. in old time called the Echinades, A. which are certain
Rocks, very famous by reason of the victory by Sea obtained by the most
happy and fortunate League of the Chatholikes, against the Turkish fleet.
Cussestan, B. a part of Assyria.
D.
DAgmat, B. a City in the confines of Parthia, and of Media the great.
Damasco, A. a City in Soria. Look Sciam. Deftardar, T. a Treasourer or
Chamberlein. Demir-Capi, T. the Iron-Gates. Demir-Capi is also called Derbent.
It is a City sometimes called Alessandria, A. near to the Hircanian Sea. It
is called Derbent, because it is in figure narrow and long: and Demir-Capi,
because there were the Iron-gates, that were sometimes the entrance into
Scythia. Demotica, B. a City in Thracia, famous in regard of the banishment of
Sinan-Bassa into that place, whereof mention is made in the History, Lib. 5.
Derbent, B. a City called Demir-Capi. Derbent signifies streit or narrow.
Diarbech, B. the Country of Mesopotamia. Diuano, B. a place of audience, or a
Counsaile-house. It is sometimes taken for the audience it self, and sometimes
for the Counsel it self. Don, B. the River sometimes called Tanais, A. in
Sarmatia. Dreuis and Deruis, B. a Religious person, an Heremite.
E.
EDel, B. sometimes called Volga, A. a famous River in Sarmatia within Europe.
Emir, B. a common name among the Arabians, and the Drusians, used for a Prince,
a Duke, a chief Noble man. Eres, B. a City in Atropatia. Erzirum, B. we think
it to be Simbra in Ptolomie. Essahul, P. a troop of Soldiers beionging to the
Guard of the Persian King.
F.
FAchi, B. a Master of Ceremonies, a Master of Religion. Famagosta, B. a new
word corrupted from the vulgar Greek, which calls it Famausta, in old time
it was Salamina in Cyprus, A. Farssi, P. the Region of Persia.
G.
GAngiara, B. a sharp crooked dagger. Gaza, A. a City in the confines of
Judea, and in the way that leads toward Pelusium, A. Genge, B. a City of
the Persians in Armenia the greater. Gheilan, B. a City in the Region of
Gilan, which Castaldo calls Geli. Giamen, B. a Province in Asia, where Arabia
Felice is situated. Gianizaro, B. a degree of Turkish Soldiers so called.
Giauat, B. a City of Atropatia, in the confines of Media the greater. Gien, B.
a City of the Parthians. Giol, T. a lake or a poole. Giurgi-Chala, T. the
Georgian-Castell, now possessed by the Turks. It is in the confines of Georgia
and Armenia. Godz, B. the City of Jerusalem. Gogna, and Conia, B. a City so
called, and in old time Iconium, A. the chief City of the Lycaonians.
Goletta, B. a famous Island. Gori, and Gorides, B. a Territory in Georgia.
Grin, B. a Territory inhabited by the Georgians, situated on the hither side
of Araxis. Gurgistan and Georgia, B. the Region that contains all the
ancient Iberia, and part also of Armenia the great. The inhabitants of the
Country do call all that Territory Gurgistan, which is inhabited by the
Georgians. In which point, Negro, Anania, and Pius secundus are not well
advised, because they think that Georgia is only Iberia. Guuergi-Chalasi, B. a
Castle situate in the midst of a little lake toward Tauris.
H.
HAlip, an Arabian word, and signifies Milk. It is a very famous City in
Soria, which Iouius calls Alapia, Bellonius calls it Hierapolis, and
Qillanoua being in a notorious error for this point, calls it Antiochia. For
Antiochia is two days journey distant from Aleppo, more toward the Sea, as we
our selves have seen with our eyes. Hasna, T. It signifies Treasure, Store,
Money collected as well for public, as for private uses, although properly it
is only taken for the public Treasure, or for the Kings monyes.
Hassan-Chalasi, T. The Castle of Hassan. It is also called by the Turks,
Passin. It is a new erected thing between Erzirum and Chars, situate upon the
banks of the river Euphrates. Heri, B. a City in Aria. Hispahan, B. a City
sometimes in Parthia.
I.
IEsselbas, B. a greene-Cap. A certain people between the Bactrians and the
Sogdians, so called, because they did wear Greene-Capps on their heads.
Imammadulasis, B. a City in Parthia. Imbrahur-Bassi, T. Master of the Kings
horse. Isnic, B. a City in old times called Nicea, A. in Bithynia, near to
the Moore Ascania, A. Istigelu, and Sagialu, B. a Renowned family, both at
Casbin, and also over all the kingdom of Persia.
L.
LAke-Actamar, in old time called the Moore or marish Martiana, or Margiana, or
Mantiana, A. and according to Strabo, it is in Armenia the greater. Lake of
Esseecchia, in old time called the Marish Lychnitis, A. in Georgia. Lake of
Isnic, in old time the Marish Ascania, A. in Bithynia. Lake Tospite, or Toeti,
it is in great Armenia. Lizza, B. a City by the Seacoast in Soria, called in
old time Laodicea, A. Lori, B. a Fortress in Armenia, sometimes belonging to
the Georgians, but now possessed by the Turks.
M.
MAcadems, B. a word used among the Drusiani for a Deputy, an Agent, or a
chief Factor. For an Emir or Lord in Drusia. Look the 7. Book. Macuco, B. a
Measure in Soria, wherewith they measure Corn. It is a little bigger then the
bushel of Padua, that is four bushels and a half, Venetian measure. Malan,
B. a City in Parthia. Mar delle Zabacche, B. in old time called Palus
Moeotica, A. the Fennes of Moeotis. Mar di Bachu, B. in times passed Mare
Caspium, and Mare Hircanum, A. It is also at this day called the Sea of
Corazum. Mar Maggiore, the great Sea. And Mar Nero, the black Sea, sometimes
called Pontus Euxinus, A. Mar Morto, the dead Sea, sometimes called the Lake
Asphaltitis, A. Marant, B. a City near to Armenia in the confines of the
Medians, or rather within Media. Maras, B. a City in Cilicia, called by
Bellonius and Ortelius, Maronia, A. Marmara, B. a City upon the Seacoast of
Thracia. Masandran, B. a City in Hircania. Massiat, B. a City in Parthia.
Masul, T. a man cassiered, or deprived of his Office: in English, Jack out of
office. Mecca, B. a City in Arabia Foelix, where some think Mahamet was borne,
and where he is also buried. Mengrellia, B. sometimes the Region of Colchos, A.
famous for the golden Fleece. Meschita, B. the place where the Barbarians do
meet together, to say their profane prayers: in English a Temple, or a
Church. Miana, B. a City situate in the borders of Media the greater, of
Persia, and of Parthia. It is peradventure so called, by the River that is near
unto it, whose name is Miana. Miriza, and Mirize, P. the title of a Prince in
Persia. The Kings chief Lieutenant. Moldauia, a Region in Dacia. Mordar, P. a
Chaunceller. The Turks call him Tescheregi. Mucaren: the first month of the
Turkish year: much agreeing with our January. Mufti, T. the chief Priest.
Mustaed-Dini, P. the same which the Turks call Mufti. The chief Priest.
N.
NAplos, B. in old time called Napoli, A. in Samaria: peradventure it was in
time past Nephthalim, A. Nassiuan, B. a City in Media the greater, or else in
the confines of Media, and Armenia. Some think it to be Nasuana, and others
take it to be Artaxata, A. Natolia, in the opinion of Bellonius, comprehends
all the Regions of Phrygia, Galatia, Bithynia, Pontus, Lydia, Caria,
Paphlagonia, Lycia, Magnesia, Cappadocia, and Comagena. Neneruan, B. a place in
Armenia bordering upon Georgia. Nisabul, B. a City in Aria. Nisaur, B. a City
in the confines of Parthia and Hircania. Nosul, T. a Tax or collection of
Corn.
O.
OLti, T. a place belonging to the Turks, between Erzirum and Ardachan.
P.
PAngiazar, B. a City bordering upon Hircania and Media the greater. Passin.
Look Hassan-Chalasi. Persiani, The Persians. They are also called Aggiami,
Cheselbas, and Sofiani. Persiani, of the Province of Persia: Aggiami, of the
Region Azemia, or Aggiamia: Cheselbas, of the Redd-marke which these people
wear in their Turbantes: and Soffians, of the Sofi, who is their chief
Governor. Peruana-Giol, T. the lake of Sclaues. It is in Armenia. Phasis, A. a
City in Colchis, called yet at this day Phasis and Fas. Porta, a Gate: but
principally in this History it is taken for the Court of the Turkish Sultan:
because all his Counsailors, and chief Governors of his kingdom do use to
sit in the Gate of the Emperors Court, to hear and dispatch causes as well
private as public. Portugal, in old time called Lusitania, A.
R.
RAfadi, B. a man of a false Religion, of a false faith. Rama, a Town in
Palaestina, which Castaldo calls Lidda. Peradventure it was that Rama, A.
which mourned and wept for the great slaughter of the holy Innocents, Math. 2.
Ramadan, T. one of the solemn feasts of the Turks. It is also the proper
name of a man, and the name of a Moon. For as we have twelve Months, with
their several proper names: so have the Turks their xij. Moons with their
several proper names also. Reiuan, B. a City in Armenia. It may be, it is
Terua in Ptolomie. But I do not altogether agree with him in that point.
S.
SAffetto, B. a City in Galilie, inhabited by the Jews. Saha, or Shah, P. the
great King or Sofi of Persia. Saitan-Chalasi, B. the Castle of Satan, or the
Devils Castle, in the confines of Armenia and Georgia. Salmas, B. a City
betwixt Tauris and Van, but Southward to them both. Sancazan, B. a place near
to Tauris, famous in this History, as well in respect of some battles there
foughten, as also of the death of General Osman, who died there. Sangiacco, B.
a Lord, or a kind of Captain. Sardar, T. Captain of the Iannizzaries,
Captain of the Army, and properly the General. Saru, B. a City in Media the
greater. Sasuar, B. a City in Parthia. Sciam, B. the City of Damasco. Look
Damasco. Scutar, and Scutari, B. sometimes called Chalcedon, A. a City in
Asia, right over against Constantinople. Some do erroniously call it
Chrysopolis, A. Sechi, B. a City in Atropatia bordering upon Georgia. Seida,
and Seit, B. in old time called Sidonia, A. a City on the Sea cost in Drusia.
Sembran, B. a City in Parthia. Semitarra, B. a Scimitarre, a long crooked
Sword. A Faulchon. Ser, B. a River sometimes called Cirus, A. that watreth the
South part of Georgia. Sessa. Look Tocca and Turbante. Siec, B. an old, wise,
Religious, learned, and prudent man. A man of good, and holy life. Siliurea, a
City in Thracia called S^lymbria: Which the Persian calls Selimbria, and
Nicolo Nicolio, Seliurie. Sinibra, or Simbra In Ptolomie A. It is now called
Erzirum, four days journey distant from Trabisonda. Siras, B. some call it
Persepolis, A. and some Ciropolis. A. It is the chief palace of the Region of
Persia. Siruan, and Siruania, B. sometimes called Media Atropatia. The Hebrews
called it Madian, A. Siuas, B. in old time Sebastapolis, A. a City in Natolia.
Soffi, and Sofito, P. an ancient word signifying a wise man, learned and
skillful in Magike Natural. It is grown to be the common name of the Emperor
of Persia. Soffian, B. a place near unto Tauris. It may be perhaps the ancient
Soffia. Soldin, B. a City upon the Seacoast of Soria, destroyed long ago. It
was called in old time Seleucia Pieria, A. within five miles whereof the River
Orontes discharges it self into the Sea: But Castaldo in his description of
Asia, does not describe it in deed, as it stands. Soria, B. in times past
the Region of Syria, A. Spahini, T. a company of Turkish Soldiers so called.
Spaoglani, B. a company of foote-men, inferior in degree to the Iannizzaries.
Stambul, by the Turks and Arabians so called, in steed of Constantinople.
Subassi, B. The Lieutenant or Captain of a Garrison or Guard. Sultania, a
City in great Media. Sultano, or Sultan, B. a Captain. A great Lord* It is
very often used for the Emperor of Turkey: as Sultan Amurath, the great Turk
Amurath. Sumachi, and Sumachia, B. the chief Palace of Atropatia. Sunni, B. a
man of sound faith, and sincere opinion in matter of Religion. Sur, B. a City
upon the Seacoast of Soria, in old time called Tyrus, A.
T.
TArtari, and Tatar, B. the Tartarians, inhabiting Scythia and Sarmatia.
Tatar-Chan, B. the chief Lord or Governor of the Tartarians. He is called the
great Chan of Tartaria. Tauris, and Taruis, Read the Letter to S. Mario Corrado
in the end of this book. Techisnandan, B. Certain Mountains in Caramania
Deserta. Teflis, and Tiflis, a City in Armenia, but belonging to the
Georgians. Teftis, T. a Process or Bill of complaint, put up by the Plaintiff.
Teracan, B. a City in Parthia. Tocca, B. the round Roll, which the Barbarians
use to wear on their heads. It is also called Sessa and Turbante. Tomanis, a
City in Armenia, but belonging to the Georgians, very famous for the
notorious and treacherous straites that are near it. Trabisondo, B. a Seacoast
City upon Pontus Euxinus, called in old time Trapezuntium, A. Triala, B. a
place in Armenia, renowned for a number of Churches there, which held of the
Romish Religion. Triala, B. a Seacoast City in Asia and (...). Triala, B. a
white Roll, which the Barbarians were upon their heads. Look Tocca. Turbat, B.
a City in Parthia. Turcoman, a City betwixt Tauris and Casbin. Turcomanni, a
people mingled among the Turks and Persians. Turcomania the greater, of old
called Great Armenia, A. Tursis, B. a City in Parthia.
V.
UAn, B. a City in the Martian Marish. Vizier, B. a chief Counsailour, or
Governor general of the State of Turkey. Vlac, and Volacchi, T. Posts, or
Currors to run of a message in have. Vlu-Bassi, B. the Captain of a certain
number of Soldiers, but not so high in degree as an Aga is.
Z.
ZAffo, and Giaffa, B. a City by the Seaside, in old times called Ioppa, A.
Zagatai, B. certain Tartarians, comprehended under the name of the Sogdiani.
Zaghen, B. a City in Armenia, inhabited by the Georgians. Zaini, T. a noble
company of valiant Soldiers. Zanga, B. a City in great Armenia. Zante, B. an
Island in the Ionian Sea, called in old time Zacynthus, A. Zine, B, certain
festiual signs and shows of public joy. Zuiria, B. a Region lying at the
roots of Mount Caucasus, toward the Hircanian Sea, and was called in old
time, Albania, A.
FINIS

