THE PRINCELY PROGRESS OF THE CHVRCH MILITANT, marching forth by the steps of
the flock to her triumphant Bridegroom CHRIST JESUS.

ENCOVNTERED WITH AN erroneous Army, turned side from JESUS to the IEBVSITICALL
Faction, to fight with the Lamb, and make war with the SAINTS.

As it appears in the ensuing Oppositions.

With an Addition demonstrating the abolishing of Antichrist, supreme Head of
Heretics, and universal Maintainer of treason.

Written by THOMAS BEDLE.

ISAIAH. 29.11. Read this I pray thee. Then shall he say, I cannot.

LONDON, Printed by Nicholas Oaks dwelling near Holburne Bridge. 1610.

TO THE MOST EXCELLENT, MIGHTY, PVISSANT, WISE, AND VIRTUOUS PRINCE, JAMES: by
the grace of God, King of great Britain, France, and Ireland, defender of the
Faith, etc. T. B. wishes all celestial Honor, and eternal Bliss.
MOST mighty Monarch.
In the infancy of the precious blooming Church, planted by the perfection of
beauty upon the earth, Lucifer in his instruments roared against it:
Christianos ad leonem: non licet esse Christianos. In the reign of Queen
Mary, the hair then being grown as white as the bloome of the Almonde tree;
Christianos ad ignem: non licet esse Christianos. In the reign of Queen
Elizabeth, when neither Lion nor Fire te^rified Gods children, he hastened to
Rome, s^nt away Perillus brazen Bull, to see if any Phalaris would, or could
torment Gods children therein. But when none of power could be found, he
(knowing that the Children of the Church played still about the mouth of the
Bull, as upon the hole of the Aspe) poasted from Rome to this little Paradise;
to try if he could by speaking to your Majesty in Popish books, and
petitions, procure your Grace to the Churches subversion, to eat of the
forbidden fruit. But herein likewise failing, he mustereth up Cayphas knights,
that they might besiege the Church by compassing the tents of the Saints about,
and the beloved city (inhabiting as a glorious Monarch, living under your
gracious and royal regiment) in the Parliament house; to the end she might
(as the Chariot of Light, there employed to Gods glory) be ouerturned by those
Phaetons, h^s isntrumental surtes: in whom he evermore roareth Nemo nostrum
frug^esto. But seeing (right royal Sovereign) the all-seeing Deity (that made
them cry, Deus venit in castra, vae no^is) has prevented the same, to the
giving of us you Majesty as a King not amongst us before; once more in all
humility, as upon a second Coronation, I do present unto your Highness, these
lively Oppositions, showing the diff^rence between the truth preached by the
Lords Ambassadors: and the falsehood by Popish instruments, which Gentlemen,
unworthy of that style, would with so much blood set up. Thus craving pardon of
your gracious Cl^mencie for my boldness herein, In all humility, praying to
God to bless your Majesty, your virtuous Queen, and royal progeny, with the
glorious beatitude of this life, and the bliss of eternity; I humbly take my
leave,

Your Majesty's poor Subject in all humble and dutiful obedience, Thomas
Bedle.

TO ALL ENGLISH Metamorphosed Romans.
THE Jesuits seriously plotting, which way, through treas^n, they might
reedifie the walls of Rome (with panting hearts, and by the means of
unmerciful fire, make spacious streets for some second Nero to walk in) sent
forth (as it cannot be unknown unto you, Gentlemen of the Romish faction)
their books, the fore-ru^ners of that wicked design, in the mean time to
solicit their causes, and to prepare to battle, when the Alarm to the
Massaker should be given. Out of which Popish books I thought good to draw
these few Oppositions.

First, that you may know the Protestants of England, bred under the preaching
of the Gospel, not to be carried with blind Papists, like Hawks hooded, they
know not whither.

Secondly, that you may examime by the same, whet^er the Church of God be
visible still at Rome or no? For says the Argument before the Acts in your
Rhems: The Church shall still continue visible in Rome until the fullness of
the gentiles be come in. Which examination being taken by your doctrine, and
the effect of your doctrine, it will appear that Antichrist is gotten into the
temple of God, seeking to draw from the true faith, to abrogate the daily
sacrifice, and atchieue desolation. All which (as your Annotations upon the
Rhems teaches) a^e the marks of Antichrist.

For doctrine, the Church of Rome disgracefully teaches, yea blaspemously;
first, that if God command us impossibilities, and not for doing them, does not
only punish us temporally, b^t damn us perpetually: He I say (says Kellison)
must needs be more cruel, inhumane, more barbarous then any Scythian; and so
tyrannical, that in respect of him Nero, Domitianus, and Dionysius were no
tyrants, but clement Princes. But we may say to these proud blasphemers, as
Saint Augustine said to the Pelagians: The Pelagians think themselves cunning
men, when they say, God would not command that thing that he knows a man is
not able to do. And who is there that knows not this? But therefore God
commands us to do some things that we are not able to do, that we may
understand, that we ought to crave of him.

Secondly, their doctrine is disgraceful to Christ, and to the decree of the
whole Trinity concerning the redemption of man through Christ: who undertook
for Adam, before he was created, that if Adam did fall, to redeem him to his
pristen estate* Otherwise God could not in iust^ce have condemne^, his Son for
Adams transgression, had he not been obliged for him, before he became a
traitor to God. Contrary to this precious redemption, K^llison says: If Christ
has delivered us from hell, because he has paid the punishment due to sin,
and requires no other satisfaction at our hands; then does he, in a manner,
egg us forward to all vice. But if a Pope with Urban the 6. or Clement the 7.
give remission of sins, to commit sin by fighting in private schisms, or
to murder a Prince with Innocent the ^. they do not egg forward to vice. But
if Christ has taken away sin, (yet he only with Kellison) although also he
works a glorious renouation in man, eggeth forward, nay opens a wide ga^e
to all licencious liberty, vice, and in^^uity.

Thirdly, they seek the disgrace of Christian Faith, stiling it an idle
apprehension of Christ's justice, and a lying faith. But their faith, which is
only hope, well corroborated, confirmed and strengthened, upon the promises
and graces of God, and the parties merit, or in the Popes Pardons, or in the
merit of others which can merit their own glory, and others salvation.
Whereas Christ merited his own glory ( as the Annotations upon the Rhems
teaches) this Romish faith is no idle apprehension nor lying faith. But to
have an affiance in Christ for happiness, which is the very life and soul of
faith: that only with them is an idle apprehension of Christ's Justice, and a
lying faith.

Lastly, they seek the disgrace of all religion in teaching, Christ's sacrifice
is not sufficient to uphold religion, and the worship of God. But a round cake
offered by a new sacrificing Priest to deface the ^lory and eternal Priesthood
of Christ, that is sufficient. By this it does appear, that the Church of Rome
attempting to draw from the true faith, and abrogating the daily sacrifice
Christ Jesus, to the setting up of the abomination of desolation, prophesied
in Daniel, is not the true Church, but the Church of Antichrist. As in doctrine
it proves it self opposite to Christ: so in the action of seeking d^solation
as well temporal as spiritual; under the color of merit, it does the like.
For the fruit of their doctrine is to murder Princes, and to ruinate States,
that Antichrist may sit still in the wilderness. To which end they went up (as
Christ has foretold) into the plain of the earth, and they compassed the
tents of the Saints. For it is not ( says Saint Augustine De ciuitate Dei lib.
20.) to be taken, that the persecutors should gather to any place, as though
the camp of the Saints or beloved city should be but in one place: which
indeed are no other thing but the Church of Christ sprea^ through the whole
world. And therefore wheresoever the Church shall then be (which shall be in
all nations even then, for so much i^ insinuated by the earth here specified)
there shall the tents of the Saints be, and the beloved city of God; and there
shall she be besieged by all her enemies (which shall be in every country where
she is) in most cruel and forcible sort. And thus she has been besieged,
(not to speak of the Bohemians, the Massaker in France, and other places) in
this little Island, by an army of Priests, of whom Gregory Bishop of Rome, has
long foretold, saying: All things are done which were foreshewed, the King of
pride is at hand; and that which is a vile thing to be spoken, an army of
Priests is prepared for him: because they which should be chief in humility,
do serve as Soldiers, under pride and arrogance. By this army of Priest^
(sent by the King of pride) treasons have grown^ up in this kingdom, as close
together, as the husk^ and corn in one ear. Squier sent by Walpoole the
Jesuit, a fellow-worker to the King of Pride, marched hither to this end with
his poison. Parry, sent by Benedict Palimon the Jesuit, an other of the rank,
with a knife, with many more: whose tails were bound together like Sampsons
Foxes, to destroy the land. Yea by fire also, had not the providence of God
prevented the gunpowder treason. Thus briefly the Church of Rome likewise
appears in seeking desolation, to be the visible Church of Antichrist. And
for the further proof hereof, I refer you (gentle readers) to these few
Oppositions following Thus wishing you all happiness in the Lord, and well
freed of the Jesuits (which like Cannibals hunt after the souls and blood of
you, and your posterities, as woeful experience teaches) I end.

THOMAS BEDLE.

THE TABLE.
Opposition 1. THat God creating us able to fulfill his law, is neither in
commanding, nor in punishing us, in not performing his will, an unreasonable
Prince, as Popery teaches. Oppos. 2. That Protestant Preachers teaching the
true use of the law, open the way to piety.

That Popish Priests teaching impieties contrary t^ the law, open a gappe to
unutterable villainy.

Oppos. 3. That Christ in taking away our sins, does not (as Popery auerreth)
egg forward to vice, but to virtue.

That Popes and popish Priests, in giving remission of sin^ to commit sin,
open a gate to all licencious liberty.

Oppos. 4. That Christ has perfected our salvation, and not left it to our
cooperation.

That Popish Priests which auerre that Christ has only merited grace for us,
cooperate not with that grace, but with disgrace of the holy Trinity.

Oppos. 5. That it is not in the power of man to raise himself from death to
life.

That Popish Priests in teaching the contrary, go about therein to blot out
Gods covenant concerning the absolute remission of sins in Christ; to extenuate
the merits of our Saviors passion, and to abase the power of Gods Spirit.

Oppos. 6. That we are justified by Christ's whole entire obedience of the law,
and not by part.

That Popish Priests in denying this doctrine, send men to seek their
salvation in the confusion of Babylon.

Oppos. 7. That we are justified by faith in Christ: which faith is not an idle
apprehension of Christ's justice, or a lying faith as Popery teaches.

That the faith Popish Prists teach, is an idle apprehension, and lying faith.

Oppos. 8. That Protestant Preachers in teaching an inherent righteousness, as
well as an imputative, open a gap to all piety.

That Popish Priests teaching neither an imputative, nor an inherent
righteousness, but an inherent evil, open a gap to all kind of impiety.

Oppos. 9. That the faithful man's prayer, believing the remission of sins,
is not without most excellent use.

That Popish Priests prayers are most idolatrous; yet (...) they not wear
their hose out of the knees to say them, except they may merit heaven by them.

Oppo. 10. That Protestants acknowledging Christ their only Advocate, neither
rob nor dispoyle him of honor.

That Popish Priests rob and dispoyle him of all honor, to bestow it elsewhere.

Oppo. 11. That Protestants believing in Christ to the remission of sins,
have both a religion and sacrifice.

That Popish Priests in seeking their salvation in their consecrated cake, holy
water, ashes, palms, candle, and such like, joined in commission with that
their G^^ of bread, as a God not all-sufficient to save of himself, have
neither religion nor sacrifice.

An Addition demonstrating the abolishing of Antichrist, universal maintainer
of treason, and supre^^ head of Heretics.


THE PRINCELY PROGRESS OF THE CHVRCH MILITANT, marching forth by the steps of
the Flock, to her triumphant Bridegroom, CHRIST JESUS.
OPPOS. 1. THe Protestants doctrine, which affirms that the commandments are
impossible, makes God an unreasonable Prince.
Survey of the new religion. page 459.
THE Protestant Preachers in teaching Gods commandemens impossible to be kept,
preach the truth: yet is God, as the sequel shall declare, most good, just,
and no unreasonable Prince.

To the manifestation hereof, we are to consider, that Jehovah, who in all
eternity meditated in the mirror of his Majesty, concerning the creation of
Angels, and Men: to the end they might participate of his immortality, and
permanent felicity. And withal the heaven, and earth, so excellent in beauty,
so admirable in variety, as glorious palaces for them to dwell in. To the
effecting, at the time prefixed what he had in his eternal counsel decreed:
created the Angels, with an understanding of surpassing excellency, and of
nature most simple, next unto his divine and sacred Deity. Afterward (not to
speak of the worlds creation) he made these glorious creatures, witnessing
spectators of Adams noble birth; made by Gods own hand, of the virgin-like
earth, and in his own image. Not that the body or soul of Adam was the image
of God, but that it had it residence in both.

In the body there was majesty, representing a divine majesty, immortality, and
innocence, which as spiritual rich robes decked the same, with an unspeakable
beauty. In the firmament of the soul: the image of God in knowledge, and the
same in righteousness and holiness, Col. ^.10. Eph^s. ^.24.
as glistering lights did shine ^orth to the garnishing thereof. In the
understanding as a bright shining sun, soundness of reason ouerspread his
glorious rays. In the will uprightness and holiness: The liberty of the
will, showing forth some very divine matter in the soul, like a precious stone
set in gold (as Saint Bernard speaks) was ^^ch, that by it own and proper
motion, it chose, and refused that which sound reason said was to be chosen,
and refused; that is, the choice of good and evil was free.

Briefly to take along with us one of our adversaries, ^^rney of the new
religion. page 253.
that his own mouth may condemn him: Adam (says Kellison) was enriched with
a soul filled with grace, and spiritual treasures: which was prone to v^rtue,
not inclined to vice, neither molested with concupiscence, nor ouer-ruled by
passion: but ruled reason, which was ruled by grace. His superior part was
obedient to God: his inferior part to the superior, sensuality to reason,
the flesh to the spirit: and all creatures to him were obedient.

Now God having created Adam in this surpassing glory: placed him in Eden,
where he was environed about with variety of pleasures. And because it was
necessary that man adorned with such height of dignity, should yet owe homage
unto his creator, as to the supreme Majesty; he made a covenant with him,
founding it in that pure and holy nature of man's part, in which he was made. On
Gods part, in Gods own law engraven in man's heart by his divine finger, in the
first creation. And not in Christ, nor the grace of God in Christ. For then God
having a delight to be with man, and man with God: there was no breach nor
variance, that there needed a mediator: as after Adams fall there did, when a
new covenant was to be made, namely, the covenant of grace in Christ: in which
legal or natural covenant, the Lord promised under condition of holy and good
works, in obedience, and faith to be performed, a continuance of immortality,
through a perpetual life, free from sorrow, sickness, age, and death it
self; or otherwise, if by disobedience he transgressed, death. In the day that
thou eatest thereof, thou shall dye the death, says God to Adam in his
fatherly warning, or admonition, to the end he should not fall.

Jehovah who had thus made the Angels, witnessing spectators of the purity of
Adams creation: ye for a further testimony likewise to all succeeding ages,
concerning the goodness of the Angels, of man, and all creatures: it is said:
God saw all that he had made, and it was very good. In the heavens when this
celestial Oracle was published, the Angels stood in their beauty surpassing,
excelling in Wisdom, Power, Holiness, and Happiness. In paradise Adam was
in most admirable glory, meditating in the height of his understanding, in the
mirror of the divine Deity; neither was there in heaven or earth, any enemy to
be seen, or found: to vnrobe Adam (by breach of the covenant) of the
illustrious image of God.

But as it commonly falls out in best governed states: though the Prince do
show never such love to the subject, by the gift of honor and rich
possessions: yet some are so ungrateful, that by conspiracy, and in hatred of
all piety, they seek to murder their Prince and Sovereign, that they might
while streams of blood inuironne the mournful throne, set the crown upon
their own tyranicall heads: so in some sort it fell out in heaven (the
be^utiful city of perfection) For some of the Angels (not contented with the
blessed, and permanent state in which they were created: having Lucifer for
their General) became adversaries to God, by conspiring in the height of their
ambition, to pluck the royal, and euer-shining Diadem, off their creators
head. Insomuch that in Gods justice, they were thrown down like lightening
from heaven. That they might at the time appointed, be chief (as a terror to
all traitors) in hellish torments: that would have been above God in heavenly
pleasure and felicity.

Lucifer and his associates thus banished the celestial Jerusalem (like a
wandering Archtraytor, that desires every one to be like himself, by infusing
into others his poyso^ through hellish persuasion) set upon Adam, using his
wife as an instrument, to effect what he intended. And like as an Aspe does
first send poison with a tickling delight, into one vein, and so from vein to
vein, until the vitals be seized upon, and the body wrapped in the arms of
Death. So did Satan, first by sugered temptation, eclipse the clear shining
light of Adams understanding, when he caused him to call in question the Lords
commandment. And afterward wounded him with the sting of concupiscence
inwardly, having procured him to reach his hand toward the apple. But once
eating, and by eating transgressing; he was wounded to death. And by
transgression likewise of the law (which is a privation and want of conformity
with the law of God) the glorious eye of the understanding became presently
obscured: like a dead man's eye, 1. Ioh. 3.
with thick and palpable darkness of ignorance. And the shining beauty of the
will, turning away from righteousness and holiness, was overwhelmed with the
darksome clouds of impurity and injustice: and became through the hardness of
heart, and deceiptfull lusts, corrupt, froward, and more poisoned then the
mind it self.

Briefly Adam (like an evil man that hates the light) being become the
companion of of death, hating his Creator: ^uruey of ^he new ^eligion. ^ag. 353.
thought forthwith to hide himself, under shade trees from his presence: from
whom darkness it self cannot be hidden. Thus when by sin, (as Kellison says)
man would not be subject to God, he became a slave to his own flesh, passions
and sensuality, hell and damnation. And of all this servile subjection, sin
was the cause. For when Adam sinned, and we in him transgressed, we were by and
by guilty of death, which is the reward of sin: and by sin we became slaves
to sin and concupiscence. For as Christ says: Whosoever sins is a slave
to sin. And being slaves to sin, we were slaves to the Devil: who has no
authority or power over us but by sin: and being slaves to the Devil, we
were the captives of hell.

Though this be the state of all the sons of men, whose birthright Adam sold
in the height of his pleasure for an apple; Romans 5.18. Heb. 12.16. Survey page
580.
and not only his own, as Esau did for a portion of meat in his hunger: Yet
God who is good and just, and must be just, (as Kellison says) else were he
not good; first, as he is good, yea essential goodness, cannot but require
(notwithstanding our woeful fall) obedience at our hands, to the fulfilling of
his law, through the purity of nature, in which he created Adam. Which purity
lost, being also the ground and justice, out of the which the law should be
kept: no man (though the Lord command obedience) is able to perform the same.
For by sin (as Kellison says) we were dispoyled of grace. Survey page 254.
And that force of grace had we none, because sin had deprived us of it.
Likewise Saint Augustine cited by M. Whittaker against Campian, says: Natural
gifts were corrupted, the supernatural extinguished. Insomuch that the
natural man's understanding, as the Scriptures auerre, is so far off from
doing the office of a General, to direct the will, to the effecting that which
is good: That it neither perceives, 2. Cor. 2.14, Ephesians. 4.18. Rom 7.14. Ibid.
6.16.17.20.
nor conceiueth the things of God. And the will deprived of liberty, to choose
that which is good, and wanting the direction of reason, (like an unruly
Soldier) transgresses continually the law, through disordered motions, and
evil desires. O evil is free will without God, says S. Augustine cited by
Bishop Jewel. Again: Man misusing his free will, Apol. page 16.
spilt both himself and his will. Again: What do men presume so much of the
possibility of nature? it is wounded, it is ma^gled, it is troubled, it is
lost: it behooves truly to confess it, then steadfastly to defend it. Again:
Free Will once made thrall, avails nothing but sin.

But to make this yet more manifest, Rhem. page 195.
that neither the will, nor understanding have life in them; most excellent is
that place cited by Doctor Fulke from the Council of Arausican. Chap. 7. That
we are not apt to think any thing of our selves, as of our selves. If any man
do hold, that by force of nature, he can think any good thing, which
pertains, and is expedient to eternal life; or that he can choose to be
saved: that is, to consent to the preaching of the Gospel, without illumnation,
and inspiration of the holy Ghost, which gives to all men, the sweetness in
consenting, and believing the truth: He is deceived with an heretical spirit:
not understanding the voice of God, saying in the Gospel: Without me ye can do
nothing. And that of the Apostle: Not that we are apt of our selves, to think
any thing as of our selves: but our sufficiency is of God. And touching
understanding, the Apostle says: The natural man understands not those
things that be of the spirit of God. For they are foolishness unto him:
neither can he know them, because they are spiritually discerned. So that
neither the will nor understanding have heavenly life in them. Therefore it is
impossible to do good, although the Lord commands it. Neither is the Lord bound
^o wo^k it in us; for he owes us nothing: and may leave us reprobate, to be
condemned for ever, without impeachment to his goodness. As he refused Esau
when he loved Jacob: Respecting them both as ill, Romans 9. Annotat. Rhem.
(as the Annotations upon the Rhems teaches) and the one no less then the
other guilty of damnation for original sin; which was alike in them both.
And therefore where he might have justly refused both, he saved of mercy one:
which one, being as ill and as void of grace as the other, must therefore hold
of Gods eternal purpose, mercy and ele^tion, that he is pr^f^rred before his
brother, which was ^lder then himself, and no worse then himself.

Survey page 58^.
Secondly, God as he is just, requires obedience at our hands: that our actions
may be tried by the divine rule of justice, namely his law. Otherwise, as S.
Augustine cited by Kellison, teaches, No sin should be, if no law did forbid
it. If no sin, then no death. I^ no death, then A^am should escape
unpunished; contrary to Gods word which says: In the day that thou ^a^^st
thereof, thou sh^lt dye the death. Yet God in commanding us that which is good:
and in puni^hing us doing evil and not good: which both (as Saint Augustine
says) are damnable: neither impeacheth hi^ goo^nesse (as we said before,) nor
justice, the fault being ours that we transgress, and not Gods: who created
Adam, and we in Adam, able to perform his law; as his word does auerre, his
Angels witness, and Kellison before cited, testify.

Therefore if Princes for a momentary transgression, may justly punish their
subjects with perpetual exile and death it self: how much more may God that
created Adam so glorious a creature, both punish him for his rebellion, and all
his posterity in him (that spa^^d not the Angels) yet himself a most just, and
good God? According to that saying of Moses: Perfect is the work of the mighty
God, Deuteronomy. 32.4
and all his ways are justice and judgment. God is true and without
wickedness, just and righteous is he: Not cruel, inhumane, barbarous or
tyranicall; as the false Prophet Kellison like a profane Marcionite urges.
For as Aristotle a heathen could say: Iustitiam esse hespero, and l^cifero
sormosiorem: Justice is far more beautiful then the evening and morning
star.

But to conclude against this most blasphemous heretic with Saint Augustine:
Detr^ctor diabolum in lingua portat: A slaunderer bears the devil in his
tongue: and yet makes himself in the mean time, as cunning as any Pelagian,
of whom Saint Augustine thus speaks; The Pelagians think themselves cunning
men when they say: That God would not command that thing that he knows a man
is not able to do: And who i^ there that knows not this? But therefore God
commands us to do some things that we are not able to do, that we may
understand that we ought to crave of him.

Thus we see, God is good in requiring that which is good at our hands: and
just in punishing us not performing the same. And Kellison a blasphemous wretch
to urge the contrary, to disgrace the truth, the Lord of truth, and the
preachers of the same.

OPPOS. 2. The Protestant Preachers,auouching the laws and commandments of
God, to be impossible; give occasion to all impiety.
Survey of t^^ new religion. Page 570.
The Protestant preachers auerring the covenant of works founded in nature,
and in the law of God, impossible to be performed, avouch the truth. Yet
teaching the true use of the law, direct the way to all piety. Whereas Popish
Jesuits and Priests making the law to be no law, lead the way to all impiety:
as the sequel shall declare.

Although the promise of the law has annexed condition impossible to be
performed by any of the sons of Adam: yet concerning the elect, it is not
without most excellent use. For first, it serves the Spirit of God, as an
isntrumental means to bring them to the notion of sin. Secondly, to work a
terror in them, for sin. And thirdly, to be as a Schoolem^ister, directing
to Christ.

Concerning the first use, Saint Paul, speaking of himself, says: Nay, I know
not sin but by the la^ for I had not known what lust meant, except the la^
h^^ ^^id. Thou shall not lust. That is, he had no^ known that every tickling
desire of concupiscence (though r^sisted) had been sin: except the law had
said: Thou shall not lust. James 1. Annotat. Rhems.
This use of the law Popish Priests and Jesuits do deny. First, in teaching
that concupiscence it self is no sin: but when we do obey and yield to it.
Nay, they do suppose, that ^he outrage of concupiscence, and sensual
appetite, is so ^arre off from sin, that he that consents not unto it, need
not to say; God forgive us our sins for the same. Moreover the Council of
Trident accurseth him that thinks concupiscence to be a sin. If it were no
sin, the law would not have prohibited the same, as it does: For says S. Paul,
as it is in their own translation: But sin I did not know, but by the law:
for concupiscence I knew not, unless the law did say: Thou shall not covet.
But occasion being taken, sin by the commandment wrought in me all
concupiscence. Upon which place the Annotation notes, That sin, Romans 7.
annotat. Rhems.
or concupiscence, which was asleep before, was wakened by prohibition: the
law not being the occasion thereof: nor giving occasion thereunto: but occasion
being taken by our corrupt nature, to resist that which was commanded. S.
Ambrose upon this place says: He has not (namely the Apostle) discerned this
concupiscence from sin: but joined it unto it. Signifying that when there was
not so much as any suspicion, that this thing was not lawful before God. I
knew (says he) that it is a sin. The argument in the Rhems, before the
Epistle of Saint James, thus speaks: The Apostle dehorteth from all sin:
but yet also namely to certain, and from certain. As fro acception of persons
from detraction, and rash judgments, from concupiscence and love of this
world. By this we may see, that concupiscence is of it self a sin forbidden
in the law: before we do obey and yield unto it. Whosoever (says our Savior)
looks on a wom^^ to lust after her, has committed adultery with her alre^dy
in his heart. Again, not only the man that ^illeth his brother is culpable of
judgment: but he ^l^o that is angry wi^^ his b^^ther unadvisedly. We ^r^
f^^^i^^^n ((...)) ^^t only to (...) t^ be a^^r^: Survey 278. page 257. p^g.
(...) from a ^ult^^^, a^^ ^^^^^tion; bu^ al^o from c^^^^s look^s, yea (...).
W^ a^e not only forbid^en t^ o^^end o^r fri^e^^s, but a^^o (...) ^wes Again^,
the l^^ restrains, oue^ (...) ^s the ou^^^^^. For Christ a^^^ng at that most
excellent pe^^^ction that was in A^am when he was created: forbideth in us by
his imm^culate law that permits no s^^th of si^ne, the least evil that may
arise through concupiscence, to labor against his spirit, in so heavenly a
building as is the renouation of m^n to his pristen estate.

A^g contra I^^^^^ li^. 3 ca^. 3.
The ^on^upiscence of the flesh (says Saint Augustine) against which (...)
good ^^^^it d^sireth, or labors: is both sin it self, and also the pain
of sin, and the cause of sin. For, as the Annotations upon the Rhems
teaches, James 1. m^^^ In a t^^^^ti^^ p^^ted b^ (...) ac^^^ ^^^gu^^^us. 1^^0.
From the concupi^cence of the flesh and the ^^^^upiscen^e of the eyes, and the
pride of life all sin an^ temp^^ti^^^ pro^^^^. As Thomas upon his Sums there
cited, confess^th. Again, Concupiscence (say they) ^s a^ ^^rdin^te appetite of
the soul, inclining it to ^^llow the d^^ires of the fle^h: proceeding from
sin, and (...) the soul to sin. Secondly they teach contra^^ to the law:
because they say, that venial sins (as they style them) be no sins. For a
man (says the A^^^ations upon the Rhem^) may be just, notwithstanding venial
sins. Again, 1 Ioh. 1. marg. Romans 1. Rh^m. Mat. 6. annotat. Rhems.
venial sins are pardonable of their own nature, and not worthy of
damnation. Now those sins that are pardonable in their own nature owe to God
no d^bt: that is, the punishment due for sins. But venial sins do. For d^bts do
not only s^gnifie mortal sins but also v^ni^ll: as S. Augustine by them
often cited, teach^th. Therefore every m^n be he never so just: yet because he
cannot live without venial sins, may v^ry truly, and ought to s^y this
prayer: Forgive us our debts. Again, w^osoeuer has any impure matter of
veni^ll s^nnes, or such other debts, to Gods judgments pay^ble: must into
Purgatory, or more truly into hell, Romans 6.23.
if they be not pardoned in Christ. For the wages of sin is death.

Thirdly, they teach, 1. Ioh. 1. marg. 1. Ioh. 3. Annotat. Rhems.
that every iniquity is not sin, against plain Scripture, that says: That
all iniquity is sin. 1. Ioh. 3.7. As it is in their own Rhems. Let no man say
(says Saint Augustine) s^^ne is one thing, iniquity is another thing. I am a
sinful man, but I am not unjust. Every one that does commit sin, does commit
iniquity: for sin is iniquity. What th^^ shall we do with our sins and
iniquities? No man in this life, has been, is, or shall be perfectly just.
Moreover contrary to the law, the Jesuit thinks he sins not at all, by
lying impudently before his Kings f^ce^ yea, and confirming his lie with
p^riury, by laying his hand upon the holy Gospel. An^ why so? Because having
received a commandment from his G^ner^ll, to lie, I^suite. Catech. 2. lib.
122. page
his vow of obedience is so precise, that he thinks he is freed from all
sin: and that he faulted much more, if by telling the truth he had not obeyed
him. Here they p^ay the Priscillianists, which said: Iura, periura, secretum
prodere noli. Swear, and forswear, but bewray no secrets.

Fourthly, whereas the law commands obedience unto the Kings of the nations,
who bear rule over us: Exodus 20. Luke 22.
and are as the forbidden fruit, and apple in paradise, that may not be
touched: Touch not mine anointed: Psalm. 105.15.
Yet notwithstanding, it is a common thing with the Jesuits, to preach to
their young Nouices, concerning the murder of Princes. And do teach that the
Bulls of Rome have power to depose all the Kings of the earth, I s^ites
Catech. lib. 3 page 204. ^e Franc. ^n^. page 18. ^. 64 65. 34.
and to deprive them of their temporal state and Sovereignty. That Kings so
excommunicated, ought to best ^ne (though they be Catholics.) That it is a
good and meritorious deed to murder them. The Council of Co^stance (says a
Jesuit) condemned that odious Proposition, concerning the killing of Princes,
by private men: whenever they judge them for tyrants; but when the Pope (that
King of pride) shall judge them for tyrants, it seems it is meritorious for
his army of Priests to set upon them. Richard Walpoole the Jesuit furnishing
Squire with poison and instructions to kill the Queen of England, Jesuit. Cat.
lib 3. page 143. 144.
told him, that it should be a godly sacrifice to God, and that Squire needed
not to fear the danger of his life, or person, by reason of the means which
he had opened unto him: and though the enterprise should sail, yet he should
change this present condition into the state of a glorious Saint, and Martyr in
Paradise. Benedict Polimio a Jesuit, caused William Parry to undertake to
murder the Queen: Le Franc. Disco. 37. page
afterward a Priest (to whom he imparted it) dissuaded him from the attempt,
telling him the act was damnable: whereupon seeing this contrariety of
opinions, he repaired to Hanniball Codretto, a Jesuit, to be confessed; who told
him, it could not be but this Wats was an heretic. For the true Church made
no question (or rather the Church of Antichrist) but that Kings excommunicated
by the Pope, were ipso facto, tyrants, and therefore ought to be slain. The
Pope himself granted unto Parry plenary indulgence, and remission of all his
sins to murder the Queen. An accident of no great wonder: for Popes have
been common murderers. Yet Bellarmine in his letter to the Archpriest, says:
It was never heard of from the Churches infancy until this day, that ever any
Pope did command that a Prince (though an Heretic, though an Ethnike, though
a persecutor) should be murdered: or did approve of the fact, when it was done
by any other. But he means by those that were deaf and could not hear. Pope
Clement the fourth stirred up Charles the Earl of Aniou, against Manfreed the
King of Sicil, who vanquished, and killed Manfreed. Pope Gregory the seventh
conspired the death of Henry the fourth, to be acted in the Church, whither the
Emperor resorted to pray. Pope Urban the sixth, sent for Charles, nephew of
Lodowicke, King of Hungaria, to aid him against Queen Jane, with a promise of
the kingdom of Naples: which kingdom Charles appeasing, put the Queen to
death. Pope Gregory the 9. caused the Ambassadors to be slain that came from
Frederick the 2. to certify him concerning the winning of Jerusalem.
Frederick the 2. was poisoned, after strangled by one Manfredus, by the
appointment of Inn^^ent the 4. Pope Clement the sixth sent one to Lodowicke the
Emperor to give him poison in wine, whereof he dyed. But to return to the
army of Priests of these Kings of pride, Jesuit. Cat. lib. 3. page 134. 335.
The Jesuits of Doway, sent Peter Pan a Cooper dwelling at Spres, to kill
Maurice Prince of Orange, and Earl of Nassaw, with a promise to procure a
prebend for one of his children. The Provincial moreover gave him a blessing
at his departure, saying: Fri^nd, go thy ways in peace, for thou go as an
Angel, under Gods protection and safeguard.

Ibid.
Balth^za^ Gizzard (that slow the father of this province of Gr^^g^) confessed
that a regent Jesuit (in the Coll^^ge of Trees) assured him, that he had
conferred with three other of his companions, who took it wholly to be fr m
God. Castle (a Scholar of the Jesuits) resol^^ ^^^stab Henry the fourth of
France in the throat with his knife: Le Franc. disco. page 34.
(and did in the mid^t of his Nobles strike him i^ the mouth) believed the act
was lawful and meritorious. Ambrose Varade did a^^^^te Battier to go and
s^eath h^^ two edged knife (prepared by a Priest of purp^^^) in the French
Kings bre^st: bindi^g him thereto ^y the Scrament, and assuring him by the
living God, that he could not do a more meritorious act, Ibid. page 31.
and that he should therefore ^e (...) Angels into Paradise. G^^guard the
Jesuit te^mes the a^t of James Clement (in mu^thering He^^y ^he third with a
poisoned kni^e, which he t^^ust into his belly) a heroical act. The Jesuits
of France, term it the gift of the holy Ghost. Ibid. page ^3.
Pope Sixtus the such in a solemn Oration, made in the Consistory of
Cardinals, the 11. day of September 1589. compared the treason of this cursed
Dominicke, with the act of Eliazer and Iudeth: yea a far greater work, a
rare, a notable, a memorable act, that a Monk, a religious man, had slain the
unhappy French King, in the midst of his host; an act not done without the
providence of God, and assistance of his holy Spirit. Thus did the Pope glory
in his bloody Oration; as Urban the sixth with great joy and contentment, did
contemplate in the bloody sword, that slew Charles: who for the kingdom of
Naples (at his request) put to death Queen Jane.

Fifthly, Romans 13.
the Apostle commands every soul to be subject to the higher powers. Upon
which place Saint Chrysostom thus says: Let every soul be subject to the
higher powers, although thou be an Apostle, although thou be an Evangelist,
although thou be a Prophet, although thou be whatsoever thou art. For this
subjection does not overthrow religion. S. Aug.
And Saint Augustine says: Who being in his right wits, would say to Kings:
Take you no care by whom in your kingdom, the Church of your Lord is defended,
or oppugned; let it not pertain to you, who in your kingdom will be
religious, or sacriligious? to whom it cannot be said: Let it not pertain to
you, who in your kingdom will be chaste, or unchaste. Again, A Prince serves
God otherwise as he is a man, and otherwise as he is a King; because he is a
man, he serves God in living faithfully; but as he is a King, he serves God
by making laws in convenient strength, which command just things, and forbid
the contrary. As Ezechias served God in destroying the groves, and temples of
idols. David, Solomon, and Ezechias, commanded the Priests to execute their
offices, according to the law of God, and were obeyed. Constantine, Theodosius,
Martianus, and Iustinianus, made Ecclesiastical laws, to comp^ll
Ecclesiastical persons to do their duties, and called general Councels to
decide questions of religion, and gave order to proceed in them according to
the Scriptures. They appointed Judges, and a Senate to order the Council, as
Valentianus in the Council of Chalcedon, and were obeyed.

But contrary to all this, and the Lords commandment, the Church of Rome
teaches, that treason in a Clergy man is no treason. For the Jesuit Emanuel
Sa delivers in express terms upon the word Clericus: Le Franc. ^isco. 26.
Page.
That the rebellion of a Church man against his King, is not treason: because
he is exempted from being the Kings subject. But so they were not in the days
of David, Solomon, Iehosophat, Ezechias, and Josias, which exercised supreme
government in causes Ecclesiastical, and over the high Priests themselves: yet
they are in the days of Antichrist, exempted, from being obedient to Princes.
For the Churchmen (says Bellarmine) are as far above Kings, as the soul above
the body: or more truly he might have said: as the Pope above the Emperor:
and so have joined the King of pride and his army together: of whom Gregory
Bishop of Rome, has long foretold, saying: All things are done which were
foreshewed: the King of pride is at hand, and that which is a vile thing to be
spoken, an army of Priests is prepared for him. Because they that were
appointed to be chief in humility, do serve as soldiers under pride and
arrogance. But of some it may be demanded, how they serve as soldiers under
him? First, they serve as spies in Israel, using to that end much craft in
change of raiment, but more in their speech. Secondly, they serve as infernal
furies to publish excommunications and Popish Brieues against Kings and
Princes, that they may incite the subject to deny obedience, and rebel.
Thirdly, they serve where they have power, as Julian the Cardinal served under
the King of pride in Bohemia: in burning of towns, killing men, women and
children, rauishing, deflouring, and making a spoil. Fourthly, they serve
where they want power, like blind Moles vnderminining under the earth, that
they may blow up the Church of God at an instant, through unmerciful fire.
Fifthly, they serve where they have authority, as the executioners in the
Massaker of France, in the reign of Charles the ninth. And as the tormentors
in the reign of Queen Mary, who spared not the child in the mothers belly.
This is not Apostolical, but Antichristian. Sixthly (like them that despise
government, and uphold the faction called Prasinie) they teach, that the
rebellion of the Laity is no rebellion. Eu^gra l. 4. Annot. Pope tyra^. Page.
74.
The Catholics of England (say the Divines of the University of Salamanca,
namely John de Sequereza, Emanuel de Royos, Jasper de Mena, Peter Osorio) may
favor Tirone in his wars, and that with great merit, and hope of eternal
reward, as though they warred against the Turks. Again, All Catholics do
sin mortally that take part with the English against Tirone: an^ can never be
absolved from their sins, by any Priest, unless they repent and leave the
English. They are in the same case that help the English with any victual, or
any such like thing. Again, the most worthy Prince Hugh a Neale, and other
Catholics of Ireland that fight against the Queen, are by no construction
rebels. Moreover (to pass from the army to the King of pride himself.) Pope
Pius the fifth, sent Rodolphin, a gentleman of Florence, to move the Laity to
rebellion in the State, in Queen Elizabeth's reign: and incited Phillip, King
of Spain, to send Duke Alua into England, to assist and strengthen the
rebellion. Gregory the 13. and Sixtus the 5. did likewise excommunicate the
Queen, to the end to fill the state with blood. Paulus the fifth, in his first
Breue (as the King of pride) thus exhorts all them that will be of his army:
Stand (says he) your loins being girt about with verity, and having on the
breast plate of righteousness, t^king the shield of faith: Be ye strong in the
Lord, and in the power of his might, and let nothing hinder you; to do what?
to deny the Oath of Allegiance to your King: Which cannot be taken without
hurting the Catholic faith, and the salvation of your souls. Thus contrary
to Gods law, they make sin no sin, iniquity no iniquity, the rebellion of
subjects meritorious, and not damnable: And he an Heretic by the Jesuit
Anniball Codretto his censure, that holds the contrary.

Secondly the law causes terror (like those fiery serpents that stung the
children of Israel. Exodus ^0. Heb. 1^.21.
) It so terrified Moses at the delivery of it, that he did fear and quake:
and so astonished the Israelites, through the divine image of Justice, shining
in the same, that they said to Moses, Talk thou with us, and we will hear,
but let not God talk with us, lest we dye. Nay such was the contradiction
between sin and the rule of divine justice, that they could neither endure
to talk with Moses, unless he covered his face with a veil.

This second use of the law, Romans 9. annot. Iam. 4. annot. 2 Timothy 2. annot.
Math. 12. marg. Rhem.
Popish Priests likewise take away. First, in teaching that a man may cleanse
himself from the filth of sin, and so become a vessel of honor in the
house of God. And that he has power to make himselfee clean, and purge his
own heart. To make himself a vessel of salvation. To be a good tree, to
bring forth good fruit. So they have no more cause to be terrified for sin,
in whom this power remains, then a naked man, going to bathe himself in a
river, has cause to grieve if he fall in a soft miery, or moorish place:
seeing he may wash it away at his pleasure.

Secondly, to take away the terror of sin, Jesuit. Catech. lib. 2. page 7.
Ibid. lib. 2. page 124.12^.
they have their oath of blindfolded obedience, whereby they bind the
inferiors, to obey the General of the order blindfolded. For these be the
express words of their Constitution.

Wisdom is not (says the Jesuit Ignace) for him that must obey, but for him
that must command. Again, there is nothing so contrary to the commendation of
obedience, as to delay; or rather arrogance in examining the reason of our
Superiors commandment. Therefore their vow constraines and binds them to
believe: that when the Pope, or superiors enioine any thing, they are to
think that God is in their mouths: and that as soon as they command, they
must obey, though it be to murder a Prince. To this end they fill the Pulpit
with fire, with blood, with blasphemies, to make their Auditory believe that
God is a murderer of Kings and Princes. And the more, to take away the terror
of sin therein.

^bid. li. 1. ^ag. 7.
The Jesuits when they send any man to execute their designements: before he
depart, they confess him, and employ one part of his penance, to confirm him
in that holy enterprise; they make him hear Mass with devotion, they minister
the blessed sacracment of the Altar unto him: and this done, they give him
their blessing for a sure pasport, to go directly to Paradise (or rather to
hell.)

Le Franc. dis. p. 35. 90
Thirdly, in stead of the law, which works terror for sin, they have their
chamber of meditations, to terrify men to sin. Which chamber is filled with
pictures, or many devils in diverse terrible shapes; Varades incited Barriers to
kill the French King.
which the Jesuits use to affright men's minds to do some notable service for
them. Namely, if a second Varades bring a commandment from his General, to
murder such a King or Prince, he must according to his oath of blindfolded
obedience, undertake it: otherwise he fears he should be damned for
disobeying his General.

Thirdly, the law serves to lead to Christ, who is the brazen serpent that
takes away the sting of conscience, that saves all them that behold him with
the eye of says, from the pains and sorrows of hell. He is that better
Mediator that has taken away the curse and terror of the law. This use of the
law God made to Adam in paradise; Moses to the Israelites in the wilderness;
Christ to the Jews and Gentiles. Concerning which use the Annotations upon the
Rhems says: Rhem. 10. annot. Romans 10. text Rhem.
The law was not given to make a man just or perfect by it self: but to bring
us to Christ to be justified by him. Again, the law was not (as the Jews
ignorant zeal supposed) for them to justify themselves by it: but to bring
them to Christ, to believe in him, and so for his sake to be justified.
Notwithstanding (like Camelions that can turn themselves into all colors)
they deny this third use of the law: in denying Christ to be the brazen
serpent, that takes away the sins of the world. Christ (say they) has
merited his own glory. Again, Heb. 2. marg. D. Kel. page 262. Mat. 5. annot.
Romans 8. annot. Romans 1. annot. 2. Tim. 4. annot. Romans 6. annot. 1. Ioh. 4.
annot. Rhem.
our sins (notwithstanding Christ's passion) are imputed unto us. Again,
Christians are truly just, and have in themselves inherent justice, by doing
Gods commandments. Again, that Christ's pains merited heaven, and so do
theirs. That a Catholic living but an ordinary honest life (either not
sinning greatly, or supplying his fault by penance) is just. That heaven is
their own right, bargained for, and wrought for. That life everlasting is the
stipend of justice. To this belongs their fidutia: which is only a hope well
corroborated, confirmed, and strengthened upon the promises and graces of God,
and the parties merit. There is no Christ in their fidutia, as there is no
faith in their Religion, For he only has merited his own glory.

But leaving them as they are, I will say with the Prophet David: It is time
for the Lord to work, Psalm. 119. verse 126.
for they have destroyed thy law. And to cry out with Saint Augustine: O
vanitas vendens vanitatem, vanitatem audituris, vanis and credituris. O vanity
selling vanity, to them that will heat vanity, and vain are they that will
believe it.

Thus, gentle reader, you may lively behold the Angels of light, directing the
way of piety to Christ: but the Angels of darkness to horrible impicy. So that
no other sect of heretics (as the Kings Majesty said in the Parliament
house; The Kings Majesty's speech in the Parliament house.
Not excepting Turk, Jew, Pagan, no not those of Calicute, that worship the
Devil) did ever maintain, by the grounds of their religion, that it was
lawful or meritorious (as the Romish Catholics call it) to murder Princes
or people for matters of religion.

OPPOS. 3. If Christ has delivered us from hell, because he has paid the
punishment due to sin, and requires no other satisfaction: then does he in a
manner egg us forward to all vice. Again. Is Christ abode the pain himself,
and would have none required at our hands, in so doing, what has he done, but
opened a wide gap to all licentious liberty, vice and iniquity?
Survey of the new religion. page 260. page 261.
O Blasphemous heretic, worse then the heretic Gnosticke, who set forth
things that were monstrous about the life of the blessed Lady: whereas he
publishes heretical doctrine disgraceful to the passion of our blessed
Savior. First (in saying) that it is not sufficient of it self. Secondly, if
that the redemption of man be perfected by it only, and not left to man's
merit, or to the offering up of a round cake in the Mass: then a gate is set
open to all licentious liberty, vice and iniquity.

Contrary to this, we will first prove that Christ is a perfect redeemer.
Secondly, that Christ has not only redeemed us, but also works inherent
righteousness to the restoring of the image of God in us: and therefore gives
no loose liberty at all to sin and iniquity, as Popes and Popish Priests do, as
the sequel shall declare.

First, concerning the redemption of man, God says (that cannot but speak
truth) that giving the new Testament, he would in such sort be merciful, Ier
31: Heb. 8. Ephesians. 1.3.
as to remember the sins of his people no more: that i^ to say, of the true
believers. The which gives us to understand, that God for Christ's sake, by
whom, and in whom, this testament was made, is perfectly and perpetually by his
only sacrifice pacified. Upon which place of the Hebrews, Rhem. page 7^8.
S. Chrysostom cited by Doctor Fulke, says: Therefore he forgave sins,
when he gave the testament; he gave the estament by his sacrifice. If therefore
he forgave sins (...) one sacrifice, now there is no need of the second.
Theod^ret likewise says: Where there is remission of these things, now there
is no oblation for sin: for it is superfluous after remission is given: and
he promised remission, sayng: Their sins and iniquities I will no more
remember. Likewise Photinus says: What need is there of many oblations? when
that once, which Christ offered, is sufficient to take away sins. Christ (says
the Annotations upon the Rhems) is that eternal Prie^t and redeemer, which by
his sacrifice and death upon the cross, 2. Tim. 2. annot. Heb. 5. an.
has reconciled us to God, and paid his blood as a full and sufficient ransom
for all our sins: he being without need of any redemption, never subject to
the possibility of any sinning. Again, The full work of that his sacrifice,
by which we were redeemed, was wholly consummate and accomplished, at the
yielding up of his spirit to God the father, when he said: Consummatum est.

The truth of which doctrine concerning the absolute redemption of man, lively
appears in the resurrection of our Savior. For seeing that Christ (as their
own note upon the Rhems confesses) dyed not in his own, but in our sins,
himself never subject to the possibility of sinning: It is most assured, that
if one sin of all our sins had remained, either not thoroughly, or
imperfectly punished, then could not Christ have risen again: forasmuch as
where there is but one sin, there of necessity must be death. For so has
the unchangeable truth and righteousness of God decreed: The wages of sin is
death. Most excellent to this purpose is that saying of Saint Hillary, Romans
6.23.
Apol. page 89.
cited by Bishop Jewel: Our everlasting life is ready and easy to believe,
that Jesus Christ is risen again, from the dead: For in the resurrection of
our Savior, w^ may behold through a lively faith, the very actual remission of
sins, and our justification. For as the Father by delivering Christ to death,
John. 3.16. Ephesians. 5.2. Luke 4.18.
has redeem^d our sins in him, that was obliged for us before Adam was
created by the decree of the whole Trinty: so by raising him from death, he
has absolved him from our sins, and us in him: according t^ the saying of
the Apostle: Romans 4.25.
Who was delivered to dath for our sins, and is risen again for our
justification. If one dyed for all, (says Saint Bernard in his 190 Epistle to
Innocent Bishop of Rome, then all were lead, that so the satisfaction of one
might be imputed to all: even as that one person bare the sin of all. No man
(says Kellison citing Saint John) has greater char^ty then this, to dye for
his friend, and especially for his enemy: And this also extolleth Christ's power
most highly, who by death overcame death: yea sin also and condemnation: Here
it plainly appears by Kellisons own words, that sin, with the guilt and
punishment, is taken away by Christ, and we delivered fron all sin, both
original and actual, venial and mortal, a culpa and poena: that is, from
the fault and punishment due to the same: as the Annotations upon the Rhems
acknowledges, and the very Canon law likewise confesses, 1. Ioh. 1. annot. De
consec. 4 cap. 8. 2. Cor. 5.2. Rhem. page 570.
in teaching that the Son God took upon him the flesh of sin, that is to
say, sinful flesh, and the punishment, he being without fault: that so in the
flesh of sin, both the fault might be satisfied, and the punishment also. Nay
more, that we should be made the righteousness of God in him. For he has made
him to be sin for us, which knew no sin (says the Apostle) that we should
be made the righteousness of God in him. Upon which place Saint Chrysostom,
cited by Doctor Fulke, says: that we should be made the justice of God in him:
what speech, what mind can set forth these things worthily? for him that was
just he made a sinner, that he might make sinners just. But rather he said not
so: but that which was much more; for he named not the quality, but the
essence: he said not a sinner, but sin it self: not only him which sinned
not, but him which knew no sin: that we might be made, he said, not just, but
justice it self, and the justice of God. For this is the justice of God, when
justification comes not of works, seeing it is necessary that no spot be
found, but by grace: by this means all sin clean vanishes away. In the
mean time he suffers them not to be extolled, seeing God performs all; and
shows the greatness of the giver, in that the former justice was of the law
and of works, but this is the justice of God. Primasius upon this text says:
God the Father made his Son sin for us; that is a sacrifice (...) sin.
The sacrifice offered for sin in the law, was called sin, although it did
not sin at all: as it is written: And he shall lay his hand upon the head of
his sin, etc. By the blood of these sacrifices, that blood which was shed for
us was prefigured: for Christ being offered for our sins, was called by the
name of sin, that we might be made the justice of God in him, not in us.
Theodoret upon this text says: That when he was free from sin, he suffered
the death of sinners, that he might loose the^ sin of men: and being called
that which we were, he made us that which he was: for he gave us the riches of
his justice.

Thus it does appear, that Christ has not only taken away the pain and
punishment of sin: but also merited a sempiternall righteousness for us, which
is (as an Ancient says) the very root of life. Otherwise what would become of
that faith (which the Annotations upon the Rhems speaks of) that reaches to
the life to come, Romans 10. annot.
making man assured of such articles as concern the same? As of Christ's coming
down to be incarnate, of his descending to hell, of his resurrection,
ascension, and return again to be glorified: by which actions, we be
pardoned, justified, and saved, as by the law we could never be. In vain would
our faith be (says the Apostle) if Christ was not risen and justified from our
sins, and we in him: 1. Cor. 15.^7.
for the^ we were yet in our sins: that is, guilty before God. Therefore
because Christ is risen, we are no longer in our sins: that is, we are in
very deed absolved from them, and the punishment due for them.

Being thus compassed about with a cloud of witnesses, concerning the perfect
redemption of man; who can but behold our King coming out of his sepulcher, as
out of a palace, leading death in chains, and the Prince of death fast bound in
fetters of iron? and with all his elect train following him, saying: O death,
where is thy sting? O grave, Ibid. 15.55:56.
where is thy victory? The sting of death is sin, and the strength of sin
is the law. But thanks be unto God, that has given us victory in our Lord
Jesus Christ: by whom we have redemption through his blood, Ephesians. 1.7.
even the forgiveness of our sins, according to his rich grace.

Secondly, forasmuch as that it stands not with Christ's Kingly power, to
begin, and not to accomplish his subjects happiness: he in his all-seeing
wisdom has merited the Spirit of his Father for us, through the effectual
working power whereof, (as by his divine finger) he writes his law in our
minds and hearts according to his promise. So that the elect may say together
with their Savior: Heb. 8. Psalm. 40.8.
I desired to do thy will: o my God I am ready to do it: yea thy law is within
my heart. That is, all knowledge to the performance of thy law; which the
natural man cannot attain unto unless God inlighteneth his understanding to
discern between objects, and things set before it in the holy Scriptures.
Again, Christ through the effectual working of his Spirit, prepares the
heart by making it soft and tender, to will those things that are pleasing to
God: yea to do the will of God, 1 These. 4.3.
whose will it is that we should be holy and clean. When he has thus done, he
sits in the heart of man, working both the will, and the deed, according to
his good pleasure, to the perfec^ repairing of the Image of God in him. God
sittet^ (says an Ancient) in the heart of man, like a King in (...) palace: in
his word like a King in his Council: in hi^ Church like a General in his
army: in his throne like a conqueror in his triumph. He sat in the heart of
Matthew, whom of a Publican and notable sinner, he made an Apostle, and
Evangelist. He stirred such a course in the heart of Paul, that of a cruel
persecutor, he became a faithful and zealous Preacher. Yea though Christ does
repair that which we have los^ by Adams transgression (according to the saying
o^ the Council of Arausicanum, chap. 21. Nature by Adam lost, by Christ is
repaired:) yet Kellison does tax his passion with this false imputation, to
egg us forward to all vice, to open a wide gappe to all licencious lilibertie,
and iniquity. But if a Pope with Bonifac^ the eighth, or Clement the sixth,
give remission of sins to those that come on pilgrimage to Rome, or send
their Angels to mediate their cause: he does not egg forward, with Killison,
to vice. Or if a Pope give remission of sins (with Vr^a^ the sixth, or
Clement the seventh) to fight in hi^ private scisme, he does not give liberty
to iniquity. Or if a Pope with Inocent the third, give remission o^ sins to
murder a King: he opens no gate to licentious liberty. But only Christ
must be taxed with that by Kellison, who in no case by the Roman^ law, may take
away sin.

Ies^it. ca^ech. lib. 2. page. 83.
But the society of Jesuits may. Our society of Jesus (says a Jesuit) is an
acquitall of all sins.

One days devotion in their house may: as you may find it thus written in
their Catech. first book, Ibid. li. an. Page. 8.
8. page. He that shall come every year to perform his devotions one whole
day in our house, shall have plenary indulgence of all his sins, though he said
but one Pater noster, or an Aue Mary.

The Mass Priest by his own authority may: Luke 5. an.
Who having obtained the wonderful grace to remit sin, says in the
preparation to the Mass: Thy mine own authority do first absolve thee from
the sentence of the less excommunication, if thou have need thereof. And
besides, I absolve thee from all thy sins.

Alms deeds of themselves may. Luke 11.16 annot.
Alms deeds extinguish sin, redeem sin, deliver from death, and gain
heaven. But Christ without the prayers of the Church, and parties merit, may
not. Therefore the Priest before Mass, in the absolution, says: Let thy
sins be forgiven thee through the merits of our Lord Jesus Christ, the
prayers of our mother holy Church, the good deeds that thou have done, and
which thou shall hereafter by the grace of God do.

The merits of Saints without the help of Christ may. Therefore as a thing of
great secret, the Mass Priest secretly says in the Mass: We beseech thee, o
Lord, through the merits of the Saints, whose relics we here have, and
through the merits of the rest of the Saints, to forgive me all my sins.

Briefly Masses, wherein a round cake is offered, and not Christ: Indulgences,
to the which the Pope subscribes, not God: men's merit, which is a menstruous
cloth, and not as sweet incense: relics purchased of Mass Priests may take
away sins, and give life: but Christ may not; for so to believe is high
treason, to the Romish and Canniball army, who having invented many heresies,
propter gulam and ventrem, for gluttony and belly cheer (as Saint Hierome
speaks) feed themselves fat upon the souls of men. But miserable is that
spouse (as Saint Bernard says) that is committed to such leaders; they are not
the friends, they are the enemies of the Bridegroom.

Thus much shall suffice concerning the difference of doctrine in this
position: wherein you may be, hold the Angels of light, leading the way to
Christ, the hope of glory: and the Angels of darkness to hopeless glory:
lying hid in indulgences, merit, satisfaction, worshipping of Saints, images,
and relics, which Kel. in his Epistle to the reader in his Survey, has
promised to make as plain, and as plausible, as may be, to those that will
take his impolished work in good part: that is, to deny Christ's passion to be
sufficient, and to look for salvation in them.

OPPOS. 4. Christ deserved for us, at Gods hands, grace: by which together with
our cooperation, we may be saved and redeemed.
Survey page 26. page 256. 1. Pet. 1. page 257.
KEllison a little before this place cited, treating of the price of our
redemption, acknowledgeeth the same to be so great, that as S. Peter says: We
were redeemed not by gold and silver, but by the precious blood of Christ. So
rich a price was this blood, that it was sufficient to have satisfied for the
sin that shed it. (as Saint Bernard says.) Whereupon Kellison concludes:
That Christ is our redeemer, who has delivered us out of the power of
darkness, Page 262. Page 191.
freed us from the slavery of sin, and bondage of the devil. Yet contrary to
all this, in another place he teaches, that Christ has satisfied for our
sins; not because his passion without any cooperation on our part does
suffice: and therefore Christ thought it good (as he elsewhere says) as we
fell by our wills into captivity; so by our own wills, together with grace, we
should rise again, and wind our selves out of the servitude of sin, and
tyranny of the devil. Saint Paul, to the confutation of this doctrine,
teaches: That Christ himself when he ascended on high, led captivity captive,
and gave gifts unto men: not that he led captivity into heaven, where there is
no place for sin and death: but that to the redeeming, and reducing of mankind
to his old liberty, and dignity, ouercoming the devil, sin, and death, he
led them in open show in an unspeakable triumph: according to that saying of
the Apostle: Col. 2.15.
Spoiling the principalities and powers, thou have made a show of them openly,
and have triumphed over them. Whereupon that joyful voice was heard out of
heaven, when Christ ascended up thither (not where God the word was not before:
but where the word become flesh, sat not before.) Now is salvation in heaven,
and strength, and the kingdom of our God, and the power of his Christ. For the
accuser of our brethren is cast down, which accused them before God day and
night. King David prophesied of this unspeakable triumph, saying: They have
seen, o God, thy goings, the goings of my God and my King, which art in the
sanctuary. The singers went before, Reu 12.10. Psa. 68.24.
the players of instruments after: in the midst were the man is pl^ying with
^^^brels. In which sweet reioicing, it does most lively appear, that salvation
and power is made perfect by the Lords death and resurrection, by the which sin
and death is abolished, life is restored, the devil cast down and ouerthrown,
so that he can no more accuse mankind before the judgment seat of God. Now we
are freed from sin (says the Apostle) who shall lay any thing to the charge of
Gods chose^? Romans 8.
There is our freedom from the punishment: It is God that justifies, who
shall condemn? It is Christ which is dead: yea, rather which is risen again,
which is also at the right hand of God, and makes request also for us: So that
no accusation may be brought against Gods chosen.

Seeing then that Christ has wrought so excellent and perfect redemption (as
the whole host of heaven does bear witness) it appears that it is not left
to the cooperation of our own wills to rise again, and wind our selves out
of the servitude of sin, and tyranny of the Devil. If it had been left unto
the will of man? how could the will of man have performed it? Ioh. 15.
Without me (says Christ) you can do nothing. Yet there be men (says an
ancient) unthankful to Grace, ascribing much to poor and wounded Nature. It
is true that man when he was created, received great strength of free will:
but by sinning he lost it. Saint Augustine cited by Doctor Fulke, propounds
this question: Rhem page 206.
May not that part of mankind (to which God has promised deliverance, and an
eternal kingdom) be repaired, by the merit of their own works? God forbid:
for what good can he work that is lost or cast away? except he be delivered
from per^^tion. What? by freewill? God forbid that also. For man using free
will amiss, lost himself and it also. For as he that kills himself, does
it while he lives: but in killing himself lives not, neither can he revive
himself, when he has slain himself. So when man sinned by free will, sin
got the victory, and free will was lost. For of whomsoever a man is overcome,
to him he is addicted, or bound as a slave. Romans 6. What liberty then can
there be of him that is a bond-slaue? but when he delights in sin. For he
serves freely, that does his masters will gladly. And by this he is free to
commit sin, which is a slave to sin: but to do justly he shall not be free,
except he being delivered from sin, begin to be the servant of
righteousness. That is true liberty for the joy of well doing, and a godly
bondage to the obedience of the commandments. But whence shall a man that is
bound and sold, have this liberty? Except Christ does redeem him, whose
saying, that is, John. 8. If the Son shall make you free, then are you free
indeed: which thing, before it begin to be wrought in man, how can any man
boast of free will in a good work, which yet is not free to work well? except
he extol himself being puffed up with vain pride: which the Apostle beats
down when he says: You are saved by grace through faith.

Neither does man, when he is made free by Christ, make himself every day
more honorable then other, until he come to be more precious then fine gold:
Rem. 9.23 Phil. 2.23
ye above the wedges of the gold of Ophir. For this is a work peculiar to Gods
Spirit, that works in us the will and the deed, according to his good
pleasure. We will (says Saint Augustine) but it is God that works in us to
will: we work, but it is God that works in us, according to his good
pleasure. This is behouefull for us to speak. This is a godly and true
doctrine, that our confession may be humbled, and lowly: and that God may have
the whole. We live in more safety, if we give all unto God, rather when we
commit our selves partly to our selves, and partly to him. For as it is God,
that first works a new recreation in the mind, through a heavenly
illumination, and a holy will, by creating holiness in the will: so it is the
same God, that causes the light of the one to increase, and the holiness of
the other to abound. Concerning which spiritual beatitude, Saint John teaches
most excellently, when he says: That life was in God from the beginning, Ioh.
1.4.5.
and that life was the light of m^n, that this light shines in the darkness,
and the darkness comprehended it not. It was the special revelation of the
Father, that Peter knew Christ. And it was the exceeding mighty and powerful
work of Christ's Spirit, Ioh. 2.20.
that Saul, afterward called Paul, did preach Christ, not directed by any
fleshly, or humane Spirit, but by the Spirit of Christ, by which he did live in
him. That we live well, that we understand aright, we have it of God, of our
selves we have nothing, says Saint Augustine cited by Bishop Jewel. From this
want arises the paiers of holy men; David beseeches God to create a clean
heart in him. And Solomon says: Let him incline our hearts unto himself, that
we may keep his commandments. These holy Pat^^^^ke: did not think, (as
ambitious Popish Priests d^e) that they had power in themselves, to make
themselves clean, and to purge their own hearts, (a^ the Rhems teaches.)

By this which has been said, we may see more clear then the light, that the
will of man does not cooperate with the Spirit of God in his recreation, no
more then Adam in his creation. For, the understanding sees no further then
the Spirit of God inlightneth it (which is but in part in this world) no more
then a man carrying a candle into a large gallery garnished on every side with
variety of curious works, sees no more then that the light of the candle
makes apparent. Psa. 18.28.
Surely (says David) thou will light my candle, the Lord my God will lighten
my darkness. Again, send thy light and thy truth, let them lead me, let them
bring me into thy holy mountain, and to thy tabernacle. Neither does the will
in any thing obey the Lords command, more then it is effectually moved
thereunto by Gods Spirit. As it does appear in Jonas, Jonah. 1.3.
who being commanded by the Lord to go to Niniuah, that great city, and cry
out against it, rose up to fly to Tharshish from the presence of the Lord. But
more apparent in the saying of Paul. Romans 7.23
For I delight (says he) in the law of God concerning the inward man. But I
see another law in my members, rebelling against the law of my mind, and
leading one captive unto the law of sin, which is in my members.

But Kellison says: Survey. page 144.
If we cooperate not with God by our own free will? In vain do we pray that his
will be done upon the earth. But to this we answer, if we do cooperate with
God, then our will shall be done as well as Gods will? 1. Cor. 25.28. Phil
4.6. Ibid. 2.13.
And so God shall never be all in all in us, that we may be wholly governed by
his holy Spirit: which is plain opposite to truth, and most dishonorable to
Christ. For if Christ should not wholly govern us by his Spirit? At the day of
resurrection, when our bodies shall rise Spiritual bodies* (that is, wholly to
be governed by his holy Spirit, which now they are but in part) then there
would remain a will in us, as now there does, cooperating against, and not
with the Spirit of God: even the will, which the Apostle complains of, when
he cries out, Romans 7. Who shall deliver me from the body of this death? Even
from the law of my mind, which leads me captive unto the law of sin. So
also should Christ's body, (that is his Church) be imperfect, the good work of
the Spirit of God unfinished, Ephesians. 1.23.
and the fullness of Christ thereby extinguished. For as by his gracious
dispensation he is head of his Church: he is not full without his body.

But what should we speak further (of the work of Gods Spirit) to those that
say, they cooperate with grace: when contrary to grace, they seek the
disgrace of the Creator of all things, Survey. page 470.
saying: That if God commands us impossibilities, and for not doing them, does
not only punish us temporally, but also condemn us perpetually, etc. He I
say, (says Kellison) must needs be most cruel and inhumaine, m^re barbarous
then any Scit^ian, and so tyrannical, that in respect of him. Nero, Domitian,
and Dionysius were no tyrants, but clement Princes. Now what can be spoken more
blasphemously then this against the author of grace, which says: Hos. 13.
O Israel, one has destroyed thee: but ^i^^e is thy help. Again, contrary to
grace, they s^eke the disgrace of the Savior of the world, Ib^d. p^g. ^^0.
in writing: If Christ has delivered us from hell, because he has paid the
punishment due for sin, and requires no other satisfaction at our hands?
Then does he in a manner egg us forward to all vice. But this is injurious to
the praise of the glory of his grace, wherewith he has made us accepted in his
beloved. Ephesians. 1.6.7.
By whom we have redemption through his blood, even that forgiveness of sins,
according to his rich grace. Ibid. 607. 637. page
Again, contrary to grace, they seek the disgrace of the faith of a
Christian: in stiling justifying faith, An idle apprehension of Christ's
justice, and a lying faith; Ephesians. 2.8.
contrary to the Apostle, which says, Ephesians. 2.8. By grace ye are saved,
through faith, and that not of your selves, it is the gift of God. Again, God
which is rich in mercy, through his great love wherewith he loved us, even when
we were dead by sin, has quickened us together in Christ. For by his grace
ye are saved. Again, contrary to grace, they disgracefully teach against the
kingly and priestly dignity of Christ: in saying, Ibid. 376. 379.
that the Reformers have no religion, because they have no sacrifice. The
reason urged without reason, is; because Christ's sacrifice is not sufficient to
uphold religion, and the worship of God. Yet the Apostle says, Acts. 2.33.
Act. 2.33.
Since the^, that he by the right hand of God has bin exal^ed, and has
received the promise of the holy Ghost, ^e has shed forth this which you now
see and hear. Again, contrary to grace, denying Christ's passion, ^hey seek
salvation in a consecrated cake, in Popes Pardons, in their own merit, in the
merit of others: in holy water, and such like: as if the blood of Christ was
quite dried up. Briefly, contrary to grace, they ^hinke to merit heaven in
seeking (having heat an oven seven times hotter then before) to offer up by
treason, the life of Princes, and the blood of Gods chosen, to the Pope, as to
a second Molech.

Though these, and such like, be the works of these co-operators with grace:
that endeavor with Honorius by profane treason, to subvert the immaculate
says. Yet (they will say) they make that perfect through these their
unrighteous actions: that Christ has not done, by his power, suffering; and
obedience. But o miserable Rome (may we say with Franciscus Zephiru^) which in
the time of our elders, have brought forth the light of worthy Fathers: but in
our days h^st brought forth monsterous darkness, sham^full and slanderous to
the time to come.

OPPOS. 5. Christ has redeemed us from captivity, and bondage of sin; not
because no sin can be imputed unto us: but because his passion has deserved
grace for us, by which we may dispose our selves to justification, which is a
resurrection from sin to newness of life.
Suru^y. page 262.
CHrist having redeemed us from the captivity and bondage of sin (as we have
already proved) it cannot be still imputed unto us. For God that is righteous,
h^uing once called into judgment the sins of all believers, and punished them
in the full rigor of his justice in his Son: is also so just, that he will
not the same debt once perfectly paid, should be again repaied. If we
knowledge our sin, (says the Apostle) he is faithful and just to forgive us
our sins, 1. I^^. 1. 1. Cor 15.3.
and cleanse us from all vnrighteousn^ss^. Again, I delivered unto you that I
received: how that Christ died for our sins, according to the Scriptures. But
Kellison delivers unto us, that he has not received, namely: that we still
remain in our sins. Which is as much to say, Isai. 53.5. Ioh. 1.
that the Lord remembers our sins still, who has promised to remember them
no more. But seeing he will have it so, let us see how dead men remaining in
their sins, and separated from God, in whom light shines, and darkness
comprehends it not, can dispose themselves to justification? which is a
resurrection from sin, to newness of life. Which search, for the trial of
the truth therein can be no better made, then by considering: first, where this
life is? that makes us partakers of the first resurrection. Secondly, the way
which we must pass to this life? Thirdly, the isntrumental means, by which
we passing, receive the same? First, where this life is, the Apostle tells
us, saying: Col. 3.3. Ye are dead, and your life is hid with Christ, in God.
Again, God has given us life, Col. 3.3.
and this life is in his Son. Secondly, where this way lies that leads to
this life? Christ directs, who is the way: I am the way, the truth and the
life. Again, No man comes to the Father but by me. Again, No man can come
to me, Ioh. 14.6. Ioh. 6.65.
except it be given unto him of my Father. And where our Lord said this (says
Saint Augustine) if we remember the Gospel before, we shall find that he
said also: No man can come unto me, except the Father which has sent me, draw
him. He said not, shall lead him, but, shall draw him. This violence is done
to the heart, not to the flesh. Thirdly, the isntrumental means, by which we
must have access to the Father, to the receiving of this life, is Faith in
Christ, Ephesians. 3.22.
and this faith is the gift of God. These things briefly considered by lively
testimonies, it appears that no man can come to Christ, who is the way to
this life, except he be dra^ne: neither can any man attain to the
isntrumental means of Faith, except it be given him of God. For faith is the
gift of God. Therefore altogether unable to dispose our selves to
justification. For this disposition comes of the work of Gods Spirit: who by
an effectual working power, (that he may viuicate the members of Christ)
descends into their souls, and creates faith in the same, which is the eye,
the understanding, the foot, and hand of the Soul. The eye, by which we see
God; the understanding, by which we know God; the foot, by which we walk in
Christ to God; and the hand by which we receive life, hid in Christ with God:
Which life once received, the soul is made partaker of the first resurrection,
without any cooperation of it own. Fides nostra est clauis regni coelorum
(says Clemens Alexandrinus cited by Bishop Jewel, Apol. Bis. Jewel. page 178.
) Our faith is the key of the kingdom of heaven. Cor clausum habent: quia
clauem fides non habent, (says S. Augustine) They have their hearts shut up,
because they lack the key of faith. God gives us this key before we can have
passage into heaven: we no sooner receive the same, but Gods treasury is
opened unto us; our of which we receive (through Christ) righteousness and
life, that we may be made partakers of the first resurrection.

Again, ^o make this more apparent (our Savior says) Except a man be borne
again, he cannot see the kingdom of God: Nor cannot enter into the kingdom
of God: that is, into a virtuous life. Man is so far off from disposing
himself thereunto (as Christ testifies) that he is not able to discern it.
And no marvel, Rom 8.6. 1. Cor. 2.
for the wisdom of the flesh is death (as the Apostle says.) Again, the
natural man understands not the things of the Spirit of God: for they are
foolishness unto him: neither can he know them; because they are spiritually
discerned.

This did lively appear in the Philosophers, who did know that there was a
God: but neither knew what that God was, nor how he was to be worshipped. And
therefore no better styled in the height of their wisdom (by Tertullian, and
Saint Hierome) then the Patriarchs of heretics.

He therefore that would attain to this spiritual knowledge, must first
receive his new birth, not in body, but in mind: that is, his mind must be
illuminated, and made spiritual, that it may become the mind of Christ, by
receiving a recreation from the Spirit of Christ. Rhem. Romans annot.
We have the mind of Christ (says the Apostle.) And the gift of faith, which
is the first foundation, and ground to build upon: must be created and placed
in that royal chair of illumination: before we can either see what a virtuous
life is, or do any thing that is pleasing to God. For without faith, it is
possible to please God.

Yet for a further demonstration of that we have in hand, there is a kingdom
of darkness, and a kingdom of light. The kingdom of darkness consists of
dead men, wounded to death by Adams transgression. The kingdom of light, of
living men, revived and viuicated by the second Adams spirit. Concerning these
two kingdoms, Col. 1.12.13.
the Apostle thus speaks: Giving thanks to the Father, which has made v^
meet to be partakers of the inheritance of Saints in light: who has delivered
us from the power of darkness: that is, out of the kingdom of Satan by
justification: and has translated us into the kingdom of his dear Son by
sanctification. Upon which place Theodoret thus speaks: We praise the
merciful God, which (whereas we are unworthy) has made us partakers of the
Saints in light.

Thus we see that this translating from the power of darkness: that is, from
death to life, can be no more in the will of men, that are dead in sin, then
it was in Lazarus to raise himself out of the grave, who only are raised by
the effectual working power of Gods Spirit: as all the selected are from time
time. As Saint Paul notably teaches the Ephesians, in showing them what is the
exceeding greatness of Gods power, not only in raising up Christ their head
from the dead, that he might sit at the right hand of his Father: but also in
raising up them, the members of Christ, quickening them together in Christ, (by
whose grace they are saved. That they might sit likewise together in the
heavenly places in Christ Jesus. The dead man cannot be raised again, unless
the Lord cry within him, (says S. Augustine.)

Seeing therefore that that sanctified body of Christ (free from sin, both
original and actual) could not be raised up, but by the exceeding great power
of the Godhead. Injurious is this Popish position, which would have us
fellow-workers with the whole Trinity, in raising our selves being dead. Nay
double injurious it is to the whole trinity. First, to God the Father, in
making his covenant to none effect, who has promised for Christ's sake to
remember our sins no more.

Secondly, to Christ, in extenuating the merits of his passion: In saying, he
only has merited grace for us, and left us in Egypt, under the slavery of
the devil (the Egyptian Pharaoh.)

Thirdly, it abasheth the power of Gods Spirit, in making us fellow- workers
with him in our recreation, as if darkness could cooperate with light, to the
perfecting of our redemption, which Christ (as they say) has not.

Fourthly, most injuriously, for their own righteousness, for their own merit
sake (yea, in murdering of Princes) would tie Gods Spirit to be life unto
them; or to who^ they sell life, by selling of merits, Masses, and such like.
The heresy of Macedonius, which said, that the holy Ghost is servant and slave
to the Father, and the Son, is as tolerable as the heresy of these me^ that
would make the holy Ghost their servant: yea, while they are through false
doctrine, Monstra and portentu (as Platinia sometimes said of their Popes)
Monsters, unnatural, and ill shapen creatures.

In this position we may behold the Angels of light preaching the exceeding
greatness of his power toward us which believe, Ephesians. 1.19.
according to the working of his mighty power (as the Apostle says:) and the
Angels of darkness attributing (as v^^^ankfull to grace) that to nature, which
is proper to the divinity. Teaching also (by denying the sufficiency of Christ's
passion) night (as Saint Cyprian says) in stead of day; destruction, in stead
of health; despera^i^^ under the color of hope: infidelity, under the pretense
o^ faith. Antichrist under the name of Christ.

OPPOS. 6. Christ has redeemed us from the servitude of the la^^ not that the
law binds us not: but because he hat^ taken away the heaviness of the law.
And by his grace, has given us force easily to fulfill it: which otherwise
would have tyrannized over us, in commanding more then we should have been able
to have performed.
Suru^y. 261.
THese Co-operators with grace, still seeking t^ lessen and extenuate the merit
of Christ's passion, Heb. 1. marg. Ioh. 17.5.
leave him to merit his own glory, and themselves to do the like. Christ
(says the Annotation^ upon the Rhems) by his passion, merited his own
glorification. When as contrariwise Christ praying to his Father, desires to
be glorified, not with any new merited glory: but with the glory he had with
hi^ Father before the world was. God the creator of al^ things, needed not to
have stepped down from hi^ throne, to have taken our nature upon him, to merit
his own glory, but our salvation, that we might in him become righteous by his
whole entire obedience of the law: and not (as Kellison would have it) by a
part only. For as not some part of Adam^ disobedience, by which he
transgressed the law, i^ imputed unto us. Romans ^.19.
So not some part of Christ's obedience, but all, which he most perfectly in the
purity of his innocence, and holiness fulfilled, both in doing, and suffering,
is imputed unto us. For the threatening of the law cannot be fulfilled, but by
bearing, and suffering the curse: nor the commandment of the law otherwise
performed, but by doing of them. Christ, Phil. 2. Gal. 3.
that he might take away the curse of the law, humbled himself, and became
obedient unto death, even the death of the Cross. S. Hierome says: For that
which was impossible of the law, in that it was made weak by the flesh, God
sending his Son in the similitude of sinful flesh, condemned sin, of sin
in the flesh, Which if it be true, it may be objected unto us: Then Moses,
and Isaiah, and the rest of the Prophets, which were under the works of the
law, were under the curse? which thing he will not be afraid to confess, which
has read the saying of the Apostle. That Christ has redeemed us from the
curse of the law, being made a curse for us: And to answer, that every one of
the Saints for their time, were made a curse to the people. As Christ became
obedient unto the death, to take away the curse of the law. Ibid. 3.4.5
So likewise to the fulfilling of the commandments, the Apostles speaking of
the precepts of the law, says: But when the fullness of the time was come, God
sent forth his Son made of a woman, and made under the law, that he might
redeem them which were under the law, that we might receive the adoption of
Sons. Again, 2. Cor. 5.2^. Rhem. page 571.
he has made him which knew no sin, to be sin for us, that we should be
made the righteousness of God in him. Theophilact (cited by Doctor Fulke) upon
this place says: What is this, that God gave his Son which knew no sin: (that
is, which was justice it self) to dye for us? and caused him to dye as a
sinner and wicked man? For cursed is he that hangs on a tree. And he was
reputed among the unjust. He says not that he made him a sinner, but sin it
self, which is more: why was this done? That we might be justified not of
works, and the law, but of grace. For, this is the justice of God when a man
is justified by grace, so that no blemish, or small spot is sound in him. For
therefore he said not, that we might be made just, but the justice of God,
showing the excellency of grace. Oecumenius says: He made him sin: that is,
he should be condemned a sinner, that we should be made the justice of God in
him. He said not that we might be made just: but that which was more, justice
it self, and the justice of God. And that is the justice of God, which is not
of works, but that we might be justified in him: that is, by him forgiving and
pardoning us. Saint Augustine. God made Christ sin for us, to whom we are to
be reconciled. He therefore was made sin, that we might be made justice: not
our justice, but Gods justice, neither in us, but in him. As he declared sin
not to be his, but ours: not placed in him, but in us, by the similitude of
sinful flesh, in which he was crucified.

Thus by the testimony both of Scripture and Fathers, we see, that Christ has
not only taken away the heaviness of the law, and left it to our fulfilling:
but has also fulfilled the law, to the meriting of a sempeternall
righteousness for us. Yea, to the reducing, and restoring us to a far more
excellent state, then Adam before inioyed: who had posse non peccare; we non
posse peccare. He, p^sse non mori; we, non posse m^ri. He had power not to
sin: we, no power to sin. He power not to dye: we, no power to dye. Nay our
estate, if we enter into some particular consideration, is in some measure
(through these two parts of Christ's obedience) far more excellent in this
life (not to speak of the life to come) then Adams was.

Adam was mortal: so are we even while we are mortal. 1. Ioh. 3.14
We are translated already (says the Apostle) from death to life.

Adam enjoyed the pleasures of Paradise: so we in part in this our pilgrimage,
Ephesians. 2.
have the fruition of the pleasures of heaven. While we are made to sit
together in the heavenly places in Christ Jesus: Who being the first ripe corn
offered to the Lord, sanctified the whole field: (that is, all his members) and
ascended on high that he might prepar a place, and take (as our feoffe)
possession of heaven for us.

Adam in the height of his liberty was called but the servant of God: but we
even in this veil of misery, are called the members of Christ, 1. Cor. 12.12.
the spouse of Christ; yea Christ. By the name of Bridegroom, bone of his
bone) by being through regeneration, made partakers of his divine nature: flesh
of his flesh, having our flesh made the flesh of Christ. By sanctification, we
have the same mind and affections, the same life that Christ has through the
participation of the same Spirit.

Adam standing in his estate of integrity, God had a delight to be with him,
and he with God: but God has a delight to be with us in this our state of
imperfection: Delicia mea cum filijs hominum: My delight is to be (says God)
with the sons of men. Delicia nostra cum filio Dei: Our delight is to be wi^^
the Son of God.

The wife of Adam in the midst of his pleasures, became an isntrumental
means to vnrobe him of the glorious image of God: But the Spirit of Christ,
our husband in this our pilgrimage, begins to cloth us with the image of
God again.

Adam in his joy, in eating the fruit forbidden, found nothing but death: We,
in the midst of our afflictions can find nothing but life; we cannot dye
though we would: Haba. 1.12
For neither death, nor life, nor Angels, nor principalities, nor powers, nor
things present, nor things to come, nor height, nor depth, nor any other
creature, shall be able to separate us from the love of God.

But seeing these privileges are in no request with them, that leave Christ to
merit by his pains, his own glory, and theirs to do the like. I cannot see
how they can by this their own doctrine? be saved? for that no man has this
justice of works, (the Annotations elsewhere thus speaks: Rhem. Romans 8.
annot. Ma^th. 5. annot.
) We be truly called the sons of God, and so just indeed, though we be not
without all sins. Every one of us, as well just as unjust, being taught, and
bound to confess our offenses, to ask daily of God by this petition: Forgive
us our debts. So far are we off from meriting any thing at Gods hands: that
by their doctrine we be still indebted to God, concerning the punishment, and
the debt of sin. Therefore it must needs be, that all that are delivered out
of the common condemnation, are delivered by the means and merits of Jesus
Christ (as the Annotations elsewhere truly teaches) or not at all. Rom 9.
annot. Reave. 20. marg.


Again, they thus teach: Reave 2. annot. Reave. 1. annot. 2. Tim. 4. annot.
That none imperfectly cleansed, can enter into the kingdom of heaven. Again,
that God cannot be good, that can love and save him he knows to be evil.
Yet they send the Catholic Christian man, living but an ordinary honest life,
either not sinning greatly, or supplying his fault by penance, as a man of
great justice, to challenge heaven in his own right, bargained and wrought
for, and accordingly to be paid for him.

Others that are altogether unclean, and not so chaste as the Priest that
keeps but one Concubine, that they may be made heirs of other men's
goodness, that have none in themselves, as the Pope is of Peter's, make (with
the foolish virgins) purchase of counterfeit oil, that they may receive to
their salvation, righteousness from their works of supererogation. As the
Pope, though never so wicked, receives his holiness by succession of Chair.

Others seek it in Popes Pardons: Apol. Bish. Jewel. page 147. Ibid. 125.
who by power (as hardening inforceth) is Peter, by annoynting Christ. And thus
Simon Begumus, Bishop of Mad^usia (in the late Council holden at Lateran in
Rome) sought it: who poynting to the Pope, as John Baptist did to Christ, said:
Behold, the Lion is come of the tribe of Judah, of the root of David, o most
blessed Leo, we have looked for thee to be our Savior. And thus the
Ambassadors of Sicilia fought it: who cried, lying prostrate on the ground: O
thou holy Father, that takes away the sins of the world, have mercy upon us:
Thou which take away the sins of the world, give us peace.

Others in the Popes Chair: For the truth (says Cardinal Cusanus) cleaves
fast to the Popes Chair. Therefore the members united to that Chair, and
joined to the Pope, make the Church.

Others whom the Pope judges in his finite wisdom to be somewhat unclean,
are sent into Purgatory, which (as Angelus Parsiensis says) is the peculiar
possession of the Pope, there to stay till his Holiness think them sit,
through the mediation of Angels, to pass to heaven.

There is none sent to have passage by Christ, to that hauenly Jerusalem, but
the abiects of the Gentiles, Call. 3. annot. Rhem.
who commit mortal sins. For they (as the Annotations teaches) cannot be
delivered by themselves, nor by any other means from the curse of the law, but
by faith, and the grace of Christ Jesus.

Here we may behold the Angels of light leading to Christ, in teaching that not
some part, but all Christ's obedience, is imputed unto us. The other, (namely
the Angels of darkness) having mingled, lerma malorum, a heap of mischief,
sends men thither, from Christ, to seek salvation in them. But (as Saint
Augustine says:) Ecclesia in nullo homine spem ponere a suo redemptore
dedicit: The Church has learned of her Redeemer, to put no trust in any man.

OPPOS. 7. The Preachers of this Monarch, teaching that faith only justifies,
open a gap thereby to all vice.
Survey page 526.
THis Popish Jesuit uses Faith (that is an assurance in Christ) for
happiness, according as he has done the object, namely Christ Jesus. In
teaching that faith cannot justify without opening a gap to vice: As Christ
could not make a perfect redemption for us without opening a gate to all
licentious liberty, vice and iniquity.

But contrary to this Pelagian opinon, we will prove, that Faith only does
justify; and withal in the next position make manifest, that though the
Preachers of this Monarch teach this doctrine: yet withal preaching an
inherent righteousness, as well as an imputative: sanctification, as well as
justification, open no gate at all to vice: Whereas they teaching neither the
one nor the other; neither the tree, nor the fruit, set open a gap to all
idolatry.

But first concerning this doctrine in hand, we are to consider, that the
reason why we are justified by faith, and not by works, is; because
justification, and therefore salvation goes before works. For the way which
the holy Ghost uses to make us able for them, is Faith, uniting us to Christ,
whereof he himself is a witness, who says: As the branch cannot bear fruit
of it self, except it abide in the vine: no more can you, except you abide in
me. Apol. Bish. Jewel. page 296.
The beginning (says Saint Syrill cited by Bishop Jewel) and foundation of our
^oline^se, is Christ, by faith I mean, and none otherwise, for in this sort
Christ dwells in us. Those only are to be counted good wookes (says Saint
Augustine) which are wrought by love. Faith of necessity must go before: for
they must take their beginning from says, Rhem. ^4. page
and not faith from them. Saint Ambrose (cited by Doctor Fulke) thus speaks:
Faith only shall go with you to the next life: and justice shall also accompany
you. Heb 11. annot.
If faith go before? which (as the Annotations upon the Rhems teaches) is the
ground and foundation of all other virtues, and worship of God, without which
no man can please God. Rhem. page 232.
Then that which follows after (which is works) cannot be the cause of that
which goes before: namely, the free justification of life, through faith. By
this argument Paul proves, that neither Gentile, nor Jew, are justified by
works, but by grace. For by grace ye are saved (says the Apostle) through
faith, and that not of your selves, it is the gift of God. The Church casts
all her living into the gift of God, which understands all that she lives,
not to be of her merit, but of Gods gift, when she says: God be merciful to
me a sinner. As Beda teaches, cited by Doctor Fulke. For whether we respect
faith, or righteousness, and life, which we receive from Christ, by that
instrument of faith, they are all the gifts of God. No marvel then if Saint
Augustine styles the opinion of merit, pride; and the justification of says,
the discipline of humility. Seeing this (as Saint Basil teaches) is a full and
perfect rejoicing in God: When a man does not boast himself of his own
justice: but knows himself to be void of of true justice, and to be
^ustified by only faith in Christ.

Saint Paul in the definition of the Gospel (the seed of immortality) shows,
Romans 1.1^
that the efficient cause of our justification, is the power of God, Romans 1.10
Gal. 3.11. Heb. 10.3
the end our salvation, and the instrument whereby it is received, faith: for
he adds unto every one that believes. And this he confirms by a testimony
of the Prophet Abacucke, wherein he so much delights, that thrice (like a
Nightingale) he records it again and again. The just shall live by faith.
Rhem. p. 568. 440.
Let the just man (says Saint Augustine, cited by Doctor Fulke) tolerate the
unjust; let the temporal labor of the just, tolerate the temporal impunity
of the unjust: but yet the just man lives by faith. For there is no other
justice of man in this life, but to live by faith, which works by love. For
if he live by faith? let him also believe, that he shall rest after his
labor: and they shall have eternal torments after their present joy. Again,
seeing all the just, both of elder time, and the Apostles lived by right faith,
which is in our Lord Jesus Christ, and had such holy in inners with faith,
Chrys^st. in Mat. hom.
that although they could not be of so perfect virtue in this life, as in the
life to come: yet what sin soever has crept upon them of human frailty, it
is immediately wiped away through the piety of the same faith.

He that desires not vain glory (says Chrysostom) being made Christ's Vicar,
ought to preach the justice of Christ. This justice did Saint Paul preach to
the Romans, Galatheans, and Hebrews. This justice did the Fathers preach to
those that lived in their times. Ambrose tells the Gentiles that they have
received a gift of grace, and not of works. Again, Amb. de Voc. Gent. lib. 1.
cap. ^
they are justified; because working nothing, nor making any recompense, they
are justified through faith only by the gift of God. ^mb. Epist. ^d Romans cap.
^.
Again, this was Gods determination, that the law being at an end: the grace
of God should require faith only to salvation. The Apostle (says Saint
Origin) does say, ^rigen. epist. ^d Romans 3. cap.
that the justification of faith alone does suffice: so that he which
believes, only is justified, although he have fulfilled no work. Wherefore
it stands us upon, that take in hand to defend the Apostles writing, to be
perfect and all things to stand with good order, to inquire who has been
justified by faith only without works. Therefore for example sake, I think
that the thief is sufficient, which being crucified with Christ, cried to him
from the cross: Lord Jesus remember me when thou come in thy kingdom.
Neither are there any works of his described in the Gospel: But for his
faith, Jesus said unto him: This day shall thou be with me in paradi^e.

Hillariu^ upon Matthew, says: It moved the Scribes and Pharisees, that sin
was forgiven by a man: (...) ^^ld a man only in Jesus Christ, and that to
(...) ^or given by him, which the law could not release: for says only does
justify. ^pol. p^g. ^^.
Saint Basil, cited by Bishop Jewel, says. Who so trusts not in his own
merits, nor lo^^^th to be justified by his own works, he has his only h^pe
of salvation in the mercy of our Lord. With whom Saint Augustine agreeing, thus
exhorts: Presume not of thine (...) working, but of the grace of Christ: for
the Apostle s^ith: Ye are saved by grace. Gregory Naza^^^^, speaking in the
person of the Publican, that prayed with the Pharisie: Works s^^ll not save
me, but let thy grace and mercy drop down (...) ^ime profane man, which only
hope, o king, thou have given to miserable sinners. Romans 9. annot. Romans 10.
text.


With this saying agrees the Annotations upon the Rhems. All that be delivered
out of the common condemnation, be delivered by grace and pardon, through the
means and merits of Jesus Christ. Again, the law was not given, as the Jews
ignorant zeal supposed, for them to justify themselves by it, considering
they could not fulfill it: but to bring them to Christ, to believe in him, and
so for his sake to be justified.

But to make the truth of this doctrine more apparent, we are to consider,
there concurres two things necessary to the justification of faith: that is to
say: the forgiveness of our unrighteousness, Act. 20.43. Romans 3.23 Ibid. 4.7.
1. Ioh. 1.4. Ibid. 2.12.
or the remission of our sins: and the imputaion of another righteousness.
For the first, the Prophets bear witness, that every one that believes in
him, (namely Christ) shall through his name, receive remession of sins: that
is, shall by faith be justified and absolved from the guilt and punishment of
sin, and so become blessed in not having his sins imputed unto him. Blessed
is the man (^aith the Prophet) to whom the Lord imputes no ^^nne. With whom S.
Augustine agreeing, Romans 4.6.
thus redoubleth the words of the Prophet. Blessed is he to whom the Lord
imputes no sin; neither is there guilt in his heart. This is the confession
of humble Saints, which boast not themselves to be that they are not. And this
is the confession of S. Ambrose, cited by Bishop Jewel: Apol. page 82.
I will not glory for that I have done good to any man, nor for that any man
has done good to me: but for that Christ is my advocate with the Father, and
for that Christ's blood was shed for me.

Yet notwithstanding this freedom, concerning the remission of sins, we have
no right to eternal life, unless we attain likewise by faith to an
unchangeable and everlasting righteousness, which the law requires. Which
sempeternall righteousness is that which Christ merited for us in keeping the
law, making them blessed to whom it is imputed. Daniel. 9.21.
Blessed is the man to whom the Lord imputes righteousness without works.
This righteousness of Christ being sempeternall, one and the same, is to him
to whom it is imputed: yea, to the just man that sins seven times a day,
perpetually the root of life. The Spirit is life for righteousness sake. Most
excellent to this purpose, Romans 8.10.
is that saying of S. Bernard, (cited by M. Whittaker against Champion.) He
that has taken the desert of sin, by giving unto us hi^ righteousness, he
has paid the debt of sin, and restored life. For so death being dead, life
returns: as sin being taken away, righteousness comes again.
Furthermore, death is abandoned by Christ's death, and Christ's righteousness
imputed unto us.

Survey. page 607. page 637. Romans 3.25.
But forasmuch as Popish Priests allows, nor likes justifying faith, (which
they style to be an idle apprehension of Christ's justice, and a lying faith.)
Let us try which way else we may be justified? It is most certain we all have
sinned, and are deprived of the glory of God: and therefore remain in death:
for the wages of sin is death. And notwithstanding Christ's passion (as says
Kellison) sin is still imputed unto us. Can the everlasting torment of the
creature pay this debt? Survey. page 262.
The everlasting torment of the creature, is not able to satisfy for it. For
although in the place of horror, they are (as an Ancient speaks:) Plena
fletus ex dolor stridor dentiu^ ex furore: Full of weeping, because of grief;
full of gnashing of teeth, because of madness: Yet Quippe nihil miseris fletus
lamentoque prosunt: Though they weep never so much, tears do nothing
prevail. Therefore we must either be freed by faith in Christ, or not at all:
namely, in believing that Christ has in the voluntary payment of the
punishment, set us free from all sin, whether original, 1. John. 1. annot.
or actual, (as the Annotations upon the Rhems confesses.) Let only (says
S. Augustine cited by Bishop Jewel) the price of the blood of my Lord, Apol.
page 356. 375.
avail me to the perfection of my delivery. Again, for Christ that came, (not
with his due reward, but with grace that was not due) found all men sinners,
being himself only free from sin, and a deliverer of sinners.

If we were able to satisfy Gods justice, concerning the punishent of sin?
(which is the debt that Kellison would have us still to owe him:) yet could we
not thereby merit eternal life, without a sempeternall righteousness, the
root of life. For the sufferings of this life, Romans 8 13.
are not worthy the glory that shall be reueiled in the children of God.
Therefore not meritorious. Where is this sempeternall righteousness to be
found in man? Is it in the understanding? 1. Cor. 3.12
That it is not: for man knows but in part, and he whose notion is but in
part, cannot attain to it, but in part.

Who living in this body (says S. Augustine) which is corrupted, and weigh^th
down the soul, Suru^y page 473.
can know all truth? when the Apostle says: We know but in part. Moreover,
Kellison says: That our understanding either rightly attaineth to the
knowledge of God, or not at all. And if it erreth in one perfection of God, it
erreth in all; because all is one.

Is it in the flesh of man? The Apostle says: I know that in me, that is, in
my flesh, dwells no good thing. Moreover, Saint. Augustine cited by Kellison,
plainly proves, Romans 8.18. Page 6^2.
that the flesh has gotten (since Adams fall) such a hand over the Spirit and
will, that though we deny consent unto her lusts and desires, yet we cannot
quite repress them, be we as holy and perfect as Paul was.

Is it to be found in the just man? No, the righteousness of the just man is
not sempeternall, Pro. 24.16 1. Pet. 4.18. 1. King. 8.40. Romans 3.23.
he falls seven times. There is no man that sins not (says Solomon.) For
there is no difference (says S. Paul) for all have sinned, and are deprived of
the glory of God. Nay, such is the imperfection of man, that the very Pagans
(as Kellison notes) that want the light of says: Survey. page 579.
yet by the light of reason, espied vice in some of our actions.

Briefly, it is not to be found among the sons of men, Job. 15.16.
who drink iniquity as water: but by Christ, who is called our righteousness
and life, by a name demonstratiue, and not appellatiue: to teach us that he is
our righteousness and life. O then may we say with David: Enter not into
judgment with thy servant, for in thy sight shall none that lives be
justified. And cry out with S. Augustine. O Lord enter not into judgment with
thy servant. What means that, Enter not into judgment with thy seruan? Thus
much it means. Stand not with me in judgment, requiring of me all that thou
have commanded: for if thou enter into judgment with me, thou s^^lt find me
guilty: I have need therefore not of thy upright judgment, but of thy mercy.
Again, when the just King shall sit on his throne, who shall glory that he
has a chaste heart? or who shall glory that he is clean from sin?

Having thus proved that we are freely justified by faith, we may say of all
popish Priests, as Saint Hierome said of the Pharisees: Ignorantes quod sola
side iustificat, etc. They not knowing that God only justifies by faith, and
supposing to be just by the works of the law, which they never observed: they
would not submit themselves to the remission of sins, lest they should seem to
have been sinners. For thus says Kellison, speaking with the whole mouth of
the University of Doway: Page 266.
If we are still sinners, and only reputed just for Christ's justice, which is
by faith apprehended, and by God imputed unto us? This is most dishonorable to
Christ.

That we are still sinners is most apparent: If we say we have no sin, we
deceive our selves, and truth is not in us. 1. John. 1. annot. Mark. 10. annot.
What sins (says Pelagian the heretic to S. Augustine) did Abell, and such
just men commit. Saint Augustine (cited in the Rhems, says) They might laugh
sometimes immoderatly, or jest too much, or covet somewhat intemperatly, or
pluck fruit over greedily, or in eating take somewhat more then afterward was
well digested, or have their intention, in time of prayer, somewhat distracted,
and such like. Again, a man may be sine crimine, but not sine peccato: 1.
John. 1. annot.
Without heinous offenses, but not without sin. Moreover the Annotations
elsewhere teaches, that none is entirely substantially, and of himself good,
but God: though by participation of Gods goodness m^^ are also called Good.
Again, we be truly called the sons of God, and so just indeed, though we be
not without all sins, every one of us, as well just as unjust, being taught
and bound to confess our offenses, and to ask pardon daily of God, by this
petition of the Pater noster: Forgive us our debts. Moreover, the Apostle
says, God justifies the ungodly, to him that works not. Know thou (says S.
Augustine, Romans 1. annot.
cited in the Rhems) that faith found thee unjust: and if faith given to thee,
made thee just, it found thee a wicked one, and of such a one made thee just.
What works then had thou, being then wicked? None could thou have, nor can
have, before thou beleeuest. Believe then in him that justifies the wicked,
that thy good works may be good works indeed. Again, Saint Augustine (cited
by Bishop Jewel) thus speaks: Apol. 22. Jewel. 376 page
For nothing thou shall save them. What is meant by these words: For nothing
thou shall save them. This is the meaning: Thou foundest nothing in them
wherefore thou ^^auldest save them, but thou find much wherefore thou should
condemn them. Again, Saint Augustine elsewhere thus speaks: Thou art
nothing by thy s^^^^, call upon God; the sins are thine, the merits are Gods:
punishment is due to thee: and when the reward shall ^^me, he will crown his
gift, not thy merit.

Moreover, David that worthy Prophet, counts them blessed: not that have no
sin, but whose sins we covered. To cover them, or not to impute them (says
the Annotations upon the Rhems) is not to charge us with our sins; because by
remission they are clean taken ^way: otherwise it were but a fained
forgiveness.

^om ^. (...).
Seeing God justifies the ungodly, no virtue inherent can be of the essence or
form of justification: for an ungodly man has no virtue inherent in him:
therefore in sin.

Yet it is not any ways dishonorable to God, that we are justified being
sinners, but to his praise and honor in saving us by grace, as he did the
Ephesians. That he might show in the ages to come, the exceeding riches of his
grace, through his kindness toward us in Christ Jesus. Which grace if we were
saved by merit, should be abolished. Because grace is no grace if it be given
(as Saint Augustine has observed) according to works. Grace is cast away, Aug.
de Praedest. sanctorum.
if faith only justifies not, says S. Hierome upon the second of the
Galathians.

So it lively appears to be by the Romish doctrine: first, in regard their
works are made equal with the merits of Christ, according as the Annotations
upon the Rhems teaches. Christ's pains were worthy of heaven, and so be ours.

Secondly, because their merits (being but sinful men) are made of more worth
then the merits of Christ, being God and man. He by his passion, Heb. 2. an.
Col. 1. marg. Matthew. 25. annot. 1. Cor. ^ annot.
merited his own glorification (says the Rhems note:) whereas the works of man
may merit his own salvation, and satisfy for another, in doing more in the
service of God then he is commanded, above duty more then duty requires.

Thirdly, in regard the merits of man must be of greater worth then the gift
of God. Chrysh^^. 10. Romans 5.
For if everlasting life was a stipend due to works? (as they say it is) and
merited by our own righteousness? then is man's merit greater then the gift of
God. For (as Chrysostom says) righteousness is much more excellent then
life, because it is the root of life: which is most dishonorable to God.

Page 305.
But Kellison says: If God have saved by the justice of Christ, how can this be
to his honor, when his justice and ours are all one, and so we as just as he.

That righteousness whereby we are made just, (as Amandus Polanus truly
holds) though it be called the righteousness of God: Phil. 3.6.
yet it is not the essential righteousness of God: for that cannot be
communicated. But partly it is so called, because it is from God: that is to
say, because God by it does justify us: and partly also because it alone is
able to stand at Gods judgment seat. Saint Augustine cited by Amandus
Polanus, Aug. de spirit. and ^^t. cap. 9. and 26 Romans 1. marg. Rhem. page 832.
and also in the Rhems, says: He said not (meaning the Apostle) the
righteousness of man, but the righteousness of God; not speaking of that
righteousness by which God himself is just, but of that wherewith he
cloatheth man. Again, most excellent is that saying of S. Augustine cited by
Doctor Fulke: He sanctifies, and he purifieth us, as he is holy or pure: He is
holy by eternity: we are holy or pure by faith: we are just as he is just; but
he is just in unchangeable perpetuity, as we are just by believing in him who^
we have not seen, that we may at length see him. And even when our justice
shall be perfect, when we shall be made equal to the Angels; neither then shall
we be made equal to him. Moreover Chrysostom says: Christ is made unto us,
justice, wisdom, and holiness: it is not (says he) of essence, or
substance, but of faith. Therefore he says in another place: We are made the
justice of God. Thus much concerning the true justification of faith, which
Popery says, is an idle apprehension of Christ's justice.

But to deny the fullness of grace in Christ to salvation, in who^ it pleased
the Father, that in him all fulness should dwell, and to believe to be saved by
the fullness of grace in others. As in the merits of Saint Francis, concerning
which Pope Alexander the 6. ordained, that Christians should believe as an
article of their faith, that S. Francis had the 5. wounds of Christ imprinted
upon him, and commanded solemnly to ^^^ebrate the feast of the wounds of S.
Francis. This says with Kell. is no lying faith, nor idle apprehe^sion. Or not
regarding Gods covenant concerning the free remission of sins, to believe to
receive pardon, by entering into consecrat^d Churches, or by virtue of Popes
pardons, who with Alexander the 6. sell Christ himself. This is no lying says
nor idle apprehension. Or to believe that the Priest can forgive sins, who
makes remission their baud, as the women of Si^il, not to speak of other
places, (...) bear witness against the^ concerning offered villainies, 20.
Notaries, and as many Inquisitors, were not able in short time to set down.
This says is no lying faith, nor idle apprehension. Briefly, to believe to be
saved by a piece of bread, whom they make their God, by praying over a
blasphem^^s ros^^y, by sayin^ a prayer before an Image of the Cross, according
to the direction of Bonifacius the 8. by saying p^^^^ upon beads by numbers, by
going on (...) and such like. This faith is no lying says, nor (...)
^ppr^hension. But to believe to be saved by Christ, (...) only with these
Popish Locusts, is a lying ^aith, and (...) ^lle apprehension of Christ's
iustic^: that only hi^der^th the sale of Pardons, men's merits. M^sses, with
^ther such commodious merchandise. Th^^ c^^se^h ^^em to be offended with the
Preachers of this M^^^^^^, for taking away their gain, in dire^^^^ (...) Ch^^^^

But leaving of them to their frenzy humor, raging against the truth, let us,
according to the counsel of S. Chrysostom, not only hold Christ, but let us
also be ^^st glued unto him: for if we fall any thing f^^m him we are utterly
lost.

OPPOS. 8. The Pr^^chers in saying that Faith makes no sin to be imput^d to
a faithful man, they give good leave to all faithful men to commit all sin
and wickedness.
Su^^^y. page 547.
Having already entreated of an imputative righteousness that through says in
Christ mak^th no sin to be imputed unto us. Now we are to speak of an
^^herent righteousness, which as the fruit of f^^th causes by degrees, no
sin to remain in us, which the Preachers in this Monarch teaching giu^ no
leave to faithful men, (as the Popish Priests do to faithless) to commit
sin, and all kind of iniquity.

For it is one thing to speak of the article of iusti^^ation, and another
thing to speak of the whole king^^me of Christ, which contains (as the
Ancients have obs^^ued) Gratia priuatiuae and positiuae, Graces ^^^matiue and
positive: that is, not only restoring from evils, but also restoring to all
gifts of everlasting blessings.

In gr^^^ privative, we may behold an imputative righteousness, delivering us
from the power of darkness: that is, out of the chains, wherein the devil
held us captive.

In graces positive, an inherent righteousness clothing us after our delivery
from a noisome prison, with the glorious image of God, the fruits of says,
that in the end we may appear before Gods presence, as Absolon did before his
Father, after he had abode two years reconciled to him in Jerusalem.

Concerning which inherent righteousness, it is one thing also to speak of
Iustitam vtatoris, and Iustitiam comprehensum: The justice of those that tend
to heaven, in which there is imperfection: and the justice of those that
already have obtained the everlasting kingdom, in which kind of justice there
is no imperfection.

In the justice of those that tend to heaven, we may behold the image of God
repairing: and in the justice of those that have obtained the everlasting
kingdom, the image of God perfected.

Concerning which repaired estate, when the Scriptures does require us to be
renewed after the image of our Creator, it does testify that our creation is
lost within us, and when it shows how the same should be renewed, it
declares also wherein the same is lost: namely, in righteousness and
holiness. And wi hall the necessity of renewing: for without holiness none
can see God. Of these in order.

And first we will speak of the power by which we are renewed. Secondly, of
the isntrumental means through which we are renewed. And lastly, of the
nature into the which we are renewed, and the pattern into which we are to ^e
made.

First for the power it consists to the effectual working of Gods Spirit:
according to the saying of the Apostle: 2. Cor. 4.6.
God that commanded the light to shine out of darkness, is he which has
shined in our hearts, to give the light of the knowledge of God in the face of
Jesus Christ. Again, the spirit is given to every one to profit withal. So I
made you partakers of the divine nature, when I caused my spirit to dwell in
you (says Saint Cyril^) For Christ is in us changing our corruption into
incorruption, that we may be in the end (as the Apostle speaks) a glorious
Church, without spot or wrinckle.

Secondly, the instrument wherewith the Spirit of God is served, to work this
renouation, or change in us: is the written word and not the traditions of men:
according to the saying of the Apostle. Of his own will he begot us with the
word of truth. Iam. 1.18.
As we do receive our beginning from the word, so we receive our nourishment
and growth likewise from the same. Therefore the Apostle exhorts us, as now
borne ^abes, to desire the sincere the milk of the Word, that we may grow
thereby. 1. Pet. 2.
To this end the Scriptures is given by the inspiration of God, and is
profitable to teach, to improve, to correct, and to instruct in righteousness:
that the man of God may be absolute, being made perfect unto all good works.
The Scripture is profitable to teach, (says Theodoret upon this place: 2. Tim.
3.16.
) For, whatsoever we know not, we learn out of it. To reprove, it reproves
our wi^ked life: to correct, for it exhorts, that they which have gone
astray, return into the right: to instruct in righteousness, for it teaches
the kinds of virtue, that the man of God may be perfect, furnished to all good
works. Peter compares the Scriptures Prophetical unto a Lantherne with a
candle, giving light in a dark place. And the Prophet David says: Psalm. 119.
Thy word, o Lord, is a Lantherne unto my feet, and a light unto my paths.
Without this light men do wander in great darkness, though they have as many
eyes as Argus: that is, be never so circumspect. Apol. Bish. Jewel. page 555.
If we have not, or know not what way to go, (says Saint Augustine cited by
Bishop Jewel) what shall it profit you whither to go?

Having thus set down the power and instrument by which we are renewed, now
lastly, two things remain in this recreation to be considered.

The first is the nature, into which we are renewed.

The second is the parterne, to the which we are to be made.

First, for the nature, it is knowledge, the light of the mind. Secondly, for
the pattern, God looks unto his own glory, and makes us according to that
form, in our understanding, he makes light like unto his own light, by
causing light to shine out of darkness: that is, out of our understandings,
that before knew not God.

In the will he makes holiness, like unto his own holiness, concerning both
which the Apostle exhorts us to put on the new man, which is renewed in
knowledge, after the image of God. Again put on the new man, which after God
is created unto righteousness and true holiness.

He then that will put on this new man, must first cloth his understanding
with knowledge, which is obtained with much reading, meditation o^ study: and
not infused by special revelation, as in times past for the most part.

Therefore it behooves a Christian, that will attain to this heavenly notion,
to read the Scriptures continually with that kingly Prophet, King David, who
through continued study therein, became more excellent then his teachers. To
pray with Daniel the Prophet, whom no decree could hinder from prayer. To
meditate with Isaac, who walked out every evening to meditate. For (as S.
Augustine says) Reading without study or meditation, is dry and barren:
Meditation without study or reading, is erroneous, and prayer without
cogitation or study, i^ half cold and vns^^it^^ll. The soul that will fly
(says Nicholas Cusa^^^) into the wilderness of contemplation, must have two
wings, the one of devotion, the other of knowledge or understanding. For as S.
Hierom (cited by B. Jewel) says: As it is more to do the will of God, then to
know it: so the knowl^dge of the same goes before doing: In goodness ^^ing
goes before, in order, knowledge. Christ himself testifies, that the eye of
the soul is understanding. John. 17.
O Father, th^s is ^u^rl^sting life to know thee, the only, and very God, and
Jesus Christ whom thou have sent. Habet sides oculos suos: Faith (as S.
Augustine teaches) h^th her eyes to s^e wit^all. Visio anima intellectus ^st
says Saint Bernard;) The seeing of the soul^ is vn^er^^^n^ing; with these eyes
we see Christ, that is to say, we understand Christ, or believe in Christ. Nay
says it self is called in the Rhems, an understanding. Therefore we cannot be
said to grow from faith to says, and from strength to stregnth, but by
increase of knowledge. For, Veritas pedetentium cognoscit? Truth is known by
little and little, through which growth we pass, as children do from milk to
strong meat, according to the saying of the Apostle: Heb. 5.13.
Every one that uses milk is inexpert in the word of righteousness, for he
is a babe: but strong meat belongs to them that are of age, which through
long custom, have their wits exercised to discern both good and evil.

Secondly, as knowledge goes before, so actio^ follows after, having for the
ground holiness, created by Gods holy spirit in the will: or a holy will enabled
(through the effectual working of the same Spirit) to bring forth a holy
action agreeable to the will of God: according as the Apostle teaches: For
this is the will of God, even your sanctification.

The which actions of the will are twofold: namely, an inclinat^on to good,
and a turning aside from evil, proceeding from the will, judged and councelled
by reason.

For the will has no light of it self, but is lightened by the mind: that
is, by reason and judgment grounded upon the word, by which it is councelled,
directed, and admonished, not violently ruled. For as God will have his image
shine in the mind of man by understanding, and wisdom, of which he has made
it partaker, through the instrumental means of his word: so he will have his
image also to shine in the will by that freedom and liberty, which he has
given, or does give unto it, by an effectual working. To the end he may have
the will frank and free; because we are to be children, and not slaves:
insomuch that it is in the choice of the will to propound what it purposes to
the mind, and afterward in the liberty of the will to effect it at his
pleasure.

Here might we speak of the internal senses joined with the spirit to know,
and of the heart joined with the will and affections, and withal how the
Spirit of God sits in the soul of man by an effectual working, as at the
stern, causing every faculty of the soul, and every moveable member of the
body to move in a sweet and delectable order: yea, with such sweetness, as if
they were all instruments and consorts of music, made by the hands of cunning
harpers.

But thus much shall suffice to prove, that the Preachers of this Monarch,
teaching as well an inherent righteousness as an imputative; as well the buds,
the flowers, and the fruit, as the root, give no leave to faithful men to
commit sin, as the Jesuits and Popish Priests do to their faithless men, in
teaching neither an inherent, nor an imputative righteousness.

That they teach no imputative righteousness, we ne^de not to stand to prove:
for they style such a s^^th, ^ut a lying faith, ^n^ an idle apprehension of
Christ's ^^s^i^^.

M^^re^ver, the d^f^^ttion of their own faith, aue^^^th as much: Which is only
a hope well corroborat^^, con^^^^^, and so ^ngthened upon the promises and
graces of God, and the parties merit: and not in the full assurance of
understanding, I^h ^.^^. ^.2 2.
to know the mysteries of God, ^^^n the Father, and of Christ.

That they teach no inherent righteousness, it shall appear in the progress
of that we are to entreat of. But first we are to consider, that they suppose,
that the power through the which they are to be repaired, consists in the
cooperation of their own will. Romans 9. an.
A man may cleanse himself (says the Annotations upon the Rhems) from the
filthy, and so become a vessel of honor in the house of God. Whereas the
Scripture teaches, that God, that he might declare the riches of his glory,
upon the vessels of mercy, has prepared them to glory, and not left them to
their own preparation.

Again, they say, Iam. 4. an.
a man has power to make himself clean, and purge his own heart: Romans 9.
Act. 15.9. 2. Tim. 2. annot.
when it is written: He put no difference between us, and them, after that by
faith he had purified their hearts. By which place it appears, that our
hearts are purified by faith, which is the gift of God, and not by our wills.

Again, to be a good tree, Matthew. 12. marg.
to bring forth good fruit, which none can be until he is united to Christ, (as
our Savior testifies) which union is not obtained, but through the Spirit of
God, and faith. That part of mankind, (says S. Augustine cited by D. Fulke,)
to which God has promised deliverance, and an eternal kingdom, may it not be
repaired by the merits of their own works? God f^rbid: For what good can he
work that is lost, or cast away, except he be delivered from perdition.
What? by free will? God forbid that also: for man using free will amiss, lost
himself and it also: for as he that kills himself, kills himself while
he lives, but in killing himself lives not, neither can revive himself,
when he has slain himself. So when man sinned by free will, sin got the
victory, and free will was lost: for of whomsoever a man be overcome, to him he
is addicted, or bound as a slave. This truly is the sentence of Peter the
Apostle, which seeing it is true; I pray you what liberty can be of him that is
a bond-slaue? but when he delights in sin. For he serves freely, that does
his masters will gladly, and by this he is free to commit sin: but to do
justly he shall not be free, except he being delivered from sin, begin to be
a servant of righteousness.

That is true liberty, for the joy of weldoing, and a godly bondage to the
obedience of the commandments. But whence shall a man that is sold and bound,
have this free will and liberty, except he do redeem him whose Image he is: If
the Son shall make you free, then are you free indeed: which thing, before it
begin to be wrought in man, how can any man boast of freewill in a good work?
which yet is not free to work well, except he extol himself, being puffed
up with vain pride, which the Apostle beats down when he says: Ye are
saved by grace through says. Thus it appears that the conversion of man in
not in his own power, but in Gods.

As they do thus most injuriously deny the power by which we are repaired: so
they do also bar the Laiety, and common people of the isntrumental means:
namely, the Scriptures appointed of God, to the repairing of Gods Image in
them. Search the Scriptures (says Christ) for in them you think to have
eternal life, and they are they which testify of me. O but what follows? a
lamentation of our Savior, saying: But you will not come to me, that you might
have life. Chrysostom exhorting all men to seek life in the Scriptures, thus
says: Let one of you take the holy book, and let him call his neighbors
about him: and by the heavenly words, let him water and refresh both their
minds, and also his own. Again, even when we be at home, let us bestow our
time in reading the Scriptures. Again, it cannot possible be; I say, it cannot
possible be, that any man can attain to salvation, unless he be continual
conversant in the Scriptures.

The Popish Priests notwithstanding, contrary to our Saviors command, and
Chrysostomes exhortation, has shut up the Scriptures in an unknown tongue,
and locked them up, with the powerful key of the bloody Inquisition, that
their people may neither read or meditate thereon, sending them over to
images, which Pope Gregory calls, Lay men's books, and sit enough for
raskally people (as he styles them.)

In this doing, they have taken the candle out of their hands, that their the
every and falsehood m^^ not be espied. For as Theophilact says. The (...) of
God is the candle, whereby the theeft, or fals^ (...) is espied.

And withal vnarming them of all Spiritual armor, (as the Philistines did
the Israelites of their weapons) have carried them into the ^ildernesse, where
Antichrist sits, that they may with more facility make pray of their souls.
The Helmet of salvation, the Shield of faith, the Breast Plate of
righteousness, the Girdle of verity, the Sword of the spirit, which is the
word of God, and the Shoes they should put on their feet, that they might be
shod with the preparation of the Gospel: they have taken away.

Neither have they thus left them, for with false glosses, and expositions they
have stopped up Jacobs well, that they may not drink of that water, that who
so drinks of shall never thirst: but of the puddles of Romish fountains,
which makes them cry (like men in an ague) for more Masses to be said after
their death; for more pardons to be purchased to the freeing them from
Purgatory, that Elizian field of the Popes.

Having thus far proceeded, now it remains to be entreated of, how they
misse-leade the people likewise: First, concerning the nature into which they
are to be repaired. Secondly, concerning the pattern, into which they are to
be made.

First, concerning the nature, they teach darkness in stead of light.
Ignorance (say they) is the mother of Devotion.

Lastly, for the pattern, as God looks unto himself, and creates in his
elect (by the effectual working of his Spirit) light, like unto his own
light, and holiness like unto his own holiness.

So they frame through the Spirit of Antichrist, continually working in a
mystery, and covertly in their own traditions, darkness like unto their own
darkness, and unholiness like unto their own unholiness.

First, in the understanding they supplant ignorance, in the place of
knowledge, the image of Satan in stead of the image of God. If a man, (says
Hosius) have the exposition of the Church of Rome, touching any place of
Scriptures; although he neither know, nor understand, whether, and how it
agrees with the words of the holy Scriptures: yet he has the very word of
God. It is written likewise in their Rhems, that it is not necessary to
understand our prayers.

Again, prayers not understood of the party, is acceptable.

Again, it is enough that they can tell this holy Or^ison to be appointed unto
us, to call upon God in all our desires, more then this it is not necessary.

Thus they say to their Scholars with Elzay the notable heretic among the
Jews: Epipha. Here. 19.
Let no man seek the interpretation, but only in his prayer say these words.

By this which has been already spoken we may perceive, that it is not
necessary for the common people, by their doctrine, either to understand their
Scriptures, or their prayers: Apol. B. Jewel. page 609.
for it is enough for them to believe what the Church teaches, not what the
Scriptures commandes. For (says Pignius cited by Bishop Jewel:) No man may
believe any thing by the authority of any Scripture.

But (says Hosius) whatsoever the Church teaches, (namely, the Church of
Rome,) is the express word of God. For the Church (says Lodouicus, a Canon of
the Church of Lateran in Rome) is the lively breast of the Church: but the
Scriptures are, as it were, dead Ink.

Thus it does plainly appear, that they teach darkness in stead of light,
ignorance in place of knowledge, the image of Satan for the image of God.

Lastly, it does remain to prove, that they do likewise teach inherent evil
to be inherent righteousness. First, in sending the people from the reading of
Scriptures, which is the best part that Mary did choose: no work to be
preferred before it: for it is written: Mary has chosen the best part. T^
meditate in images, which are (as the Annotations upon the Rhems teaches; 1.
John. 5. ann^t.
) The books of the unlearned, and the people ought to be taught the true use
of them. This is a notion of darkness in the understanding, an action of
idolatry in the will, an inherent evil, and not an inherent righteousness.

For God will have us to know him in that image of his, Ier. 9.24.
that he has engraven in the holy Scriptures. For it is written: Let him that
glories, glory in this, that he understands and knows me: for I am the
Lord which shows mercy, judgment, and righteousness in the earth. For in
these things I delight, (says the Lord.)

Secondly, whereas the Lord has appointed the word to be preached until the
doctrines of books surcease, and we immediately taught from God: For seeing
the world by wisdom knew not God, in the wisdom of God, 1. Cor. 1.24
it pleased God by the foolishness of preaching, to save them that believe
(says the Apostle.)

First bren.
But Paul^^ the fifth says: They cannot, (namely the Catholics, so styled)
hear a Sermon, without endang^ring the worship of God, and their own
salvation.

But a Mass they may, wherein Christ is dishonored, and a round cake
worshipped, and offered, for the salvation of their souls.

This is not inherent righteousness, but inherent evil, and the greatest
idolatry that ever was.

Thirdly, they send the people to seek their salvation in consecrated
Churches, in holy water, hallowed fire, and ashes, in Masses, Pardons, merits
of supererogation, and such like; but these are actions of inherent evil, and
not of inherent righteousness.

Fourthly, whereas Saint Augustine says, there is but one hope of all the
godly, which groan under the burden of corruptible flesh, and infirmity of
this life, that we have an advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous.

But they finding many other hopes, send the people sometimes to the blessed
virgin, to pray in this sort: O Mary, pure, chaste, holy, have mercy upon us,
wretches: virgin mother, make thy Son reconciled unto us: let the wisdom of
the Father save us by the prayers of the mother.

Sometimes to Adelme: O God, which have this day lifted up thy holy Bishop
Adelme to eternal joys, we beseech thee, let thy mercy bring us thither, by
his merit. This is inherent evil, and not inherent righteousness.

Briefly, they being, Tu^ba grauis paci placi^^que inimica quieti: Foes to
peace, and enemies to rest; incite the people sometimes to rebellion, sometimes
to the murdering of Princes under the color of merit.

This is not inherent righteousness, but inherent evil, which the spiritual
(as Saint Ireneus says:) shall judge. The spiritual also shall judge all that
make schisms which be cruel, not having the love of God: and respecting more
their own gain, then the unity of the Church, mangle and divide, and as much
as in them lies, for small causes, kill the great and glorious body of Christ.
Speaking peace, and seeking battile. Speaking peace, in their petitions to the
Kings majesty, and seeking battle in their gunpowder treason. But the Church
stands, Frustra circumlatrantibus hereticis, The heretics in vain barking
about it.

Gentle Readers, thus you may behold the Angels of light teaching as well an
inherent, as an imputative righteousness, not to give leave to sin: whereas
the Angels of darkness teaching neither, lead the way to all idolatry.

OPPOS. 9. In vain the faithful man prays for justification, or remission
of sins: because before he prays, his sins are forgiven him, and he is
justified, or else his full assured faith, is a lying and deceiptfull says.
Suru^y. of the n^^ Religion. page 458.
THe Protestants (says this Popish Jesuit) pray in vain: but the Papists (we
may say) pray vainly, who think to wash away their sins by prayer, Heb.
^.2^. Page 4^3 annot. 4^^
which cannot be remitted without blood. Otherwise, Kellison knows no reason
why we should wear our h^se out in the knees with praying: if prayer neither
s^nctifieth for sin, n^^ meriteth any thing at Gods hands: truly if we wear
our hose out in the knees, we^ loose more then we get, if this doctrine be true.

This is the supreme honor (called by them Latria) that this heretic gives
to God, that asks in the ambition of his own heart: Who is the Almighty,
that we should serve him? Job. 21.
or what profit should we have if we should pray unto him? unless by our
prayers we may wash away our sins.

But by what prayer? By those that are more odious then profitable, and not so
profitable as odious. For though they begin, in many of their prayers, with
Omnipotens, and sempeterne Deus, Act. 17.28.
and end with Per Dominum Iesum Christum: yet nothing is placed in the middle
part, but Saints, and the merits of Saints, to make their prayers meritorious,
being filled so full of merit.

But what Saints? Such, for the most part, that have been canonized, not by
God, but by Popes. As S. Francis, made a Saint by Gregory the ninth: and Thomas
Becket by Pope Alexander the third, For none by the decree of the said
Alexander, are to be taken for Saints, but such are canonized and admitted by
the Bishop of Romes Bull. The merits of Saints so canonized, are in their
prayers offered as an unlawful composition for the remission of sins: not
upon the golden Altar, as the righteousness of Christ, but upon the stinking
Altar of men's nature, as the merits of men: John. 16. marg. 1
yet they suppose they are made in Christ's name; because their prayers made to
Saints, are concluded with Per Christum Dominum nostru^, meum (as the margent
note upon the Rhemes testifies.

But for breuity, we will speak no further of the prayers of these faithless
men, that denying the sufficiency of Christ's passion, seek their salvation in
them, by saying them upon beads by number, that they may know at least thereby,
how many they say, though they understand not what they say.

But leaving them to their beads, I will turn my pen to maintain the prayers
of the faithful man: whose prayers Kellison says, are vain, because he is
assured of his salvation. Will Kellison say that S. John, (the beloved Desciple
of the Lord, that leaned upon his breast, unto whom he bequeathed in his last
will his mother, a virgin to a virgin) was not assured of his salvation? If he
say he was not, the testimony of Saint John will confute him, wherein it is
written: 1. John. 3.14.
We know that we are translated from death to life.

Or that Peter did not believe the remission of sins? 1. Pet. 3:18.
whose confession is, that Christ once suffered for sins, the just for the
unjust, that he might bring us to God.

Or that the Apostles in general, did not believe the remission of sins,
when the Creed of the Apostles does testify they did. Yet Christ taught them
to desire, not once, but always when they prayed, forgiveness of sins, by
these words: Forgive us our debts; Mat. 6.12.
not that the punishment due to sin was not forgiven them, for then Saint John
would not have said: We know that we are translated from death to life. But
that through the increase of faith they might more and more inwardly feel the
application of the forgiveness of sins.

Saint Paul, 1. Cor. 15 17. Phil. 3.13
who proves by the resurrection of Christ, the actual remission of sins:
which could not be; If Christ be not raised (as he says) your faith is in
vain, and ye are yet in your sins. Afterward says: I count not my self
that I have attained unto it (namely in the 9. and 10. verses before) to the
full knowledge of Christ, and perfect taste of his resurrection.

Now if an Apostle (wrapped up in the third heaven, a pen man of the holy
Ghost) could not attain to a full and perfect taste of his salvation: how much
less those whose faith is but as a grain of mustard seed, yet sufficient to
salvation, attain to the full taste of the application of the forgiveness of
sins, without much prayer? The man that believed in Christ, desired of him to
help his unbelief and many a poor souls conscience cast down: yet the
children of God would be glad to pray day and night; to find but one dram of
this application that Popish Priests will not wear their hose out in the knees
for.

Secondly, Tim. Ephesians. Isa.
God who has showed mercy unto the faithful man, not that he was, but that he
should be faithful: and has selected him, not that he was, but that he should
be holy, has promised that he may be both faithful and holy, to work a
renouation in him: and that so apparent, that whosoever sees him, shall know
him thereby.

Then here is another notable motive to stir up a faithful man to prayer,
that he may earnestly desire with Saint Paul: that God would make perf^^^ his
image in him. And that by understanding and knowing aright the cause, and
author of all things, he may attain to more noble and purer actions as well in
his vnderstandidg as will. That his memory sanctified, may retain evermore
good and holy cogitations of God, and of commendable actions, whereby religion
is preserved and increased. That he would purify his affections, and in stead
of such as are evil and corrupt, excite (by his holy spirit, working in his
word) honest and virtuous motions in his heart. And that the inferour powers
may be obedient to the superior: that the image of God thereby repaired, and
the image of Satan abolished, we may be wholly governed, through the
effectual working, and the plentiful presence of Gods Spirit.

For as yet in this life, the faithful man has the first fruits of the
spirit, and not the tenth: so that the flesh lives still in a manner fully in
him. The which advantage Satan espying, by beholding grace begun and not
perfected, fights against the beginning, fearing lest by the growth of grace
they should come to perfection.

Shall not then a faithful man that aims at holiness, (that excellent
garland of glory, resist Satan by prayer? seeing necessity requires it, and
our Savior commands it, Mat. 26.41
saying: Watch and pray, lest you enter into temptation: that is, lest you be
overcome of temptation: the spirit is ready, but the flesh is weak: the Spirit
is ready to work a new creation in us, that we may be prepared as a Bride to
meet our Bridegroom, yet the flesh is weak to yield, but strong to resist.

These things among many considered, who would not wear his hose out in the
knees yea, and heart in prayer? for the more and more assurance of his
salvation, and to have the image of God repaired in him, though Kell. nor his
followers will not, who will have heaven for their hire, or not pray at all.
Has not the Creator, in whom we live, move, Act. 17.28
and have our being, deserved a prayer at our hands? Or the Ancient of years
that became a child to redeem us, through the shedding of his precious blood,
not he wearing out of a pair of hose in the knees? counts they this loss
labor, does they loose more then they get in praying without wages?

Then it seems that they have gotten nothing by his death and passion, or it
is so little that i^ is worthy thanks.

But leaving them to the preservation of their hose in the knees, I will
conclude with Sant John: Blessed are they that have washed their roabes, not in
their own merits, but in the blood of the Lamb.

Here, gentle Reader, we may behold the faithful man praying for an increase
of faith, to the perfect application of the forgiunesse of sins, prays not
vainly, whereas they pray vainly, that think by their profane prayers to
merit their own freedom, yea heaven it self, as the annotations upon the
Rhems speaks, is our right bargained for, 2. Tim. 4. annot.
and wrought for, and accordingly paid to us as our hire, at the day of
judgment.

OPPOS. 10. The Protestants take from the Saints, the mother and friends of
Christ, all secondary mediation, and intercessions, and will seem to be
zealous of Christ's honor, that they will have none honored but him. And yet
indeed under this fair show they carry false hearts: and even then when they
call him, and adore him, as a redeemer, they rob him, and dispoile him of that
honorable title.
Survey. ^f the new ^eligion. ^ag 265.
KEllison here cited, that in all his positions has dealt with our Savior (as
many Popes have done with the Emperous) namely, given him a bare title without
the thing it self: here to the manifestation of his love toward him, (the
sufficiency of whose sacrifice he has often denied) would make Christ's
Saints, mother, and friends, secondary mediators and intercessors.

And least any man should suppose, that thereby he intended to lessen the
prerogative of so great a majesty, he has set down what honor belongs to
his sovereignty: namely, supreme honor, called Latria: Page 350.
to Saints, and holy things, inferior honor called Dulia. And to the blessed
virgin, that excels other Saints, honor inferior to Latria, but superior
to Dulia, called Hiperdulia.

Latria (says the Gloss) includes three things; Love, multitude of
sacrifices, veneration; and that belongs to God. Dulia one thing; that is,
veneration without love. See then, how well they love the Saints, and friends
of God, that worship him without love, and Christ also with no less, in
sending the people to other Saviors, and other intercessors.

First, to other Saviors, Hiponianus says: Behold how mighty is the mother of
God, Apol. Bish Jewel. page 682.
and how no man can be saved but by her. Others of their own writers, have
likewise taught, that S. Francis could likewise save all them that lived after
him to the end of the world through his merits, from everlasting death. That S.
Clare came at that same time that S. Francis did to save all those that should
call upon her to the end of the world.

Again there is salvation attributed also to their Saint Thomas, while they
pray, in this sort: For the blood of S. Thomas, which he for thee did spend,
Grant us, o Christ, to clime where Thomas did ascend.


As they have thus placed other Saviors in Christ's stead: so they either pray
unto them, or to God in their names, as if they were Saviors.

To the blessed virgin they pray in this sort: Holy mother of God, which
worthily have deserved to conceive him, whom the world could not comprehend, by
thy godly interuention wash away our sins, that we being red^emed by thee, we
may be able to clime to the seat of eternal glory, where thou remainest with
thy Son, without end of time.

To God in S. Adelmes name, in this sort: O God which have this day lifted up
thy holy Bishop Adelme to eternal joys: we beseech thee, let thy mercy bring
us thither by his merit.

As they do thus call to them as Saviors, and pray unto them as Saviors: so
likewise they do confess themselves unto them, as if they were gods, by
ioynning them in the Consiteor, wherein they confess themselves to God, to the
blessed Mother, to S. Peter, S. Paul, some to S. Michael, and to S. John
Baptist, some to S. Dominicke, S. Francis, some to S. Augustine and S. Bennet,
according to the diversity of Friars, none to Christ, being God and man.

Secondly, they have found other intercessors, to whom the Pope prays; who
prays not only most humbly to Christ, 2. These. 2. annot.
(as the Annotation upon the Rhems says,) but also to his blessed mother, and
to all his Saints, and to whom all his fauourits prays. Behold (says S.
Augustine upon the first Epistle of S. John, chap. 2.) John himself keeping
humility, certainly he was a just man, and a great person, which drank the
secrets of mysteries of our Lords breast: He, even he, which by drinking of
our Lords breast, uttered his divinity, saying: In the beginning was the word,
and that word was with God: Even he being such a man, said not, you have an
advocate with the Father: but if any man shall sin, (says he) we have an
advocate: he said not, you have, nor you have me; neither (says he) you have
Christ himself: but he set Christ, not himself to be an advocate. And said:
we have, not you have, he had rather place himself in the number of sinners,
that he might have Christ his advocate, then that he should place himself to
be an advocate instead of Christ, and to be found among the proud that are
damned. Brethren, we have Jesus Christ, the just himself to be our advocate,
and he is the propitiation for our sins: he that has held this, has made no
heresy.

S. Aug. ^^n Pa. lib. 2. cap. 8.
Again, if the Apostle had said so: These things have I written unto you, that
you should not sin: but if any man sin, he has me a mediator with the
Father, and I do by my prayer obtain pardon for your sins (as Permenius in a
certain place, placed the Bishop a mediator between God and the people) what
good and faithful Christian could abide him? who would behold him as an
Apostle of Christ, and not as an Apostle of Antichrist?

Who can then behold the Pope, but as Antichrist? who have canonized Saints to
this end, and prays to his own Saints, or the Popish Priests, as the members
of Antichrist, who incite men to pr^y unto them, and give them that honor which
is ^ne unto God.

Moreover, do they not likewise give that worship proper unto God, to images?
They testify no less in their behavior to them: they go a pilgrimage to
them, they make vows to them, they make courtesy to them, they give kisses to
them, they offer to them, they give gifts and call they not that sacrifice
besides veneration? which Pope Gregory the 3. commanded to be given them, and
the Council at Nicene assembled by Hieren, at the request of Pope Adrian, and
of Therasius, Anno. 710. Anno. 789. Apol. Bish. Jewel. page 683.
Archbishop of Constantinople. Iacobus Nauclatus, cited by Bishop Jewel,
says: We must grant that the faithful people in the Church, do not only
worship before the image, but also worship the image it self, and without any
scruple of conscience whatsoever. And further, they worship the image with the
self same honor wherewith they worship the thing it self that is represe^ted
by the image. As if the the thing it self be worshipped with godly honor,
then must the image be worshipped with godly honor.

The Bishops assembled at the second Nicene Council not only, agreed, that
images in Churches are to be allowed; but also devoutly and reverently to be
honored, and that with the same honor which is due to God himself.

One of them says: I receive and worship the reverend images, and this will I
teach while I live.

Another says: I do perfectly adore the holy images, and I accurse all them
that hold the contrary.

Another says: There be not two kinds of addoration, but one only is due to
the Image, and the pattern of the Image.

Seeing then that the Image of God the Father, or of Christ, is to be honored
with that honor that belongs either to God, or unto Christ, how can they
avoid idolatry? Page 353. Apol. B. Jewel. page 683.
Robertus Holcot says: This kind of worship is plain idolatry. Kellison has
set it down to be idolatry to give supreme honor due unto God, to his
creatures. Gregory the Bishop of Nissa (cited by Bishop Jewel,) says: He that
worshippeth a creature, notwithstanding he does it in the name of Christ, yet
is he a worshipper of images, as giving the name of Christ unto an image.

Both Epiphanius and S. Augustine, numbered among heretics, a certain woman
called Marcella, which worshipped the images of Jesus, and of Paul, and offered
incense unto them. And shall not they be numbered among heretics that worship
images according to the commandment of of Pope Gregory the 3. by kneeling unto
them, by scensing them. By the decree of Pope Stephen the 3. by garnishing them
with costly vestures, by setting up candle before them. Is this due to stocks
and stone. Pope Gregory the first says no: The Council of Toletane the 12.
holden in Spain, made constitution, both against images, and the worship of
images. The Council of Elibertine, likewise holden in Spain, decreed that all
pictures should be had out of Churches, and that nothing which is honored and
worshipped, should be painted on the Church walls.

Here were godly decrees to remove Images, whereas they have removed the
second Commandment out of the first table, to maintain images, and divided
the last Commandment into two, to make up ten, though not able to say which is
the ninth or tenth: For that which is first in Exodus: Exodus 20.17. Deuteronomy. 5.21
Thou shall not covet thy neighbors house, is last in Deutronomy, and that
which is first in Deutronomy, is last in Exodus.

Thus it appears that they that would seem to adore Christ as a Redeemer,
rob and dispoyle him of his honorable title, in stilling others their
Saviors, in canonizing Saints for intercessors in his stead, by calling images
after his name, and by worshipping them with the same honor.

Now it remains to clear the Protestants of that false imputation, which is,
that they should rob and dispoyle Christ of that honorable title of Redeemer.
But wherein? In denying Saints to be mediators.

In that we acknowledge Christ, and not the Saints to be the supreme and only
advocate: we maintain a truth, to the proving that we are not Christians of a
latter brood. And to begin withal, we know and hold it for granted, that in
the beginning no Saint could be prayed unto. For what Saint was there for Adam,
or Abel to pray unto? or by whose help or power entered the first Saint into
heaven? say not by intercession of Saints, for then there was none in heaven:
nor by their own power, for then Christ dyed in vain.

And is not Christ now as powerful as before, that we need the help of Saints?
no doubt he is. What Saint did Ambraham, Isaac, Jacob, Moses, David Ezechiel,
Daniel, and Paul pray to? we have examples in Scripture, that all prayed to God.

And has the Church of Rome found out a better way then the Prophets and
Apostles knew of, or Christ himself has ever revealed? That has taught us to
pray to his Father.

But since they have found out a safer way, let them in their wisdom show us
likewise: first the time when we must pray to the Saints? the Annotations upon
the Rhems says: That we cannot pray to our blessed Lady nor any Saint in
heaven, Romans 10. annot.
until we believe, and know their persons, dignity, and grace, and trust that
they can help us. It is necessary then by their doctrine, to attain to the
notice of them in this sort, which no created understanding can do. And withal
before they pray unto them, by believing to rely upon them, contrary to Christ
precept: Believe in me, and you shall be saved: not in the merits of Saint
Francis, S. Clare, and such like. Eusebius Emissenus, cited by D. Fulke, says:
We ought of right to believe both Paul and Peter: Rhem 471.
but to believe in Peter and Paul, that is, to bestow upon the servants the
honor of the Lord, which we ought not. Ruffinus upon the Creed has observed,
that the proposition In, is not added where the speech is not of the Godhead,
but of creatures and mysteries. As for example: We believe in God the Father,
in Jesus Christ, in the holy Ghost: The holy Catholic Church, not in the holy
Catholic Church; The forgiveness of sins, not in the forgiveness of
sins. Resurrection of the flesh, not in the resurrection of the flesh.
Therefore to believe in Saints is injurious to God.

Secondly, the place where we must pray to them, Apoc. 6. annot.
the Annotations upon the Rhems says: Where they are present, the Catholic
men resort to pray to the^: that is, to their tombs and relics: for the
Saints are present at their tombs and relics (says the Annotation.)

But we must understand that they are present with their dead bodies, if their
presence be at all. For their souls, (says the Annotation) live under Christ,
their Altar in heaven expecting their bodies.

So that if we will needs pray to them, we must pray to them as they are
present: namely to the dead bodies separated from their souls.

Thirdly, how the dead bodies of Saints, in whose presence they pray, come to
the knowledge of our prayers? for other presence they can prove none.

Kellison says: By the revelation of God. Page 354.
For as they see God face to face; so in him they see and know our cogitations
and prayers.

Seeing then they come to the notion of our prayers, by seeing God face to
face, it rests they prove how the dead bodies can see God face to face, in
whose presence they pray.

But say that their souls did attain to the knowledge of our prayers from
God, what necessity is there in it, that they needing themselves a perpetual
mediator to stand in the presence of God, should acquaint God, as second
mediators, with that he knew before to the breeding of a confusion in that
celestial Jerusalem, 2. Cor. 4.9. Isai. 42.1.
where the Saints, both living and departed, behold God in the face of his
Son, and God again his Saints in the face of his Son, as in him in whom
his soul delights.

If their souls did know when we prayed unto them, yet would it nothing
profit; because, not knowing whether our prayers were in faith or no, (which
is a thing peculiar to God) they could not tell, when to offer, or not to offer
them for fear of the Lords displeasure, who has threatened everlasting
destruction to the fauourits of his enemies.

Romans 8.27. Apo. 14.
Neither if they did know, could they be secondary mediators, or intercessors:
for intercession, is to stay or let a matter, that it goes not forward. And
what Saint by merit, can make stay of the Lords judgments against us, in whose
sight the Angel^ are not perfect? For this is peculiar to Christ the righteous,
who showing himself to the Father, craves for his own name, and his own
merit, a^ just reward upon a due debt, namely, remission of sins,
sempeternall righteousness, and the gift of the holy Ghost for all his elect.
He is Emanuell, God with us, he speaks for us, he excuses us, he makes
our cause good, by offering up his own righteousness upon the golden Altar of
his own pure, and incomprehensible nature, which as sweet perfume mounteth to
the highest throne seated in incomprehensible light, to the obtaining all
things for us: that we might be complete in him, in whom all things are given,
even in him who is not the Son of God vnu^, or vnicu^, one alone, but with many
brethren. And to what Saint can this without blasphemy be spoken, but of
Christ? Who (as S. Amb. says) is our mouth whereby we speak to the Father,
Ambrose. de Isaac Euanua.
our eye whereby we see the Father, our right hand whereby we offer our selves to
the Father: without whose intercession, neither we, nor all the Saints have to
do with God. S. Augustine cited in the Rhems, says: That Christ is the
advocate and patron of mankind, that by himself alone, and by his own
merits, purchases all grace, and mercy to mankind in the sight of his Father:
1. Tim. 2. annot.
none making intercession for him, or giving any grace or force to his prayers,
but he to all: none asking or obtaining, either grace in this life, or glory in
the life to come, but by him.

Gentle Reader, now with equity censure, whether the Protestants give more
honor to Christ, in acknowledging him their only Savior and advocate, and his
righteousness the only sweet perfume to be offered up in the censer of faith.

Or the Papists that have found out other Saviors, and intercessors, and
withal made a composition of diverse men's merits to offer up as a sweet
incense of grateful smell to God. Exodus 30.38.
But if the earthly incense might not be imitated but upon pain of death, let
Kellison, and all Popish Priests judge what their hire shall be for
counterfeiting that which is heavenly, and not of any created composition, as
the Legal incense, the shadow of the heavenly was.

OPPOS. 11. The Reformers have no religion, because they have no sacrifice. His
reason, without reason, is; because Christ's sacrifice is not sufficient to
uphold religion, and the worship of God.
Survey. page 376. page 384.
ANtichrist, (says the Annotation upon the Rhems) shall abrogate the daily
sacrifice. Again, shall impugn Christ's kingdom upon the earth: 2. These. 2.
annot.
that is to say, his spiritual regiment. Again, shall impugn Christ's
Priesthood: page 384.
and take away (as Kellison likewise says ( the daily sacrifice. And what is
this, but to take away the Priestly and Kingly dignity of our Savior, to teach
that Christ's sacrifice is not sufficient to uphold religion, and the worship of
God. Concerning whom, the Lord has sworn, and will not repent: that Christ
(and none but Christ) is a Priest for ever, after the order of Melchisedec.
Thou art a Priest for ever, after the order of Melchisedec, says the Lord,
speaking in the singular, and not in the plural number. For only Christ is
King of peace, King of righteousness. Only without Father of his manhood, and
mother of his Godhead. Having neither beginning of his days, nor end of his
life: and therefore continues a Priest for ever without successors in his
Priesthood, as confirmed unto him by the oath of the Lord himself, after he
had said: Sit thou on my right hand until I make thine enemies thy fot-stoole.
O Lord, which have sworn (says S. Augustine) Thou art a Priest for ever after
the order of Melchisedec: The same Priest for ever is the Lord on thy right
hand: The very same Priest, I say, for ever, of whom thou have sworn; is the
Lord on thy right hand; because thou have said unto the same my Lord: Sit thou
on my right hand, until I make thine enemies thy footstool.

Which everlasting Priesthood of our Savior, cannot be without use; yea, most
excellent use: first, in showing himself before his Father. Secondly, by
giving gifts unto men.

First, in that he appears in the sight of God for us: we are esteemed
righteous, perpectually in him: who is the true sacrifice, and full
accomplisher of man's redemption. H^b. 7. an.
As the Annotation upon the Rhems truly styles him. And has by once offering,
wrought a perpetual freedom from the kingdom of death. Our high Priest (says
the Apostle,) which is holy, innocent, impolluted, separated from sinners, and
made higher then the heavens: has no need daily (as those Priests) first for
his own sins, then for the peoples, to offer sacrifice. For this he did, once
for all, in offering himself. That which they did daily, and insufficiently,
in offering the sacrifice of beasts: Christ did once, and perfectly, in
offering himself.

From hence appears: first, Revel. 1.5.
the excellency of his love. Secondly, the excellency of his mediatorship. The
excellency of his love, who loved us, and washed us from our sins in his
blood. What greater proof can there be of his love, then this? that of tender
compassion and love toward us, (as a most merciful and excellent high Priest)
he offered up himself in sacrifice, even a slain, and bloody sacrifice for
the sins of the world. And so, with his blood once powered forth, and once
offered, has w^shed away all our sin^, and reconciled us to his Father.

Secondly, insueth (as a fruit of his passion,) the excellency of his
mediatorship. But now our Priest has obtained (says the Apostle) a more
excellent office, in as much as he is the mediator of a better Testament,
which was made upon better promises: namely, the remission of sins perfected
by his death, and sufferings. Ier. 31. Heb. 1.16.
For I will be merciful unto their unrighteousness, and I will remember their
sins and iniquities no more, (says Jehovah) that made the Testament, or
covenant concerning the remission of sins. And by his death confirmed the same.
Therefore he forgave sins (says Chrysostom) when he gave the testament by
his sacrifice. If therefore he forgave sins by one sacrifice? now there is no
need of a second. Theodoret, where there is remission of these things. Now
there is no oblation for sin: for it is superfluous, after remission is
given. And he promised, saying: Their sins and iniquites I will remember no
more. Which promise of God, Romans 4.5.
is every day more and more performed in the justification of the ungodly man,
who is justified by faith in Christ: by having his righteousness imputed unto
him, that has none of his own.

The second use consists in the Kingly dignity of our Savior, who being
exalted, and placed in the highest degree of honor, gives, as he has
received, Psalm. 68.8. E^h. 4.8.
gifts for men. By the merit of his manhood, gifts unto men: through the power
of his Godhead, the gift of the holy Ghost, 1. Ioh. 4.13. The gift of grace.
Romans 5.15. The gift of faith. Ephesians. 2.8. The gift of righteousness. Romans
5.17. The gift of life. Romans 6.23. with other graces infinite, decking us fit
for the bridegroom. Since then, (says the Apostle) that he by the right hand
of God, has been exalted, and has received of his Father the promise of the
holy Ghost: he has shed forth this which you see and hear.

As God did beautify the souls of the Apostles with supernatural knowledge,
making them of Fishermen, Preachers, and to speak as the Spirit gave them
utterance, to every one in his own language. So he does likewise through the
same spirit, Romans 10.17. Ephesians ^1.18. Romans 8.2. Gal 3.13.
open the hearts of the hearers of his word: that he may sow the seed of
immortality: namely, the Gospel, in them. To the bringing forth of faith,
through the which the holy Ghost applies the benefits of Christ's passion. To
the begetting the Church anew lost in Adam: and to the reedifying of it daily
more and more, 1. Pet. 1. 1. Cor. 6. Ioh. 6. 1. 1. Cor. 10. and 12. Ephesians. 2.
until it come to the full period of perfection. For Christ by the holy Ghost,
does sprinckle us with his blood, does make us his members, does feed us with
himself, does make us drink of himself, and does build us upon himself,
that we may be complet in him, which is the head of all Principality and Power.

How then comes it to pass, that Christ's sacrifice is not sufficient to
uphold religion, and the worship of God. Kellison tells us the reason is: If
Christ never offered any other sacrifice, Page 291.
then that of the cross: then is he not a perpetual Priest, because he has
no sacrifice, which either by himself, or by his Ministers is perpetually
offered.

Then it may be of them demanded, wherein the eternal Priesthood of Christ
consists? Heb. 7. annot.
The Annotation upon the Rhems tells us: That Christ is not called a Priest
for ever, only for that his person is eternal: or for that he sits on the
right hand of God, and perpetually prays, and makes intercession for us: or
for that the effect of his death is everlasting. For all this proves not in
proper signification, that his Priesthood is everlasting and perpetual. But
that Christ's eternal Priesthood consists in the perpetual sacrifice of his
body and blood in the Church. Yet by an unbloody sacrifice, Page 144. page 614.
page 288. Page 387.
continually to be offered; (as Kellison says) not immediately from Christ the
high Priest: but only by his under, and virgin like Priests. For the worship
of God, and exercise in religion (which sacrifice in the Mass so offered) is a
most pleasing and clean sacrifice; not only in respect of the outward form,
which is unbloody, but also in respect of the most chaste, pure, and virgin like
flesh and blood of Christ.

Now then seeing Christ's sacrifice, (as the Annotation upon the Rhems teaches)
consists in the perpetual sacrifice of his body and blood in the Church.
Then it consists not in that sacrifice Kellison speaks of: because it is
unbloody, without blood: therefore without profit. For without shedding of
blood is no remission. Heb. 9.22.
If Christ's perpetual Priesthood consisted in that unbloody sacrifice: then
should Christ's perpetual Priesthood surcease to be, when that should surcea
so to be offered.

But seeing a sacrifice offered by an under Priest, is so powerful to uphold
religion, and the worship of God, which the sacrifice of Christ cannot. Let us
behold this sacrifice so highly commended, and so maiestically offered by
virgin-like Priests. And first the excellency of the Priests that makes and
offers it. For though they do style themselves under Priests; as the Pope
styles himself: Seruus seruorum, The servant of servants: yet they challenge
notwithstanding with him, supreme power over the Creator of all things.

To the manifestation hereof, we are first to consider the excellency of the
Priest in the consecration. They tell us, that in their hands, Stella
Clericorum.
(as it were in the virgins womb) the Son of God is incarnated, and takes
flesh.

That in their consecration they are above the blessed mother of Christ. For
she caused Christ to come into her virgin like womb, with eight words: Ecce
ancilla Domini fiat mihi secundum verbum tuum: whereas their Priests make him
come into the host with five words only: that is to say: Hoc est enim corpus
meum.

That they are more higher in authority then Kings: Sermo disci^^ stella Cleri.
happier, or more blessed then Angels: and a creator of his creator. Insomuch
that he that made him, without him: is made by the means of him. Are not here
excellent under Priests? in their authority above Kings. For he that sets
the King before a Priest, sets the creature before the creator, says
Stamsl^^s Orichouius.

In their consecration, they are above the mother of Christ; more blessed then
the Angels: yea, above the supreme majesty. For God made the world, and they
make him that made the world; even the Godhead of Christ. For otherwise they
cannot be the creator of their creator, without giving a beginning to him that
has no beginning.

As the under Priest is before God in the consecration, so he is in the place
of God in the offering. For the offering up of the humanity of Christ is proper
to the Godhead of Christ. Ioh. 6.51.

As the under Priest is in the place of God in the offering: so he is before
Christ in the offering. For God looks not to the sacrifice, but to the
worthiness of the offerer: which was the cause he rejected Cains, when he
accepted Abels.

As the under Priest is excellent in his consecration, and offering: so he is
in his mediatorship. Not entreating only in the Mass, for the quick, and the
dead; but for Christ himself: Praying the Father to accept the body and blood
of his Son: as he accepted the sacrifices of Abel, Abraham, and Melchisedec.
Is not here an excellent under Priest? that desires that God would so accept
the blood of his Son, the Redeemer of the world: as he did the blood of
beasts.

As the under Priest is a mediator, to entreat God: to accept the sacrifice of
his Son. So likewise, he desires God to command his holy Angels, to convey
the body and blood of his Son to his high Alter, Bonauentur (cited by Doctor
Buckly says) That the Priest, does lift up the body upon the Altar. As though
he should say: Behold, he whom the world is not able to contain, is our
prisoner: therefore let us not let him go, unless we do first obtain of him
that which we do desire.

Must he not needs be their prisoner, that cannot depart of himself, unless
he be carried? Nay: must he not needs be their prisoner, whose belly is his
sepulcher? The Priest is Jesus Christ his sepulcher, (says that treatise
entitled Stella Clericorum) Because he swalloweth down his body, and blood
into his belly.

Briefly, as the under Priest, has power to make his Creator: so he has to
give remission of sins, before his Creator: nay, as well as his Creator.
Priests have obtained (says the Annoation upon the Rhems) the wonderful
grace, Luke 5. annot. Mark. 2. annot.
to remit sins. Again, their is one court of consciencce in earth, and
another in heaven: and the judgment in heaven, follows, and approves this
on earth. And Cardinal Cusanus says. This power of binding, and loosing, is
no less in the Church: then it is in Christ. For the holy Church of Rome,
Ca^d. ^usa. ad Bohamos.
(says Pope Julius) has power granted unto her, by a singular privilege: to
open and to shut, the gates of the kingdom of heaven, to whom she listed.

So the under Priest, with the king of pride, in the remission of sins, would
communicate to a creature, that which is proper to the Divinity. For no man can
remit sins but God only. Therefore he which remitteth sins is God: because
no man forgiueth sins but God. And thus the under Priest in the Mass, takes
upon him to be as a God, when he says: Et ego, authoritate mihi concessa, etc.
And I by my authority do first absolve thee, from the sentence of the less
excommunication, if thou have need thereof. And besides I absolve thee from all
thy sins.

Thus much concerning the excellency of the under Priest, who is the maker, the
offerer, and the mediator of this excellent sacrifice: that is offered to
uphold religion, and the worship of God: which Christ's sacrifice cannot do.

Secondly, it is necessary to know: who it is that can make a round cake a God
by consecration, able to perform this. The Master of the Sentences says.
That an heretic cannot consecrate. Moreover, whosoever bewrays himself, to
be of the latter standing, is an heretic: (by Kellisons censure) which all
popish Priests do, in offering up bread vnconsecrate, for the remission of
sins.

In the first part of the Canon, which begins with Te igitur, the bread
unconsecrated (yet called a holy sacrifice, and without spot) is offered up:
for the Catholic Church.

In the second part of the Canon, beginning with Memento Domini. It is offered
not consecrate, for the redemption of souls.

That it is not consecrate, it is manifest: for in the fifth part of the Canon
beginning with Quam oblationem. The under Priest desires, that it may be made
the body and blood of Christ: Neither are the words of consecration, as they
term them, (namely, Hoc est enim corpus meum,) read until the sixth part of
the Canon. Thus they bewraying themselves, to be of the latter standing, (by
offering bread vnconsecrate, for the remission of sins) are heretics: by
Kel. censure. And cannot consecrate, as the Master of the Sentenc^s says.

Thirdly, we are to consider, what other things hinder the consecration: which
we can no better do, then by taking a view of their own Canon. Wherein the
Priest is commanded. To frame his whole mind and intent, to the crosses and
words. He is commanded also, to make choice of one Host, and let it lie amongst
the rest always provided: and that his mind be upon them all at once: He is
moreover commanded with one breath to speak these words. (Hoc est enim corpus
meum) without thinking any other thing.

For if the Priest do not speak these words, cum intention consecrandi, that
is: with an intent and mind to consecrate, they be not made the body and blood
of Christ: but remain still nude, nude, and bare creatures of bread and wine.
H^lcot Tho. de Aqui. in rationale. diuino ^um ^ffi^io.
Therefore Holcot says upon the Master of the Sentences. The lay people
worship a wafer that is not consecrate.

Therefore to avoid the error of such idolatry: The Master of Sentences
advises them to worship with a condition: saying, Lord if thou be there I
worship thee: If thou be not there I worship not. Whose counsel an Inquisitor
of Spain following. As Master Cyprian Valera writes, said to avoid
idolatry. I adore thee Lord If thou be there.

In which matter of ambiguity, likewise the Priest (in the cantels of the
Mass) is commanded, to take up his own Host before any other: because, he
believes and is assured of his own: howbeit he believes of the rest, but is
not assured Moreover, there must be great heed taken by the Priest, that a
little water be put into the wine: For if there should so much be put in, as to
cause the wine to loose his color, the consecration wereof none effect.

Fourthly, we are to search the Scriptures, Page 386.
whether the bread may be consecrated, and made a God, or no? Kellison says it
may. For the sacrifice of the Mass, (says he) is the sacrifice, which Christ
offered at his last Supper: when taking bread, and wine into his hands, he
blessed them, and by blessing, turning them into his sacred body and blood: he
told his Disciples, that it was his body and blood which he gave for them.

If Christ consecrated the bread and wine when he blessed it, where are the
words of consecration? Seeing there is none named, but a testimony that he
gave thanks. If not when he blessed the bread? It is not like it was done
after (as they would have it) by virtue of these words: Hoc est enim corpus
meum: namely, after his Disciples had received it, who being always ready to
obey the Lords command, did take, when Christ commanded them to take, and did
eat, when he commanded them to eat: which both went before he said this is my
body.

There be words of God nominated in the first of Genesis: whereby God made all the world. Yet though we have the words of the Creation, a new creature we
cannot make: much less without words of consecration, the Creator of all
things. Who will not give his glory to a creature: that is, he will not be made
by a creature, a work far excelling all his works for a man to make his
Creator. Isay. 43.


These things briefly considered, how can Kellison prove: that Christ
consecrated the bread, when he changed not the substance but the use. Which
created for a temporal life to feed the body, is changed by the Omnipotency of
the word (which is Christ) to feed the soul to eternal life. 1. Cor. 11.26
Luke 22.18
And that he changed not the substance, but the use, it is manifest, by the
words of the Apostle, where it is called bread, after the words of
consecration, and the wine the blood of grape. Both lively representing the
death of our Savior (as the Annotation upon the Rhems confesses) The bread,
the body of Christ, with the blood poured out: the wine, Luke 22. annot. John
6: annot.
the blood powered or shed out of the body.

Therefore the Mass Priest, should always receive both kinds, by their own
confession: because he must lively express the passion of Christ, and the
separation of his blood from his body: Which cannot be done by a round cake, or
unbloody sacrifice. For if it could he needed not both to consecrate, and
receive bo^^ kinds, as he is commanded.

But Kellison, citing the speech of our Savior: namely, Your fathers did eat
Manna and did die: further urges. If it be true (says he) that the blessed
Eucharist is only a sign of Christ, and his body and blood? Then I demand of
our Adversary? Page 706.
with what show of truth, Christ would prefer it before Manna. Why should
Christ's bread give life, rather then Manna, seeing that Manna signified Christ,
who is the bread, as well as the Eucharist. Our Savior spoke in that place, of
such fathers, that eat the sign and not the thing signified: that is Manna to
fill their bellies; without looking to Christ the true life of the soul. 1.
Cor. 10.3.
Whereas the Apostle makes mention of fathers, that eat the same spiritual
meat that we do: that is, not only Manna the sign: (as they did whom Christ
speaks of) but also by faith feed on Christ the spiritual meat, as we do.
Saint Augustine says. Whosoever understood Christ in Manna, did eat the same
spirtuall meat that we do: But whosoever sought only to fill their bellies
with Manna, (which were the fathers of the unfaithful) they have eaten and are
dead. So also they did drink of the same spiritual drink that we do: but
spiritual drink, that is, which was received by faith, not which was drunk
in with the body. Again, you shall not eat the body which you see, nor drink
that blood which shall be shed of them, that crucify me, but I have commended
unto you, a certain Sacrament, which being spiritually understood shall give
you life. Words which are no other, but as witnessing signs, do change the
sound by times, when the self same faith abides, to the ^^ting of the same
spiritual meat, and to the drinking of the same spiritual drink.

But to answer the question, wherein it is demanded, why should Christ's bread
give life, rather then Manna? We may answer, Christ's bread, as the creature of
God, can give no more life then Manna. For then Judas might have been saved as
well as the rest of the Disciples: For he eat the bread of the Lord, though
not bread the Lord. As S. Augustine cited by. M. Calvin says:

But if Kellison had asked, why Christ (the true bread of life) should giu^
life rather then Manna, which was but as a witnessing sign? It might easily
have been answered: seeing Christ's is life: yea, the fountain of life it
self, and bestows it by the effectual working of his holy Spirit, Romans
8.10.11.
upon his members in whom he dwells: And therefore may easily give it, being
the Creator, when the creature cannot. But this (as S. Augustine speaks) is a
miserable bondage of the soul: to take the signs, in stead of the things that
be signifi^^. Contrary to the counsel of S. Chrysostom: Let us not confound
(says he) the creature and the creator both together: lest it be said of us:
They have honored a creature more then their maker.

Kellison to prove a real presence, and a round cake to be God, cites also
this saying of our Savior: Except you eat the flesh of the Son of man, and
drink his blood, you have no life in you.

Christ (who with his sanctified mouth) spoke these words, also said: And this
is the will of him that sent me, that every man which sees the Son, and
believes in him, should have everlasting life. Again, whosoever eats my
flesh, and drinks my blood, has eternal life. Al which words being true, it
must needs follow, that to eat is to believe in him. For if these words might
be understood otherwise? Then a man might have everlasting life, without the
eating of Christ's flesh, and drinking his blood: which is against Christ's
express words: Ioh. 6.53.
(who says) Except you eat the flesh of the Son of man, and drink his blood,
ye have no life in you. Or else we must needs say: that a man eating may be
saved, not believing in Christ, which is contrary also to the written word:
which says. He that believes not, is condemned already. Ioh. 3.18.
Therefore of necessity, to believe in Christ, and to eat him is al one. Creed
and manducasti (says S. Aug.) Believe and thou have eaten.

If it were literally to be understood of Christ's real presence? Then first of
all, Christ should be in a thousand places at once: yea, in as many Hosts as
pleases the Priests: Secondly, the wicked should receive life as well as the
godly.

Now that Christ is not present every where: their Annotation upon the Rhems
testifies (which thus says) Christ, Revel, 6. annot.
nor his Saints be personally present every where, nor can be at once in every
place alike, a^ God is: But their motion, speed, and agility to be where they
list, is incomperable: and that their power, and operation is according.

Here it plainly appears, that Christ is not personally present, according
to his humanity, every where: for that is proper to the Godhead of Christ. For
if the flesh of Christ, should be every where? Then the flesh of Christ is
everlasting: which thing to hold, 1. Ioh. 4.3.
is, to deny that Christ came in the fullness of time, which is an especial
mark of Antichrist,

Secondly, if Christ were really present in the Sacrament? yea, in the
perfection and sweetness of glory, as our Adversary holds? then it must of
necessity follow: that whosoever receives him, receives life: Whosoever
(says Christ) eats my flesh, and drinks my hloud, has eternal life.

Col. 3.3.4
For what is death but the absence of God and his graces? And what is life? but
the presence of God, in whom our life is hid, Aug. in trac. John 26.
He that receives not this meat, has no life (says Saint Augustine) and he
that receives the same, has life and that everlasting. For as S. Gregory
Missene (cited upon the Annotation of the Rhems) says. That lively body,
entering into our body: changes it, and makes it life and immortality. Again,
S. Cyrel there cited, Ioh. 6. ann.
also thus speaks. Though by nature of our flesh we be corruptible: yet by
the participation of life, we are reformed to the property of life. Otherwise
that comfortable doctrine of Saint Ambrose, could not be true: namely, Thou
shall not fear death, if thou bear Christ. Nor that sweet sentence of S.
Augustine, cited in the Rhems: namely, Thou art life everlasting, and thou
give not in thy flesh and blood, but that which thy self art.

Yet it is said in the Mass book: That the good folk receive him, and so do
the ill, though not all alike: Mors est malis: Vita est bonis. It is death to
the wicked: but life to the godly. But contrariwise ( Origin says:) That
Christ is the true food, that no evil man can eat. For if the evil man could
eat of the body of the Lord, it should never be written: He that eats this
bread, shall live for ever.

For the condemnation of the unworthy receiver lies not in eating the body of
Christ: 1. Cor. 11.
but in not deserving it: as the Apostle testifies, in coming without faith,
the eye of the soul, and therefore without Christ.

Whereas the worthy receiver, having faith, Ephesians. 3 17. 1. Ioh. 3.24.
has Christ: For by the spirit and faith, Christ dwells in him. Having
Christ he has righteousness, and so worthily presents himself to receive
the seal of a further confirmation, and assurance, by a visible sign of the
invisible righteousness, which he brings with him, by bringing Christ, who
is his righteousness. Otherwise how can he look for a confirmation at Gods
hand of that, by any seal or received sign which he has not.

Abraham was justified by an imputative righteousness having Christ dwelling
in him by faith: and afterward received circumcision, as a token of the justice
of faith. The Eunuch of Candace, Queen of the Aethyopians, first believed, and
after received baptism, as a witnessing sign that his sins were washed away
by the blood of the Lamb Christ Jesus. Aug (...) Ioh. T^^ct, 26.
This is to eat that meat (says S. Augustine) and to drink that drink to
dwell in Christ, and Christ in us: Again, he that dwells not in Christ, and
in whom Christ dwells not, does not eat spiritually his flesh.

But the annotation upon the Rhems obiecteth: That ill men receive the body and
blood of Christ, 1. Cor. 11. ann^^.
be they ill l^^ers or infidels: for in this case they could not be guilty in
that they receive not. How then were the Jews guilty it does appear by two
most excellent testimonies. Not in receiving Christ, but in betraying and
murdering the just (says S. Stephen, And in crucifying the Lord of glory.
(...) ^.3^. A^^. 2.^6.
says S. Peter. So the wicked are guilty, not in receiving Christ, but in not
receiving him, and in crucifying to themselves again by sin, H^b. 6.6. Prou
^.4.
the Son of God: approving therein, by forsaking the law, the horrible
impiety of the Jews. S. Augustine says: They are guilty; not because they
receive, but because they received not the body of Christ? For (as S. Hierome
tea^heth:) Heretics do not eat the body of the Lord nor drink his blood.

Thus in conclusion we may see, that the Scriptures will not allow their cake
to be a God. Gabriel Biel says: S^^e^ Can^s ^^cl. 40.
That all their transubstantiation is not found expressed in the Canon of the
Bible. Scotus says: That neither by Scriptures, nor by reason, it can be
proved. And the Jesuits themselves hold: Ann^t. Pop^s^ tyr l. 1. Pro^. 4.
That it is not once named of the ancient Fathers: and the Apostles knew not of
it before the death of Christ. For says says the Annotation upon the Rhemes:
Heb. 10. annot.
It is by his death and resurrection to life again, that his body is become
apt and fit, in such divine sort to be sacrificed perpetually. Neither was it
heard of after the death of Christ, until the Council of Lateran, holden in
Rome, under Pope Innocentius the third, in the year of our Lord, 1215. In the
reign of King John. This verity (says Scotus,) about Transubstantiation, was
declared first in the Council of Lateran.

Having thus far taken a view of their sacrifice without blood, being unfit
to wash away sins, and no better then bread, profaned to an idolatrous use;
and therefore altogether unable to uphold religion, and the worship of God. We
may boldly conclude, that the Protestants relying upon Christ, have both a
sacrifice and religion: whereas they relying upon a piece of bread, have no
sacrifice nor religion.

Neither do they altogether rely upon their god of bread. For with him (as
with a God not all sufficient) they have joined many commissioners to the
remission of sins: their Holy water, Ashes, Palms, Candles, and such like.
Hallowed with this clause (as it appears in their Pontifical) that they may
be to us the salvation of body and soul. Christ his sacrifice takes away
original sin. Theirs actually therefore of greater efficacy.


Concerning their real presence, or god of bread, Thomas Aquinus thus
teaches: As the body of our Lord was once offered upon the cross for the debt
of Original sin; so it is daily offered upon the Altar for the debt of daily
sins.

Concerning holy water, Augustine Steu^ns thus speaks: We hallow water with
salt and prayers: that by the sprinckling thereof, our sins may be forgiven.

By this we may see that their God of bread marches not alone in forgiveness
of sins: therefore not the only sacrifice, but a sacrifice accompanied with
many companions, to the upholding of religion, and the worship of God: which
Christ's sacrifice (as they say) is not able to do.

Notes of Antichrist in the Rhems. Revel. 12. 2. These. 2. annot. Heb. 9.14.
Thus (Gentlemen) you may behold Antichrist sitting in the Church of Rome,
attempting to draw from the true faith, abrogating the daily sacrifice, and
openly atchieuing desolation.

Attempting to draw from the true faith, in denying that Christ has taken away
our sins, in drawing us from believing the remission of sins, confirmed
unto us by the Oath of God, and sealed with his blood. By teaching that faith
in Christ is an idle apprehension of Christ's justice, and a lying faith: that
inherent evil is inherent righteousness, wherewith we are saved.

Abrogating the daily sacrifice, in denying the sufficiency of Christ's
sacrifice, and in undertaking to offer Christ in the Mass to the Father, not
to us: but for us, which cannot be done but by his eternal Spirit nor without
his death, who dyed but once for all.

Openly atchieuing desolation, in seeking by treason, to ruinate States,
inciting men to rebel against their Sovereign, and by plotting the ruin of
Gods Church by spiritual desolation, as well as temporal.

Therefore (Gentlemen) seeing by diverse marks and tokens set down in the
Rhems, the Church of Rome (the fullness of the Gentiles accomplished) is become
the seat of Antichrist, I will say with the kingly Prophet David: Kiss the
Son lest he be angry; and so ye perish in the way. Psalm. 1.
And conclude with the Council of Ambrosius Ausbertus (one of your own
Doctors. The Prophet Jeremy says: O my people, go forth from the midst of
them, and save every man his soul from the rage of the Lords fury. For none of
the elect of God, can in this life go forth from the midst of that wicked
city: (that is, from the midst of evil, which that Babylon sign^fieth,) but
by defying, that they do; and by doing that they defy.


