The festyuall




Prologus
The help and grace of almighty god thrughe the besechynge of his blyssed
mother saint Marye be with us at our beginning / help us and speed us here
in our living. And bring us unto the bliss that never shall have ending
Amen.

Mine own simple understanding. I feel well how it fares by other that been in
the same degree / and heaven charge of souls and holden to teache their
paryshens of all ye pryncypall feestes that come in the year showing unto them
what the holy saints suffered and did for gods sake and for his love / so
that they should have the more devotion in good saints / and with the better
will come unto the church to serve god and pray his holy saints of their
hel^e. But for many excuse them for defaute of books and also by symplenes of
conning. Therefore in help of such clerks this treates is drawn out of
(Legenda Aurea) yt he that lust to study therein. He shall find ready therein of
all the pryncypall feestes of the year of euerychone a short sermon needful
for them to teache / and for other to learn / and for this treates speaks of
all ye hye feestes of ye year I will and pray that it be called ye Festyuale /
yt which begy^neth at the first sunday of Aduent. in worship of god and
his saints that been written therein.

Tabula.
Dn^ica prima adue^tus.iii. Dn^ica in septuagesima.v. Dn^ica in sexagesima.ix.
Dn^ica in ququagesima.xi. Dn^ica pri^a quadragese.xv. Dn^ica.ii.
quadragesi.xvii. Dn^ica.iii. quadragesi.xix. Dn^ica.iiii. quadragesi.xxii.
Dn^ica in passione.xxv. Dn^ica palmarum xxvii. Feria.iiii. post pal..xxviii. In
die parasceues.xxxiii. In die pasche xxvi. Feria.ii.iii. and.iiii. ante
ascensionem dn^i xxxviii. In vie ascensionis xxxix In digilia pe^thecostes.
xlii. In die penthecostes. xliii. In die sancte trinitatis. xlvi In die
corporis xp^i xlix Descto^ Andrea liiii. De sancto nicolao. lvii. De
co^ceptione marie lxi De sancto thoma aplo^ liiii In die natiuitatis dn^i lxv
De sancto stephano lxix De sancto iohanne euangelista. lxxi. Scto^ru^
innoce^tiu^ lxxvi De sancto thome ep^o cantuariensi. lxxviii De circu^cisione
dn^i lxxx In die epiphanie. lxxxii In die conuersionis sancti pauli. lxxxv In
die purificatio^is lxxxviii De sancto mathia lxxxxi. De a^nu^ciatio^e marie
lxxxxiii De sancto georgio. lxxxxv. De sancto marco. lxxxxvii. In die philippi
and ia. lxxxxviii De inuentione crucis. Ci. De sancto ioha^nes ante portam
latinam Ciiii. De festo Iohannis baptiste. C.iiii. Scto^ru^ petri et pauli
C.vii. In die visitato^is marie. C.x. De translatione sancti thome. C.xiii De
sancta maria magdalena C.xiiii De sancto iacobo. C.xvii. De sancta anna C.xix.
In die transfigurationis domini. C.xx De nomine jesus C.xxiiii. De sancto
laurentio. C.xxx De assu^ptio^e marie. C.xxxii. De scto^ bartholomeo. c.xxxv De
natiuitate ma. c.xxxviii. De exaltatio^e sce^ crucis. c.xl. Quattuor temporu^.
C.xlii De sancto matheo.. C.xlii De sancto michaele. C.xliii. De sancto luca
C.xlvi. De sci^s symo^e and judah. c.xlvii In die oi^m scto^ru^ C.xlviii In die
animaru^ C.l. De sancto martino. C.li. De sancta Katherina. C.liii. In
dedicatione ecclie. C.lv. Hamus charitatis C.lviii. Pos^ea quattuor sermones.
C.xli. The general sentence. CC* The bedes on the sunday.
Finis tabule
Dn^ica prima Aduentus.
Friends this day is called the first sunday in aduent / wherefore holy
church makes mencyon of ye coming of christ gods sone in to this world to
bye mankind out of the deuylles bondage and to bring all well doers in to the
bliss that ever shall last and also of his other coming that shall be at
the day of dome / when he shall come to deem all wicked doers in to the pain
of hell for ever. But the first coming of Christ in to this world brought
Joy and bliss with him / therefore holy church used songs of mirth as
(alleluya) and other. And for the second coming of Christ shall be so cruel
yt no tongue may tell. Therefore holy church lies down songs of melodye as
Te deum lauda. Gloria in excelsis and wedding / for after that day shall
never be wedding more in tokenynge vengeance that comes after. Than after
the first coming of Christ in to this world saint Austen says there ben three
things ryfe in this world / that is birth / trauaylle / and death. This is
the testament that Adam our form fader made to all his ofsprynge after him
that is to be borne in sykenes / and for to live in traueyle / and for to deye
in dread. But Christ he came to be our socour of this testamente. And was borne
and traueylled and deyed. He was borne to bring men of out of sykenesse in to
everlasting hele. He traueyled to bring man to everlasting rest. He deyed
to bring man to everlasting life. This was the cause of the first coming of
christ in to this world / wherefore he yt will escape the dome that he shall
come too in the second coming he must leye down all manner of pride of heart
/ and know him self a wretch of earth and hold mekenes in his heart / he
must traueyle his body in good works / and get truly his leuelode with
traueyle of his body / and put of him a way all idleness. For he that will
not travail his body in good works as saint Bernarde says / he shall
travail ever with fendes in hell. And for dread of death he must make him ever
ready to god / when he will send for him / that is to say shryue him clean of
all his sins / and not abide fro year to year / but as soon as he fails
anon rise up and mekely take down his shryfte fader / then shall he at that
day of dome have great worship / for right as a knight showed his wounds that
he has in batell in much commending to him. Right so the sins that a man
has done and is shryuen of and does his penance shall be much worship to
him / and great confusyon to the fend. And that he is not shryuen of shall be
showed openly to all the world in great shame to him. This is said for ye
first coming of Christ in to this world (Dominus veniet ad iudicium) The
second coming of Christ is to the dome (Tu^c videbu^t filiu^ hominis venientem
in nubibus cum potestate magna et magestate) And these comynges shall be so
cruel / that.xv. days before shall come tokenes of great dread so that there
by the people may know that sone after comes the dome (Secundum Iheronimum)
as saint Iherom says. The first day the water shall rise upon the sea and it
shall be higher than any hylle by.xl. cubytes. The second day the sea shall
fall down so low that uneath it may be seen. The third day all the fysshe
and beestes in the sea shall make such a cry and rorynge that no tongue may
tell / but god him self. The fourth day the sea and waters shall brenne. The
fyfte day all trees and herbs shall sweet blood / and all manner of fowls
shall come together / and another ete ne drink for dread of dome that is
coming. The syxte day all great buldynges castles tours steples and houses
shall fall down and brenne tylle the son rise again. The.vii. day all
stones and rocks shall beat together that each each of them shall break other
with an horrible noise / that which shall be herd in to heaven. The.viii. day
the earth shall quake / so that there may may no man stand thereon / but shall
fall down The.ix. day the people shall goo out of their dens / and goo as
they were myndeles and none speak to other. The.x. day the hills and the
earth shall be even and plain. The.xi. day all graves and tombs shall be
opened and the bodies shall stand upon them. The.xii. day sterres shall
fall fro heaven shetynge out brennynge bemes a dredefull syghte to see.
The.xiii. day they shall deye that beren life. The fourteyne day heaven and
earth shall brenne. The syxteyne day heaven and earth shall be made new and
all people shall rise in the aege of thyrty winter and come to the dome
(Dominus veniet ad iudicium cum multitudinie angelorum) Then shall come to
the dome our blyssed lord Ihesu Christ very god and man with his aungelles /
and show his wounds fresshe bledynge / as that day he deyed on the cross
with all the Instruments of his passion. The spear crown / scourges nails /
hamer / pynsons / and the garlonde of thorns / to show what he suffered in his
passion for mankind. Then may they be sorry and ferde that have sworn by his
passion or his wounds / or by any membre of his body / that shall be a great
repreef to them but they amend them in this world or that they deye. Then
will our lord Ihesus Christ gretely thank them that have done mercy in this
world for his sake to their even christian / and will say thus to them (Venite
benedicti patris mei percipite regnum. etc) Come ye my faders blyssed chyldern
and receive ye the kyngedome of heaven yt is ordained to you / and so rehearse
unto them the seven works of mercy other wise called the operacyons of
myserycorde done to the needful / When I was houngry ye gave to me mete
(Sitiui et dedistis miche bibere) When I was thyrsty ye gave me drink and when
I was herberles ye herbered me / and so forth all ye works of mercy. For when
ye gave any thing in my name / it was to me. Then shall our lord rebuke the
rich people / that would not do for his love / nor to forgive no trespace for
his sake. And said to them (Discedite a me maledicti in ignem eternum) Goo ye
cursed people into everlasting pain of hell. For when I was a houngred ye
gave me no mete. etc. Than may they be full sorry and woe that ever our lord
Ihesu christ shall thus rebuke them. For there shall be no man of law to plete
nor for gold nor for silver nor other gifts to help. For then shall another
master ne lordeshyp help but all be set beside / but right as a man has
done so shall he have. And there shall be diverse accusers both above him and
byneth him and on every side. Above him shall he our lord Ihesu christ his
domes man (Iratus est furor domini in populo suo) without mercy to them that
did no mercy / and so accuse them of ye leest thought that ever was a mys. On
the right side his angel telling redely where when and how often he did a
mys. On that other side fendes chalengynge him theyres as by right for his
wicked deeds. Under him hell ready if he be found in sin that day they
shall be payned and in pain withouten end. That day poor people shall sytte
with christ at the dome / and deem the rich people for yt great wrongs that
they did to them / and they might get none amends till the day of dome /
then they shall have their will of the rich people / for when the rich done
the poor wrong / they can do no more but pray to god to quyte them at the
day of dome. And so he will for god says thus (Michi vindictam et ego
retribua^) Put all to me and I yield every man after his deseruynge / therefore
while that ye ben here / make ye amends to them for your wyckednes / and make
them your friends that be your domes men at the day of dome and trust not to
them that shall come after you leest ye be begyled. And dread the pain of
hell / that never shall have end.

Narracio.
Saint Bid tells how there was an housbonde man in England that fill syke
and leye deed from the even till on the morrow. Then he rose and departed his
goods in to four parties / and all his own part he gave to poor men / and
went and was a monk in an abbey that was nyghe ye water side. In to ye which
water he went every night were it never so cold and stood therein long / and
suffered great penance. And when that he was asked why he did so to suffer
that great penance. He said to eschew a gretter pain that he had seen. And
he would ete but barley bread and drink water all his life after. And told
two relygyous men the pains that he had seen / And they were so great that
they could not tell them openly. He said that an angel ladde him in to a
place there that one side was so cold that no tongue might tell the pains
thereof. And that other side was so hot that no man might tell the pain
thereof / and souls weren cast out of that one in to that other and that was a
great pain to them. And the angel showed him the fire that came out of hell
that was so hot. And so far as him thought he might see it / he thought it
brent him / and in the leme thereof he saw souls boil up and down cryenge
and waylynge for woe. Also he herd fendes cry / cast out hot led and
brymstone to make their pains gretter / and so they tourmented ye souls in
pain / Now lord god for thy great mercy have mercy on us and keep us fro tho
pains / and bring us to the bliss of heaven that never shall have ending
Amen:

Dominica in septuagesima
GOod friends this day is called in holy church yt sunday in septuagesme.
For cause ye holy church is mother of all christian people / she takes good head
to the chyldern as a good mother ought to do and for as much as she sees them
full sore syke in sin / and many of them wounded to the death with the
sword of sin the which sin has caught all this year tofore. And namely
this crystmasse time that was ordained in holy church for great solempnyte /
for every man should be besy to serve god with all his power by cause that
christ him self showed that day swetnesse of love to all christian people. For
man he was borne that time. And in the same flesh and blood as one of us /
and laid in a cradell more poorly than any of us / and was crystened in water
as any of us. And also he came to a wedding for to cleanse it from sins / and
to make us holy and brethern to him / and heirs to ye kyngedome of heaven. For
this causes all christian people owen to be full glad in their souls as in
that time making solempnyte and myrthe / and making them both clean in body
and in soul from all manner of sins / and geoundynge them in great sadness
of love to god and to all christian people doing great alms to them that have
need. But now the more harm is / for that high and solemn feast is turned
in to foul fylth sin and great sykenes to the soul / as in pride by diverse
wise in clothing and in many diverse gyse using / in to great couetyse / and
in to lecherye / ye sueth always glotonye. In slouthe in gods service / as
Iapes and vanyte singing rybaudry speaking / for vanyte caused much slouthe
for among such people he is the most worthy that most harlatry can speak /
thus these solemn and hye feestes that were ordained to great worship of
god and of our blessed lady and all the saints in heaven now ben turned in to
great offense to god / Wherefore our mother holy church seeing her chyldern in
such dyspayre / as a mother full of compassyon / sorry in her heart for them.
This day she leyeth down alleluya and and other songs of myrthe and melodye
/ and takes tractus / that been songs of morning. Also for this holy
sacrament of wedding is much defouled by vanyte of sin / therefore it is
leyde down these days / and in aduente. For many that been now wedded gives
them in all lust and liking of the bodies of flesshely lust of this world.
And thinks full little of the death that is full grievous that comes so sone
after. But as it is read by great clerks / it is more spedefull to man's
soul to goo to an house there as is a corpse and weeping / than to goo to an
house there as is great revel and much myrthe / for such things maken a man
to forgete his god and him self both / but there as is a syghte of a corse
makes a man to think on his death / that is the specyal thing to put away
sin and vanyte of the world. For Solamon says thus to his sone (Fili
memorare nouissima tua et ineternum none peccabis) Sone have in thy mind that
thou shall deye and thou shall never sin deedly / thus holy church having
great compassyon of her chyldern ordeyneth three manner of salues to help and to
hele her chyldern that been to think on death Inwardely / to labor besely and
to chastyse the body resonably. The first is to think on death Inwardly / holy
church gives ensample this day in ye office of the mass (circu^dederu^t me)
The sykenes of death has beclyped me / thus says he techy^ge every good child
to have in my^de how he is bestade with death on every side / in so much yt he
may not escape no way / but ever death sueth him with a bow drawn and an arowe
ever therein ready to shote him he wot never what time. This is a pryncypall
salve to ever man that takes it to heart to put away all manner of vanyte and
vain myrthe. But for to understand this the better I show this by ensample.

Narracio.
I read of a king that ever was in heavy sorrow and he would never laughe ne
make merry chere / but ever was in morning and in heaviness / therefore his meyne
and all other men were grieved. Therewith they yede to the kings brother praynge
him to speak to the king / and said he grieved all tho that were about him
with his heavy chere / and cou^seylled him for to leave it and make light chere
in time coming. Then was this king wise and thought to chastyse his brother
within a while / and full wroth badde him go home and do that he had to do.
Then was the manner of the country that when a man should be put to death /
there should come trompettes and trompe before his gate. Then said the king
bidding them to go trompe before his broders gate / and men to go with them to
arest him and bring him before the king. And in the mean while / ye king
called to him seven men that he trust on and badde them that when his brother
was come to draw their swerdes and set them at his breast before his heart. So
when his brother was comen / they did as the king badde them. Then ye king
commanded all men to dance and to make revel all yt they could and so they
did. Then said the king to his brother / why art thou so heavy of chere / heue
up thy heed and be merry / for all this myrthe is made for ye. Then answered he
and said. How should I be merry of chere and se here seven swerdes set to my
heart / and wot not who shall be my death first Then said the king. put up
your swerdes and spoke to his brother / this it fares by me ye.vii. deedly
sins ever is ready to reave me of my soul to ye heart / and this makes me
that I that is the life of my body. Then said the brother I cry the mercy /
for I knew never this till now and shall be wyser ever after This I say boldly
he yt will take this to heart he shall have better will to loure than to laughe
to syghe than to be glad to weep than to sing so yt he shall find ye mind of
death ye pryncypal salve of al manner of sin / also pryncypaly we must have in
mind ye paynfull death of our savior yt he suffered for us all / of the which
is made mencyon in the first chapter of Trenys (Attendite and videte si est
dolor similis sicut dolor meus) That other salve is to labor besely in this
world / of this labor speaks saint Poule in the pystle of this day and
says (Sic currite vt co^prehendatis) Run ye so that ye may have the game /
by this rennynge ye shall understand that he yt renneth for ye game enforseth
himself with all his might for to re^ne fast Right so must every servant of
god enforce hy^ to labor besely in that degree yt god has set him in. And
men of holy church must labor in studyenge and prayenge and to teache the
people the law of god. Lords and rented men must labor to keep holy church
in rest and peace / and other common people must labor to get living to these
other degrees and for themself both to soul and body. And for no man should
excuse him from this labor. Christ in the gospel gives an ensample saying
thus. (Primo mane conducere operarios) An husbounde man went in to his gardyn
or vyneyerde at pryme / and again at vndern or myddaye / and at even song time
/ and he hired people to labor by all ye tides of ye day. This is to
understand all ye grees of ye world. For as Job says. A man is born to
lobour and to traueyle in this world as a bird to flee. And saint Bernard
says. He that will not labor here in this world / he shall labor with the
fendes in hell. For that is the testament of Adam / that he left to all his
ofsprynge labor and traueyle. To this labor he gives ensample and reherseth
how god made Adam and Eve to labor and to keep paradyse / and he badde them
ete of all the fruytes that was in paradyse except one tree that he kept for
hy^self / and as often as they saw ye tree they should thynken on him that
made them and know him for their god And for they should not ete thereof in
pain of the death and of dampnacyon / Then the fend saw them in so much
Joy that they were in and him self in so much pain and woo that he had
great envy to them and went to Eve and asked her why they ete not of ye
fruit of that tree. And she said god has forbode us that tree in to pain of
death. Then said ye fend wot full well yt if ye ete thereof ye should be like
god knowing both good and evil / and if ye will prove yt I say sothe / ete
thereof and assaye. Then took Eve of ye fruit and gaaf Adam and badde hy^ ete
thereof and assay / And he loved her well and would not wrath her / took an
apple and ete / And anon therewith either of they^ saw others shappe and were
ashamed. And took leaves of a fygge tree and so covered her me^bres. Than came
our lord to Adam and said (Quare fecisti hoc) Why have you do so. And he said
(Mulier qua^ dedisti mi chi sociam) The woman badde me. And then said our lord
to Eve. Why dydest you thus (Serpens decepit me) The serpent begyled me Then
for they might not deye in paradyse ne suffer no penance therefore he droof
they^ naked out in to this world yt is full wretched weeping and waylynge to
go and get their mete with great labor and traueylle and deye at the last.
Than prayed Adam our lord sore wepy^g he should not take great vengaunce upon
them / but have mercy on them and pity / for they were begyled by envy and
malice of the fend / and by Innocen^^^ of themself that they wist not what
they did. (...) our lord pity on them and for they were (...) clothed them
in pylches / and badde them go labor and traueyle for their living / and said
to Eve (In dolor paries filios) In sorrow and woo thou shall bear thy childern
/ and took Adam Instruments to labor with and left them there. By this ye
shall understand and take ensample to labor besely. For and Adam and Eve had
labored besely the fend had never overcome them. For the fend desires no
more when he would tempte a man but for to find him idle And therefore know ye
well that it is a rich salve against sin for to labor besely. The third is
to chastyse the body dyscretly (Vnde Paulus. Castigo corpus meum et in
seruitute^ redigo) I shall chastyse my body / and dress it in service of my
soul / for man's flesh is so wild and so lusty to sin that it will not
in no way leave his lust to serve god but if it be chastysed with penance For
it must be chastysed some time with pain Thus did Adam and Eve in ensample
that al other that shall come after them should do the same For many a year
before her death either of them stood in water a nyghtes up to the chyn one
far from an other to suffer penance till her flesh was as grene as grass
/ for cold. Then come that fend to Eve as bright as an angel and said that
god has sent him from heaven / and badde her go to Adam and say to him that
god badde him leave his penance / for his trespace was forgyuen. And Eve did
so / but Adam wist well that it came from the fend and not from god He said to
Eve when god droof us out of paradyse for our sin and had compassyo^ on us /
for we wept sore on him / and prayed him mekely of mercy he setted us here to
penance to our lives end. And therefore go again / for the more penance that
we do the more shall be our mede. And therefore go again and do thy penance in
gods name. Yet the fend come again the second time and said to Eve god of
his grace has take reward to your penance that ye suffer and has forgive
you. Then went Eve to Adam and told him so. Then said Adam. I wot well
that he that has said so to the is our enemy / for our penance greueth
more him than us and he would have us to leave of and so to lose our mede / but
do we forth our penance to our lives end. For god takes none head to the
beginning of a thing but to the ending. Yet the fend came again the third
time to Eve and said / goo thou to Adam and say to him yt he began foul and
well fouler will end / for first he tresspaced by Innocensye and dysceyte of
the fend / and now he synneth by good delyberacyon and will not do as god
byddeth him wherefore your trespace is worthy dampnacyon. Then was Eve aferde
and told Adam so. Then Adam syghed sore and wept and said to her unadvised.
Woman god made the of one of my rybbes for to help me and comfort me. And now
by techynge of the fend thou art besy too combre me again / but think how
our first sin stanke in the sight of god / yt all our ofsprynge shall be
enfecte and have repreue thereof in to the worlds end. Wherefore though we
might do so much penance as all our ofsprynge might do / yet it were to
little to quyte our lord god for our trespace but god of his special grace
allowed a good will. Then went Eve again to her penance as Adam badde / and
than said Adam god will send us the oil of mercy when time of mercy is. And so
Adam and Eve did their penance to their lives end. And when Adam had
lived.ix.C. year and.xxx and had.xxx. sons and.xxx. daughters they deyed and
were both buried together Ada^ and eve. Thus ye may se well yt Adam and eve were
full holy or they dyed / and thought on death full Inwardely and labored full
besely / and chastysed her flesh full resonably / and so must we do ye come
of them that will come to the Joy of paradyse / in tokenynge thereof this
sunday is called the sunday in septuagesime a nombre of.lxx. The which
nombre begins this day and ends on Eester even so holy church is morning
from this day till Eester even / than she takes comfort again in party of
one alleluya with a tracte. For it is not yet in full might tylle saterdaye in
Eester weke / the which is called (Dn^ica in albis) than she lays down the
tracte and grayell and syngeth double Alleluya techynge all christian people to
labor and do penance truly till the saterdaye / that is to a man's lives
end that is till the soul goo to rest / yet is not the soul in full rest
till the saterdaye (in albis) that is tylle the day of dome when the body and
the soul shall come together and be clothed (in albis) that is in white.vii.
times whyter than the son / and than they shall sing double alleluya / that
is to say lord make us saufe in ever lasting bliss. To ye which bring us
he yt for us all deyed on the rode tree. Amen.

Dominica in Sexagesima.
Dear friends this day is called ye sunday in sexagesime yt is the noumbre
of.xl. the which nombre holy church techeth every man and woman to thy^ke how
short our life is now in our days for sometime people lived.ix.C. year and more
and now three score or four score is a long life. But ye grace of god and his
mercy and goodness is so much that if we will do our besynes and dylygence
to serve god and please him. He will give us as much Joy and bliss in Heaven
as he gave to Adam and Eve that lived so long. But he that will have that
Joy and bliss must do three things. One is he must hate sin namely / and
suffer trybulacyon mekely / and do alms deeds wylfully. Than for our days be
short we must the more trybulacion suffer mekely and with pacyente heart and
not grutchynge and disease comes of special grace / for it is remedy for
sins here in this world for penance or else for great encreasynge of his
Joy in to an other world / wherefore gods Appostle saint Poule will that all
christian people shall take example of him for he suffered much trybulacyon
pacyentely that he reherseth in the pystle of this day and said thus (In
laboribus plurimis) saint poule says I have be in many great trauayles and
often times in prison sore bounden with chains of iron (Ouinque virgis cesus)
Five times beten with rods and scourges on my bare body with paynems (Semel
lapidatus. And ones beten with stones / and three times in ship brekynge
(Nocte acdie in profou^do maris fui) And I was in the ground of the sea a
night and a day (Sepe in percusis fluuiu^) Many times in peril of flodes
(Periculis latronum) In peril of thieves / and in peril of false brethren
that showed true love to me and were false / and counseyled other to done
disease and trouble (In fame et siti) In houngre and thirst (In ieiuniis
multis) In much fasting (In multis vigiliis) In long waking (In frigore) In
cold and in many other myscheues and peril that were to long to tell / and
all he suffered with good will and ever thanked god of his sweet love / for
well he wist that all his trybulacyons and disease was for sin that he had
done tofore / and to encreace his merit and Joy that should come after /
wherefore all christian people that will please god what manner disease or
trybulacyon that come to them be it sykenes loss of catell or other goods or
death of friends take it pacyentely and mekely / and think it comes for sin
that thou have do before. Or else for great encreace of Joy and bliss that
thou shalt have after / for it comes of special grace there as god vysyteth
and comes there as god sends / but there as he suffers all their will is no
godesygne that he loved. And therefore thank god ever of his vysytacyon and
beseech him ever of his mercy / god knows our entente. And therefore he
forgyueth soon to them that ask mercy with a meke heart. Thus must a man
suffer trybulacyon pacyently. He must also do alms deeds dyscretly which he
fygured by these.xl. days For.xl. is syx times ten. So that by.vi. ye shall
understand the six works of mercy that comen out of the ten
commandments / the which ben these. To give mete and drink clothe
herberowe vysyte prysones / comfort the syke blind lame / and to burye them
that been deed. These be the.vi. works of mercy the which all christian people
must do that will be saved and have mercy of god / wherefore sexagesime
begins this day and ends the wenesdaye in Eester wyke the which holy
Church speaks of thus (Venite benedicti patris mei. etc.) Come ye my faders
blyssed chyldern and take the kyngedome of heaven that is ordained for you /
these same words god shall say to you at the day of dome / and to all that
has done alms deeds dyscretely / and fulfilled the works of mercy if they
were of power / and that to that been not of power must do their good will and
that shall fulfill the deed / and this must be do dyscretly. And how god
teched this day in the gospel by example and says thus (Exiit qui seminat
seminare semen suum) A man went to sow his seeds. And he sewe / and some
fell by the way and fowls come and ete it. And And some fell among thorns
and was lost. And some fell in good earth and brought forth an hundred fold
encreace. To this our lord Ihesu says thus him self (Ego sum via veritatis
et vita) I am that very right true life and way to heaven. Then falls his
feed beside the way that gives not of his goods in alms for Crystes sake
dyscretly and secretly unto the poor and nedy / but for pride pomp and vain
glory of the world and so leseth his mede / and that I preue by ensample.

Narratio.
There was in Irlonde a wonder rich man and did much alms in his life in
so much that the people wend he had be a saint. But when he was deed he
appyered to one yt he loved well in his life as black as any pytche with an
horrible stynke and said / ye wene that I be a saint / but now I am such as
thou see. Than said he where by thy alms deeds / and he said / the wind of
vain glory has blown them away for he that does his alms for vain
glory of the world leseth his mede / and the fendes of the air destroys
it. Also he leseth his mede that gives his alms to such as he knew that been
in deedly sin and so to mayntene them in their sin / his sede falls
among stones and wexeth dry and so leseth his mede his sede falls among
thorns that gives his good to rich people that has no need thereto / and so
leseth their mede / but his sede falls in good earth that gives his alms to
good true people for they be gods earth and that sede shall give an hundred
fold encreace in everlasting Joy and bliss and shall be everlasting fode
to them that done thus their alms dyscretly / ye must also hate sin namely
and flee it in all ye ye may / for he that hates and sleeth sin loves god /
and god loves him / for god hates sin in so much that he took vengeance
on all the world for sin of lecherye and in special for the sin against
kind. For when god saw this sin reynynge in all the world so unworthily /
he said thus. Me for thinks that ever I made man / and said to Noe (Fac tibi
archa^) Make the a ship of planed bordes / as I shall teache the / and make
chambres there in / and take of all clean bestes the couple by him self / and
mete and drink with them. Than made Noe this ship as god taught him square in
the botom and.CCC. cubytes of length / and.l. cubytes bread / and.xxx. cubytes
in hight / and this ship was in making a hundred year to show how mercyable
that god is in taryenge to look if the people would amend them / and how
loathe he was to do vengaunce / but ye people was ever longer the wors. Than by
help of Angels all manner birds and beestes were brought to Noe and when all
were brought to the ship / our lord bad Noe and his wife and his three sons
go in to the ship by them self / and Noes wife and his sons wives by them
self / for yt men should not comen with the women. So when they were all In /
god closed the door to them without forth (Quadraginta diebus et quadraginta
noctibus aperti su^t celi) Then it rayned. xl. days and.xl. nyghtes yt the
water bare ye ship higher than any hylle by.xl. cubytes / and stood still an.C.
days and xl. and drowned all the world both people and bestes save those
that were in the ship yet Josephus says of Armany there is an hylle and that
is called Barus / that was hyer than the water was / and therefore diverse
people have opinion that there was much people saved So Noe was in the ship
all a year / and than put out a raven for to bring word to know if that the
rain water seaced or no. And he came not again. Then he sent out o douue
and she came again and brought a branch of Olyue in her bylle and there by
Noe knew well that the water was seaced in some place. Then as god bad Noe
went out and took the unclean bestes from the clean and burnt the unclean
bestes in sacrefyce to god. And that pleased god so well that he gave them and
all that come of them after leave to ete flesh of all clean beestes and for
to drink wine there as before the flood the people ete and drank no thing
but water for the earth was so fertyll in it self to fore / that the people
neded none other fode but such as came of ye earth. Thus may ye see and
understand how great vengeance god took on all the world for sin / and now
there is as much sin as ever there was in tho Days / and much more in many
degrees / wherefore I dread lest god will take vengeance on us and would or
this time were not the prayers of holy Church and good saints / and in
especyall by the prayers of our lady and that ye shall here by Ensample of
saint Domynicke. As he was in his prayers he saw our blessed lord Ihesu
Christ holding three speres in his hand ready to shote them in to this world
for vengeance and all for sin. Then came our blessed lady knelynge before
our lord and said my dear sone what will ye do. And he said my dear mother /
the world is so full of sin of pride couetyse lecherye and diverse other
sin / that I will shote these three speres of vengeance on the people. Then
said our lady / my dear sone have mercy on them and abide a while for I have
sum true servants / the which shall preche and teache the people to torn
them from sin / and thus by prayer of our blyssed lady god spared to take
vengeance / but now the world is so full of sin and cursed living of false
extorcyon and oppressyon of the poor people / that they cry to god for
socoure and help wherefore it is full like that we shall be smyten full soon
with sum vengaunce. Other with death / other with death of pestylence /
wherefore is is needful for us to pray besely to our blyssed lady that she
may pray for us to her dear sone our lord Ihesu Christ to spare us in our
days that we may have grace and mercy now and ever Amen for saint charity.

Dn^ica in quinquagesima.
GOod men and women This day is called the sunday in quinquagesime. This
word quinquagesime is a noumbre of.l. the which noumbre betokens remyssyon
and Joy for in the old law every fyfty winter all manner of poeple that were
over set with service of bondage / when they come to that age they were made
fre in great Joy and myrthe to them wherefore this noumbre begins this day
/ and ends on Eester day showing that all christian people that be oppressyd
with any trybulacyon or disease here in this world / shall be made free and
have remyssyon at the day of dome / and be heirs in the kyngedome of heaven.
And (...) in comfortynge of (...). (...) Pope of (...) of all (...) to all
(...) to (...). And for all that may (...) pardone. The Pope of heaven our
lord Ihesu Christ of his special grace granted to all Christian people full
pardone of all sins in their last end / so that they will keep three
things here in this world / confession / contrycyon / and satysfaccyon. Holy
shryfte of mouth / with contrycyon of heart / and satysfaccyon in deed doing.
And also he must have charity with out feynynge / and stable faith without
flaterynge / and without these there may no man have pardon (...) / and
therefore he that will be asoyled of the holy pope of heaven and have clean
remyssyon. He must be contryte sorry for his sins and shryue him clean / and
be in full purpose never to sin more. And they yt so done god will forgive
them all their sins / for a man may have so great and such contrycyon that
it may quench all the pains that ever were ordained for him. Take example by
saint Peter that for soke Christ thryes with great oaths. But he was after
contryte and sorry (Et fleuit amare). And wept full bytterly / and god of his
great mercy forgave him his trespass and made better chere to hy^ after than he
did tofore for that he should be in no dyspayre and dread.

Narracio.
We find of a great rich man yt was so wicked in his life that much people
demed hy^ dampened to hell so he fell syke and felyd him self that he should be
deed / and he be thought how wicked he had be in his living / and took such a
contrycyon to him and so great sorrow that he wept night and day ever when his
sin came unto his mind and so lay seven days and seven nyghtes / and shroue
him clean and took great repentance to him / and ever cried god mercy. So that
all the people had great pity on him and so he deyed. Than it happened so that
there was a monk in an abbaye that dyed the same time / and was made by his
Abbot to come again to tell him how he fared and so he did / and said to the
abbot when he was comen. Sir I am come to keep my promysse / I pray you give me
leave to go again / for I go to Joy. Then said the abbote / was there any more
that dyed when thou dyed that went unto Joy but thou / he said ye forsooth one
/ and no more / and that was the soul of such a man and told his name. Than
said the abbote now I se well that thou art not my monk / but some fend is
come to tempte me / for we know well if any soul be in pain he is one of tho.
Than said the monk full unworthily / is any man to know ye preuyte of gods
dome. For that man had so great contrycyon and repentance and wept so bytterly
for his sins / that the water of his eyes perysshed thoroughe al his clothes
unto the ground / wherefore go thou thither to morrow / and when thou fyndest it
true that I say than believe me and I go to ever lasting Joy and bliss.
Than went the Abbote thither and found that it was true as that monk had
said and there the Abbot knelyd down and thanked god and bad all the people to
be glad yt god is so merciful / and that he had that knowelge. Here ye may se
that great co^trycyon that this man had quenched the great pain that was
ordained for him thus ye may se how great help it is to a man's soul to be
contryte and sorry for his sin and draw a man to ye more co^trycyon those.l.
days the psalm in the sawter as (Miserere mei deus) is more rehearsed these
days than any other time of the year / the which is thus much to say. God
for thy mercy have pity on me / and when a man is sorry for his sins and says
thus with a sorowefull heart. God heryth his prayer and forgyueth him his
trespass / so that he be never in full purpose to sin more / but to amend
him and be in parfyte love and charity without any feynynge / and but he has
charity without feynynge all this auaylleth not / and by this ensample.

Narracio.
There was a man that had five sons and had found them long to scole and
cost him much good / so on a day he called his five sons before him and
said chylderne I have found you long to scole and have spente much good upon
you and I se no great profit thereof / wherefore but ye will among you all
assoyle me a questyon. I will do no more cost on you ne find you no longer
to scole. And they asked of their fader what ye questyon was and it should be
assoyled and he said I am old and feeble and may not live long / and therefore
I would wit of you what thing that would bring a man's soul sonest to
heaven. And anon the eldest sone answered and said / for sothe fader prechynge
and techynge will bring a man's soul sonest to heaven of any thing. Well
said quod ye fader. What say thou to the second sone. He answered and said
faith and true believe bry^geth a soul as soon to heaven. What say thou to,
the questyon my third sone. And he said good prayers and alms deeds brings
a soul sone to heaven. What say you to the matter my fourth sone. And he said
pylgremage going and great penance sufferynge bry^geth a soul sooner to heaven
than any of these / What say thou to ye matter my fyfte sone. And he said /
forsooth fader there is an other thing that bry^geth a soul sooner to heaven
than all these what is that said the fader. Forsooth fader said he charity. For
what virtue yt ever a man have and he lacks charity it avails not to heaven
wards / for though a man pray and do alms deeds go a gylgremage have full
faith and believe / teache and preche / fast and suffer penance never so much
/ cry and weep never so loud / and be out of charity god hereth him not. And
here to accords saint Poule in his pystle and says thus (Si linguis hominu^
loquar: etc) Though I were so eloquent as any man or any au^gel (Et si habuero
prophetiam et omnem scientia^). And though I had all the conning in the world
/ and knew the prophecye and preuyte of god (Omnem fide vt mo^tes transferam)
And though I had so much faith / yt I might meue hills (Et si distribuerem in
cibos pauperu^) And though I dealed all my good to the poor people for goods
sake (Corpus meu^ vt ardea^) And my body to brenne in hot fire (Caritate^
aute^ no^ habe am michil michi prodest) ye I have not charity all this
profyteth not to heaven wards / wherefore it is nedeful and most necessary to
every soul yt will be saved to have charity / but though a man says yt he
loves god / and loves not his even christian / he is deceived. For he yt loves
god loves his neighbor in good intent thus must a man have full charity yt
will be saved (Charitas cooperit multitudine^ peccatorum) For charity covers
the multitude of sins / for he that dies in deedly sin and out of charity
shall be dampened And therefore of all virtues charity is most virtuous and
most necessary to a man's soul / yet we must have a stable faith without
flaterynge and to believe sadly as holy church techeth and to believe faithfully
in the fader / the sone and holy ghoost / the fader full god / the sone full
god / and the holy ghost full god. And these three person ben but one god /
that made all thing of naught. This faith was first showed to the holy
patriarch Abraham in the vale of Mambre. There he saw three fair men coming
toward him / but he worshypped but one / yeuynge ensample to all christian
people to se in spyryte / the fader the sone / and the holy ghost / three
persons and one in god head / and worshypped them as one god. Also ye must
believe of the Incarnacyon of our lord Ihesu Christ that our lady conceived of
the holy ghost without wemme of her body in flesh and blood as one of us /
and very god and man / and was deed and buried (Tercia die resurrexit a
mortuis) And on the third day he rose from death to life (Ascends ad celos
sedet) And steyed up to heaven on holy thursdaye (In deventurus est iudicare
viuos et mortuos) And shall come again at the day of dome / and deem the
quycke and ye deed. This is fygured by Ysaac the sone of Abraham that he gate
on his wife Sara thrughe the holy ghost / when they both were passed age to
bring forth any fruit for God said to Abraham yt he should have fruit as
great in multitude as were sterres in the firmament. Than when this child was
borne he was called Ysaac / and when he was.xxv. years of age / god said to
Abraham in this wise. Take thy sone Ysaac and goo to such an hylle as he
showed to him and offer him in sacrefyce that was for to slay him. As the
manner was sometime. Than Abraham had a promysse of god too have great issue /
and though that he loved his sone never so much / yet he took him anon with
out grutchynge or again saying the commaunment of almighty god and went
straight unto the hylle / and made his sone Ysaac for to bear wood for to
brenne him self with. And when they came to the hylle top Abraham made an
awter of wode and set it on fire. And than he took his sone Ysaac and would
have slain him and offered him to god. Then anon spoke an angel to Abraham
and bad him leave of and take the sheep that stood there by and offer hy^ instead of thy sone Ysaac. By Abraham ye may understand the fader of heaven / and
by Ysaac his sone Ihesu Christ that spared for no love that he had to him. But
suffered the Jews to leye wode upon his back / that was the cross that he
should be done on him self / and ladde him to the hylle of Caluerye and there
did him upon the awter of wode that was the Cross that was made of four
diverse manner of wode / that was Cedre / cypres / olyue / and palm and thereon
he dyed for all mankind. Thus may christ well be called Ysaac / that is to
understand laughter / for many a soul he brought out of hell laughing yt
went thither sore weeping. Then like as this was a figure of Crystes passion
long or he was borne. Right so this day Christ him self in the gospel said
thus to his dyscyples yt he should be bytrayed (Tradetur eni^ gentibus et
illudetur and flagellabitur et consuetur et postquam flagellauerunt eum die
tercia resurget). And how he should be taken and beten with scourges spytte
upon / and after his scourgynge done upon the cross and slay him. And the
third day shall rise again to life. And for they should have the better
believe thereto and unto his words anon tofore them he made a blind man to se
that cried and said (Ihesu fili david miserere mei) Ihesu ye sone of David have
mercy on me. Then said our lord to him what would thou that I should do to
the. And he said (Domine vt videam) Lord give me sight. Then said our lord
thy faith has saved the / and and then anon he had all his sight and
then he thanked god. So must every christian man that will have pardon of god.
He must have full contricion of heart with shrifte of mouth and satisfaccion /
in deed being in holy charity without feynynge and in stable faith without
flaterynge / and to stere you more to the faith I will tell you this ensample.

Narracio
There was a bishop in England that high Grosthed and was bishop of
Lyncolne and was holden the gretest clerk in England or in the world and as
he lay in his death bed there came to him a great multitude of fendes and
dysputed with him of the faith / In so much that they had nyghe turned him
out of the believe and put him into dyspayre. Then was our lady ready and said
to him. My seruau^te beleuest thou not in holy church as it techeth the And a
none he cried and said / yes gracious lady I believe as holy church techeth me
/ and anon the fendes vanished a way and he gave up the ghost to everlasting
bliss unto the which god bring us all.

Dn^ica prima in quadragesime.
GOod men and women this day is called in holy church the first sunday in
Quadragesime a nombre of.xl. for from this day to Ester day be.xl. days. And
for by cause that every man sins more or less for to make satysfaccion for
trespass all christian people ben bounden by the law of god and holy church to
fast these.xl. days save tho that the law dispenses with reasonable cause
Chylderne that been within aege / women that been with child. Old people that been myghtles to the last labourynge people / as pilgrims and syke people those
that the law dyspenseth with upon their consyence. Thanne for the cause yt
sunday is no day of penance / therefore ye shall be gynne your fast upon
asshe-wednesday that day must ye come to holy church / and take ashes of the
priests hand / and think on the words well that he says over your hedes
(Memento homo quia cinis es: et in cinerem reuerteris). Have mind thou man of
ashes thou art come of / and to ashes thou shalt torn again. Than ben
there dyuerce causes why ye shall fast these.xl. days. One is as the gospel
tells this day thus Ductus est Ihesus in desertum a spiritu vt temptaretur a
dyabolo) How the holy ghoost bad our lord Ihesu Christ go in to deserte by
twene Jerusalem and Ieryco / to be tempted of the fend / and was there forty
days / and.x.l nyghtes fasting for your sake / showing unto all christian
people the virtue and the mede that comes there of fasting the which ben
expressed in the Preface of the mass that is said in the holy church the
forty days that is thus. (Qui corporali ieiunio vicia comprimus mentem eleuas
virtute^ largius) That holy fasting thyrsteth down vices / and lyfteth up the
thought of man unto virtuous and to largeness of all goodness and geteth hy^
great mede in heaven that shall ever last and get grace here in earth. For as
clerks says. The spetell of a fasting man shall sle an adder bodily. Then
much more it sleeth the might of the old adder / that is the fend of hell
that came to Eve in paradyse in likeness of an adder and tempted her to
glotony vayneglory and couetyse. Right so the fend came unto Christ in lykenes
of a man lest he had be known / and tempted christ as the gospel says (Cum
ieiunasset quadraginta diebus et quadraginta noctibus postea esuriit) When
christ had fasted forty days and forty nyghtes then by kind of man hode he
houngred And then came the fendes unto him and showed unto him stones and
said (Si filius deies dic vt lapis isti panes fiant) And if it so be yt thou
art gods sone of heaven / make thou these stones turn in too bread For
right as Eve was rauysshed when she saw the appell by the temptacyon of the
fend to ete thereof And the same wise he had thought to have made our
savior Ihesu christ to have eten of that bread. For glotonye is not only in
man's mete / but in the soul lust and appetyte of a man. And then said our
savior Ihesu christ unto him (Non in solo pane viuit homo: sed et de omni verbo
quod procedit de ore dei) Man lives not only by bread / but by every word
that comes fro the mouth of god. And then the fend took our sauyoure Ihesu
christ and did set him upon the highest pynacle of the temple and then he
said. And if thou be gods sone now bring thy self down without man's help
or harm / yt I may know the for gods sone. And then said our savior
Ihesu christ (Non temptabis dominum deum tuum) Thou shake not tempte thy lord
god. Yet he came again the third time. (Assumpsit eum dyabolus in montem
excelsum et oste^dit ei omnia regna mundi). And then he took our savior
Ihesu Christ and set him upon a high mountain and then showed unto him all
the kingdoms and also all the richesse of the world and said thus unto him
(Hec omnia dabo tibi si procedens et adoraueris me) All this I shall give ye if
you wylt fall down and worship me. Then said christ to hy^ (Vade sathanas
Scriptu^ e^ enim dn^m deu^ tuu^ and adorabes et illi soli seruies) Go sathanas
it written / you shalt worship thy lord and only hy^ serve. Then he left hy^
and went his way (Tu^c a^geli accesseru^t ad Ihesu^ and ministraba^t ei. Then
au^gelys came and brought hy^ fode. For ye fe^de is most besy these.xl. days
to tempte people to three sy^nes to pride couetyse and glotony / it is nedeful
to have three remedies aye^ste them / against glotonye abstene^ce against pride
mekenes against couetyse largenes / against glotony we must fast yt is not to ete
by fore time and at mete ete not to much and to fast both day and night as
christ did / but there is much people will ete and drink both day and night
and fyl their bodies with foul lust of glotonye. Also ye must fast from all
manner of flesh mete / and white mete. For saint Ihe^ says / eggs is all
most flesh / and milk blood / and when ye go to your mete take ensample by
holy church when the priest gooth too mass that is gods word how he at his
beginning boweth down his knees / and byddeth all other do the same in the
mids of the mass. And at the end of the mass bow ye down your hedes too
god. And therefore when ye go to your mete / so worship god with a Pater noster
and an Aue that he sent you that fode / and make a cross upon your mete / and
after mete an other. And thank ye god hyghly that he sends you such food at
your need to your bodily sustenau^ce. Thus must ye fast against glotonye against
pride / that is but vain glory of the world ye must put a way al such
thoughts of pride and hyghnes in heart and be meke and lowly in heart. And
think how a man is borne feeble syke and full poor / how he gooth every day a
Journey toward his death while he lives in this world / and at the last comes
death and casts him down in bed / and lies there syghynge and gronynge and
changes both hyde and hew. Then stynketh his breath / and his lyppes wexen
blake / his face pale / and his eyes yelowe / and his tongue engleimed and his
nose black his teth fallen a way and his flesh wyderyth and tourneth to
earth. And then at the last with great syghynge gives up the ghoost and then
lies there as earth / and so puts it in to the earth Cito obliuisceris) And
so he shall be sone forgoten. Therefore I pray you take this sadly in your mind
/ and I hope ye shall put a way pride. Then against coueytyse ye must have
alsoo abstynence / and that is for say or understand that ye absteyne your
self from worldely couetyse and vanytes / and they that have been herd in
keeping of goods / and ever has gadrede together and fast has keep it. But
now should ye be as ready to pay and content that ye be in debt unto / both
to god and to the world. And also to restore again that ye have taken
wrongfully. And give to poor people mete and drink and clothes and other
things such as is needful unto them. And the fete that has gone all this
year besely to get goods of the world. Now must ye be also besy to goo and
give the poor people / unto them that have need as we have in the gospel
(Date et dabitur vobis) Give and god will give you. For the hondes that will
not give alms they be full unworthy to be acceptable unto god. Also ye must
go full besely unto gods service and in pylgrymages going / and to all manner
good deeds of alms. And he that has been besy to gader good. Now should he
spare from his own mouth for to give the poor nedy / that is gods people /
for that pleases god full much and ^etely helps the soul (Elemosina a
morte liberat) Alms delyuereth ye soul from death Sicut aqua extinguit ignem:
ita elemosina extinguit pctm^) For right as water quenches fire / right so
alms deeds quenches sin / wherefore the prophet says thus (Date et dabitur
vobis) Give ye and god will give you (Dimitte et dimittemini) Forgive and god
will forgive you / but now all is little enough to feed your bodies / that
no thing ye may give to poor bodies for gods sake.

Narracio
We read that there was a worthy knight and a rich man of goods and a mighty
man of his hondes / but he cherysshed much his body with delycate mete and
deyntes / but at the last he dyed and was buried in a tomb of stone / than
had he a sone that was a worthy man and used every day in custom too say
(De profundis) for his faders soul by his tomb. So upon a day he made a
great feast to all the worthy states in the country about him when they
should wasshe and goo to mete / this man bethoughte him how he had not said
(De profundis) and prayed the people to abide tylle had had said his
deuocions. And they said they would goo with him and did so. Than there fell
such a lust in this man's heart that he must needs se his faders tomb
opened or else him thought he should dye. And so made the people to open the
tomb. Than anon was he ware of a great black toode as black as any pytche
with eyes brynynge like fire that had beclypped his faders heart with her four
claws and gnewe fast thereon. He said. o fader much good mete has gone in
that throat and now art strangled with a foul hell hounde and an horrible
foul be. And anon he let goo close the tomb again and so went to mete.
And when he had served all the people / preuely he went forth and left child
and worship and all his goods and went unto Iherusalem and lived there among
beggars with other poor people in great pouerte all his life / and so dyed
when god would / and went to everlasting Joy as I hope. To the which Joy
god bring us all to Amen.

Dn^ica secunda quadragesime.
GOod men and women / this is ye second sunday in clean lent / wherefore like
as ye have all this year before made you honest and well besene in good array
to your body. Now should ye be as soon besye to make you a clean soul /
wherefore this time of lent is ordained to cleanse your conscience from all
manner rest and fylth of sin. So that ye may on Eester day with clean
conscience receive the body of your lord Ihesu Christ / wherefore Saint Poule
in the Epistle of this day says thus (Hec est voluntas dei) This is gods
will that ye should be besy and holy to keep your bodies in clennes for to
please god much / and to pray to him to make his vessel clean against the
comnynge of our lord Ihesu Christ. Than shall ye understand that this vessel
is man's conscience. And that is a good vessel that keeps all good things
that is put therein tylle the day of dome for that day every man's vessel.
That is to say every man's conscience shall be opened / and the world shall
se what a man has kept therein be it better or worse / fair or foul / than
he that brings a clean vessel before the hye Judge shall be well allowed. Than
how that a man shall keep his vessel clean / holy Church techeth by an
ensample of ye holy patryarke Jacob that is red and song of all this weke*
Jacob had a fader the which was called Ysaac / and his mother Rebecca / and
she had two chylderne at one birth / and that was first borne hight Esau
/ and that ^ther Jacob / but for this storye is long we shall take at this
time that is most needful and leave ye other. Than had god given his patryarke
Ysaac such grace yt what blessing he gave his chylderne they should have it.
Than for Ysaac was old and blind and nyghe his death. He said to his sone
Esau (Affer michi de venatio^e tua) Goo and hunte and get me some mete that I
might ete of (Vt benedicam tibi priusquam moriar) So that I may give the my
blyssynge or I dye. But when Esau was gone. Jacob the younger by techynge of his
mother gate his faders blessing / and his fader said to him (Esto dominus
fratrum tuorum. Be thou lord of all thy brethren / and so made hy^ his heir
/ and blyssed all ye blyssed hy^. And wha^ esau was come home and wist this /
he hated Jacob his brod and thought to slay him. Than Jacob by counseyll of his
mother went out of the country to an uncle that he had that hight Laban. And
as he went by the way in a country of evil people living / he durst not
long with them abide / but lay all the night in ye field by ye way and laid a
stone under his heed and slepte (Viditque in somnis scalam stan / tem super
terra^) And in this sleep him thought he saw a ladder that stood on the earth /
and raught up to heaven / and god Joined to the ladder (Angelos quoque dei
ansendentes et descendentes) And angels of god going up and down. Than god
spoke to him and said. I am god of Abraham and Ysaac / and I will give the this
land and be thy ke / per in the way. Than a woke Jacob and said (Vere dominus
est in loco isto et ego nesciebam) Forsooth god is in this place and I wyste it
not / and so went forth to his uncle and was with him.xx. winter and more
his servant / and wedded his daughters that one hyghte Rachell. And that other
Lya / and when he had been tthere so long / he desired to go home again in to
his own country. And take with him his wives and his chylderne / and al his
catel and went forth. Then came there too him a multitude of aungelles to
help him. And than when Jacob came to a forde he made all his meyne to goo
before with his catell / and him self abode behind in his prayers. And as he
prayed there came an Angel to him in likeness of a man and wrastled with him
all the night tylle on the morn / and took him by the great senowe of his
thygh and so made him for to halte ever after / and than said the angel to
Jacob what is thy name. He answered and said Jacob. Nay said he thou shalt not
longer be called Jacob / but Israel shall be thy name / and blyssed him and
left him there halting / and thus he went home to his own country with
great prosperyte. And ye shall understand this storye is read in holy church
in this ensaumple of all good servants ye desire to get the blessing of the
fader of heaven and to have the heritage that is there. He must first be Jacob
and after Israel / for Jacob is to understand a wrasteler / and Israel a man
that sees god. For he that will see god / he must wrestle here in earth with
the bad angel that is the fend / and with his own flesh / as thus when he
has done a great horyble sin then the fend puts to him a great shame
in his heart so that he dare not tell it. Then must he wrastell with the
fend and the flesh and over come him and tell out his sin openly with all
the cyrcumstaunce of his sin / then will his flesh be a ferde and a shamed
thereof. But then he must wrestle with his flesh strongly / and make it to
tell his sins / and to do penance after the counsel of his ghostly fader /
taking ye ensample of the woman of far countres that came to Christ as the
gospel says (Ecce mulier chananee a finibus illis egressa clamauit dice^s)
How the woman of chananee came to Christ to get hele for her daughter that was
troubled with a fend and said (Ihesu fill david miserere mei) Ihesu the sone of
david have mercy on me. Then our lord answered (Non est bonum sumere panem
filiorum et dare canibus It is not good to take bread of chylderne and give it
to the hounds (Nam et catuli edent de mensa dominorum suorum Yes lord for why
whelps ete of the crommes that fallen from their lords board / then said
our lord (Mulier magna est fides tua fiat tibi sicut vis) O woman thou have
agrete faith wherefore as thou wylt thy daughter be saved and so was her
daughter hoole. This woman and her daughter betokens a man that his
conscience trauayleth with a fend of dedely sin / that may not be helped /
but he goo to god and there shryue him to the priest sparynge for no rebuke
another for shame nor for dread / but mekely suffer all that thy ghostly fader
says unto the and then take his penance mekely with a contryte heart and
with a good devotion / and so he shall be delivered of the fend that has
trauayled his conscience. For a man that has done an horyble sin / and shall
be saved / he shall never have rest in his conscience till he be shryuen thereof.
For right as a dog gnaweth on a bone his hard / right so his sin gnaweth his
conscience. Showing by experyence how hou^des of hell shall gnawe his soul
ever more without rest that deyeth wyttyngely in deedly sin / that he have been shryuen of and would it not. Ensample of a woman.

Narracio
There was a woman that had done an horyble sin And would feign have been
shryuen thereof / and durst not Then came our lord to her bodily and said my
daughter why shryuest thou not of thy sin. Lord I may not for shame. Than
said our lord give me thy hand / and put her hand in to his side even to his
herteaad said. woman what felest thou / and then she quaked for fere and said
Lord I feel thine heart. Then said our lord / be thou no more ashamed too
show me thy heart than I do let the feel mine. Then this woman a rose and
with light saw her hand yt was all blody and wodle have washed it of / but
it would not till on the morrow that she was shryuen / and then was her hand
clean as it was before and she was clean of all her sins and thus she was
made clean both body and soul.

Dn^ica terria quadragesime
GOod men and women this is the third sunday in clean lent / wherefore we read
in the gospel of this day and says thus (Erat Ihesus euciens demoniu^. How
our lord kest out a fend of a dombe man / and when ye fend was out (Locutus
est mutus). Than the dombe man spoke By this dumb many shall understand all
tho that have no might to shryue them with their tounges to tell their sy^ne /
but tarry as long as they may for shame of the people and it were not for
shame of the world in lenten nor out of they would never come to shryfte / and
that makes the fend / for he is that man or woman wheder it be that is so
disposed. Therefore ye that be be hynde / come and shryue you and make you clean
and have this dombe man out of your mind / and cast away ye fend. But there
ben many that be not yet shryuen / what shall I do there they will say they
can not shryue them / they wot not what. But I may say to you of many an
idle word / and many an evil thought and many a cursyd deed / many great
oaths / many an evil word that ye have spoke. I wot ye can not tell for ye
have been so long fro confession / but I say to you that vnknowynges shall
not excuse you at the day of dome. For when ye have offended god in many
trespaces that hurted the soul / anon ye should make you clean and keep it in
your-mynde. But ye will not come tylle it be forgoten / and so yet when ye
come to shryfte ye ben dombe / for the fend is within you / for ye wene many
times that it is no sin to speak an idle word to make the people to laughe /
nor to swear a great oath / it does no harm. But saint Poule in his pystle
forbedeth every man to speak idle words / and says thus (Dico autem vobis
quod omne verbum o^iosum quod locuti fuerint homines reddent rationem in die
iudicii) Forsooth I say to you that ye shall give a reckoning for every idle
word that ye speak / and none shall pass unpunished at the dredefull day
of dome / and therefore let all idle words and harlotrye / and rybandrye be.
And if that ye will so do / that is worship to god / and prouffyte to the
speker / for there as harlotrye is much spoken / it is much in mind. For the
tongue she with ye haboundaunce of heart / so first in thought / after in his
speaking. It causes much people to fall in to sin of deed doing
(Vnusquisque temptatur a concupiscentia) First every man is tempted to sin by
lust of thought thereon (Concupiscentia generat peccatum) and the lust
engenders sin (Peccatum cum consummatu^ fuerit generat morte^) And when the
sin is done / it causes dampnacyon everlasting death / that is in speaking
rybaudrye and harlotrye for the lust that a man has in speaking is great sin.

Narratio
We find of an abbess that was a clean woman as for any deed of sin / but
she had great lust to speak thereof. So when she was deed and buried in the
church / the night after came fendes and took up the body and all to beat it
with brennynge scourges from the nauel upward / that it was as black as any
pytche / but fro the navel downewarde it shone as bright as the son / and
the fendes might do it no harm. And ever as the fendes beat her / she cried
peteously that two of her systers that were sexstens were sore a ferde / but
either comforted other / so that they went nere till they wyste how it was.
Than spoke the spyryte to her systerne and said / ye know well that I was
clean maiden as for any deed / but I had great lust to speak of sin / that
party has great pain as ye may se wherefore I pray you systerne pray for me
/ for by your prayers I may be helped and beware by me in time coming. Here
by ye may se what peril it is for to speak idle words and harlotrye speech /
wherefore this same pystle says thus (Abstinetis vos a fornicacione) Absteyne
you from fornicacyon and all sins and walk with christ in love and pease as
christ did / that suffered for us many scorns rebukes and despytes / and al he
took mekely patiently and in charity / gyuynge ensample to all christian people
to do the same. But he that will live in rest and pease shall have great
persecucyon of evil people. But and he suffer it mekely he is a martyr before
god / and in confortynge of this the holy church makes mind and mencyon as
thus. We read of an holy man that was called Joseph that suffered great
persecucyon but he suffered mekely / therefore god brought him to great worship
and prosperyte / as ye shall here / but for this hystorye is long / therefore
we shall take that is most needful at this time. This Joseph had a fader
named Jacob and had.xi. sons brethren to Joseph / But his fader loved him
most specially of all other / and therefore his brethren hated him the more.
And in especyall for a dreme that he dremed whereby they supposed all that he
should have be lord over them all and al they should him worship / and anon
they took their counceyll together and said (Venite itaque occidamuus illu^)
Let us go therefore and slay him. But yet they durst not for dread of god /
anon (Ve^dider^t eu^ in egipto) They sold him in to Egypt to a man for thyrty
pens / as god was sold. And therefore god was with him / so a man that was
steward to the king Pharao bought him that was named Putyphar. But ye fend
had great enmyte toward Joseph and tempted ye lady sore on him (Post multos
itaque dies iniecit domina oculos i^ Joseph et ait. veni dormi mecu^) So on a
day the lady looked on Joseph and took him by the mantell and said / come and
sleep with me. And soon as Joseph understood her meaning / anon he yede and
fled his way / and left his mantell there. Then this woman cried and
told her husbonde how Joseph would have lain by her. And for he should not
say nay she kept his mantell. Therefore the lord made to cast Joseph in
prison there as Pharao had put his boteler and his baker. As they fell a
sleep they dremed the which dreme they told to Joseph. And he said that the
king would restore his boteler to his office again within three days / and
the baker should be hanged within three days / and as he said so it was Then
happened so that the king dremed him self but there could no man tell what
should fall thereof / but by counsel of ye boteler / the king sent after
Joseph. And when ye king had told him his dreme. Joseph said that god sent
him a fair warning too puruey him by fore that should come after. And he said
there should come seven ple^teuous years of corn / and of all manner of fruytes
/ and vytayles / and after should come seven years the which people should
spend all that was gotten to fore. Then the king said I know no man could
puruey so well for such a thing as thou coudest / wherefore I make the
gretest under me of all my Realm and they shall do to the as unto meat thy
commau^demente. Then anon Joseph let make the gretest bernes that ever was
seen and gadred corn fast seven year. And sone after came seven years that all
thing was scars and dear. Then Jacob Joseph's fader herd how that there was
corn to sell in Egypt / and he sent thither his: x. sons for too by corn.
And when they came thither and saw Joseph they all fell down on their knees and
did worship unto him like as his dreme was for they knew not him but thought
that he had been the lord of the country but he knew them well enough. Then
he spoke to them in latin (Surge) And said they were spies that were come to
know of ye land. And they said n^^ they were all brethren and al one man
sons and an other brother they had that was at home with their fader. And
there was an other and they wist not whether he were on live or no / and that
they mente by Joseph / and to preue ye truth he made to bind one of them
that hight Symeon and said that he should a bide with him till that they had
set him that was at home. And so let fill their sackes with corn and preuely
put their money in too thyr sackes vnwytyng to them / and so when they came
home to their fader and put out their corn and they found their money and
told it to their fader / but then was he sorry for Symeon his sone that was
left behind in prison and more over that he must needs send for him which
he loved most. And that was Beniamyn Joseph's hole brother / for the other were
but half brethren to Joseph / but when Jacob failed corn he must needs send
for more / and then he sent forth Beniamyn. And when Joseph saw Beniamy^ he
might not forbere weeping / and a none delivered him Symeon and set them all
to mete and filled their sackes with corn and preuely put the cup that they
drank of in Beniamyns sack and bad them go their way. But a none after
Joseph sent after them and said / ye were too blame while they had so good
chere to bear a way the cup that ye drank of. Then they were heavy and sad
/ and said it was not so and he ransaked them by and by. And than they found
it in Benyamyns sack. Than came they again to Joseph sore weeping. And when
Joseph saw them all weep and his own brother Benyamyn made most sorrow for
it was founden with him. Than Joseph badde them all be of good chere for I am
your brother Joseph / and be no thing adred for god has sent me hither for
your profit and anon sent after his fader and so dwelled all together a
great while in that land with much prosperyt^ This storye is read this weke
in holy church / for gods chylderne should take ensample of old faders to
suffer trybulacyon and parsecucyon mekely in perfyte charity for gods sake as
he suffered for us for who that grudgeth against trybulacyon and persecucyon
that god sends must shryue him and take his penance for there is some people
that will say / why does god thus by me / what have I trespassed against hy^
they be in great peril for their pacye^ce For truly words may let much
grace.

Narratio.
We find in miracles of Wenefryde ye virgyne yt a man came to her on a night
upon.ii. cruches full of many manner syknes / and so by the help of god and
this holy vyrgyn this man was hole and so went where he would and hole day
in the abbaye and thanked hyghely god and this holy vyrgyn of his hele. So at
night he went to his bed in good hele. And on the morrow his syknes took
him again sorer than it did before and so leye cryenge that it was great pity
for to here. Then came a monk to him and asked hy^ what he had done that his
syknes was come again / and he said no thing. Then said the monk / were thou
shryuen sythen thou were hole. And he said nay I had no need / for I stale
another ox nor cow / nor did no grievous syn^e. Then thought the monk /
though a man do none deedly sin / he may do so many venyall sins so that
they may make a deedly sin / for right as a man may with many small corns
charge a strong horse / so may he lade his soul with so many small sins /
that he may fall in to ye pytte of hell. Then anon this man went to a
priest and shroue him and so was hole both in body and soul ever after by
confession and prayers of this holy vyrgyne Amen.

Dn^ica.iiii. quadragesime.
GOod men and women / this is the.iiii. sunday in lenten / the which holy
church makes mencyon of an holy prophet that was called Moses / the which
was a figure of our lord Ihesu Christ many year or our lord was borne. Then
as we read in holy church as Moses was in ye deserte of Synay god spoke to
him and said (Vidi afflictione^ populi mei que est in egipto clamore^ eius
audiui) Pharao ye king of Egypt oppressed so the people of Israel with
boundage and unreasonable works / and they for woo cried to me for socour and
help / wherefore go thou thither and bring them out of their boundage and I
shall be with the. Then bring them and offer them to me. I will bring them
in to a land of plenteuousenesse of all goods. So when he had taught Moses
how he should do. Moses went thither and gadered all the old people together
that knew ye prophecy how they should be ladde out of that land and said to
them as god badde him. Then were they full glad and went with him old
and young tylle they come to the reed se / and god was ever before them in the
day in a pyler as a cloud to refreshe them for the hete of the son / and in
ye night in a pyler of fire to light them fro harm of venym bestes. But when
that Pharao herd that Moses had forth this people / he took.ccc. charyots of
his own and.ccc. of ye land / and lx.M. horsemen and.ccc.M. fotemen went
after. and when Moses saw this people come / he prayed to god for help. And
god him self bad him smite the sea with his yerde (Et per cussit mare rubrum)
And when he had smyten ye see / he had a way for him and for his people / the sea cloue in two parties so that the water stood stylle on every side as an
hylle / and the ground was dry sonde. Then Moses went forth and all the
people after him. Then thought Pharao to have passed also and sewed after
with all his oost / but wha^ he had his oost within the sea / the water went
together and drowned him and all his oost. And when Moses saw that he and his
people were thus perysshed. He thanked god and was there seven days after /
and every day they went to the sea thanking god of their passage / making
great meledye that our lord had done so to them. And yet in mind hereof all
Eester weke we make solemn processyon to the font / that is the reed see.
Then went Moses forth with his people in to deserte tylle he come unto ye
hylle of Synay and there he left the people benethe (Stabat moses super
monte^) And Moses stood upon ye hylle there as god was / and there he was.xl.
days and.xl. nyghtes without mete or drink. Then god gave hy^.ii. tables of
stone in ye god wrote with his own fyngers the.x. commandments / and took
them Moses / and bad him to teache them to his people. And when Moses come
down to his people his face was as bright as the sone / and two spytes
stondy^ge on his heed like two horns so that ye people might not speak with
him for clerenes (Abscondit moses facie^ suam) Then Moses hid his face
with a kerchyef. Then in that one leef were written the three commandments
that longen to god / and those ben these. The first thou shalt worship thy god
and love him above all thing. For thou shalt dyrecte all manner thing to
gods will before thyn own / and sue his and not thyn own will. The second
commandment is this. Thou shalt not take in vain / that is for to say /
thou shalt not be called gods child as christian man and serve the fend /
for then that same is to yt but vain. Also thou shalt not swear by god nor
by no part of his body / nor by no thing yt he made / but in forderynge of
the truth / and yet when thou art constrained thereto. The third
commandment is. Thou shall keep thyn holy day / that is for to say / thou
shalt be erely up and late down too serve god on the holy day as you art the
werke-daye to thyn own work / as besy shalt thou be on the holy day for to
serve god. The fourth commandment is this. Thou shall worship thy fader and
thy mother that brought them to this world. Also thy godfader and thy godmoder
that made the a christian man / and thy fader under god that has cure and charge
of thy soul. The.v. is thou shall slay no man another with tongue nor with thy
hand nor with thy evil ensample. The.vi. is thou shalt stele no man's good
The.vii. is thou shalt do no lecherye. The.viii. is thou shalt bear no falls
witness. The.ix. is thou shall not coueyte thy neighbors goods ne no thing
that longs to him that is his / against his will. The.x. thou shall not desire
thy neighbors wife / nor counseyll her in no way to do evil / that should
be harm or vylonye to her husbonde^ These ben the.x. commandments the
which every christian man and woman is bound to keep. Thus was Moses a figure
and a token of Christ. Moses came before and gave the law / and Christ came
after and gave his grace and mercy. For in the same manner as Moses fette the
people out of Egypt thrughe the reed see to the hylle of Synay / in the same
wise Christ when he come by his prechynge and miracles doing / he fette the
people out of derkenes of sin and of all evil living thrughe the water of
baptysme to the hylle of virtuous living. And therefore he that will shryue him
clean / and leave his foul living / and keep the commandments of god / that
he made covenant to keep in his crystenynge / then shall he be encreaced
higher than any hylle in earth / yt is heaven. But he that will do thus / he
must be fed with five loves and two fysshes. we read this day in holy
church in the gospel how Christ fed five thousand people with five loves
and two fysshes. The first loofe the five is contrycyon of sin. The second
is shryfte of mouth. The third is satysfaccyon for their trespass. The fourth
is not to torn again to his sin / for he that is often aferde shall do
well. The fyfte is perseueraunce in good living. And the.two. fysshes ben good
orysons and almesdedes / for these be norysshed in waters / yt is weeping
teeres in devotion. These.ii. fysshes geten what they will.

Narracio.
It is written yt sometime was a man yt was called Pyers and was a rich man /
but he was so hard that there was no beggar that might get no good of him.
Then on a time it happened so that many beggars set together in a place /
and spoke of this Pyers how they might get no good of him. Then spoke one of
them as master and said. What will ye leye with me that I shall get no good
of hy^. And so they made a wager. And then went this man forth and came to
pyers place and sat hy^ down in ye porche at ye halle door and there a bode
till Pyers came / and anon as he saw Pyers he spoke so horrible to Pyers /
that for great anger / as his servants came by him with a basket of bread /
he took a loof / and with all his might he cast it at the beggars head and
smote him at the breast and said / stop thy mouth therewith that the devil
stop the. And a none the beggar caught the loof and ran his way too his
fellows and showed his loof and so he gate his wager. Then the next night
after it happened so that this Pyers was shryuen and brought to his bed and
so dyed / and a none fendes came too take his soul. But then was our lady ready
/ and bad them bring the soul to her / and so they did / then was there
nothing to help the soul / but only that loof that he cast to the beggar.
Then said the fendes he gave it against his will / therefore by right it should
not help him Then went our lady to her sone praynge him to grant the soul
to go to the body a gain to look if he would amend him. Then our lord bad
bear the soul gain too the body. And when the soul was with the body / anon
he satte up and gave a great syghynge / and called to him all his servants /
and told them at how hard a dome he was at. And he had be dampened had not
that loofe be that he cast at ye beggar. Therefore a none he made to selle his
good and dealed it to poor people for gods sake / and when he had done so /
he made him self an hermyte / and after was an holy man. Here by ye may well
wit how great that is almesdede and prayers / that made a man so preuy with
god / and so syker against the dome / for all that have done alms deeds for
gods sake shall be saved / if they be out of deedly sin. We find that
auoutry / that is for a man take an other man's wife / or a woman an other man
tha^ her husbonde it is a grievous sin / and that ye shall here by ensample.

Narracio.
There was sometime a man that made charke coals in a wood / and when he had
made a great fire he leye all the night thereby and so about mydnyght come
there a woman rennynge a fore a man on a black horse as fast as he might ride
and hunted her about with a naked sword all about the fire. And so at last
this man slew this moman and hew her all to pyeces and cast her in to the
fire / and rode again with all his might. So when this man saw this done
many nyghtes / then he went to his lord and told him all this matter.
Then was the lord abolde knight and said I will wit what all that mente /
and he come thither the night after and found it as the man had told. Then the
knight asked ye spyryte why he did so. Then he said he was such a man and
told his name / that was his servant a little tofore / and that woman was an
other knights wife / and he had leye by her / by her husbondes life / therefore
they were both put to that penance / and said the horse yt I ride on is ye
fend yt breneth me an.C. fold wors than any other fire might yt is in earth /
and that pain they must so suffer tylle they had help of good prayers /
masses / and almesdedes / and told him many other things. Then this knight
did all things that he said should be their help and so delivered them out
of this pain to everlasting bliss / the which god bring us all to Amen.

Dn^ica in passione.
Dear friends / this day called the sunday in passion weke / this day our
lord Ihesu christ begane his passion / for this day the Jews had such an
envy to him / by cause he told their defautes and vices meslyuynge. And so
for this cause they repreued him. So this day they were full assented to do
hy^ to death / and so they were boute often before. But they were let by
some thing / and most for fere of the common people for they held him a
prophet. But this day they knytte them together and fully accorded / that
they would spare for no thing / but he should be deed / wherefore as the
gospel tells / as Christ preched in the Themple the Jews rebuked hy^
spytuously and said (Nu^c cognouimus qa demoniu^ habes) Now know we that thou
have a fend with ye. And all was to tempte him to have made him speak some
evil words / by the which they might have put him to some repreef. And for
he told them that he was gods sone / they were ready to have stoned hy^ to
death / but he knew all their malice (Ihesus aute^ abscondit se et exiuit de
te^plo) Ihesus hyd him self and went out of ye Temple. Thus our lord this
day began his passion / wherefore holy church redeth this weke in the book of
Iheremye the prophet that first prophesied of crystes passion / and told how
and in what manner the Jews should do him to death Then ye shall understand
well that in the same wise yt the Jews pursued Christ to death. In the same wise
I fere gretely lest there ben much falls people that be crystened that pursuen
christ in heaven now. Holy saint Austyn says that they sin more grievously
that pursue him in heaven than the Jews did that pursueden him here in earth.
Then if ye wit which those ben / take heed how Christ marked them and said
thus (Qui ex deo est verba dei audit He that is of god hereth the word of god.
For he hereth not the word of god that swereth many great oaths full falsely /
these ben tho that pursuen him in heaven / that been glad in their hertes when
they have done a foul deed / and they grounden in foul cursyd living of
sin that will not amend them for prechynge nor techynge but ever do foul
deeds. And anon ben ready to fight and chy^^ whith them that tell them their
defautes / as it is showed by our lord Ihesu Christ. For the more harm is /
the ^^ndycyons of the people is such now a days that he shall have many
enemies that will say troth. And that I may preue by ensample.

Narracio.
There was sometime a mawmette in a Cite / that would tell where oony thing
was that was stolen or myssed and who that had it So it happed on a time
that a young man had stolen a thing and was ferde of this mawmette / and
anon he went to this mawmette and said thus / well I wot that thou may
do me a great shame and vylony / but by god that I believe upon and thou
dyscouer me I will break thy heed and so went forth his way. Then soon
after come they that myssed this good praynge the mawmette to tell them who
had it / and when they had long prayed / at last the mawmette spoke and
said / times ben changed / the people ben wors than they were who that says
the truth his heed shall be broken. So he that will say the truth he
shall be shente / and so the true man shall be hunted and so plucked that he
shall not wit to whom he shall speak / nor to whom he may tell his
counseyll in trust / for he that will sonest deceive him will sometime speak
the most fairest. It is written in the book of kings how there were two
knights that had great enemyte one to that other / that one hyghte Ioab and
that other Amasa / and this Ioab said to Amasa as they met heyle brother and
kyssed him / and with his other hand behind he slew him with his knyfe and
smote him too the heart. Thus it fayreth now a days by much people / they
speak full fair before the people / and behind them they will slay them
with a shrewde knyfe / that is with the evil and cursed tongue. These ben they
that pursued him in to heaven and set naught by gods word / for though if
they here it with their e^es but it synketh not down in their hertes wherefore
god playnethe him grievously by his Prophet Iheremye and said thus. What gylte
found your faders in me / if I have trespaced to you in any manner thing /
tell me / alas for shame of your obstynat pride. For god is in the right / and
so he treats with us that been in the wrong / he profred mercy or we ask
it. He makes him merciful to them that dyspleseth him and shows love there
none is worthy. Thus ben their hertes harder than any stone / and thus ben we
wors tha^ Jews / thus we be unkind to him that showed to us all kyndnes and
ever he cried to us and said. I have left on earth for ye should here my
scripture torn again to me and I will receive ye / lo my arms be all ready
spread to clyppe yt to me and my heed is ready bowed to kiss the / my sides is
all ready to show the mine heart / my hondes my feet bleden to show the what I
suffered for the / and thou tornest away from me / and if thou be in parfyte
life. I will give the tresour without nombre. I shall auaunce the with out
comparyson and give the rest without end so that all the fault shall be
found in the and not in me. Thus our lord profereth and techeth us and there
ben full few that will here him / but let all these words pass out of
their hertes and take none head / but all their mind is in richesse and in
prosperyte of this world in this present life / and take full little head of
the life that is coming. And how our lord Ihesu christ suffered death to bring
us to euerlasty^ge bliss / and therefore in Crystes passion makes ye prophet
a great lamentacyon for the great unkindness that he sees in mankind and says
thus. Thou man for vanyte thou stynkest for thy rusty sin / and therefore I
cry and weep for thou have on thy head a garlonde of flowers / and I for the
have one of thorns. Thou haste on thy hondes a payr of white gloves / and / I
for the have many blody wounds Thou haste thyn arms spradde to lead karolles
and daunces / and my arms for the ben nailed on a tree with sharp nails. Thou
haste thy clothes pynched full small / and my body for the is full of great
wheles / and one thing greueth me most of all / thou set not by my
passion that I suffered full sore for thy sake / but with thyn horrible swerynge
thou vpbroydeste me with many great oaths / by mine heed / eyes / arms / nails
/ and sides / wounds / feet / bones. By mine heart and by my passion that thou
sholdest do worship to thou do great despyte and repreef.

Narracio.
We read in the gestes of Romans that an Emperor sent a great man to a land
to be a Justice and or he came there no man in the country could swear an
oath but ye and nay. But when this Justice came among them he made the people
to swear on books in sessyons and gave them charges / and so the people took
ensample of this Justice to swear as he and his men did / by our lords
passion / sides / arms / nails / face / wou^des / blood / heart / and so
forth / and took it so in use / that the common people swore as they did.
Then on a day as the Justice satte in his office and charged the people /
there came tofore him a fair woman clothed all in grene and brought a fair
child in her lap all blody and all to martyred / his heed all to prycked /
his face dysfygured / his eyes out his arms broken / hondes smyten thorugh /
his nails cut / and his feet cut from his legs / his sides all to rent
/ his bowelles and his heart drawn out of his body. Then said this woman to
the Justice. What are they worthy to have that have thus do to my child. And
he said they were worthy to have death. Then said she / thou and thy men with
your horrible oaths have thus dysmembred my sweet sone Ihesu Christ that I am
mother unto / and thus ye have taught all your country / wherefore / thou shall
have thyn own dome / and so insyght of all the people the earth opened and the
Justice fell down in to hell / than the people were sore aghast / and they
left all such oaths and did amend their lives. And so let us leave all our
oaths and live as christian people should do / and reverence the passion of our
lord Ihesu christ / that was cause of our redempcyon By the which we shall
come to everlasting bliss that never shall have end Amen.

Dn^ica palmarum.
GOod friends / as ye know well this sunday is called palm sunday. But for
by cause that the service of this day is long. I will tell you shortly why
it is called palm sunday. As Saint Johan says / our lord Ihesu Christ came
to Betanye where he says (Venit ihesus betaneam vbi lazarus fuit mortuus quem
resuscitauit) And there he raised Lazar from death to live that had leye four
days deed / and this Lazar was brother unto Marye mawdeleyne and to Martha that
was an other sister. Then Ihesu Christ wyste that his passion was nyghe and
took Lazar with him / and riding on an ass came toward Iherusalem. And when
the people herd thereof / the people went against hy^ (Non propter ihesu^
ta^tum. sed vt lazarum viderent quem resuscitauit a mortuis) Not only for
Ihesu / but for to see Lazar that was risen from death to life / and also for
to see Christ and do him worship (Acceperunt ramos palmarum et ster neba^t in
via) They took branches of palm and other flowers / and strawed in the way
against his coming. And some spradde their clothes in the way and song
(Benedictus qui venit in nomine domini (Blessed be he that comes in the name
of our lord king of Israel / wherefore holy church makes this day
solemn processyon in mind of the processyon that was made against Christ. And
also Joy and myrthe of our rysynge from death to life / that had ley all this
year in dedly sin. Now I trust to god that we ben raised unto good living /
and more over the aungelles of heaven make great Joy of your vpreysynge out of
sin. And thus we take palm and flowers in the processyon as they did and go
in processyon knelynge to the cross in the worship and mind of him that was
done on the cross / worshyppynge and welcomynge him with song in to the
church / as the people did our lord in to ye cite of Iherusalem. Then
Johan Belet asked a questyon and says / yt our lord had the gretest worship
riding on the ass that ever he had in this world / then why worship we the
cross and not the ass. To this questyon he answers himself and says that
the worship of this world as Solomon said al is but vanyte and makes a man to
forgete his god and him self / there is great trybulaco^n disease and heaviness
it causes a man to think upon god and cry to him for socoure and help / and
to know him self. And therefore all christian people should put away all
worldly vanytees that brings much people to great myschefe / and many to
everlasting pain. We worship the cross for is was cause of our rede^pcyon
and salvation / and to bring us to everlasting Joy and bliss that we hope
to come to. Then anon when Christ was come to the cite of Iherusalem / he
went to the temple and drove out all the buyers and sellers that he found there
in and said. (Domus mea domus orationis vocabi). My house is a house of prayers /
and ye make it a den of thieves Thus our lord gave all christian people
ensample to leave by enge and selling on the holy day. And in especyall in the
church. An other it is why it is called palm sunday. For because that palm
betokens vyctorye / wherefore all christian people should bear palm in
processyon / in tokenynge yt he had foughten with the fend our enemy and
has ye vyctory of him by shryft of mouth / satysfaccyon with deed / mekely
done his penance with great contrycyon in his heart / and in these manner of
wise he overcame his goostly enemy the fend of hell. We read in the gestes
of Romans that it was ye manner and guyse sometime that if there were any land
that rebel against themperoure. Anon themperoure would send some worthy
knight with great puyssaunce to that land and put them down and make them
subgettes to the Emperor of Rome. And when this knight had done so than
should he be set in to a chair arrayed with clothes of gold in the best
wise / and a branch of palm in his hand in tokenynge that he had the
vyctory / and with great worship brought in to Rome / but when he came in to
any worthy Cite / then there should stand one by him and beat him in the
mouth with a branch of olyue saying thus. Know thy self / that is for to
understand. Though thou be great now and have the vyctory / make not to much
of thy self. For it may fortune an other time here after that thou may have
the worse / and torn to much vylonye / more than now to worship / and
therefore be not now to proud of thy self. And thus should ye beat your self
in the mouth of your soul with the branch of olyue / that is with the
virtue of mekenes. And so hold you in love and meke in heart / and evermore
dredynge and ferynge lest ye fall again in to sin. And so leave the
worship that ye have now. For trust thus truly / mekenes is that virtue that
most and soonest ouercometh your ghoostly enemy the fend / and soonest
gadreth a man to virtuous living. That we may have this virtue of meekness /
pacyence and charity to overcome our ghostly enemy the fend now and ever
Amen.

Feria.iiii. post festum palmarum.
Dear friends ye shall understand that holy church used these three days and
says service in the even tide / that is meekness / wherefore we call it
tenebre / but holy church calls it tenebris. Then why this service is thus
done in meekness / holy faders tellen for three causes. One is the night before
that our lord was taken / he went unto ye mount of Olyuete and prayed thus
(Pater mi si possible est: transeat calix iste) My fader if it be possible that
this bitter passion may pass fro me / if it were the faders will and else not.
And for dread and fere of that bitter passyo^ that he felt in spyryte / he
swette both blood and watyr. And an other cause is this / that anon after
mydnyghte came Judas with fyfty knights and much other people to take Christ
And for it was derke / and they could not well know him from saint James he
was so like Christ. Therefore Judas said (Quem osculatus fuero tenete eum) For
sothe quod he / him that I shall kiss / it is / and take ye him for saint
James was so like our sauyoure Ihesu Christ that the most part of all the
people called him Crystys own brother. And thus as ye have herd Judas betrayed
his own master / and thus was our savior Ihesu christ take in meekness / and
which all the spyte and enmyte that the Jews could do unto him / and alsoo
betynge our savior Ihesu Christ and alsoo spyttynge in his blyssed face And
alsoo the third cause was when our sauyoure Ihesu Christ was spredde naked
upon the holy cross and also when his holy hondes and his feet hanged from
nine of the clock unto none. Then ye should have seen the son with draw
her light / and it was so obscure and derke through all the world showing
/ and understanding that the maker of the light was at that same time payned
unto death. And for three certain causes / the service in the night is done in
derkenes and the which service makes mencyon / how as Judas betrayed our
sauyoure and lord Ihesu Christ with the Jews. And then after that the Jews
came as preuely as they could for fere and dread of the common people wherefore
as this day there is no belle ronge unto service / but sown made of wood or
of tree / whereby all christian people may have knowledge and understanding for to
come unto this holy service preuely and secretly without making any manner of
noise. And more over and all that the people should speak of coming and going
should sown of tree that is for to say the holy cross that our sauyoure
Ihesu Christ was spredde upon and of his bitter passyo^ and also of the words
that our sauyoure Ihesu Christ spoke hanging on the cross and also how he
said unto his blyssed mother (Mulier ecce filius tuus) Woman se thy sone / and
then our lord commanded his blyssed mother unto saint Johan the
Euangelyste in keeping. And what said the thief that henge by him and he said
thus (Domyne qua^do veneris in regnu^ tuum memento mei (Lord when thou come
into thy kyngedome have mind on me. And then our savior Ihesu christ said
unto him (Hodie mecum eris in paradiso (This day thou shalt be with me in
paradyse / and how he be took his spyryte into his faders hondes and said (In
manus tuas domine. etc). And so he yielded up the ghooste. Thus coming and
going to the church all christian people should come and leave vanyte and idle
talking / and speak oonely unto the cross / that is our redempcyon. and an
other cause is when yt Judas had betrayed christ / and saw by his treason he
should be deed / anon he fell in dyspayre and henge hy^ self on a tree / and
then he dyspleased more christ for that deed than for all the trespace that he
had done to fore / for christ is so merciful / that and he had asked mercy he
should have had mercy Also at this service he set certain candels in the
quere after ye use in some place more than in some other as the use is the
which ben quenched one after the other. in tokenynge of crystys dyscyples how
they went a way each after other / but when al these candels ben taken a way
and the light gone yet one a bydeth still a while till ye clerks have song
the kyryes / and these verses / the which betoken the wymmen that made
lamentacyon at Crystys sepulcre. Then that candell is brought again and
another light there / and that betokens our blessed lady. for all the faith
was lost save oonely our lady / and of her al other were informed and taught.
Also it betokens Christ him self that was in his manhood deed and laid in ye
sepulcre and the third day a rose from death to life a gain and gave light
by love to all that were deed and quenched by dyspayre. The strokes that the
priest gives on the book betokens the clappes of thonder / when Christ brake
hell yates and dyspoyled them and fet out Adam and Eve and all yt he had
bought with his bitter passion. Now have ye herd somewhat what this service
betokens and think there upon and be not unkind to your lord god that
suffered all this for you. For unkindness is a sin that stynketh in the sight
of god as saint Ambrose says that there may no man find a pain great
enough to for punysshe unkindness / and that ye shall here by ensample.

Narracio.
I find that Alysaunder Neham tells how that there was sometime a knight the
which went out of his own country far into a strange land to seek
adventures / and it happened that he came into a great forest / and there he
herd a great noise of a best that seemed in dyspayre and then he would wete
what it mente / and went nere / and saw how a great horyble adder of a great
length beclypped a lion and bound him to a tree as he lay and slepte and wha^
the lion a woke he found himself bound and might not help hy^ self he made
an horrible noise desiring help. The knight would feign have helped him / but
he drade when he was louse lest he would have fallen to him. But because he was
a knight and the lion was the king of all beestes in that dystresse / he took
his sword and did smite the adder asonder / then ye lion fell to ye knights
fete and always after he followed the knight / and every night this lion lay at
his beds feet / and in every battle this lion was ready to help his master
in so much that the people spoke unto the knight of the lion / yet by
counsel of the people he had the lion insuspecte / wherefore when he went
intoo his own country a gain pryuely whiles the lion slepte he took ye water
and went to the ship and sailed forth And when this lion awoke and myssed his
master / anon he gave a great rorynge and went after him in to the sea / and
swa^me after him as long as he might / and when his might failed him then he
was drowned. By this knight ye may understand gods sone of heaven that come
out of far country / that was out of heaven in to this world / and was
bound for mankind with this old adder the fend to a tree of Inobedyence /
wherefore with the sharp sword / that was his passion he losed mankind out
of his bounds / and made him free to goo where he would. And therefore all
christian people ben bound to worship him and thank him for his losing and
to be buxom to him all time that they have life / and follow and sewe the lore
of holy church / and he shall pass thrughe ye water / that is to say through
the pain of death and so he shall come to the Joy that ever shall last
without end / to the which god bring us all to Amen.

Diverse questyons.
MAny will ask diverse questyons of the service of these days of such
priests as they suppose can not make no ready answer / but put hy^ to shame
and do to him vylonye and repreef wherefore I have tyteled which be nedeful for
every priest to know / and if he will look on it and keep the^ redely in heart
/ he may make ready an were and so it shall be to hy^ both profit and worship.
First if a man ask why shere-thursday is called so Ye may say that in holy
church it is called (Cena domini (Our lords souper day. For that day he
souped with his discyples openly and after souper he gave them his flesh and
his blood too ete and to drink and said thus. Accipite et manducate hoc est
corpus meu^) Take ye this and ete it / for it is mine own body / and anon
after he wysshe his own dyscyples feet / and showing what mekenes that was in
him and for ye great love that he had to them. It is also in English called
sherthoursday for in old faders days the people would that day shere their
hedes and clyppe their berdes and polle their hedes / and so make them honest
a yenst Ester day. For on good friday they do their bodies none ease / but
suffer penance in mind of him that / that day suffered his passion for all man
kind. On ester even it is time to here their service and after service make
holy day. It is written in the life of a saint that he was so besy on the
saturday before none that he made a man to shave him at after none / then was
the fend ready and gadred up the here is. Then this holy man saw that and
commanded him for to tell why he did so Then said he thou do no reverence
unto thy holy day / therefore I will keep these here is till the day of dome in
great repreef to the / then anon he left of shauynge and took these here is
from the fend and made them too brenne in his own hand to suffer penance
and so a bode vnshauen till the monday after. This is said to al thoo in
repreef of them that worship not the saturday at after none. Then as Johan
Bellet says / on sherthursday a man should do polle his here and clyppe his
berde / and a priest should shave his crown so that there should nothing be
by twene god and him. For here is come of veins and of humors of the stomach /
and they should pare their nails of hondes and feet that comes of superfluyte
of the fylthe with out forth / and then shryue them and make them clean
within his soul as with out. And thus make them clean both with in and with
out. The veyle that all this lent has be drawn by twene us and the quere
betokens the passion that was hid and unknown till the day came the which
these days be done a way / and the awter openly showed to all the people. For
these days Christ suffered his passion openly that he had hanging on the
cross saying (Consu^matum est) It is ended / that is to say. Now the
prophesye of my passion has an end / wherefore the clothes of mine awter ben
taken a way. For Crystys clothes were take a way from him / and so was done
naked on the cross / save our lady his mother wound a karchyf about him to
cover his members. The auter stone betokens Crystys body that was drawn on
the cross as a sky^ne of parchement on a harowe / so that al his bones might
be told / and the besoms that the awter is wesshen with betokens the scorges
that they beat our lords body with and the thorns that he was crowned with.
The water and the wine that it is wasshen with betokens the blood and the
water yt ran down from his wounds that was in his side peryshed with a
spear. The wine that is pored upon the awter on the five crosses betokens the
blood that ra^ne down from his precypall wounds of his body. Also this day
is no paxe given at ye mass / for Judas betrayed Christ this night with a kiss
/ thus was the prophesye of his passion this day ended / wherefore as this
night when he had souped / he made the sacrament of his own body and gave it
to his dyscyples to ete and drink / and began the sacrament of the mass and
of the new law and after souper he wysshe his discyples feet / that was a
manner of the new law full out. For as he said to peter he that is wasshen and
is clean of dedly sin has no need to be wasshen it betokens the afflyccyon
of dedly sin And then if the people ask why priests do not Mass after
souper as Christ did. It was turned in to more honest and more salvation to
man's soul. For as Haymo tells upon ye pystle of saint Poule that many in
the beginning of the faith come to the church on sherethurdaye / and those
that were rich brought mete and drink with them / and eten and drank their
bellyes full and then at night took their housell / and said that christ
gave them ensample / but when the rich ete and drank to much the poor
people abides without tylle after the rich has done sore an hu^gred and
then ete of the releef that they left / and so after the people took their
housell / where as the pystle of this day tells / saint Poule rebuked them
thereof / and turned that foul use in to more honest / clennesse and holiness
/ that is for to say at mass fasting all the people to take their housell
fasting. On Eester even the pascall is made the chyef tapre in the church /
so is christ chyef above all ye saints in heaven. The pascall also betokens
the pyler of light fire that went before Moses and the chyldern of Israel
when Moses ladde them out of Egypt in to the land of byhest / that is
Iherusalem / and so they passed save and sound. And so seven days after
they come all unto the sea and thanked god for their passage. And in mind here
of holy church uses all the Eester weke to goo a processyon to the font /
that is now the reed see to all christian people that been crystened in the font.
For the water in the font betokens the reed see / for blood and water is
the wound that were in Crystes side in the which power of Pharao the fend of
hell is drowned and all his might lost / and Christian people saved and for the
font is hallowed on Eester even and on wytson even / for in the beginning all
chyldern abode too be crystened unto these two days / and to be crystened at
the font halowynge. But now for by cause that many in so long abydy^ge were
deed withouten crystendome / therefore holy church ordained now to christian all
times of the year save eight days by fore these euyns / that child shall a
bide too the font halowynge if it may for peril of death and else not / thus
is the pascall hallowed by light with the new fire. And of it all other tapres
and candelles ben light for all holiness and good techynge and good living
comes of christ / and techynge of holy church and lyghteth them in crystes
passion with brennyng love. and charity. Pyeces of conscience ben stycked in
the pascall in the manner of a cross those be token the five wounds of our
lord As Bede says / that he suffered in his body / that shall be fresshe and
sweet as any enscence till the day of dome to great repreef to all that shall be
dampened that believe not in crystes passyo^ and will not ask mercy and for
yeuenes of their sins. In the font halowynge the preeste casts water in
four parties of the font / for christ had his dyscyples going prechynge and
techynge in four parties of crystendome. In the name of the fader and the sone
and the holy ghoost. And after the priest bretheth on the water / for the holy
ghost in making of the world was borne on waters. For when god for Adams sin
cursyd the earth and the land / he cursed not the water / wherefore it is
lawful for a man to ete in lenten that ye comes of the water. After he
droppeth the wexe in to the water of a candell brennyng the which betokens
the ma^hode of christ that was fulled in water / and puts oil and creme in
the water. For by ye virtue of the sacrament those that been in heaven and in
earth be Joined to gyder / and that was preued by Crystes baptysme / for there
the fader of heaven spoke and said (Hic est filius meus dilectus in quo mi^hi
been co^placui) This is my well-beloved sone that will please me. And the holy
ghoost (Sicut columba) As a white douue. Thus was the ^onte hallowed two times
in ye year / at whytsontyde and Ester / when the people is brought out of
thraldum by Crystes passion fro ye danger of the fend / and at wytsontyde.
For then is the holy ghoost given in remyssyon of all sins. Then from the
font the people gone to the quere singing the letanye / prayenge all the
saints in heaven to pray to god to give to all yt ben christian to keep that
worthy sacrament to gods pleasaunce / and the covenant that they have made
in their crystenynge. Then the priest gooth to mass For Christ that is heed
of all holy church is not risen. Kyryeleyson is said / for in every prayer in
especyall in the mass it is great need to ask help and socour of god to keep
us from all manner of temptacyon that the fend puts in us and namely in
gods service (Gloria in excelsis (is said. For the fader of heaven has great
Joy to behold the people that his sone has bought with his passion / and to
see them in peace rest and charity each one with other. The greyle is not said
/ for those that been new crystened ben not yet parfyte to walk in grace of
virtues (Alleuya) is said / for it is great Joy to angels to see by
crystenynge the nombre of them restored again After (alleluya) a tract is said
high songen / for though by crystenynge they be washed from sin / yet
must they traueyll besely to keep them from comberaunce of the fend that they
fall not in to deedly sin. The offertory is said / for the women that comen
with oynementes to offer to Crystes body they found hy^ not in his tomb
(Agnus dei) is said / but no paxe is given / for Christ that is heed of peace is
not risen. The postcomyn is not said. For those that been new crystened should
not be houseled this day / but on the morrow. For in old time there came to
crystenynge people of great age. Then a short euensonge is done / for the
chyldern that were not crystened whereof gretely they were noyed with sykenes of
cold of long service. Then it is ends under a short colet. All ye
sacrament of crystenynge is ended in the passion of Christ by the which all
christian people were restored to everlasting bliss. To ye which god bring us
all amen

In die parasceues.
GOod friends this day is called good frydaye. For all that our lord Ihesu
christ suffered this day turned us to great Joy / for this day he suffered
passion under ponce Pylate for our sake / It is an old saw that a foul
beginning has a foul ending. Now se how this Pylate began cursedly and
ends full wretchedly. For as saint Austyn says Cursed living first asks
a cursed end / after he that forgeteth him self here in his living / is full
like to forgete himself in his last end. This Pylate was a knights sone that
was called Tyrus / that he gate him on a woman that hight Pyle / and this
woman's fader hight Ate. So when this child was borne they set his moders
name and the grande fader after / and so by both names called him Pylate.
Then after when he was three year of aege his mother brought him to the kings
court. Than had the knight an other sone nigh like to Pylates aege. But for
this knights sone was in all rule more gentyller / more manfully / more goodly
/ more beloved than this Pylate / so for hate and envy thereof this Pylate on a
day slew this knights sone / Then was the knight wonder sorry / but yet he
would not sle Pylate and sent him to Rome to be there in hostage for a trybute
yt the knight should pay to the emperor. Than it happed yt the king of france
had sent his sone thither for ye same cause. The^ for this cause when Pylate
saw that he was more beloved and cherysshed / therefore this Pilate slew hy^
Then for he was so cursed the Emperor by counceyle of ye Romans sent Pylate
in to a country that was called Po^ce where that the people of the country were
so cursed yt they slew any yt came to be their master over them. So when
Pylate came thither / he applied him to their manners / so yt with wyles and
subtylte he overcame them and had the maystry and gate his name and was called
Pylate of Ponce / and had great domynacyon and power. Then the king of
Iherusalem sent for him and made him lyuetenaunt under hy^ of the land of Jury
/ and for Pylate lyked well thoffyce / pryuely he sent to the emperor and had
his office confermed of him vnwetynge to the king Herod that time being
king. Wherefore when king Herod herd what he had done he was so wroth that
they were enmyes unto the time yt our lord Ihesu christ was take / and than
they became friends again and fell both in to one assent of Crystes death
Then it happened afterward ye the emperor fell seek and sent for Christ for to
hele him / for it was told him that Christ heled all them that ever would come
to him of al manner sekenes what so ever it had be. But then had Pylate done him
to death or the messenger came. Then when the emperor understood that he sent
for Pylate and made him come to him. And as Pylate herd this he was sore
aferde and took on crystes cote / and so when he came to Rome to the emperor /
all they that were in presence made Pylate good chere all the while that he had
on Crystes cote. And the emperor swore before that he should be deed. Then
took they of the cote and anon as the cote was of / the Emperor was sore
wroth with Pylate that he put him in to a prison till he had taken counceyl
what death he should deye on. Then as soon as Pylate wist and understood
that he should be deed / he took his own knyfe and slew him self therewith.
And when the Emperor herd thereof and did understand that he had slain
him self with his knyfe / then anon he commanded for to bind a great stone
about the foresaid Pylates neck and for to cast him in to the river of Rome
that is named Tyber without ever for to be seen of the people^ Then when he
was casten therein the fendes made such a noise there about that all the cite
of Rome was sore afreyed. Then when the Emperor saw this / he made to take
him up again. And then was he cast in to a water that was bytwix two hye
hills. And so long time after there was in the water many horrible syghtes
seen about that cursed man. Thus our lord Ihesu Christ suffered passion and
death for all mankind / And first when he was taken they did buffet him and
stryped him naked / and beat him with scourges (A vertice capitis vsque ad
plantas pedum non fuit in eo sanitas. That from the highest place of his heed to
the soole of his feet was no thing left hole on him but all raw. And after
made a crown of thorns and set it on his heed and beat it down with staves
of reed that it perysshed his brain. And when they had payned him so / they
ladde him forth all blody (Admonte^ caluarie) To the mount of Caluarye to
the end of death / yet women of the cite wha^ they see him so foul faren with
and all to lugged and to drawn / for very pity they wept upon him. Then
said our lord to them (Nolite flere super me. sed super vos and filios
vestros) Ye women of Iherusalem weep ye not for me / but upon you and your
chyldern. For there shall days come / in the which ye shall bliss the wombes
that were barayne and the pappes that never gave souke. Thus our lord preched
before the vengeance that fylle after upon Iherusalem. The which prophecye
Iheremye the prophet spoke of / that is read in holy church these three days
at tenebras / the which was so horrible of many diverse myschyues / and in
especyall of hungre / that chyldern lay deed for hungre in the streets. Then
was there a waman that was come of great birth / that for hungre took her
own child that was deed with her pappes and slew it and parted it in two
parties / and than she roasted half and the other half she kept tylle on the
morrow. Then as the people came by the street they had sauoure of the roast
and anon they came in to have had part thereof. And when they saw the mother
roste her own child. and soon they were heavy and foul dysmayed / and would
not ete thereof but went their way forth again. Then took the mother of that
child and ete thereof / and said in this manner wise. This is mine own sone and
mine own child that I bare of my body / and fed it with my pappes but I will
rather ete it than deye for hungre / therefore I tell you this to show you
somewhat of the vengeance that fylle on Iherusalem after the death of our
lord Ihesu Christ. Then they ladde him to ye mount of Caluarye and there they
streyned him so on the cross that every bone of his body might be known one
from an other. And nailed him hand and foot to the cross and they lift up
the cross and the boody together / and with a great peyce they let the cross
and the body fall down together in to the mortesse / that all the body dasshed
and his bones craked / and his Joints and veins braste out of blood sides /
arms / legs / feet / and hondes / so that there was no blood left in him.
And yet they took a clothe while the blood was hot / and wonde it about his
body tylle the blood was cold / and then they drew away the clothe and
pulled away the flesh fro the bones. This was a great pity. And so when he
should deye / he began as Johan belet says (Deus meus respice in me) And so
said all the verses suynge tylle he come unto that verse (In te dn^e speraui)
And so at this verse (In manus tuas dn^e commendo spiritum meum. redemisti
me domine deus veritatis) There he gave up the spyryte. This is a great
ensample that our lord Ihesu Christ gave to all christian people that every man
should have in mind these verses / and he that can them say / and say them
every day / he shall not deye no manner myschyuous nor vengeable death. Then
after this passion we say orysones and knelynge at every oryson save at that
oryson that is said for the Jews / at ye oryson holy church kneled not by
cause the Jews in scorn knelynge three times to Christ when they scrourged him
Then these orysons holy church prayed for all manner of people / for Jews
Sarasyns cysmatyks heretyks but not for christian people for while any man or
woman stands acursyd / he is dampened before god / and dampened shall he be at
his death. but he repent hy^ and made hy^ while he lives in this present
world. But take heed what saint Austyn says (Siscirem pro certo quod pater
meus esset in inferno non orarem pro illo nisi vt pro dyabolo) If I wist for
troth that my fader were dampened in to hell. I would never pray for him but
as for the devil of hell / for there is no prayer of holy church that helped
a dampened man. Then after these orysons the cross is brought forth / to the
which all christian people should worship of him that this day deyed on the
cross / and pray our lord to forgive us our trespace as Christ prayed to his
fader of heaven to forgive they^ that did him on the cross.

Narracio.
There was a knight sometime / and that was a great lord / and had a worthy
man unto his sone. And so it happed that an other knight and this man fell at
debate / and so this knight slew him wherefore the fader of this man that was
deed gadred a great multitude of people for to dystroye and utterly undo him
and pursued that other knight in what place and where some euerhe went to
have slain him night and day / so that he might have no rest / but ever did
flee for fere of his life Then it happed on a good frydaye / this knight saw
all christian people go to the church / and he bethought him that Christ deyed
that day on the cross for all mankind / and put him only in the mercy of
almighty god and went to the church with other people to serve god. And as he
was in the church / anon this other knight had word and come with much
people in to the church and his sword drawn in his hand for to slay him.
And when this other knight saw that and wist well that he had trespaced to him
/ he fylle down flat to the ground with his arms spradde abroad as our
lord Ihesu christ spradde his arms on the cross and said. For his love that
this day spradde hi arms on ye cross and suffredde passion and deyed for the
and me and for all mankind / have thou mercy on me and forgive me thy sons
death. Then this knight thought it had be to horrible a thing to smite him
while that he lay so and cried him mercy so mekely: And anon he put up his
sword and said to him in this manner wise Now for his love that this day deyed
on the cross for the and me and all mankind. I fyrgyue the. and then he took
the foresaid man up and kyssed him / and anon went to do worship to the cross
knelynge / And when this knight would have kyssed ye feet of the cross / the
image loused his arms fro the cross and beclypped the knight about the neck
and kyssed him and spoke thus that all the people herd. I forgive the for thou
have forgyuen for the love of me. And thus all cryste^ people should do / and
then they should have mercy and grace of god. and everlasting bliss Amen.

In die Pasce
GOod friends ye shall know well that this day is called in many places gods
so^day ye know well that it is ye manner in every place of worship at this day
to do the fire out of the halle and ye black winter brondes and all thing
that is foul with fume and smoke shall be done away / and there the fire was
shall be gayly arrayed with fair flowers / and strewed with grene rysshes all
about showing a great ensample to all christian people. Like as they made clean
their houses unto the sight of the people / and in the same wise ye should
cleanse your soulys doing a way the foul brenny^ge sin of lecherye / and put
all these a way and cast out all thy foul dust / and strewe in your soulys
flowers of faith and thus make your soulys able to receive your lord god at
the feast of Ester (Deponentes omnen maliciam). And put a way all malice and
sorrow / for right as ye will suffer nothing in your house that stynketh and
sauoureth evil where with ye may be deceived. Right so Christ when he comes
into your house of your souls and he find there any stynke of wrath envy or
any other dedly sin he will not abide there / but a none he goth his way.
And then comes the fend in and abides there / then may that soul that
is so forsaken of god and betaken unto the fend Thus it is with those that be
in wrath and envy / or in any other dedely sin / and will not forgive to them
that has trespaced unto them / for no prayer he shall no forgyuenes have /
for our lord says thus (Dimittite et dimitte mini). Forgive and ye shall
have forgyuenes. And therefore every christian man and woman should search well
their conscience and make them able to receive their savior Ihesu christ very
god and man.

Narracio
There was some time a holy bishop that prayed often times besely unto god /
that he might have grace too see and know which were worthy too receive the
holy sacrament and come to gods board. Then on a time as he houseled ye
people / he saw some come with their faces reed as blood dropped out of their
mouths. and some their faces were as black as any pytche. And some were fair
and reed and lusty to be hold and some as white as any snow Then among all
other he saw two common women come and their faces shone as bright as the son
/ then had that bishop great marvel of that sight / and prayed god to give
him reuelacyon what all that betokens. Then there came to him an angel
and said / those that have blody faces and blood droppeth out of their mouths
ben enuyous people and wrathful / and will not amend them self thereof / and
ever they be backebytynge and sclaundrynge their neighbors / and ben ever ready
to swear oaths / therefore their mouths shall drop black blood till they
come to amendment / and those that have black faces as pytch be lecherous and
will not leave their sin and ben great sinners in many degrees and will not
amend them. They that have their faces white as any snow / those be they yt
have done great sin and ben shryuen thereof and be sorry for their sins. For
the weeping of their eyes has washed their souls and made them clean / and
so they ben clean in life and truly labor for their living / and those two
common women that shine so bright passing all other they were great sinners /
and were sore aferde when they came to the church / and took a great
repentance in their hertes yt they made a vow to god praynge him heartily to
take no vengeance on them / and they would forsake their sin and never do
amysse more. Wherefore god of his great grace and mercy has forgyuen them their
trespace and all their sins / and the sorrow of their hertes has so wasshen
their souls yt they shine bryghter than all other / and then the angel went
his way / and the bishop kneled down and thanked god for his reuelacyon /
and therefore take example by these two common women / and be sorry for your
sins / and repent you in your hertes / and purpose never to torn again to
sin / and trust verily ye shall have grace and socoure to endless bliss.
wherefore thy^ke for certain though ye make glosy^ge with words for to
dysceyue your goostly fader / and say that ye be in charity and be not / ye
begyle your self / and trust truly ye shall not begyle god that sees every
corner of your heart and therefore deceive not your own souls for ye love of
god And also be besy and ready to meke your souls clean to the sight of god /
as ye ben to make your houses to the sight of men / and as ye would array you in
your best clothes that ye have against the comy^ge of your best friends / so
should ye array you now to receive your best friend / that is your maker our
lord Ihesu christ that this time suffered passion and death to bring us to
everlasting life. This day is called a passing day / and in especyall for
two causes. One is for this day all christian people in reverence of god should
forgive all them that have trespaced to them / and be in perfyte love and
charity to all christian people that have mysse done them all the year before.
This day should be amended with the salve that heleth all sores / yt is
charity. Caritas cooperit multitudinem peccatorum). Charity covers the
multitude of sins. It is also a passing day / for this day should all
gods children pass out of evil living in to good living / out of vices in
to virtues / out of pride in to mekenes / out of couetyse in to largenes / out
of slouthe in to holiness / out of envy in to love and charity / out of wrath
in to mercy / out of glotony in to abstynence / out of lechery in to chastyte
/ out of the fendes claws our mortal enemy in to our gods arms / and of
his great ennemy make his dear friend / and he that passes thus is worthy to
come to a good feast. The which our lord Ihesu christ makes this day to all
people. It is called also gods sunday / for this day gods sone rose from
death to life / and so gladded all his servants with his vprysynge /
wherefore all holy church makes mirth and melody this day and syngeth thus
Hec est dies quam fecit dominus: exultemus and le temur in ea). This is the
day that our lord made. Joy we and glad we in that with all our hertes / for
the fader of heaven with all his aungelles makes so great melodye of the
vprysynge of his sone / that he makes this day a passing great feast and
byddeth all christian people thereto / as well they yt ben in heaven as they that been in earth / and they shall be full welcome that comes to this feast clothed
in gods lyuery that is a good clothyng / that is in love and charity. And
also evil shall they be welcome yt shall come in the fendes leuery clothed in
wrath and envy. For as the gospel tells / they shall be cast in the prison
of hell / and then while other laugheth and make merry / they shall weep and be
sorry / and while some ete and drink at gods board / they shall gnasshe with
their tethe and say. Ve. ve. ve. quante sunt tenebre). Woe woe. woe / how many
derkenes ben there for they shall think that they may feel the derkenes it is
so derke / and the pains of hell shall be so hard / for worms shall gnawe
them / for they ete their even christian here in earth with false backebytynge
and sclaundrynge / wherefore I charge you in gods name yt none of you come
thus too gods board / but if ye be in perfyte love and charity / and be clean
shryuen and in full purpose to leave your sin. For I wyste in certain which
were out of charity / and in deedly sin I must by the law of holy church
with a loud voice say thus to him in audyence of all the people. I give the
not thy housell to thy salvation / but to thy dampnacyon till you come to
amendment. And therefore every christian man and woman should search well his
conscience and make him able to receive his savior Ihesu christ to the health of
his soul that he may come after this fynall life to everlasting Joy. Amen.

Rogationum. Feria.ii.iii.iiii. ante ascencionem dn^i.
FRe^des these three days / that is to say mo^daye tuysdaye wenesdaye ye shall
fast and go in processyon man woman and servant / for all we be sy^ners and
have need to pray to god for help grace and mercy. for they may not excuse
them fro the processyon that may lawfully be there. Then he yt wtdrawe hy^
self fro ye commandment of holy church wylfully / he synneth full grievously.
First he sinned in pride / for he is vnbuxon / also he sinned in slouthe that
knows him self in sin / and will not do his dylygence to come out thereof /
and right as he withdraws him from the people that been gadred to serve god.
Right so will god put him from all the company of heaven and from all the
prayers yt ben done in holy church / till he come to amendeme^t. Therefore all
christian people come oonly to gyder and pray these three days to all the
saints in heaven / to pray to god for us / for we have sy^ned many times in
the year against the commandment of god / and therefore these three days we
shall fast and pray to god for mercy and remyssyon of our sins And put away
all the power of the fend / and keep us from all myschyef perils and dread
that fallen more this time of the year than any other time / For in this time
fall many great thondres and light wings. And as Lyncolnyence says. There
were fendes that fleteren in thayer for fere of ye blast of thondrynge when
that Christ come to hell yates when he dyspoylled hell And so yet when they
here the thonder in thayer they ben so aghast thereof that they fallen down /
and then they go not up again till they have done rered some cursyd deeds and
make tempests in the sea and draw down ships and make debate among the
people / and make one to slay an other / and tend fire and brenne houses / and
draw down steeples and trees and cause wy^me^ to ouerlaye their chyldern and
make people for to ha^ge themself and drown them self in wanhope and dyspayre
/ and do many cursed deeds. And for to put away all such myscheues / and
power of the fend / holy church has ordained that al christian people shall
fast and go on processyon these three days / and pray to god and our lady and
to all the saints of heaven of help and socoure. Wherefore in these processyons
belles be rongen / baners be dysplayed / the cross comes after / and the
people sueth after / for right as a king when he gooth to a battle his
trompettes gooth tofore / then the baners / and than comes the king / and his
host following. So in this processyon the belles be gods trompettes / the
baners comes after / than comes the cross in Crystes lykenes as king of
christian people / and all sue him / and with their good prayers chase away the
fendes that they have no power / and like a cursed tyrant will be sore aferde
and adred when he hereth the trompettes of a king that were his enemy and
sees his baners spleyed in the field with his host comy^ge toward him. In
the same wise ye fend the tyraunte of hell is aferde and dredeth him sore when
the belles ring / and the baners ben borne / and the cross with all the
people come prayenge / then he flees and dare not abide and puts away his
power that processyon.

Narracio.
We read of ye cite of Constantyne as the people went in processyon for a
disease yt the people had / as they song latyny suddenly a little child was
plucked up in to the air and borne in to heaven / and the angels taught hy^
to sing this so^ge. (Sete^ deus: scte^ fortis: scte^ et i^mortalis miserere
nobis.) And anon he was laten down again to ye earth / and then he song ye
same song / and anon they were delyuerd of their dyseases / this is to say in
english / holy god / holy strong god / holy and without death have mercy on
us. God yt is holy and never shall dye have mercy on us. God wylleth and will
that we be strong for to fight with the fend / with ye world / and ye
flesh / and then he will have mercy on us / and bring us to that place
then / there as angels sing / (Sancte deus sancte fortis) Holy god / holy
strong god / have mercy on us And bring us to his bliss. Amen.

In die ascensionis dn^i.
GOod friends such a day ye shall have an hye and a solemn fest in holy
church that is called the ascensyon of our lord Ihesu christ. For that day as
the faith and believe techeth / how god is very god and man / and styed up in to
heaven / wherefore in tokenyng of this the pascall that is the chyef light in
holy church that has stand openly in the quere from ester unto this day /
now it is remeued away in tokenynge that Christ is chyef light in holy church
/ and so our lord diverse times openly appyered to his dyscyples and taught
them the faith and the believe. And this day he styed up in to heaven / and
there will abide until the day of dome. But now ye shall here the manner of ye
ascensyon from Ester day till this day. He was not with his dyscyples always.
but diverse times appyered unto them / and he appyred to them as they saten at
their mete and ete with them to show them yt he was very god and man in flesh
and blood as they were. For some of them weren in doubt lest he had be a
spyryte yt had another flesh ne blood. And therefore to preue the troth he ete
with them in their sight / and badde them go in to ye hylle of Olyuete / and
there in the sight of all his dyscyples he blessed them and styed up in to
heaven. and left ye steps of his feet threst down in to ye hard marbyll
stone for a token of his ascensyon. Then ye shall understand that ye hylle
of Olyuete betokens mercy / wherefore Christ styed up at the hylle of Olyuete
showing well that he is the heed of mercy And he is ever ready to give mercy to
all that ask mercy with meke heart / Then in his vpstyeng as we call
asce^syon angels made so much melody yt no tongue may tell it so glade they
were of his coming (Ascendit velociter) He styed up swyftly. For as it were a
moment so he was from earth in to heaven A great clerk a philosopher yt is
called Rabby moses he says / that it is as far from heaven to earth as a
holy man might live a thousand year / and every day go a thousand mile / but
he yt met this way knows best. And this way shall be met of a ryghtfull and
a good man Then in his ascensyon he had with him a great multitude of
souls / the which he fette out of hell from the fendes bounds. And he styed
up also with his wounds reed fresshe and blody. And as Bede says for five
causes First for to verifye ye faith of his resurreco^n for he rose in very
flesh and blood that deyed on the cross for all mankind / The second to
show his wounds to his fader in great help and socour to al mankind. The
third is to show how ryghtful they be dampened yt will not believe in his
passion and in his resurreccyon / The.iiii. to show how merciful he is unto
them that will believe and ask mercy The fyfth is that he bare with him a sign
of vyctorye for a sykernesse to all mankind For like as a lord is syker that
has a true advocate before a Judge to answer for hy^ so in like wise to all
mankind we find him our aduocat evermore ready to answer for us at need /
that ye fend our ghostly enemy makes against us. Wherefore says the holy
scripture / Asykerer attorneye may no man be than god / (Vbi matter ostendit
filio pectus et vbera) Wherefore the mother shows the sone her breasts and her
pappes (Filius patri latus et vulnera (The sone shows to the fader his sides
all to beten and his wou^des bledynge / how should any thing be put away
ordained there as such tokens of love be showed / he may not fare ill yt has
such.ii. fre^des in heaven. Also by the styenge up in to heaven of our lord
Ihesu christ man has gotten a great dygnyte. For a man to se his own flesh and
his blood sitting on the right side of the fader of heaven in his trone /
wherefore angels considering ye dygnyte of man / they would not suffer no man
to do them worship as they did before thyncarnacyon of Christ / but they
worship man for god himself has take mankind on hy^ and is now in heaven
bodily. Here by a man may see how much he is behold to his god that we that
were bound before and thral to the fend of hell / and now we be made friar
of all that. And our lord Ihesu christ has given to man a fredom above any
angels / and therefore we be bound unto him to do him service reverence and
worship. And there as angels kept sometime ye yates of paradyse with brennynge
swerdes that no soul might come Inn. Now by faith our lord Ihesu christ to
mankind he has cast up ye yates and warns no man to enter therein that is of
steadfast believe. For as saint Austyn says (Aperuisti credentibus regna
celorum) Thou have opened the yates of heaven to them that believe. Also ye shall
believe right as a king of this world that has in his country officers of
diverse degrees some hyer and some lower / and some more preuyer than some. So
our lord styenge up at this time / the lower angels for great wonder that they
had in Crystys ascensyon / when they saw him in flesh and in blood styenge
up to heaven with so great multitude of souls with him / and also for the great
wondre that they had when they saw the fendes of the air flee away for dread
and fere of his strong comy^ge / that before were wont sparynge nothy^ge to
assail ye souls yt come by they^ / and then they flewe away for great fere
of his comy^ge / Also the good angels came in all ye have yt they might to do
our lord Ihesu christ service reverence and worship. Thus for great wonder yt
the lower angels had of his up styenge. They asks the hyer angels and they
said. (Quis est iste qui venit de eodem) What is this now that comes out of
the world with blody clothes as he were a king of Joy. This is he that with
death suffry^ge / reed in his scourgynge / syke and deed in the cross / strong
in hell / bodily in doing / ferfull in rysynge / and thus has overcome all
his ennemys / and now is king of glory in heaven. Then when our lord Ihesu
christ was styed up in to heaven and then his dyscyples standing with his
mother for great wonder of that sight. And also of the melodye that they herd
in thayer they looked up in to heaven And sodaynely two angels clothed all in
white stood by them and said thus (Viri galilei quid statis aspicientes in
celu^. Hic ihesus qui assumptus est a vobis) Men of Galyle / what stand ye
beholdynge in to heaven. It is Ihesus that is styed up from you / and so he
shall come at the day of dome again and deem all quycke and deed. And therefore
all christian people lift up your hertes to our lord Ihesu christ that now is
styed up in to heaven / and sytteth at his faders right hand / and is ready to
give mercy to all they^ that will ask mercy with a meke heart And therefore there
is no manner of man yt may excuse himself / nor have no manner excusacyon / but
if that he will himself / and ask mercy to his lord god / with a meke heart
and he shall have mercy and shall be saved. For though a man be never so
sinful and he will ask mercy with a meke heart he will give him mercy (Cor
contritu^ et humiliatu^ deus non despicies) A meke and a contryte heart god
shall never despise. For and he will ask mercy and be sorry for his sins / our
lord will take him to his mercy. Then for to show his great goodness and
co^passyon yt our lord has on manky^de I shall tell you this Ensample. We
read in the life of saint Carpe how a^ man of mysse believe turned a christian man
out of his faith / Narracio.
and forsook his believe and his crystendome / wherefore this holy man Carpe was
sore an angered so that he fell in great sykenes / and when he should have
prayed to god for amendment / he did pray to god night and day that he might
se them have a bodily vengeance. Then^e it happed at mydnyght as he prayed
thus / suddenly the house that he lay in cleued in four parts / and he looked
up and saw one hanged so pyteously that it was pity to se. And then he looked
up to heaven / and there he saw our lord Ihesu christ with a great multitude
of aungelles sitting in his trone / and he looked up again / and than he saw
these two men standing before an hot oven quakynge and trembling for dread
of fendes like adders and worms coming out of the oven to draw these men in
to the oven with them. And so many other fendes came in diverse lykenes too
help that they were in too the oven. Than was this holy man Carpe glad to se
these two men to have that vengeance / and was wonder feign thereof / that he
lost the sight of our lord Ihesu christ and his holy aungelles / for his heart
was on these two men's vengeance and was sorye that it was so long or they
were put unto their pain. But then he rose and went to him self / and helped
all that ever he might. And when they were in to the oven then was this Carpe
very glad thereof / and then he looked up in to heaven / and there he saw our
lord Ihesu christ / and he saw him rise from his trone for great pity and
compassyon that he had on the two men / and came down to them / and took them
out of their pain. And said thus. Carpe exte^de manus tuas contra me).
Stretche for the thyn hands against me. And than our lord said thus / I am
ready and need were for to suffer death and passion again for to redeem
mankind / rather than for to lose the^. By this ensample ye may se how ready
that our lord Ihesu christ is to all that will ask forgyuenes / and deserve
mercy / that is that every man amend and leave his sins / and be in full will
and purpose to sin no more. And thus he shall come to the grace and mercy of
our lord Ihesu christ that suffered for us and all mankind on good frydaye
passion / and this day styed up to heaven. The which he will grant us and
bring us all thereto. Amen.

In vigilia penthecostes.
Dear friends as ye know well on saturday next coming is whytson even / and
ye shall fast and come to the church to here your service / and make you clean
to receive the holy ghost / that the fader of heaven sends among mankind /
wherefore I counceyle you and charge you if there be any of you that fall to any
sin / that he come and amend him thereof / and I will be ready to all that
belongs to me / for take this in rertayne In the same wise as a man will not
go to a place there as stynkynge caryon is / but if he stop his nose and hye
him thens. Right so the holy ghost flees from the soul that is combred with
deedly sin / and angels will stop their noses / for much more fouler
stynketh deedly sin in the sight of god / than does any caryon to the people
/ and as ye holy ghost flees to him yt abides in good life and clean / and in
perfyte love and charity / and has pity and compassyon of all those that been
in disease or trybulacyon / to such the holy ghost vysyteth and comes to. And
with such as him lysteth to come to abide / and comfort and techeth them in
all their need. But as the service of this feast is more praised than any other
time / for at this feast holy church calls to them and says. Veni sancte
spu^s). Come holy ghost specially to have socour and grace / and to have part
of ye dole yt he makes at this time to al christian people that been able to
receive his gifts / but ye shall understand that the holy ghost makes his
dole in other wise than other people / for they dele as it lyketh them / but
the holy ghost deleth to all christian people yt is needful and spedefull to
them that give and some more and some less one gift and some an other / some
he gives wisdom in holy scripture to understand holy scripture / he gives
grace to have great lust and liking therein / yt is to say / they be lusty to
preche and teache virtue and goodness / and enfourme the people to the health of
their souls unto them that here it and bear it away. But many had lever to
here a tale of Robyn hode / or a tale of rybaudrye / wherefore gods word shall
not be preched to such. And some he gives grace so in understanding of
diverse languages / as English / frensshe / walshe / Irysshe without any great
travail in learning / it is a great gift and miracle / and a special grace of
almighty god that any man can understand any such speaking. There ben five
lettres that makes all ye words yt may be prenounced of all the languages
that been under heaven. And without one of these lettres / may no manner of man
make any word / and these ben they.a.e.i.o.u. And also some he gives grace of
counceyle: for to do after good counceyle. And some he enspyreth within / for
they that he shows them / and makes them for to know tofore what will come
after and fall. And gives grace to deem the better from the worser / wherefore
they do so wisely and dyscretely that all the people ben glad to here them
speak and do after counceyle And some he gives grace also to do after
counceyle as our lord Ihesu christ gave him self counceylynge a man that will
live a perfyte life / to leave all that he has / and goo in to relygyon / and be
there governed by his wardeyns counceyle / and by his own. This counceyle
comes of all mighty god. And to some he gives the grace of suffrynge much
bodily sykenesse / great wrongs and much disease both in body and in soul /
loss of catell lordshyp maystershyp frendshyp and all yt he suffers with a
meke heart / thanking almighty god of his sonde yt comes of ye grace of ye
holy ghost Also he gives some grace of learning in diverse science. some to
learn one craft / and some an other So by the which he may get his living
with troth / so that a man will put to his dylygence / and truly to labor
and not to slombre and sleep slewfully and vnthryftely / but in due time for to
labor besely / for the holy ghost has given to every man some knowing to
get his lyuy^ge with truth. Some he gives grace of pity and fylleth their
hertes so full of pity and co^passyon on her even christian that been in disease /
and aduersyte / yt they give he^ of her goods to help and socoure they^ at
her need and to comfort they^ in all yt they may for Crystis sake: And also
mercyable that they forgive all yt they trespaced to them in any wise some he
gives also to dread god / in so much yt they ben ever aferde to dysplease
almighty god. and ever thy^ke of great vengeance that god will take for sy^ne
at ye day of dome (Timor dn^i expellit peccatu^) The dread of god and the
horrible pains of hell puts away sy^ne and thus night and day some be
ever aferde for to offend god / and ever be besy to do well in preuyte as in
ye open sight of people. He yt has this gift he has a special grace of ye
holy ghost (Hec su^t septe^ dona spiritusscti^) These be the seven gifts that
ye holy ghoost departed among all man kind / and gives to some more than
some. But there may no man excuse hy^ but that ye holy ghoost assygneth to them
some what of these in time of his crysteny^ge / where ye bishop at ye
confyrmacyo^ reherseth these words of ye sacrament. I will tell you ye more
to ye sacrament of crysteny^ge that is founden in the life of saint James

Narracio.
There was an holy bishop yt turned Lowys the king of France to christian faith.
An so when ye king came to ye crystenynge / at the halowynge of the font
there was great press of people / that the clerk that bare ye bishop
crysmatory might not bring it to the bishop: And so when the font was
hallowed and came to the anoyntynge he might not come to his crysmatory Then
the bishop lift up his eyes to god prayenge god devoutly for help. And anon
therewith there came a dove as white as any milk that was the holy ghost berynge
in herbylle a vyole with oil and creme to the bishop. And when he opened the
vyole there come out thereof so sweet a savor that all the people had wondre
thereof and were greatly comforted thereby / and that continued till the service
was done Loo here ye may well see though the priest say the words. the holy
ghost worcheth the sacrament and does virtue of the wordis Now that the holy
ghost may descend and lyghten us that we may come to receive him to our
salvation Amen

In die pentecostes.
GOod men and wymmen this day is called whyt sunday. because the holy ghost
brought wit and wisdom in to Crystis dyscyples / and so by her prechynge
after in to all crystendome. And then he may ye understand that many has wit
but no wisdom. For there ben many that have wit to preche well / but there
ben few yt have wysedo^ to do well. There be many wise prechers and techers
but her lyuy^g is no manner thing after her prechy^ge. And there be many ye
labor to have wit and co^ny^ge / but there ben few trauaylleth to come to
good lyuy^ge. For who so has wit and connyng to get good with fair subtle
words be they never so falls he is wise / but wit of holiness is not set
by / for he that can get good falsely with knackes and mowes he is a wise
man. But he that forsakes the wit of this world is a foul / but look what
holy scripture says (Dn^s recitauit no men pauperis. quia ipsu^ approbauit. et
nomen eius in libro vite scriptu^ fuit) Our lord has received the name of the
poor man / for he has proved him in his pouerte / and written his name in the
book of life (Sed nomen diuitis tacuit. quia no^ approbauit) But he left the
rich man for he has not preued him. But though a man be never so rich at
last he shall be poor. For naught he brings with him but his good deeds and
his badde he that lives well and techeth well for a good ensample in living is
a good doctrine. This grace at this day was given to Crystys discyples for
they taught well and lived well For they gave good Informacyon in techynge of
good ensample. In living for her techynge / and her living is sprade through
out all the world. Than how they come unto this grace ye shall here (Post
ascensionem domini) After when that our lord Ihesu christ was styed up in to
heaven his dyscyples were in great heaviness and morning. For they had lost her
master yt they loved full well and for him had lost all her goods for his
love / and forsook all her frenshyp / and served him full poor / in hope that
they should be gretely helped by him And thus they were all heavy and greatly
astonyed and sore aferde to be taken of the Jews and cast in prison / and
after to be put to death. This made them sore that they durst not go among the
people for to get them mete and drink. But yet as Christ badde they^ in his
asce^syon / they went in to the cite of Iherusalem / and there they were in a
halle of stage. And there they sat together prayenge unto god with hole heart /
and one spyryte of help and socoure / and so me comfort in their disease.
Then as they were thus praycnge together / suddenly there was a great cloud
made in the air like a blast of thonder / and even therewith the holy ghost
came among them. (Et apparuerunt illis dispertite lingue tanquam ignis). And
a light came down among them in lykenes of tongues brennynge and not
smerty^ge / warming / and not harmy^ge / lyghtnynge and not flytterynge. (Et
repleti su^t omnes spiritu sancto). And filled them all full of goostly wit.
For as they were tofore but lewd men of sight and unlettered and very ydeottes
as of conning / and nothy^ge could of clergy / suddenly they were the wysest
men of the world. And anon they spoke all manner of languages under the son.
And there as before their hertes were cold for great dread and fere of death.
They were than so gretely comforted of the holy ghost in brenny^ge love / that
they went and preched and taught the word of god / sparynge for no dread /
but ready to suffer death for crystes sake. Than at that time there were in
Iherusalem people of all nacyons / and drew in to the temple for great fere of
the blaste of thonder that was in the air / and studied what it might be. Then
came the appostles in to the temple and preched. And all manner of nacyons
understood the^ and they understood all manner of nacyons / and so they preched
the word of god. Then were the people astonyed wha^ they herd the appostles
speak all manner languages. Than said some they have dronken so much that they
wot not what they do say / neither what they mean / for they be all dronken.
Then answered Peter and said / we ben not dronken / but this was the prophecye
of Iohel the prophet / how the holy ghost should be given plenteuously to the
people / so that they should speak with all tongues / that is to preche in all
the world the laws of Ihesu Christ. And then the people turned fast / and so
within few years the faith was in all the world. Now it is to wit why the
holy ghoost appeared more in the lykenes of tongues than in to any other party
of man's body / and why he came to them sitting rather than standing. As to
the first this is the cause. A tongue is the best membre of a man's body wha^
it is in good rule and well dysposed / but when it is out of rule it is the
worst. (Venenu^ aspidum sub labiis eorum). Bitter veny^ is under the tongue
that speaks evil says Dauyd in the psalter. And as saint James says. A
cursed tongue is fyred with the fire of hell / and may not be chastysed while
ye fire brenneth it / and also for tongues must speak words of fire / that is
sharp and sperkelynge to say truth / and not spare in prechynge / and to
repreue misdeeds / for as holy men in old time overcame and drove away ye fire
of lyghtnynge with holy words and good prayers with the brennynge love to god.
Right for that fire of the holy ghoost should drive away / and overcome the
fire of hell that envy has and evil living / that reygneth now in much
people / and in hertes. And for appostles and other prechers yt comes after
him should speak brennynge words / that is neither to sharp / neither for
dread / ne for love to say the truth and to tell the people their defautes
and to repreue the sins that reygneth in them in many diverse wise / and so to
do / and say the word of god and to repreue sin / and but they will leave
sin they shall without remedy be dampened in to the fire of hell. For though
thou sholdest deye spare not to relate the word of god and tell the truth.
(Ite^ deus est misericors penitentibus peccata sua. Also god is merciful to
them that be sorry for their sins and will leave them. (Cu^ vero confessus
fuerit et reliquerit ea: misericor diam consequatur) For though a man had done
never so much sin / and he will shryue him / and forsake his sy^ne mercy
shall follow him and he shall have forgyuenes / and so come to the bright fire
of everlasting bliss. That is the precious love of god that brenneth among
the aungelles and saints in the kingdom of heaven. Also he comes in likeness
of tongues of fire. For it is the kind of fire to make low that is high / and
to warm that is cold / to make soft that is hard and make hard yt is soft
/ And also the holy ghoost makes hertes that been high of pride and envy / he
makes them low and warm in love and charity And also hard hertes yt have
be gaderynge and holding of worldly goods the holy ghoost makes them soft
and lyberall to give and deal almesdedes for the love of almighty god our
lord Ihesu christ / and makes them hard also in sufferynge of hard and
strate living / and in doing of great penance for their sins. Thus the
holy ghoost is ever ready to make salve for to hele all manner of sy^nes That
othet skyll is why the holy ghost come to the apostles rather sitting than
standing for sitting betokens mekenes in heart / with rest peace and unity.
The which any manner of man must needs have that will receive the holy ghost
For right as the dry wood will bre^ne clearly without sterynge So should
every christian man love other with brennynge love and charity / clearly without
feynynge of wrath or envy / or any manner of malice each with other. And so
every man should be feign of other welfare / and this makes to have a good
tongue. But as soon as the brondes ben cast a twynne by dyscensyon of malice
and envy / anon the fire of the holy ghoost quenches / and so then ryseth
up smoke of great wrath and envy between party and party / and also great
greuaunce and heaviness for the soul / and causes it to fail grace / that it
may have no consyderacyon to reason. Then anon the wicked spyrytes ben ready
/ and reyse up smoke in the same man's heart. That is to say / great wrath
and envy / and evil will / that it may have no manner of rest. But ever
studyenge and thinking also / how he may avenge him / and do vengeance unto
his enuyes. And so is a man ever troubled and besy ever in cursyd deeds and
lykely for to be dampened both body and soul in hell to everlasting pain /
but if he have some socoure and help of the holy ghoost. And all such things
that may come of cursyd and wyckede tongues. Therefore the holy ghost comes in
the likeness of tongues of brennynge fire to brenne out the malice and envy /
and to anoynte them with swetnesse of grace / love and charity. And therefore
shall we pray to the holy ghost for to give us grace so to tempre our to^ges
that we may evermore speak good and that our hertes may be fed with
meekness* that we may be able to be fed with the holy ghost as saint Gregory
was / when he expowned the prophecye / he took to him his deken saint Peter to
write as he expowned / and made draw between him for saint Peter should not
see how he did in his standing. Then as Gregory sat in his chayr holding
up his hondes and his eyes to heaven ward the holy ghost come like a white
douue with foot and bylle brenny^ge gold and sat on Gregory right sholder and
put her bylle in Gregoryes mouth / and when he withdrewe it / then he bad
Peter write / and so continued till he had made an end / But he expowned the
gospel so boldly that Peter had great wonder and merueyled thereof and the^
pryuely made an hole in the clothe that was between Gregory and him / and saw
how ye holy ghost fed him. And anon the holy ghoost showed Gregory how Peter
had done. then Gregory blamed Peter / and charged him yt he should never say
nothing while he lived. But when Gregory was deed an heretyke would have
brenned his books that this holy man made / and then Peter withstode him and
said nay / and told al how the holy ghoost had done to him while he expowned
the prophecye / and so saved his books vnbrenned that he had made by the grace
of god and gift of the holy ghoost. The which give us grace to be fed of
hy^ here in our living that we may have the bliss that never shall have end.
Amen.

Indie sancte Trinitatis.
GOod men and wy^men this day is an hye and a solemn fest in holy church /
for it is of the holy Trynyte / for as holy church at Wytsontyde makes
mencyon how the holy ghost came to Crystys dyscyples Now at this time is made
mencyon of all three persons / that is for to say (Pater filius et
spiritussanctus) Fader and sone and holy ghost / three persons and one god /
wherefore we be bound to do all the reverence and worship that we can or may to
this holy Trynyte. Also ye shall understand why / how / and what the cause is
that this fest was ordained. This holy fest was worshypped for the Trynyte
first finding / for heretykes confou^dynge / and for the Trynyte worshypynge
First it was ordained for the form of the Trynyte finding / and a great
clerk Johan bellet tells the form how ye Trynyte was in the first man Adam
our forne fader that came of the earth one person / and Eve of Adam the
second person and of hem both comes the third person as her child / thus
the Trynyte was found in man / wherefore man should have mind to do worship to
the holy Trynyte for holy church ordained that in wedding of a man and woman
together so that the mass of the Trynyte is songen / and his death one belle
shall be rongen in worship of the Trynyte Wherefore al christian people ben bound
greatly to worship the holy. Trynyte. The second cause is that fest is ordained
in confoundynge of heretykes and lollers for to destroy them and her falls
opynyons that they had against the holy Trynyte / for right as heretykes in ye
begy^nynge of the faith with her sweet words and falls opynyo^s were about to
destroy the faith of ye holy Trynyte In ye same wise lolers now a days with her
falls spyce of gyle be about also to withdraw ye people from ye true believe and
faith of the holy Trynyte / and ye believe and faith of holy church. Popes
martyrs and confessors to the death / Right so now these lollers pursuen men of
holy church and ben about in all manner ways that they can and may find to
destroy and undo them / so that they might have their purpose. and thus they
show openly yt they ben not gods servants / for they be out of charity /
and he yt is out of charity is far from god. But he that suffers trybulacyon
persecucyon and disease for ye love of almighty god and prays for his enemies
and mysdoers / and will do no vengeance / but put all in god almighty And he
will quyte the^ full well in everlasting bliss / for our lord says thus
(Michi vindictam et ego retribua^) Put all thing to me and I shall quyte every
man after his deseruynge / for though god suffered holy church to be pursued by
such mysse and proud heretykes at the last he ordained such a remedy yt
holy church is helped and her enemies confounded and shamed Thus it happed on
a time with the emperor of Rome yt hight Attilia and he was made by heretykes as
Johan bellet tells / the which Emperor pursued christian people sore and hated
them and holy church greatly. Wherefore he made to brenne all the books yt might
be found of christian faith. But as almighty god would / there was a good holy
man and yt was a great clerk and that clerk was called Alpynyons. That in
mayntenynge of the faith of holy church / he made the story of the Trynyte.
and the story also of Saint Steven and brought it unto the pope for to have
them songen and read in holy church. But by cou^seyl of ye great clerk they
took the story of saint Steven / and left the story of the holy Trynyte / till
ye time yt saint Gregory was pope then for to preue the^ and do the^ shame
yt ben such mysleuynge people and would not believe in the trynyte / but made
after her reason many heretykes / and in consyderacyon of them saint Gregory
the (...) ordained this feast to be hallowed / and this story to be song and
read in holy church in worship of ye trynyte with all christian people^ The
third cause is for the high trynyte worshyppynge / and for all christian men
should know how and in what manner they should believe in the trenyte / for as
holy church techeth / he that believes in the trynyte shall be saved / and
they that do not shall be dampened. Then it is full expedyent and needful to
all christian people to know how they should live / ye shall understand ye
perfyte love unto god is the believe. For he that believes perfytely makes no
questyons. Fides non habet meritum vbi humana ratio prebet experimentu^). Faith
has no mede ne merit where man's wit gives experyence. Then it is good to
all christian people to make love to be medyatour to the holy ghost praynge him
to lyghten us within our souls that we may have grace to come too his perfyte
believe. Therefore this day was set next whytsonday hoping that ye holy
ghost will be ready to all christian people that will call him / and specially in
learning of the faith / but yet for man's wit be dull to learn / then they
may not se nor here / but they be brought in by great ensample. But those
people be not most commendable if we may by ensample come the sooner to the
believe / in the fader and the sone / and the holy ghost / three persons and all
one god / take heed to this ensample / of yse / snow / and water / how that
these three ben diverse each in substance / and yet all is but water. Ye may
understand by the water of the fader / by the yse of the sone / and by the
snow of the holy ghost. Water is an element that has great might and
strength. And as master Alysau^der says. It is above heaven in the manner of
yse like as crystal and does worship to heaven / and anon it is under earth /
and the earth is grounded upon water. And Dauyd says in ye psalter. It is all
above the world / and in all thing. For in hard stones and yren sometime is
sweet water* For this water is so full of might / that is to understand the
fader that is power is so much that he governs all the world and knows
all this / and all thing is at his commandment. By the sone Ihesu christ ye
shall understand yse that is water congyled hard and bryttle / that is Ihesu
christ very god and man that took the substance and fraylte of mankind when he
was conceived of the holy ghost in the vyrgyn Mary / and borne of her body god
that suffered passion under ponce Pylate / done upon the cross deyed / and was
buried / and the third day arose from death to life / and after on holy
thursdaye styed up in to heaven / and shall come again at the day of dome and
deem the quick and the deed. By the snow ye shall understand the holy ghost
/ for right as snow is but water and yse and light in the air / but how no
man can tell. So comes the holy ghoost from the fader and the sone.
Spiritussanctus a patre et filio no^ factus nec creatus nec genitus sed
procedens). But how it is for no man to study / for it excedeth all man's
wit to study thereupon / but sadly believe the fader is full god almighty /
and of him came the sone full god / and of them both came the holy ghost full
god. This trenyte was known in the fullynge of Christ as the gospel tells.
In baptismo eni^ xp^i tota trinitas manifestauit se. silicz pater in voce.
filius in carne. and spiritus sctu^s in columba et totum celu^ apertu^ erat)
Then our lord Ihesu christ was baptized in the water of flom Iordane / and all
the people nigh of the country there about were baptized there with hy^ / and as
they were in their prayers. Et aperti su^t celi et spiritus sanctus descendit
sicut columba). The holy ghost came down in the lykenes and form of a white
douue / and lyghted upon the heed of Ihesu christ. Et vox de celo dicens. Hic
est filius meus dilectus in quo michi been co^placui). And the fader spoke in
heaven and said. Thou art my well beloved sone that pleases me well / that was
ye holy trynyte that spoke in his person / and his sone was bodily there in
his person. Than Johan baptyst said to ye people. (Ecce agnus dei). Se the
lamb of god / and the holy ghost was seen in his person. (Sicut colu^ba^
descendente^) As a white douue came down / and these three ben but one god in
trynyte / wherefore it were needful to all christian people to pray besely / so
that we may have grace to have perfyte love to believe in the fader / the sone /
and the holy ghost / three persons and one god in trynyte

Narracio.
We find that the mother of saint Edmonde of Pountney as he studied of this
holy trynyte she appeared unto hy^ and laid in his hand three rings each
within other / and in the first was written (Pater). The fader. In the second
(Filius). The sone. In the third (Spiritussanctus). The holy ghost / and said.
My dear sone to such fygures take heed and learn that thou may. And take
good head to this ensample. For right as a ring is round without any
beginning and ending / right so ben three persons in one godhede But for to
study how it might be / it is but folly / for it excedeth any man's wit to
muse theruppon / but sadly believe there upon.

Narracio.
We read of a clerk that was gretely learned in dyuynyte the which studied
besyly to have brought this in a book / why god would be believed in one god
and three persons / and so as he walked on a day studyenge on this matter by the
se sonde / he was ware of a fair child sitting on the sea sonde / and he had
a little shell in his hand / and therewith he took water out of the sea and
kest it in to a little pytte fast by. Then said this master to this child /
sone what do you / And he said / sir I am about to have all this water that
is in the sea in to this little pytte. Then said the master / yt shall thou
never do / it passes any man's power. Sir said he / as soon shall I do this
/ as thou shalt do that thou art about to do / and anon the child vanysshed
away. Then this master thought it was not gods will / and left his studyenge
in that matter / and thanked god hyghly. By this ensample ye may se that it is
not gods will that we should muse in that matter / but steadfastly believe in
the fader / the sone / and the holy ghost. Veni per fidem scte^ trinitatis).
Come to this believe by doing of works of right wysnes / and thus ye shall
come to this perfyte believe / fader / sone / and holy ghost. Et tunc
coronaberis corona glory eterne). Then thou shalt be crouned with a croune of
everlasting Joy and bliss / to the which bring us the holy trynyte. Amen.

De corpore christi.
GOod friends ye shall understand that this day is an high and solampne feast
in holy church and is the feast of (corpus christi) It is the feast of our
lords own body / the which is offered to the hye fader of heaven at the awter
in remyssyon of our sins / for all christian people that live here in perfyte
love and charity / and great socoure and help in releuynge them yt ben in
pains of purgatory / there abiding the mercy of god. Ye shall understand yt
this feast was found by a pope that was called Urban the.v. the which had
great grace and devotion in the holy sacrament of the awter / considering the
great mede / help and socoure to man's soul / and to the forderynge of
living to all christian people here in this present world. Therefore he did
establysshe and ordained this present feast to be hallowed in the next thursday
after ye feast of the holy trynyte. For all christian people that will be saved
must have sad believe in the holy sacrament / that is gods own body in
form of breed made by the virtue of crystes words that the priest says /
and by werkynge of ye holy ghost. Then for this holy pope thought to draw
people to more devotion and better will to this holy sacrament and to do the
service this day / he grants to all that be worthy / that be they that be
very contryte and confessed of their sins and be in the church at both
euensonges / at matyns / and at mass / for each an hundred days of pardon and
for each hour of the day.xl. days of pardon / and every day of the vtas an
hundred days of pardon in remyssyon of all their sins / for evermore
endury^ge / than ye shall understand that our lord Ihesu christ on
sherethursdaye at night when he had souped / and wist well that on the morrow
he should suffer passion and death / and pass out of ye world unto his fader
of heaven / he ordained a perpetuel memory of his passion to abide for ever with
all christian people here in earth. He took breed and wine / and made his own
flesh and blood / and gave it to his dyscyples to ete and to drink / and
said. Accipite et manducare hoc est corpus meum). Take ye this and ete it / for
it is mine own flesh and blood / and this he did for they should have mind
of him. And so he gave to al other prestes power to make his own body of breed
and wine / thus every priest has power to make the sacrament be he good or
bad / for the sacrament may no man amend ne appayre / but he yt is a good man
and an holy contemplatyf liver helps gretely them the which he prays for
in saying his mass. And he that mynystreth the office of the priest worthily
and truly as it appertains to the high order of preesthode shall be glad and
Joyful that ever he was borne for to have mynystred so worthily the precious
body of his savior and redemptoure in form of breed. For our lord Ihesu
christ of his great goodness has given to a priest a gift and power here in
earth the which he gave never too the aungelles in heaven for ye love that he
had to man that is to make his own body in form of breed. Therefore ye shall
have worship more in heaven than any tongue can tell or heart thy^ke. And he
that is an evil liver and knows hy^ self in deedly syn^e and presumes to
mynyster that worthy sacrament and will not amend him / he may be sure of
perpetual dampnacyo^ with the fendes of hell in everlasting pain and in
detestable tourmentes as they have well deserved for their unclean living.
Then ye shall understand that our most benygne and merciful savior
grants this most worthy sacrament of his precious body for to be used and
mynystred for evermore in our mother holy church / for four causes that be
necessary and needful unto all christian people. The first is for man's great
helping and aid. The second for our redemptoures passion minding. The
thurde for great love showing. And the fourth for great mede getynge Nota
quod propter nouem raciones prodest homini audire missam secundum augustinum.
Saint Augustyn says / that it prouffyteth gretely all christian people for to
here mass / and specially for nine causes and says in this manner of wise.
Quia illo die qua audierat missam necessaria cibaria conceduntur). For that
day that he hereth a mass he shall fail no bodily fode or sustenaunce / nor
no necessary thing that shall be belongy^ge or appertaynynge unto him / nor no
let ne impedyme^te shall have in his Journey that he has to go or ride where
so ever he trauayleth. The second cause is all venyall sy^ne shall be forgyuen
him by the virtue of ye mass and idle words. The third is that if a man deye
it shall stand hy^ for his housell The fourth he shall not yt day lose his
sight / The fyfth all idle oaths that day shall be forgive hy^. The.vi. that
day he shall deye no soden death. The.vii. as long as he hereth that mass he
shall not wexe old. The viii. all his steps toward and from ward the holy
church / his good angel rekeneth to his salvation. The.ix. all ye while that
he beholds the holy sacrament all wyckedde spyrytes flee from him / and have
no power over him be he never so great a sinner. This help and socoure we have
of the holy ghost and of the sacrament herein earth / and at our last end all
christian people will send after the priest to come to him with gods body. and
to receive it knowing well that he byleueth steadfastly yt it is the same
flesh and blood yt Christ took of our lady saint Mary. and was borne of her
body very god and man / and after suffered passion and death on the cross for
all manky^de / and laid in tomb / and rose from death to life / and now sytteth
on his fades right hand in heaven and shall come again at the day of dome and
deem the quycke and the deed / every man after his deseruynge. So with this
parfyght believe all christian people shall be armed and made strong to withstand
the fendes that will come and assail at the departing between the body and
the soul / For then fendes comen besely to bring him out of the believe /
then shall the sacrament that a man has received in his life make him mighty
and strong that he shall set all the fendes at naught and so overcome them
/ And other skylle that the sacrament is brought to a man to ask mercy of
Christ and remyssyon of his sin / having full trust and believe that Christ is
ever ready to forgive al them that will ask mercy with a meke heart. As Dauyd
says (Cor contritu^ et humiliatu^ deus non despicies) A contryte heart and
meke our lord shall never despise / and that we may seues the which were men
of cursed living / and therefore they were ordained for to be deed / and the
one asked mercy with a meke heart and said. Domine dum venet is in regnum tuum
memento mei). Lord quod he when thou come in to thy kyngedome have mind on
me. and anon at his first asking he gave him mercy / and more over he said
thus to him. Hodie mecum eris in paradiso). This day thou shall be with me in
paradyse / and that other these would ask no mercy in no wise for pride that
he had in his heart and therefore he was dampened in to hell. Thus our lord
Ihesu christ shed his blood upon the cross in health to al mankind. So in
the mass he shewith his blood in the great socoure and help and salvation to
all mankind / and ye same flesh and blood is showed every day in the mass /
for we should believe steadfastly there on / and he yt believes not thereon
verily that it is so shall not be saved at the dredeful day of dome.

Narracio.
Therefore I tell you this ensample that is in the life of Odo bishop of
Caunterbury. This bishop had with him clerks that believed not perfytely in
the sacrament of the awter / and said that they might not believe that the body
of Christ might be mynystred in the mass. Then was this bishop sorry and prayed
to god besyly for their amendeme^t and so on a day when he was at the mass /
and had made the fraccyon / he saw that blood drop from the host in ye
chalyce / then he made a sign unto them that believed not to come nere him
and to se.. And when they saw his fyngers blody / and the blood ran from
thoost in to ye chalyce / anon for great fere they cried and said. O thou
blyssed man that have this grace too hold crystes body in thyn hondes yt
droppeth blood in ye chalyce / we believe verily thereon / and we beseech the to
pray to him for us yt you haste in thyn hondes yt he take no vengau^ce on us for
our mysbyleue / and we cry mekely mercy. And anon the ost turned in to the
form of breed as it was before / and then they were perfyght men of believe
after An other skyll is the sacrament is made in the awter to make a man by
often sight thereof ye sooner have my^de on Crystys passion and to have it in
my^de For it is ye best defense against temptaco^n of the fend / For saint
Austyn says / the mind of Crystys passyo^ puts away all temptacyons and
the power of all wicked spyrytes / and for this cause roodes and images ben set
on hye in ye chirches / for as soon as a man comes in to the church / he
should see it and have it in his my^de and thy^ke on Cristis passyo^ wherefore
crosses and other images be full necessary and needful what someuer these
lollers say / for and it had not be full profitable holy faders would have
destroyed them many years agone. For right as ye people done worship to ye
ky^ges seal not for love of ye seal / but for reverence of the king yt it
comes fro. So roodes and images be set for ye kings seal in heaven and other
say^tes in ye same wise for images ben lewd peples books And as Johan belet
says there ben many thousands of people yt can not ymagyne in her hertes how
Christ was done on ye cross / but as they se by ymagis in ye chirches and in
other places there as they ben / and to have ye bitter my^de of Crystis passion
I tell you this ensample.

Narracio.
There was a christian man of England yt went in to ye holy land and hired an
hethen man to be his guide / and as he came in to a fair forest and saw many
fair things but this christian man merueyled gretely yt he herd no noise of
birds and thereof he had great merueyll and said to this hethen man I merueyll
much yt there is no song of birds in this wode Then said this hethen man
this is ye weke yt ye call passyo^ weke yt your great prophet deyed in
wherefore on sunday ye last was yt ye call palm sunday / all ye fowls of
this wood deyed for sorrow / and all this weke shall lie as deed / but on
so^daye next come yt ye call ester day they quycken again / and all the year
after make melodye wherefore look up in to the trees see and than he saw every
bow of the trees lie full of birds as flat as they had be spread on ye cross
Then^e sith birds have my^de of Crystys passion and make such morny^ge and
sorrow much more cause had ma^ky^de yt were brought fro euerlasty^ge
da^pnacyon to euerlasty^ge salvation by his passion. The third cause is why ye
sacrament is used in the awter for a man should by ye sight thereof thy^ke on
god Ihesu christ / fader of heaven yt has but one sone yt he loved passy^ge all
thing / but he spared nor to send hy^ down in to this world to suffer
passyo^ and death and to shed his p^cyous blood for manky^de / to bye hy^ out
of ye fendes bonds and to write a charter with his own p^cyous blood of fredom
for evermore to all mankind so yt a man forfeyt not his charter by dedely
sy^ne / but he yt loved god will keep his charter for god asks of a man but
love where he says thus (Da mihi cor tuu^ and sufficit mihi) Sone give me thyn
heart and it is enough for me. Then take heed of this ensample.

Narracio.
There was an earl of Venys yt was called sire Ambryzt yt loved ye sacrament in
ye awter passing well / and did it all ye worship and reverence yt he could
and might so wha^ he leye syke and should be deed he might not receive ye
sacrament for casting / then^e was he sorry and made dole / and then^e he let
make clean his right side and to cover it with a fair clothe of sendell / and
leyde gods body therein and said thus to thost. Lord you know yt I love ye
with all my heart and would feyne receive ye with my mouth and I durst and
therefore I may not I leye yt on the place yt is next to my heart / and so I
show the all the love of my heart yt I can or may wherefore I beseech ye good
lord have mercy on me / and even therewith in the sight of all the people that
were about him his side opened and thost went there in to his side / and then
it closed again and so anon after he deyed and departed out of his world So
let us love the sacrament in our life and do it reverence and worship. And
then at our last end when we shall deye and pass out of this world it
will socour us and bring us to everlasting bliss. Thus the sacrament is used
for great mede getynge to all that believe therein / for though it have the
lykenes of breed and the taast / it is flesh and seems breed. It is quycke
and seems deed ye must believe verily that it is gods blessed body that took
flesh and blood of ye virgyn Mary / and after deyed on ye cross / and roos
fro death to life and styed up to heaven / And now sytteth on his faders right
hand and shall come again at the day of dome to deem the quycke and the deed /
and he that receive it here and byleueth verily thereupon shall have
everlasting life in ye kingdom of heaven as the gospel says (Qui manducat hu^c
pane^ viuet ineternu^) Who so ereth of this breed shall live ever and never be
deed And he that received it and byleued not thus (Reus erit iudicio) At the
day of dome he shall be dampened in to everlasting pain (Augustinus in
persona xp^i. Manducas me non mutabis me in te. sed tu mutaberis in me) Saint
Austyn says in the person of Christ. Ete me but I shall not torn and change
in to the / but you shall torn and change in to me.

Narracio.
We read that there was a Jew that went with a cryste^ man a fellow of his in
to a church of christian people and herd mass (Et post missa^ dixit iudeus)
And after when mass was done the Jew said to ye christian man (Siego tantum
edisse^ qua^tu^ tu comedisti no^ esuria^ vt puto in tribus diebus) If I had
eeten as much as you hasteten I would not be a hu^gred as I trow in three
days. And then^e said ye cryste^ man to ye Jew. (Vere nihil comedi) Forsooth
says ye christian man to ye Jew. I ete no manner mete this day Then said the
Jew (Ego vidite comedere puerum pulcerrimu^ quale^ sacerdos eleuauit ad
altar) I saw ye ete a child / ye which ye priest held up at the awter (Et
tu^c venit pulcerrimus ho^ habens mltos pueros i^ gremio suo) Then^e came there
a sayr man that had many children in his lap (Et dedit vnicuique vestru^ vnu^
pueru^ tale^ quale^ sacerdos conmedit) And he gaf each christian man a child
such as ye priest ete. Yet to sharp your believe ye more to this holy
sacrament. I will tell you this ensample.

Narracio.
We read in saint. Gregoryes time. There was a woman yt hight Lacyua and she
made breed for ye pope and other prestes to sing with and for to housel with the
people. And when the pope came to this woman to give her housel and said here
gods body Than this woman smyled and laughed. Tha^ the pope wtdrewe his hand
and laid the ost upon ye awter and turned to this woman Lacyua and said to her.
why smylest you when you sholdest receive Crystis body. And she said / why
call you that Crystis body yt I made with mine own hand. The^ was Gregory ye
pope sorry for her mysbyleue / and bad all ye people pray to god to show some
miracle for this womans help / and when they had prayed long. Gregory went
to ye awter again and found ye ost turned in to reed flesh and blood bledyng
and he showed it to this woman Then^e she cried and said lord now I cry ye
mercy I believe yt you art very god and man / and gods sone of heaven in form
of breed. Then^e badde Gregory ye people for to pray again yt it should torn
again to bredes lyknesse and so it did / and with ye same ost he houseled this
woman Lacyua and therefore let us do all ye worship that we may to the
sacrament that we can or may and be in no mysbyleue.

Narracio.
Also we find in Deuenshyre beside Exbrydge was a woman yt lay seek and was
nigh deed / and sent after a holy parsone about mydnyght too have her ryghtes.
Than this man in all haste he might arose and went to the church and took
gods body in a box of yuory / and put it in to his bosom / and went forth
to ward this woman. And as he went through the forest in a fair mede that was
his next way it happed that his box fell out of his bosom to the ground and
he went forth and wist it not: and came to this woman and herd her confession.
And than he asked her if she would be houseled / and she said ye sir. Then^e he
put his hand in to his bosom and sought the box / and when he found it not
he was full sorry and sad / and said / dame I will go after gods body and come
again anon to you / and so went forth sore weeping for his symplenes. And so
as he came to a wylowe tree he made thereof a rod / and stryped him self naked
and beat him self that the blood ran down by his sides and said thus to him
self. O thou simple man / why haste thou lost thy lord god / thy maker / thy
fourmer and creator. And when he had thus beat him self / he did on his
clothes and went forth / and than he was ware of a pyller of fire that lasted
from earth to heaven / and he was all astonyed thereof. yet he blyssed him and
went to it / and there lay the sacrament fallen out of the box in too the
grass / and the pyler shone as bright as the son / and it lasted from
gods body to heaven / and all the beestes of the forest were comen about
gods body / and stood in compass round about it / and all kneled on.iiii.
knees save one black horse yt kneled but on one knee. Then said he if you be
any be that may speak I charge yt in gods name here present in form of
breed tell me why thou knelest but on one knee. Then said he I am a fend of
hell / and will not knele and I might / but I am made against my will / for it
is written that every knelynge of heaven and of earth shall be to the worship to
the lord god. Why art thou like an horse. And he said to make the people too
stele me / and at such a town was one hanged for me / and at such a town an
other. Then said this holy person. I command the by gods flesh and his
blood that thou go in to the wilderness / and be there as you shalt never
disease christian people more. And anon he went his way / he might no longer
abide / and then this man went forth to this woman and did her ryghtes by the
which she was saved and went to everlasting salvation / to the which bring
us he / yt for us shed his blood on the rode tree. Ame^.

De festo sancti Andree appostoli.
Good me^ and women such a daiye shall have saint Andrews day / and ye shall
fast the even and come too god and to all holy church / and worship this holy
saint and the day for three special virtues. One is for his great holiness in
his doing The second for his good lyuy^ge. The third for his great passion
suffry^ge / he was a man of holy living / for when he understood and herd of
saint Johan baptyst yt he preched in desert he left al his wordly occupacyon
and went to hy^ and was his dyscyple / and so after on a day as christ walked by
ye way / and saint Johan saw him he said to his dyscyples. Ecce agnus dei q^
tollit p^ta^ mundi). Se the lamb of god that shall do away the sin of all
ye world / and as saint Andrewe herd that anon he left saint Johan baptyst
and sued Christ / and when he herd Christ preche it pleased him so well / that
anon he went and fetched Peter his brother to here Christ preche. Then they kest
great love to god / and soon after as they were in the sea of Galyle fysshynge
Christ came and called them / and anon they left fysshynge / ship / net /
and all yt they had / and sued Christ ever after / and were with hy^ until
he styed up unto his realm of heaven.

Narracio.
Then after that saint Andrewe preched among the people. Then on a day as
he preched it happed so there was a man among the people that was called
Nycoll that had lived many wynters in lechery. But yet by the grace of god he
thought to amend his life And when he herd that the word of god was of so
great virtue that it should put away all temptacyonns of sin / he let write
a gospel and bare it with him where soever he went / and wc the virtue thereof
he abstayned himself fro sin / but yet on a day by temptacyon of the fend /
he forgate himself and went again to a brodelles house as he was used to do
before. And as he came there / and that the women looked upon him they cried out
on him and said. O thou old sely man / what do thou here / go home again
For we se so many meruayles on the yt we may not have to do with the. Then
Nycoll be thought yt he had ye gospel upon him / and anon he went to saint
Andrewe and told him all the case / and he prayed saint Andrewe to pray for
hy^ yt his soul might be saved. The^ saint Andrewe would not ete ne dry^ke till
he wist if Nycol should be saved or not. Saint Andrew fasted.v. days breed and
water prayenge night and day. Then came a voice and said. as you have fasted and
prayed / make Nycoll for to do the same / and then he shall be saved Then
saint Andrewe badde Nycoll fast five days breed and water / and pray besely
unto god / and so he did. And then come a voice unto saint Andrewe again
and said Thy prayers and thy fasting has made Nycoll that was lost to be
found again and he shall be saved.

Narracio.
Also an other miracle that an other young man come to saint Andrewe on a time
and said pryuely to him. Sire my mother has be long about me that I should lie
with her and for I would not do her will / she has accused me to the bishop
and said yt I would have done that sinful deed with her / wherefore I wot well
yt I shall be deed / and yet I had lever deye than scau^der my mother so foul /
therefore I beseech you pray for me that I may take mydeth pacyently to the
salvation of my soul. Then said saint Andrewe go forth to thy dome and I shall
go with the. And sother with the people come and fette him before the bishop
And wha^ his mother accused hy^ / he said no thing but held his peace. Then
said saint Andrewe (Innocens sanguis eius da^p nabitur (This cursyd woman for
lust of her body wrongfully is about for to dampne her own child to death
vengeance will come to the. Then she said / loo sir Justice ever sith that he
might not have his will / he has drawn to this man for counseyll and socour.
Then the Justice commanded to cast this young man to the water to drown
him and to put saint Andrewe in to prison till he were auysed what death he
should deye. Then saint Andrewe prayed besely unto god for help and socour.
And then anon come a great thondre and made all the people so aferde yt they
were feign to fette saint Andrewe out of the prison And even therewith come a
lyghtny^ge of fire and brenned ye mother of ye young man in sight of all the
people And thus

day he waxed wood and deyed among all the people. And when Maximilia his wife
herd thereof / anon she took Andrews body / and buried it in a tomb. And out
of the tomb welleth manna / and oil together / and by that people of the
country know when it should be dear / and when great ple^te. For when it shall
be plente / it welleth plentefully / and wha^ it shall be derthe scarcely.

Narracio.
It fell so there was a bishop that loved well saint Andrew / and for the
fend might in no wife bring him out of his purpose. He came to the bishop in
lykenes of a fair woman prayenge him that she might speak with him in
counceyle of confession / and he granted her there too. Syrshe said. I am a
knights daughter / and have be much cherysshed / and nourysshed in great
tenderness / and for I se this world is but a vanyte to trust upon. I have
auowed chastyte / and so now my fader would mary me to a worthy prince. And for
I would not break my vow I am come pryuely away in poor array / and thus I
herd of your great holiness and am come to have your counceyle / socoure / and
help of you* Wherefore I pray you ordeyne for me that ye fend have no power
to let me of my purpose. Then the bishop conforted her / and badde she
should thank god that had set her in such purpose / and that he would send
her grace therewith to continue. And said to her. Esto secura filia). Be thou
seker daughter this day thou shall dyne with me / and then we shall by good
advise when we have dyned or deyne so for you that ye shall do right well. Nay
sir said she leest the people would have any suspeccyon of bad rule. Ye said
the bishop thereof no charge. Plurimi erunus et non soli^. For there shall be
so many in company that there shall be no suspeccion. Then she thanked him
fair / and she was set to fore the bishop in a chair at mete / and ever when
ye bishop looked on her / he seemed her so fair that he was gretely tempted on
her / so that he had almoost forgete him self And then anon there came a
pilgrim to the gate / and beat fast on the gate / that all that were within
the hall were sore astonyed of the noise / so he cried let in / let in.
Then said the bishop / shall this man come in. Then said she let him
answer to some questyon / first if he be worthy or not to come so nygh in your
presence. Then said the bishop. I pray you to make the questyon / for I am
not auysed at this time. Then said she unto the messenger. Interroga quod est
magus miraculu^ quoth deus vnquam in paruare fecit). Ask him what was ye gretest
miracle that ever god made in a foot of earth. Then when the pilgrim was
asked this. He answered and said. A man's face which is but a foot / and but
a man's own face / for though all the men and women that ever were borne
stood before me / yet should I know one from an other by some degree. When he
gave this answer / he was gretely commended therefore. Then said she. I se yt
he is wise / bydde him give an other answer to an other questyon. Ask him
whyder earth is higher than heaven. Then he answered and said thus. There as
Crystes body is there is earth / for Crystes body is of our kind / and our
kind is earth / so therefore there as Crystes body is earth is higher than
heaven. As he had given ye answer he was well allowed and was boden come in. Nay
said she / let him assoyle ye third questyon. Ask him how far it is from
heaven to hell. Then when he was opposed of this he answered the messenger. Go
again to her that sytteth in the chair before the bishop / and bid her give
this answer / for she can better tell it than I. Quando de celo in abissum
cecidit). For she is a fend of hell / and she has metten it / and so did I
never / she fell out of heaven for her pride and presumpcyon with Lucyfer. And
when that the messe^ger herd this he was all heavy / but he gaf this answer
that al men might here. Then^e this fe^de vanysshed away with an horrible
stynke* Then ye bishop bethought him of this temptacyon and was sorry in his
heart. And anon he made to send after this pilgrim / but or yt the messenger
came again to the yate he was gone. Then the bishop made all men to pray to
god to send wetynge what the pilgrim was that so goodly halpe him at his need.
Then came a voice to hy^ and said it was saint Andrewe yt came to socoure him
for the love and service that he did to him / and badde hy^ preche this
miracle to the people to see and know how gracyously he helps all that will
pray to him / and therefore let us worship and pray to him to be our socour
and our help against the fend now and ever Amen.

De sancto Nicholao.
GOod men and wymmen such a day ye shall have saint Nycolas day the which
is much praised in holy church and specyaly for three causes The first for
his meke living The.ii. for his heavenly techynge. The.iii. for his great
compassyon having. First he was made lowely (Pater eius Epiphanus. matter eius
Ioha^na dicta est) It is said that his fader hight Epyphanus and his mother
Iohanne yt which in her yougth gate saint Nycolas. And when he was borne they
made her vows both to keep and to live in chastyte and no more came together /
but hold them plesed of this one child that god has sent them the which
they made him christian and called him Nycolas / yt is a man's name / but he
keeps the name of ye child / for he chose to keep virtues meekness and
symplenes and with out malice. Also we read while he lay in his cradell he
fasted wenesdaye and frydaye / these days he would souke but ones of ye day /
and there with he held him plesed / thus he lived all his life in virtues with this
childs name. And therefore childern done him worship before all other say^tes.
For he was ever meke without any malice / so yt all the people praised him for
his meke living here. Also he was made bishop of the cite of Myrre by a voice
which came from heaven / for wha^ the bishop was deed all the bishops of the
country came together to chese an other. Then came voice to one of them and
bad him rise erly on the morrow and go to the church door and make him bishop
yt ye find there / that is called Nycolas And so on the morrow he came to the
church door and there he found Nycolas / and then he said thus to him
(Quale nomen habes tu) What is thy name / and lowtynge with his heed answered
mekely and said. Nycolas / Then^e said ye bishop (Fili veni mecu^) Sone came
with me I have to speak with ye in counsel and so ladde hy^ to ye other
bishops and said / lo syres here is he yt god has ordained to be bishop and
so they made him bishop of Myrre by heavenly chesynge. He had also a great
compassyon of them yt were in disease and peril. For when his fader and his
mother deyed they left hy^ wordly good enough the which yt he spend on them yt
were poor and nedy.

Narracio
It fell so yt there was a rich man yt had.iii. fair daughters young wy^men
but by myschyef he fylle in to pouerte / so yt for great need he ordained his
eldest daughter for to be a common woman / and so after the other two daughters
for he might not find them. and by this mean he thought to get his lyuy^g
and hers both. For he wyste not how to live for great pouerte yt he stood in
And when Nycolas herd thereof he had great compassyon of them all / and came
pryuely in a night to this man's house / and at a wyndowe he cast a bag of
gold in this man's chamber. And on the morrow when this man rose and found
this gold / anon there with he married his eldest daughter. Then came Nycolas
and brought an other so^me after / and there with he married the second daughter.
Then this man had great merueyll how this gold came thither and walked
pryuely to know thereof / and the iii. time Nycolas came and when this man
herd the gold fall / anon he went out and ouertoke Nycolas and when he
knew yt it was he that had helped him so in his need / he knelede down and
would have kyssed his feet / but he would not suffer it / but he prayed him to
keep counseyll while he lived.

Narracio.
Also on an other time men were in ye see lykely for to be drowned in a great
tempest / they cried to god and saint Nycolas saying thus (Dn^e rex eterne
succurre nobis miseris Lord king everlasting socour us wretches. And anon
Nycolas came and said (Vocastis me ecce adsum presens) Loo I am prese^te at
your calling and so brought them forth save and sound to land.

Narracio
Also in ye country there was on a time great derth of corn (Fames valida)
And great hu^gre in so much yt the people were almost lost for defaute of mete.
Then^e it happed there came ships of the^perours straight in to an haven with
whete in yt country. Then^e went saint Nycolas to them and prayed them yt he
might have of every ship.C. busshels of their whete for to releue ye people with
and he would undertake yt they should lack none of their mesure wha^ they came
home. Then^e he had all his asking / and wha^ ye ships came to the emperor
they had herfull mesure and lacked nothy^ge of her corn yt saint Nycolas had
through his holy prayer (O quam probat sanctu^ dei farris augme^tacio) O how
merueyllously by ye grace of god and prayer of this holy man this whete was
multeplyed and encresed / for of yt whete was so great plente yt it found all
ye people to ete and drink and to sow enough for three year after.

Narracio
An other miracle there were two knights yt were accused of treason to
the emperor of a falls matter and were commanded to pryso^ / for to have be put
to death soon after / Then^e they cried to god and to saint Nycolas for help
and socour so that ye night before they should be deed Saint Nycolas came to
the emperor as he lay in his bed and said thus to hy^. Why have ye wrongfully
dampened these knights to death arise up anon and deliver the^ out of prison or
else I will pray to god to reyse battle up on ye in ye which thou shall deye
and wild bestes shall ete ye. Then^e said the emperor to hy^ What art thou ye
so boldly spekest and so thretest me. Then^e said he I am Nycolas ye bishop
of Myrre. Then^e the emperor anon sent after ye knights and said to them what
wytchecraft can ye yt thus has trauayled me to night know ye any man yt hight
Nycolas bishop of Myrre / Then^e as soon as they herd this name they fell
down to ye ground and held up their hondes thanky^ge god and Saint Nycolas
when they had told the emperor of his life and how holy he was ye Emperor bade
them go to him and thank hy^ of her lives / and so they did. And he prayed ye
knights to pray Nycolas to threten hy^ no more / but pray to god for hy^ and
for his Reame and so they did. Thus ye may see yt he has great co^passyon of
the^ yt were in disease. Then^e after when saint Nycolas should deye he prayed
to god to send him an angel for to fetch his soul. And when he saw this
angel come / saint Nycholas louted and said. In manus tuas dn^e co^mendo
spiritu^ meu^ redemisti me domine deus veritatis). And so he yielded up the
ghost. And when he was buried / at the heed of his tomb sprange a well of
oil that did medicines to al sores. Then it happened many years after that
turks dystroyed ye cite of myrre there as saint Nycolas lay. And when the
people of the cite of Barus herd yt ye cite of Myrre was destroyed.xlvii.
knights were ordained to go thither. Then they arrayed ships and went
thither. And by telling of four monks that were left there / they knew
saint Nycholas tomb / and vndyde it anon / and there they found saint
Nycholas bones swymmynge in oil. Then^e they took them up and brought them to
the cite of Barus with great solempnyte. Then for great miracles yt were done
there in the cite of Myrre increased again. And so after saint Nycholas was
deed / they chose an other bishop in his stead. And anon after by enuyte of
the people he was put down from his bysshopryche / and then anon the oil
ceased and ran no more. Then was ye bishop called again to his cite /
then the oil sprange out again as it did tofore / and did many miracles.

Narracio.
There was a christian man borrowed a certain sum of money of a Jew / and the
Jew said he would lene none but if he had a borowe. And this christian man said
/ he had none but saint Nycolas / and he granted to take saint Nycholas to
borowe. Then ye christian man swore on the awter that he would pay well and
truly this money again / and so departed and went their way till the day of
payment came. And when this day was passed / then the Jew asked his money /
and ye christian man said yt he paid hy^ / and the Jew said nay. and that other
said yes / and that he would do his law and swear upon a book / and so when
the day came yt they should go to the law / the christian man made him an holow
staff / and put the gold therein / and so came to the law. And as he should
swear while he went to ye book he took the Jew his staff there the gold was
in too hold / and by this mean swore that he had paid the Jew. And when he
had sworn he took his staff of the Jew again and went homewardes / and as
he went by the way he was passing slepy and he laid him down in the hye way
Then^e it happed there came a carte rennynge and went over this man and slew
him / and brake this staff that the gold was in / and ye gold fell out. And
then the people saw that this came of great vengeance for the falshode that
he had done / and they fette the Jew / and badde him take up his money.
Then^e was the Jew sorry / and said he would not / but if that they would pray
saint Nycholas to reyse him again / then he would be crystened. Reuelauit a
defu^ctis defunctu^. Then this deed man was raised from death to life by the
prayer of saint Nycholas. Baptisatus au^t iudeus viso miraculo). Then the
Jew yt was out of believe / by the sight of that miracle was crystened.

Narracio.
Also there was an other Jew that saw the great might of saint Nycholas in
miracles werkynge. And he let make an image of saint Nycholas and set it in
his ship to keep his good and charged the image to keep well his good while yt
he was absent. and when this man was gone there came thieves of the sea and
robbed the man / and bare away his good. And so when this Jew came home again
/ and saw all his good gone / he was wroth with saint Nycholas / and took a
staff and all to beat the image and said. Ecce oi^a bona mea posui i^ vr^am
custodia^. Lo quod he I took my good to your keeping for great trust / and it
is stolen away / ye have deceived me / and therefore thou shalt abye every
day till I have my good again. Then as these thieves departed the good saint
Nycholas came to them and said. Cur tam indirecte fecistis me flagellare). Why
have ye made me to be beten thus sore. Then they said. Quis es tu). What art
thou that speaks thus to us. Then he said. Ego sum nicholaus seruus dei). I
am Nycholas the servant of god yt ye have made thus sore to be beten / and
showed them how sore he was beten for the good that they had borne away / yt
was taken him to keep / and he bad them goo and bear this good again anon /
or else gods vengeance shall fall on you and ye shall be hanged in hell
euerychone. Then they were sore aferde / and bare again ye good that same
night And on the morrow when the Jew came and saw his good brought again /
anon he was crystened / and after that he was an holy man. And every year
after on saint Nycholas day for the great love that he had to saint Nycholas /
and also of a sone that he had that was a clerk / he made a great feast on
saint Nycholas day. Then it happened on a time upon saint Nycholas day / he
badde many clerks to his feast Then came the fend to the gate in lykenes of
a pilgrim / and asked some good for gods sake. Then^e the good man that made
the feast took his sone an alms to bear to the pilgrim / so the child went
to the gate. Then was the pilgrim gone / and the child followed after the
fend And when he was a good way from his faders place / the fend caught the
child and slew it. And when the fader herd thereof he was full sorry / and
took the child and laid it in his chamber and cried for sorrow and said. O
saint Nycholas this is the reward and mede that I shall have for the great
worship that I do to the / and anon ye child rose from death to life. And
than this man was full glad and thanked god and saint Nycholas.

Narracio.
An other miracle / there was a man yt prayed to god and saint Nycholas yt he
might have a child. And if he had a child he would led it to the church of
saint Nycolas / and there he would offer a cup of gold / and than soon
after he had a child. And when this child was of reasonable aege his fader
let do make a cup of gold / and when it was made / it lyked him so well
that he let make an other. And then he went toward saint Nycholas / and he
must pass over the sea. So when they were in the sea / the fader badde the
sone take up some water with the cup. And then the child would have taken
water / and the cup fell out of his hand in to the sea. And then the
child would have caught the cup again / and fell after in to the sea / and
ye child was drowned there in the sea. Then the fader made much sorrow /
but yet he went forth with ye other cup to do his pilgrimage. And when he
came to saint Nycholas church / and offered up his cup and set it on the
auter anon it was cast from the awter / and he set it on again / and it was
cast ferder / and yet the third time he set it on again / and then it was
cast much ferder. Then came the child with that other cup in his hand /
and said to all the people yt saint Nycholas took him up by the hand when he
fell in to the sea / and led hy^ safe out. And then was the fader glad
and offered up there both cups / and went home again with Joy and myrthe.

Narracio.
There was an other rich man that by ye prayer of saint Nycholas had a
child. And he made a fair chapel in ye worship of god and saint Nycholas.
So it happened on a day that this child was taken with enmyes and led in
to an other strange country / and there he was in service in the ky^nges
court. And as it happened on saint Nycolas day he bethought him of the great
myrthe and solempnyte that was made that day in his faders chapel at home:
and he was heavy and syghed wonder sore. Then ye king herd thereof and said
to him. Nycholas what menest thou for to syghe so sore / be merry / for thou
must needs abide here with us. And anon there came a great wind and smote ye
house and braste it / and the child was caught up with the cup that he bare
in his hand and was set before the gate of the chapel there as his fader made
the feast. Then was there made great Joy and myrthe of this miracle. Lo thus
ye may se how great compassyon saint Nycholas had of them that were in myschefe
and disease. Some books say that this child was of Normandy and was taken of
the Soudan beyond the sea. And often he was beten / and ones when he was beten
on saint Nycholas day and put in to prison then he wept sore / and with that
he fell a sleep. And wha^ he awoke he was in ye church of his fader.

De concepcione beat marie virginis.
Good men and women such a day ye shall have ye concepcyon of our lady / yt
which day and feast our mother holy church makes mind and mencyon of ye
concepcyon of our blyssed lady forthre special causes. The first is for her
faders holiness. The second for her moders goodness. The third for her mekenes
She had a fader that was called Ioachym / that was so holy a man that when he
was but fyftene year of aege he departed all his goods in to three parties. And
one party he deled to wydowes and to faderles children. The second party he
gave to them that were poor and nedy. The third part he kept too him self
and his household. And when he was.xxxii. year of aege / for the great goodness
of Anne he wedded her. And when they were wedded they were together.xxii year.
In the which time Anne never dyspleased him with no manner thing / neither night
nor day. For she was so gentle to him / and they were both good and holy.
Yet god sent them no fruit of their bodies but were baraynes. Wherefore they
made a vow to god that if he would send them a child they would offer it up
to him in to the temple for to serve god both day and night. Then on a day
as Ioachym went with his neighbors to the temple for to do his offringes. The
bishop that hight Ysachar rebuked him openly before all the people and said.
Ioachym it falls not for the that is barayne and have no fruit to do of
frynges with other people that god has sent fruit in Iherusalem. Then was
Ioachym sore dysmayed and astonyed with this rebuke. Then he went home
wepinge and took his shepeherde pryuely with his sheep / and went forth in to a
far country among mountains and hills and purposed to have be there all
his life / and neuermore to come home to Anne his wife. Then when Ioachym was
gone. Anne was right sorye and prayed unto god and said. Lord that I am woo
and doleful. I am barayne / and I may have no fruit / and now more over my
husband is gone away from me. And I know not whyder he is gone. Lord have
mercy on me poor desolate creature. Then as she prayed thus / an angel came
down and comforted her and said / Anne be of good comfort for thou shall have
a child in thy old age there was never none like ne never shall be. Then was
Anne aferde of this angels words and of the sight of hy^ / and lay always in
her prayers as she had be deed. Then went ye same angel to Ioachym and said
these words / and badde Ioachym take a lamb and offer it in sacrefyce to god
/ and so he did. And when he had done so from myddaye till euensonge time he
lay on the ground in his prayers / thanking god with all his heart. Then on
the morrow as thangel badde he went homewarde to Anne his wife with his sheep.
And when he came nigh home the angel came to Anne and badde her go to the gate
yt was called ye golden gate and abide her husbonde there till he came. Then^e
was she glad and took her maidens with her and went to the gate / and there
she met with Ioachym and said. Lord I thank the for I was a wydowe / and
now I am a wife. I was barayne / and now I shall bear a child. I was woo and
weeping / and now I shall be in Joy liking And soon after Anne conceived our
lady / and when she was born she was called Maria was ye angel badde before.
Then after yt she was wened she was brought to the Temple / and left there
among other virgynes to serve god both night and day / Then^e was she so meke
among all other virgins in all her living yt all virgynes called her queen
of virgynes. So she is mekest of all the saints that be in heaven / and most
redyest to help all them that call to her in any need

Narracio.
We read in holy writ a miracle of our lady. There was a lords man that had
gadred much good of his lords / for he was his rent gaderer and went to bear
it to his lord Then were there thieves that set for him to rob him by the
way in the wood there as he must needs go through. So when he came in too the
wood / he bethought him that he had not said our ladies sawter as he was
wont to do. And he kneled down and began to say. Then came our lady like
a fair maiden / and set a garlonde on his heed. And at each Aue she set a rose
in the garlande that was so bryt that all the wood shone thereof / and when he
had done he kyssed the earth and went his way. Then came the thieves and took
him and led him to their master the which had seen al these doings. Then
said he to him / what woman was that / that set the garlande on thy heed /
and he said sir forsothe I saw no woman nor garlonde. Then said the master
thief / I wot well thou art a lords man and haste much good with the. But I
would feign wit what woman that it was that came to the / and why thou kneled
down. And he said / when I saw you I was aferde / and also I bethought me
that I had not said our ladies psalter / and kneled down to say it / prayenge
our lady for to help me at my need. Then said he / for her love goo thy
way / and pray to her for us / and so he went his way sauf and sound by
help and socoure of our lady. But now ye shall here how this feast was first
founden. There was a king in England that hight Wyllyam conqueroure / and he
sent the abbot of Ramsey to the king of Denmark on his message. And when he
came in too the sea / there came a tempest and a derkenes that he and all that
were with him wend to have be drowned / and every man prayed besyly unto god
and to our lady for socoure and help / and other diverse saints / and this
abbot prayed unto our lord Ihesu christ / and to this holy vyrgyn saint Mary
full deuoutusly. Then came unto him a fair woman and said unto them / if ye
will have the concepcyon of our lady in worship and honor / that is two days
after saint Nycholas day / she will be ready thelpe and socoure you at this
time Then this abbot said ye / with a good will / and I wyste what should be
the service of the feast. Then said she / the same that is in my natyuyte /
saufe torn the natyuyte in to my concepcyon. And the abbot said it should be
done with full good will. Then anon the tempest ceased / and all was well and
they sailed forth and thabbot did his message / and came again sauf and
sound and sped well in every degree. And when he came home he told ye king
this vysyon. The king made him preche it in all the realm about. And thus it
was hallowed in all holy church.

Narracio.
Also we find that there was a seculer chanon that on a time went over a water
to do auoutry with a woman. And as he was about to begin to say our ladies
matyns / and as he was at the Inuytatorye / that is (Aue maria) there with the
fend keste him down / and drowned him and would have had him to hell. Then
came our lady and said / why haste thou taken this man / the fend said / for
we find hy^ in our service going to do auoutrye. Then said our lady / he
was in my service / and anon restored him to life again / and badde him do no
more sin / and badde him halowe her concepcyon / and so he did and was a
good man ever after all his life.

Narracio.
Also there was a clerk that every day used to say the service of our
blyssed lady. Then it happed by counceyle of his friends that he should take
a wife / and when he should be wedded he bethought him that he had not said
our ladies service. Then he made all the people to go out of the church /
whiles that he said his service. and then he kneled down and said his
service till he came to an antem of our lady. Quam pulchra es amica mea) Then^e
our lady appeared unto him and said. Why say thou that I am fair and honest
/ why will thou than leave me and take an other. Then said he to our lady /
what will thou that I shall do. Then said our lady / if thou wylt leave thy
flesshely wife / and serve my sone and me I shall be thy spouse And thou shalt
have with me a crown of everlasting life in the kyngedome of perdurable
bliss. The which god and his blyssed mother saint Mary / and all holy saints
in heaven / bring us all thither. Amen.

De sancto thoma.
Dear friends such a day ye shall have saint Thomas day that was Crystes
appostle and ye shall fast the even / and do him worshypp / and specially for
three causes. The first for the preuynge of our believe / and for great wonders
in his ways / and great miracles in his days. This holy appostle preued so our
faith that he left no trouble. For when the dysciples said that our lord was
risen from death to life / and they had seen him and spoke with him. Thomas
said he would not believe it till he had put his hand in his side in to the
wound that the spear had made. Then.viii days after when all the dyscyples
were together and thomas with them / then^e our lord Ihesu christ came bodily
to them and said. Pax vobis Peace be with you. and then our sorde said to Thomas
of ynde Mitte manu^ tuam in latus meu^). Put thy hand in to my side in to the
wound that was made with the spear yt smote me to the heart. Et noli esse
incredulus). And be no longer out of the believe / but be steadfast in the faith
And then when Thomas had done so / anon he said for great wonder Dn^s meus and
deus meus. My lord and my god. I believe yt you art god and man. Then our
lord said to him (Beati qui crediderunt et no^ viderunt) Blessed be they that
believe and see not / for now thou have seen thou byleuest. But yet the tarye^ge
of Thomas brought us to sadder believe / and to the blessing of our lord Ihesu
christ / Of this speaks saint Gregory and says Thomas of ynde / thou have
helped more to the faith that would not believe till thou hade feled his
wounds / then did Mary mawdeleyne that did believe at ye first sight
(Minus est enim in maria magdalena que cicius credidit quam thomas qui diu
dubitauit) Thus Thomas he preued our faith and our believe / so that we need
never for to varye nor to be in doubt Also Thomas did many marueylles and
great woundres yt were in his days.

Narracio.
It happed that a king of ynde send his messenger (Albanus indie requirens
artificem) To seek some crafty men in to the country of Cezar to seek a
carpenter ye could make him a palace to his plesau^ce. Then our lord Ihesu
christ met with this Albanus and sent wiht him holy saint Thomas in to the
great ynde. And when that Thomas and Albanus were passed the sea / they come to
a Cite there as the kings daughter was wedded the same day / wherefore all
manner of people were commanded to mete. So among all other people Thomas and
Albanus came in / and were set to mete. But Thomas ete not / for his thought
was ever of god and had no lust for to ete Then came a botteler to Thomas and
smote Thomas on the cheke and badde him ete. Then said Thomas to him / (Non
hinc surgam donec manus que me percussit a cambus aufertur) I shall not rise
from this place till that hand that smote me be brought in with a dog.
Then anon after the boteler went after water and a lion mete with him and
slew him and drank his blood / and ete of his body / and then came a black
dog and caught that hand yt smote Thomas and brought it in to the halle in
to the sight of all the people and laid it down before Thomas. Then was there
a woman that understood Thomas words and anon kneled down to Thomas and
cried and said thou art god or else one of his dyscyples / for right as you wylt
so it is. Then^e the king prayed to Thomas to bless his daughter and her
husbonde. And Thomas was glade there of Cepit erge predicare beatus thomas)
Therefore the blessed Thomas began to preche and told they^ of our lord Ihesu
christ yt he turned the man that was wedded ye same day from his wife and made
him bishop of the same Cite / and his wife a nonne / and they were martyrs
after for Crystys sake. Then went. Thomas forth in to ynde to the king to
make hy^ a palace to his plesaunce. So when Thomas was come to the king he was
glade and delivered Thomas a great so^me of gold to make a palace with. Then
rode ye king forth in the mean time And wha^ Thomas should have made this
palace him thought it was better to make a palace in heaven than in earth / and
deled his gold among the poor people / and converted they^ to the faith
Then^e came the king home and wend that his palace hade be ready. And when he
herd how Thomas and Albanus hade done / he would have put them to death / But
it happed that his own brother was deed the same time and therefore he put they^
both in to prison / unto the time yt he hade buried his brother. And then as god
would when his brother had lay long deed / he rose from death to life / and
told to the king that he had seen his palace in paradyse that Thomas had made
for him / and prayed the king that he might have it / and he would give hy^ as
much gold as he took Thomas. Then the king took his counseyll and said nay.
I will have it myself / let him make the an other For his brother had seen the
palace in paradyse made with gold. and arrayed with precious stones and clothe
of gold. Then the king took crystendome and many a thousand with him. And
when the bishops saw that the king and so much other people forsook herlawes
and turned to crystendome. they werefore wroth with Thomas. Then one of them
said he would venge his god / and with a spear smote Thomas through the body and
slew him. Then christian people buried him in a tomb of crystal / and there
god wrought many miracles for him / for the hand that was in Crystys side
would never come in to the tomb but ever lay with out. Also in his prechynge
and techynge he taught / (Duodecum gradus virtutum assignare) Primus est vt in
deum crederent qui est vnus in essencia. et trinus in personis. Dedit eis
triplex exemplum sensibile quomodo tres person sint vna essentia Primum quia
vna est in homine sapiencia et de vna procedit intellectus. memoria. et
ingenium. Memoria est vt no^ obliuiscaris. Intellectum vt intelligas que
ostendi possunt vel doceri. Ingenium est vt quod didiceris inuenias / Secundum
exemplum est. quia in vna vinea tria sunt lignum folium et fructus. Et hec omma
tria sunt vna vinea. Tercium exemplum est. quia caput nostrum ex quatuor
sensibus constat. In vno autem capite sunt visus auditus. gustus. et odoratus.
et he plura sunt. Et tamen vnum caput Secundus gradus est. vt baptismum
suscipiat. Tercius gradus est. vt a fornicatione abstineat. Quartus vt se^ ab
auaricia temperet. Quintus. vt gulam distingeret. Sextus. vt penitenciam
teneret. Septimus. vt in his perseueraret. Octauus vt hospitalitate^ amaret.
Nonus vt voluntatem dei requirat. Decimus est. vt facienda quereret. Vndecimus
vt caritatem amicis et inimicis impen deret. Duodecimus est. vt custodiat hec
vigile^ cura^ exhiberet Item appostolus. Omnes qui oderant deum de tribus
breuiter instruxit faciendis. scilicet de ecclesiam diligerent. Sacerdotes
honorarent et assidue ad verbum dei conuenirent. Also there ben many meruaylous
and wonderful things done in this daye^ For on that day all the country
comes thyde to take pardon of that hand / that lies out of the tomb in
their use the bishop of the Cite that gooth to mass. And when he has said
(Confiteor) then he takes a branch of a vine and puts in to Thomas
hand that is out of the tomb / and then he gooth forth to mass / And the
branch burgeneth out grapes / and by that time that the gospel be said / the
grapes ben ripe / then the bishop takes the grapes and wryngeth the wine in
ye chalyce / and so syngeth with the same wine and houseled ye people. And when
any man or woman comes that is not worthy to receive this housell / anon the
hand closes together / and will not open till he be shryuen / and then it
will open Also if any people be in debate / they shall be brought before Thomas
tomb / and there the cause shall be rehearsed then will the hand torn to
him that is in the right and so they be made at one. Thus Thomas preued our
believe and did many wo^dres in his days. Also Johan grysostomus says that
Thomas came in to the country there as the three kings of Coleyne were and
Thomas crystened them for they had worshypped god in his birth / and therefore
Thomas came to they^ and taught them the faith and the believe of Christ / to
that believe that we may be saved / god bring us all Amen.

De Natiuitate domini nostri Ihesu christi.
Friends as ye here and se all holy church / makes mind and mencyon of ye
great mirth and melody of the blyssed birth of our lord Ihesu christ very god
and man / yt was this day borne of his mother Mary in socoure of all mankind.
But in especyall for three causes. First to give peace to man of good will and to
light the^ that were derke in syn^e And for to draw us with love to him.
Then as to ye first cause he was borne to give men peace of good will. I may
well preue this For when he was borne / angels song thus Gloria in excelsis
deo). Joy be to god in heaven / and pease in earth to mankind of good will. At
mydnyght our lord was borne for by kind all thing was in peace and rest in
showing that he was and is (princeps pacis) prince of peace. and come to make
peace between god and man. and between the angel and man / and between man and
man And for to be true medyatour between god and man / he took nature and kind
of both and was both very god and man / and by his medyacyon he knytte the
love of god to man / so sadly yt the fader of heaven spared not him that is his
own sone / but sent him down in to this world too bye mankind with his
precious blood through his great mekenes to Joy of paradyse that man had
lost by couetyse of vnbuxsomnesse. Thus he made pease between god and man /
and man and man. For when aungelles saw their master wroth with man for his
vnbuxsomnes / for it is a sin that aungelles does hate gretely. Therefore
they kept the gates of paradyse / and would let no soul come in to paradyse
till they saw their lord and sovereign borne of mankind and take flesh of
the blyssed vyrgyn Mary his most beloved mother. And then anon for love of
our lord the angels did manky^de worship and spoke goodly to mankind / as to
the shepeherdes that kept her sheep in the country by. They badde them go to
the Cite of Bethleem / and there they should find a child borne / and laid
in a cratche and badde them do him worship and so they dyden / and ever syn
angels have been friendly to man and lowly. and have done reverence to manky^de /
for thyncarnacyon of our lord Ihesu christ Thus he made peace between angels and
man Also he made peace between man and man for against the time yt our lord
would be born. he made so great peace / yt in all the world there as kingdoms
and countrees were in debate and warred each with other unto ye time of our
lords birth. Then there was so great peace that a man yt was called Octauyan
Emperor of Rome / and he had ye governance of all the world for all the
world was subget to Rome / and it dured.xxx. year in so much yt there was a
maundement sent out from Rome in to all ye world / co^maundynge that all
manner of people should go to the Cite that he drew lygnage of and lay a penny
upon his heed and offer it up in know lechynge that he was subget to the emperor
of Rome Then must Joseph our ladies husbonde needs go to ye cite of Bethleem
for to offer with other people / but for he had no money to offer he took an
ox with him to selle at the Cite to make money to do his dute with. But for he
durst not leave our lady be^hy^de him / for she was nigh her time and therefore he
set her upon an ass and took her with him. And so when they came to the cite
of Bethleem / it was so full of people so that Joseph and our lady might have no
lodging / but turned in to a cabon that was made betwix two houses there as
the people of ye country set their horses and their asses and other bestes
wha^ they come in to the town to the market / and there they found a cratche
with heye / and they set the ox and the ass thereto and so there they tarried
all that night. And when it was a little before mydnyght / our lady badde
Joseph goo in to the town and look for her a mydwyf. For the time was come
that she should be delivered. And so while that Joseph was in the town for
the mydwyf / our lady was delivered / and she lapped her sone in clothes and
laid it in the cratche before the ox and thasse / anon they knew her lord
and fill down on her knees and worshypped him / and ete no more of the heye.
Then anon after came Joseph with two mydwyues zebell and Salome / and zebell
found that our lady was a clean maiden and cried and said / (Virgo peperit
filium) A maid has born a child Then Salome would not believe it / but
anon went to our lady and boustously handled our lady (Probare vellet) And she
would preue it / and even there with her hondes dried up Then came an angel
to her and badde her she should go and touch ye child. and so she did and
anon she was hole. Then went Joseph and did his offrynge with other people
/ and kept our lady in the same cabon while she was in child bed Thus ye may
understand that Christ gives peace to all people that be of a good will and
called hem his childern. And in verefyenge of this the first mass that is
so^ge yt day in holy church is song soon after mydnyghte / and begins
thus (Dominus dixit ad me. filius meus es tu ego hodie genui te) Our lord
says to me you art my sone Our lord called him his sone and his child that
loved hy^ in rest and peace. and when he departs out of this world he will
bring him to ever lasting rest and peace And he that will not have here no
rest nor peace / shall go to everlasting pain / there as is never no rest nor
peace nor never shall be but everlasting woo Thus he gives peace to men of good
will He lyghtneth them that lyketh him. Here by good men ye shall understand
that Christ heled not oonly them that were blind in soul and combred with
derkenesse of synful living. For as saint Austyn says when our lord should
be borne the world was full of derkenesse and specially of sin of lechery /
and of the sin against kind. In so much that he had almoost left to have be
borne of mankind / wherefore al those that dyden sin against ky^de that time /
they deyed suddenly through out all the world / in showing how horrible and
abhomynable that sin is in the sight of almighty god. Then looked they full
derke in sin that had their thoughts always in sin and evil living / and
had full great need for to be lyghtned. Wherefore Christ was borne at mydnyght.
And turned the derkenesse of the night in to the day light. and lyghtened all
them that ever were covered and combred with derkenesse of sin Also the same
time that our lord was borne as many doctors sayen Christ appeared in a bright
sterre to the kings of thest and badde them go to Bethleem / and worship a
little child that should be king of Jews that was there now borne / and so
they did / And ever the sterre showing before them till they came thither.
Thus he lyghtened them that before were full derke in sin / for these kings
were paynems before and bileued in mawmetry and in falls gods / and after they
byleued in Christ and were holy lyuers. And now be at Coleyne. Thus the birth
of our lord Ihesu christ made many a man look full bright that tofore were full
derke in sin. For he is full derke in his soul that ever sets his heart /
mind / and thought in the prosperyte worship and welfare of this world / and
that makes them so inwardly blind and so ignorant that they have no feeling
of the great and inestimable grace of ghostly sight / but ben made blind and
abused with the transytory richesse of this wicked world / and for couetyse
thereof they commytte usury / and so they get their good / and have no desire
to the richesse of heaven / ne too se the light that is there. For such things
as man's heart is most on that he makes his god. For to dystroye all such
mawmetry of sin our lord was borne. Then the king Herod pursued our
lord and would have slain him. Then his mother bare him in too Egypt / as
an angel badde Joseph and said. Accipe puerum et matre^ eius and fuge in
egiptum). Take the child and his mother / and flee with them in to Egypt. And
as soon as he came thither / all the mawmettes that were in the land fell
down to the ground doing to understand that he was come in to the world
that should cast down the mawmetry of all manner syn^e and evil living. Pride
couetyse and all manner of falshede that is used no we a days. And therefore
take heed how that lord that made all manner thing of naught / and is lord of
all lords. Where he was borne in a poor place and in poor array and of a
poor maiden / gyuynge ensample to all christian people to set naught by ye
worship / richesse / and vanyte of this world. For have a man never so great
worship and never so much richesse / yet he leueth it here / and shall bear no
more with him but his good deeds. Thus our lord showed many things in his
birth / and lyghtned many one that here before were full blind. In tokenynge
hereof the second mass this day is said in the dawning / when the night and
the day departs / the which begins thus. Lux fulgebit hodie). That is
thus much to say. Light shall shine this day upon us / for the fader of
heaven se^deth the grace of the goostly light to all christian people that believe
truly that our lord was borne very god and man of his mother Mary very mother
and maiden. Thus they that believe truly in our lord Ihesu Christ and his
mother Mary set full little by the vanytees of the world / but put al their
hope and trust in Ihesu christ. Thus the birth of our lord Ihesu christ
lyghtned many one that before looked full ill Also he drew us to him with love.
For children draw too them that makes much of them and play with them. Thus
our lord Ihesu christ was borne a child / the fairest that ever was borne to
draw man's love to him. For while a child is young / and without sin he is
more amyable and more loving then he is at man's aege / and is paste
Innocencye with doing. Sythen the love is not only for his beauty / but for
the clennes of the soul / and also for the goodness. Each man is bound for to
draw to him and do him worship / as Octauyan did the emperor of Rome that
pleased so much the people of his Empire of Rome yt they would have worshypped
him as for their god. But ye emperor was wise and wist well that he was but a
man as an other was / and durst not take that upon him. But a none he sent
after Sybyll the sage and asked her / whether should any be borne after him
that should be greter than he Then at myddaye Sybyll looked in the son / and
there she saw a cercle of gold about the son. Et in medio circuli virgo
pulcherrima cum puero). And in the mids of the cercle a maiden and a child
in her arm with a crown of gold. And when Sybyll had showed this to
themperoure / she said to him. This child shall be greter than you art / or
ever were or ever shall be. And therefore do him worship and reverence. Then
anon the emperor took ence^se and did worship to him / and charged all the
people too do the same / and to call the child their god / and him but a man
as other were. Thus all christian people may learn to do worship and service to
this child this day. And therefore the third mass this day is said at
myddaye / in tokenynge that christian people should come and offer in the
worship of this child and his mother. And show them seruau^te and subgecte
unto him / And knowelege this glorious child for her lord and her god. And
each man should come to him and not for dread. And therefore the office of ye
mass this day begins thus. Puer natus est nobis). A child is borne to us
he says and not a man. For all christian people should be bold / and not aferde
for to come unto him to have grace / for he is full of grace / and ready to give
mercy to them that ask it mekely with due reverence. He is ever ready to give
mercy and grace. In tokeny^ge that same day that Christ was borne in bedleem a
well of water turned and ran oil all that day showing that the well of
grace and mercy was borne that day yt should give mercy and grace to all them
that would come to him and ask mercy and grace and that ye shall here by
ensample.

Narracio.
We read of a woman that was defouled in lechery / and almoost fell in dyspayre
of dread. For as she bethought her of the streytnesse of Crystes dome / and the
great and horrible pains of hell that were ordained for such sinners as she
that was sore aferde and bethought hereof Crystes passion what love he showed to
all christian people / she thought she was unkind to him / and he suffered so
sore for her and then^e she bethought her how children be they never so wroth
and show never so great vengeance / how lightly they will cease and forgive /
wherefore this woman cried to christ / praye^ge him for his chyldehode to have
mercy on her. And anon she herd a voice on hye in the air that said / thy
trespace is forgyuen the.

Sermo breuis de sancto stephano.
GOod men and women such a day ye shall have an hye day and an holy feast in
our mother holy church of the prothomartyr saint Steven the which suffered death
for gods sake after Crystes ascencyon. Then for to stere your devotion the
more to this holy martyr. I will tell you somewhat that he suffered for Crystes
sake / as the book of Appostles tells. Post ascencionem domini) After the
ascencyon of our lord that he was styed up in to heaven the appostles labor
was all to preche and to teache the word of god to christian people. And for they
were to few to serve all the people that came / there came so many to torn to
the faith. Therefore they chose vi. holy men and good lyuers for to help them
in gods service / of the which saint steven was one of them / and the first
/ and the wysest / and was so full of grace and might of the holy ghost that he
did many miracles and meruaylous among the people / but though a man be never
so holy / yet he shall have enemies / wherefore of diverse countrees that had
enmyte to saint Steven and came against him and dysputed with him for to have
overcome hy^ with dysputacyon / and for they might not / they brought false
wytnes against him to put him too death. But when saint Stephen saw and knew
their malice / anon he thought to cease them by one of these.iii ways. Other
by shamynge in dysputacyon. Or by dread of reuelacyon. Or by prayer of holy
oraysons. But first he said by shamynge in dysputacyon. For when they began to
dyspute with him / he was so full of the holy ghost that they had no power ne
no might for to gaynsaye him. And so he over came them in all their matters /
and preued al their matters false that they said against. And therefore he said
that he was ready to suffer death in the verefyenge and susteynynge of all that
he said. And so put them that were great clerks and knew the law and the
prophecye unto great shame and velonye. But yet they would not believe / but
always agaynstode him. But he was so full of the holy ghoost that he preued that
he said by great reason and truth / yet would they not believe it / for all
that the holy ghost spoke in him and yet for all yt would not they believe in
their conscience yt they did amysse. And there as they saw the comynte turn
to the faith / for words and miracles that god showed in her sight yet they
ayenstode hy^ and set gods miracles at noughthy malice and enmyte of her
cursyd hertes / and by none other reason of scripture. And so they freted her
hertes with in himself / and grutched with her teeth for anger / and thought
how that they might overcome hy^ with dysputacyon. And then they sought if
they might have taken him with some word of Crystys death / where by they might
have made them a cause to have put him to death* Then Saint Stephen knew her
malice and lift up his eyes unto heaven (Et vidit celos apertos) And he saw
heaven open / and our lord Ihesu christ sitting on his faders right hand ready
for to help him And there with his face shone as bright as it had be an angel
of heaven / but when they herd hy^ speak / then were they feign to stop
their eres as though they had herd him speak falls sclaunderynge of god / and
so anon drew him out of the Cite to stone him to death as for a
dyssclaunderer. Then they took two young men that could best cast stones /
and took of his clothes and laid them at the feet of a young man that hight
Saul / and after was Saint Poule. Then when saint Stephen saw that he might
not cesse their malice by reuelacyon showing / he turned to devout orysons
prayenge / and yet it would not be / and then they casted stones at him and
smote out his brain / and then he cried to god and said (Domine ihesu accipe
spiritum meum) O thou lord take my spyryte / for he would pray more deuoutely
for his enemies than for himself / He kneled down to the ground and said
(Pater ignosce illis. quia. nesciunt quid faciunt) Fader forgive them for they
wot / not what they do / and anon he slepte in god. Now take heed what
brennynge love he had in his heart to god / that prayed more deuoutely for his
enemies than for himself / In this he gaf an ensample to all christian people to
be in charity each one with other / and to pray for his enmyes and them yt
pursued him and did him disease (Vniuersa delicta cooperit caritas) Charity
hydeth every trespass for he that prayed for his enemies that martyred him with
any disease / and suffered it pacyently he is a martyr before god. For there ben
three manner of martyrdomes. The first is by passion and will thereto / by will
without passion / by passion without will The first is showed by saint Stephen
yt is set next the birth of Christ / for he suffered passyo^ and had will
there to / Saint Johan the Euangelyst he had will but no passion The Innocents
they suffered passyo^ and no will there to but against will. Thus may a man be a
martyr though he shede not his blood that is when he suffered great wrong of
cursyd people and thanked god thereof / and took it with a good will and prayed
for his enemies devoutly in clean charity Now take heed and ye shall see how
these three were in parfyght love and charity. Saint Stephen when he should deye
/ he kneled down and prayed for his enmyes Saint Johan when he went toward
his end. He said often to them that ladde hy^ / children love together / for
charity is enough for your salvation. The Innocents for they were to young yt
they could not speak / yet they showed love by sign / for they did laughe and
play with their ho^des wha^ they saw the knights come with her bright swerdes
to slay them. Then for saint Stephen was so glorious a martyr god showed many
fair miracles for him.

Narracio
There was an honest man that had.vii. sons and.iii. daughters / but in
myssehap upon a day al they wrathed the mother at ones / and in a great anger
she cursyd them al at ones and anon there fylle great vengeance upon hem for
there came such a sykenes on their preuy me^bres that they were so sore gnawen
that they might no where abide for woo but walked up and down in the country
like mased bestes / that all the people that saw them had great pity of them.
Then it happed so that one of the brethern that hight Poule and asyster that
hight Palyda came in to ye church of saint Stephen / and there they herd
people tell how devoutly saint Stephen prayed for his enmyes that martred him.
anon they kneled down and prayed to saint Stephen to pray to god for hem and
they would be his true servants / and kneled down in ye church prayenge
saint Stephen hertly of his help / and anon they fell a sleep in sight of
all the people and so were hole. and anon went after her other brethern and
systern / and they were helped all in the same wise.

Narracio.
An other miracle tells saint Austyn / how there was a Senator of Rome went
to Ihrlm / and there he made a fair chapel of saint Stephen / and there he
deyed and was buried in the same chapel. Then long after his wife would home
in to her country and would feign have had her husbo^des bones with her in too
her own country / and prayed the bishop yt she might have the^ Than ye
bishop brought saint Stephens bones and her husbondes bones to her and said. I
know not thy husbondes fro saint Stephens And she said I know my husbondes
bones well enough and took saint Stephens bones for her husbo^des And wha^ she
came far in ye see angels so^ge with great melody in thayer. and there was a
passy^ge sweet savor yt came out fro ye bones yt passed any spycery in ye
world and anon they herd fendes cry in ye air and said woe woe is us for
Stephen beteth us and brenneth us bytterly and therewith raised a great tempest
yt the ship men went for to have be drowned and for great fere cried to saint
Stephen / and anon ye tempest cessed. And then ye people herd ye fendes cry
thus Thou cursyd prince our master you nor we may do nothing to the ship For
Stephen our adversary is therein. Then ye prince of fendes sent five fe^des
for to brenne the ship But then gods angel was ready and drove the fendes
in to ye ground of the sea And wha^ they came to ye land with ye ship /
fendes cried and said Gods servant comes that was stoned to death with ye
Jews And then in worship of saint Stephen the people made a church and
laid his bones therein / where god wrought many a fair miracle for him.

De sancto Iohanne Euangelista
GOod fre^des such a day ye shall have a hye feast in holy church ye fest of
saint Johan Euangelyst / which was gods own derlynge. Wherefore all holy
church makes mind and mencyon of the specyalte yt our lord gaf to him before
any other of his dyscyples / our lord gaf him grace to keep his virgynyte and
of keeping of his mother and our lord showed hy^ his preuyte / he gaf him grace
to keep his virgynyte / yt is may denhode. For this stori tells and ye people
have opinion wha^ Johan should wedde Mary mawdeleyn Christ called hy^ and he
came and sewed him and Johan left ye worlds vanyte and sewed our lord and so
kept hy^self clean maiden till he passed out of this world. In preuynge of
this when Domycyan the emperor of Rome herd ye people tell ye Johan preched in
a country yt was called Asia* and there Johan made to bylde many chirches and
when the emperor herd that he se^te after Johan / and made hy^ be put in a
braso^ to^ne full of sethy^ge oil And when Johan had long soden therein / that
all the people wend that he had been all to soden and deed. Then ye emperor
bad open the tonne. And when the tonne was open Johan came out of the tonne /
and as he was clean of all sin / so was he clean of all brennynge or harm in
all parties of his body. An other hard tourment he had on a day. Johan saw a
temple of Jews that was full of maw metrye. And then he prayed to god to
dystroy it / and anon therewith it fell down to the ground all to powder.
Wherefore Aristodimus the bishop of the temple was so wroth that he put Johan
in prison. Then said Johan / yet wylt thou that I shall make the believe in
Ihesu christ. And the^ said Aristodimus / I will make venym and make two me^ to
drink it before the / and when thou see them deed before the / drink thou
thereof without harm / and than I will believe on thy god. Then said Johan / go
and do as thou haste said / Then ordained the bishop poison / and
fetched.ii. men out of prison yt were dampened to drink of the poison and anon
they were deed. Then said Johan / if ye give me venym to drink. I shall call
to my god. And then Johan took the poison and blyssed it / and drank thereof
and he was never the worse / but rather seemed the better and ye fayrer. For as
he was clean from sin / so he was clean fro all greuaunce of the poison. Yet
said the bishop he would not believe unto the time he se these two men areysed
from death to life that were deed. And then Johan kest of his own cote and
said. Vade et mitte hanc tunicam super corpora defunctorum). Go and lay this
cote upon the deed bodies and say thus / the appostle of Ihesu christ sent me
to you / and badde that ye should arise up in gods name / and anon they
arose to life again. Then the bishop with many other were converted and
believed in Ihesu christ / and Johan crystned them. And after the bishop was a
full holy man. Thus Johan had grace to keep him clean both in body and in
soul. And thus he was a martyr tofore god in withstanding of sin. Also he
was keeper of the mother of god. For our lord Ihesu saw the great clennes that
was in Johan before all other when our lord should deye / he did say to
Johan. Ecce matter tua). Se thy mother. And be took Johan the keeping of his
mother. And our lord said to his mother. Ecce filius tuus). Se thy sone. And so
betoke either to other. And when our lord was deed / and laid in his tomb.
Johan took our lady home with him in to his house and kept her till our lord
Ihesu Christ was risen from death to life again. And wha^ our lord was styed
in to heaven he kept our lady in the same chamber as long as she lived after.
Thus he had grace of keeping of gods mother / and he had grace of knowing of
gods pryuete. For this was first when our lord sat at his souper on
sherethursday for great love that Johan had unto our lord Ihesu christ / he
laid his heed to Crystes breast / and in the same wise as a man lays his body
down to a well and drynketh his body full of water. Right so Johan drank
his soul full of goostly wisdom at Crystes breast / and at ye same time our
lord showed him all his preuyte before all other / and for he was old and
would not leave to preche the word of god / the emperor exyled Johan him
self alone in to the isle of Pathmose / and there god showed him ye
appocalypsis of the world / and of the day of dome. And as he saw it / he
wrote it in great Informacyon of holy church But after when the emperor was
deed Johan was called again to the cite of Ephesye / for there he was bishop
/ and he came thither / and there was a wydowe that hight Drusyana yt was deed
and laid on a bear. Then Johan saw much people weep and make sorrow for
her / and then said he. Drusyana arise up / and make me some mete / and anon
she rose and went forth as though she had risen out of her sleep.

Narracio.
It happened on a time that there were two young men by prechynge of Johan /
they sold all the good that they had and went forth with Johan / for they
were rich men. Then on a day as they came to the Cite of Pargame / they
that were their servants a little before / were well arrayed and were rich
men / and they were poor men. Then^e by temptacyon of the fend they
forthought al their purpose / and were sorry that they had lost their goods.
So anon by reuelacyon of god Johan knew their purpose and their hertes / and
said. I se that the fend tempts you / and makes you to forthynke your
purpose that ye were in too serve god. But go ye to the wood / and either of
you bring a burden of small yerdes / and so they did. Then through the
prayer of Johan god turned the yerdes in to gold and than Johan said thus to
them. Now take ye this gold and be ye as rich as ye were tofore / and know
well that ye have lost the kingdom of heaven. And then it happed that there
was a deed man that same time / and the mother of him saw Johan / and she anon
fell down on her knees and prayed him that he would reyse her sone too life as
he did the wydowe Drusiana. Then prayed Johan to god and this deed man anon
arose again to life. Then he said to him / I bydde yt tell these two men
what you have seen and what Joy was ordained for them / and how they have lost
it. And then the man. told of the Joy of paradyse / and of the pains of
purgatory and of hell / how strong and how horrible they were / and how
glorious ye place was ordained for them / and how sorye their good aungelles
were for they had lost ye glorious bliss of heaven And how much Joy the
fendes made for tornynge of them. And than the same men were sorry and cried to
Johan and prayed him to pray to god for them and wept sore. and Johan saw
them weep / he prayed to god for them / and gave them penance. And wha^ he
had done so / anon the gold turned in to yerdes again. And after they were
holy men.

Narracio.
An other holy reuelacyon Johan had showed by the preuyte of god. It happed on
a day he saw a child yt was like to have been a man. Wherefore Johan brought
him to a bishop and badde him keep the child and teache him For in time
coming he shall be a man / and so this bishop kept hy^ And when he came to
man's state / he gave him all to folly and felin company of thieves / and in a
while after he was a master thief and the leder of them. Then by reuelacyon
of god Johan knew all this well enough / and came to the bishop and asked him
where the child was. And the bishop told him. Then Johan blamed him and
said yt he had mysgouerned the child. Then Johan was old and might not well
go. He took an horse and rode there as ye thieves were. And when the thief saw
Johan / anon he fled away / and Johan rode after him and cried and said Quid
fugis o fili mi). Thou my sone why fleest thou fro thy fader / abide my dear
sone and speak with me thy fader that is old and may not well go. and then
at the last this man abode Then Johan preched so yt he left his folly and after
was so holy yt he was a bishop. Thus had Johan reuelacyon of gods preuyte.

Narracio.
It is written in the life of saint Edward ye confessor ye lies at
westmynster yt saint Johan theua^gelyst appeared to hy^ as he went on processyon
at halowy^ge of ye church saint Johan came like a palmer and axed good for
saint Ioha^s sake / for ye king loved saint Johan well / but he had nothy^g
there / but he took a ring of his finger and gaf it hy^ And so Johan had the
ring.vii. year after and and then saint Johan appyred to two knights that
were beyo^de the sea toward Ihrlem and asked them how the king fared and bad
them give hy^ ye token / and took them ye ring / and ask the king for whose
love he gaf that away / and bydde hy^ make him ready for he shall deye soon /
and so he did.

Narracio
An other fair reuelacyon he had when he was.C. winter old and.xvii. then
our lord came to him with his dyscyples and said thus (Veni dilecte mi quia
te^pus est vt in mea mensa cu^ fratribus tuis epularis) Come well-beloved
derlynge / for now it is time that you come and ete with thy brethern at my board
or in my fest. Then^e Johan rose up anon and would have go forth with him.
Then^e said our lord to him / upon sunday thou shall be with me. Then by
sunday he was passing feeble (Die dominica conuenit ad Iohannem vniuersa
multitudo populi (So on the so^daye there came to Johan a great multitude of
people and then Johan made them to lead him to the church And as he might
speak he said to them that ladde him thus (In fide sitis stabiles. et in
mandatis dei feruentes) Be yestable and sad in the faith and fervent in the
commandments of god. Then said one of hem. why say ye thus often to us.
Then said he / if ye love together and be in parfyght charity and steadfast in
the faith / it is enough to salvation / And therefore be ye stable in the faith
and fervent in the commandments of god. And then he commanded to make hy^
a grave before the awter / and wha^ it was made he went in to it and then
came such a light about him a great while yt no man might see him / and when
this light was gone / ye grave was full of ma^na and welled up as sonde does in
the water / and thus he departed out of this world in to ye bliss of heaven yt
never shall have end.

Sanctorum innocencium.
Friends such a day is called Innocents day / some call it chylder mass
day. For children were slain ye day for crystes sake / they be called
Innocents / yt is to say without sin / for they did no sin / for god is
ever gretely grieved with sin / and in especyall with proud people against
their neighbor doing them wrong / these Innocents did never sin ne
consented to it / wherefore I may well say that they lived here without shame /
and deyed without blame / and were crystened in their own blood at home / and
some in their moders arms. Holy church as this day syngeth and redeth in the
worship of these innocents / for they were within two year of aege / and
therefore they were not ashamed of their own shap. For they were not defouled
with no manner spotte of sin / but the sin yt they had of the draught of
kind of our fader Adam and Eve. for Adam and Eve were in the same wise in
paradyse in the state of Innocence / for they were naked / but they were not
ashamed of their shape / all the while they were with out sin / but when they
had sinned they saw their own shape / and were ashamed thereof and couerd
their shape with leaves of a fygge tree. Right so when sin begins to take
rode in a child / then innocence gooth away fro him for he knows good from
evil / and euylll from good / and leueth the good and does the evil / then he
synneth and he is no longer innocent / for then greueth he god / but these
children lived not so long to know the good from the evil. But were slain
wtin aege of Innocency / wherefore they lived their life without shame and blame.
For king Herod ye king of Jews made to sle them without gylte. For when the
three kings came to king Herod and said to him. Vbi est q natus est rex
iudeorum) Where is he that is borne king of Jews / and badde him tell the^
for they were come to worship him far out of the eest. Then was king
Herod foul astonyed of their words / and axed his clerks where this child
should be borne. And they said in Bedleem jude And then king Herod told
them so / and badde them goo thither and worship him / and come again by me
that I may go and worship him also. And so the kings went thither and
worshypped Christ / and when they had done their offrynge to Christ. Per aliam
via^ reuersi sunt in regionem suam). By an other way they turned home. For the
angel badde them do so in their sleep. Then was king Herod wonder wroth
/ and anon ordained to sle Christ. And when he had made all ready thereto. It
happened so that ye Emperor of Rome sent after him for to come to him in all
the have that he might / for two of his own sons had accused him to the
emperor of treason. Then Herod left all his purpose of Christ as at that
time and rode to Rome and had the better of his sons / and came home again with
more worship tha^ he had tofore / but yet always he thought to sle Christ /
leest Christ had come to man's estate and would have put him out of his
kingdom. Then sent he anon and badde them slay all the children that were
in Bedleem / and in the country about yt were within two year of aege / and
that were borne the same day / and so they did. For king Herod was going
and coming / and so taryenge.ii. years / and so he made to slay all that ever
were within two year of aege. And for he was so vengeable in party it fell on
himself. For a child of his own was slain among the other the same time /
but there came an angel to Joseph and and said to him (Accipe pueru^ et
matre^ eius and fuge i^ egiptu^. Take the child and his mother and fle in to
Egypt and be there / and so he did. Thus Innocents were slain without blame
/ and they were not ashamed of their own shape / and they were crystned at
home in their own blood / and not in no font. Therefore ye shall understand
that there is three manner of crystenynges. One is in water as we be crystned in
the font. An other is as these children were crystned in their own blood /
and a thousand martyrs moo yt shed their blood for Crystes sake. The third
crystnynge is in ye faith / in the which all patryarkes and prophets and
other holy faders that were before the Incarnacyon of our lord Ihesu Christ
that believed verily in the coming of Christ they were Crystned in the faith.
Thus may ye se what enmyte that ye king Herod had to shed so many chyldrens
blood for Crystes sake that trespaced not to him nor to none other. There wept
many a mother for their child at yt time. but god wrought full fair for them /
and that tyraunte showed enmyte and it fell on him self / for as he pared an
apple with the same knyfe he slew himself. Thus he was glad for to shed blood
gyltles / and therefore at the last he shed his own blood. For he that is
without mercy and ever vengeable often times vengeance falls on himself. And
he that loves to do mercy shall have mercy / and this I may preue by an
ensample.

Narracio.
We fyndein ye life of saint Syluester how Co^stantyne ye emperor was mesell /
and by council of his leches / he gadred iii.M children to be slain / and
their blood to be put in a vessel and he should bathe hy^ in it. The Emperor came
riding in his chare there as ye children were / and their moders cried
dolefully unto the emperor. and made great lamentacion to him. Then the
emperor did demand his folowers what women they were ye made yt
lamentacyon. And the people said yt they were the moders of the childern yt
should be deed for to hele hy^. Then said the emperor / it were a doleful
deed of us all / to make thus many to be slain yt ben fair bodies to hele one
foul body and I am but a man as an other is / and many of this herafter may be
full good men and worthy / and stand the emperor in good stead. Nay said
the emperor I will not do so / but let every woman take her child a yen home
with her / for they shall not be deed for me / Then were the wy^me^ glad and
merry and took her childern with great Joy to them and went home. The night
after as this Emperor lay in his bed / Peter and Poule came to hy^ and
said. For the great compassyon and pity yt thou had dest on the wy^men and her
childern / therefore send after saint Syluester and be crystened and thou shall
be hole and so he did. And as soon as he was crystned the leprehode fylle in
to the water and he was clean fair and hole. Thus ye may see how he yt will do
mercy shall have mercy / and they yt do vengeance shall have vengeance So did
Herod vengeance / and it tell upon himself. And Consta^tyn the emperor did
mercy and he had mercy and grace I hope for ever and so may we all Amen.

De soncto thoma archiep^o cantuariensi.
GOod men and wymmen such a day ye shall have saint Thomas day yt was slain
for ye right of holy church and the law of this land. This holy man Thomas
was born in the cite of London / and his fader was called Gylbert and was
shyref of London Then^e afterward he ordained himself and went in to the holy
land. and there he was take and put in prison / Then came a worshypfull woman
to hy^ and said if he would plyght her his troth to wedde her / she would
help hy^ and bring hy^ out of disease. and he did so. Then came Gylbert home
in to England / and wha^ this woman same her tywe she came after and met in
London at ye church of Poules / then Gylbert made the bishop to christian her
and afterward for to wedde them together / and Gylbert gate saint Thomas on
this woman So when she was with child / she dremed in a night yt she came to
saint Poules church but / wha^ she would have gone in / she thought her womb
was so great that she might not in to the church by no way. Then on the
morrow she went unto her confessor and told him all the dreme. Then said he
dame be glad and thank god hyghly. For you have a child in thy body yt all
holy church shall be to little to receive him. Then was she glad and thanked
god hyghly. And so soon after was this child born and was called Thomas
Then by space he wexed a man and so he was a man in all degree For he served
the king manly and served god worthily / and deyed for the laws of holy
church mekely. I may well say he served the king manly For when he was made
chau^celer of England / this land was so full of outlondysshe men and so sore
ouersette with them yt there might noman go by the way vnrobbed But in short
time after. Thomas with his wisdom and with his man hode drove them all out
of this land / so that all the people might go faue and vnberobbed / Thomas
was also manly in repayrynge of the kings manners that were let fall down
and destroyed. And in especyall the ky^ges palace at London and at Westmynster
that was all let fallen down. But between Eester and Wytsontyde Thomas made
to repair it again / for he had there so many werkmen of diverse crafts that
a man should uneath here his fellow speak for do^nynges of strokes. He was
also manly in deeds of arms for there as the king had many Castelles and
towns out of his hondes and he spente much good for to get them / and
shed much blood for the gety^ge of they^ again at the first and they were
hold out of his hondes. Then Thomas with his wits and wisdom gate them again
Also when he was in the kings wars of France / he quyte him so ma^fully /
that when ye king of England had exyled Thomas / the king of France was his
chyef help and socour. Also Thomas was as ma^full in his array. for he was
clothed in the best and rychest clothe and furre that might be found. And also
his aparayl his sadels brydels shone as bright as any silver / He was also
manfull in his household for his halle was every day in the somer season
strewed with grene russhes / and in winter with clean heye for to save the
knights clothes that fat in the flower for defaute of place to sytte on For
there came so many every day to ete of his mete and drink / for he would have
al manner of dey^tyes that might be found in this land. In so much that the
king himself many times vnwarned came to Thomas to mete both for love that he
had to Thomas / and also to see the array / and also the revel that was in
Thomas household / for there spoke so much people worship to Thomas. And for
more truer and also better love that then was between the king and Thomas
while it last was never between two men. Wherefore I put this ensample. It
happed that it fell in cold winter as the king and Thomas came riding
together in chepe side at London. The king was ware of a poor man that was well
nere naked / and had no clothes and was sore a cold Then said the king to
Thomas / it were great alms deed to give to this poor man better clothes.
Sire said Thomas of such ye should take heed. Then had Thomas a clothe of
good scarlet and well furred with rich furre. Then the king laid hand on
this clothe and would have pulled it from Thomas for to have give to this poor
man / but Thomas held it fast. And thus they wrasteled long. In so much
that they were like to fall to the ground / but at the last by favor Thomas
suffered the king to take his clothe of. And then the king cast it to the
poor man / and badde him run away fast and selle it / and bye him other /
and if thou besette it well thou may fare the better ever while thou lyuest.
Then Thomas feigned himself wroth. But in his heete he was well plesed that
his robe was so well besette / Then the people merueyled gretely first what
was between the king and Thomas. But when as they saw what it meaned / the
people were glad and had great sport thereof. This I say to show you
exemple how well they loved together / thus Thomas served the king manfully.
Also we must learn of our lord patron saint Thomas to serve god devoutly For
he served god full deuoutely / for as soon as he was made archebysshop of
Canterbury / anon he turned his living in to better living and thought to
serve the king of heaven as well as he had the king of this world before. And
anon he laid away scarlet and rich furs / and all rich a byllementes of
clothe of sylke and were clothe of myddell price and cast away sylke and
sendell. and wered here next his naked and bare body in suffrynge great pouerte
/ and hard punysshement of his flesh that it should not usurp his good will
and in like wise he made a breche of the same / in which was so much vermyn /
that it was an horrible sight for to se / but this knew but few people. And
every wednesday and friday he made his confessor to beat hy^ with a rod upon
his bare body as a child is beten in the scole. And he used every day for to
wasshe three poor men's fete knelynge on the ground. And then he gave to each
of them four pens. And also much more penance he used in praynge and in
waking that were to much to tell at this time. Then when Thomas was in the
abbay of Pounteney / upon a day when he had said mass he kneled down before
the awter in his prayers. Then the abbot of the same place had to speak with
him / and stood under a pyler and abode after Thomas / and he saw our lord
Ihesu Christ appear to Thomas and told him how he should be slain in
Caunterbury in his own church for his sake / and bad him be steadfast and
hold forth as he had begone. Then came Thomas out of his chapel / and anon
the abbot fell down to the ground and said. Sir we may bliss the time and
the hour that ever ye were borne / and also blyssed might she be that bare you
for to have such vesytacyon as I have herd you have. Then said Thomas. I
charge the that thou never tell it to no man whiles I am alive / no more he
did. But when Thomas was deed / he told it openly too all the people. Thus I
may well say that Thomas served our lord devoutly. He deyed also for the law
of holy church mekely / for when he saw the king begin to make laws to
ouerset the holy church and such laws as would have dystroyed the land.
Then Thomas put him self forth and repreued che king of his misdeeds.
Then was the king wroth and made a parlyament at Northampton / and for that
saint Thomas would not set his seal unto the cursed laws the which the king
and his sorye counceyle had ordained and constytued in the realm. Anon they
called him a traitor to the king and exyled him out of ye land Then Thomas
went unto the king of France for socour and help / and full goodly and
mekely he received him and all his clerks and found them almoost.vii year
all that they behoueden. Then great disease and greuaunce Thomas had of the
king of England / and al he suffered mekely And then by treatise and
counseyll of ye pope and of the king of France / there was made a fynyte love
day between the king and Thomas. But when ye king should have kyssed Thomas he
would not / For he said he had made his oath he would never kiss him. But
badde hy^ go home to his church boldly. Then by the counseyll of the king
of France and bidding of the pope Thomas came home to Caunterbury / Then
were there four cursyd knights of living that thought to have a great thank
of ye king and made her auowe together to slay Thomas and so on childernasse
day almost all the night they went and came to Thomas halle sir Reynold
beryston sir Wyllyam tracy sir Richard breton / and sir Hew morley. Then^e sir
Reynolde beryston for he was best of kind. anon said he to Thomas / the king
yt is beyond the sea sent us to the and badde yt you should assoyle the
bishop that you cursyddest. Then said Thomas / they be not acursyd by me /
but by the pope / and I may not assoyle that he had cursyd. well said Reynold /
then we se thou wylt not do the kings bidding and swore a great oath by
the eyes of god thou shall be deed. Then cried the other knights slay slay /
and they went down to the court and armed them. Then prestes and clerks
drew them to the church to Thomas and spered the doors to them. but when
Thomas herd the knights armed and would come in to the church and might not
/ he went to the door and vnbarred it / and took one of ye knights by the
hand and said / it besemeth not to make a castle of holy church and took
them by the hondes and said / come in my childern in gods name. Then for
it was derke yt they might not see nor know Thomas they said / where is the
traitor. Nay said Thomas no traitor / but arshebysshop. Then one said flee
for you art deed / Nay said Thomas I came not to flee but to abide (Ego pro deo
mori paratus sum et pro defensione iusticie and ecclie liberate) I am ready to
deye for the love of god and for the fredom and right of holy church. Then
Reynold with his swerdes point put of Thomas cappe and smote at his heed and
cut of his crown that it henge by like a dysshe then smote ye other at hy^
and smote it all of. Then fell he down to the ground on his knees and
elbowes and said God in to thy hondes I put my cause and the right of holy
church and so deyed. Then the third knight smote / and his half stroke
fell upon his clerks arm that held Thomas cross before him and so his
sword fell down to the ground and brake of ye point and he said Gowe hens
he is deed. And when they were at door going sir Robert broke went again and
set his foot to Thomas neke and thurst out the brayn upon the pauyme^t Thus
for the right of holy church and the law of the land Thomas took his death
Then how this martyrdom was known in Ihrlm ye shall here There was an abbey
of monks in the which that same day and the same time yt Thomas deyed a
monk lay at his death / then for he was a good holy man of living / his abbot
badde hy^ if it were not to gods dysplesure wha^ he were deed he should come
again and ces^e hy^ how he fared / and so wha^ he was deed he came again and
told his abbot when he deyed an angel brought him before god and as he stood
there / he saw a bishop come with a great company of angels and other saints
and he stood before god at his Judgment / and his heed dropped down of blood
of wounds that he had. Then^e said our lord to hy^ / thus it besemeth a man
to come to his lords court and anon our lord set a crown on his heed and
said thus to hy^ As much as I have give to Peter and poule / so much Joy I
grant the And ye monk said here by I know well yt this is the gretest
bishop in England and is slain for gods sake. and wete well that I go to
everlasting bliss This told ye patryarke of Ihrlm soon after that Thomas
was deed / there came in to England after people to fight against he then men.

Narracio
Also there was a bird yt was taught to speak and could say saint Thomas as
she had herd other pylgryms to speak much of saint Thomas / and it happed on
a time this bird satte without his cage and there came a sperhawke and would
have slain hy^. and anon the bird cried on saint Thomas help and anon this
sperhawke fell down deed. so saint Thomas of his great grace and goodness here
the bird and wist not what shemente / much more would he have herd a christian
man or christian woman that cried hertely to him for help and socour.

Narracio
Also there was a man that Thomas loved passing well in his life / and it fell
so yt this man fell syke on a time and came to Saint Thomas to^be praye^ge hy^
of socour and help and anon he was hole but after he bethought hy^ yt his
sykenes was encreasy^ge to his souls hele and so went again prayenge Thomas yt
if it were more mede to his soul to be syke tha^ hole yt he might be syke
again / and so he was and thanked god and saint Thomas. Then^e when ye king
herd how ye god wrought so many miracles for saint Thomas he went to
Canterbury barefoot and wolwarde almoost naked save a feeble cote to by^de his
body and went as he had be poor man in this lord prayenge to saint Thomas of
forgyuenes of his trespace / and at the tomb he made all the covent by and by
too give dyscyplyne on his bare body with a rod / and there he dampened all
sorry customs and false laws that was cause of the debate between Thomas and
the king before / and granted the church her fredome again / and went his
way. Then these.iiii. knights when they herd how god had wrought for
Thomas they were full sorry of their cursed deeds / and cursed the time that
ever it happened so with the^ and left all their lands / and went to
Iherusalem in to ye holy land to war on gods enmyes / but Wyllyam Tracy
was let by the way / and fell seek and roted al his body in so much that
himself with his own hands kest away the flesh lompe mele / and so deyed
an horyble death. And the other three also deyed in a pyteous death soon after
/ and thus within three year after the death of Thomas they dyed all four / but
as long as they lived they cried ever mercy to god and to saint Thomas / and
so I hope they had.

De cyrcumsicione domini.
GOod friends such a day is called new years day / and is ye first day of
the beginning of the new year that is comy^ge / and is the last day of the
year that is gone. And therefore this day ye shall come to god and holy church
to here your dyuyne service forth this year For like as a good servant that
has a good master makes his covenant but ones / but holds forth from
year to year / having full trust in his master that he will for his good
service give hy^ a good reward in his great need at his last end. In the
same wise gods servants makes couenaunte with him but ones / that is at
the crystenynge at font. And there he makes a covenant to be gods servant
/ having full trust in god that at his great need that is at the day of
domewyll quyte him for his service in everlasting bliss of heaven / and so
will he do to all that be good servants. Thus this day is called newyeres
day. It is also called (circumsicio domini). The cyrcumcisyon of our lord.
Also this day is called the new years day. For this day is the first day of
the calendar / and the year gooth much by the kale^der / therefore it is called
neweyeres day. Saint Augustyn says. This day and this night hethen people use
many false opynyons / and wytchecraftes / and false believe the which be not to
tell among christian people lest they torn to ye use / wherefore ye that be
christian people be well ware lest ye be deceived by any false sorcerye as by
taking counceyle of a man before an other in bye^ge or selling or lenyng / in
ye which some have diverse opynyones / and if they be well shryuen they be
worthy for to have great penance for their mysbeleue / for that comes of ye
fend and not of god. This day is called the cyrcumcysyon of our lord. For
as holy church tells this day he was cyrcumcysed / and bled his blood for
our sake / for when the flesh was cut he bled fast and was full sore for he
was but young and tender / and but viii. days old / and therefore he bled the
more. And ye shall wete yt he bled five times for us. Quinque em^ vicibus
sa^guine^ suum pro nobis effudit). The first sheddy^ge was at this day when he
was cyrcumcysed. An other was for fere of his passion / for right as a child
wepeth for fere when he sees ye rod and has no harm / so ye flesh of our
lord sweet blood for dread of a strong passion yt was comy^ge. ye.iii. time
was in his flagellacyon when he was beten with scourges / so that all his body
ran on reed blood. The.iiii. time was when he was nailed hand and fete on
the cross. The fyfth time was when that Longyus perysshed his heart with a
spear that water and blood came out of his wounds. And then they took up the
cross with the body and lift it upon hye / and suddenly they let the cross
fall down in to ye mortayse that all the synewes / veins / and Joints brake
and blood and water came out of every wound / this he suffered for us. Then
sith Christ was cyrcumcysed and shed his blood thus for us that was without
sin / and cyrcumsysyon is for sin remedy and help / why would he be
cyrcu^cysed that never did sin. Sctu^s augustinus dicit propt quattuor
causas). Saint Austyn says it was for four causes. The first was for to make a
sees with the Jews / for else they would and might have said that he had not
ben of their law / wherefore they would not receive him / nor consent to his
techynge / this was to deceive ye fend. For right as the fend deceived Adam
and Eve / and so all mankind was dampened / so it fell to Christ to deceive the
fend / wherethrugh all mankind might be saved. Then wha^ the fend saw
that he was cyrcumcysed as an other child he wend that he had taken the
penance in remedy of orygynall ^^^ne / and so he knew him not fro an other
child For if (...) had known him verily that he had come to have bought
mankind / he would never have tysed the Jews to have put him to death. The
second cause was that our lady was wedded to Joseph for to deceive the fend /
for ye fend should wene that Joseph had be his fader and not conceived of the
holy ghost. The third cause why he was cyrcumcysed / yt was in confermynge the
old law in great comfort to the old faders that were of the old testament.
For and if he had be crystened and not cyrcu^cysed it had been a great
dyscomforte to all yt were before thyncarnacyon of Christ The.iiii. cause of his
cyrcumcysyon was / for our lord wist well yt there would come heretykes after
yt would have said yt Christ had a body of the erthly fantasy / and not of
flesh and blood as one of us have / for a body of the air may not blede. And
therefore to put away all such erroures Christ was cyrcu^cysed and bled in the
cuttynge of his flesh. The which flesh was cut from his membre / and an
angel brought it after to king Charles for the most precious relyke of the
world / and for the gretest worship yt he could do thereto he brought it to
Rome to a church yt is called (Scta^ scto^rum. And for these four causes Christ
was cyrcu^cysed. This day also is called the vtas of the natyuyte / yt is
ye.viii. day of our lords birth in great to kenynge to all us yt be gods
servants to think on these.viii. days that follows his birth. The first
day is to thy^ke inwardly on the sede yt we were conceived of / that is foul
and abhomynable in it self / that a man or a woman be they never so fair that
and they saw ye matter them would be ashamed in themself to think that ever
they were conceived of yt foul thing. The.ii. day is to thy^ke how grievously
he payneth his mother in his birth in so much that it is a great miracle of god
yt she may have her life. The.iiii. day is to think how feeble and how
wretched he is borne / for all the beestes of kind somewhat they can help
themself / save only mankind / he neither may ne can help himself in no
degree but deye anon but if he have help and socoure of other. The.iiii. day
is to think in how much peril and dread he lives / therefore in every place
death follows him and is every day ready to fall on hy^ what time ne where no
man knows / but only god him self. Incertus est locus i^ quo mors te
repectat). It is uncertain there as death abides the. The.v. day is for to
think how horrible death is when he comes For in short space and time he
makes a man for too stynke so that all the best fre^des yt he has in the
earth and hyde him there The.vi. day is to think how sorrowful is the
departing of the body and the soul yt may not be departed till the heart in
the body break for dread of the syghtes that the soul shall see that for great
fere the heart breketh (O mors quam amara est memoria tui) O thou death how
bitter is it to think upon ye. wha^ you art coming to any man. The.vii. day
is to think how dredful is the dome yt he shall go to anon / and how straight
his Judgment shall be / Then he yt will think on these.viii. days I hope he
shall be circu^cysed / yt is he shall be cut away from the lust of his flesh
and of sin / and so do deperte from this worlds liking / and thus comes
the.viii. day yt is the vtas of Christ yt is the Joy of bliss yt never shall
have end. To the which god bring us all to Amen.

In die Epyphanie.
GOod friends this day is called the.xii. day / but it is the.xiii. day of
Crystis birth the which day holy church called it (Epyphania dn^i) That is
to say / ye showing of our lord Ihu^ christ very god and man for this day he
was showed very god and man / by three of frynges / by his crysteny^ge / and
also by tornynge of ye water in to wine. The.xiii. day of his birth by
offrynge of the three kings. And that same day.xxx. winter and.xiii. days
after his birth he was crystned in the water of flom Jordan. (...) that same
day.xii. month he turned water in to wy^^ at the wedding at Cana galylee.
But the fest makes mouit mind and mencyon of the three kings offre^ge and
therefore let us folowen the form of holy church and ye shall here how it
fell of her offry^ge to our lord Ihesu christ very god and man. These three
kings were of the lygnage yt prophesied how a sterre should shyue of Jacob /
but they were no Jews kind / but they had herd by prophecye of this
wherefore they had great desire and lust to see it / and so oftentimes wha^ they
might came together upon certain high hills then they would dyspute among
they^ of this sterre So it happed upon Crystmasse night the same time as our
lord was borne / they were together and were dysputynge of this sterre (Super
montem) Upon the hylle (Du^s enim erat natus) Our lord was born (Et apparuit
illis) And appyered to the^ in the sterre as a fair child / and under his
heed a bright cross of gold / and said thus to them Go ye anon in all the
have ye ye may in to ye land of Jury and take with you gold myrre and ensence
/ and offer these three things to him that ye shall find there now borne king
of Jews very god and man / and I shall be your gyde and led you to the way
Then anon for great have they took bestes that been called dromedaryes / that been of such ky^de / they be so swyfte yt they will run ferder in one day /
than any other best will run or goo in three days. And so they came to
Iherusalem / that was the chyef cite of all Jury hoping that they should here
there some tidings where that this child was borne. But as soon as they
turned in to ye Cite of Ihrlm* then they lost ye sight of ye sterre that ladde
the^ ever ye way till yt they came thither bryghter than ye son. Then when
they came to ye cite of Iherusale^ / they tode to king Herod / for he was
there the same time and said to him (Vbi est qui natus est rex iudeorum) Where
is he that is borne king of Jews (Vidimus enim stella^ eius in orient) We
saw his sterre in the East (Venimus adorare eum) We become to worship him.
Then king Herod was troubled and all the Cite with him / but more for
flaterynge of him then for any love that they had to him / Then king
Hetode asked his clerkis where that this child should be born And they said /
in Bethleem Jude. Then king Herod asked the kings pryuely of the sterre /
and badde them go in Bethleem and worship the child and come again by him / and
tell him where he might find the child / that he might go and worship him.
And then the three kings of Coleyne were passed from king herod goy^ge
toward Bethleem / anon ye sterre appyered to them and when they saw that
the sterre was come again they were glad in their hertes. And as it is in many
places painted / the king that is it in the myddell for great Joy of the
sterre / he looked bacwarde to his fellow behind him / and with his finger
showed him the sterre / and yt is the cause that the myddel king looked
bacwarde. And thus the sterre brought them to Bethleem. And when the sterre
came over that house there as our lord was in it stood stylle. And then the
kings lyghred down and went ^n to that house and with all the reverence that
they could ^^elynge down and offered each of them these three things (Aurum
thus et myrram) Gold ensence and myrre / knowlechynge by the gold / that he
was king of all kings. And by the ensence / that he was very god. And by the
myrre / that he was very man / and should be deed and laid in grave without
rottynge. For as gold is chyef of all metalles. Ensence is burnt in holy
church in the worship of god. Myrre is an oynement that keeps the bodies from
rotrynge Thus when the kings had done their offrynge by techynge of the angel
(Per aliam viam reuersi sunt in regionem suam) By an other way they went
toward their own lands and left king Herod / and the sterre vanysshed away
from them. Then as saint Bernarde says Joseph kept of this gold as much as
hy^ neded to his trybute that he should pay to the Emperor / and also more to
keep our lady with while she lay in child bed / and the remenaunt he deled
to poor people such as had great need thereto. The encence he burnt to put
away the stenche of the stable there as she lay in And with the myrre our
lady anointed her child to keep him from worms and disease. But what befell of
the kings after I find no thing in certain. But some people have an opinion
how that saint Thomas of Ynde crystened them when he came in to that country
of ynde. And then as the sterre lyghtned them to Crystys birth. so the holy
ghost lyghtned them in their souls / and taught them the parfyght way of
the believe. and also of parfyght and gracyous living. In so much that they
left all their kingdom and went forth on pylgremage. that is to say to
Iherusalem and to many other places. And so they came forth to Myllayne / and
there they deyed all three. And so after they were translated to Coleyne / and
there they be yet. Now so have ye herd by these three kings how our lord
Ihesu christ was this day showed very god and man / wherefore like they offered
with devotion. so should ye do your offrynges when ye come to holy church /
knelynge down with all the reverence that ye can or may not on your one knee
as to a temporal lord / but on both your knees and do worship him with good
prayers. Then offer ye precious gold / for there is no gold so precious as
is the good deuote praer / and then hold up your hondes to him with all the
reverence that ye can / and with a devout heart pray to him and show him all
the love of your hertes. And then ye offer to him ensence. For there is no
ensence sauoureth so sweet and gives so encensyall an odoure brennynge in the
(feyre as does good prayers that is said with a brennynge love in clean
charity. And if thou do thus then thou offrest knelynge on thy knees / make a
cross on the earth and kiss it / and think well that thou art but earth.
Then must ye offer myrre. For right as myrre keeps a body from rotynge / so
the mind of death keeps a man's soul from deedly sin. In this wise do ye
your offrynge / and then^e shall ye have as much mede as had these three
kings. Also he was showed both god and man at his crystenynge. For he came to
the water of Flome Iordane he went to the water and hallowed it. For right as he
was cyrcumcysed to conferme ye new law / for no need that he had thereto / for
he was clean without sin / but for to make the sacrament yt should wasshe
them / took crystenyng in his name fro all sins. Then was Johan baptyste
ready and much people with him that came to the crystnynge. Then said Johan
too our lord all quakynge and trembling / blyssed lord thou art gods lamb
without sin / thou have no need to be crystned of me / but I that am a man
gotten and borne in sin / has need to come and be crystned of the in
remyssyon of al sins. Then said our lord Ihesu. Johan suffer at this time.
For thus we must fulfill al ryghtwysnes. And John^ crystned our lord Ihesu
christ. And as it is credyble / our lady was crystned after with other dyscyples
of Christ / all the people that were comen thither. Then when all were crystned /
our lord went out of the water / and as he went our of the brynke of the
water and all the people with him. Aperti sunt celi). Heaven opened and a great
light beclypped hy^ in sight of all the people. The holy ghost came down in
lykenes of a white douue / and light upon our lords heed. And the fader of
heaven spoke and said thus in herynge of all the people. Hic est filius meus
dilectus in quo michi been complacui). This is my well beloved sone the which
pleases me. This was to teache all christian people the faith of ye believe of
holy church. For all christian people be bound too believe steadfastly in the
fader and the sone / and the holy ghost. In baptismo xp^i tota trinitas se
manifestauit. scilicz pater in voce: filius in carne. spu^ssanctus in colu^ba
et totum celu^ apertum est). In crystes baptysme all the hole trynyte was
showed. For the fader spoke in voice when he said. Hic est filius meus
dilectus). This is my well beloved sone / and was there bodily when Johan
baptyst said. Ecce agnus dei). And the holy ghost was seen. Sicut columba). As
a white douue. These ben three persons in one godheed / for the fader spoke
above / and the sone was there bodily / and the holy ghost in lykenes of a
douue. Ye shall believe that these three persons be but one god in trynyte /
this believe ye shall know on the water bry^ke / that is in your crystnynge at
ye font. Wherefore he that believes thus / and does works of believe shall be
saved. Qui crediderit et baptisatus fuerit saluus erit). He that believes and
is baptized shall be saved and follows the works of believe. Qui vero no^
crediderit conde^p nabitur). And he that belyueth not and does not the works
of believe shall be dampened. The works of believe ben mekenes and charity / for
without these two no man may be saved. And he that has these two is written in
the genelogy of our lord Ihesu christ. the which is read in Crystmas / that
begins above with Abraham / and so comes downewardes to Joseph and to our
lady / in showing yt he that is most mekest in heart is most next our lord
Jesus christ. And such he auau^ceth in everlasting bliss. And therefore the
genelogy this night begins at Ihesu christ and gooth vpwardes to Abraham and
so to god. Also he showed verey god in trynyte when he turned water in to
wine at the wedding. It happened so yt the people lacked wine whiles they were
at the meet. Then badde our lord that they should take.vi. stones or
pottes yt were empty and bad fill them with water / and they did so. Then
our lord blyssed them and badde that they should bear them to hy^ yt began the
table / and let him begin / and then he began / and said that it was the best
wine that ever he drank. Thus our lord showed himself both god and man /
god yt he turned water in to wine / and man that he ete and drank with the^ This
miracle he showed at the wedding / in tokenynge yt he blysseth all weddynges
that be done after the law of holy church. And therefore keep your wedlock /
and be in full faith and believe of holy church as holy church techeth / and
so ye shall come to endless bliss. Amen.

De conuersione sancti pauli.
Friends such a day ye shall have saint Poules day that is called conuersyon
of saint Poule / for that day he was converted and turned fro a wicked
tyrant in to gods servant / from an hye man and a proud / in to a meke man
and a good man / and from the dyscyple of ye devil in to gods holy
appostle. So for this man was turned from all wyckednes in to great goodness /
in great help and socoure to all holy church. Therefore holds his conuersyon
/ and so do we of no mo / but of him only / and that for three causes. The
first for great miracles in his tornynge / and for the great Joy in his
defending / and for the ensample of his amendy^ge. First or he was turned he
was called Saul / for right as Saul ye king of Ierlm pursued Dauyd to sle
hy^. So did Saul pursue Christ and his dyscyples to bring them to death.
Therefore while Christ went here in earth this Saul would never come to here his
techy^ge. But as soon as Christ was styed in to heaven / then anon this Saul
for he was learned and could the Jews law / he began to withstand and
gaynesayd Crystes dyscyples dysputynge against them / and pursued them in all
that he might in full intent to have dystroyed them / and all christian faith.
Then on a day he dysputed with saint Steven / and for he might not overcome
him / he bethought him how he might bring him to his death / and so he left
him never till he was deed. Then it is ye manner of the fendes children when
they have done a cursed deed for to be glad thereof / proud in heart and
increase in their malice / so was Saul glad of the death of saint Steven And
for he would have gotten him a name of wickedness passing all his fellows / he
went to them yt had the Jews laws in keeping and gate him a lettre of
warraunt to take all yt believed on Christ / and bring them to Iherusalem to be
put to death there. Then when he had these letters he took such a envy there
wtin his heart against cryste^ people yt wha^ he herd any man speak of them
anon for great anger he would snese at the nose and frooth at the mouth for
anger: and grynte with his tethe / thretenynge and menacynge toward them /
that all christian people were aferde of him. Than on a day he herd that in the
cite of Damask was much christian people hyd for dread / and so he rode
thederwarde. But anon our lord Ihesu crist showed his swetenes of his grace
when this Saul was in his hye pride / and in will to have done most harm.
Then about myddaye our lord keste a great light of grace about him / the
which was much bryghter than the son / and the light said unto Saul in
this manner of wise. (Saul saul quid me per sequeris). Saul saul what
folowest thou me. And anon he was aferde / and fell down of his horse and
cried and said for great fere (Quis es tu dn^e) Lord what art thou. Than said
our lord to him. (Ego su^ jesus nazarenus. I am Ihesus of nazareth / for yt
was ye name of his manhood. Then saul anon byleued in him and said. Lord
what wylt thou yt I shall do. Then saw the people about him the light and
herd the voys / but they saw no thing / but anon went to Saul and took
him up by the hondes. for he was bly^de and might not see / and so ladde hy^ to
the Cite to a good man's house. And there he was three days and three nyghtes
fasting / and another ete nor drank / ne might not see / but ever prayed to
god for dread of that vysyon. The which time the holy ghoost taught him
Crystis law Then the third day one of Crystys dyscyples that hight Ananyas
as god badde him came to him full sore aferde and said (Saul frater. dn^s
Jesus misit me ad te qui apparuit tibi in via) Saul the lord has se^te me to
the Ihesus that appyered to the in the way / and that thou sholdest see and be
crystned And when that Ananyas laid his hand upon his heed / anon he saw
clearly / and there fell from his eyes like scales of fysshes / and when he
had crystened him he called him Poule and then ete and was comforted / and
had his strenghte / and was there a few days with ye dyscyples. Then went
he in to the Temple / and preched openly of our lord Ihesu christ / preuynge
clerkely yt he was both god and man / and none other (Stupebant enim omnes qui
audiebant et dicebant) Forsothe all they that herd him were astonyed and said
/ that it was a great miracle and grace of god of his soden conuersyon. For he
that was so cursyd of lyuy^ge so little before / was so soon turned to god and
man. Thus may ye here how great a miracle that god showed in his conuersyon.
And how great Joy holy church makes of his defending / it was great Joy to
all christian people that was a little before besy to destroy christian people
anon after as ready to increase christian people And he yt was so besy and glad
to shed christian me^nes blood Then he was as ready to shede his own blood for
them And as besy as he went to put them to death / then with as good a will
he was ready to take the death for them / and there as no man durst preche the
word of god for him / after the comfort that they had of him / they spared
not for lord nor for knight but openly preched the word of god / and taught
the faith after in every place. And he that to fore was so proud and so fyers
/ and soon after was made so meke and so lowly that he fell to the ground to
every christian man's foot yt he trespaced to / and mekely besought them of
mercy with a full pacyent heart. Wherefore saint Austyn lykeneth him unto an
unicorn of kind that bears a horn in his browe / and with that horn he
sleeth all the beestes that he fyghteth with Also he is so fyers of himself that
there may no hunter take him / but thus they will begyle him. They will espy
where the unicorn haunteth and uses to walk. And there they will set a
maid. And as soon as the unicorn sees the maid / anon by kind he will
fall down and lay his head in her lap / and then all his might and
strength is gone. And then they come and take him Thus he says / that saint
Poule was first so fyers in him self / that they durst not preche there as he
was ne speak to him for dread. But when our lord Ihesu Christ showed to him
swetenes of his grace / and this fair maid that is the law of holy church
anon Poule fell down to the ground and was subget to all christian people /
herfore holy church was glad of his defending. He is set also in hye
ensample of hye amendynge for our lord is so gracyous that all christian people
may be saved that will forsake his mysse believe and be converted. Multo magis
gaudium erit in celo super vno peccatore penitenciam agente quam super
nonaginta nouem qui non in digent penitentia) There is more Joy in heaven upon
one sinner repentaunt doing penance / than upon.xcix. that did never
commit sin. And therefore our most blyssed lord would that al were
converted / wherefore in hye ensample and conforte to all sinful people he set
saint Poule to look upon. For though a man had done never so much syn^e and he
would forsake his sin and sin no more / then all the company of heaven
makes Joy and melody of his conuercyon / as we do here in earth of the
conuercyon of saint Poule. But there is much people that love more sin with
lust and liking in this world than they love god. For there be many that
never will leave sin / neither for love of god ne for the desire of the bliss
of heaven / nor for fere of the fend / nor for dread of the pains of hell. But
some say ye god will never lose that he has bought so dear with his passion
But they that say so ben not wise. God will that none were lost / but beware
thou lose not thy self. For all the while thou love more sin than god /
and had lever to serve the fend than god / thou art cause of thyn own
dampnacyon. For while thou have more will to serve the fend and be his child
than gods child thou lesest thy self / and god has ordained fendes to
tourmente them in everlasting pain. But saint Gregory says. They that
shall be dampened begin their penance here in this world in party / and
after their death co^tynueth for evermore. Wherefore I tell you this ensample.

Narracio.
There was a man that was an offycer with a lord and stood acursed / and on a
time as he rode toward a manoyr of his lords he fell out of his mind / and
unbridled his horse and led him to a manoyr of his lords. And then anon ye
baylyf pereeyued how it was with this man that he was dystraught out of his
mind / and anon made the people to bind him to a post in a berne. So when
this baylyf had souped and all his servants / he badde one of his servants
go and look how this man did. And he went to this man And when he came there
he saw three black dogs pluckynge away this man's flesh from the bones.
Then was this servant so aferde that uneath he had his mind but went to his
bed and lay there seek long after. And on the morrow when the people came
there as this man was bound / they found no more of this man but the bare
bones / and all the flesh was clean away. Thus ye may se he that contynuelly
lives in sin / may be full sure of a foul end. And though his end seems
fair in ye sight of man Yet it is right foul in the sight of almighty god and
al his aungelles / wherefore it is needful for every christian man and woman to
amend him while he is here in this life / and has time and space of
amendment / and he yt does so shall come to saint Poule and be there with him
in everlasting bliss. To the which bring us our lord. Amen.

De purificatione marie virginis.
GOod friends such a day ye shall have Candelmas day / that day makes mind
and mencyon of our lady of her sone / and specially in three things. Of our
ladies puryfycacyon / in Symeons metynge. And in candelles offrynge. This day
is called the puryfycatyon of our lady / in english it is ye clensynge of our
lady. But for no need that she had thereto / for she was enclensed with the
clensynge of the holy ghoost in conceyuynge of her sone / but there was in her
no manner of fylthe. But for that day was the.xl. day from the birth of her
sone. And was called in the Jews law the day of ye puryfycacyon. Not only
for our lady / but for all other women wherefore we call it the puryfycacyon of
our lady. The law of ye Jews was such yt when yt as a woman was delyuerd of
a man child she was hold unclean.vii. days after / and than the law gave
her leave to goo to her husbonde but yet she was unclean.xxxiii. days. But
until.xliiii. days were fulfilled she should hold her without ye church with
her offri^ge / and the offrynge in this days was of a rich man a lamb / for
a poor man was a payer of turtell douues / or else other douues and so offered
our lady with her sone. and if a woman be delivered of a maiden child / she
should double al those same days before said / yt is to say the comy^ge to her
husbo^de / and also ye coming to the Temple and so this is ye reason thereof For
it is so that all great clerks say yt it is.vii. days after wha^ a woman
has conceived a manchild / or yt the same seed torn in to blood / and it is
also.xxxiii days after or it torn to any shap of man / and than god sends
life in to it. And if it be a maid Child it doubleth all tho days both in
tournynge in to blood and also in shappe of body and this is ye cause Eve that
was ye first fourmed woman yt ever wrathed our lord more than did the man
Adam / Therefore she is ye longer in fourmyng Thus for fresshely co^plexyon of a
man and woman she is unclean in herself / therefore this Puryfycacyon is
ordained. But understand well that our lady had none need of this clensynge /
for she conceived not with co^plexyon of man but only of the holy ghost / so
yt she was clean of all manner of fylth touching co^sente of man. But yet she
went to the temple as other women did specially for four causes. The first
was to fulfill scripture yt says thus (Qua^to mayor es ta^to humilia te) The
higher yt thou art in degree the meker thou sholdest make ye Thus did our
lady / for she wist well yt she was mother to gods sone of heaven / and had so
great worship passing all other women / yet she made her as the poorest
company. The second cause was / as she fulfilled ye law of circu^cisyo^ of
her sone / in ye same wise she fulfilled the purificacyo^ and in offrynge of
her sone in the temple doing for him as other poor women did for their
childerne. The third cause to stop ye Jews mouths / lest they had said
yt she had not done ye law / and so cast a great sclaunder against her in time
coming. The fourth cause was to give ensample to all other women that they
should come to the church after ye birth of her childerne / and thank god yt
he had saved them from death in her trauayllynge. For in that time a woman is
in great peril of death / for there is no sykenes in ye world that gooth sonye
death / for these causes holy church makes my^de of our ladies puryfycacyon It
makes mind also of ye coming of Symeon and Anne. Simeon ille senex diu
vixerat etas co^paratur anne) This Symeon was a passy^ge old man. But he had
prayed to god besely al his life yt he should never dye tylle he had seen Christ
bodily in this world / and so he did. And this Anne prayed the same / Also ye
chall understand that this Anne was not our ladies / mother / but an other Anne
that had husbondes seven years / and when her husbonde was deed she would not
be wedded no more / but lived till she was.lxxx. year old and served god in
the Temple night and day and prayed that she might see god or she deyed / and
our lord granted her. Then when our lady came in to the Temple with her
sone / the holy ghost warned Symeon and Anne / and anon they with much Joy
went against him and brought him in to the Temple (Et simeon accipit eum in
vlnas suas) And Symeon took him in his arms with all the reverence that he
could and might and said unto him in this manner of wise that follows (Nunc
dimittis seruum tuum domine secundum verbum tuum in pace) O thou lord now
suffer thy servant after thy word in peace. And so with all the worship and
reverence that he could he loved and thanked him that he would let him live so
long to see him bodily with his eyes / where in mind of this when a woman
comes to the church of a child / she abides at the church door till the
pressed come and cast holy water on her / and takes her in by the hand in to
the church / gyuynge her leave after to come to the church / and to go to her
husbo^de. For and they have comened together before / they must shryue them
both thereof and take her penance. Also holy church makes mind of candelles
offrynge. And as ye see it is a common use for all christian people that be of
convenient age to come that day to holy church and bear a candell brennynge
in procession. As like they went bodly with our lady. But now ye shall here
how this worshypfull feast was first found. Sometime when the Romans by
grette might and royal power conquered all the world for they had great
domynacyon / they were so proud that they forgate her god and made hem diverse
gods after her own lust. And so among all they had a god that they called
Mars / that had be tofore a notable knight in battle. And so they prayed to
him for help / and for they would speed ye better of this knight / ye people
prayed and did great worship to his mother that was called Februa / after the
which woman much people have opinion that this month that is called.
Februarii. Wherefore the second day of this month is Candelmasse day the
Romans this night would goo about the Cite of Rome with torches and candels
brenynge in worship of this woman Februa / for hope to have the more help and
socour of her sone Mars Then was there a pope that was called Sergius and
when he saw christian people draw to this false mawmettry and ventrue believe. He
thought to undo this foul use and custom and turn it in to gods worship
and our ladies. And gaf commandment / that all christian people should come to
church and offer up a candell brennynge in the worship that they did to this
woman Februa / and do worshypp to our lady and to her sone our lord Ihesu
christ. So that now this fest is solempny galowed thorugh all crystendome. And
every christian man and woman of couenable age to come to church and offer up
her candels as though they were bodily with our lady / hoping for this
reverence and worshypp that they do to our lady to have a great reward in
heaven / and of her sone our lord Ihesu christ / and so they may be syker and
it be done in clean life and with good devotion. A candell is made of weke and
wexe. So was Crystys soul hid within the manhood. Also the fire betokens
the godhede / Also it betokens our ladies moderhode and maydenhede / light
with the fire of love. Also it betokneth every christian man and woman that does
good deeds with good entente and parfyght love and charity to god and to all
christian people wherefore if there be any of you that his candell of charity be
quenched / goo anon and be accorded with his neighbors and light his candell
/ and then offer it up for that is gods will And if ye do not thus ye shall
lose all your mede and al your merit in heaven.

Narracio.
We read in the life of saint Donstone / how that his mother when she was with
child with him / she came to the church upon Candelmasse day. And when all
the people had gone a processyon with her candelles brenny^ge and came in to
the church every man and woman with his light in his hand / suddenly all the
candelles in the church went out and a great derkenesse come therewith / that
uneath one might see an other / and when they had stand so long full sore
aghast. There came a fair light from heaven and lyghted ye ca^dell ye saint
Donstons mother had i^ her hands And then of her all other took light in
tokenynge that he was in her body that should tempte many men's charity that
before were quentched with envy.

Narracio.
Also there was a woman that was devout in our ladies service / and many times
for our ladies sake and love yt she had to her / she gave a way all her best
clothes / and went in the worst her self. So it happened on a candelmas day
she would feign have gone to the church / but for she was not honestly arrayed
she durst not for shame / for she had done a way all her best clothing.
Then was she sorye that she should be without mass that day / wherefore she
went in to a chamber that was nyghe her place. and there she was in her prayers
/ and as she prayed she fell a sleep / and than she thought she was in a fair
church and saw a great company of maidens coming to the church / and one
was passy^ge all other much fair / and went before with a crown on her heed /
and she kneled down / and all other by her. Then came there one with a great
burden of candelles / and first he gave the maiden a candell that had the
crown on her head / and so after all the other maidens yt were in the church
/ and then he came to this woman and gave her a candel / than she was glad /
and than she saw a priest and.ii. dekens with two cerges bre^nnyge in their
hondes going to ye auter ready to go to mass / and as she thought christ was ye
priest / and the.ii. deke^s Laurence and Vy^cent yt bare the cerger / and.ii.
young men began mass with a sole^pne note. Then when ye gospel was red the
queen offered her candell / and than all other after her / and when all had
offered ye priest abode for yt woman to offer her ca^del Then ye queen sent to
bid her come / for ye priest abode her and she said nay she would not leave her
candell / but keep it for devotion / than sent the queen an other messenger and
bad hy^ say to her yt she was vncurteyse to tarry ye priest solo^ge and said
but she would come with good will and offer it / take it fro her / and she said
nay. than ye messenger would have take it from her but she held it fast / and
so betwix them two ye serge brake in mids / and half ye messenger had and
the other half ye woman had with her and in this wrastelynge the woman a woke of
her sleep and had half ye serge in her ho^de / and tha^ she thanked god and our
lady hertely yt she was not with out a gospel that day and offered the candell
to holy church (Et pro maximis reliquiis reseruatur) And for a great relyke it
was kept ever after.

Narracio.
Also there was a woman of evil living / and she did never good deed in her
life but only found a ca^dell brennyn-before our lady. So it happed when she
was deed / fe^des came to her and took her soul / and wha^ they were going
there came two angels and rebuked ye fendes why they were so bold for to take
ye soul without dome Than said they there needs none she did never good deed
Tha^ said they take and bring ye soul before our lady / and so they did But
when it was found yt she did never good deed she must needs go to hell. Than
said our lady she found a candell brenny^ge before me and was ever her will
while she lived and therefore I will be as kind to her as she was to me / and
bad an angel take a great serge and light it / and set it before her in hell
and our lady charged and commanded that there should no fend came there nigh /
but let it stand brenny^ge for ever more to comfort all yt ben in hell Tha^
said ye fendes they had lever leave the soul tha^ do so Than badde our lady
take ye soul and bear it to the body again so they did And when she was a
live she bethought her oon her straight dome there as she was at / and went
and shroue her to a priest and lived long after and she amended her life and
was ever after a good voman and an holy.

De sancto Mathia apostolo.
GOod fre^des such a day ye shall have saint Mathyes day yt is gods
Appostle / which has none even in certain. But as clerks say all christian
people owe to fast ye even though it be not set vygyll in ye calendar. ye
shall understand when our lord was in earth / he chose.xii. apostles for to
here and to se that he did here in earth For ye Jews were so hard to him
and against hy^ that they would believe nothy^ge yt he did. And also for they
should bear wytnes after his Asce^syon of that he did in earth for the Jews
would believe no manner thing but that might be preued by witness. Than was
Judas scariot one of the.xii. ye christ had chosen to him Judas had a little
tofore slain his own fader / and lay by his mother and tha^ came to christ to
be his discyple / but he was ever wont tofore to stele and could not leave it
and he was weary anon of crystis holy living. And for great couetyse of money
he sold his lord unto the Jews for.xxx. pens and when he had so done and
saw that christ was take and demed to death. Anon he fell into dyspayre and
went and henge himself with a rope / For the throat yt spoke ye word of
treason and gyle / the same throat was strangeled for he that did so foul by
his lords life would have said many an evil word after his lords death by
him that did so foul by his life. And for the fend might not draw out his
soul by his mouth for he had late kyssed the mouth of christ therefore ye
fend brake his womb and shed out his guts and tha^ they took his soul
and bare it to hell. But our lord is so ryghtfull and gracyous yt he will
every good deed reward and every sin punysshe And yt ye shall here by this
ensample.

Narracio
We find that saint Brendan as he failed in the sea he saw this Judas sytte
upon a stone / and a cloth hangy^ge before hy^ yt lay in ye water and
ofte^bete hy^ in ye face Tha^ brendan we^de it had be some holy man yt had
suffered yt for great penance / and asked in the name of god what he was. And
he answered and said I am Judas gods traytoure / that have this place of
gods great grace and curteysye / for it refressheth me of the great hete that
I suffer within me / and for no merit that ever I did deserve. For me
thinks yt I am in paradyse while that I am here. Then said saint Brandon /
why have thou that stone under the / and wherefore does that beat the in the
face. Than said he I laid this stone in an hye way there as the common people
should goo and they were eased thereby / and this is the cause that I am eased
thereby now. This clothe was not mine own that do the me this refresshynge now
/ but and it had been mine own it should have refresshed me much the more /
for I gave it unto a poor man. Than said Brandon how long have thou this ease
and refresshynge. Than said he / every saterdaye from euensonge / till
euensonge on the morrow be done and fro Cristinasse day to the.xii. day and
from Eester day till wytsondaye and in our lady Assumpcyo^ and Candelmasse
day. Than Brandon thanked god that he is so mercy full and gracyous in all
thing. And anon he badde sail for the fast yt they were gone for they
should here tidings soon after. and even there with came out of an hylle many
fendes and casted many brennyng glemes of fire in to the sea after them that
the sea brenned on every side of them / but god kept them so and they had
no harm Than for this Judas was one of the.xii. apostles and the nombre of
them must be fulfilled. Than was christ styed up to heaven / and the enleuen
apostles were together with many other people in a place. Than said Peter to
them thus / now all good men and brederne it is well known to you that Judas
was one of the twelve and by cause the nombre may not be in parfyte it is
needful to chose one of these.xii. men that has be with our lord Ihesu christ
fro the time that he was baptized to the time of his ascencion for to bear
wytnes with us of his vprysynge and of his doing. Then they set these two
men Joseph barsabas and Mathy and kest lotte on them and said thus. O lord
thou know the hertes of al men show to us which thou choysest of these two
men / and the lotte fell on Mathy. And so he was in nombre with the other.xi.
Then Mathy went in to Myrre to preche the word of god for he had the grace
of the holy ghost / he did miracles and turned much people to the faith of
Christ. Then was the fend sorry and appeared to the bishop of the Jews law
in lykenes of a young child with long here is and hoar. And badde hy^ take
Mathy and do him to death or else he will torn all the people to the christian
faith. Then the bishop was nigh wode for wrath / and sent forth people to
seek Mathye. And when they had him they bound his hands behind him / and
kest a rope about his neck and led him to prison and there bound him fast
with chains of Iren. Then the night after our lord Ihesu Christ came to hy^
with a great light and losed his hands. And when he had well conforted hy^ he
opened the prison door and badde him preche the faith and spare for no man.
Then there as he preched were some that withstode him / and let other that
would have turned to the faith. Then said Mathy to them. I tell you before
he shall fall down to the pytte of hell / and so anon in sight of all men
the earth opened and he fell down in to the pytte of hell body and soul and
was never seen no more of them. Then was the people sore aghast of that
sight and turned to the faith a great nombre of them. Then when the bishop
herd thereof they took him and bound him and sent men to throw stones at him
/ and when he was nigh deed he badde christian people to take the stones that he
was stooned with in to the grave with him in wytnes of his martyrdom / and he
kneled down and held up his hands to god and said. O lord I beseech the
take my spyryte and gave up the ghost. Reynolde of Chester in his chronicles
tells an other miracle like this and says when saint Wolstone vysyted his
bysshopryche the people brought a man before him that did his neighbors much
disease / and would never be in peace prayenge the bishop to chastyse him. And
wha^ the bishop had preched this he was ever ye longer the worse / than the
bishop and all the people prayed to saint Mathy to show some miracle by this
man what he was worthy to have. And anon in sight of all the people there came
out of the earth two fendes with brennynge hokes and pulled this man quycke
down to hell / and when he was gone the people were releued and had rest and
peace ever after.

De annunciatione marie virginis.
WOrshypfull friends such a day ye shall have an hye and solemn feast in
holy church the annuncyacyon of our lady / and that has auowed or Joined in
penance must fast the even / ye shall understand that it is called ye
annu^cyacyon for this cause / for the fader of heaven sent his angel gabryell.
(Missus est angelus gabriell a deo in ciuitate cui nomen nazareth). In to the
cite that was called Nazareth to our lady that was new wedded by ye bidding
of god and reuelacyon of the holy ghost to a man called Joseph / and she was in
her chamber in her prayers / ye angel Gabryell came to her and said / our
lord is with ye. Than was she gretely astonyed of this gretynge. For there was
in that country a man that could much wytchecraft / and so with help of
fendes he made himself like an angel and came to diverse maidens and said he
was sent from god to them on his message / and so often times lay with them and
did them great velony. Then when our lady herd tell of that man she was
adradde lest it had be he. For she had spoke with none angel before / nor
there were no such words ne such gretynge made never none to her before.
Then Gabryell the angel conforted her and said. Ne time as maria i^uenisti
gracia^ apud dn^m). Dread not Mary / forsothe thou have found grace at our
lord. For among all women our lord has chosen the for to be the mother of
his sone. And him thou shalt conceive by faith and by love of the holy ghost
without any deed of man that shall shadow the and quench all flesshely lust
and light the light of goostly love that you shall conceive the sone of the high
god. Then anon our lady herd these words / and anon there came a
spyrytuell swetnes and Joy in her heart that anon or any erthely man could
tell it / and so with all the reverence of mekenes that she could she answered
thus again and said. Ecce ancilla dn^i fiat michi scdm verbu^ tuu^). Lo here
gods own maid ready to do gods will / prayenge it may be to me right as
thou say. Thus that blyssed body conceived our lord Ihesu christ in
everlasting Joy to al ye world. Thus I may lyken our lady to a precious
stone called onyx / and it is as clear as any crystal / and shall of kind when
ye son shyneth hot on it / it opens and receives a drop of the dew of
heaven in to it / and closes again till.ix. months after / and then it
opens and there falls out a stone of ye same kind and so closes again as
close as ever it was and never opens after. Thus our lady was as clean as oni
cristall / for the hot love of the holy ghoost at the.ix. months end she
was delivered of her sone our lord Ihesu christ. and was after as clean maiden
as she was tofore Then when the angel had done his message he went his
way to heaven and our lady went to her cosyn Elyzabeth the which was great with
child with saint Johan baptyst And when she came to Elyzabeth / she grette her
mekely / and as soon as our lady spoke to Elyzabeth the child that was in
Elyzabeths womb played and made great Joy / for he saw that our lord had
taken mankind and was come to save them that were lost. Then our lady
dwelled there with Elyzabeth her cosyn till the time that saint Johan was borne
/ and was mydwyfe to Elyzabeth / and took saint Johan from the earth / and
there she learned all that she neded for to know against the time that our
lord should be borne / and was perfyte enough thereof / then mekely she took
her leave and went home again to Nazareth. Then thought Joseph that he would
goo look how his wife did and went to ward her. And when our lady herd of
his coming / she went for to mete him / and grette him full mekely. But when
Joseph saw her great with child / he meruayled gretely how that might be /
for well he wyste that it was not his / for he had never part of her body in
that degree. For he knew well that she had made a vow before that she would
never have part of man's body / and thought how he was made for to wedde her
by ye commandment of the holy ghost and great miracle showing / and thought
right in his heart that he was not worthy to dwell in her company / and thought
in his heart for to have goone home again and to leave her there. Then there
came an angel unto him and said / be not aferde too take Marye thy wife in to
thy keeping / for it is of the holy ghost that is quycke in her womb. For thou
shalt be keeper and nouryssher unto her child / and when that it is borne call
it Ihesus. For he shall be the sauyoure of all the world. Then ye shall
understand that four causes as saint Ambrose says our lady was wedded to this
old man Joseph. The first was if she had conceived without wedlock ye Jews
would have said that she had be an evil woman of her body / and so have stoned
her to death. The second cause was / for she was so shamefast that and she had
herd any have put any defame to her she would have deyed for sorrow. The
third cause was ye Joseph should bear witness of her maydenhode The fourth
cause for Joseph should help her at her birth / and bring her to Bethleem
and after in to Egypt / and so again in to her own country. For these.iiii.
causes she was wedded to this old man Joseph / and also to begyle the fend
that he should not know hy^ fro an other child. Now have ye herd of the
Annuncyacyon. There be some people that ask a questyon why there stands a
wine pot with lylyes between our lady and Gabryell the angel at her
salutacyon. This is the cause for our lady at salutacyon conceived by faith.

Narracio
It befelle thus upon a Crystmasse day yt a christian man and a Jew sat together
and spoke of the concepcyon of our lady. And there stood a wine pot tofore
them with a lylye therein. Then said the christian man / we believe that our
lady conceived like as this lylye conceived color of grene and after brings
forth a white flower without craft of man or any peyrynge to the stalk.
Right so our lady conceived of the holy ghost and after brought her sone our
lord Ihesu christ without any we^me of her body that is flower and chyef of all
wymmen. Then said the Jew when I see a lylye spring out of the deed stalk
that stands in this pot / then will I believe that you say to be true and
anon therewith sprange a white lylye out of the deed stock that stood in the
same wine pot And when ye Jew saw ye anon he fell down to ye ground
upon his knees and said thus. Lady now I see well that thou conceived with the
holy ghoost our lord Ihesu christ gods sone of heaven / and thou were clean
maiden both before the birth and also after the birth. And so anon he was
crystened / and so after he was a full holy man. And this is the cause wherefore
that the pot with the lylye is set between our lady and the angel. For
right as the Jew dysputed with the christian man of the manner of the concepcyon
of our blessed lady So our lady dysputed with the angel of the manner how she
should conceive / and be both mother and maid or she consented thereto Then^e ye
yt will fast the five euens of our lady / in worship of her.v. Joys yt she
had of her sone. The first when she conceived of the holy ghost / and knew yt
she was mother to goddis sone of heaven. The second was on crystmasse day wha^
she was delivered of her sone without any pain of her body / For as she
conceived without lust of her body also was delyuerd without pain of her
body. The.iii. Joy was on ester day when her sone rose from death to life.
and came to her and kyssed her and made her more Ioyefull of his vprysyng /
than she was sorry of his death. The.iiii. Joy when he styed up to heaven on holy
thursday in that same flesh and blood that he took on her body The.v. Joy
was in her assumpcion when she saw her sone come with great multitude of
angellys and say^tes to fetch her to heaven and to crown her queen of heaven /
and empress of hell / and lady of the world / and so all yt ben in heaven
shall do her reverence and worship. and all yt ben in earth shall do her
service. These ben the five Joys yt our lady had of her sone. and ye shall
understand yt he yt will greet our Lady with five Auees / shall never come
in to the pains of hell.

Narracio.
We find written of an holy mayde^ that was devout in our ladies service / and
every day greted her with five Joys then it happed so on a day ye she fell
seek / and felt her self well yt she should be deed. and for fere she syghed
wonder sore / and made great moan / for because she wyste not wheder she
should goo after her death. Then came our lady to her and said / why art you so
sorry yt haste made me so glad grety^g me with Joys that I had of my sone /
therefore be not sorry but know well that thou shalt goo with me in to
everlasting bliss and Joy without end.

Narracio.
We find of saint gylberte / that on a time he was nigh deed of the quynty /
And when his throat was so great / and well nigh deed yt he might not take
breath Our lady came to him / and said to him Gylberte my servant it were
evil do yt thy throat should suffer penance that had so often times gladed me
with Joys / and anon she took her fair pappe and mylked on his throat and
went her way and anon therewith he was hole and thanked our lady ever after.

De sancto Georgio martyr
Good frendis such a day ye shall have say^te Georgis day ye holy martyr / it
is written in his life yt there was an horrible dragon beside a cite that was
called cyrme / of ye which dragon men of ye Cite were sore aferde / in so
much yt by counsel of ye king every day they gaaf hy^ a child and a sheep
to ete For fere leest he would have come in to ye Cite. Then wha^ all ye
children and ye sheep were nigh ete for by cause yt the king himself gaaf the^
ye same counsel they co^streyned hy^ that he had but one daughter to give her
to ye dragon Then ye king for fere of ye people with wepy^ge and great sorrow
maky^g delivered the^ his child and sent her forth to the place there as they
were wont to set their own children and a sheep with her to abide till ye dragon
come. But than by ye ordenau^ce of god say^te George came riding yt way and
wha^ he saw this damoysel i^ her array hy^ thought she was a woman of great
birth and asked her why she stood there with ye sheep in such array so
morny^ge. Then answered she and said ge^tyll knight well may I morn and make
sorrow. for I am a ky^ges daughter of this cite / and now I am set here to be
devoured of a dragon yt has ete all ye childeren of this Cite. and be now
dystroyed / and now he must have me for my fader gaaf the^ counsel there to and
therefore gentle knight ride hens and save thy self. leest ye dragon slay
both ye and me. Then said george / damoysell yt were great shame and vylony
to me / yt am a knight well arrayed and should flee and you a woman and sholdeste
abide. Then with yt the dragon put out his head at an hole / and spytted fire
/ and proffered battle to george Anon George made a sign of ye cross before
hy^ and set the spear in ye rest / and with great might bare down the dragon
to the ground And then he bad the damoysell bind this dragon with her
gyrdell about the neck and led it with her in to the cite and so the dragon
followed after her as it had be a hou^de made to bow pacyently. but when the
people of the cite saw the dragon come / they fled for fere a way then
george called the people again and said to them be not aferd for and ye will
believe in christ and take crystendome I will save you and slay this dragon / and
deliver you of your enmye / then were they so glad that anon.xx.M. men
without wymen and children were crystned And the king and the queen were
first of all with all their household and then george slew the dragon / and
bad the people tey oxen to him and draw it out of the cite that the sauoure of
it did ye people no harm. then george bad ye king edyfy chyrches in every
corner of his lord and be lusty to goddis service and to honor and worship
all the people of of holy church / and ever have compassyon and be sorry for
them that be poor or in any disease. Then when George had done thus and had
turned all the land to christian faith / he herd of an emperor that hight
Dyoclesyan how he did many christian men too death / Then he went to him and
rebuked him of his cursed deeds. Then themperoure anon commanded to put
George anon in to prison / and to lay him vpryght / and to lay a myll stone
upon his breast to press him to death. Then George prayed to god for help /
and our lady kept him that he had no harm ne no part of his body. And when
themperoure herd thereof / he did do take two wheles / and put them full of
hokes / and George was set in the mids between them two / and then the wheles
were turned / and so to raze his flesh fro the bones / and when George was in
this tourment anon he prayed to god of socoure and help / Anon he was helped
/ and then they put him in to a hot lyme kyl and closed him therein / for he
should have be brent / but anon our lord turned it to cold and there he was
three days / and then they wend to have found him brent / and he was saufe
from all manner harm and was merry. Then he was brought forth and set
before the emperor / and George repreued him of his false gods / and said
to him they were but fendes without might and power. Then the emperor made to
beat his mouth with stones till he was powned / and made to beat his bare body
with dry bromes till the flesh fell from the bone / and the people might se
the guts / yet after they made him to drink venymme that was made strong for
the nones / for to have pyned him to death. And when George had made a sign of
the cross he drank the poison without grefe / in so much that the man yt
made the poison turned to the christian faith / and anon he was done to death
/ then ye night after as George was in prison god came to him and said.
George be of good comfort to morrow thou shall make an end / and come to
everlasting Joy and bliss / and set a croune on his heed and gave him his
blyssynge. Then on the morrow for he would not do worship to the false gods
the emperor made to smite of his heed / and then as the emperor would have gone
in to his palace there came a fire lyghtnynge and brent him and all his people.
We find in a storye of Anthyoche written that beside Iherusalem a fair young
knight appeared to a priest and said. I am saint George / and a leder of christian
people / and commanded ye priest that he should bear with him his relyckes /
and come with hy^ to Iherusalem. But when they came to the walls yt he then
people therein were so strong that the christian durst not come to the walles^
Then came saint George clothed in white and made a cross on his breast and
went upon the ladder / and badde the christian people come after him / and so
with the help of saint George they gate the cite of Iherusalem and slew all
the hethen people that were found there. And therefore let us pray to saint
George to help us against our goostly enemy. Amen.

De santo Marco euangelista.
Reverent friends such a day ye shall have saint Marks day that was one of
the four euangelystes that wrote Crystes gospelles / and preched them to the
people. Then Mark was first an hethen man / and after was crystened of saint
Peter / for he made him to go and preche to the people gods word. And then
for he was so holy a man the people would have had him to be a priest. But he
was so meke in himself that he made one of his thombes for to be cut of. For
he thout he was not worthy to be a priest / but fot god would have it so /
saint Peter with great instaunce made him take thorder of preesthode upon him.
Then was he besy both day and night to preche the word of god / and all yt
he said with word / he confermed it with good ensample / and with doing of
great miracles. Thus by thynspyracyon of ye holy ghost he went in to the cite
of Alysauner / for to toure the people to the faith. Then when he came to the
cite / uneath that he was entered in to the cite his sho brake and thereby he
wist well yt he should be deed / than he saw a man sit and cloute shone to
poor people / and Mark prayed him to amend his sho. Then for this man was
poor / he thought it was alms to help him at ye time / and took his sho
and began to sewe / and anon with his nall he hurt his hand. And what for
pain and ache he said god help. And when mark herd that he called to god /
anon Mark prayed to god for him And then Mark spytted on the earth and
blyssed it and anointed his hand therewith and said. In noi^e patris jesus xp^i
filii dei viui sanet manus tua). In the name of the fader Ihesu christ ye sone
of the quycke god / thy hand be hole. Vocabit au^t ho^ ille ananias). Forsothe
ye man was called Anania. And when Anania saw such virtue in mark he prayed
him to dwell still with him. Co^moratisque ibide^ duobus annis). And there he
dwelled two years and crystened him and all his household. And after for great
holiness that Mark saw in him he made him archebysshop. Then the people saw
how that Mark preched in the cite / they took him and tied a rope about his
neck / and drew him among stones / till the flesh fell to the earth / and
said draw we the bugle to the bugle place. So when he was drawn nigh to the
death / then they put him in to prison till on the morrow Then the same
night Christ came to him in to prison and said. Peace be to the Mark mine
euangelyst / be not aferde for I am with the. Then on the morrow they came and
fet hy^ out of prison / and drew him till he was deed. And when he should deye
he said. In manus tuas dn^e). And so he gave up the ghost / and afterward they
would brenne his body. And then there came such an earth quaue with a
thondry^ge / that there durst no man abide / then in the night christian people
came and took Marks body and buried it. Then fell it so that every christian
land hallowed saint Marks day saufe one country that is called Appolonia the
which country was so grieved with hete and drought yt all the country failed
them of fruit so that they were well nigh famysshed and there came a voice
from heaven / and badde them halowe saint Marks day / and than they should be
comforted / and they did so / and anon god sent them plente of all manner of
fruytes. Now it is to wit why we should fast this day / and go in processyon.
We read in the cite of Rome fell such a qualme and a sudden death that wha^ a
man yaned / or gaped or snesed anon he deyed / and there deyed many suddenly.
Then was there a pope that was called Pellagius yt commanded all christian
people yt when he yaned every man should make a cross over his mouth / and
when any man herd an other man snese / he should say Christ help you / and so
many were saved / and there he made the people go on processyon and so prayenge
to all saints of heaven to pray to god for them / and so they did. Then came
after saint Gregory and made them do the same on saint Marks day / to halow
and fast and go in processyon and canonysed it for to be done for evermore.
Then there came an other pope the which was called Liberius and in his time
all manner of fruytes in time of the year of great tenderness of it self /
took great harm / so what by tempest thonder / lyghtnynge / and unkind hetes
/ by storms / myldewes / by worms. and by long tayled flies for great
vengeance and punysshement ye anon after Eester day the people turned again
to their old sinner / having no reward of the sacrament which they have
received therefore god sent more vengaunce this time than in any other time of
the year wherefore this holy pope to put away all these things and in
especyall goddis wreche fro ye people he commanded to al christian people to
halowe and to fast and to go in processyon / and he that said that it is made
by a constytucy^^ is acursed tylle he come to amendment. And therefore I
charge you and counseyll you all that think to be saved / keep this day after
ye rule of holy church.

In die Philipi et Iacobi apostolorum
GOod frendis / such a day ye shall have ye feste of phylip and Jacob ye
which were holy apostles. but for this feste comes with in that feste of
ester / ye shall not fast that even But ye shall come to church and worship
god and the holy Apostles. Then ye shall know well ye phylyp was ordained by
all other apostles to goo in to ye country that was called Sytha. to preche to
ye vnbyleued people but when he came thither and preched ayenste ye mawmentis yt
they were fendis / and no goddis And so they took him. and ladde hy^ to her
temple / and would have constreyned him to do sacrefyce. Then as they were
besy to do him disease / suddenly a great dragon came out of ye earth and
slew three of these mysbyleued people and venemed ye people so with his
brethynge / yt there fell on the^ such a sickness yt the woo and ye sorrow yt
they had / they cried after help. Then said Phylyp to the^ if ye would be
helped and heled of your / sekenes / and also these men rered from death to
life. First cast down ye mawmentis and set in their stead crosses there as
our lord deyed upon / and do it worship / Then they did so for they were
glad to be helped of their sekenes and as soon as they had do so they were
helped / and then Phylyp prayed to god for these three men to reyse them from
death to life. (Tunc precepit philip pus draconi vt in locu^ suum
redescenderet. Then Phylyp commanded the dragon to go down to his place
again and never disease man more. Then the cursed people of the cite saw that
Phylyp would have turned all the people took him / and did him on a cross and
so on a cross he deyed / and went to everlasting bliss. Amen.

Of saint James.
NOw ye shall here of Jacob that was called among ye appostles (Iacobus minor)
the less James. For to know hy^ from Iacobus mayor) James the more was saint
Johan the euangelystes brother / but when Iacobus or James yt is all one name /
was called Crystes own brother. For he was so much like to Christ. Then when
the Jews would have taken christ / they could not know one fro an other. But
as Judas betrayed Christ with kissing / by which he was. known and taken.
This James was so holy fro the time that he was borne / yt as long as he lived
he never drank wine / ale / syder / ne bear / nor no manner of drink yt might
make a man drunk. ne never ete flesh / ne his heed was never shaven / ne
never used to be bawmed with oil as the manner of the country is for hete of
the son / nor he ware never no lynnen clothe / and he lay on his knees
prayenge for ye people / yt his knees were so thycke that they were bollen out
like a Camel. This was ye first man yt ever song mass in vestymentes as
priests do now. Then it fell so ye time in Iherusalem by ye deed of crystes
death yt it must needs be dystroyed. Wherefore this holy man James was made
bishop of Ielrm / and there he was left to preche and too torn ye people to
better living / but for they were co^bred so with sin yt they had no grace of
amendment. But needs for the prophecye of Christ must be fulfilled / and the
cite dystroyed / wherefore these men took saint James and set him in an hye
place prayenge him to preche the faith of Christ for much of the people were
turned to Christ / and he stood up and preched by good reason / how all that
believed not in Christ should be dampened at ye day of dome in to hell. Then
master of the Jews bad cast him down fro ye hye place yt he stood in / and
with stones they bet him down till he was deed. Then he kneled down
prayenge to god to forgive them his death / and therewith a cursed man smote him
on the heed yt the brain fell out / and so in this wise he gave up the ghost
Then after for vengeance of Crystes death / and for this holy man's death
the cite of Ierlm yt was that time ye gretest cite of the world and never like
to have be won / soon after was dystroyed / in to the vttermoost. In so
much yt ye stones of all the walls of the cite was turned up so down like as
our lord said.xl. winter before that it should be so and it was / and the
Jews were driven out in to diverse countrees / in so much that all the
kingdoms were dystroyed / and yet ben under other kings / and ever shall be
subgettes / and not possessyoners. Yet shall ye here more of the dystruccyon of
Iherusalem / to show how vengeable god is to them yt be glad to shede christian
men's blood as they were / when god would have taken vengeance of the cite.
It happed so that a man of Pylates the which did Christ to death came from
Iherusalem toward Rome / but the tempest in yt see took him and drove him upon
a land by a temple with great tempest. And there dwelled a great lord that was
called Vaspasyan / and for this cause he was called so / for he had a maladye
in his nosethrylles / there dropped out of his nose worms like waspes. Then
said Vaspasyan to this man Fro what country come thou / and he answered him
and said from Iherusalem / and would go toward Rome / then^e said Vaspasyan.
I am glad thereof / for I have herd say that there be many good leches in
that country wherefore I would well that you could heel me / and if thou do not
heel me you shalt be deed. Then answered he and said. I am no leche my self
/ but he yt heleth all seek and reyseth the deed to life may help yt / and if
it be his will. Who is he said Vaspasyan. Sir said he Ihesus of Nazareth that
the Jews have slain and if thou will believe in him thou shalt have all yt
thou will desire and behole. Then said Vaspasyan I believe verily as thou
say that he may hele me that reyseth men from death to life. And anon he was
hole. Then anon he sent a man to themperoure of Rome and gate license and
leave to dystroye the cite of Iherusalem / and he gadred a great multitude of
people / and Tytus that was his own sone with him and went to Iherusalem.
Then in the mean while that he besyeged the cite the emperor deyed / and
then he was chosen emperor and turned again to Rome and left Tytus his
sone there to dystroye the cite. Then Tytus lay so sore to the cite that he
enfamysshed them in so much that they ete their shone and their botes. And the
fader took mete from the sone / and the sone from the fader and either took it
from others mouth / the husband from the wife / and the wife from the
husband. Then among all other there was a woman of great birth / and was
comen of gentle blood / and she had a young child / and for hunger she
said. My dear child I have suffered more pain for the than ever thou dydest
for me. Wherefore it is good reason that I ease and aledge my honger on y^ than
that I should be famysshed for honger and thou also / and there with she took her
child and slew it / and roasted the one half of it / and the other half she
kept till on the morrow / and so as the flesh roasted the sauoure went in
too the cite. And when the people felt ye smell they wend there had be plente
of mete and came to have had part. And then this Woman would have hid it /
But they said they would see what mete she had / and then she brought it
forth and showed it and said. Loo here I have roasted mine own child and here
is ye other half against to morrow. Then the people were sore a grieved of that
syghte. and went forth leuynge ye woman etynge of her child. Then hunger
increased so gretely / yt there dyed with in ye Cite so thycke yt they cast
ye bodies over the walls out of ye cite in to ye dyches / and so filled ye
dyches full of deed bodies and the stenche smote forth in to ye country / and
enfected the people greatly then so at ye last great need made the^ yield up ye
cite. Then Tytus went in with his host / and right as the Jews sold Christ
for xxx. pens. so. they sold.xxx. Jews for a penny. and tha^ turned ye cite
up so down. In so much yt they left not a stone stondy^ge upon a another but
destroyed it to ye uttermost part Lo thus may ye see though god almighty
abide and suffer long / he smyteth sore at last. and takes great ve^gau^ce
on them that be lusty to shed christian mennys blood. Wherefore every christian
man and woman amend himself pray^g to this holy apostell / to be medyatoure
between god and them that they may have very repentance in their hertes here
with shryfte of mouth / and satysfaccyon in deed doing that we may come to
the bliss that never shall have ending. Amen.

De Inuencione sancte Crucis
Good frendis such a day ye shall have the Inue^cyon of ye holy cross ye
shall not fast ye euy^ but come to god and to holy church as christian people
should do / in worship of hy^ that deyed on the cross. Then ye shall
understand why it is called (Inuencio sancte crucis.) The finding of the
cross. the which was found in this wise as I shall tell you Wha^ Adam our
first fader was seek for age and would feign have be out of this world adam
sent Seth his sone to ye angel kepar of Paradyse / prayenge the a^gell to
send hy^ the oil of mercy to anoynte his body therewith. when he were deed.
Then went Seth to paradyse / and said his message to the angel Then answered
the a^gell and said / yt he might not have it till the years were fulfilled
But have this brau^che of the tree that thy fader sy^ned in. and set it on his
grave. and wha^ it bears fruit / then shall he have mercy / and not erste
Then took seth this brau^che and come home / and fond his fader deed then he
set this branch on his faders grave as tha^gell badde hy^ do the which
brau^che growed there till. Solomon was king and he made fell it down for it
was fair to the work of his temple / but it would not cord with the work of
his temple / Salomo^ made to cast it down in to therth and was hyd. there to
the time shat the bishop of the temple let make a wayre in the same place
there as the tree lay / to wesshe in sheep that were offered to the Temple.
Then when this wayre was made / they called in their la^gage (Probatica
piscina) To yt which water came an au^gel certain times fro heaven and did
worship to the tree yt lay in the ground of the wayre and meued the water and
what man or woman yt came to the water next after the a^gell / was made hole.
what seknes yt ever he had by virtue of the tree and so endurede many wynters
to the time that Christ was taken and should be done on the cross. Then this
tree by the ordenaunce of god swam^e upon the water and when the Jews had none
other tree ready to make the cross of for great haste that they had they took
the same tree and made thereof a cross / and so did our lord thereon and
then the tree bare that blessed fruit crystes body of the which welleth the
oil of mercy to adam and eve and all other of their ofsprynge. but when christ
was deed / and was take down of ye cross. for envy yt the Jews had to him
they took the cross and two other crosses yt the thieves were hanged on either
side of christ and beryed them deep in the earth for cryste^ people should not
wit where they were done for to do it worship. And there it lay a year and
more in to ye time that Elyn / the^perours mother of consta^tyne gadred great
people to fight with maxencius / at a great water / over the which water lay
a great brygge. For dysceyte of Constantyne Maxencius let make a trappe
hoping for to have dysceyued constantyne yt he should have fallen in to the
water. And as costa^tyne lay in his bed sore aferde of Maxencius for he was
much bygger of people than he was then came to hy^ an angel with a sign of ye
cross / shyny^g as gold / and said to him. To morrow when you ghost to the
battle. take this sign in thy hand. and by the virtue thereof / you shall have
victory. then was co^stantyne wonder glad and anon let make a cross of
tree and to bear it tofore him to battle. But when maxencius / saw him nigh yt
brygge he was so fyers of himself that he had forgete the trappe / the which
he had made himself and so came on the brygge and fell down in ye water by the
trappe / And was drowned. Then was all his oost wonder feyne to yield the^ to
constantyne with good will. Then for Co^stantyne was not yet cristened and
also he was heled of a leperhode that he had Then anon by counsel of the pope
/ he sent his mother queen Eleyne that was queen of Iherusale^ and prayed her
to go and seek ye cross that crist deyed on This Eleyne was a kings daughter
of england / and the emperor of rome wedded her for her beauty and so she
was made Empress of rome. but after her hubondes death she had the kingdom of
Iherusalem to do wry / where she made gader all ye Jews that might be found
and said but if they would show her the cross they should all be burnt.
Then was there one of them that hight Judas and all said that he knew best
where ye cross was Then said Eleyne to him. Si vis viuere ostende michi
lignu^ crucis) If thou wylt live show me ye cross that god deyed upon / or
else thou shall be bre^t and so put him to great distress. Then he saw he
must needs tell or deye / and said to them. I beseech you led me to the
mount of caluary there as I shall bid you. and I shall show you the cross of
christ for he was blind and might not see. And so when he was brought to the
mon^t of caluary / and he kneled down and prayed long and wha^ he had prayed
/ the place where the cross was meued and earth quoke and there came a sweet
sauoure fro the place there the cross lay yt was as sweet as any spycery in
the world / and then they dygged there long and at last they fond there
three crosses. But then wist they not which was crystes cross for the other two
And then took they a deed body and laid it on that one cross and then on
ye other and when it came to cristes cross anon the body rose to life and
thanked god then said Judas / thou art christ truly and sauyoure of the
world. and after yt Judas was crystened and was a holy man after. Then took
Eleyne a part of the cross and sent it to rome to her sone and the remenau^t
thereof she made to shryne it in silver and gold and left it in Iherusalem with
all the worship that she could. Thus holy church makes mind this day that
the holy cross was found Then as we read we find in a Cite that was called
(Byrectus) a christian man hired a house of a Jew to dwell in. Then had this man
a rode / the which Nychodemus had made in mind of christ. Then took he this
rode and set it in a privy place of his house / for syghte of the Jews and
did it worship and honor after his conning / then after it fell so that
this man went in to another house and happed him to leave this rode behind him
vnwetynge. Then came a Jew and dwelled in the house there this christian man
had dwelled / then for to make him good chere his neighbors came on a
night and souped with him / and as they sat at souper and spoke of this christian
man that dwelled there before this Jew looked beside hy^ / and in a corner he
saw this rode / and when he saw that anon he began to grynde with his tethe /
and to chyde with this other Jew his neighbor / and said you art turned to
christian faith / and have a rode / and do it worship pryuely / then this
other Jew swear nay as deep as he could that it was not so / ne never saw it
before ye time / yet notwithstanding that other Jew went and told his
neighbors / and said that this man was a preuy christian man and had a rode
pryuely in his house. Then anon came all his neighbors wood for wrath /
and all to bet this man / and drew him and tugged him in the worste manner that
they could / and so at the last they said all / this is theymage that you
beleuest upon / and they took the image and beat it and scourged it / and
crowned it with thorns / and at the last they made the strengest of them to
take a spear and with all his might to smite it to the heart / and anon therewith
blood and water ran out of the sides. Then^e were they sore aferde thereof and
said / take we pottes and fyl them with this blood and bear it to the temple
there as all the seek people is of diverse maladyes / and anoint them therewith
/ and if yt they be hole with the blood / then cry we god mercy / and anon
let us be crystened man and woman. Then they anointed the seek people with
ye said blood and anon they were hole. Then went these Jews unto the
bishop of the cite and told to him all the case / and anon he kneled down
on his knees and thanked god of this fair miracle / and when he crystned the
Jews he to vyoles of glass / crystal and aumber and put of this blood in
them and sent it about in diverse chyrches and of this blood as many men
understood / came to blood of hayles. Mylytes tellyth in his chronicles / yt
many years after / yt Iherusale^ was dystroyed the Jews would have builded it
ayene / then as they went thyderwardes erly in a morny^ge they fond many
crosses by the way / and they were aferde thereof and turned homewarde ayene
yet on ye morrow they came ayene / then were ye crosses full of blood and then
they fled homwardes again each one / yette would they not leave thereby / but
ayene yt.iii. day the^ fire rose out of therth and bre^t the^ euerychone in to
ashes

Descto^ Iohanne ante porta^ latina^.
FRendis such a day ye shall have saint Iohans day at port latin. why is this
day called so It happed this day this holy say^te preched the word of god in
a cite yt was called Ephesye / ye Justice of ye cite saw yt he turned much
people to ye believe of christ. and would have had hy^ to do sacrefyce to false
goddis / and for he would not / but rather lose his life. Then^e ye Justice
let take hy^ and commanded hy^ to be set in prison while he sent to ye
Emperor of rome to know what he should do with hy^ And so letters came to
ye Emperor / in ye which letters he called Ioha^ ye worst yt he could / and
said he was a false deceyuer of ye people. Then wrote the emperor ayene to ye
Justice / and bad he should send Johan ayene to hy^ to rome. and so he did.
And the emperor apposed hy^ of his deeds And when Johan stood steadfast in the
faith / and for great scorn ye e^peroure made clyppe some of Iohannys here of
his head for he had a fair head of here And wha^ he was so clypped all ye
people lough hy^ to scorn. and so did hy^ great disease. And they lad hy^ to
a gate of ye town of Rome the which is called Port latin) and there they
put hy^ in a tonne of hot ferue^te oil and closed hy^ therein. And put under
fire to have burnt him therein But for he was goddis own derly^ge / he kept
hy^ so yt he had no harm in no part of his body / Then when yt people went
yt he had be deed they unclosed ye tonne. and found him as hole and as
sou^de in all pertyes of his body and clothis as no thy^g had touched him
therefore christian people let make a church there in ye worship of god and
martyrdom yt he suffered there. Then for the^peroure might not overcome him by
no way of martyrdom and penance he exyled him in to an isle yt is called
pathmos. Then herd say^te Ioha^nys mother that her sone was sent to Rome for to
be deed / for great sorrow and co^passyon of him she went after to Rome. But
wha^ she herd yt he was exyled she turned again and went homwarde / and so
when she came to a cite yt was called vetula^ and there she fell seek and deyed
/ and there she was buried beside the cite in a roche. And wha^ she had layne
there many years / saint James her other sone came thither / and took up his
moders body and it smellyd as sweet as any spicery and brought it in to ye
cite and beryed it there with great worship and honor. Amen.

De festo sancti Iohannis Baptiste
GOod frendis such a day ye shall have an hye feast and an holy. yt is called
say^te Ioha^nys day ye Baptyst. And it is called so for he baptized christ in
ye water of flome Iorda^. wherefore ye shall fast ye even. And ye shall
understood and know how ye euyns were first found in old time in ye
begy^nyng of holy church. It was so that ye people came to church with ca^dellys
brennynge and would wake and come with light toward night to the church in
their deuocyons / and after they fell to lecherye / songs dau^ses / harpynge
pypynge and also to glotonye and sin and so turned the holiness to
cursednesse wherefore holy faders ordained the people to leave the waky^ge and to
fast ye even / and thus turned ye waking in to fasting. but it is called
(vigilia) that is waking in english and it is called the even. For at ye
even they were wo^te to come to the church. But in worship of saint Johan
the people waked at home. and made.iii. manner of fyres. One was clean bones and
no wood / and that is called a bone fire A another is clean wode and no bones.
and that is called a wode fire / for people to sit and wake thereby. The.iii. is
made of wode and bones. and it is called saint Iohannis fire. The first fire as
a great clerk Johan belleth) tells he was in a certain country / so in
the country there was so great hete the which caused that dragons to go
together / in tokenynge yt Johan deyed in brennynge love and charity to god and
man. And they that deye in charity shall have part of all good prayers. and
they that do not shall never be saved. Then as this dragons flewe in thayre /
they shed down in to that waters froth of her kind. and so enuenymed the
waters and caused much people to take their death thereby and many diverse
sickness. Then on a time there were many great clerks and rad of king
alysaunder how on a time as he should have a battle with ye king of Jude. And
this king of Inde brought with him many olyphauntis berynge castellis of tree
on their backs as the kind of the^ is to have armed knights in ye castle
for the battle / them ne knew alysaundre the king of the olyphauntes that
they drad no thing more than the Iarrynge of swyne wherefore he made to gader
to gyder all ye swyne that might begoten. and caused them to be driven as ny
the olyphauntes as they might well here the Iarrynge of the swyne. and then
they made a pygge to cry. and when the swyne herd the pigs a none they made
a great Iarrynge / and as soon as the olyphauntes herd that / they began to
fle each one / and keste down the castelles and slew the knights that were
in them / and by this mean Alexander had ye vyctory. Also these wise clerks
knows well that dragon hate nothing more than the stenche of brennynge bones
and therefore they gadered as many as they might find and brent the^ / and so
with the stenche thereof they drove away the dragons / and so they were brought
out of great disease. The second fire was made of wood for yt will bren^e
light and will be seen far. For it is the chief of fire to be seen far / and
tokenynge yt saint Johan was a lantern of light to the people. Also the people
made blases of fire / for they should be seen far / and specially in the
night. Iheremye the prophet many a year or Johan was borne he prophesied and
spoke thus with gods mouth and said. Prius quam te formaui i^ vtero noui te)
Before or you were formed in thy moders womb I knew the. Et antequam exires de
vulua scti ficauite) And before or thou yedest out of thy moders womb I
hallowed the. Et propheta^ in gentibus dedite). And I gave the a prophet to the
people. Then for saint Johan should be holy or he were borne god sent his
angel Gabryell to zachary saint Iohans fader / as he did sacrefyce instead
of Abya the bishop in the temple / and prayed to god to have a child / for
both his wife and he were barayne and old. Then said thaungell to zachary.
Ne time as zacharia. Dread not zachary god has herd thy prayer. Elyzabeth
vxor tua pariet filium and vocabitur nome^ eius Ioha^nes Elyzabeth thy wife
shall have a child and his name shall be Johan / he shall be fulfilled with
the holy ghost. Et multi in natiuitate eius gaudebunt). And many shall Joy in
the birth of hym^ Then for zacharye was old / and he prayed to have a token
of his beheste. Then said the angel too him he should be dombe till the
child were borne and so he was. Then conceived Elyzabeth / and when she was
quycke with child our lady came with child also to speak with Elyzabeth. And
anon as she spoke to Elyzabeth / saint Johan plied in his moders womb for
Joy of Crystes presence that he saw in our lady. And so there our lady was
with Elyzabeth unto the time that Johan was borne / and was mydwyfe to
Elyzabeth. and took saint Johan from ye earth And when neighbors herd that
Elyzabeth had a sone / they were full glad / and came thither as the manner was
that time to give the child a name / and called it zachary after the fader /
but Elyzabeth bad call him Johan / but there was none of the kind of that
name. They asked zarchary by signs what the child should hight. Then he
wrote to them and bad call him Johan / and there with god losed zacharyes
tongue / and he spoke redyly and thanked god hyghly. Thus was Johan hallowed or
he was borne. And for he would give every man sight of grace and of good
living he gave them ensample. For as soon as he was of couenable aege / he
went in to deserte and was there till our lord came to be crystned of him. And
there he lived full straytely. Iohannis habuit vestimenta de pilis camillorum).
Johan had his clothing made of the here of a camel / and a gyrdell about him
of the same skin. Esca autem eius erat locusta et mel siluestre). Forsothe
his mete was leaves and honysocles that has a white flower ye grows in trees
/ and he eete all manner of worms that were nourysshed in that desert among
herbs: and the worms be as great as a man's fy^ger / and sucked honey of
flowers that be called honysocles that poor people gadereth and frye them in
oil to their mete. Also Johan did ete broad round leaves the which grows
in that deserte upon trees. And so when that they be broken and rubbed between
a man's hondes they be sweet as any honey and drank water of a well that was
in that deserte / there was Johannes life in that deserte / till that our lord
was.xxx. winter of aege. And then our lord and Johan met at the water of
flome Jordan and then Johan told the people of christ and said / Ecce agnus
dei Se the lamb of god / that I have told you of / that shall fulfill you in
the holy ghoost. Then went Johan in to the water / and there he baptized
christ. And when he was baptized / Ecce aperti sunt celi / Heaven opened / Et
vidit spiritum dei discendentem sicut columba^) And he saw the holy ghost come
down as a douue. Et vox de celo dicens And a voice from heaven spoke thus.
Ecce filius meus dilectus in quo michi been complacui). This is my well beloved
sone that pleases me. Here learned Johan first to know ye three persons in
trynyte / and all this betokens two fyres The third fire of bones betokens
Iohans martyrdom for his bones were burnt / and how ye shall here. We read
that king Herod had a brother yt hight Phylyp / and he had a fair woman to
his wife / and Herod loved her well and held her under his wife wherefore
Johan repreued hy^ and said. Non licet tibi habere vxorem fratris tui). It is
not lawful to the to have thy broders wife / and therefore he put him in
prison. And ordained between him and his wife how Johan might be deed without
troublynge of ye people / for the common people loved Johan well. Then Herod
ordained to make a great feast to all the states of ye country / for they
should hold with him / if people had risen. And so when the day wos comen that
the fest should be holden and all the people were served at mete. Herodes wife
as covenant was by twene them and tho / she sent her daughter into the hal for
to dance and tomble a fore the gestes And that ple^sed her fader so well yt he
swore a great oath and said. Pete a me quid vis dabo tibi. Ask of me what thou
will and I shall give it the. Then as her mother badde her she said. Caput
Iohannis baptiste). Johan baptysts heed. Then Herod feigned him to be wroth
and sorye yt he had made such an oath. But he was glad in his heart. And
then sent in to prison to smite of Iohans heed / with out any other dome / and
was brought to the damoysel. Then the mother let bury it in a preuy place far
from the body Then the next night after Iohans dyscyples came and took his
body and buried it. And there it lay till Iulyan the appostata the emperor
came that way then he made to take up Iohans bones and to brenne them / and
to cast the ashes in the wind hoping that he should never rise again to
life. Thus ye may understand how holy yt this man was? Then anon an angel
came from heaven and told zacharye of his conceyuynge / And was hallowed in his
moders womb / and our lady took him fro the earth in his birth and an angel
brought his name from heaven. And after he crystned our lord Ihesu Christ /
this was an holy man / ye shall understand that saint Johan theuangelyst deyed
that same day / but holy church makes no mencyo^ thereof / for his day is
holden in Crystmas weke. Then for these two Iohans be holden the worthyest
saints in heaven Then there were two scolers of dyuynyte the one loved Johan
baptyst / and the other Johan euangelyst / and on a day they purposed to
dyspute of this matter / and the day was assygned / but then the night before
either Iohans appeared to their amantes / and badde them leave their dysputacyon
for they were well accorded in heaven / and made no strife ne debate. And then
on the morrow before all ye people / either of them told his vysyon the
which were come for to have herd their dysputacyon. And then ail ye people
thanked god and both Iohans of this fayt miracle. and also there were two
mesels the which loved these two Iohannys / and so as they were in comuny^ge
/ they spoke of these two say^tes / which were the gretter in heaven. And so
that one said / ye one was gretter than ye other / and so they began to
fight. Then^e there came a voice fro heaven And said / we fight not in heaven.
And therefore fight not ye in earth for us / for we ben in peace. and so be ye.
And therewith they were booth hole of their sykenesse and thanked god and both
saint Johannes and afterward they were holy men. And therefore let us
worship thise holy Say^ntes yt they may pray for us / yt we may come to
heuens bliss. Ame^.

Sanctoru^ Petri et Pauli apostolorum
GOod frendis / such a day ye shall have ye feste of peter and Poule / and ye
shall fast ye eue^ and on the morrow come unto the church and worship god and
to pray these two saints / yt were holy apostles to pray for us. Our lord
has peter on his one side / and Poule on ye other side. and he has his
wounds open and fresshe bledynge / shewy^ge to all manner of christian people / yt
he suffered these wounds for us that be the five wells of mercy yt he suffered
for us. Ye / shall understood yt these two appostles were first great sinners
but for they left their sin and were sorry and contryte and sinned no more Our
lord took them in ensample to all other that will leave sy^nne they shall be
saved. for he yt is shryuen and forsakes his sy^ne mercy folowethe yt and he
do his penance / he shall have mercy and grace. For as glad as the fader is
to see the sone rise from death to life / also glad is our lord and much
gladder to see a man rise out of dedely sin. and never to do it more and
therefore showing by ensample poule bears / a sword to all christian peole to
cut away ye cheynes of sin with his sharp sword of confession for dedely
sin byndeth a man sore to the fe^de and therefore cut away yt cheyne Peter is
also ready to open the gates of heaven to al cryste^ people and to let them in.
Ye shall understand that Poule was first so hye and so feerse against all
goddis seruau^tis / that there durst no precher deal with hy^ / but after he
left great malice. And there as he was feerse after he was gracyous / and there
as he was before hye and proud of heart / he was meke and lowly to al goddis
seruau^tis. Peter also held hy^ self most perfyte and steadfast of all
crystis dyscyples wherefore he made boste by a vayn glory that he was ready to
goo to death with crist and said thus. It behooves me to dey with the And wha^
crist said that al his dyscyples should forsake hy^. Peter for the great boost
said though all men forsake hy^ he would not. And yet more over when christ was
take Peter drew out his sword / and smote of a seruau^tis ere / that hyghte
Malcus) But soon after when he saw yt christ was take / and should be put to
death then he swore and stared that he never knew him And forsook christ. But
wha^ he herd the cock crow / then he remembered of that our lord said to
hy^ that or the cock crew.iii. thou shall forsake me. Then Peter went forth
(Et fleuit amare) And wept bytterly and hyd him in a cave and durst not come
among his bredren for shame / till our lord sent to hy^ by name. Then was
Peter ever after ashamed and sorry for his trespass. And there as he was a
booster and unstable of his wordis / Afterward he was true and stable and
grounded in stablenesse of perfyght living in so much that Christ called him
Peter yt is a stone in English For there as thou layeste a stone / there thou
shalt fy^de it So was Peter so steadfast after that neither for well nor for
woe he never fleytered. But ever stood sted fast in crystes law and had ever
his sy^ne in my^de and to amend yt he had done amysse and was afterward of
great abstynence that he ete but bread and oil wortes / And full seldom
flesh And wered but a syngell kertyll with a mantell and ever as often as he
herd any man mind Ihesus anon he began to weep full sore / And when he herd
any cock crow / anon he rose up and would goo and pray and suffer penance
and he wept many times so bytterly / that the teres of his eyes burnt his
face / in so much that where he was he had a cloth in his bosom always to
wype away the teres. Then so following he was so holy yt where that ever he
went and he might shadow any syke body / anon they were hole. So on a time
he sent two of his dysciples in to a far cou^treye to preche. and when they
were gone two days Journey one of them deyed / and ye other turned ayene and
told peter. Then peter took him his stafe. and bad him go lay the staff on
his felawe / and bad hy^ arise in ye name of god And he rose anon / and went
forth to gyder and preched. Then were many wroth that peter turned so much
people to the faith and put hy^ in to prison. And bond him fast with great
cheynes of yren / tylle he was nigh deed lest he should be stolen away /
wherefore the knights woke it that he should not escape. and thus the comen
people took ensample of them and made fyres in worship of saint peter and
watch. Then christ came to peter in prison and then came an angel to Peter
with great light as our lord bad And anon the cheynes brake and fylle fro
his hondes and fete and he went to rome and was there pope.xxv years / and
turned much people to crystes feyth / but soon after came the fendis lymme /
yt was called Simon magus that could much of the fendis craft and made much
people syke in diverse sykenesse. Some bly^de some lame / some deef. so yt the
people what for fere and for wonder byleued in him. Then peter heled all those
that magus had hurt. and bad they should not believe in him. Then was this
simon magus wroth with peter that he might not have his will / and in
especyall he might not reyse a deed body to life that peter raised Then this
simon teyed a fend in likeness of a great dog there as Peter should come /
and slay peter. But peter blessed him and let this dog lose and then he
lepte to simon and pulled hy^ down under his fete / and then peter bad leave
and do him no harm of his body / but he al to rent his clothes / so that
simon went almost naked away. Then simon ordained all the ways yt he could to
have peter deed. Then our lord appeared to peter and said Simon et Nero co^tra
te cogita^t) Symo^ and nero and other have ordained thy death to morrow I will
send to the Poule my servant in comfort to the. and ye shall suffer
martyrdom together for my sake. and so come to me to my everlasting bliss
Then peter told his brethren his visyon yt he had in the night. and so
took clemente by the hand and set him in his chair / and made him pope and
successoure after him. Then on the morrow came poule and preched the people
Then this simon had so charmed ye Emperor in such a folyshnes / that he wend
that he had be goddis sone. So this Simon magus came to The Emperor and said
there be two men of Galylee come in this cite that one hyghte peter and that
other Poule that do me so much disease / that I may no longer abide here in
earth wherefore command such a day all manner of people to come to capytoll /
and there in syghte of all the people I will stye up to my fader in heaven. And
when all the people were come to gyder. Simon went up in to a toure of the
capitol / then came two fendes like two angellis and set on his head a
garlonde of laurel / and bare him up in to the air like as he had flowen.
Then said peter to poule / Brother look up and see. Then said poule / it
falls for me to pray / and the to command / and anon Peter said / I
command you the angellys of Sathanas that ye let that man go down that all
men may se whom they have worshypped. Then Simon fell down and al to
braste. Then was themperoure wroth / and made to lead Peter and Poule forth
/ and did Peter on a cross and his heed downewarde / and so put him to
death. And Poule for he was a gentylman borne for the more worship they smote
of his heed. Then the people saw aungelles with crowns standing on the
cross there as Peter hanged / and when Poules heed was smite of / there came
out fair plente of milk and after blood / then ye night after came christian
people and laid their bodies together in a grave / and there they lay till
christian faith was more open in Rome. Then would they have borne either body
to his church / but they could not know either bones from other. Then^e came
there a voice from heaven yt said / the more bones be of the precher / and the
less of the fyssher. So after when the christian faith came in England king
Ethelberte let make a great church at Westmynster in worship of saint Peter
and an other in London of saint Poule. And so on a day wha^ the church of
saint Peter should be hallowed / in the night before was a man fysshynge in the
Temse under Westmy^ster and a little before mydnyght came saint Peter like a
pilgrim and prayed the fyssher to set him over the water and he did so / and
Peter went to the church / and there ye fyssher saw a great light / and
therewith was the swetest savor that ever he felt / and also he herd the
meryest song that ever he herd that he wist not where he was for Joy. Then
came Peter to him again and said / have thou take any fysshe to night / and he
said nay. For I was so stonyed with light and with melody that I might do no
manner thing. Then^e said Peter. Mitte rethe in mari). Cast the net in to
these and I will help the / and so they took a great multitude of fysshes.
Then said saint Peter to the fyssher I am Peter that has hallowed my church
this night / and took a great fysshe and said. Here bear this to the bishop /
and say yt I send him this / and on this token bydde him do no more to the
halowynge of the church / but sing a mass there / and make a sermon to the
people that they may believe this / and for to preue ye truth bid them go to
the church / and se where the candelles stycke on the walls / and all the
church wete of holy water. And so the fyssher did his message / and the
bishop found it true / and kneled down on his knees / and much people with
him and song. Ve deum laudamus) and thanked god and saint Peter.

Secu^da die Iulii celebrat festu^ visitacionis marie.
Among devout christian people in this day is syngulerly worshypped our
blyssed lady Mary for her great mekenes and lowly visytacyon of her cosyn
Elyzabeth / the wife of zacharye the prophet and mother to saint Johan baptyst.
Saint Iherome says. Quid quoth humanis potest dici verbis: minus est a laud
virginis gliose que diuinis. etc.) The which may be englysshed thus / what so
ever laud or pray sy^ge yt any man or woman can or may make to our lady laud.
it is to little and far insuffycyent from ye laud yt she is worthy to have
/ yt so excellently was accept of god and wonderly praised of patryarkes / and
prophets / appostles / and euangelystes / yet not for thy though we be unable
let us ever and in especyall at this feast do our deuoyre after our power and
fre substance to worship this blyssed lady by virtuous living and devout
prayer / folowy^ge her by ensample as much as we may. Now ye shall understand
that after ye said Elyzabeth had conceived by miracle Johan baptyste / and had
borne him in her womb.vi. months came thaungel of god from heaven unto Mary /
saying unto her yt she should conceive ye sone of god almighty / and in token
that this shall be true and that all thing is possible to god to do / the
angel said that her cosyn Elyzabeth the which was barayne by nature and aege
/ and had all ready conceived and borne vi. months a child in her womb. And
when Mary herd this and believed / and therewith consented / and forthwith she
conceived the sone of god. And then the gospel of this day says thus. Et
exurgens maria abiit in montana. etc. Luce.i. Our lady rose up and went hastily
to Nazareth / yt was in Galyle to the mountains that was in Jury / and so
entered the house of zacharye the prophet. Lo here in the gospel is said that
she went hastily showing to all women and specially to al maidens that they
should not tarry by ye wayne tell no tales or have talking with men. For three
causes our lady vysyted Elyzabeth. The first was yt they might be glad
either of other. (Iheronimus). Vt miraculum miraculo: gaudiu^ gaudio
cumularetur). That is to say / yt miracle to miracle / and Joy to Joy should
be had and encreaced. It was a great Joy and miracle to our lady that she
being still a vyrgyn had conceived Christ the sone of god / also it was a great
Joy and miracle to Elyzabeth yt she being barayne and in aege had conceived
so great a prophet Johan the baptyst / and so gracyously escaped the reprefe
of them that were barayne among the people of Israhell. In likewise should we
christian people do folowy^ge our lady by this ensample for to be glad of our
neighbors prosperyte and welfare / and be sorry of their trybulacyon. But the
contrary does enuyous people / the children of the devil for they will be glad
of their neighbors hurt and disease / and they will be sorry when they fare
well and ben in prosperyte. Such condycyons have ye deuyls / they howl and
sorrow when we do any good deeds. And they Joy when we do evil / wherefore
such people must be punysshed in hell / and bide there ever with their fader
the devil. Prouerbiorum.xvii. Qui in ruina alterius letatur no^ erit
impunitus). That is to say. He yt is glad of an other man's fall / he shall
not escape unpunished. The second cause why our lady vysyted Elyzabeth was to
do her service and help her in her need. For likewise as she showed mekenes
too god at all times / and to the angel when she said. Ecce ancilla domini:
So she would show mekenes to all people. Was it not a great mekenes that the
mother of god / and queen of heaven and earth / and also empress of hell / and a
maid sanctyfyed of god would meke herself / and go on foot so far with her
vyrgyns that waited upon her that is to say from Nazareth to the mountains of
Jury which was ( scdm albertum) about a forty mile of combrous way and thereto
salute and serve an old wife her servant / and to abide with her so long in
great watch and labor to ye time that Johan was borne / yes doubtless.
Behold now thou christian man and woman / for here is good lerny^ge both of our
lord Ihesu christ yt was in her womb for his members / and also of our lady /
and all for ensample to us. Here specially women ben taught to be attendaunt
and seruyable in the time of a chyldes birth / for every woman with child
bears a precious treasoure in her womb that is to say) ye soul of the
child and his life. Bernardus. Votus mundus iste vnius anime precium estimare
non potest). That is to say. All the world may not tell the price of one
soul. Then woo shall be to them the which wyttyngly dystroyeth children in
the moders womb / for the child shall never se the face of god. Iohannis
tercio. Nisi quis re^^tus fuerit ex qua et spiritu sancto) that is to say
without one be baptized he may not enter in to the ky^gdome of heaven. Also
those men yt evil entrete their wives with child / as betynge or tredynge
the^ under their fete or troubly^ge them with their vncurteys langage sy^ne
grievously and most grievously if the child perysshe thereby (Vn^ Augus Maius
dampnu^ est in a missione vnius anime quam milium corporum (that is to say. It
is more sin in letynge of one soul than in a thousaunde bodies The third
cause was yt our lady vysyte elyzabeth yt Ihesus her sone in her womb should
in that wise sanctyfye Johan ye baptyst and that was by instygacyon of ye holy
ghost of the which the said / Johan was so glad that he daunced in his moders
womb (Et exultauit infans in vtero meo etc. Here may ye learn what goodness
and grace may come unto us if we worship our lady dowtelesse there will grow
thereof great Joy / for the holy ghost will be there and the secretis of God
also shall be showed wherefore let us often and devoutly say our (Aue maria)
this salutacion and we may be sure yt she will resalute us ayene and help us
wha^ we have most need. Moreover for our learning ye shall understand that
in all holy scripture is not found that our lady spoke so much as only in
this cantycle (Magnificat) The which is written feste. The which she enlarged
for the great laud to god in gyuynge thanks for his benefetes we read that
she spoke four times and four great benefeytes and miracles folowen there
upon. First when she spoke to ye angel in the annuncyacyon where forth with
she conceived our savior Ihesu christ The second was as this day wha^ she
vysyted Elyzabeth / wherthorugh Johan baptiste was fulfilled with the holy
ghost and sanctefyed in his mother womb The third was that she spoke in the
temple when she sought Ihesu her sone / and said (Fili li quid fecisti nobis
sic. etc. After the which time contynuelly he was subget to his mother our lady
/ and also too Joseph and all for our instruccyon. The.iiii. time was when she
spoke at the feast of Archytryclyne where that our lord turned water in to
wine. So of this process may we take goodlernynge of our blyssed lady / that
we speak little or nothing / and that we speak se we that it be too the laud
of god / and prosperyte to us and to other. For our lady says by Mathewe.xii.
De om^i verbo ocioso. etc. Of every idle word that we speak we shall give
acompte in the last day of Judgment. Then it must follow that we shall
give a strayte acompte of noysom speech. Three manner of sinners there ben that
offend with their speech. First ben they yt swereth wytyngly a thing that is
not true. and these synneth deedly / whyther it be in game or ernest / as it is
plainly showed. Thomas secu^da secu^de. q.xcviii. Also they offend gretely
that swear to their children yt they shall chastyse them for their offenses. As
is accordn^ge that they do so / and yet they will not do it. (in decreto). Omne
iuramentum est seruandum nisi vertat contra salutem animaru^.xxii. q.iiii. quoth
david). Every oath is to be kept without it be in preiudyce and hurt of
man's soul. Also they sin gretely yt swear by god and his saints in their
bargeyns making / deceyuynge their neighbor / and that not only in great
things but also in small / as in apples selling or peers flesh or fysshe /
swerynge by god or by our lady ye get no mo / or ye get no better chepe /
or such other. And the byer on the other side swereth by god I will give no
more / where either be found liars or they depart. Alas a christian man should
not swear falsely / for all this world to win. O how peryllous / how
domageable it is unto them the which use for to say in their bargaynes and
marchaundyses making unto the preiudyce and extreme sorrow of their souls. As
god help me / or I forsake god and take me to the devil or such a vengeance
/ or such a punysshement of god fall upon me with such other. O how sinful
and abhomynable they ben in the sight of god that use such language. And how
great shall be their pains withouten amendment. The second ben these
blasphemers that swereth by ye wou^des / sides / bones / or body of our lord /
as by the sacrament of the awlter / or such other / such people synneth
gretely. Vnde augustinus. Non minus peccant qui cristu^ blasphemant regnantem
in celis quam qui christum crucifierunt ambulantem in terris. Which is in
english. No less syn^e they that blaspheme Christ reygnynge in heaven than
they did that crucyfyed Christ walking here in earth. Vnde paulus ad
hebre.vi). Rursum crucifigentes filiu^ dei). Such people in as much as they
may crucyfye again ye sone of god Ihesu christ. For the which sin of
swerynge by the members of Christ our lord sometime punyssheth a hole town a
cite or a country / by tempest / thonder / pestylence or other Vnde in quoda^
decreto. Qn^que multitudo populi propter delictum vnius punitur. dis. xlv. sed
illud. Such blasphemers in the old testament before Christ was borne were stoned
to death. vt habetur leui.xxiiii.) O Ihesu if it were so now I trow that
right many should be stoned too death / but our lord punyssheth them
otherwise in these days / sometime in such of their members as they swear by /
or else suffer them to dye a sudden death / or by other mysfortune. Saint
Gregory in his dyalogus the.xvii. chapter of the fourth book writes and
shows to all men his lerny^ge / that certain deuylles at Rome came to a
child of.v. years old wantonly brought up yt which blasphemed our lord. And
the fendes took him vyolently from his faders lap and trysed him and rent
his body all too pyeces / and his soul carried in to the pytte of hell / and
was dampened eternally for his wanto^nesse. Remember here well / if that our
lord suffer this punysshement to be done to a babe or little child of five
year old / and trow ye that he will forgete or se unpunished them that been
of more ryper aege / and of dyscrecyon. Nay be ye sure. The third be they that
curses their neighbor. Thou shalt understand that who wyttyngly of ire and
vengeance curses his neighbor synneth deedly as often as he so does. And
oftymes is seen that ye vengeance yt they desire for their neighbors falls
upon themself. Vnde genesis.xxvii. Qui maledixerit tibi sit ille maledictus.
etc. Also this sin is the more grievous if they name god in such evil speech
or cursynge / as thus / our lord give the a myschefe or such other / this is
more grievous than to say the same clause / putting therfrom the name of god /
saint Thomas says that it is not lefull to curse unreasonable things / in
that they ben the creatures of god. Then it is more unlawful to curse any man
Now that we may than leave these oaths / and blasphemynges and cursynge of our
neighbors / and to have pacyence / and pray for their amendment. And for to
follow the mekenes of our lord and of his blyssed mother Mary / and to vysyte
them often with good prayers / and our neighbor to help in all charity /
grant us qui sine fine viuet et regnat in secula seculorum. Amen.

De translatione sancti Thome
Friends such a day ye shall have the translacion of saint Thomas ye martyr
yt day he was take out of his grave / and his bones laid in a shryne / and
how ye shall here This man was ordained in his birth to be a holy man and a
worthy saint. For yt was showed first to his mother and after to his fader in
his old age and now is known over all. First it was known to his mother For
in a night she lay in her bed slepynge / she thought thomas lay in his
cradell and wept and when she herd him weep she called to the norse and say
de Look to ye child / and when she came to the child she fond al his clothes
frompled and she would have amend them and she might not fold them for gretnes
and she thought she took the one end and the norse the other end / then it was
so much that they might not fold it in the chamber and went in to the halle
and yet it would not be. then went they to chepe side that in the cheef street
of london Then she thought it sprad all london / then on the morrow she
went to her confessoure / and told him all her dreme. then said he dame you
art much holden to God for ye child yt now is in the cradell shall be so
great of power yt all london shall be at his governance So when Thomas was of
co^uenable age his fader sent him to the abbay of Merton / yt was an house of
chanons to go to scole. Then on a day his fader came to look how he did. and
when thomas came before him. Anon his fader fell down in syghte of all the
people and did hy^ great reverence then the pryoure of ye place rebuked hy^
and said / thou old fool / this reverence he should do to the / and not thou
to him Then he took ye pryour aside and said I wot full well what I have to
do this child shall be a worthy man tofore god / that all christian people shall
do him worship Then wexed thomas wise and actyfe in all wisdom. yt the
archebysshop of cau^terbery se^te after hy^. And made hy^ Chaunceler of
england and for he governed his office wisely / he was made afterward
arshebysshop of caunterbery. Then anon he turned to great holiness of
prayers and fasting and almesdedes doing. and wered hard heir next his
body and a breche of ye same The which was so full of vermyn that it was an
horrible syghte to see but yet he changed but ones in.xl. days. He was also a
man of great almesdedes / and cast great love to god that he drad not to
deye. Then he rebuked the king of his mysdedys a yenst holy church and
oppressed the reame. Then had the king great indignacyon of him and exyled
him out of his reame and did thomas all the greuaunce that he could / and
exyled him and all his kynne and friends both old and young / crooked and
lame blynge and wymen in chyldebed and some with young children in her arms
soukynge and much people for woo in defaute of help. and all he made to swear
upon a book / that they should never tarry till they come tofore thomas and all
to increase his pains. And when thomas saw this he wept for sorrow. For he
had great co^passyo^ on them But yet he ordained for them yt they were better
at ease in France than they were in England Then when god would yt thomas
should pass out of this world / by the byddyng of the pope and counseyle of
the king of France / thomas came to caunterbery to his own church and when
the kings knights herd thereof / four of them that were cursed lyuers went
after and the.v. day of the feste of Crystmasse they slew hy^ in his own
church before an altar of say^te benet and there they left him deed then
the monkis of the place / weeping and making great sorrow beryed him in a new
tomb that was there all ready made. But Then god showed so great miracles for
him that pope alysaunder sent letters in to england to the archebysshop
stephen / and to other abbottis and prelates / commaundynge them to take up
thomas bones and to lay them in a shryne and to set it where it might be
worshypped of all christian people. Then the bishop ordened a day when that
should be done. So over even while they might have space / he took with him
the bishop of salesbury* and other monks and clerks many and went to the
place where thomas had lay.l. years. Then they kneled all on ye earth prayenge
to Thomes devoutly of help then four took up the tomb with great dread
and quakynge and there they fo^de a little writing. (Here lies and rests
Thomas archebysshop of caunterbery prymat of england and the popes legate
slain for the right of holy church the fyfte day of christ mass Then for
great devotion that they had of yt sight / all cried saint thomas. And then
they took ye head to the archebysshoppe to kiss and so they kyssed it all and
then they beheld his wounds and said they were ungracious that wounded the
thus and so laid him in a shryne and covered it with clothe of gold and set
torches about it brennynge / and the people to wake it all night. Then on
the morrow came all the statis of this land and bare ye shryne to the place
there as it is now with all the reverence and worship that they cowde / and
there it is with worship. Amen.

De sancta maria magdalena
GOd frendis such a day ye shall have the feste of Mari magdaleyne that was so
holy yt our lord Ihesu christ loved her best of al wymmen next his own mother
wherefore ye shall come to god and to holy church and pray to that holy woman
yt she will pray to our lord for us. that we may have grace For she was ye
first in time of grace that did penance For she had lost grace by flesshly
lust so she is made a myrroure to all other sinners yt will forsake sin and
do penance they shall have grace yt which was lost by syn^e. She had a
fader that was a great Lord and nigh of the kings blood and had a great
lordshyp in Iherusalem / the which he gaaf to lazarus his sone. And he gaaf
mary the Castle of Magdeleyne / with all ye lordshyp longy^ge there to of ye
which Castle she had her name and was called mari magdeleyne for she was lady
thereof. Then as many books sayen / saint Johan euangelyste wedded her and
our lordo bad him goo with him and keep his vyrgynyte and so he did and was
clean vyrgyn. and magdeleyne went forth and gaaf her all to sin. In so much
she lost ye name of magdeleyne / and was callen the sinful woman But it was
often seen that our lord made of the greteste sinner yt holyeste afterward.
And so when our lord saw time he gaaf this woman grace to know her self /
and to have repentance for her sins Then when mary herd that christ was
at a mannys house that was called (Simon) the pharyse / she took a box with
oynemente / such as ye people used that time for hete of ye son / and went
thither but she durst not for shame goo tofore him / but at his fete behind hy^
and herd him speak. And then she took a great sorrow in her heart and wept
tenderly. and with ye teres of her eyes / she washed crystes fete and with the
here is of her head she wyped them and with all the love of her heart she kyssed
them and anointed them but no word she spoke that any man might here / but
softly in her heart she cried mercy / and made a vow to him that she would
never trespace more. Then our lord had pity upon her / and cast out of
her. seven fendis / and forgaaf her all her sins in herynge of all that were
there / then she took such a love to christ / that she left all her
lordshyps of mawdeleyne with all other goods / and such him forth with great
love / that in his passion there as his dyscyples fled from him. she left
him never till she with help of other had laid him in his tomb / and when no
man durst go thither for fere of the knights that kept him / she spared not.
Cu^ tenebre essent. etc. wha^ it was derke in the dawning she took with her
sweet bawmes to anoynte Crystes body with / she showed love both in will and
in deed / wherefore Christ in his life heled Martha her sister of the reed flyxe
that she had.vii. year tofore and payned her sore. Et resuscitauit lazaru^ a
mortuis). And raised Lazar her brother from death to life that had layne.iiii.
days stynkynge in his grave. And when our lord rose from death to life he
appeared to her / and suffered her for to touch him and kyssed his fete. Then
when it was known to the Jews that Christ showed her so many tokens of love
before all other when Christ was styed up in to heaven they took Mary and Martha
her sister. Lazarus maxencius. and many other / and put them in to an old
ship in to the sea to have drowned them / but god ordained so for all thing
at his will and brought them saufe to a land called miracle / and there they
rested under a bank that was nygh ye temple / then Mary saw much people
coming toward ye temple to do sacryfyce to their mawmettes / and the lord of
the country came with them / but Magdaleyne was gracyous / and with gracyous
words turned them again. Then this lord had great lust to here her speak and
said thus to her / if that god that thou spekest of be so gracyous and of so
great power as thou say / pray to him that I may have a child by my wife
that is barayne and than I will believe in him. Then Mary said she would / and
within short time after the lady conceived and was with child. Then^e this
lord anon made to ordeyne every thing that longed to him to go to Iherusalem
to Peter for to wit of hy^ why der Magdaleynes prechynge were true or no and
vytayled well his ship and made him ready. Then came his lady prayenge him
that she might go with him so with great prayer ye lord granted her / then
by assente of the^ both they made Mary maudeleyne to keep her lordshyppes and
goods yt they had and Mary set a cross in either of their sholders. and bad
them goo in the name of god. wha^ they had seyled a day and a night great
tempest arose in so much that they wend al to have be drowned. Then was
this lady sore aferde and therewith she began to travail / and so was
delivered of a manchylde as maudeleyne said and she in the birth fill down
deed. Then this lord made great sorrow and lamentacyon / and said. Alas alas
/ I wretch what shall I do with this child now is the mother deed and nedest
must ye child deye Also for here is no womannys help to keep it. Then he
cried to maudeleyne and said / alas mary why doste thou thus to me. thou
behote me a child. and now is the mother deed and ye chyde must nedys deye for
fawte of woman's help and I my self look ever when I shall be drowned. Help
mary and have compassyon on me and of my child. Then said the ship man cast
this body in to the sea for we shall never have rest while it is in ye ship.
Then said the lord she is not deed / but lies in a swoune for fere. but I
pray you let us have ye ship to yon de roche For I had lever to grave her
there / than to cast her in to the water. And for there was none earth to make
her a grave / he left her hanging on the roche of stone. and the child by the
mother. and covered them with his mantell and be took the^ to god and mary
mawdeleyne to keep and went his way. So when he came to Iherusale^ he spoke
with peter / and he bad hy^ be of good comfort though his wife were deed. For
god might restore her to life ayene / then peter showed him the places there
as our lord was quycke and deed and told him of his birth and of his passion
of his resurreccyon and his ascencyo^ and informed him of the says and made
hy^ steadfast to christ. and when he had be there.ii. year. peter sent hy^ home
ayene And badde hy^ great well mawdeleyne and her felysshyp. Then wha^ ye
lord came far in ye see and saw the place there his wife lay / he longed
sore in his heart to goo thither And then he prayed the shypman to set hy^ there
Then he saw a little child sytty^ge on the sea sonde pleyng with small stones
/ but as soon as ye child saw him / it ran forth in to the rock / and he
followed till he came there he left his wife and he took up the mantell and
found ye child soukyng on his moders pappes. Then thanked he god and mary
maudeleyne. and then he said. Mary you art great with god. yt haste keped a
young child soukynge upon a deed body. in great comfort and Joy to me but
and you will pray to thy lord that my wife might be restored to life then were
I ever bound to be thy servant / and will while I live. Then with that
word she spoke and said. Blessed mote you be mary that were mydwyfe to me /
and nouryse to my child while I have be in my pylgremage. Then said this man
wife art you a live. and she said ye sir now I come fro my pylgremage as ye do
/ and told him of every place that he had be at then / he kneled down and
thanked god and Mary magdeleyne And when they came home they found mary
prechynge and techynge the people and anon they kneled down and thanked her
and told her what peter said. and prayed her to tell what they should do.
and they would do it with good will. Then mary bad they should distroye ye
temples of mawmentry. and byld chirches and make fontes and christian the people
and so within short time all the land was crystened. Then for mary gaaf her
all to contemplacyon she / went far in to a wilderness and was there therty
wynters unknown to any man Descendebant angeli et eam in ethera leuabant) And
angellis came seven times a day / and bare her up in to the air. and there
she was fed with heavenly fode. But wha^ god would that she should pass out
of this world he made an holy preeste to see / how angellys bare her up in
thayre. Then went he nere ye place. and asked in the name of god / who was
there. If it were a christian man / he should speak and tell what he was Then
answered mary magdeleyne and said I am the sinful woman yt the gospel speaks
of that wysshe crystes fete. And she bad the priest goo to Maxencius the
bishop and bid him on ester day in the mourning to be in the church and
there I will mete him and when he come to ye church he saw how mary was borne
up two cubits fro the earth with au^gellys that he was sore aghast Then mary
called to hy^ come nere and goo say a mass that she might be houseled then
in syghte of all ye people wha^ mass was done she was houseled and received
goddis body in form of bread. And anon therwyth she gaaf up the ghost.
Then took the bishop the holy body and laid it in a tomb of stone and
wrote all her life in the worship of god that did so gracyously by her. and
all sinful people that will leave their sin. Thus ye may come to everlasting
bliss to the which god bring us all to. Amen.

De festo sancti Iacobi apostoli.
FRendis such a day ye shall have saint James day the appostle and ye shall
fast the even in the worship of god and this holy appostle This James was a
holy man for he came of an holy kind he was our ladies systers sone / and
brother of saint Johan euangelyst / and by thassent of all ye appostles he was
sent in to Spain to preche the word of god / for ye people were so combred
with the sin of mawmetry / that he might not torn but.ix. persons / of yt
which he left there two to preche / and seven he took with him in to Iurye for
he herd that there was one called Hermogines and he had a dyscyple that hight
Philetus / they two begyled so the people that James had turned to Crystes
faith / that anon they turned again to mawmetry. Then James blamed the^ to
torn from everlasting bliss / to everlasting dampnacyon. Then Hermogynes
herd thereof and came and dysputed with James of the faith hoping with the
fendes craft to have overcome him. Then James did so many miracles yt
Phyletus forsook Hermogenes his master. Then was Hermogenes wroth and sent a
company of fendes and said. Go ye and bring James and Phyletus bound unto me.
Then when the fendes came to James / the angel of god was ready and bound the
fendes yt they cried. James appostle have mercy on us / for we be bound so
sore with yren chains that woe is us on every side. Then said James wherefore be
ye come hyder. And they said Hermogynes sent us hyder for to bring the and
Phyletus bound to him / and now gods aungelles have bound us / that woe is
us to suffer this pain. Then said James I will lose you so that ye go to
Hermogynes and bring him hither bound too me / and do him no more harm.
Then said they to Hermogynes thou haste sent us where we have be bound with
yren chains / but now we will bind the and bring the before James. Then
said they to James / this false Hermogynes has done to the and us much
trybulacyons and disease / Now give us leave for to avenge both the and us upon
hy^ Then said James / nay not so. My master Ihesus bad me do good against
evil. Then James bad Phyletus unbind Hermogynes. Then said Hermogynes /
now I know the malice of the fendes. I pray the James give me some of thy
power / or else these fendes will sle me / then James gave him his own staff
/ and then he went boldly to his own house / and took his books and kest
them in the sea / and came to James and fell down on his knees and cried him
mercy. Then was James glad and crystned him and taught him the faith / and
after he was an holy man and god wrought many miracles for him. Then herd
the Jews thereof and took James and bound a rope about his neck and led
him unto king Herod and prayed him to do James to death / or else he would
torn all their nacyon to Crystes faith and destroy their law Then Herod
commanded to smite of his heed / and wha^ he was deed Hermogynes and Phyletus
with many other of his dyscyples took James body / and for they durst not for the
Jews bury it they took it with them in to a ship and went in to the sea /
prayenge god to bring them there as he would that the body were buried. Then
god governed ye ship so that they landed in Spain. There was a queen called
Lupa yt is a she wolf / and she was called so for her cursed living / then
they took the body and laid it upon a stone / and that stone waxed so soft
that the body sanke down in to the stoone / like as it had been a tomb made
therefore Then some of them kept the corpse while the other went to the queen
Lupa and said for she would not receive James in his life god sent her the body
thither to be buried / wherefore we pray you of a place to burye his body in to
his worship for such an holy man. Then this queen did her wolves kind / and
wist well yt the king of spain was a ill man of manners / and would do them
harm and sent to him praynge to ordeyn a place where this body might be buried
and he did as a cursed man should do / he took them and put them in prison /
and bound them fast hand and foot with great yren chains. And as he sat at
his mete an angel came and let them out of prison / and badde them go their
way and so they did. And when the king herd that / he sent two knights wc
much people to bring them again / and when ye knights came to a bridge yt
they were gone over / they would have gone after and the bridge brake ye
knights and all the people were drowned. Then was the king aferde of
vengeance and sent after them peasybly / and prayed them to come again and
they should have all their desire / and when they came again the king
commanded all the cite to be crystned Then when ye queen herd yt she was
wroth and thought to do them all ye harm and dyspyte that she could / and
sent for them prayenge them to come to her / and she would ordeyne for him in
the best wise / and when they were come she said. Go to such an hyl / and
there I have oxen and bulls / take of them and yoke them in a wayne / and lay
the corpse therein / and let them choice their way / and thither as they led
the wayne I grant you the place to bury the corpse in Thus she did for great
malice hoping that the wild bestes would have dystroyed them all / but when
they made a cross tofore them the beestes stood still while they were yoked in
the wayne and so let them go / and in sight of all ye people they led the
wayne in to the queen's palace / and then she repented her and cried mercy to
god and saint James and anon was crystned and gave the palace with good will to
saint James / and yt longs thereto / and made thereof a worthy church and laid
saint James therein and did him all the reverence yt they might / and there god
shows many fair miracles.

Narracio.
There was a man called Bernarde / yt happened to be take with enmyes and put in
prison in a dongeon / and bound with great chains of yren as he might / then he
cried hertely to god and saint James for help and socoure / then came saint
James to him and conforted him / and anon the chains brake / and James hanged
them about his neck and said. Veni sequere me. Come and follow me / and led
him to a top of a tour yt was forty cubytes of heyght / and bad him lepe down
/ and bear his chains in to Spain and offer them at saint James and so he
did.

Narracio.
Also there was a man yt yede to saint James in the company of other pilgrims
/ and helped a poor woman yt was seek to bear her scryppe. And anon after met
with a syke man and for he might not go / he set him on his horse to ride and
went himself on foot berynge the poor woman's scryppe / and the seek man's
staff. So for great hete and travail wha^ he came too saint James he fell
seek and lay three days / and might not speak / and then he gave up great
syghy^ge / and spoke and said I thank god and saint James by his prayer I am
delivered of a great multitude of fendes / for right now came saint James to me
with ye poor woman's scryppe / and the seek man's staff / and has driven
away ye fendes fro me / but get me a priest anon / for I shall not live but a
while / and he said to one of his fellows / good friend go fro thy lord yt you
seruest for he is sothely dampened and shall deye wtin short time a foul
death. And when they came home they told their lord / and he set naught
thereby / but wtin short tym he was deed as the man said.

Narracio.
There were.xxx. men in a company yt plyght their truth each to other to be
true to go to saint James together saufe one yt would not plight his troth and
in short time one of the^ fell seek and lay.iii. days and spoke not / and
for he lay so long all ye other left hy^ / sauf he yt would not plyght his
troth he abode with him and with in a while he spoke and mended and his felawe
carried him forth. but he might not travail but soft. And it happed they
abode all night under a hill / and were full sore aferde. what for cursed
people and wild bestis there that man deyed. Then about mydnyght came saint
James riding and said Give me the deed body thy felawe before me / and come
then up behind me and by the morrow they had rydden.xv. days Journey. and
came to the mount Joy half a mile from saint James and there he let hy^
down. and badde this man go fet the chanons of saint James to bery thy felawe
and say to thy felawes / her pylgremage stand in no stead. For they were false
to her felawe And therefore let every man and woman be true to other / and we
shall at the last come to the bliss of heaven. Ame^

De sancta anna
Good frendis such a day ye shall have saint Annys day yt was our ladies
mother / That day ye shall come to god and holy church and pray to this holy
woman to pray for us We read of.v. holy women that hyghte Anna. I will tell
you of these.v. wymen. The first Anna was mother to ye prophet samuel yt
governed ye people of Israhell. Anna had a husbo^de yt hyghte Eclana and he had
no children by anna long time but by great prayer to god at ye last he had a
sone yt was called samuel Then was there another a^na yt was wife to a man
called raguell / and they had a daughter hyghte sare / ye which sare had.vii.
husbo^des and ever ye first night yt find strangeled they^ wha^ they would
have comuned with her only for lust of flesh and not to bry^ge forth fruit to
goddis plesau^ce and for no chylderen. But soon after came young tobye and by
techynge of thangel. Toby wedded this sare and threnyghtes and.iii. days he
forbear his wife and was in prayers / and so after he had children The iii. anna
was thelder tobyes wife this elder tobye was an old man and did ye works of
mercy full be syly. and to preue his mekenes and suffrau^ce / god made him
blind. For on a day as he beryed many deed bodies that were slay^ he was weary
and lay down in his house by the wells and as he looked up ye dong of the
swalowes fell in his eyes and so he was bly^de but for he took it pacyently and
thanked god of his vysytacyo^ god restored hy^ his sight ayene The.iiii. anna
was in the temple of Iherusale^ / when Joseph and our lady bare christ to yt
temple on candelmasse day For she prophesied of crist how it should fall of
him. This anna was so holy / yt when she had be wedded seven year her husbonde
deyed Then went she in to ye temple and was there night and day till she
was.iiii. score year old. then had she grace of god to see hy^ bodily or she
deyed and had him in her arms. The.v. anna is our ladies mother. So wha^ our
lady was of age and brought in to the temple and left there with ye other
vyrgynes of her age to learn moses law and to serve god night and day. This
Anna had a husbonde that was called Ioachym our ladies fader / and was come of
ye kynred of Dauyd for the prophets had told long tofore / how the kynred of
dauyd should descend down to christ and had written it in books yt were kept
in ye tresorye in ye temple then king herod of Iherusalem thought to torn
ye life of god to hy^ and to his eyres / and took the books out of the
tresory. and made to brenne them for the mind of christ should have be forgote^
and by this mean to have turned the lygnage of dauyd to him / wherefore there
be no books that tells how Ioachym descended fro Dauyd. But when herod
had done this foul deed yet were there some good wise men yt had copyes of
this books with in the^ at home ye told how Ioachym came of ye kingdom of
dauyd for dauyd had many chyldere^ and one of them was called Natan / of ye
which come leuy / and there was a another called panther and of hy^ came Barban
yt was Ioachyms fader. yt married our ladies mother (Pater eius Ioachym) matter
vero a^na vocati This Ioachym that was our ladies fader / and her mother Anna
when they had this child / she was given after in marriage to Joseph. And so
both Ioachy^ and anna ended their life full virtuously. Therefore as god says.
Of a good tree comyth good fruit So of this good woman came a holy ofsprynge.
So let us serve this holy woman yt she may pray for us now and ever. Amen.

Festum transfiguracionis domini celebratur.vi. die Augusti.
THe satyrdaye ever in ye first hole weke of lent is read the gospel of
Mathewe ye.xvii. chapter. (Assu^psit Ihesus petru^ and Ioha^ne^ In ye which
is showed how yt our sauyoure took.iii. of his dyscyples peter James and Johan
his brother and led the^ unto a hye mou^te yt is called Thabor and there he
was tra^sfygured before the^. And his face shone as ye son and his clothy^ge
were white as ye snow. And there appeared Moses and Hely speaking with him etc.
All this was done for our learning / and our great comfort and Joy yt is to
come. For in that ye our lord was thus transfygured in to so great
bryghtnesse / Betokens the glory that ye soul and body of every christian man
and woman shall have here after if they live well in this world and keep the
co^mau^deme^tis. This day is greatly pryuyleged in holy church. In so much
yt orders ben give as this day thoruth all cryste^dome and great pardons be
granted to this day in diverse places. As in to syon plener remyssyon and all
is to the well and comfort of man and for a purueance to sanctyfye his soul /
that in the last resurreccyon the said soul Joined to the body may together
be gloryfyed and tra^sfygured in clernesse more / bryghter than is the son
and so ever to endure. Then to have more knowledge of this transfyguracyon. ye
shall understand that our lord took these three dyscyples and appostles. For
by cause he was more famylyer with them than with any other. and also to Peter
he made before by promysse to be head of ye church and prince of the appostles
And Johan he took for a synguler love yt he had to him and for his vyrgynyte.
And James the more for by cause he should first dye for his love / and take
martyrdom. Also our lord had there Moses / that was deed before this
transfyguracyon a thousand year and five hundred And also Hely the great
prophet that was a thousa^de years and more before translate in to paradyse a
live and is yet a live. And ye said Hely is preserved to preche against
Antecryst in the end of the world and the said antecryst shall put him to
death / and martyr him. These two he took in sygnefyenge. yt he is and shall be
Judge of all that is deed as Moses was then. And is in body and also of all
those that been a live / as is yet the said prophet. Hely in paradyse. And
also for by cause that they both fasted. forty day in penance / as it is
showed of Moses (exodi xxx. and of Hely.iii. regu^.xix. and so we read not of
Abraham ne of Noe / or of such other that then were in lymbo with Moses nor
also of Enoch that yet is alive with the said Hely in paradyse. So then by
this may we learn that it pleases much our lord that christian people fast.xl.
days / that is to say the lent / that they may be the more able at
transfyguracyon the which shall be on pasche day / and more clearly when we se
our lord and maker face to face in his glory. where through we our self shall
be transfygured in soul and body in to an unspeakable bryghetnes during
without end in all Joy and gladness. Some peradventure that here this will
say that they would fast / but they may not. For ye which it is too
understand that there ben nine causes for the which a person is not bound
to fast. First as is a woman with child for she must provide for two and so
of congruence she ought to have two meles / or refeccyons / without yt she be
of strong and of good compleccyon / then she may fast some day in the weke.
The second ben nouryces that gives children souke. The third ben seek folk
that may not ete when common time requires / but they that have ye gout be not
by this excused / for to them is a good medycyne breed and water. The fourth
ben poor people that have not whereof to take a good mele / or their refeccyon
suffyently at a dew hour but go from door to door. The fyft be poor people
that lies bedred and may no ferder. And have not mete enough / if that such
fast their mede shall be great / if rich people fast not they fall in to
dampnacyon The syxt be footmen and horsemen that have great Iourneys that eete
for necessyte. And else they be not excused. The seventh ben those that ledeth
their lives in great labor but handcrafty men ben not excused thereby. The
eight ben young people. For as saint Thomas in.ii. secunde says A young man
may he excused till he attain and come to.xxi. year of aege for so long he
grows in all his parties / and by much fasting he may demenysshe it. Nor
for at twelve year of aege let him fast friday in the lent at ye leest. And
at.xiiii. years two days in ye weke. And at.xviii. three days in the weke. And
at.xx. four days in ye weke. And at.xxi. all the days in lent. The ix. ben
aeged people that may not ete / but they that in aege have good stomachs and
ben hole ben not by this excused.

Hec vincencius:
What form and order we shall keep in our fasting our lord and the said
Moses and Helye by their ensample techeth us. For our lord in fasting prayed
/ and Moses when he did fast took good head what our lord said unto him wha^
he gave him of his laws and commandments. And Hely the prophet was ever
going / and in like manner wise should we do as much as we may in the time of
our fast in lent / entende to prayer / and to dyuyne service / and to take
good head what is said at sermons and prechynge / and of the preeste when he is
in the pulpytte / and to bear it away / and to do thereafter in as much as ye
may. In rehercynge and techy^ge the same to your children and servants yt ye
have charge and power of. Also going to holy places and to pardons / that we
may the sooner be released and have forgyuenes of our sins / and after to
come to the mount of heaven yt we labor for / the which is our herytau^ce
where we shall se the tranfyguracyon of our lord god our maker and redemer
much more larger and more bryghter / and more glorious than ever Peter and his
felawshyp saw him than in this said mount of Thabor. For in this mount shall
we se sensybly without fere or falling down to the ground / as the said
appostles did. The fader / the sone / and the holy ghost with an excellent
glory there resydent and reygnynge lord and god / worlds without end in the
mids and among his cytezyns and saints there can not nor may no tongue
suffyse to tell. Of this mount and glorious Cite of heaven we find this
writing that / sorrow / heuenesse waylynge / nor weeping there is none another
pouerte nor sickness. No man there is hurt / no man there is grieved nor hated
/ nor enuyeth a another / couetyse there is none nor desire of mete and drink /
nor of any worship or power. There is no fere nor of their malice that they
have to man and woman to bring them to their dongeon of hell death of body
and of soul shall never be there / but glory and Joy that never shall cease
with everlasting grace there shall be no dyscorde / but all things in order /
and accord with other in contynuell gladness. There ben all things quyete
and restfull in great clerte / and bryghtnesse / not of the sone that shyneth
here the which it shall not need. For our lord him self gives and shall
give yt cite his light And Ihesus the lamb of god is / and shall be the
lantern there of. There ben none aged people nor none other wretchydnesse of
age / but all people shall be there at full age of our lord.xxxii. There is
none night / another derkenesse nor gaderynge of clouds nor none excess of
hete nor cold but all things so temporate / that eye never se such / nor ere
never herd. Another it may here be perceived of mannys heart or mind / but
only of those which be worthy to have it / the names of whom ben written in
the book of life the which have taken hete in this world their penance by
great passion and streyte life / and now ben in the bliss of heaven serving
him day and night. And above all these what Joy and glory shall be to them
that is and shall be accompanied with all the ordres of aungelles / as angels /
archangelles / thrones / and domynacyons / pryncypates / and potestates /
cherubyn / and seraphyn / and to all the heavenly spyrytes of so high virtue.
And to behold so innumerable company of saints about our lord Ihesu Christ /
dystyncte and keeping their order and felawshyp much bryghter shyny^ge than
the sterres of heaven. As is our lady ye mother of god the patryarkes and the
prophets / the appostles and euangelystes / martyrs / and confessoures / with
vyrgyns and all other saints.

Narracio.
We find that a dampened spyryte was compelled to tell a symylytude of the
Joys of heaven / and he said this ensample / if a man were on the top of an
hye hill and might se by possybelyte fro hy^ on each side the space of an.C.M.
miles / and all that space in compass were full of whete / and every ^ere of
that whete were shynynge also bright as the son yet all this light were not
in comparyson like too the leest bryghtnes and clerenes that the Just people
gloryfyed has and shall have in heaven. Then all chis considered that we have
often in our mind remembrance of this glorious hill of heaven / and this
solemn transfyguracyon of our lord god and his saints / and well to
understand it in our faith and that we love it with all our heart / and
labor therefore contynuelly in thought / word / and deed. For the kyngedome
of heaven asks none other price but thy self / and so much it is worth as
thy self. Therefore give thy self therefore / and thou shalt have it. Be never
in fere for the price. Pur lord Ihesu christ gave him self for to deye to the
intent to make us a mancyon and kingdom unto his fader. Wherefore beware and
let no sin reygne in you / and thereby exclude our lord of his habytacyon
within your souls Out have ever with you the spyryte of life in all goodness
and virtue that ye may obtain and come to this said transfyguracyon in heaven.
Amen

Of the sweet and holy name of Ihesus which shall be the seven day of Auguste.
IN the first book of scripture is written yt after god of his in fynyte
goodness has made man / and ordained him to be lord and have domynacyon of
all other living creatures and he brought or causede them to be brought as
it pleysed him before man adam to the entente that he should know all that was
made for man. and to give to every living creature a name / according to his
nature and to ye propryete thereof. Therefore it is of congrue^ce / that of and
for the nobleness / dygnyte and virtue of every good thing ought to be
praised magnyfyed and loved the name that sygnyfyeth that same thing Specially
the more / if the imposytoure and gyuer of the name has perfyte syence and
knowledge both of the thing / but of all the names that ever has or shall be
in the use and knowelege of man. The name Ihesus sygnefyeth ye most noble /
most honorable / and the most precyouse thing that ever was is or shall be.
(Quia filius dei) Ihesus is the name of the sone of god the second person in
the trynyte (Ante seculo Before the worldis creacyon predestynate and ordained
in the hye wisdom of the godhede. thus in our nature and kind to be named and
called Ihesus. Though it were in terra ex tempore) To us here in earth shewede
as a new Imposycyon / sent and releued from heaven by thaungell gabryell the
which after he had of his heavenly message showed to the blessed vyrgyne.
Marye how she should conceive / and bring forth a child a sone. Filium. He
added and said. Vocabis nomen eius Ihesum) Thou shalt name and call him
Ihesus (Luce primo) And the same words after that were said unto her holy
husbonde Joseph The very true witness and keeper of our blyssed lady mother and
vyrgyne. Be not aferde said the angel of god unto Joseph / dread the not to
take mary thy spouse and to abide with her for that she has conceived / that
is to say the child that is in her / is of the holy ghost. De spiritu sa^cto
est And shall bring forth a sone (Et vocabis nome^ eius Ihesum. Mathei primo.
And at his cyrcumcysyon where he shed first of his blood (Vocatum est nomen
eius Ihesus / This blessed babe was of them named and called Ihesus. By the
which name Ihesus / he was called or clypped by for he was conceived so in his
moders womb says the euangelyst (Quod vocatum e^ priusquam in vtero
conciperetur Luce secundo / O thou blessed Ihesu. O thou sovereign Ihesu. O
holy and heavenly name Ihesus I beseech the be to me / and all that worship and
honor and love thy holy name Ihesus be to us very Ihesus. What is Ihesu to
say / will ye ask me / by cause I have desired him to be to us very Ihesus.
Forsothe Ihesus by interpretacyon Est idem quod saluator seu salutare vel
salus. Ihesus is as much to say as a savior / a health gyuer / or health it
self. All we be sinners / and all we be borne the childerne of ire / and have
need of grace says saint Poule. Of whom shall we have this grace / and be
delivered from sin / and certainly of none other / but of Ihesu / that is
Plenus gracie et veritatis. et per quem gracia et veritas Iohannis primo. Of
Ihesus full of grace and also by who me all the grace and our salvation comes.
And also with out Ihesu no grace may be had / and also nor no good deed ne
operacyon may be wrought / Iohannis decimo quin to) Sine me nichil potestis
facere) for this blyssed Ihesus the holy faders and patryarkys / Abraham /
Jacob and other / mourned longed / and syghed cryenge and calling. Veni domine
veni) Come lord come Discende / Come down gracyous Ihesus / and deliver us
out of pryso^ that we all ben in / and must goo to for the sin of adam. Of
this desired Ihesus and of his blyssed acts and deeds wroughte and done by him
and his name be the prophesyes the fygures the signs and oracles and tokens
innumerable wryte^ in holy scripture. And though in scripture be found other
persons of this name Ihesus filius Naue / other wise called Iosue. And Ihesus
filius syrac. And Ihesus the sone of Iosodech / and though each of these were
according to their name helpers / and in manner saluatoures of ye people that
then were. But there was never none that was universal sauyoure and delyuerer
from sin / but our IheIhesu christ the sone of god of whom David said and
prophesyed. The fader god in heaven has sent his only sone Ihesu god and man /
to hele and to redeem all man kind Misit verbu^suum et sanauit omnes / and
this confermyth celestis paranimphus that is the heavenly messager gabryel
saying unto Joseph the spouse unto our blyssed Lady / This Ihesus he said
shall save and redeem all his people he shall deliver them of their sins.
Ipse enim saluum faciat enim populum suum a pectatis eorum) Ihesus then may
well be called and know ye for a certain that it is a name of might and of
great power. Ihesus is alsoo a name of pity and socoure Ihesus is and
perpetuelly shall be to his lovers rewarder and premyoure. That our lord
Ihesus is of might and power it appears. In rerum creatione. In demonium
subiectione: et in miraculorum operaco^e The might and power of Ihesu first I
say is showed and appears in the creacyon and making of the world / and of
all that is thereto. For as it is written in holy scripture (Prouerbi.viii.)
Ihesus / that is to say the hye wisdom of the fader / was before in eternyte
with the fader / or heaven or earth / son / or moan / water / fysshe / foul /
or be. And before any law / or ordinance of any creature in heaven or in
earth was made or create. And as it follows in the same chapter. Ihesus not
only thus with the fader / before making or creacyon of the world / but also
he was. Cum eoque cuncta componens). Ihesus with god the fader was the fourmer
/ the maker / the shaper of all these things before said. This witnesses and
confermeth the euangelyst Johan saying thus. Oi^a per ipsu^ facta sunt et sine
ipso factu^ est nichil). By Ihesu says the holy gospel / all things were
made and created / and without Ihesu there was never any creature made. O Ihesu
sith it is so yt here in earth men for a small power / a transytory domynacyon
in a reame / in a cite / or in a country receive great reverence and worship
What honor / what reverence / what laud / or praysynge ought to be given to
the Ihesu / that thus by creacyon art lord of all creatures / of whom and by
whom every thing has his being and substance / certaynely no tongue may
speak / nor heart thy^ke it / this name Jesus is exalted as witnesses saint
Poule above al names. In so much yt. In nomine jesus omne genu flectatur
celestyum terrestriu^ et infer norum. Ad philypenses.ii. In sentence to say.
All the power of aungelles in heaven / of deuylles in hell / and men upon earth
is subget to Ihesu and to him / and to his name bow and give reverence /
honor and worship. The which considering pope Johan the two and twenty of
that name / and to styre the people to have the more reverence to our
honorable Ihesus granted to every person dysposed / that as often as the
blyssed name of Ihesu is reherced in the dyuyne service / and does bow his
knees and that makes inclynacyon or smyteth himself upon his breast with
devotion and reverence / so often he shall have.xx. days of pardon and
remyssyon of sins. Also I said that the might and power of Ihesu is showed
i^ subduy^ge of wicked spyrytes. The which needs not long to treat of. For
it is manyfested Innumerable in all the four evangelists how they dread Jesus
fled him were cast out of them yt they vexed / by Ihesu sometime a legyon of
deuylles from one man And how they have no power / but of ye suffrau^ce of
Ihesu as plainly shows in the story written Mathei viii. and Marcy.v. And many
other places of the gospel. and not only thus by Ihesu in his own person / but
also by his discyples deuylles and cursed spyrytes were subgette and obeyed /
as it is written Luce.x. Domine ecia demonia sub^i cuintur nobis in nomine tuo)
Lord said the discyples to Ihesu with great Joy / forsooth in thy name lord
evil spyrytes obey to us This will every christian man / this power may not can
not be demynysshed lessed. For Ihesus is god of Infinite power. therefore as
then so ever seen and ever shall continue yt who so ever call devoutly and
trust verily in this holy name Ihesu / he shall not / he may not fail of
help wytnessynge ye prophet saying) Quicu^que vocauerit nomen domini saluus
erit Ioha^nis.ii. Of many stories that show ye same / one I shall tell you.
In the time of king herry ye third there was in the chircheyerde of saint
Edmoundes bery a child with a pair of tables in his hand studyenge to make
his letters and to write / and suddenly he was by the power of god rapte / and
taken from that place and brought in to far and strange country / and then
led in to a great palace or halle and there he met with other three
chylderen that were of diverse regyons brought the same time in such form
as he was There was also a relygyon man that moved these chylderen to
confession the which they made to him and received absolucyo^ And then the
monk did unclothe them / And bad them Join their ho^des together in manner
of prayenge and goo forth And where or wheder so ever they were led and
brought / and what so ever they herd or see they should without ceasing
call on the blessed name Jesus And that Ihesu should ever be in their mouths.
After this / these four children were brought to places where souls were
tormented and peyned and fendes and deuylles would have take these said chyldern
and cast them in to pain. and as they had be taught / cried and called / Jesus
Jesus Jesus / and the wicked spyrites anon and at all times fled from them After
this dreadful wysyons they were brought to delectable and plesau^te places /
and there they saw angellys and holy souls and of dyuyne secrets / and of ye
unspeakable Joys of god Ihesu. For mannys wit and knowing can not in this
life comprehend the leest prouynce thereof this seen and done the chylderen were
brought ayene to the said hall / and and clothed ayene by ye said relygyous
man. And then restored to their proper countries. And the.viii. day after
the said rapte of this first spoken child he was first seen and fou^den in
the suberbes of bery and his tables in his hand These vysyons was so
enprynted in this chyldys mind that all the time of his life there might no
worldely myrthe come in his heart / nor any thing cause him to laughe. A
storye like to this There is written of Nycholas that was in the purgatory
reveled to Saint patryk how he passed all peryllys / and auoyted the deuylles
oonly saying. (Ihesu adiuua me Ihesu miserere mei) Also a devil said to saint
bernarde / when he bad him in he name of Ihesu / go out from the woman that
the vexed. (O nomen terrybyle Ihesu. iam cogis me exire) O dreadful name Ihesu
/ thou constreyneste me to depart said the fend. O merueylous O thou hy.
name Jesus how is it seen that thy hye name Ihesu is so dredde to spyrytes /
that of their own nature have in comparable knowledge conning and might unto
any erthly creature. How dare specially any christian creature be so bold to
dysplease the. or do that is or might be contrary to thy name Ihesu / that is
to say contrary to salvation of him. Be ware man beware and remember the of
that dredefulle word / that Ihesu shall say to them that here displeasen him
and lyuen with out dread of him. (Ite maledicti in ignem eternum) Go ye cursed
people from me in to euerlastyne fire The contrary) and to the great Joy
shall be said to them that here have lived in dread and loved him. (Timentes
autem dominem glorificat) Says the prophet. Ihesu gloryfyeth and takethe to
his bliss men dredynge him with love and shall say to them. (Venite
benedicti patris mei. possidete paratum vobis regnum. Mathei.xxv. Come ye
blessed of my fader take possessyon of the kyngedome of heaven to be partenars
of my bliss and Joy / To this name all prophets bear witness* and so have
thereby remyssyon of sins The might and virtue of the name Ihesu I said / all
is showed (In miraculorum operacione) In the merueylous and plente full
miracles that Ihesu showed and wroughte himself / and have be done and wrought
in his name / the which ben innumerable For manyfeste it is / that both of
him and in his name / thousands have be myraculously heled. and saved / the
blind and that never see before have their syghte the dome their speech the
lame crepellys and crooked their right members and lymmes. The deef their
herynge. the lepers their clensynge For this there ben many auctorytees and
ensamples both in the pospellys and in actybus appostolorum. Mathei quarto) Is
written that Ihesus went over all galylee prechynge and techynge and helynge al
manner of langour and sickness in the people. And (Marcy.iii.) is this same
thing to this intent. and how Ihesus gaaf the same power to his dyscyples.
Many other and unknown how many times the experyence of the virtue of this
name Ihesus has be showed to them that have loved and trust in this blessed
name Ihesus.

Narracio
It is wreten of a brother of the mynours / remembrynge him of the virtue and
miracles done in the name of Ihesu. and for to avoid a great fever and ares
that he had he with devotion wrote this name Ihesus) and put it in water and
with a ferd full heart in Ihesu he drank the water and anon he was hole.

Narracio
Of a devout young man / it is also read / that he prayed to god to have the
means how he might best love him. and continue in the same love. an angel
appeared and took him a byll. wherein was written (Ihesu fili dei propicius esto
michi peccatori) Ihesu the sone of god be mercy full to me sinner. Open thy
mouth and ete this said thangell for by virtue of Ihesu and to this name / ye
trynyte is enclyned to favor thangellis to serve and help the / ye deuylles
to flee from the all vexacyons to be swaged / and heaven to be opened. Of all
these yt said young man in virtuous lyuy^ge had experience (as said the storye
/ co^fyrmacyon of all ye premysses / is plain of ye mouth of our lord Jesus
the last chapter of Mark. (In nomine meo (dicit Ielus) demonia encient
linguis loquuntur nouis) In the second pryncypall it is said / that Ihesus is
a name of pity and of socour Here may thou show and preche / how for pity
that he had of mankind. And for to socoure and releue him of mysery that he
was in. Ihesus would meke himself for to be come man / and so proceed if thou
will in his acts of mysery / of pouerte / of sapyence / and specially of the
cyrcumstaunce of his passion. First that we ought to meke us too him that he
dystroy our pride / he suffered his heed for to be crowned with sharp thorns /
and yt we should not forgete him in prosperyte / his right hand was perysshed
with a great and boystous nail to have pacyence in aduersyte / behold his pain
in his left hand to despise erthely and vain Joys / his fete nailed toward
the earth is a myrour and a spectacle / and in sign that he loves the he
spredde his arms to clyppe the / and boweth his heed to kiss the. All his
blyssed body is like an haubergyon mayled with drops of blood and in token
that this was pure and hole love our mercyful Ihesus our pytefull Ihesus
suffered his side too be opened his heart with a spear to be perced / and every
drop of his precious blood to be shed for the and me and al mankind. Thus
Ihesus has verefyed the prophecye that is written. Ysaye v. Quid vltra debui
facere et non feci). What ought I. What might I. What would thou man that I
did for the more than I have done. Have I not given mine own life for the.
Quia maiorem caritatem nemo habet. etc. More love can not be showed than to
give life for his friend. And as the holy man saint Bernarde says in Ihesus
name that and my passion were not suffycient for the redempcyon of man I would
for the love that I have too man yet suffer again that I have suffered. O we
unkind wretches / worse than unreasonable creatures / if we mourn yt not /
sorrow the not / pity the not Ihesu in thy passion / that for pity of us thou
would be tourmented and deye for us And also if we for the and in thy holy
and blyssed name Ihesu be not pacyent in all aduersytees / ready to suffer for
the vexacyons / trybulacyons / Iniuryes / wrongs / repreues / sykenesses / and
all manner extremities and dyseases / and yt with desire and Joy with thine
apostles and dyscyples of whom it is wryte^ (Actuum quinto. Ibant gaudentes a
co^spectu consilii quoniam digni habiti sunt pro nomine Ihesu contumeliam pati.
etc And saint poule says in the same book the.xx. chapter. he was ready to dey
for his Masters name Jesus (paratus sum mori) Have then after the cou^seylle
of Bernarde. Jesus ever in thy hand in thy mouth and in thy heart / by whom
you shalt now dyrecte all ye powers both of soul and body (Ihesus (iniquit)
semper sit in manu. semperque set in ore. sit in sinu. quo tui omnes sensus
dirigantur et actus) And that I said for the last pry^cypall / should move
every person to the premysses. For Ihesus I said / is will and shall be / thy
reward far and a boue thy me cytes. Ihesus says to all his servants.
(Venite ad me omnes qui laboratis et onerati estis. et ego reficiam vos) Come
ye all to me says Ihesus that labor / take burden and I shall refresshe you.
I shall reward you / I shall reco^pense you. Where with good Ihesu / surly
with Joy bliss eternal. with fruycyon / vysyon and knowelege of the blessed
trynyte with Joy that comprehends all that pleyseth and suffers no thing
with it / that dyspleyseth and Joy that shall never be taken from us. Quod
nemo tollit a vobis) says Ihesus) This is the name and there is none other to
be saved by (Non est aliud nomen sub celo datum hominibus in quo oportet nos
saluos fieri (Actuu^.iiii) Ihesus then I beseech the grant us here to love
so to follow the in meekness / pacyence and charity / that we may come to ye
where ever we shall see the preche praise the abide with ye Joy in the. and
never to depart from the. Amen.

Narracio
It is read that a man lived many years and days in peasyble wise with his
wife according to their degree. then the enmye of all virtuous life intyced
them / temted and brought them both unto a soul nable temptacion to have
destroyed themself. The husbo^de not knowing of his wives temptacyon ne the
wife of her husbonde. This temptacyon troubled them both so much / yt
neither of them could well ete / drink ne sleep. But ever were syghynge and
in heavy chere. In process of time of vnwoned conforte between them they
demanded and asked each of other the cause of their heuines and sorrow and
showed The man and husbonde after many questions made of the woman and not
satisfyenge her / at last he answered and said. Certay^ly my trouble is that I
am day and night / erly and late / etynge and drinking / or what so ever I
do / or occupye / tempted for to hang myself. tell me now wife said he
what is the cause of your heaviness and why ye neither ete / drink / nor sleep
as ye have be accustomed The wife answered and said. Forsothe Sire I am in the
same temptacyon and will. And anon thorugh Instygacyon of the devil / they
were both consented and agreed to perform this false temptaco^n. And anon
made ready their halters and theymselfe with all that should be had / to execute
that cursed deed to have hanged theymselfe. But before that they should begin
this foul and horrible deed. The wife said to her husbonde. Sire said show
never yette tasted ne have not dronke of our bestewyne. let us said she
drink ones thereof or we deye. I co^sente and grant / said the husbonde /
she fette of the desired wine. and when it was before them both of a blessed
custom that they had when they should take any sustenau^ce they said that one
to that other drink we / Or let us drink or in like terms. As thus / I
drink to the wise in the name of Ihesus with the common blessing In nomine
patris et full et spiritus sancti. Amen. Bibamus in nomine Jesus). And she
receyuynge and drinking of the wine in the name of Ihesu. And anon their
temptacyon boyded and was gone. Et fugit dyabolus) And the devil fled from
them. And they then co^tryte shewede this and confessyd their sin openly /
to the magnefyenge of the glorious and heavenly name Ihesus. Bernardus (Habes
anima mea reconditum electuarium cum vasculo vocabuli quod est Jesus. quod
nulli vnquam^ pesti inefficax inuenitur.)

Narracio
It is wreten that a paynym being converted to the christian faith wherefore the
deuylles had so much envy that they vexed him with bodily hurt and sensyble
/ that they beat him many times. and specially in his bed. Then this man as
he was taught of an holy mansowed this name Ihesus in four corners of the
shetes of his bed. and after this / the deuylles as they were accustomed to
come in sensyble wise to his chamber / for to have beat and vexed him But wha^
they were nere toward the bed they sterted abacke and stood a ferde and
said mowynge and with a crooked countenance / Ha Ihesu / ha Ihesu. and thus
this man was saved from betynge. He then vnderstondy^ge ye virtue of this
name Ihesus made and ordained a long ^pere / and fastened this name Ihesus in
the end. And wha^ someuer this cursed spyrytes apperede unto him to trouble or
vex him / he held and put the spear with the name of Ihesus against ye
deuylles / and they fled and ran away all co^fused. And thus this man was
no more / by them troubled ne assailed. But ever after was delivered fro all
temptacyons and troubles of them. By the virtue of this holy and sweet name of
Ihesu.

Narracio
O would Jesus yt me^ could follow and love Jesus as a knight yt I read of which
went to Iherusalem when he was come thither he vysyted in order by and by all
those places where any act or deed was done in by our lord Ihesus from his
birth unto the place of his ascencyon. Then he considering that he had no
mo places to vysyte or to follow Ihesu / but only in heaven where Ihesus
ascended. And in consyderacyon he was in so great desire and affection to be
with Ihesu that the soul of him there departed from his body. Wise and learned
men understand that this man for Joy yt he had in his pilgrimage and in Ihesu
was dysceased / made his heart to be opened and there was written therein. Jesus
amor meus). Ihesus my love. O says saint Augustyn de ciuitate dei (libro
decimo octauo. Capitulo quadragesimo nono. Quid amicius. quid dulcis nominare
nome^ jesus. What is more frendlyer / more louelyer / and more sweter to name
than Ihesu. Example

Narracio.
There was a woman that through thynstygacion of her ennemy the evil angel /
her heart fell in to such an obstynate opinion that she in no wise / nor by
any persuacyon would forgive certain trespaces done to her. A good holy man
trusting in the holy name of Ihesu in her extreme sekenes wrote this holy name
Ihesus in her forheed / and anon the virtue of this high name Ihesus wrought
in her so that it molefyed and melted her heart / that with all the power of her
heart she forgave all trespaces asking Ihesu forgyuenes of her Induracyon and
obstynacion thanking him of the remedy. Wherefore every man ought to honor /
sanctyfye / and halowe this day in the reverence of this holy and sweet name
Ihesu. Amen.

Sequitur de sancto Laurencio.
GOod friends such a day ye shall have saint Laurence day gods own holy
martyr. His martrydome as maximus says / shyneth to all holy church and
lyghtneth all the world / wherefore ye shall come to god and holy church and
shall fast the even. This saint was holy in living and great in co^passyon of
ferynge. Saint austyne says that ensaumple in doing is more commendable /
than is prechinge and techynge therefore saint Laurence gave all christian people
too show against malice meekness / and against coueytyse largess / against
persecucion and tribulacyo^ love and swetnes. When Sixtus the ^^^e had be in
spain he brought Laurence with him to Rome / and made him archedekyn to serve
holy church and pour people. Then had the emperor envy to him and
purposed for to do him to death Then Laurence to show meekness against
malice / inquired fast after pour people / and went unto them / and gave them
mete and drink and clothes and so he came to a wydowes housthere as was many
pore people lodged / ye which wydowe had be long seek of the head ache.
Then laurence had compassyon on her and made her hole and mekely washed all
the poor peoples fete / and served them of mete and drink. And for he herd
that there was a poor man beside in a place that was blind he went thither and
heled him So ever the more the emperor showed malice to him / the more he
gave him to meekness and to holy devotion / he showed also against couycyse
largeness. For when pope Sixtus had taken to Laurence the tresoure of holy
church to keep and to give to them that had most need. Then^e blessed
Laurence followed his master and said. Sancte pater noli me derelinquere) Holy
fader forsake notte me. For I have deled all the tresoure that thou tokest unto
me / wherefore goo notte thou unto thy passion alone but let me go with the /
as we have served god to gyder / so let us suffer death to gyder. Then said
the pope / I will go to fore and thou shalt come after and suffer more
penance than I may / for I am old and thou art young / and may suffer more
than I / and therefore make the ready* For there is great tormente ordained for
the. Then were there some herd laurence speak of tresoure. Then the
emperor sent after Laurence / and said. Ostende michi thesauros ecclesie)
Show to me the tresoure of the church / or else thou shalt be put to such
a tormente that thou shalt be feign to deliver it. Then how pope Sixtus and
saint Laurence came unto this tresoure / ye shall here. We read yt there was an
holy man / that was named Orygines that converted phylyp the emperor of Rome
Then the emperor sent a knight of his in to france / wc with much people
to over come france. This knight was called decyus and in short time he made
France subjects unto the emperor as they were before. Then when this
emperor phylyp herd that decius had done so well to great worship to
decius and to thank him for his Journey. The Emperor took with him a few men
and rode out of rome against decius to welcome him home then Decius saw that
the Emperor did him so great worship he thought it had be for dread and not
for love and thought to be emperor him self / and so in the night next
after as themprour lay in his bed slepynge / decyus slew him and took all his
people to rome with hy^ / then wha^ the romans and the senators herd there of
what for dread and what for love they made decius emperor. When phylyps sone
herd tell yt his fader was deed in this wise / he was a ferde leest decius
would have slain hy^ and gave his faders tresour to holy church and bare it
to pope sixtus and laure^ce praye^g hy^ if so were ye decius slew hy^ they
should dele this tresour to holy church and to poor people that had need.
Then Decius slew Phylyps sone for feere / leest he would have venged his
faders death when he had come to man's state / and this was the treasoure that
pope Syxtus and Laurence had / and for this treasoure they put Laurence in to
prison. Then was there a man that hight Lucyllus in prison yt by great
weeping had lost his sight. Then Laurence made him to se again / and
crystned hy^ / wherefore many blind men and women came to Laurence / and had
their sight. Then the emperor sent to laurence to deliver ye treasure. Then
he prayed him of three days respyte / and then he would show him the treasour.
So these three days Laurence was let out of prison / and went and gadred all
the poor people to gyder that he might find / blind / lame / and crooked /
and the third day he brought them before themperoure to his palace and said.
Lo here is everlasting treasour / this will never fail / for it will endure for
ever in heaven. So showed Laurence largeness against couetyse / for he deled
for gods sake all the goods and rychesses that he had / and he might have
spente it in vain pleasures and in worldly operacyons if he had would. Also
in tourmente of ins passion / he showed perfyte love and fervent swetenes.
Then^e the emperor in great furoure and anger commanded to bring forth all
manner of Instruments of tourmentrye. scourges / nails / stones / salt /
pytche / brymstone / brenny^ge coals / yren / shaftes / bars of yren / and
gredyrons. And commanded that all should be spente and worn upon Laurence /
but he would show treasoure and forsake his god that he believed on / and for
to adoure and do sacryfyce to mawmettes and ydolles. Then said Laurence /
thou vnblyssed man / these metes and drynkes have I ever desired and sought.
For right as sweet and delycyous metes and drynkes pleases and satysfyeth thy
body so these tourmentes pleasen my soul / and maken me strong and mighty to
suffer passion for my lordis sake. Then was the emperor wroth and commanded to
beat him with scourges full of knottes and leave not till the blood ran down
on every side. and then they laid cheynes of yren brenny^ge to his sides yt
brenned the flesh fro ye bones. and ever laurence thanked god hertely Then
was decius wode for woe. and said though you with thy wytchecrafte scornest my
tormentys / yet thou sholdeste not scorn me. And then he commanded ayene to
beat hy^ with whyppes and knottes of led till the bones were bare. Then
laurence held up his head and prayenge to god / then came a voice fro heaven
and said. Thou must suffer more torments and passion for the love of me this
Decius herd it himself And thou shall come in to great Joy and bliss
Then said decius to the people / ye may here all how the fendes come and
comfort him / go and beat him ayene with scourges / then was there a knight of
themperours that hyghte romanus) that saw an angel with a shete of sylke come
and wype laurence sides. Then he forsook the emperor / and became the
dyscyple of saint laurence and laurence anon crystened him. Then Decius made
to smite of romanus head then decyus did make a great fire and set a
gerdyren thereon / to roste Laure^ce and thrested him down with fire forkis /
then laurence looked upon the^peroure and said you wretch yt side that is
roasted enough / ete thereof while that other side rosteth I dread not thy
tormentis and cast his eyes up to god and said. Lord Ihesu take my spyryte.
and so he yield up the ghost. Then the tormentours went their way and left
the body lyenge there then come christian people and took the body and beryed
it with great lamentacyon. Thus laurence showed mekenes ayenste malice. and
largenes against couetyse / against passion love and swetnesse for the great love
that he had to god / made him set naught by all his torments that were do to
his body / Saint Gregory tells how there was a priest yt hyghte staculus /
and was besy to a mende a church of saint laurence yt was destroyed with
lombardes but he wanted bread to his work men and made much sorrow therefore
And he prayed to god and saint Laurence besely of help / and then he looked in
to an oven and found it full of new white bread and he wend it would have
served the^ but for a weke / and it found them Enough all the time that his
work was in making.

Narracio
we find yt there was an Emperor that was a cursed man of living / And when
he was deed. There came a legyon of fendes to fetch him and as they came by an
holy heremytes cell / they made great noise the heremyte had great marvel
thereof / and opened a wyndow and spoke to one of them that came behind and
asked in the name of god what they were. And he said fendes that were sent to
the Emperor that was deed / to look if they might have him for their
reward. Then thermyte commanded them to come again by him to know how they
sped / and he did so. And said there his sins were laid in the balaunce
and was nigh overcome. Then come the brennynge deken laurence and laid a
great pot on the balaunce and it drew up all together. This pot was a great
chalyce / that the emperor made to worship saint Laurence. Thus ye may learn
to suffer ayenste enuyous people also what mede is in largenes to give them that
have need and what Joy and merit it is to suffer tribulacyon and persecuco^n
and disease pacyently learn of the holy martyr Saint Laurence and let us take
him for a myrrour / and pray to him that he will be mediatoure to god for us /
that we may come to everlasting bliss. Amen.

De assumptione beat marie virginis.
GOod friends such a day ye shall have the assu^pcyon of our lady. And it is
called so for that day her sone took her up in to heaven body and soul / and
crowned her queen of heaven / for the aungelles of heaven came to fetch her up.
Aungelles syngyng came with processyon against her with roses and lylyes of
paradyse. In token that she is rose lylye and flower of all women / and they
did homage to her. For all aungelles and saints in heaven made Joy and melody
in worship and honor of her / and so holy church makes mind of her
assumpcyon. And yet the gospel of that day makes no mencyon but of two
systers / that was Martha and Maudelayne and says thus (Intrauit Ihesus in
quodda^ castellum et mulier queda^ etc) Ihesus entered in to a castle and a
woman that was called Martha took him in to her house. And she had a sister that
was called Mary / and she satte at crystes fete and herd him speak. Then was
Martha besy for to serve christ / and she said to him. Sir bydde my sister
arise and help me. Then answered christ Maria meltore^ patre^ elegit q^ no^
auferet ab ea) Mary has chosen the better part / yt shall not be taken away
fro her. These ben the words of the gospel of yt day / and here be no words
of our lady as by semynge. But he yt redeth what saint Ancelme says / there
he may se yt the gospel perteyneth all to our lady and to the living of her.
For she was the castle yt Ihesus entered in to / for right as a castle has
diverse propryetes that longs unto a castle / that it should be mighty and
very strong* right so was our blissed Lady before all other women that ever
was. For there as all women be frail and feeble and easy to overcome / our
lady was strong as a castle / and agaynstode ye cautelles of the fendes
engynes / and put them beside at all times / for right as a castle has first
a deep dytche / right so had our lady a deep mekenes in strength of the
castle / in so much she passed other in virtue of meekness. Wherefore god
chose her to be mother to his sone before al other women and thereto christ bears
witness saying thus. (Quia respexit humilitatem ancille sue) for god beheld
the mekenes of his handmayden / all generacyons shall bless me. This dytche if
it be full of water / it is the more strenger to the castle / this water is
compassyon that a man should have of his sins and for other peoples disease /
This water had our lady. Upon this dytche lies a draw bridge that shall be
drawn up against the enemies. And let down against friends / by this bridge
is vnderstonden obedyence / For right as a man shall not let down the bridge
too his enemy though he bid him / In like wise a man should not let the
fend come to his soul though he tempte him But a none as he is boden any
thing that is help and soucoure unto his soul than shall he let down the
bridge of obedyence / and the sooner the better. This did our lady when the
angel gabryell told her of her concepcyon of her sone she let not down the
bridge a none rylle she knew wheder he was a friend or an enemy and said she
should contryue and be a maid / and keep the vow of chastyte that she had
made to fore. And as she herd that she let down the bridge of obedyence and
said (Ecce ancylla domini) Lo here gods own hand maid be it done to me
after thy word. This castle is treble or thryes double walled. The first wall
betokens wedlock for first she was wife unto Joseph / or else the Jews
would have stoned her as for a lechoure and if that she had continued without
wedlock / and so the ferther wall betokens pacyence and the ynner vyrginyte
the which is clean mayde^hode. But that is little worth but it be strengthed
with the wall of pacyence / and little help is for maydenheed / it is little
worth that can nothing suffer of persecucyon nor disease / but all way
playnynge and grudgynge / and to be a claterer / a Iangeler / a curser / a
waryer / and a scolde of her tongue / these defend not maydenhede / but rather
cast it down / for maydenhode should be of few words / and that she speaks
should be honor and worship both to her person and to all them that be in
her presence. For it is an old english. A maiden should be seen and not
herd. This virtue had our lady. For saint Bernarde says / read al ye gospel
over and you shall not fy^de yt our lady spoke in her life any more than four
times. The first to Gabryell. The second to Elyzabeth. The third to her own
sone in the temple. The fourth at the wedding in the cane of Galyle. Thus
must the wall of pacyence defend the wall of maydenhode. This wall of
maydenhede and if it be well kept it is passing all other. As Bede says /
wedlock is hye there as it is well kept / but yet wydowhede is hyer. But
vyrgynyte passes al and has most worship in heaven passing all other. This
wall kept our lady / for she was clean by frewyll and by vow / and she had a
degree passing al other maidens that ever was and ever shall be / for she was
both maid and mother. And in this castle is a gate that betokens faith. For
right as it is unpossyble for a man to go through a wall of stele / right so
it is impossyble to a man to please god without faith. This faith had our lady
passing all other. For as it seems Impossyble for a woman to conceive without
carnal concupyscence of man / for it was never seen before / but by techynge of
an angel she believed. And so came Christ and entered by the gate of believe in
to ye body of our lady. This gate had a toure above / which betokens charity
/ for that is above all thing / and that virtue had our lady. Well may she be
called a castle / for right as all manner of people fle in too a castle both
old and young for dread of enemies. In so much that the leest child that can
cry or speak that is a ferde of any thing / anon cried / Lady / lady for
socoure and help. For she is socoure and help both to young / and too old /
less and more in sykenesse and in health. The holy ghost is capytayne of this
castle / and his knights ben holy aungellys that goth with our lady both
night and day / In this castle ben two manner of systers Martha and Mary
Magdalene (Martha recepit illum in domum suam) Martha received him into her
house / and was besy to serve him / and the other sat still and had great lust
too here him speak. By these two systers I understood two manner of living of
people / that one is actyue / and that other co^templatyue. Martha betokens
actyue / that is business in this world / but that she ^e be for Crystes sake
/ that is to take poor people in to his house / and then to give them mete and
drink / clothes herborugh / visyte them that be in prison comfort the seek /
blind and lame and to burye the deed. By that other I understand the
contemplatyffe that is to the people of holy church that should void in all
that they may this worlds business / and give them too all spyrytuell
occupacyon. And though they do thus / yet there be couetyse people of the
world that say that it is all lost that men of holy church have / for it
seems to them that they do no good. Saint Austyn says that all the world
is holy church / but yet god answered for them and is their advocate and so he
will at all times while they live in rest and inpeas with in them self. But
now se how our blyssed Lady mother of our sauyoure Ihesu Christ satysfyeth
both these lives / she was first named Martha / For there as Martha was besy
to receive our sauyoure Ihesu christ in her house / our lady received hy^ into
her body and there he was.ix. months / and she fed him and after came poor
and naked into this world / and she gave him mete and drink of her pappes and
so fed him And when he was naked / she clothed him and nourysshed him / and
when he was syke by kind of his youth / she heled him and when he was bound
hand and foot / in his cradell as in prison / she came to him and vnbou^de him
and took hy^ and healed his sores with the milk of her pappes and wha^ he was
deed she help to burye him in his tomb and thus she fulfilled the office of
Martha perfourmyng the.vii. works of mercy and yet she was many times troubled
in her heart / when she must bear him froo country to country that was full of
mawmettes and there as she knew no man. And when that she saw him taken and
stryped naked / beten with scorges that all his body ran with stremes of blood
nailed on the c^^^^e / and so done to death that was to her great trouble. Thus
was our lady actyue / for as the gospel tells / she gave so great delight to
her sons words that she bare in her heart / all the life and techynge of
christ. In somoche that she taught the four Euangelystes. Mark / Mathewe /
Luke / and Johan much of that they wrote. And namely saint Luke. For he wrote
much of the manhood of christ and so fulfilled the office of Mary For it was
for the best / when her sone styed up into heaven she left all her business /
and gave her to contemplacyon till her sone fette her out of this world. Thus
every man that can understand may se that this gospel is conuenyent to be
read for it touches the life of our lady. Then for this day is the end of
her life in this world. Therefore holy church redeth this gospel in example
to all christian people to perform the same lyuinge in as much as they may and
as god will give them grace to serve our lady. I shall show you an ensample

Narracio.
We find of a clerk that loved our lady well for he read of her beauty he had
great lust to se her / and prayed besyly that he might ones se her or he deyed.
Then at ye last came there an angel and said to him / for thou seruest our
lady so well thou shall have thy prayer. But one thing I tell the / if you se
her in this world thou shalt lose thy sight for the great clerenes of her.
Then said he I will well so yt I may se her. Then said the aungel / come
to such a place and you shall se her. Then he was glad and thought that he
would hyde his one eye and look with that other. So when he came to yt place /
he laid his hand over ye one eye / and saw her with yt other eye. And so
came our lady and he saw her / and she went a way anon / and he was blind on
that eye and saw with that other. Then the sight lyked him so well that he
would feign se her again and prayed night and day that he might se her again.
Then said the angel if thou se her again thou shalt lose the sight of
that other eye. And he said I will well though I had a thousand eyes. Then
come to such a place and thou shalt se her. And so when he came he saw her.
Then said our lady / my good servant when thou saw me first you lost one of
thyn eyes / how wylt thou do now when you have lost that other eye. Then said
he / dear lady I will well though I had a thousand eyes. Then said our lady
/ for thou have so great liking to me you shall have thy sight with both thyn
eyes again as well as ever you had before and better / and so he had.
Then^e served he our lady ever after to his lives end / and went to
everlasting bliss. To the which almighty god bring us all. Amen.

De sancto Bartholomeo appostolo.
GOod friends such a day ye shall have the feast of saint Bartylmewe gods
own appostle / and ye shall come to the church and here your dyuyne service
in the worship of god and saint Bartylmewe. Ye shall understand that
Bartylmewe is asmoche for to say as. Filius suspendentis me) the which is for
to say. The sone hanging upon me or upon waters. Then ye shall understand
that god is he that hangs upon waters in two ways. The first is when he
hanged upon the clouds in the fyrmament till he sees time to let them
down. Another way he hangs upon waters / when a man or a woman is sorry for
their sins / and weeping sore for his trespace bytterly. Then god takes his
teres and hangs them of the hye hylle of heaven / where all the saints of
heaven may have them in sight in great Joy to al saints and to all the
aungelles that been in heaven / when they may se man or woman that has done
amysse in many trespaces to forsake their sin and do no more / therefore the
teres of man or woman that is sorry for their sins in this manner quenched the
fire of hell. Of these teres speaks Johan Grysostome and says. O thou teere
that art mekely let in oryson and prayer with good devotion / thy might is so
great that thou ghost to heaven and take the word of the Jews mouth making
him to torn the to salvation that before was in way of dampnacyon. Also thou
make thyn accusers dombe the fendes and so thou quenchest the fire of hell
that fendes made ready against thy coming / and thus god hangs upon waters.
Then because saint Bartylmewe was gods sone / as all ben that serves him /
he was hanging up in four ways / in devotion of holy orysons prayenge / and
in faith monycyon / and in suffrynge of passion. He was hanging to god ward
in devout orysons / for that the which he sasayd with his mouth he thought in
his heart / so that his heart was always hanging up toward god both in word
and in deed as the priest says in the mass Sursum co^da Hold up your hertes
/ thus this holy saint Barthylmew had ever his heart to god for devotion.

Narracio.
We find written of him thus / that he kneled a ho^dred times on the day / and
a hundred times on the night for a great devotion that he had to god. But for
he should not bewery of the travail / our lord sent an angel ever more to
show him and keep him. Thus hanged he up by holy orysons prayenge He was also
hanged by the faithful monicyon in this wise / for god gave him so great power
over all fendes that by his holy monycyon he suspended them / wheder they were
in man / or in woman. And also in other mawmettes we find written of saint
Barthylmew / how he came into Ynde in the temple / in the which temple was an
image therein was a fend a mawmette that was called Astaroth and this image
was made of gold / then ye fend that was therein spoke to him and did hy^
worship And by such words as he spoke he made the people to believe that he
was god and yet to make them the more to believe he heled syke men and women /
both blind and lame and of many diverse sykenesse that he had cast upon them
tofore him self / and semy^ge to them that they were heled by him but such
sykenesse as god sent upon them he could not help. Then was the temple full
of syke people that were brought to this mawmette to be hole. But as soon as
Barthylmew came to ye temple / he suspe^ded ye fendes power yt he might hele no
man. Now there was a another god called Bauruth and they asked hy^ why their god
gave them none answer he said barthtlmew ye appostle of god has bound hy^ so
sore yt he dare not ones speak / then he told hy^ ye fetures of Barthylmew and
said. He knows every word what we say now / for he has an aungel of god with
him / and tells him all things that ever was said or done by hy^ and more
over though ye seek him ye shall not find him / but if he will himself.
Then went they home again and sought Barthylmewe and might not find him.
Then as Barthylmew walked among the people / a mad man yt had the fend
within hy^ / anon cried to Barthylmew / gods own appostle thy prayers bind
me sore and bren^e me also. Then said Barthilmew / hold thy peace you fend
and go out of that man / and with that word the fend went his way and left
the man / and anon he was hole. Then it happed so yt the king of ye cite
had a daughter that was mad and sore bounden with chains for harm that she
did among the people. And when as the king herd how this man was heled he
sent to Barthylmew prayenge him that he would hele his daughter / and so he
did. Then^e Barthylmew preched so the king that he turned the king too be
crystned / and then anon he commanded to draw down the mawmettes that
were in the temple. Then ye people teyed ropes about the images necks and
would have drawn down the mawmettes / but they could not / for ye fendes were
so strong in them. Then Barthylmew commanded the fendes to come out of the
images / and to pull them to poudre and so they did / for they had no power
to with stand his commandment / and so they all to brake them. For the temples
were so full of syke people Barthylmew prayed to god that they might be hole /
and anon they were hole euerychone. Then came there an angel that god
sent from heaven / and anon in sight of all ye people the temple shone so
bright that no tongue could tell / and flewe all about the temple / and in
four parts of the temple he made the sign of the cross with his fyngers on
the walls and said. Right as all the people ben hole of their sykenesse / so
shall this temple be cleansed from all the fylthe of sin / and of the fendes
craft that has be therein. And I will show you the same fend that ye have
worshypped for your god. Then^e the fend appeared like a man of Ynde all black
and made a cursed noise. Then the people began too fle for fere he was so
lothely. Then said the angel / make such a sign of the cross in your
forehedes and be not afraid of hy^ Then anon in sight of all the people the
angel vnbou^de this fend and bad him go there as was neither sterynge of man
ne be. And ever to be there till the day of dome / and never disease the
people more. Then the fend went his way / and the angel styed in to heaven.
And then ye king his wife and his daughter / and all his meyne and much
other people turned to the faith / and Barthylmewe crystned them all. Thus
saint Barthylmew hanged by faithful monycyon / for he suspended ye fendes
power / that he might do no thing He was also hanged up by suffrynge of
passion / for when the bishop of the temple saw that the people were almoost
turned to the christian faith / and left the fendes mawmetry / he went unto ye
cite there as a king was called Astrages / and brother to the king Polymyes /
and co^playned to him sore and said yt there was a man come too him yt was
called Barthylmew that had turned his brother and all people to the faith yt
they set not by their gods / but had drawn them down and all to brake them
and hallowed ye temple only to Christ. For this cause he prayed hy^ of help.
Then sent the king a thousand men for Barthylmew. And when Barthylmew was
come / he asked him why he had turned his brother and made him to believe on a
deed man the which was hanged upon the cross. Then said saint Barthylmew. I
have bound that god that thy brother believed on / and showed the fend to him /
and if thou or he may do so to my god / then will I believe as thou do / Then
the king commanded to hang Bartylmewe on a cross and long to torment him
thereon / and after took him down and fleyed him quycke / and then smote of his
heed. Then came christian people and buried him with great reverence and
worship / and thus he was hanged up by great compassion suffrynge.

Narracio
We read in gestis Romanorum that when Frederyk ye Emperor had destroyed a
great cite / and therein was a fair church of saint Bartylmewe / and other more
of diverse saints. And as a good holy man came by the cite and he saw a great
company of men standing together. And than had this man great meruayll of them
and asked them what they were / and what was their counsayll. They said to him
again that it was saint Bartylmewe and other saints / that had chirches in
that cite that were destroyed / and there they took their counsayl what they
might do with the emperor. And they were in a full purpose that he should come
before god / and answer there for his deeds. And so the emperor deyed a foul
death and was dampened. And also it is written in the life of saint Good lake
that first enhabyted Crowlande in the fennes / and the first day that he came
theder was on saint Bartylmewes day. Then he prayed to this holy appostle to
be his patron against the wicked spyrytes that were in that place. For it was
called the Inhabytacyon of fendes / for there durst no man dwell there for
fendes. Then when this holy man was come theder / he had almoost lost his
wits for fere: but then by grace he had mind of saint Bartylmewe and prayed
hertely to him for help and socoure. Then anon came saint Bartylmew and
commanded the fendes to go from the place. Then the fendes made a great
horrible noise and went their way in saying. Alas alas for now have we lost
our might and our habytacyon / and now shall we go to hell for evermore And so
sorowynge and waylynge they went all their way. Then this holy man thanked
god and saint Bartylmewe for the great help and socoure that he had done to
him. Here by ye may se and understand that this holy appostle is ever ready to
all that will call to him with good devotion / he will help them at their
need. Amen.

Sequit^ sermo de natiuitate gloriosissime virginis marie.
WOrshypfull friends such a day ye shall have the Natiuite of our lady / yt
is when she was borne / and ye shall fast the even and come to god and holy
church in the worship of our lady saint Mary. Ioachim was her fader / and Anne
was her mother. There can no man tell ye Joy yt Ioachym and Anne had in their
hertes when our lady was borne / for they had prayed.xxx. year to god night
and day / and dealed much alms: and for the good deeds yt they did they
had reuelacyon of god yt they should be holy and please god / and also by ye
birthe of our lady ye repreef yt they had before of their bareynes should be
put away / and so Anne went forth among other women. So yt the birth of our
lady gladded yt fader and the mother / wherefore god sent them fruit of their
bodies more by grace than by kind. Then all ye neighbors came and conforted
Anne and called her daughter Mary as ye angel bad or she was borne. Ye shall
understand ye holy church worshippeth.iii. byrthes. One of our lord /
another of our lady / and the.iii. of saint Johan Baptist. Showing openly yt
every body yt will be saved must be thryes borne. First of his mother in this
world / ye.ii. from sy^ne by water washing / ye.iii. out of this world to
Joy passing. The first betokens by our lady / ye.ii. by saint Johan baptyst
ye third by our lord Ihesu christ. For these three byrthes is great Joy and
myrthe seen and herd Though a woman have great pain in the birth of her
child. I may well believe saint Anne then our ladies mother had not so in her
birth of her child our lady For she was hallowed in her moders womb holy borne
/ and holy ever after. So when she was born and wened and was three year of age.
Ioachym and Anne and other friends brought Mary in to the cite of Jerusalem
tofore the Temple as they had made their a vow tofore. Then the Temple stood
on an hill and was.xv. steyres up to the door and so they left Mary at the
nethermest stayere while they made them ready to do their offrynge Then
went Mary to the vppermoost greece herself and knelynge down made her prayers
to god as she had be of a great age / for the holy ghost was ever with her /
and gaf her grace. Also god sent her an angel to keep her and to teache her.
And when her fader and mother had offered / they went home and left her there /
and she changed no cher^ but gaf herself all to spyrytuel occupacyon / and
every day from morrow to vndern she was in her prayers / and from vnderen till
none she occupied her craft of weuynge of clothes in the Temple and at none the
mete and the drink that was brought to her she gaf to poor people and was in
her devotion till an angel brought her mete. Thus she lived so clean and so
honestly / that all her felawes called her queen of maidens. And when any man
spoke to her / mekely she lowted with her heed and said (Deo gracias) For that
word was comen in her mouth / and therefore she is lykened to a spycers shop
for she smells sweet / for the presence of the holy ghost was with her and
habundaunce of virtues that she should bear the king of virtues. And thus her
birth daily is Joy to all good christian people. How this day was first found
a great clerk Johan bellet tells / there was an holy man that prayed to god
often by night / and on a night as he was in his deuocyons he herd a song of
an angel / that our lady was borne of her mother and no more of all the year
after. So in a night he herd this melodye in the ayere wherefore this holy man
prayed to god yt he might have wyttynge what was the cause that he herd ye
melody that night and no more of all the year after. Then came an angel to hy^
and said yt night our lady was borne of her mother and / therefore the melodye
was made in heaven at that time. Then went he to the pope and told him how
the angel said / and then the pope commanded that day should be hallowed
for ever more / thus came this feast first into holy church. Also our lady is
borne by water washing / that is by crystnynge. for when our lord Ihesu
christ was baptized in ye water of flom Jordan then our lady and the.xii.
apostles in ye time were crystned / therefore right as our lord followed the old
and the new law both and all that fell to a man of right / and so our lady
fulfilled both laws / and all fell to a woman at the same crystenynge / for
there her sone took his right name and she both / And as ye gospel tells
when our lord Ihesus was crystned the fad of heaven spoke and said (Hic est
filius meus etc) Here is my well-beloved sone. But after he was called Jesus
gods sone / and fro ye time our lady was called the wife of Joseph and after
yt she was called the mode of ihesu to much worship of her. The third time
our lady was born to Joy passing / for when she should pass out of this
world her sone came with great multitude of angels and brought her to heaven with
much Joy / and there crowned her queen of heaven Empress of hell and lady of
al ye world so she is in everlasting bliss.

Narracio
We find of our lady how there was a Jew that was born in France / and came
in to England for diverse matters yt he had to do with other people / and came
to Gloucester and Brystowe / and so would go in to Wyltshyre / but he was take
by the way with thieves and led in to an old house and bound to a post and
his hands behind him / and so let him there all night / and at last he fell
on sleep / and saw a fair woman clothed all in white / he had never seen
such / and even therewith he awoke and found him self lose. Then he saw
our lady so bright that he thought she passed the son and said / what art
thou. And she said I am Mary that you and thy nacyon despised and say yt I never
bare gods sone / but I am come now to bring the out of thyn error and out
of prison that thou art in. And therefore come thou with me / and stand yonder
at the stone and look downewarde and so he did / and there he saw the
horrible pains of hell that he was nigh out of his mind. Then said our lady
to him / these be the pains that be ordained to all those that will not believe
in my sons passion / and in the faith of holy church. And yet come forth
and se more / and she set him on an hye hill / and showed him a place of great
Joy and mirth in so much yt he was rauysshed with that sight. Then said our
lady. Lo these ben ordained for all those that believes in thyncarnacyon of
Christ / and yt he was borne of me / and I clean maiden before and after / and
that my sone shed his blood for all mankind. Now have thou seen both Joy
and pain / chose which thou have lever. Then went he much of the night he
wist not what way / but walked forth. But on ye morrow he came to bathe there he
was crystned and named Johan / and after he was an holy man. And to come again
to our purpose of our lady what time that Ioachym had offered our lady in to the
temple to the bishop to keep her safe in ward till she were.xii. years of
aege and more / then must the bishop ordeyne for her an husband / and
then they let cry all about in the country that kings lords and other
gentyles that were without wives should come at a certain day for to know
who were best worthy for to wedde ye fair maiden that was flower of all
maidens. For right as the lylye is white and fair among the breers and other
flowers. Right so was our lady among other maidens. So when they came to
Iherusalem to se ye maiden that was of the best blood of the world / the
bishop ordained an old staff of asshe that he had kept in ye temple many
year and was all worm eten / and he said / he the which handeleth that staff
and burgeneth and bear flowers / he should have the maiden / and she was
brought forth in to the temple that all the people might se her. Then bad the
bishop bring forth the staff / and when any man handeled it he badde him
hold up on hye that the people might se if it burgened. So then went to
kings / princes / lords / knights / and squyres / and other gentylmen / but
it would not be the first day nor the second day / so the.iii. day they
should make an end Then came there an old man in to the temple and had
herd of this / but he saw it not and he thought to go se how the people did
/ and came theder and stood a far in a corner and looked on this maiden.
Then he thought in himself he would not handle ye staff / for this maid is
not for me that is so passing fair and I so passing old. Then came there a
white douue and satte upon his heed with a golden bylle / and her fete shone
like bright burnysshed gold that all the people saw it and some would have
caught her but they might not. then was the bishop ware and badde Joseph come
up to him anon. And Joseph said nay she is not for me / she is to young and I
am to old for to govern her estate. then said ye bishop handle this staff /
and anon as he had done so it flourysshed and bare fruit. Then was the
bishop glad / and Joseph sorry for to have her / for he was fully purposed
never to have wife. Then the bishop wedded them worshypfully / and badde
Joseph take her home with him and so he did. Then soon after the holy ghost
lyghted in her with gretynge of the angel Gabryell / and so began for to ware
great with child. Then Joseph looked upon her and thought to have gone away
pryuely from her and leave her alone. Then came an angel to Joseph and badde
he should take Mary to his keeping / and study no more thereupon / and leave all
such thoughts for that was gods will / and god himself will that it be so.
Then he left al such fantasyes and kept her well as every man should do his
wife.:

De exaltatione sancte Crucis.
GOod friends such a day ye shall have holy rode day / in the which ye
shall come to the church in worship of him that was done upon the cross /
this day is called (Exaltacio sancte crucis) The exaltacyon of the cross /
that is to say / the lyftynge vf of ye holy Cross when saint Eleyne had set
the Cross in Iherusalem christian people did it great worship But then came the
king of Perse yt was called Cosdre and he took the Cross with him and made the
Cite bare / and bare a way all that he might and went in to the Temple and
took all the tresour Jewels and precious stones and bare them away. Thus this
cursyd man did destroy many kingdoms and so bare the holy Cross in to his
own country / Then the emperor Eraclius herd thereof and was full wroth and
sorry / and sent to this Cosdre to trete with him for Eraclius was a christian man
Then Cosdre answered cursedly and said he would not treat till he had all his
people to forsake crystendom and do sacrefyce to his mawmettes. Then this
Emperor Eraclius betoke all to god and gadred him an oost of people to fight with
this cursyd king Cosdre hoping to god to get the holy Cross again. But when
this cursyd king Cosdre came he fell in such a fantasye and madness that he
took his sone all the governance of his reame and let make an house for himself
in manner of an awter like unto heaven / and made it all shynynge gold and
precious stones / and set himself in the mids in a chayr of gold / and
commanded that all the people should call him god / and so sat / and the holy
Cross in his right hand instead of his sone and on left hand a tame kocke
instead of the holy ghost and himself in the mids instead of Trynyte and
thus he sat like a mad man Then his sone herd that Eraclius was coming / he
went against him / and met him at a great water over the which water was a
bridge. And then by thassent of both their oostes / that the two chyef captayns
a mids of the bridge should fight for them all / and both ends of ye
bridge should be drawn up / and which of them yt had the vyctory should have
both the kingdoms. Then was Eraclius so full in faith of the Cross and
trusted in the prayer of people yt he overcome his enmye. Then Cosdres people by
sterynge of the holy ghost turned to the faith by free will of themself / and
when they were all crystened / Then went Eraclius with both oostes to ye old
king Cosdre as he satte in his trone and said to him thus. For by cause thou
have do worship to the holy Cross / thou shall chose if thou wylt be
crystened and have thy kingdom again for a little trybute in rest and peace / or
else to be deed and he forsook to be crystened. Then anon Eraclius smote of
his heed and made a cry yt his tresour should be dealed among his men / and
precious stones and other Jewels should be kept to restore the chirches that
were destroyed and bare the Cross to Jerusalem. And when he came to the mount
of Olyuete toward the cite of Jerusalem riding on a trapped horse / he would
have ryden in to ye cite of Jerusalem but suddenly the yates fell together and
was a plain wall. Then he was gretely astonyed and meruayled gretely of that
vengeance / and made a great moan. Then^e came an angel and stood upon the
gates and said. Quando rex noster. etc). When the king of heaven came this way
and through these gates toward his passion he rode on no trapped horse / nor on
no clothe of gold / but mekely on a simple ass / gyuynge ensample of mekenes
to all people / then the angel went his way. Then the king with all the
devotion yt he could or might do / anon did of his clothes to his shyrte and
went bare foot and bare legged. Then the gate opened and he went in to the
gate of Iherusalem and so in to the temple and offered the cross again as it
was before. And then for ye great Joy that the people had of this cross /
and of the great miracles yt god showed it was the more worshypped after than
it was before and the worship of the cross that was cast down / after was
lift up / wherefore this day is called exaltacyon of the holy cross. For as
saint Austyn says / the cross was first of great spyte and velony. And now
it is of great worship / so that emperoures and kings worship and do to it
great reverence.

Narracio.
We head in legenda aurea that a Jew came to a church and for defaute that no
man was in the church he went to the rode / and for great envy that he had to
Christ he cut the rodes throat / and anon the blood sterte out on his clothes
and so his clothes were al reed with blood. Then he hid the rode in a preuy
place / and as he went home a christian man met him / and said to him / thou
have slain some man where have thou done him / and the Jew said nay / and ye
christian man said / thy clothes ben all blody of him. Then this Jew kneled
down and said. Forsothe the god that these christian people believe upon is of
great virtue / and told him how he had done / and then he cried mercy with all
his heart / and so he was crystened / and was a holy man ever after / and so
went unto everlasting Joy and bliss to the which god bring us al Amen.

Quatuor temporum
GOod friends this weke ye shall have ymbre days / that is wednesday / friday
/ and saterdaye / yt which days Calixtus the (...) ordained four times in
the year / to all that be of conuenable aege to fast for certain causes as ye
shall here. Our old faders fasted four times in ye year / against four hye
and solemn feestes / and if we will show us good children we must fast and
follow the same rule that they used. And therefore we fast four times. First in
March. The second at whytsontyde. The third between heruest and sede time.
And the fourth before Crystmas. March is a time yt dries up the moisture that
is in ye earth. Wherefore we fast yt time to dry the earth of our body of the
humures yt be nedeful to the body and to the soul. For ye time the humors of
lechery tempts a man most of any time of the year. Also we do fast at
whytsontyde to get grace of ye holy ghoost yt we may be in love and charity to
god and to all the world. Caritas cooperit multitudine^ pcto^rum). Charity
covers ye multitude of sins. Also we must fast for to have mekenes in our
hertes / and to put away all pride yt renneth within us. Also we fast between
heruest and seed time for to have grace to gader fruytes of good works in to
ye house of our conscience / and so by ensample of good living among the
people yt we be common with both rich and poor. Also we fast in winter for to
sle all stynkynge wedes of sin and of foul earth of flesshely lusts / yt
makes good angels and good people to wtdrawe them fro us. For right as a
nettle bre^neth roses and other flowers that grow nigh him. In the same wise a
vycyous man or a woman stereth and sets on fire them yt ben in his company /
and for these causes we fast four times in yt year / and every time three days
/ that betokens three special virtues that helps a man to grace. That is
fasting devout prayenge / and alms deed doing. And by opinion of much
people these days ben called ymbre days / because that our elder faders would
on these days ete no breed / but cakes made under ashes / so by the etynge of
that they reduced in to their mind yt they were but ashes / and so should
torn again / and wist not how soon / and by that turned away from all
dylycious metes and drynkes and took none head but that they had easy
sustenaunce. This caused them to think on death / and that will cause a man to
desire no more than him needs / and abstain him self from al manner of bodily
lusts and to increase in virtues / whereby we may come to everlasting bliss.

De sancto Matheo appostolo.
GOod friends such a day ye shall have saint Mathewes day which was Crystes
appostle / and ye shall fast the even and come to holy church in the worship
of god and saint Matthew. He is gretely commended in holy church for certain
holy virtues that he had. He was obedyent to Christ at ye first calling. He
preched the gospel without faynynge / and he suffered passion without any denyenge.
First he was obedyente to Christ at ye first calling. For he sat at a certain
place besy to get good / and Christ came yt way and looked on him / and bad him
come and go with him. Then he kest so great love to Christ yt he left all his
goods yt he had and sued Christ forth full simple and full poor. Also he
fed Christ gladly / for on a day he prayed Christ to ete with him / and made
Christ a great feast / not with dylycate metes and drynkes / but in fedynge
Christ and all his company. For he fed all yt would come for crystes sake for
much people sued Christ whersoeuer he went. Et secuti su^t eu^ turbe multe).
For diverse causes many followed hy^ some to be heled of their sores and of
diverse sykenes / and some to se ye miracles yt Christ did show / some to ete
and to drink with him. And some yt were his enmyes yt were learned in ye law if
they might have taken him with any word whereby they might have accused hy^. And
some to be reformed in virtues and to here his doctrine and techynge / as ye
appostles and many other. (Vn^ versus. Moribus signa cibus blasphemia doctrina
fuere. Causa cu^ (...) turba secuta fuit). And when Matthew had fed Christ thus
and all that come with hy^. Christ made him one of his dyscyples / and gave him
knowlegynge to preche the believe and gods word so boldly ever after yt he
spared neither for love ne for dread. So this Matthew appostle came on a time
in to a cite and preched yt was called Nadabar. And there he found much
people taught by the fendes craft in nygromancy / and taught so many things
and so meruaylous yt it was great wonder to here to many men's wit sand al
for the people should believe in them and do them worship. Then Mathewe anon
delivered their nygromancye / so that all the people knew openly that it was
the fendes craft / wherefore these people the which did believe on this
nygromancy made dragons by the fendes craft for to spyt and degorge flambes of
fire out of their mouths / and brenne so that the stenche of them slew much
people. And they did bring these dragons for to have devoured saint Matthew.
And wha^ saint Matthew herd thereof he made a cross before him and went against
them and anon ye dragons fell down deed before him. Then said Matthew to the
people. If ye have any might reyse them again to life / but they had no
power. Then said Mathewe / if I were not gods servant I would make them to
do to you as ye purposed to do to me / but it is the techynge of my master
Ihesu christ to do good against evil / wherefore I bydde you dragons arise / and
go to such a place as ye shall never grieve man nor be / and anon they rose
and went their way. Thus Mathewe turned much people that came to se that
sight / then he preched the people and tol them of the Joys of paradyse /
there said he is ever day and never night / there is ever youth and never
aege / there is health and never sykenes / there is roses lylyes and flowers /
without welowynge / there be popyngayes / nyghtyngales and diverse birds ever
singing / love rest and peace with everlasting charity. So they that byleueth
in christ and does after his commandments shall come theder and be there
without ending. Thus he preched in a cite there as cursed people were. And
they took him and put out his eyes / and kest him in to prison till they took
aduysement of what death he should deye. But then there came an angel to
saint Andrewe as he preched in a far country / and brought him over the sea
there as saint Mathewe was / and then when Andrewe saw Mathewe so foul do to
/ anon Andrewe wept and prayed to god for hy^ / and anon god restored to
Mathewe his sight again / and Andrewe went again to his own country to
preche again as he came fro. And when Mathewe was out of prison he went and
preched in the cite of Nabadaran the which the kings sone deyed. Then sent
the king after Mathewe and prayed him to restore his sone to life again / and
so he did. Wherefore the king and his wife and his daughter yt was called
eufegeme took crystendome / and the most part of ye people / and for god
had chosen this Eufegeme to be an holy woman to godwarde Mathewe blessid her
/ and gave her the veil of chastyte and charity / and so was after an holy
woman / and was kepar of many other vyrgyns. Then deyed her fader and there
came a king yt was called Hertagus which loved this maiden Eufegeme / and
prayed Mathewe to help him that he might have her. then said Mathewe yt might
not be / for she was wedded to the king of heaven and might not break that
spousehede. Then was Hertageus wroth and badde slay Mathewe. And so as he
stood and said mass at ye auter / there came one behind him and slew him /
and the christian people buried the body in the same church. Then bad ye king
to set fire in Eufegemes house / and that on every side for to brenne her
therein. Then Mathewe appeared to her and badde her be of good chere / and anon
turned the fire from her house in to the kings palace / and left there nothing
save the king and a young child with him / and the king was smyten with
meselry so foul / that he for great pain and woe slew himself. And so the
vengeance fell on himself that he would have done unto other. Now ye may well
se by these great miracles that he was an holy man / and therefore let us
serve him and he will pray for us all to our lord. Amen.

De sancto Michaele archangelo.
GOod friends such a day ye shall have saint Myghelles day tharchaungell /
that day all holy church makes mind and mencyon of all aungelles for the
great socoure comfort and help that mankind had of aungelles / and
specially of saint Mychaell / and for three prerogatyues yt he had For he is
wonderful in appyerynge / merueylous in miracles werkynge / and vyctoryous in
fighting / he was wonderful in apperynge For saint Gregory says wha^
almighty god will work any wonderful deed then he sends for Mychaell his
servant as for his banerer. For he bears a shield a sign of his arms /
wherefore he was sent with Moses and Aaron to Egypt to work merueyles. for
though the sign was in Moses the werkynge was done by Mychael. for he
departed the reed see and kept the water in two parties while the people of
Israhell went through / and so passed and lad them forth to flom Jordan and
kept the water like an hylle of each side of them while they passed sauf and
sound to the land of behest Also Mychaell is keeper of paradyse / and takes
the souls that be sent thydre. Also he shall slay Antecryste in ye mount of
Olyuete and he shall bydde all ye deed arise and come to the dome and other
angels with him shall bring all the Instruments of our lords passion the
cross ye crown spear. nails hamer. spo^ge. eysell. gall. scourges. and all
other things that were at Crystys passion to them yt shall be dampened / yt
set naught ne believe not in his passion. Thus it appyereth wonderfully. He
wroughte also miracles merueylously. In Apulia is an hye hylle / yt hylle /
that is called Garganus and is nigh a great Cite and there dwelled a rich man
of diverse catell And as his bestes went on the hylle / it happed a bulle to
be left behind the other bestes. Then this man and his servant went to
seek this bulle and found him standing before an hole in a great den / and
then one of them shot an arrowe at him and the arowe turned again / and smote
him yt shot the arrowe and hurt him sore. Then were they sore a ferde and
merueylled what that might mean and went to the bishop and told him all the
cause Then the bishop prayde to god for to have parfyght knowleche what it
was. Then in the mount of Garganus Mychaell appyered to him and said / it was
gods will that that man should be hurt For ye shall know well that I am
keeper of ye place / wherefore go ye and make a church of ye den / And so the
bishop made a fair church there / Also Mychaell appyered to an other bishop
/ and badde him go to an hylle top unto the mount of Gardell / and there as
he found a bulle tied he should make a church in the worship of god and saint
Mychaell Then were there two roches of stone on either side yt the work might
not up. Then saint Mychaell appeared to a man that hight Haymo / and badde him
go and put away ye roche and dread no thing So this man went thither and
set to his sholders / and badde the roche go utter in the name of god and
saint Mychaell / and so the hills went utter as much as neded to the work.

Narracio
We read also in the life of saint Gregory / how there was a great multitude of
people in Rome and they saw arrows of fire come out of the air and slew
much people. Then saint Gregory prayed to god to cesse ye pestylence. Then
he saw an angel standing upon a castle wall wypynge his blody sword. But
ye a^gell he said was saint Mychael that was sent thydre to punysshe the people
for sin. Thus Mychaell was merueylle in miracles werkyng. He was also
vyctoryous in fighting for when ye cytezens of Sepontyne were oppressyd with
paynems and should give them battle / they prayed often to saint Mychaell of
help Then ye night before as ye batayl should be Mychaell appeared to ye
bishop and said to hy^ / have no dread / but go to ye battle boldly and he
would help hy^ And so on ye morrow wha^ the battle should be / the hylle of
Garganus was ouercouered with a grette myste. And arrows come out of the mist
fleing of fire / and boltes of thonder and hurt much people of the paynyms /
in so much that they slew ye night much people of the infydeles / and so
many were slain / and they that were alive saw the great miracle of god and
were crystned. Saint Johan the euangelyst says in his appocalyps / how
Mychaell and his aungelles fought with Lucyfer in heaven / that is called the
dragon and his aungelles / and with help of god Mychaell had the better and
drove out ye dragon and his aungelles in to the air between heaven and earth And
so they be there yet as thycke as motes in the son. And for that Christ came
to heaven in a blast of thonder / and therefore yet when they here thonder they
fall down to the earth for fere / and than they goo not up again till they
have done some harm / for than they make debates / stryues / and manslaughter
/ and make great wyndes both on land and in water / and do much harm / and
yet they would do more than they do if it were not for dread of god and saint
Mychaell. For all their sorrow is to se souls and aungelles in heaven / in the
place there they were in tofore. Also there were other spyrytes that stood not
steadfast toward god / but flaterynge / the which saint Mychaell drove out of
heaven in to an isle of the sea as ye shall here. As saint Brandon sailed on the sea / he came to an isle and saw a tree that was right great both in heyght
and bread that it was marvel to se / on the which tree sat many birds /
thycker than ye bows / and were as white as snow. Then prayed he to god to
know what they were. Then came one of them and sat on the ship board and
batered with his wings and made a sound like an organ. Then said Brandon /
if yt be come like a messager / speak and tell what ye ben. Then^e he said / we
were aungelles that stood not steadfast in the believe as Mychaell was. And
therefore we were driven out / When Mychaell drove out Lucyfer and his
au^gelles / but yet we have every day a remedy to worship god. Than was
Mychaell wonderful in apperynge merueylous in miracles doing wherefore let
us worship this holy aungelle that he may be our shylde in fighting against
our ghostely enemy the fend / so that we may have the vyctorye of him now
and ever. Amen.

De sancto Luca euangelista
GOod friends such a day ye shall have saint Lukes day ye euangelyst. Ye shall
understand that Christ had.iiii. euangelystes / that is Mark. Mathewe. Luke /
and Johan. These wrote ye gospel The gospel is no more to say but gods word
These holy euangelystes wrote not only yt god spoke. But also what he did /
and what he suffered for mankind / for it should be known to all mankind /
for evermore to think on gods word and to do there after. These four be
lykened to four diverse beestes and so they ben portrayed in four parties of
the cross on every side of Christ. For Mark a lion. For Matthew a man. For Luke
an ox. And for Johan an egle. But let not a man suppose that they were such
bestes but lykened to such bestes / for diverse causes. For because that Matthew
wrote most of Crystes manhede / therefore he is lykened to a man. And Luke
wrote most of Crystes sacryfyce and his death / therefore he is lykened to an
ox / for an ox was offered in sacryfyce of the old law / in tokenynge that
Christ should be offered for sin of people in sacryfyce in the auter of the
cross. And Mark wrote much of ye resurreccyon / and therefore he is lykened
to a lion. For as the books say and tell when a lion has young whelps they
shall lie as deed.iii. days after they ben whelped / then comes ye lion and
sees his whelps deed anon he makes such a rorynge and a cryenge yt the deed
whelps wake therewith and queken and take life. So when Christ had laid three
days in his tomb / then the fader spoke to him and bad hy^ rise and rered
him from death to life. Also Johan is lykened to an Egle. For by kind he
flies highest in the air and next to the son and so Johan wrote most of
the godhede / and but little of the manhede. These be the causes yt they be
lykened to four diverse bestes. But now ye shall understand that Luke was
lykened to an ox.iii. manner of wise yt is in thought / word and deed. He
offered his thought to god for there as he was first besy to get goods of the
world with his craft. For as books tell he was first a leche and for couetyse of
good he slew many a man bodily Then had be offended god so grievously yt a none
he offered his thought in sacrefyse. For as books says / god is hyghly pleased
with thought yt is wha^ a man is sorry for his sins in h^s heart and thinks
verily to for sake them and a mende hy^. Also he offered his word in sacrafyce
/ for as he was wont to spe^de his speech in many idle words or he came to
the appostle after he turned his speech to ye profit of all cryste^ people
wherefore he went to our lady and she taught hy^ ye gospel / yt he wrote and
for he was a maiden / our lady cheryshed hy^ ye more and so taught hy^ full
goodly how ye au^gel came to her in message and what he said and what answer
she gave* And so all thing that she did with her sone / and of all her doy^g
till our lord was styed up into heaven. And when Luke had learned this
perfyghtly / then he looked what Mark and matthew had written. And so took at
them / and there as they wrote obscurly or derkly / he wrote more plainly / and
openly all thing. And thus in prechynge / and in techynge he offered his word
unto god. And also he offered his deed unto god in sacrafyce. For he payned him
self with diverse penance of fasting / and alsoo of hard living and in
weeping and praynge. And also he did write all the persecucyon that the
appostles suffered of the Jews in Iherusalem when they had great pursuyte and
tourmentes for Crystes sake. And he wrote all ye persecucyon of saint Stephen
how he was stoned to death. Then went saint Luke to saint Poule / and sued
him in many myscheues and dyseases that he had / and in full great dread / and
never departed from him till Poule was deed. Then went Luke to a country
that was called Bethany / and there he preched the word of god / and was there
till he was.xli. winter of aege / than he deyed full fair full of the holy
ghoost. For he lived in holy virtues / and after his death god showed for him
many fair miracles / and so ended in Christ and went to euerlasty^ge bliss. To
the which god bring us. Amen.

De sanctis simone et judah.
Friends such a day ye shall have ye feast of Simon and Jude. And ye shall
fast the even and on the morrow come too the church / and worship god and these
holy appostles. Ye shall understand yt either of them has two names / yt one
was called Simon zelotes / and yt other Judas Iacola and Judas thadeus /
shewinge by these how the name yt a man has in this world deyeth and passes
out of my^de when he is deed / wherefore every christian man should be besy to
take him a name yt should be written in the book of life / that should last
ever. And therefore these two appostles suffered great penance / travail /
trybulacyon / and disease / and at the last pain of death for Crystes sake /
with meke heart and clean conscience. Simon is as much to say as obedience /
yt makes a man meke in herte^ Judas is as much to say as confession ye
cleanses a man's conscience of all sy^ne. And thus or they dyed they gave to
all men ensample how they suffered death for Crystes sake and deyed with clean
conscye^ce. And then they shall be written in the book of life with great
worship in ye fraternity of heaven. But they that grutchen in their hertes of
disease and persecucyon and ever pleynynge they have need to pray to god to be
healed of that sykenesse yt they have in their spyrytes.

Narracio
We read in the life of the apostle / how a king that was called Abagarus and
was a lepar / and herd how that our lord Ihesu christ did many miracles and
heled all them yt were seek. then he wrote a letter in this wise king
Abagarus greteth Jesus savior well. ye precheth in ye country of Jerusalem.
And I have herd of thy miracles that thou do / and so thou heleste all
manner of sickness without any herbs or salues / blind crooked and the lame.
And that is more merueylle that thou reyseste deed bodies to life wherefore I
think in my heart and in my believe yt thou art very goddis sone / and come
down from heaven to earth and lived among the people as one of them wherefore
I write to the that thou wylt come to me and hele me of my leperhode / that
greueth me full sore. and so I understand that the Jews have ordained to do
the to death and I have a little Cite yt is good and honest and plenteuous and
is suffysau^t for us both to live by and there shall we have peace Then^e Christ
wrote again and said thou art blyssed that beleuest in me and have not seen me
/ and for thou would that I should come to the I say to the I must do that I
came for / and than I will send some of my dyscyples to the yt shall hele the
of thy leprehede. Then for this that Christ might not come to him for great
desire that he had to se him / he sent to him a paynter that was a master of
that craft to paynte crystes vysage as he could. But when this paynter came to
Christ and looked on his vysage it shone so bright yt he might not look thereon /
then he made great sorrow and mourning that he was come so far / and might
not speed of his purpose. Then^e Christ took a clothe of the paynter and wyped
his face therewith / and then was the form of his face thereon / and then
the paynter bare it to ye king. Then was the king wonder glad and did it
great reverence with all his heart. Then after Crystes ascencyon Thomas of ynde
by the assent of the appostles was sent to this king Abagarus. And when he
saw Thomas he saw such a shynynge in his face yt he wend it had be Christ.
Then said Thomas to the king / believe in Christ and you shalt be hole And he
said. I believe hole in him / and feign I would be wroke on them that put him to
death. And anon he was hole. Then Judas went to Simon / and went both
together in to Percy to preche / and there they did many miracles / so that
they turned ye king / and.xlii. thousand to christian faith and so the christian
people increased strongely. So the king and all his meyny were crystned / and
withdrewe their offrynges from their mawmettes / that was the bysshoppes
lyuy^ge / wherefore all they were so wroth that they gadred them together / and
took these appostles / and led them in to their temples to do sacryfyce to
their mawmettes / or else they should be deed. Then came an angel / and
asked them if they would have their enemies deed or no / and they said they
desired to have their enemies turned to the christian faith. And the angel
asked if they would suffer martyrdom for Crystes sake / and they said they
would suffer death. Then they commanded and turned to the mawmettes in the
temple / and commanded the fendes in them to come out / and to pull the images
all to pyeces / and so they did. Then was the bishop wroth that their gods
fell so to pyeces / and anon there came a thondrynge and a lyghtnynge and
cloue the Temple in three parties down to the ground / and then these
bysshoppes suddenly slew these appostles. Then the king took their bodies
and buried them ryally and made there a fair church in the worship of god /
and these holy appostles.

De solempni festo. Omnium sanctorum.
Friends such a day ye shall have all halowen day. And ye shall fast the even
/ and on ye morrow come to the church / and worship god and our lady and all
halowen. Good friends ye shall understand yt this feast was ordained for three
special causes / and those ben these. First for the temple halowy^ge for
omyssion fulfyllynge / and also for neclegent lyuinge. First for the temple
halowynge / for when the romans were lords of all the world they made a
temple in Rome like a dove house / and named it Pantheon / and set in the mids
of ye temple an image that was the chief mawmet in Rome / and of every land in
the world was an image / and the name of the land that the image was of /
written under the foot of the image / and all was made so by nygromancy if that
any land turned from the emperor / anon the image of the land would torn
his back to the image of Rome and his face to the wall. So when the
bysshoppes came to ye temple / and found any image turned / anon they would
goo to the emperor and tell him. Then would they ordeyne an host of people
and send in to ye land and set them at rest and peace. And so this temple
endured thus unto ye time that pope Bonyface the fourth came. Then he went
to the emperor yt was called Foca / and prayed that he would give him ye
temple that he might put out the multitude of mawmettes. And to halowe it in
the worship of god and our lady and all halowen / and so he gave the temple to
ye pope. The^ came there an other pope yt was called Gregory / and commanded
al holy church to halowe the feast like as it was begone. Also this feast was
ordained by the same pope to fulfill our omyssyons / for many saints days in
the year we leave unserved. For there be so many yt we may not serve echone by
himself / for as saint Iherome says that there be for each day in the
year.x.M. martyrs out take ye first day of January wherefore holy church
ordained that this day we should fulfill that we have left behind all the year
and thus every saints even has worship of us / if we keep well that day in
worship of god and our lady and all halowen. Also this feast is ordained to be
hallowed to cleanse us of our neclygence / and uncunning / and also by worldly
occupacyons doing we be full recheles in keeping our holy days / and therefore
this feast is ordained / for we should make amends as much as we may of that
we have trespaced in other feestes / and therefore understand ye that they be
in great peril that break the feast / or in any other worldy occupacyon
werkynge / or in sin doing in byenge or selly^ge / or in any other falshode
contryuynge. Also ye shall understand that this day our prayers shall be
sooner herd than any other day / for this day all the saints in heaven come
together to pray to god for us and therefore ye may well know that all coming
together shall be sooner herd than if they came but by one / or two by
theymselfe. The holy saints the which ben in heaven were sometime as we be now
/ both in flesh / blood / body / and bone / and were our elder faders / and
they be full glad and make much Joy when that they may get any prayers or
almesdedes of us / with the which they may present our savior and our
blyssed lady prayenge for us. And for to show and declare you by ensample how
all the saints comes and assembleth together as this day ye shall here

Narracio
We find written in legenda aurea) that in the same year this feast was
ordained to be hallowed. there was a keeper of saint peter's church in rome that
this day after matens at mydnyght / when all the people were gone from matens
/ for great devotion yt he had he went to every auter in ye church and said
his deuocyons. And when he had gone all about / then went he to the hye
altar / and there fell aslepe and his spirit was rauisshed. and saw the
fader of heaven sitting in his mageste / and a great multitude of Angellis
about him. And then a fair queen with a crown on her head / rychely arrayed /
and a great company of vyrgyns and maidens suynge her. Then ye king rose
aeynst her and bad to fet a chair of gold and set her therein. Then came
one clothed in camellys skynnes And him sued a great company of good men. Then
came a another like a bishop and after hy^ many other bysshoppes. then came a
great multitude as it had been knights and after them much other people /
and all they come before the king and did him worship Then the bishop began
to say mateyns Then spoke this man to the angel that lad him and asked him
what all these people were in that array Then said ye angel. ye king is
God him self and ye queen is our lady / and he yt was clothed in camellys
skynnes was Johan baptyste and other patriarkis / and prophets with hy^ The
bishop was saint peter and other apostles and co^fessours with hy^ ye knight
was saint George with other martyrs comyners yt were good true lyuers and
seruauntys to god here upon earth and they came all to thank god for the great
worship that ye have here in earth / prayed besely to god for them in earth
that he should have mercy on them. This is the cause that this feast was first
found. And therefore let us come to church and worship god and al halowen yt
they may pray for us / yt we may at our last end be of ye nombre yt shall
worship god that ye book speaks of / and says thus (Vidi turbam magna^ qua^
nemo dinumerare poterat / For they be so many yt no man can nombre them And al
they pray for us evermore / that we may come to that bliss that they be in.
Amen.

In die Animarum.
GOod frendys such a day ye shall have all souls day / the day of the
souls in purgatory there abydyng the mercy of god / and have much need of
help. and right as holy church worshyppethe all saints to be helped by the
prayers of them right so holy church ordained this day to sing and read
and to do almesdedes / having full believe to relese them that been in
purgatory / of their peynes / wherefore god will yt all christen people to their
power this day releue the^ for ye leest prayer or almesdede this day done
greatly releueth the^. Ye shall understood yt there ben four things yt
greatly helpen souls yt ben in purgatory. and that been these. (Fidelium
amicoru^ oration / elemosynaru^ largio salutaris hostia et ieiunioru^
obseruatio) That is prayers of friends devoutly said and almesdede doing and
masses syngy^ge / and abstynence in fasting. Prayers helpen much a soul For
like as a Lord yt has a man in pryso^ or in any dystresse and at yt prayers
of hy^ yt he loves he releseth in party or all and that is showed by Ensample.

Narracio
We find wryte^ in lege^da aurea) how yt there was a man yt had his house
fast by a church yerde side / and yt his door opened to ye church And he
used by custom as often as he came or went to say every time. De profu^dis)
for all cryste^ souls. Then it happed so on a time that he was pursued with
enmyes. as he went homwardes / but when he come in to the church yard / he
kneled down and thought to say (De profundis) And these enmyes came after
Anon ye deed bodies rose euerychone with such in strume^tes as they wroughte
with by their lives and anon they drove away his enmyes. But wha^ they saw
that they cried god mercy and this man and ever after prayed / and did
almesdedes for them that were in pain. Thus I may well preue that devout
prayers helpen many a soul that been in purgatory. Also almesdedes helpen many
a soul (Sicut aqua extinguit igne^. ita elemosina extinguit peccatu^ etc).
Right as water quenches fire / so almesdede quenches ye fire that brenneth
them yt ben in purgatory / if they ben in good life and in parfyghte charity
that done it / and if almesdede be done for them that been in Joy and have no
need thereto it is put to the tresour of holy church And as gods will is so
it is dealed / and reueleth them that have most need thereto / and so god
assygneth it to them that have most need / And then the souls yt ben helped
therewith thank the soul that it was done for. Thus ye may well know ye
almesdedes helpen greatly souls yt it is done for and ben in purgatory. For
often holy men have herd fe^des cry and make great sorrow For with almesdedes
ye souls were taken from them

Narracio
We read in old time good people would on alhalowen day bake bread and deal
it for all christian souls. And yet there ben some that vsen it but all to few.
We find in legenda aurea of a knight that should goo to a battle and had a
cosyn that he loved passing well and said to him thus. If he were slain in ye
battle / he should selle his horse and deal the value to poor people in
alms / to pray for all christian souls. So it happed that he was slain /
and his cosyn loved well that horse and took him to his own use Then soon
after this knight appyered to his cosyn and said thus to him / these.viii.
days for my horse thou have made me to brenne in purgatory / and therefore god
will take vengeance on the. Forsooth quod he this day thy soul shall be in
hell with the fend (Ego purgatus vado in regnu^ dei) And I am purged and
shall goo to ye kingdom do heaven. And anon an horrible noise was herd in the
air of fendes / and caught this man and bare him away. The third that
helps is the mass / for when any soul appyereth to any man to have any
help / he desires masses and prays to have masses songen for him right as
mete and drink conforteth a man when he is feeble so the sacrament of the awter
conforteth the souls that ye masses ben done for. It is written in legenda
aurea / how a bishop suspended a pressed for he could say none other mass but
of Requiem. but he song every day devoutly after his conning. Then on a
day as the bishop went toward matens / it seemed to him that deed bodies
rose and came about him and said thou have said no mass for us. And more over
thou have taken our priest away from us Look that this be amended or else god
will in short time take vengeance on the for our sake Then was the bishop
gretely aferde / and anon he badde the priest sing mass of Requiem / as he
did tofore and so he did as often as he might

Narracio
Also we find that fysshers set her nets in heruest to fysshe / and they
took up a great pyce of yse. and that was the coldest yse that ever they felt
/ and it would not melte for the son. And so brought they that yse to the
bishop / for he had a great brennynge hete in his foot and it was the
coldest that ever he felt Than spoke there a voys to hy^ out of the yse and
said / I am a soul yt suffers my penance here in this yse / for I have no
friends yt will do masses for me. I shall be delivered of my penance / and
thou shalt be hole of thy sykenes if you will say mass for me. And he said
he would sing for him / and bad tell him his name / and ever while he was at
mass / he laid the yse under his foot and ever as he said mass the yse
melted away. And so within a while the yse was molten / and the soul from
pain / and the bishop was hole of his sykenes. Then the soul appeared to
him with much Joy and said. with thy masses singing I am out of pain in to
everlasting bliss. And he told the bishop that he should dye soon after /
and come to everlasting Joy. to the which god bring us. Amen.

De sancto martino episcopo.
GOod friends such a day ye shall have saint Martyns day. When Martyn was.xv.
year of aege he cut his mantel in two pyeces as he rode among other knights /
and was not yet crystned / and gave half his mantell to a poor man for gods
sake yt asked alms. Then^e the night after god had ye same clothe and said
to his angel. Martyn yt is not yet crystned has clothed me in this clothe.
And Martyn herd this word out of heaven / and anon he was crystned. And anon
he left this worlds occupacyon and gave hy^ all to holiness. So as he rode on
a time yt way the fend came like a man and met him and asked wheder he would.
And he said thither as god will Then said the fend. I will be thyn enmye in all
that I can. Then said Marten / god is my help and therefore I dread the not
Then Marten wexed so holy yt he rered deed bodies to life / and so for his great
holiness he was chose^ bishop of Turon. So on a time as men were in great
peril and like to be spylt / one of them knew the holiness of Marten and said.
Marten help and anon they were helped Also he rode on a time in his
vysytacyon a hounde ran at an hare under his horse feet / then had he pity
of this best and bad the hounde stand stylle / and let the best go and anon
the hounde stood as stylle as he had be put in to the earth. Also he saw an
adder swy^mynge in the water / and he said to thadder (In nomine din^ iubeo te
redire) In the name of god I command the to go again where thou come fro /
and anon she turned again then Marten syghed wonder sore and said. I am sorry yt
serpents heren me / and men will not heren me. An other time he came by the
gates of a Cite that hight Paris and there he kyssed an horrible mesell and
anon he was hole with the same kiss. Also he was so pacyente that many times
his own clerks mocked him and yet he suffered it pacyently and was not wroth.
So on a time as he rode by the way in his vysytacyon himself for that was his
manner / he had a rough mantell of black and came a carte by the way with
caryage / and the beestes in the carte saw the black wauerynge with the wind
they fled away / and all to brake their gere / then the carter with his
whyppe all to beat Marten and gaf him many sore strokes / and all he suffered
mekely and said nothing. Then would they have gone their way but they might
not stere fro that place till they knew that it was Marte^ and then they
cried him mercy and then anon he for gave hem / and the beestes passed fair
forth and all the harneys was save enough. Also on a time as Marten satte in
his celle / the fend come to him in likeness of a king with a shynynge crown
and said. I am come fro heaven to speak with the / believe on me / (Cristus ego
sum) For I am Christ. And marten looked on him and said My lord Ihesu christ
will not come in such array / and thou be Christ show me thy wounds / and
anon the fend went his way and left an horrible stenche behind him. Yet an
other time he came again to Marten and repreued him that he took people to him
that had sinned. and were shryuen and turned again to the sin that they had
done tofore and said / though thou take them to thy grace / god will not.
Then said Marten wretch and thou wylt leave thy persute of christian people and
ask mercy with a meke heart. I trust to god he is so merciful that he will
give ye mercy. And wha^ Marten should pass out of this world and lay in his
deed bed / the fe^de came and satte by him dysputynge with him if he might
have caught him in any word of mysbyleue in his end. Marten said to him / go
hens thou cruel best / for thou shall no thing find amysse with me but god
shall receive me Then he made to lay him in ashes and heir / And then he
said the.vii. psalms and the letanye and gaf up the ghoost / and (...) buried
in his own church with much honor. Then.liiii. winter after there came a
bishop and translated him. And when he had made all thing ready / he laid
hand on Martens body to have borne it forth / but he might not. Then thought
the bishop / it is not Martens will to be remeued and left of. Then came a
fair old man and badde him go to ayene and he would help him / and then
they bare the body in to the tomb without lettyng. And so when the service was
done / this old man vanysshed a way And there by they knew well that it was
Saint Marten. And then god showed many fair miracles for him.

Narracio
It happed on a time that there were two beggars / that one was lame and might
not go / and that other was blind and might not see / and so to make the
people to have the more compassyon of them. the blind bare the lame / and the
lame taught the blind where he should goo / and thus they gate much good and
had an easy life But they were ever aferde to mete with the shrene of saint
Marten / leest he would have heled them of their syknesse. And so on a time at
a streets end at a tornynge suddenly at a corner they met with the shryne of
saint Marten / and anon they were both hole. And the blind might see / and ye
lame might goo. And then they cried to saint Marten and said Marten we thank
the for the good that we have had for thy sake here tofore. But we thank the
not for our hele / for now we must go labor and traueyll / and so get our
living / for the people will give us no more alms / and here tofore we
lived full easily with little travel and fared well. Alas alas that we came
here this day / for now our myrthe and welfare is gone. Thus this holy man
did many miracles / wherefore ye may see that he may do much with god.
Therefore let us pray to him that he may pray to god for us. Amen.

De sancta Katherina
GOod friends such a day ye shall have saint Katherynes day the holy vyrgyn
and martyr she was a ky^ges daughter and came of great birth. But she set all
her mind to god and set naught by pride / vaynglory / and rychesses of this
world / for it is but vanyte / but she set her all only in Ihesu. So when she
had be at scole and learned a while / anon she would dyspute with any clerk yt
would come / for she was enspyred with the holy ghost. But when she herd on a
time that Maxencyus was come to the town of Alexandry with so much people and
so ryally / that the cite dommed of them. For he came to make a solemn
sacryfyce to his gods that were of gold and silver in lykenes of bulls and
calves / and other bestes. Then saint Katheryn saw that and blyssed her and
went in to the temple and rebuked the emperor boldly / and said that he did
foul amysse for to do that worship to fendes / and leave the worship of god in
heaven that made all thing of naught / and sent man life / wit and hele / and
preued by great reason how Christ was both god and man and how he bought all
mankind with his passion and death on the cross / and taught how yt every man
should honor god and leave all false mawmettes. Then was the emperor
wroth and badde take her to ward till he might be at la^ser. So in the mean
season he sent after the gretest masters / and the wysest clerks that might
be in any country far about him. And when they were comen he bad them go and
dyspute with Katheryne and overcome her / and they should have right well for
their labor. Then were they wroth to come so far to dyspute with a woman
/ and said ye leest scoler in the scole had be enough to overcome her. But as
Katheryn had dysputed with them with the help of the holy ghost she converted
them euerychone to the faith of our lord Ihesu christ / in so much that they
were ready to suffer death for Crystes sake. Then anon Maxencius commanded
to make a great fire and brenne them therein / but by the help of the holy
ghost the fire brenned not their bodies ne the leest clothe of them / and yet
lay fair deed as they had been a sleep. Then the emperor made do Katheryn to
be naked / and to beat her with sharp scourges / that she was all blody / and
full of wounds / and then he put her in to apryson.vii. days without any mete
or drink. Then had ye queen great lust to speak with Katheryn / and took a
knight with her yt hight Purphyryus and went to Katheryn. And then they saw an
angel set a shynynge crown of gold on the queen's heed / and an other on
Purphyryus heed / and bad the^ be steadfast / for within three days they should
come to heaven by suffrynge of martyrdom. Then sent the emperor for
Katheryn / and wend to have found her nygh deed / but all yt ^^me god sent
her meet from heaven. And when the empe^^re saw her on live / he was wood for
wroth / and made her to be set between two wheles / and turned one upward and
an other downewarde full of hokes and swerdes points (...) all to raze
Katheryn. Then came an angel as it had be a wind and all to brake them /
and slew.iiii. M. of the tyrau^^^s. Then saw the queen that miracle and
came before the king her husband and rebuked him yt he saw the myt of god so
openly / and would not believe thereon. Then bad ye king led forth the queen
and cut of her pappes from ye body with hooks and then to smite of her heed
/ and purphyryus buried her / and.lxxx. of her knights yt were martred with
her / and Purphyryus beheded also. Then spoke themperoure to Katheryn and
said he would wed her if she would forsake Christ and believe in his gods. And
she said she set naught by him nor by his gods. And when he saw that he
made to smite of her heed / then anon instead of blood came out fair milk
/ and then came an angel and bare the soul in to heaven. And aungelles came
and bare ye body in to the air / and so to the mount of Synaye / and there
buried it with worship. And there god werketh many fair miracles to this day.
At the foot of the mount there is an abbay of monks that lives in great
abstynence / and this abbay is hye and strong walled / and barred about with
iron for wild beestes / and in that abbey lies saint Katheryn in a fair
tomb of alabaster / for her bones were fette th^der for the more morshyp / and
above that church is a busshe there god stood in when he spoke too Moses /
and wrote the law in two tables of stone / and the busshe is as grene and
fair as it was the same day. Also in that abbey is a great marvel / and that
is this. Every monk has a lamp with oil brennynge / And when he shall deye
they know by his lamp / for as he draws to death so derketh his lamp. And
when the abbot deyeth his bredren shall sy^ge a mass of the holy ghost / and
burye him solempnely / and when mass is done they shall find a bylle written
on an awter who shall be abbot and so they chese their abbot. Also on saint
Katheryns night all the birds of the country comes thither / and each of them
brings a branch of olyue in their bylles too the place / and as pilgrims
says the monks make oil of the branches to their lamps for all the year
after.

Narracio.
We read of a man that served saint Katheryn and fasted her even breed and
water / and on a time he came in company of recheles people / and by comfort
of them he left his fast and did ete with them / and so in the night after he
saw a great company of maidens coming by him / and among them there was one
passing all other / and each of them had a crown / but one had a passing
fair crown and that was saint Katheryn / so when she came by this man she hyd
her face from him and would not look on him. And then he asked one of them
what they were. And she said / we ben vyrgyns / and the pryncypall yt thou
see is saint Katheryne yt hyd her face fro the because thou have left thy
devotion fro her even of fasting. Then this man repented him soon yt he had
done this deed / and turned again to his devotion and fasted / and after was
an holy man. And therefore let us worship this holy vyrgin yt she may pray for
us.

In dedicatione ecclesie.
GOod friends such a day ye shall have your dedycaco^n day yt is your
church holyday / ye shall come to the church and here your dyuyne service in
ye worship of god / and for three causes the which the church is hallowed for /
yt is for ye church clensynge / for devout praynge / and for ye deed bodies
buryenge. The first is for the church clensynge / ye church is ordained for all ye people yt come thither should be in perfyte charity / and there mete with
god / for god is ever there present. And when all ye people come so together at
this ensygnement it pleases god much to here them / and their good words in
yt place. But when the fend sees any man besy thereto he is full sorry and
seeks all the ways yt he can to let him fro the church / for they should
not come to ye presence of god. Then when holy faders knew the malice of ye
fend / they ordained the church to be hallowed / and so by good prayers ye
fend is driven out / but if any cursed liver bring him in again yt is out of
charity or in deedly sin is with the fend and the fend with hy^. But how the
fend is driven away by halowy^ge I will tell you by ensample yt is written in
legenda aurea Saint Gregory says in a book yt is called (dyalogus). On a time
as a church was in halowy^ge a swyne ran^e among ye folk to and fro / and so
ran out of ye chirch door / and yt was a fend but yet ye next night he came
again / and made such a noise as though ye church fell down / and then came
never again. but there be many folk yt say their prayers and they were as
good at home as at church / but they err against ye faith of ye church. For
if there be any man or woman that has a matter to speak with his good friend.
and would feyne have his entente he will goo home to his house goodly and lowely
in hope to speed the better. Right so if any man would pray to god devoutly /
he should come to church there is God for he yt is in clean life and prayed to
god he speaks with him for many of you wot not how ye should pray The setting
of the church gyuethe you knowleche. for ye church is set in ye eeste and so
when ye pray set your hertes in theest prayeng hertly for mercy with perfyte
charity. for though ye be put out of your heritage by malice of the fend. yt
is enmye to your souls for we should not have the Joy of paradyse that he
was in. and lost it by his pride. Also we lost it by our faders trespass ada^
Let us thy^ke yt crist deyed in the eeste. therefore let us pray besely in to
the eest / yt we may be of ye nombre that he deyed for Also let us think that
he shall come out of the eest to ye dome wherefore let us pray hertely to him
and besely / that we may have grace of contryco^n in our hertes of our
misdedes with shryft and satysfaccyon / yt we may sto^de that day on the right
hand of our lord Ihesu christ and so be of the nombre that shall be saved and
come to everlasting bliss and Joy and that we may escape ye horrible rebuke
that shall be given to all them that shall be dampened and goo to everlasting
pain / that will not be sorry and repent them / and ask mercy in this world.
And thus for devout prayers / holy church was ordained to be hallowed / for
god says thus (Domus mea domus oracionis vocabitur) My house is called an
house of prayers. But it is now made an house of rownyng / why sperynge cryenge
/ claterynge / scornynge / tales / and simple speaking / mouyng of vanyte / and
many simple words and lewd. We read how Saint Gregory was at mass on a
time. and Saint Austyne was his deken and bad the people turn to the popes
blessyng then he saw two wymmen rowne together in the popes chapel. and the
fe^de sat in her necks wryty^g a great roll / and it lacked pa^chement / and
he drew it out with his tethe and so it fell out of his claws and saint
Austyn saw it and went and took it up. Then the pope was wroth and asked hy^
why he laughed him to scorn and he showed him what the fend had wreten of the
wymmen. And theune he come to the wymmen and asked them. what they had said
all this mass time / and they said our pater noster) then the pope bad read
the roll to them yt the fend had wreten. And saint Gregory red it. and
there was never a good word therein. Then they kneled down. and asked mercy.
and besought ye pope to pray for them and so he did. and brought them out
of the fendes books. Also for long resting to holy church for when a man is
deed / he is brought to the church to his rest Some time the people wexen
beryed at home as pour people and the rich were biered in the hylle tops
And some at the foot of the hylle in tombs made of ^o^kes. But the sauoure
was so great and grievous Holy faders ordened church yardes to berye the
people in / for two causes One is to be prayed for as holy church uses. and a
another is for the body shall lie there without traueyll For the fend has no
manner of power to any thing wythyn christian beryellis. But if so be that the
body be not worthy to be beryed in such holy ground. For Johan bellet tells
that there should none other body be beryed in the church / But if it be the
patron that defend it fro bodily enmyes. or the person Vycary priest / or
clerk that defend the church fro ghostly enmyes with their prayers / For
some have be beryed there and cast out again on the morrow. and a^le the clothes
left still in the grave. An angel come on a time to a warden of a church /
and bad him go to the bishop and bid him cast out the body that he had beryed
there. Or else he shall be deed withy^.xxx. days and so he was for he would
not do as he was bode. Also we read in gestes of rome. that an angel told an
holy bishop that hight encres / how that charles the king of france was
dampened / he took away holy church right that good people had give to fore /
and bad him go and open his tomb and to see it then the bishop took with
him other people and opened the tomb. and there come out a great dragon and
fley forth / and left the tomb brennynge within. as it had be a ouyn mouth.
and thus to berye in holy place is but little avail to hem that be dampened
Also there be many that walk on nyghtis when they be beryed in holy place but
yt is not long of the fend / but of grace of God to get hem help / and some
begylty and have no rest. Also it happed beside thabbey of lusohyl / that
iiii. men stale an ox of ye abbotis of the same place to their layrder. and
thabbot did a sentence and cursed therefore within the abbey. So.iii. of them
were shryuen and asked mercy and were assoyled but the.iiii. deyed and was not
assoyled / and had not forgyuenesse. so when he was deed the spyryte went by
night and fered all the people about that after son going down durst no man
walk. Then as the parisshe priest went on a night with goddis body to
housell a seek man this spyryte went with him and told him what he was and why
he went. and prayed the priest to go to his wife and they should go both to the
abbot and make him amnedes for his trespass and pray hy^ for ye love of god of
forgyuenesse and so to asoyle him / for he might have no rest. And anon the
abbot assoyled him and he went to rest and Joy for evermore The which Joy
and bliss bring us all to / he that deyed for us on the rode tree. Amen.

A short exhortacyon often to be showed to the people for in this specially
restethe the well of man and woman Hamus charitatis
Do to a another as thou would be done unto this commandment have we of our
lord Jesus crist in his gospel. of Matthew.viii. capitulo) where he says. Omnia
quecunque vultis vt faciant vobis homines. ita et vos facite illis. Hec est lex
et prophet.) And it includes all the laws and prophets of god / the which
observed with our feyth is suffysaunt for mannys salvation. This is the first
age of mankind men only moved by their reason and law of nature. with out any
other techy^g observed effectuelly for their law. After ye tra^sgressyo^ of
which our lord gaaf to moses.cc.xlviii. co^man^dementes affermatyf:
according in no^bre ( Scdm Iosephu^ To the bones of ma^nis body beside ye
precepts negatyffe the which were many moo in no^bre as holy scripture
remembers / and after by process he reduces all thise to ten
co^maundementis after the nombre of mannys fyngrys ye like as a man with.x.
fyngrys werketh for ye body in likewise he should with these ten
commau^dementys be besy to get his bliss eternal where now finally in thin
last age / he shortly has comprysed them al in to one / that is to say In
love and charity* That like as in all the body is but one head / of the which
proceeds all the governance of man / as his reason / understanding / and
other. So all the rule of virtuous life grows and proceeds only of love and
charity / which is God himself. Then to execute and fulfylle this love /
which our lord desires / thou must follow his a foresaid doctrine and
Instruccyon (Do to another as you would be done unto) And first begyne with thy
fader of heaven / thy lord god and savior / and learn to love him with all thy
heart. Vnde Mathei.xxii. Diliges dominu^ deu^ tuu^ ex toto cord tuo / and
think if thou have servants / for whom louyngly thou prouydest al thing to
them necessary / thou would that they should not counceylle ne meddle with
thyn enmyes or yt they should mystrust the / or yt they follow their own
pleasures and will and leave thine. Than do thou not so unto thy lord god.
Exodi. xx. ca. No^habebis deos altenos). But only believe in him / and not in
enchauntementes / wytchecraft and such other / and think in all thy sykenes /
trybulacyon or disease that all such is for the best. Nor do not meddle with
sin / or sinners / which all ben gods enemies. And ever show thy self
in word and deed that thou love him above fader and mother cyldren / gold
and other. For all these can not deliver ye fro the pains of hell but god
alone. As for the second. Non assumes nomen dn^i dei tui in vanu^). Take not
his name in vain. Remember that you would not that thy servants should
speak evil of the or call the forto bear false wyttenes in Judgment or beside.
So then in likewise speak thou none evil of thy lord god and maker but love
him. Ex tota ai^a tua) with all thy soul / not taking his name in vain as at
dyce / hasarde or other forboden plays: blasphemy^ge him or his saints nor
call him ne name him in judgment or beside to false witness / for swerynge
the for any cause or lucre. That thereby might grow unto the. For there is
poor winning where the soul peryssheth. And yt one is made worse in so
dyhonourynge god than is a Jew or a Sarasyn. As for ye third remember that
thou would thy servant should serve the / and keep thy commau^deme^tes. Than
do thou so to thy lord god. And serve him with all thy mind. Et ex tota me^te
tua. Mathei. xx. ca. quo supra. And specially on the holy day. Memento vt die^
sabbati sanctifices. Exodi quo supra. And pray than hertely unto him / unto
our lady / and unto all saints thanking him for his benefytes and use ever
for to say (Deo gracias). And dyscusse than thy conscience / and make thy
soul clean by confession. And among receive thy savior doing deeds of
mercy. And note this in thy mind / yt more holiness and grace shall grow
unto the if thou be well dysposed by ones comunynge in taking the sacrament of
the awter than if you sholdest fast a weke breed and water. Hecsanctus
vincentius. And daily were the heir. Teache than thy servants / and also thy
children their believe and the law of god. And use this that as soon as they
begin for to speak that they render customably a word or two of their (pater
noster. Aue maria. and Credo in deu^) daily or thou give them breed. And so as
they grow in aege / yt they grow also in virtue and good ocupacyon and never
idle / for many be lost for their evil and wanton bringing up / and specially
in cytees whereby great peril grows of either party. Then with this thou
must love thy neighbor as thy self. Vnde. Diliges proximu^ tuu^ sicut teip
su^: vt dicit^ Mathei. xxii. ca. ever keeping ye said doctrine / Do to an
other as you would be done to. If you have any children you will yt they
worship yt as it is accordy^ge to gods law / and nature. Honora patre^ tuu^
et matrem tuum vt sis longeuus super terra^). Exodi xx.) Then worship thy
fader / and mother / and prelates / prince / benefactours / and also aeged
people. And ever follow their counceyle and pray for them when they ben deed.
Also think that you would not that any man with thy wife or daughter should
dyshonestly behave them / than behave the according to the same. Non
mechaberis. Also thou would not that any man should sle the or any of thyn.
Non occides: et sic de ceteris december mandatis: vt Exodi. xx. patet) or do to
the gyl wrong. Injury or rob the. Or sclaunder the with such other Then^e do
thou not these to another / nor suffer none of thine to do the same and so
shalt thou find all the ten commandments applyable and agree with thy
reason / and therewith you shalt find how heavenly is the said doctrine of our
lord. Do to another as thou would be done unto. So that in short time thou
shalt have a synguler delight in execucyon of them. In so much that for all
this world thou would not break them with thy will / nor the said love of god
and man The which may cause thy great rest here / and glory endless in heaven.
Then it is well done that of what degree / or order or occupacyon thou be /
say daily at the leest at thy rysy^ge. Pater noster. Aue maria. and credo / or
else five of either in remembrance of the passion of our lord / and the
great compassyon of our lady. Ex reuelationibus sancte birgite. And cross the
in the forhede. Hec ieronimus. And follow thou Christ. Augustinus. As much as
thou may / of whom thou take thy name called a christian man. And beware that
thou bear not that name voydely. And therewith norysshe the worm of conscience
that never shall deye. Vermis eorum non morietur: et ignis eorum non
extingutur. Ysaye.lxvi. ca. But ever gnawe the perpetually if a case be thou be
neclygent in the premysses for lack of execucion / and se ever in thy mind or
thou begin any thing if it will agree to the said Instruccyon or that thou
would be done so unto / as you entendest to do to another. And the case so
requires or nay / and thereafter guide the clear in charity and clear
conscience as a true dyscyple / and the sone of Christ that thou may say as he
did. Sicut mandatum dedit mihi pater sic facio. Iohannis.xiiii. As the fader
has given me in commandment so I do. The which he grant that you may /
and the rather by the help of his blyssed mother Mary / and his holy spousesse
saint Byrgytte / and all the saints of heaven. Amen.

Quattuor sermones.
THe master of se^te^ce in ye second book. and ye first dystyncion says that
ye sovereign cause why god made all creatures in heaven / earth / or water was
his own goodness by the which he would yt some of them should have part and
be comoners of euerlasty^ge bliss but for as much as no creature might come
to yt bliss without knowledge of him. therefore he made reasonable creatures as
aungelles and mankind of wit and wisdom / whereby they should know him /
and so through that knowledge come to the bliss that they were made to. This
manner of knowledge had our forne fader Adam and Eve in the state of their
Innocence without any travail / the which we should have had also if they had
not sinned / but that knowelege the which we have now is of herynge learning
and techynge of other yt which can the law and the faith of our mother holy
church. The which we that have the cure of souls be bound for to teache / or
do for to teache our parysshens / on pain of eternal dampnacyon of our
souls. And for as much as my will is not for to offend god neither to lose
mine own soul ne yours I purpose me by his leave homely thus for to show it
and read it too you in the book. For to your lerny^ge it is as good thus as
without And thus did (Esdras Moses. Baruk) in the old law. and so did
Christ also in the new law. And right as I am thus bound to tell and to
teache it you / so be ye bound to learn it and to conne it. And so to teache it
to other folks the which be^ under you to your power / and how ye shall come
to this knowelege of god. These thyngys following shall show you. This is the
first petycyo^ of the Pater noster. The first is the Pater nostet / the
which our lord made and taught his discyples The which conteyneth. seven
short petycyons. The first is / fader our that art in heuens halowede be
thy name) By this ye be behold to love each other as sister and brother. And
also to yield him worship and dread. for the great worthynes / riches and
fayrnes / that he has here given to you and lent you for more worthynes may
not be then to be called the sone of god / ne gretter riches then to be
heir of ye bliss of heaven / ne more fayrnes / tha^ to belyke such a fader /
For we be all brethren and systers of one fader and mother / god and holy
church. In token that none of us should scorn other / as ye proud does the
pour. He is also in heaven / not wythstondynge that he is in every place / but
yet most properly he is in heaven / therefore halowe we so in his name in us
here yt we defoyle not his holiness be sin / but by the yeft of wisdom / we
may so here be cle^syd fro all fylth of sin / and so fulfilled of his love
that all other loves contrary to his will be bitter to us. The second is / thy
kingdom come to us) that is to say yt he and his holiness so regne in us and
govern al our lyffe here that we may after reyne with him in bliss that
ever shall last and by very charity thou shall destroy the foul sin of
envy. The third is thy will be done in earth as is in heaven and tho that
grutche in sickness / loss of goods or other dyseases against god / do against
this petycon / and grea grudge in sykenes / loss of goods / or their dyseases
against god do against this pytycyon / and gretely dysplease god therefore pray
we that all au^gelles and all holy souls pleases god in heaven / so must we
here in earth / no thing asking against his will / and thus by love thou
shalt dystroye the foul sy^ne of wrath. The fourth is our every days breed
give us to day / that is to say our full sustenaunce for body and soul Thus
prayed the wise man yt said / lord neither richesse ne pouerte give me / but
that is necessary to my lyuelode / by this is dystroyed couetyse. And the gift
of compassyon and pity brought in. The fyfte is / and forgive us our trespaces
/ as we forgive them that trespace against us. This is against them that bears
rancoure and malice against their neighbor or art to gredy of thy dettes to
the poor / and will not forgive hy^ a little debt or trespace there as god
forgyueth the many trespaces / for the which ne were his great mercy thou
sholdest be dampened. To this therefore is knytte the spyryte of conning / that
shows yt what thou art / what peril you stand in / and our lord suffered
for ye The.vi. is / and led us not in to temptaco^n. It is not to pray here
that no temptacyon assail us / in that the devil has license to tempte man as
he did christ and his appostles and us all day does so that his power may not
be put away without the help and mercy of god. Therefore holy fader by the
help and grace of the spyryte of pity keep our hertes in temptacyon / that we
consent not ne be overcome with sin. The seventh is / but deliver us from all
evil sin. Amen. And this is the last petycyon / to the which is given ye
spyryte of dread that makes a man to withdraw from all evil of sin / for
the beginning to wisdom is for to dread all mighty god and his ryghtwysnes.
The seven pytycyons thus with a clean and pure heart asked / renneth and
puts away the seven deedly sins / and endue thy soul with many holy
virtues. Aue maria. Ferd^rmore as for the salutacyon of our lady. pope Urban
and pope Johan to all being in clean life that in the end of the Aue maria)
say these words Ihesus ame^) as often as they say it / they have granted of
pardon.lxxxiiii. days / and as often as thou say our ladies psalter / so often
thou have of pardon.xxxiiii. year. and.xxx. wekes. These ben the.xii. artycles
of the faith. Credo in deu^ patrem oi^potente^ creatore^ celi et terre. The
second thing that thou sholdest know god by / ben thartycles of the faith /
by the which grace and mercy ben purchaced of god and each virtuous deed
strengthed / what this faith is these artycles following shall show you. The
first is. I believe in god fader almighty maker of heaven and of earth. To believe
to god is one / and too believe in god is an other / the devil believes to god
/ that is to say / yt he and his words ben true. Yet many one fails here in
/ for and they believe that the words of god were true / that is to say / that
for their good deeds they should have everlasting life / and for their evil
deeds the pains of hell / they would either for dread or for love amend
them. To believe in god says saint Austyn is to cleue to god by love
fulfyllynge his will / this is very believe. Thus and thou sin against god is
for lack of believe / yet in that he is of power to punysshe the / if thou
will not leave it. The second is. Et in thesu^ christum filiu^ eius vnicum
dominu^ nostrum. I believe in Ihesu christ his only sone our lord. Understand
that Ihesu Christ the sone is in heaven with the fader without beginning / and the
fader does nothing without ye sone / ne the sone without the fader / and thus
both they ben almighty The third is. Qui conceptus est de spiritusancto:
natus ex maria virgin). I believe that he was conceived of the holy ghoost /
and borne of the vyrgyn Mary. Here Christ the second person of the holy
trynyte did take flesh and blood of our lady / by the holy ghoost without
medlynge of man / she being a maid after as she was to fore / for as she
conceived him without sin / so without sin and bodily pain she chylded
him very god and man The fourth is. Passus sub poncio pylato crucifixus mor
tuus et sepultus. I believe that he suffered pain under ponce Pylate / done on
the cross deed and buried. Here Christ the sone of god suffered mekely and
trespaced never. For we should mekeli suffer that much have trespaced. He was
also crucyfyed for we should also chastyse our flesh by penance / in
withstanding sin. He was buried in token that we should hyde our good deeds
fro praysynge and vaynglory of the world / and to have mind that earth is our
heritage by kind of our bodily flesh. The.v. is. Descendit ad infernatercia
die resurrexit a mortuis. I believe that he went down to hell / and the third
day arose from death to life. Christ thus bodily deed lay in the sepulcre
without ye soul to the third day that he arose / the godhede departed not fro
the body / he went down in to hell / and delivered the holy souls that were
there through virtue of the godhede and the third day arose from death to
life. In token yt the light of his death has dystroyed our double death And
that we shall arise from goostly death by three manner of medicines / contrycyon /
confession / and satysfaccyon. The vi. Ascendit ad celos sedet as dexteram dei
patris omnipote^tis). I believe yt he styed up in to heaven and set him there on
his faders right hand. Thus Christ apperynge to his dyscyples after his
resureccion did ete with them. In token that he was very man than as he was
before his passion and lo to stye in to heaven / and hyghed mankind above
au^gelles / opening heaven gate to show mankind the way to come thither and
for to pray for all humayne lygnage. The seventh is. Inde venturus est
iudicare viuos et mortuos.) I believe that he is to come to deem the quick and
the deed. This christ Ihesu very god and man / shall come to ye dome and deem all
mankind quyck and deed / good and evil after their deeds there shall come some
to ye dome and not be demed / as hethen men for they syn^e without law and
therefore without law they must perysshe. Some also shall be demed and
dampened / as falls christian men yt byleuen in Jesus christ without love and good
werkis there shall subgettis accuse their evil curates / yt would not repreue
them of their sins / ne teache them the co^mau^deme^tis of god / Also
chylderen vnchastysed shall there repreue there faders and moders that would not
chastyse them of their wantonness There shall the pour accuse the rich /
that would not help them in their myschyef. Amend all this therefore whiles
that thou art here And have mind how suddenly his vengaunce falls. and as
how he fyndeth yt he shall deem the. The.viii. is (Credo in spiritu^ sanctum.)
I believe in ye holy ghost the third person of the trynyte) The holy ghost /
is also very god and without beginning and ending. and even in wit might
and goodness with the fader and sone. And all three persons ben but one god
almighty. The.ix. is (Sanctum ecclesiam catholicam sanctorum commumonem.) I
believe in holy church / and comonynge of saints. Holy church through out the
world is holy / (and one to all christian men that in the sacraments of holy
church (...) comoneth to gyder. Therefore it is forboden that (...) church nor
church yerde there be no clamoure nor strife / daunsynge drinking / nor any
other dyshoneste marches / nor occasyon of sin should not be given there /
where as foryeuenesse should be asked holy church is parted in three. One is in
this world of them that should be saved by the mercy of god and this is ever
fighting against these three enmyens (the world the flessh and ye devil. And a
another is in purgatory of the souls yt abide there / the great mercy of
almighty god. The third is christ of heaven head of all other with his saints
/ the which is free from al manner dyscencyons. These three shall be one after
the day of dome going with Ihesu their head in to the bliss that never shall
have end. Comonynge of saints when each of these three parties helpen other /
they in heaven helpen the other two with prayer / and they in earth helpen them
in purgatory with their prayer and almesdede and these two helpen in heaven /
when their Joy and bliss is encreaced. and thus each comoneth with other.
The.x. is (Remyssionem peccatorum) I believe remyssyon of sins they that
amend their life here. and do very penance / willing to leave their sins
And end in charity shall have foryeuenesse of all their sins. For christ by
his death and passion of his fader gate us forgyuenesse. and he himself also by
his godhede forgyueth all orygynal and actual sy^ne in their baptym. The.xi.
is. (Carnis resurrectionem) I believe rysy^ge of body. All mankind at the day
of dome shall rise from death to life in body and soul to gyder / And after that
never to be departed / and then they that have ended in dedely sin shall
goo in body and soul to the everlasting pain of hell without mercy. And
they that have well lived and ended in charity and out of dedely sin shall
wend in body and soul to gyder to bliss for evermore. Of this bliss speaks
saint Matthew in the last article. The.xii. is (Et vita^ eternal) Ame^ I believe
in everlasting life These ben the artycles of the faith / the which but every
man truly and sadly believe may not be saved for without faith it is not
possible to please god. These ben the.x. commau^dementis of god / the third
thing that thou sholdest know god by his.x. commaundementis which he
himself wrote in two tables of stoon. And took them to Moses to show his
people / promising to them that would keep them his blyssynge. wel^he and
welfare. And to them that would not his curse great sorrow and myscheue. A man
asked of Christ / what he might do to have everlasting life. And he answered
and said / if thou will enter in everlasting life. keep the commaundementis.
This preue the if thou keep his commaundementis / thou fulfylleste all the law
of god and shall have everlasting life. The first he commands that thou have
no god but him Ne that you worship serve. ne give thy trust to none other
creature / image / ne thing graven but only to him. In this is forboden
mawmetry / false enchauntementis whitchecrafte / false charms and dremes. and
mysbyleues that any man or woman hope the help in. without almighty god. In
this ye sin dedely / that for sickness or loss of good put your faith
and believe that ye should have in your lord god. by the deuylles mynystres
falls witches the which bring many a soul to the devil. For they believe more
the wytches word then in the words of scripture that the priest teched
them. All such have goddys curse at lest four times a year in the great
sentence / and every day in our prime as for images. Also ye shall
understand that as clerkys say in their books how they should live and do /
so should lewd men learn by images whom they should worship and follow / in
living to do goddis worship to ymagis every man is forboden. Therefore when
thou come to the church first behold goddis body / wnder form of bread
on the altar / And thank him that wouchesauf every day to come fro the holy
heaven above for health of thy soul / look thou on the cross and thereby have
mind in the passion. that he suffered for the then thymages of the holy
sayntis not byleuynge on them. but that by the syghte of them / thou may
have mind of them that been in heaven. and so to follow their life as much as
thou may. If thou thus worship love and serve god then shall all worship
love and serve the and so thou shalt fulfill the first and the most
commandment. The second is / that thou take not in vain the holy name of
god. Thou takeste the name of god in vayn when thou torneste ayene to sin
after thy baptym. thou take it in vayn also when thou swerest and forswerest
the / and rekest not how. Before all thing says saint James / swear ye not /
leest ye fall under that dome of god. It is only reserved to god / says saint
Iehan. that thou swear by him and his troth and his right wysnesse. Therefore
or thou swear see that thou be compellyd by dome / and that it be right Not
for envy / love / nor dread / but only for ryghtwysnes in declarynge of
troughte / and if any of these fail it is perjury. Be ware therefore ye that
use questis or consystory and hereth what peril ye stand in that wyttyngly be
forsworn on the book. The kook betokens all holy scripture and the suffrayes
of the church the which there thou forsakeste when thou forswerest the thy
hondes all the goods werkys that ever thou dyddest. The which thou forsakest
/ when thou wythdraweste it / Thou forsakest also god almyghte. our lady
saint Marye all ye saints of heaven. And the merytes of the holy sacrament /
And holy betakeste thy self to the devil of hell: but thou amend ye or
thou ghost hens / if they then should be punysshed thus for swerynge / How
shall they be that blaspheme and dysmembre him / swerynge by his heart nails
wounds and such other some / when they ben repreued hereof said It is good to
have god in mind and with such lewdness they kepen still their great oaths /
and thy servant did against thy bidding saying that he did it to have yt in
mind / would thou not be wroth with him / much more must god than with the /
when thou do against ye bidding / and some say. I may well swear / for I
swear sothe / this is a false excusaco^n / for and thou sholdest swear always
when thou say sothe / than would not christ have forboden swerynge. But for in
much swerynge / is often for swerynge / therefore he says. He that much swereth
/ shall be replete with wyckednes and sorrow / ne vengeance shall not depart
fro his house / some says also that no man will believe them but they swear /
this is a subtyl excusacyon. For thereby a false man may swear as well as a true
man / and so should he be as well believed as a true man. For the falser he is
the more he swereth / and forswereth / and so begyleth. Therefore if thou will
be believed without any swerynge / be true of thy word / and let it be / ye /
ye / and nay / nay. In token that you say with thy mouth / thou sholdest say
it with thy heart. And not say one thing and think an other. The third is /
Have in mind to halowe thy holy days / that is to say sondayes and other that
be boden. Almighty god in.vi. days made heaven / earth / and see / and all that
in them is. And the.vii day rested / therefore he blyssed it / and made it holy
/ but instead thereof we christian men of great devotion halow ye sunday the
which was the first day of ye world wherein god made light / and that day
god gave to Moses the law / ye day he rose from death to life / that day
the holy ghost gave wisdom to the appostles of Christ to preche and declare
the troth of Crystes law. And that day also as clerks say shall also be the
day of dome. Therefore shall every man and woman in that day besy him for to
here gods service / learn his laws / and fle sin and flesshely lusts /
tauernes and such chaffere as lets them for to rest in our lord / yet
many folk there be yt which such days be more besy in worldly werkis and
sins / than all the weke after and ever will rest for no techynge / ne love
ne dread of god these be most like to them in hell that never rest / but ever
labor in pain / they break also holy day yt spend their time in ydelnes as
in vain plays / ydell speech and bacbytyng of their even christian / why says
our lord have mind to halow thy holy day but for you sholdest put out of thy
heart all worldly thoughts and occupye it with heavenly desires. as to think
what god has done for the how he made yt of naught / and like to him in soul
/ how he rau^sonned ye out of the pyt of hell with his own precious heart
blood how also of his own goodness he keeps ye night and day in thy right
wits. and fro all bodily myscheues that many one all day fallyth in And
against all this ye gyuest him a drink of galle of bitter sin and brekest his
commau^dementis both in word thought and deed thus to have mind in all
these. He asks rest in body and soul of the holy day and this rest
sygnyfyeth the rest in bliss that we shall have after this if we rest in him On
the holy day here and flee sy^ne. The.iiii. is worship thy fader and mother The
manner of faders ben there yt thou must worship The first is ye fader of heaven
that made the of naught and nonrryssheth thy body with erdly fode comfort
thy soul with heavenly desires defends it fro the devil and makes it thereof
the bliss of heaven thus may no man do. but he our fader our lord and our
god. The second fader is he that gate the and thy mother that bare yt to whom
thou shalt be subget and seruysable. for they be the two causes of thy by enge
in this life. then thou shall also worship and give of thy goodys freely if
they have need and thou have more than they comfort counseyll and teache them
in meke manner after thy conning / how they shall please god but beware that
thou obey them not in sin. And if they be deed / live well and pray for
their salvation. This lesson should every fader and mother bodily and gostely
teache their chyldern. The.iii. fader is man and woman of age / namely tho that
be virtuous / and most specially thy gostely fader. the which when you haste
respaced / makes god and the at one / For as thy soul passes thy body so
thy ghoostely fader passes ye flesshely. To thy mother holy church also thou
must be buxum. and with all thy power may^teyne it / for it is mother of all
tho that ever were or shall be saved / thus worship and obey thou sholdeste thy
Fader and mother as says saint Austyne / for the more yt thou thus obeyeste
them / the more says he / will almighty God obey prayer / The fyft is / thou
shall not sle / that is to say / bodily ne ghostely this sin cries vengau^ce
before god / as witnesses the old law and the new / therefore slay no man. For
he that sleeth shall be slain / other bodily or goostely or both. yet they yt
trespass openly must be sleyne by them that bear the temporell sword for
brekynge of his commaundamente. There is ghostely man slaughter also in many
wise One is when hate thine even christian or consenteste to wicked thoughts
of thine own heart. Another when thou lie / bacbytest. or flatereste in
sin and will not repreue him of his de fautes. also thyself wha^ thou
wyttyngly dooste a dedely sin / or when thou have ye goods of ye world and
will not help thy brother at his need / when thou defrawdest thy neighbor
also by false weyghtes mesures or not paye^ge the laborers hyere. Or when
through neclygence of thyselfe the state of office that thou stondest in is
perysshed or spylled Therefore slay no man with hand tongue ne heart For he
that smyteth shall be smyten / and he that bacbyteth or sclau^dreth / is a
mansleer / and for them that cursen it is said / cursed be he that preuely
smyteth that cursyth warryeth or wylleth vengaunce on his even christian. The.vi
commandment is / thou shall do no lechery / this cursyd sy^ne defouleth both
body and soul / and of al other most pleseth the devil. For in other sins
he most comynly geteth but one / and in this at the leest he getety ii. or moo
for this sy^ne god almighty often has taken great vengau^ce. In so much that
all the world he drowned save.viii. persons alone. and for this sin he made
synke unto hell the five cytees of sodom The devil in this sin tempted in
many manners. First by folyly lokynge / after by in honest words / then in
foul touching and kyssyng. and so to ye deed and this syghte is the first
darte that these lecherous seken Therefore ye wymmen array ye not your self to
nycely to be seen of folys / though ye have no will to sin yourselfe. for
your nyce array and countenance ben cause of many soulys dampnacyon For the
which ye shall answer at the high day of dome (says salomo^) but ye amend
you here. Therefore another by countenance ne array stere ye man to sy^ne ne
have not your vysage popped ne your here pulled or crowled another your faces
colored / ne your head hye or wide laid with costelewe kercheues ne your
body to curyous in clothing / ne nyce in shap but after the counsel of saint
Poule / let your array be shamefastness heelyng your hedes with your here /
or with a kerchef to cover your shame thus says saint Poule. This
commandment then breken al tho that for fleshely lust ben wedded to gyder /
not keeping thorder of wedlock / but live as bestys without dyscrecyon / as
the flesh moves hem. And for this sin. The. seven husbands of Sara were
strangled with the devil / therefore ye that be wedded be ware / that no such
things be done whereby the concepcyon of birth might be let. For he that
does other wise wylfully than natural kind asks synneth most grievously and
dedely in that sin. For.v. causes a man takes his wife. One is cause of
generacyon / and then it is no sin. Another cause is of yeldynge of debt
/ and then he synneth not / but rather deserves mede. Another is for
eschewynge of more sin / as when he is incontinent / and may not keep him
self and then it is venyall sin / as says saint Austyn. Another cause is
fulfyllynge of lechery / as when a man uses hot metes and drynkes / medecyn
or spyces / and so enforces himself to be myghtyer to fulfill the sin of
lechery / then I trow says he it is deedly sin. The fyfth cause is / when
he knows her against kind / and that is most deedly / therefore to you yt
ben wedded saint Gregory says thus. Study each of you to please your make / yt
therewith ye dysplease not your maker. The.vii. commandment is / you shalt not
stele / in this is forboden all manner of wrong taking / withholdynge / or
withdrawynge of any men's gooddes quycke or deed / as robbynge / reuynge /
sleyghtes / and dysceytes / begylinge in byenge or selling / symony / usury /
extorcyon / with al their branches. All that thus desire to be rich says saint
Poule they fall in to the snare of the devil / and deep dampnacyon of their
souls. And the prophet says also to them yt falsely purchaceth and makes
great buyldynges / woe be to you says he that with wrong hold house to house
/ and field too field / and says that right is wrong / and wrong is right /
and to crafty men / and laborers saint Poule byddeth yt they do truly their
labor without slouthe / or else they do theft And no man witholde the
laborers hyre / for that cries vengeance tofore god. And in especyal these
that follows usury / when thou lenest money to them that have need / for a
certain wy^nynge at the times end. And for the lendynge / other thou take
service / presents or gifts. Another when thou lenest it for the half
winning / he to pay the hole / that you lenest it to / though al be lost.
Another when thou byest a thing for much less than it is worth. Another is
when thou sellest thy chaffere the derer for the leny^ge. Another when thou
have a thing tofore ye time / as corn or it be ripe. Another when thou take
the beast of a poor man with this condycion that if it deye it shall stand to
the poor man and not to the. So says pharysyens / therefore use leful chaffere
/ and wy^ne without subtylte or sleyght as much as thou may. But that yt is
reasonable to thy sustenaunce after thyn estate is dew. This desired the wise
man of our lord when he said / neither richesse ne pouerte give me good lord
but that is necessary too my lyuelode The.viii. is thou shalt bear no false
wytnes in this is forboden all manner of lesynges / conspyracyon / and
forswery^ge / where by yt thy neighbor leseth his catell / frendshyp / or
good / all such ben called the chyldoen of the devil / for they put out
truth / and bring in falsehede / put out christ and bring in the devil /
lesynge stands not only in falls words / but also in false works / and if
thou be a christian man live thereafter / or else thou lie. There be three manner
of lesynges / one is when thou lie with full purpose too hurt thy neighbor
/ and then it is deedly sin. Another is when thou lie to further thy
neighbor in a truth / and then it is not so much sin. The third is
when you lie for the dysporte of them that be about the not willing to hinder
any person / these two ben venyall but thou have them in custom / therefore
beware of all manner of lesynges / and another for hate ne for mede bear no
false wytnes. The ix is thou shalt not desire thy neighbors wife. In the vii.
commandment god forbedeth the deed of lechery / and their desire in token
that they both ben deedly sin / yet some wene but they do the deed it is no
sin. Christ therefore willing all such to be clean within and without both
in body and soul says all the which sees a woman to the couetyse of their
lust / they do lechery with her in their heart / and thus by shrewde thoughts:
man is oftymes departed fro god / yet saint Byrgyt in her vysyons says / but
if evil thoughts sometime come to man / he should wene himself rather angel
than man. And so all thing comes of himself / and none of god. Therefore that
man should know the Infyrmyte that he has comes of him self / and ye
strength that he has comes of god / it is necessary that he suffer sometime of
the great mercy of god to be tempted with evil thoughts. To the which if he
consent not ben a purgacyon to his soul / and a keeper of his virtues /
therefore wha^ shrewde thoughts come to the / withstand the first subgestyon /
and let thy soul always so labor that he consent not to delight in them. And
then have in mind ye bitter pains that Christ suffered for the / and thendles
bliss of ye Joy of heaven that thou must lose if thou consent to them / and ye
bitter pains of hell also that thou shalt have if thou deye in them. And if
thou do thus / then shalt thou have in my^de thy last end / and never do
sin. The x. commandment and the last is / thou shall not desire thy
neighbors thing / house / land / ox / horse / neither nothing that is his
/ for such desires of couetyse as scripture makes mention Balaam. Nachor.
Anany. Gyesy. Achab. Iesebell / and many other fell to great myschefe / both
of body and of soul / therefore be ye well ware of all such false desire. And
take no man's good against his will / leest it fall to you as it did to them
/ and think also that without satysfaccyon / or having will for to amend the
thereof and make restytucyon / the pope ne none by him may dyspence with the /
and yet thou stand accursed of all holy church in the great sentence four
times in the year / what shall all such false desires then prouffyte the /
when the curse of almighty god shall thus abide on the / there is no man that
dredeth the curse of god now / but when our savior Ihesu christ shall say at
the day of dome that scripture makes mencyon of Go ye cursed in to the fire
of hell everlasting / then shall they both dread it and feel it. For this
word (go ye cursed) shall be more paynefull / as doctors says than ye
pains of a thousand helles though they were al gadred in to one All these.x.
commandments ben brought in to two of ye gospel / that is love god above al
thing / and thy neighbor as thy self. First thou shalt love god with all
thy heart. that no thing be nerer thyn heart than god / in all thy soul that
thou suffer no sin abide within thy soul for the love of god / and with all
thy mind yt thou spare not for myschefe to please god. Thy neighbor also as
thy self in good and not in yeull as much as thy self in health / in sykenes
/ in welthe / and in woe. Thus for love thou shalt keep gods commandment /
and not only for dread of pain / these commandments should each man tell
and teache his children. And thus badde our lord to Moses / these words said
he the which I take the here this day shall be in thy heart / thou shall tell
them to thy sons and think on them slepynge / waking / sitting and going /
thou shalt bind them as a sign to thy hand / and write them on the doors
and lanternes of thy house / and shalt rule all thy thoughts / words and
deeds / preuy and aperte in each place by the commandments of god. Forgete
not these words said he / ne fall they not fro thy heart / all the days of
thy life. Thus govern ye your meyny says saint Austyn / for as we speak thus
to you here in the church so should ye to yours at home / that ye may give
true reckoning too god of them the which ben subgectes unto you and tell
them says he the great love and swetenes of heavenly things / and the great
bytternes of the horrible pains of hell / for ye shall answer for them at
the most strayte day of dome / and counseyle them all that they be not
neclygent in no wise to learn these commandments for dread of his sentence
that follows if thou will not here the voice of thy lord god says he /
that thou keep and do his commandments all these curses shall come to the
and take the thou shalt be cursed in cite / in fylde cursed shall be thy
relyques / the fruit of thy boby / the fruit of the land the droues of thine
oxen and the flocks of the sheep you shalt be cursed in the going in / and
going out / thou shalt be smite with honger / sekenes / and pestylence /
with adres / with fire with hete / with corrupt air / all these he says
shall pursue the / and thou shalt perysshe. And if thou will here the voyse
of our lord yt thou learn and keep his commandments / he shall make the
hyer than all the dwelling in earth. And all these blessings shall come to
the and take the thou shalt be blessed in cite and in field in fruit of thy
body / and fruit of the land / in flocks of thy sleep / and droues of thy
bestys / in thy bernys / and in thy celleres in thy going in and in the going
out / and in all the works of ho^dis so yt every man shall see yt the name
of god is called upon yt / and they shall dread the I shall give ye rain in
time says he / therth shall bring forth his sede / trees shall be replete
with fruit / thou shalt have peace in thy country and thou shall sleep / and
no man shall fere all these blyssyngis shall take the if thou learn and keep
his commandments / therfo have mind in the preceptis of god / and in his
byddynges be ye most besy. For if thou keep them they shall keep the / and
bring the to bliss that never shall have end. Ame^.

THe fourth thing that thou sholdest know god by in the seven sacrame^tis of
holy church which be mynystred to the people of the persons and prestys that
have power thereto of the which five / the first / that is baptysme.
confyrmacyon shryfte. howsell. and anoyntynge are every man and woman hold to
do in pain of cursynge in certain time as ye law gives. The Other two may no
man take / as order and wedlock but at his own will These sacramentis took
their beginning of the gracyous well / of the side of our lord Ihesu christ in
his passion. For right as out of Adamis side while he slept was taken out a
rybbe that eve was made of / right so at the death of our lord there ran out
of his side both blood and water / by virtue of which passion the sacrame^tis
of holy church took first their strength and their beginning. The first
sacrament is batpty^ in which orygynall sin that we be borne in / and all
other sins that we be defoyled with they ben wasshen away through the passion
of criste / and there with is betaken us the faith and believe of holy church /
without which there may no man be saved. Therefore it is commanded that
every cryste^ woman that feleth her quycke with child / to keep her from
heuyng and shouynge / great travail and falling and other myscheues yt should
myscheue the chyldes life / and so be lost body and soul. And that each
woman before her travail of child come to church and take shryfte and
housell / for peril of death that might. fall in the birth. Also the mydwyf
and tho yt be about the child. if it be in peril of death / should christian it
on this wise. I christian the in the name of the fader and of the sone and of the
holy ghost. And then spring the child with water and that thou forgete not
these words. I christian the / and if it be crystened in this manner at home.
It shall not be cristened eftsone at church. For that were a great peril as
to nail god eftsoon upon the cross. And if it live after this crystenyng at
home / bring it to the church / and there it shall have all the hole service
that it lackethe. In time of peril of death fader and mother may christian their
own children without harming of their spouschode. Godfaders and godmoders ben
borowes tofore god for their god chylderen / and therefore they ben bound to
teache them to love ryghtwysnes / charity / and chastyte / to keep them from
deedly sin and specially to teache them the Commandments and bylyue. A man
and his wife should not hold it atones to a child at the fontstoon / ne them
that fongyth to it / there shall not fonge to it at the confermynge but at
need. Fader ne mother / ne noryse ne none other should suffer no young child
by them at bed while they sleep / ne press them fast in cradell / ne
suffer them lie slepynge ne waking without a keeper. There is goostly kynrede
/ through fongynge of chyldern at the fontstoon on.ix. wyses. One is between
the child and the godfader. Another between the chylderen of the godfaders.
Another by ye child and the wife of the godfaders fleshely known tofore. A
another betwyx the godfader and the fader of him that is crystened. A another
betwix the priest and the child that is baptized. A another betwix the child
and the chylderen of him that baptyseth. A another betwix him that baptyseth and
the wife of him that baptized first I know. A another between the baptyser and
the mother of him that is baptized. There ben also.ix. before the bishop at
the co^fermynge in the same form / these letten spowsehode not made / and
fordooth spowsehode made. The second sacrament is confyrmacyon of the bishop
/ this is a manner of a noyntynge in the forhede by the hondes of the bishop /
whereby the holy ghost gives strength against the feebleness of sin of our
forne fader with a mark impressed to the soul / whereby thou shalt knowledge
the faith and love of christ To this every christian man and woman be bound to
bring their chylderen as soon as they may namely or they be a year of age.
For they shall have the more grace of life / and the more bliss in deed. And
those that be not confermed mow not receive none other sacrament. Another they
shall not wash head nor forhede three days after for the reverence of that holy
oil. The third sacrament is shryfte of penance / to ye which every man and
woman is bound anon as they can reasonable wit at.xii. year / every year
clean to be shryuen onys at the leest at their own curate / that these may
every day see of all the sins that ever they dyden or can think upon / that
when they look on them / they may have more shame and dread in their hertes of
their sin / where thrughe by the grace of god they mow leave their sin / yet
notwythstondynge that ye ben bound over a year to show your shryfte to your
own curate / and if there ben any of you that have more affection to a another
than to me / let me wete to whom and where / and he shall have right good
leave and crystes blyssynge and mine. So that he do it not in no deceyte of his
own soul / as to hyde his sin fro me / to that entente he might the longer
abide therein / as some done / and have done many years. For I know more of
their counseylle than they wene that I do / or would I did. Such be like
thadder yt hydeth his venyme in preuy places / or he would engender with the
lamprey and after he tourneth and takes it up ayene. Thus some of you ones a
year or ye come to your curate / ye cast out venym of your sin at
pardons and other preuy places / and anon after Eester ye take it up again. As
theft / auoutry / and such other / and ben worse after than ye were before /
ye that this done begyle your self / and need great penance. Had Judas wha^
he betrayed christ told his sin to his true herdman as he did to Cayphas and
pylate wha^ he said I have sy^ned in body betrayenge ryghtwyse blood he had
be saved. For they took none head thereto / but said / what is yt to us / auyse
the as who says they have no cure of the. Right so thus I trow. and some of
you went to your own herdeman wha^ ye go to other / then should brybery /
stolen goods / and such other be restored. And auoutry and other cursed
sins be thus dystroyed. I say not this for no desire that I have to here your
shryft / for it is but a pain to me / save for charge that I have of your
souls. For I had lever mynyster all the sacraments yt longs to mine office
forty times than that ones. But I do it for too dystroye the false subtylte yt
ye use in shryfte against the health of your souls / and so god help me. Also
when thou come to shryft / thou shall come with great sorrow of heart / and
mekely knele too the priest as to him that is in gods stead / and tell him
holy how you have mysgouerned thy life / and be in full will to do so no more /
and hertely do thy penance enjoined the therefore / and e^les it is no shryfte.
But many there be that set naught by their penance doing / so that they have
told their syn^e to the priest and such begyle themself / for the very
sacrament of shryfte depends specially in three things without which thou
may not truly be shryuen. And yt is sorrow of heart / shryft of mouth / and
penance doing / for though thou be sorye for thy sin / and shryue the not
it avails not a seth ne do thy penance it avails not. For wit well thou
may / if thou sholdest reken with a man and at the end of thy reckoning
though thou were.xx. lib. in his det Right so thou shryuest the and make
reckoning with the priest in gods stead / but thou make a sees therefore / and
pay thy det with penance doing it is naught / for it is a token that thou
art not sorry for thy sin / and if thou be not sorry therefore as I have said
tofore thy shryft is naught / and so thou synnest against the holy ghost which
is ye most peryllous sin that is. Therefore if thou will have the bliss of
heaven do thy penance / and then thou shalt have grace and pardon of thy
sins / for in these three words contrycion / confession / and sarysfaccyon
stands all the virtue of pardon in this world. Our lady saint Mary in the
vysyons of that holy woman saint Byrgyt / tells when pardon prouffyteth / and
when not / saying that he yt comes to pardon / and has will after to leave
sin / and to restore that he has wrongfully taken / not willing to win a
penny after with wrong ne falshede nor to live any day longer than god would
he did. In prosperyte and aduersyte to submytte his will to gods will / to
flee worship and frendshyppe of this world / he shall have pardon and
remyssyon of sin / and is like to the angel of god in the sight of god. But
he says he that vysyteth her for remyssyon and pardon of sins / and has no
will to leave his old vanytees / ne ye Inordynate affection / but keeps still
his wrong getynges / false deceyte and subtyltees / and also loves the world
in him self and other / and will flee shrewde customs / ne restrenyne his
flesh from superfluytees. Right naught avails him pardon ne Indulgence. And
with this accords saint Gregory where he says thus. Thou make never
satysfaccyon for thy sin says he / but if thou feere of thy sin. Every
body that will desire pardon / but few or none will do that they should have
pardon for / but through trust and color of that pardon they do many a cursed
deed / and do sin on trust thereof other any good deed / it is a great sin
of pride / for be you never so full of good virtues / unkindness to thy god may
dystroy all those virtues. More unkindness thou may not show then for to
dysplease god wylfully / therefore fle such unkindness / and think that the
more acceptable that thou art to god through thy good living the more
culpable thou shalt be / if you return again to sin. It is a slypper hope
says saint Austyn when a man synneth upon trust to be saved. He that does so
he neither dredeth ne loves god. So that it is more profitable to hold thy
self feeble and low than to be hold strong / and for feebleness fall and be lost
/ therefore take heed what goodness god puts in the. And thank him / and
pray him of contynuaunce and do no sin upon trust of pardon / ne of any
other good deeds. The fourth is the holy sacrament of the altar / the which
is crystes own body / his flesh and blood in form of breed / the same that
was borne of the vyrgyn Mary / and done on the rode / this is made through the
virtue of gods words of ye priest that has power / which power neither
angel ne archaungell had / but only man in mind of himself. This sacrament
is every man and woman bound by the law ones a year as at eester / if he
be.xiiii. years of aege / and have dyscrecyon to receive it / wha^ they ben
with shryft and penance made clean of their sins / and else to be put out
of the church / and of christian buryelles / but if it be for sykenesse / or for
some other reasonable cause / which cause he must certyfye his curate of. For
he that unworthily receives this sacrament he receives his dampnacyon. Also
as often as any man sees that body at mass / or borne about to the seek / he
shall knele down deuoutely and say his pater noster / or some other good
prayer in worship of his sovereign lord. Also ye shall understand that the
drink the which ye do receive in the chalyce after your howsel is no
sacrament but it is water for to bry^ge the lyghtlyer the holy sacrament in to
thy body. But in form of breed it is hole our sauyoure Ihesu crystes body
both in flesh and blood. Therefore thou shalt take it in as hole and as
entyere as thou may / leest any part of it abide and stycke in thy tethe.
For in the leest part of the host is hole the most precious body of our
lord / that day thou herest thy mass / god grants thy needful and lawful
things / that day idle oaths and forgoten sins ben for given / that day
thou shall not lose thyn eyes sight / ne deye in sudden death / ne the time of
the mass thou shalt not wax aeged / every step thyderwarde and homewarde /
an angel shall reken. Lewd men and women to dyspute of this sacrament are
utterly forboden / for it is enough unto them to believe as holy church techeth
them. The fyfth sacrament is anoyntynge of seek men / the which oil hallowed
of the bishop and mynystred by priests to them that been of lawful aege / in
great peril of death. In lyghtnes and abatynge of their sykenes / if god will
that they live. And in forgyuynge of their venyall sins / and releasynge of
their pain if they shall deye. So that this sacrament may be given as often as
needs to every man and woman that been in point of death The.vi. sacrament is
holy ordres / yt no man may take but at his own will. This gives power to them
that takes it to serve in holy church after state is as to him that takes
the order of preesthode / for to make the sacrament of Crystes flesh and his
blood / and for to mynyster other sacraments too the people. These must have
their crowns shaven / their hedes tonsured / and their clothes honestly shapen
as falls to their estate / and namely in holy church. They must also in the
quere read and sing with clennesse of conscience / and great devotion of soul
/ not ouerscyppinge ne momblynge / ne musing of vanytes not medlynge with
lewd ne unthrifty tidings / ne inhonest comunycacyon / not coming to late to
gods service ne going out before the end without a reasonable cause / not
gronynge / ne slombrynge / ne sparynge their voice. But showing out the voice
of the holy ghoost with sown and with hole speech / and thus says ye holy man
saint Bernarde. The priests must also every day dyspose them for to say
mass if they may and thereto they be bound For saint bernard says in the
person of our lord / to every man thus Have I not made the and give the power
to make me / and to offer my sone Incarnate tofore ye fader of salvation of the
world if thou have power to sing and syngeste not (says he.) thou benymeste
the aungellys in heaven their Joy thou benymest mankind trauayly^ge in earth
their help and grace / and thou benymeste the souls that aren in great
pains in Purgatory their rest and their forgyuenesse these ben heavy words
and little thought on with many of us / Saint Austyn says / how worshypfull is
the dygnyte of presthode said he betwix whose ho^des the Sone of god as in his
moders womb was Incarnate. How blessyde ben prestes says he) if they prestely
live how heavenly a mystetery is that (Says he) that by the werkynge of the
fader and sone and holy ghost / the same god that is in heaven / the same and
self. is in your hondes in the sacrament Therefore says our lord be ye
holy. for I am holy A ryghtfull life to you is necessary (says sayncte Austyn)
therefore ye must so live / see that your life accord with your name So that
if your order be holy. let your conuersacyon of the same. And if men say
well of you says he). see yt your weckes bear witness of the same. And this
is for us preestis. The seventh sacrament is wedlock. for the which the
baynes must be asked thryes in holy church. This is a lawful knyttynge
together of man and woman in form of holy church by assent of them both /
for to be to gyder in the law of God. And never to depart whiles their lives
lasten in remyssyon of sins / and getynge of grace when it is taken for a
true intent. for though there be no truth plyght / nor flesshely deed done.
If they ben of full age / and accord in hertes to gyder to fore god. they be
wife and husbonde.) All preuy couenau^tes in troth plygh tynge / and forward
making without assent of friends and knowledge are forboden. All such that
make or be there at ben in great peril of soul. Also it is forboden that no
wedded man and woman / one without ye others assent make vow of chastyte /
pilgrimage ne fasting. For if yt wife auowe / the husbonde at the first
wytynge may for do it. But if he consent and suffer it wytingly after the
first knowing / the man synneth not. For the wife has no power of her own
body / but the husband. And if the man abstain him fro his wife / by such
wise without the will of his wife and she give hy^ no leave / he is cause of her
sin. And the wife is ye same caas if she do the same to her husband.

The seven deeds of mercy.
THe first thing that thou sholdest know god by are the seven deeds of mercy
/ the which every man is bound by the byddy^ge of god to fulfill and to do his
power / yt is to say / feed the hungry / give drink to the thyrsty / clothe
the naked / herborow the housles / vysyte the seek / deliver ye prisoners / and
bury the poor when they be deed. These be needful to us plesynge to god / and
helping to body and soul of al the^ yt do them Therefore says Christ / give
and it shall be given to you. Alms says saint Austyn is a holy thing / for
it increases that you haste / lesseth thy sin / it multyplyeth thy eres / and
no bleth the mind. It lengeth ye terms and cleanses all thing. It delyuereth
yt from death / and joins the to angels / and depart the from deuylles /
and is a wall inexpugnable about the soule^ Therefore give almesses and all
things shall be clean to you. Three things he must consider that shall give
alms. First who asks / what he asks and wherre First I say that god
asks it / for he loves so much pore men / that what ye do to them in his
name he holds it done to him self. He asks his and not ours. Dauyd says.
All things ben thy lords. And that we take of thy hands we have give yt. He
asks it us not for to give it him / but to lene it him. Wherefore he will
yield an hundred fold / and the bliss of heaven wherefore says saint Gregory
poor me^ shall not be despised but prayed as faders. And he that gives the
poor shall not be poor says Solomon. And he yt stops his eeres from the
cry of the poor shall cry and not be herd / therefore al those that ask
these / he that asks vnryghtfully give it not that he asks / but that that
is better / and that is correccyon. Iherom says give the poor to sustain
their riches. There may no man excuse him of alms gyuynge. For an halfpeny
of the poor sometime pleases god more than an hundred shelynges of the rich /
if you may not give him that / give him words of comfort. And what thou gyuest
give it gladly. For the glad gyuer god loves. There ben also seven other
goostly deeds of mercy. The first is / teache the uncunning / that he savor
ryghfully. Another is / give counceyle to him that asks it / that he work
and do truly. The third / chastyse him that trespaceth / that is to say /
repreue or beat / or do other due correccyon. The fourth / comfort the
sorrowful / as with gifts / words of comfort / or such other. The fyfth /
forgive them that trespace to the. For if thou wylt not forgive the^ god will
not forgive the / the rancour and the offense / thou must needs forgive / the
accyon and ye amends ben at thyn own will. The syxte that thou suffer mekely
and pacyently when any man or woman do any preiudyce or offense against the
that they be not the more prompte and ready too sin / but that they be the
more fervent for to do penance and good works and operacyons / and be moore
priest and ready to suffer disease and trybulacyon than for to do it / if any
man chyde the / or blame the / or repreue the / or do the wrong keep
scylence. And set before a sharp word ye shylde of suffraunce / and think
that our most benygne sauyiour and redemptoure Ihesu Christ was bobbed /
buffeted / and spytte upon / and scorned / and evermore he held his pease.
Therefore what disease or mysfortune fall fo the believe that it comes to the for
sin. And so thou shalt suffer it light liar / if thou take heed wherefore it
comes. The seventh is pray (that is to say for thyn ennemy / and all those
that be sinful. And if thou may not help them with one of these seven
aforesaid / pray unto our lord for them. Christ says. Love your enemies /
and do well to them that hate you / and pray for them that does you
persecucyon that ye may be the children of heaven. And thus may ye fulfill the
deeds of mercy / bodily and goostly. The.vi thing that thou sholdest know god
by / ben the seven pryncypall virtues / that every man and woman should use.
The first is faith which is ground and begynny^ge of your salvation. And it
stondeth in three things. In the unity of the godhede in three persons in the
manhood of Christ. And in the sacraments of the holy church. This virtue is
needful too all christian people. For it is the beginning of all good works.
So that faith without good works / ne good works with out true faith. Ne
without true faith may no man please god almighty. The second is hope / this
is a trust by the mercy of god to be saved. And it stands in ye grace of god
and good works / not only in our own good deeds / but in them both together.
For we shall not hope so little that it is called wanhope / that we should hope
to have bliss / if we do well and perceuer in the commandments of god. Ne
not so much trust in the great mercy of our lord / for to hope to be saved
without good deeds and operacyons. The third is charity / this is the end and
perfeccyon of all the commandments of God. And understand in this / that
thou love God above all thing. And thy neygbboure as thyselfe / so that one
may not be byloued without that other / and says saint Johan) That he that
loves god / he loves his brother / and that loves not his brother which he
may see. How should he love god / which he may not see. The fourth virtue is
ryghtwsnes / this is not ellis but a payeng of dewte to each thing that it
dewly longs to. As to god praysynge and thanking for the goods of kind
fortune and grace that he has give the and lent the. And thereof to give his
part. and many other benefaytes. As in preserving the from many myscheues
and vengaunce that thou had fall in and all. day see many one fall in /
And sholdeste happily thyselfe have fall in / had not his gracyous keeping have
be To thy neighbor thou must also yield love and charity. That is to say)
that thou do right and reason to him in all thing as thou woldeste he did
to the. And if thou would he should be true to the / and pay his dettys and
begyle the not / with subtyltees and sleyghtes in byenge and selyng / do the
same to him if thou would also that he were not proud / enuyous whrathfull /
couetyse. glotenous / slothful / ne let cherous / be thou the same and thus
in all other things / as thou woldeste thy neighbor do to the / do thou to
him And then thou do ryghtwysnesse to thyself. Also thou must have
besynes to learn and fulfill the will of the commaundementis of god and to
withstonde sin and to shrewde living. The fyfth virtue is wisdom / this
virtue departs good from evil and techeth us to beware of sleytes / and
deceytes of the wretched world / and in likewise of the freyle flesh. and of
the cursed enemy the devil of hell. And for to despise and set at naught
all that we may / and of.ii. good to chose the better. But saint Austyn says
as many one does / that thou must despise ye world and hate the flesh for
me. Where be the lovers of the world. That but a little while ago were here
with us. There is no thing left of them but powder and worms Take heed what
they ben now. And what they were than They were men as thou art / says he /
they drank / they laughed and ladde their life in earth / in myrthe and Iolyte
/ and in this point they descend in to hell what profyteteth them their
vain glory / their short Joy pomp of the world all dylycates lust of the
flesh / false richesse great meany / and evil couetyse where is their
laughter their play / their pride / their boost. After all this lust How
great pain and sorrow all that fylle to them may fall to the / says he for
thou art a man of earth as they were / and of the earth thou lyuest / and to
the earth thou shalt turn again. These ben ye words of the holy doctoure
saint Austyne. This remembrance shall make you wise and hardy to dispyse your
enemies the world / the flesh and the devil saint Isyder says / there is
none other thing better then wisdom. Ne none other thing sweter and
lustyer then knowledge. Ne none other thing worse then lewdness. Therefore
know thou where thou shalt flee / and wheder you shall go. Love wisdom and it
be showed to the. and it shall come to the / be besy there about and it shall
learn the. The.vi. virtue is strength. This makes a man mighty and hardy to
wythstonde many great myscheues. for the love of god. For it stondeth in
suffrynge pacyently aduersyte / and mekely to make prosperyte / and to suffer
euenly both well and woo. that our heart be not to hye for no well fare / ne to
much under for none evil fare but to be strong against our foon. both of
body and soul. that no temptacyon make us fall / ne fail in our faith
against God almighty. The seventh virtue is mesure which is a mean between to
much and in like wise to little and it stondeth in taking suffycyently that
needs And refusing vterly that that is to much or to little. The.viii.
thing / and the last that thou sholdeste know god by / is the seven dedely
sins. that all men should refuse. for each of them is an even way to hell
therefore it is nedeful every man to konwe them. Therefore says the wise man as
fro the face of thadder fond to flee sin For as the venyme of the adder
sleeth mannys body / so the venym of sin sleeth mannys soul. The first
sin is a liking or a highness of mannys heart. Of his high estate or
nobleness that he has by fortune. kind or by grace or that he can passing
a another. or has more than a another. Of this comes many shrewd spyces as
boostyng / bacbytyng / dispite of thy neighbor / vnbuxumnes / ypocrysy /
proudberynge / and displeasyng scornynge / and inobedyence hye heart / gaye
array / pride of great kynne. and of vayn glory / boldness of sin boostynge
of good deeds and auauntynge of evil deeds. indignacion shame lessed
presumpcio^ and stourdynes / and that is worste of all other And so says
saint Austyn). That none is worse nor more dampnable sin than is the sin
of pride In this ben they gyltye that list not to be repreued of their sins.
Ne to here of their defautes. but anon with a great stourdynes as a galled
horse / that is touched on the sore he wyncheth and wryeth. And seken how they
may mayntene such lewdenes of sin. Thus did not king Dauyd when nathan the
prophet of god came to him. and told him his sin and the vengaunce / that
he should have therefore / he showed no stourdynes to the prophet ne rebuked
him / ne chydde him. but mekely said to our lord. I have sinned. As who says.
I am sorry for my sin. I will amend it. And therefore god took away much of
the vengaunce that he should have had for his sin. Right thus should ye here
be repreued of your sin / mekely come to your curate. as to the minister of
god. that occupyeth his stead for the time (And say) sir I knowledge my
defaute. and wot well that I did amys my will is to amend it And so put
away stourdynes and the vengau^ce that thou deserueste therefore. This sin of
pride says Gregory is rote of all evil. For right ne were the rote of a tree
hid in therth / there should no branch spryng out thereof. Right so ne were
pride roted in thine heart. there should no branches of sin break out
thereof. For thus was lucefer that was the fairest angel in heaven. made the
fowleste devil in hell.) Also Chore. dathon and abyro and their felysshyp
they rose against moses and Aaron of great pride. and therefore the earth
openede and swalowede them all quycke down in to hell. Also the people of
Nynyue / for their great boldness of pride that they had in their hertes
to turn ayene to their sins there were a hundred score thousand people /
as the bible reherseth and shows destroyed. by dodely enmyes. Therefore every
man beware of this sin and wisely look in the myroure of mekenes. for that
techeth him what he was / is / and shall be. First consider that thou were made
of foul stynkyne slyme and fylthe of the sin or lechery / borne of thy mother
with great sorrow and pain / norysshed with great labor and anger and kept
with great dread and now thou art but a sack of foul dunge. that no
swetenes nor fruit comes of trees leaves comes flowers and fruit / and of the
lycenettes and fleen. Of herbs also comes right sweet and odoryferous smell
and in likewise of the above and in like semblable manner of wise beneth and all
other parties / but stynkynge fylthe / and after the end thou shalt be worms
mete and torn again to earth / till the day of dome / that thy body and
soul shall rise again. That day says Malachy shall brenne as hot as any
furneys of fire / and all proud men be as stoble / which shall be there brent
/ yt there shall be neither rote not rynde therefore says Isyd. By mekenes make
thy leest and lowest of all other stretche not forth thy wings of pride by
boost of enhauncynge thy self. For the less thou set by thy self says
he the more god sets by the. Be shamefast in chere / and dysmayde to look
proudely / for shame of the sin walk with a low chere / meke mode a sad
vysage. In high worship have great mekenes / and the higher that you art the
meker thou sholdest make thy self. And think how our sovereign lord Ihesu
meked him to the death for thy sake. This is mekenes and utter remedy against
pride / and a sanatyf salve against all myscheues of sin. For it makes the
to have mind of thy short abiding here. Of the strayte dome that thou shall
come after / for the mekenes yt thou sholdest have had here. The second sin
is envy / and this is when thou art sorry for thy neighbors welfare / and
Ioyest of his evil fare / of this wicked sin come many branches / one is
hatred / and that is when thou art loathe to speak / or here spoken any thing /
the which might torn thy neighbor to good and prouffyte. Another is false
demeny^ge of deeds against thy neighbor. The third is backebytynge / and that
is to speak evil behind thy neighbor / which thou may not ne will not
auowe before him / or though thou do not speak evil thy self / you hastly king
and great delectacyon for to here evil speaking of him / and in so doing
thou synnest deedly. For not only he the which speaks evil of his
neighbor / but alsoo he yt which will gladly here such evil speaking are
in defaute of sin / So that if there were no berer there were no bacbytynge
ne bacbyter. therefore says Isyder be not glad of the fall or evil fare of
thy neighbor leest god turn his wrath from him to the. and so thou
sholdest fall in the same or worse / But be glad to sorrow for him that is
desesed and evermore mourn his myscheef as you woldeste thy^ own / Love peace
outward and in ward peace with all men and make peace where hate is / Flee
chiding. beware and do away thoccasyon of strife. And live always in peace.
Let no thing pass thy lyppes that may defoyle ye eeres of the herers. for
as vain words is take of vain conscience And such as the word is / such
is the soul. therefore besy the not to speak that lyketh / but that that needs
take heed what thou spekest and both in speaking and not speaking be right well
ware. For thou may not call ayene that thou have said put fro thy tongue
the sin of bacbytynge and defoyle not thy mouth with a another ma^nys sin /
but be sorry of him / and that thou bacbyteste in a another / dread it in
thyselfe. when thou blamest a another / think on thine own sin. and look not
on other mennys. For thou shalt never bacbyte if thou will behold thy self
therefore here ne lysten to none such tytelers For they ben like gylty the
heter and the bacbyter. Desire not to wit that perteyneth not to yt / ask
never what any man does spekyth or says / leave besynes that perteyneth not to
the. And by as great besynes amend thy sin / by as much as thou beholdest
other mennys. sor no man knows whether he be worthy hate or mede that is for
to say / pain or Joy. For there is many one seems to us right good / and
yet against god happily are right naught. And many one also that seems to us
ryghe naught. And yet ben to him right dear Therefore no man deem other. but put
all his Judgment and estymacyon in god Thus with charity that is knyt of all
virtues thou must destroy the foul sin of envy. Thus charity stondethe in
the love of god and love of thy neighbor. In which two all the law of god
abides. So that that one may not be loved without that other For if thou love
god thou will have none other but him ne thou will not take his name in vain
Ne break not thy holy sondayes If thou love thy lord god and also thy
neighbors thou will do no manslaughter / ne theft ne false witness bear.
ne letchery ne desire thy neighbors wife. ne his good. This is charity the
fulfyllynge or goddis love and thendynge of all other good werkys. Charity is
pacyente and benygne / he has none envy / he wertcheth no shrewednes / he
loves not to be with pride / he coueyteth no worldly worshyppes he seeks no
propre goods / He is not wroth. He thinks none evil / He Ioyed not of
wyckednes but of troth / He takes all thing mekely / He byleueth all that
god says and hops of bliss. He suffered all harms and never is dyscomfyted
thorugh goddis help to abide long. He falls never down in this world. ne
in that other. He keeps man in believe and makes him stable / under him wexith
obedyence and by him patience over comes al wrongs without him no man
pleases god. and with him no man peryssheth. Therefore ayenste envy. seek
charity with great study / that thou may have it in thy living. and dwell
parfyghtly there in to thine ending. Amen. The third is the sin of wrath.
the which is wicked styrynge of a mannys heart whereby he will avenge himself
up on his even christian Of this comes many shrewde spyces / as fighting /
chiding / hurtynge / betynge grutchyng / warryng / and cursynge / cruellys and
man slaughter / and desiring of vengaunce. There ben also other four in
special. One wha^ thou art soon moved / and soon swaged / and that is easy.
Another when thou art not soon swaged / and that is shrewde. The third when
thou art soon meued and not soon swaged. and that is perylous. The fourth is
long or thou be meued and soon swaged / and that is most easy. Therefore
ayenste these branches thou must arm the with the virtue of pacye^ce. and
think what sorrow might fall to the of thy words and deeds. then put
crystes passion and pains between the and such pains as he might suffer /
and so shall thy wrath soon slake. In four things spyrytuelly it is
necessary to have pacyence One is ayene thine enemy. For the more cruel he is
/ the more thou nedest of pacyence and soft speech For that slaketh wrath.
Therefore if any aduersyte falls to the / suffer it pacyently whether thou
have deserved it or not / If thou have deserved it thou art worthy that or
more if thou have not / thou have thy reward of christ wha^ he says blesed be
they that been pacyente / for they shall be called the children of god. Another
wha^ thy sovereign corrects thy defautes thou must be pacyente / and draw
in thy horns of pride. As a snayle when he is towched And so did Adam at the
voys of our lord. The third is in loss of thy good. as Job when all his
good. was gone mekely he said) our lord gaaf it / our lord has take it.)
As it like him so it be done. his name be blessed. The.iiii. is in sickness
for our lord says. those that I love I chastyse. As the mother chastised her
child for taking of harm when it neygheth fire or water Right so the fader
of heaven chastysed the / to beware of fleing away. So our lord puts
away from the richesse and strength / one by pouerte a another by sickness
that thou sholdest not flee from him therefore be pacyente and grutche not
against the scourge of our lord Ihesu christ and also in likewise ferthermore
that thou grudgest the more thou styrest god against the / says saint Isyder.
The fourth sin is couetyse / yt which is a wrong desire yt man has to
have any thing but he has right thereto / this stondeth in two things
pry^cypally. One is when thou wrongfully purchasest or getest any manner thing
by sacrylege / symony / stelthe / usury / or by any manner falshede / or gyle /
that worldly men use / which cast all their besynes too couetyse yt they ne
recke how they come to good. In this sin be they gylty that for money or
other worldly winning use to play at the dyce or tables which is utterly
forboden by holy church / for many sins that comes thereof. The first is
for the couetyse yt thou have to win and to dyspoyle thy felawe. Another is
for the great usury.xii. for.ix or double or quyte. The third is for increase
of gods / lesynge / and many other vain words that there ben used in great
dyspyte of god and his faith. The fourth is evil ensample that thou gyuest
to other yt behold the. The fyfth is lesyng of time in which you might have
done many good works. The syxte is dyspyte and dysobedience that thou do to
thy mother holy church that forbyddeth the such play. The.vii. is fraud and
deceyte yt you do also to thy felawe in that play. The.viii. is cursed wrath
and strife that comes thereof / whereby often thou renyest thy god and lesest thy
kyndly wit. The.ix. is the brekyng of thy holy day / for in tho days it is
much used and excercysed. The tenthe is manslaughter the which often happens
in that dame. The enleuenth is ydolatry that thou co^mysen. For thou make it
against the dyse that is a token above unto all mighty god. The mycheues and
many mo mysfortunes comes of this sorry play. All that thou getest and wynnest
at this foresaid play for all the business that thou have had therewith thou
may not rejoice but needs thou must give and dystrybute it unto the poor and
nedy And if thou have it of him that thou make so to play by strength or
against his will / thou art bound to restore hy^ again which has lost it
with his play. Also thou brekest all the commandments of god / and whyder
thou wy^ne or lose it is all thyn harm / for and thou lose thou lesest god and
heaven. And if thou win / you wynnest the devil and hell The law canon says
/ that a priest or deken yt gives them to the dyce or dronkenes / but if he
leave it he is certainly dampened. Subdeken clerk or lewd man yt use the same /
they must either leave it or lack their howsell. Therefore every man beware of
this play / and that he suffer it in no wise be done where he may let it.
For they that consent thereto or favor it in any wise ben in as great peril
as the doers. The second point is wrong withholdynge / in which you fallest
in / as often as thou do not to god almighty / to thy neighbor / and to
holy church thy dutees that thou sholdest do by duty / and by gods law /
but wylfully wtholdest them. For not only he that wrongfully geteth / but
also he that wrongfully withholdeth ben in deedly syn^e. Out of sin spryngeth
many shrewde branches / as mawmetry / ambycyon / nygardshyp / treason / usury
/ and symony / raueyne / theft / sacrylege / and such other. These sins ben
so cursed / as I said tofore / that in all thing it contraryeth the will and
commandment of god. The first commandment it contraryeth when thou
withdraws fro god any thing that thou sholdest worship him with. The second
also when for a little winning thou take his name in vain. The third when
by worldly business of getynge of money thou brekest thyn holy day. The
fourth / when for couetyse and auaryce thou withdrawest and take fro thyn
own propre fader and mother bodily and gostly their sustenaunce and lyuelode.
The fyfth when thou sleest and mordrest a man for to have his hauoyr and goods
The syxte when thou do lechery / more for good than for true matrymony. The
seventh when for couetyse you steleste thy neighbors good. The.viii. when in
questes and also consystoryes thou forswerest the and bereste false witness.
The.ix. and the ten when thou desyreste falsely thy neighbors wife or any of
his good. Thus false couetyse contrayeth all the commandments and will of god
Therefore flee it / and think that for all such false gotten goods / but thou
make restytucyon / and amend the here or thou goo hens thou shalt be hanged
in hell without end) Mammona which is the devil of couetysehe / gytueth
four commandments to his servants. One is that thou keep well thine own.
Another that thou give not ne do no alms. The third that thou lene not to
the poor for dread of lesynge. The fourth is / that thou withdraw the and
thy meany from mete and drink / to spare thy good. Of these four shrewde
commandments each man beware and flee such couetyse and desire of good as
Solomon did. For he desired none other richesse nor pouerte. But that is
needful to his lyuelode / and according to his estate. And think though
thou have never so much thou shalt leave it here. For naked thou cameste in
to this world / and again naked (save a ragge thou shalt goo out thereto /
and thus all the care that thou have here is but for an old shete at thy
going hens. The fyfte sin is glotony / the which is an unskillful liking
or love yt a man has in taste or in taking of mete or drink to erly / or to
late. But if sickness or other great need excuse it. Out of this sin
spryngen four branches. One is when thou eteste or drynkest to gredly. In
this fall those that on the fasting days will not abide the hour of noone /
and sytte the longer at mete / and ete more that time than a another. And
often times quench their hunger with breed / spyces / and ouermoche drink for
dread of hunger / and thus they break vygyles / ymberdayes / frydayes in lent
and such other. Another is when thou castest the to live in delytes and
pleasures passing thyn estate. And haste no Joy but when thou may speak of
such welfare / thinking all best beset that thou do spend thereon. Thou
may well use such dayntye metes and drynkes and not sin says saint
Gregory. For the sin is neither in mete ne drink / but in the appetyte / and
talent that thou delytest so much therein. The third is surfeit that is when
thou pomperest thy body with much mete and drink that thou may not broke it
/ but lesest thy sight speech and wit Iangelynge and bostynge / and wenynge
to say well and right / and all that he says is against reason and order. In
this fall these the which makes riot / rere soupers / and destroy vytayle /
the which many a poor man might be releued and sustained by. The fourth is
curyosyte / and yt is when thou can not hold the apayde with easy fare / but
gadrest many curyous metes / more to increase thyn appetyte than to quench
thyn hongre. In this fall they the which waste their goods in desolute etynge
and drinking and great feestes and bankettes making. Against all these cursed
branches thou must keep abstynence in metes and drynkes. For nothing dryueth
away sekenesses / ne dystroyeth the lust of the flesh / than does mesurable
taking of mete and drink. Five manner of folk ben excused from fasting /
that is to say women with child / laborers / pilgrims / young children /
old folk / and seek people. Al these synneth not for to ete twyes on the day
that is mesurable for to sustain nature / and not their appetyte. There is
diverse abstynences / and fastings in diverse manner of persons. The seek man
absteyneth and withholdeth him fro mete and drink for he may not ete and
drink for medycyne. The nedy where he has not whereof The covetous for he
would not spend The gloton to ete the more after. The ypocryte to behold holy
and virtuous man / to deserve mede absteyneth him / both from excess of mete
and lust of sin. Thus should each man keep to his power. This same techeth
saint poule when he says / I pray you as straungeres and pilgrims that ye
absteyne you from flesshely desires / that fight ayenste thy soul / and also
to destroy thy body. These myscheues comen of glotony. It engendrethe sores
bring the in sekenes / destroys virtues / dulleth the wit It hastes the
to death and that that worse is / For it makes the like a best. For the fuller
thy body is the emptyer is thy soul of virtue. Therefore use virtue (says
say^te Austyne) and these virtues shall follow. Abstynence saves thy mind / it
sharpeth thy wit. cleanses thy syghte / makes holy thy fame / swageth thy
sin and makes strong thy blood norysheeth thy mary / destroyth lechery
renneth thy blood / and lengtheth thyn age The.vi. sin is slouthe / and that
is greuaunce or anoy of gostely deeds. One of this spryngen many shrewde
branches. One is to draw long / and tarry the good deeds. that thou
sholdeste do / the which might torn to the health of thy soul and of many
other. Another is a dullness or heuenesse of heart that lets the to love god
/ and makes the that thou haste no liking in goddis service / for though thou
pray. thy heart is not thero^. The third is ydelnesse the which is to much
used / and that lets us to begin any good werkis / and lyghtely makes us
to leave when we begin. And where we were made of kind to travail the sin
of sloughthe / holds us in ydelnesse. and ease against our kind. Therefore
and thou wylt be saved / thou must flee ydelnesse for it is enmye of christen
souls stepmoder to goodness and all virtues and the key of all vices. Always
do some good werkis) says saint Iherome) that that the occupied. For he is
not lightly take with temptacyon / that be syethe him about And Solomon says)
that he is most fool that loves ydelnesse. For in heaven he shall not be
received. For it is ordained only for them that have besyed them here in
virtue. In erthly paradyse they shall never be. for they were never in man's
labor here / Ne in purgatory they shall not be scourged with men but in
hell with deuylles where they shall never have rest Therefore be besy here in
virtue and always think that no thing makes a man so soon to enclyne to
sin as ydelnesse) The seventh sin is lecherye. and that is a flesshely
sin that comes of lust and liking of the flesh. Out of this spryngen
many branches One is fornycacyon / that is dedely sin done flesshely /
Between syngell man and syngell woman against the law of god / and the
techynge of holy church Therefore holy church byddeth that no man child ne
woman child / that passen seven year of age / lie to gyder in bed for dread
of fornycacyon. Ne sister ne brother for dread of inceste.) Another is called
auoutrye / and that is spowsebrekynge / whether it be done bodily or goostely
It is gretter sin and more mysheues than that other. For therein thou dooste
sacrelege (that is to say) thou brekeste the sacrament of wedlock where of
there comen often vnryghtful heirs and falls maryages. This sin dowbleth often
times when it is done by man married / and woman married. For one of these four
myscheues folowes them that customably use this sin.) One is pouerte.)
Another is lesynge of some membre. The third is perpetuell prison. The fourth
sodeyn death And this fails not hardely and if that it be custumably used as I
said tofore. Another is incest / and that is with thy kynne / or thine
affynyte. A another is when thou mysusest thine own wife / and dooste ayenste
kind or order of marriage. For as thou may slay thyself with thyn own
sword. right so thou may with thine own wife. For this sin was Onam
Iacobus cosyn smyten to death. and seven husbondes of Sara also. This sacrament
and all other should be done and used honestely / and with great reverence
Another is when a. man synneth with the kind of his wife / and the contrary
this is right perylous for he may not after wedde none of her kynne / and if
he do the marriage is naught / and that worse is he may know his wife no
more after ward infourme of wedlock without dedely sin. but he be required
of her. Another there is and that is most stynkynge of all / which is the
sin ayenste kind that the devil techeth both man and woman The dyuersytees
of this sy^ne be so abhomynable. that they be not named / but oonly in shryfte
of them that be fall therein* For the gretter and more horrible that they
sin is / the more avails thy shryft So that the shame of the telling is a
great part of thy penance. This was so dyspleasynge to god that he made to
reyne brymstone and fire / that destroyed five Cytees of Sodom and Gomere. The
devil himself that causes this sin has shame of the deed. These and many
other flesshely sins / which ben dedely / and eueryche werse than othere
comen out of this foul sin of lechery.) The which be well known to them
that lyuen in lust of their flesh. Therefore flee the occasyons (says
saint poule) that is to say) syghte of wymmen / kissing / touching. and
such other / This wise escaped Joseph the sin of his lady when he left his
palle or mantel with her. And ran away Think also upon the fynyshement and
end / and in likewise how nyghe it is of the dredefull and streyte dome the
which thou shalt come unto and the horrible and inestymable pains and also
tourmentes the which are in the perfounde depnes of hell made ready for such
horrible sins / and look that thou presume not of thyself in no manner of
wise. For the noble king Dauyd / and the wise king Salamon his sone / and the
strong Sampson were ouercomen with that unhappy sin. Also in no manner of
wise here nor also speak no lecherous words / but with all thy heart and mind
love holy scripture. for that draws a man much therefore. Use also prayer
fasting / good and lawful occupacyons / and wythdrawe the from
superfluitees. And excess of hot metes and drynkes for if thou live after thy
flesh thou shall be deed says scripture / that is to say / dampened unto
ever lasting pain of hell.) Therefore shytte the gates of thy body and thy
soul fro all these myscheues of sin / that is to say) thy five wits
bodily and goostly / that they consent not with him. First thine eyes from
shrewde and lewd things bac byty^ge and evil words and cou^ceyles. Thy mouth
from unlawful taste of glotony lewd kyssy^ges / and rybawdry words thyho^des
from lewd towchy^ge of thyselfe and of other And from stelthe and taky^ge
other me^nes goods agay^st their will Thy feet also from the paths of sin
/ and all other wretched ways that thou myghtest draw to. These ben the
bodily wits. Than take thy ghoostly, wits as mind / and understanding /
reason and ymagynacyon / that is to say. Have mind of the kyndenesse of god /
and of thy last end / and thou shalt never sin. And ye shall understand
also Crystes loore and his techynge and let ever thy will be ready to worship
him in thought / word and deed without any werynes. Let reason also rule thy
deeds Inward / and outward by Crystes loore and his tehynge withouten oony
deceyte or blyndenesse of thy own self And always have ymagynacyon of
virtuous living of needful works / and of dredefull deeds of Joy and bliss
that is ordained in heaven to them that leave their sin and shall be saved /
and of the horrible pains / and sorrows that they shall suffer endlesly /
which for their sins shall be dampened in to the dongeon of hell. In the
which ben.ix. manner of horrible and hydeous pains / that nine manner of people
shall be tourmented with there as clerks says. The first is fire that ever
brenneth / and never gives light in which thoughal ye water in the sea were
cast in it should not que^che it. For as our fire passes a fire painted so
does that fire pass ours. In this fire shall they ever brenne / that here
always brenned in the fire of false couetyse. The second is passing cold /
that if a great hylle of fire were casten therein it should torn to yse / with
this shall they be tourmented there / that been cold in love by malice of the
fend. The third pain is worms and horrible serpents as dragons that never
shall deye / but live in fire as fysshes does in water. With these they shall
be gnawen there that here gnawe them self with venymous hate of their even
christian. The fourth is abhomynable stynke / wherein they shall be lapped there
that here delyteth them in the foul stynke of the sin of lechery. The fyfth
shall be betynge of mighty fendes as it were with hamers of yren / wherewith they
shall be payned and beten without ceasing that would not here be chastysed by
ye techynge of gods words. The syxte pain is derkenes the which is so
tenebrous and thycke / that as it were that it might be felt with hand. In
these horrible derkenes shall they be bound there that lives here in present
world in derkenesse of this foresaid sin and will not come to Christ the
which is very light by holy living and leuynge of sin whiles they might.
The seventh pain is open shenshyppe or shame for sin / the which shall be
apertly known / and not hid in paynfull reprefe of sinful folk / and
specially to them that will not knowledge their sin here to god in due manner.
Ne were not ashamed of him / this shall be a full herd tourment. The. eight is
the horrible sight of deuylles / rorynge / and cryenge with ferefull and
sorrowful voice wherewith thus they shall be payned there that here took none
head of holy ensamples and good deeds. Ne of prechynge nor techynge of gods
words and byddynges. The nynthe is fyry bonds / wherewith they shall be bound
there hand and foot / and other members that here spends their members and
lymmes in ye deuylles service after the lust and liking of their bodies. These
nine pains shall these sinful suffer there that here forsook and left
unwisely the felawshyp of the nine ordres of aungellys by their sinful living
/ but they amend them or they goo hens. Therefore be sorry for thy sin and
amend the whiles thou art here that thou may escape all these horrible
pains / and reygne with our lord Ihesu Christ in his high bliss of heaven.
Where is ever myrthe after travail / fredome after bondage / health after
long sekenes / rest after travail / life after death / perfyte love without
dread / and ever day without night. There thou shalt have seven Joys in thy
body / and seven in thy soul. In thy body fayrenes / swetenes / strength /
lust health / and in mortalyte / and in thy soul wisdom / frendshyppe / and
accord / power / worship / surety / and Joy without end. To the which he
bring us that for us deyed on the rode. Ihesu christ gods sone. Amen

ON sunday that last was I enfourmed you on homely wise of the worthynes of
man's soul what it is / when it is out of sin / what sin is / and how it
defowleth thy soul. Of the sacrament of penance also / how it is a salve
sanatyfe for all manner sores of sins / when it is dyscretly used. Now by ye
leave of god I shall declare to you the three parts of penance / contrycyon /
confession / and satysfaccyon / how by ye fulfyllynge of them your souls that
thus have been wounded with sin may be reformed and brought again to grace.
First as for contrycyon it is said cut your hertes and your clothes. For
confession also shows out your hertes before the priest by open speech of
mouth. And for satysfaccyon do ye worthy fruytes of penance: Thus by these
three things this holy sacrament of penance is preued. For confession also as
it is said in the sawter. I have trauayled in my sorrows. I shall make moist my
bed every night with my teres as who says. I have trauayled to make
satysfaccyon for my sins with sorrow of mine heart / having in my mind how
long I have lived and how I have spent my time. What goodness I have left
undone. How much evil I have done / and how by my sin I have lost ye
felawshyp of heaven and Joined me to the felawshyppe of fendes that I am also
here in the vale of teres full of wretchedness / and by birth brought forth
unto man's sins and sorrows and shall come unto the dredefull dome / and
give a reckoning for the leest and the most syn^e that eue^ I did. In word /
in deed / or thought not knowing wheder I shall be worthy hate or mede / that
I would also be in bliss which I may not come to without great tourment /
trybulacyon and sorrow. These considering thyn eres and works thou shall well
know and perceive that thou art cause of thyn own sorrow and myschaunce. And
so for shame thou shalt fall in to contrycyon / and win the grace and mercy
of our most merciful lord god. It is a right hard and endurced heart /
says saint Bernarde that neither the benefaytes of almighty god may grynde and
molyfye / ne the horrible pains of hell may feere / ne the Joys of heaven may
sustain. Ne that temporal tourmentes ne sorrow may chastyse. Many one there is
that can not be contryte in that they do not know what contrycyon is. Therefore
ye shall understand that contrycyon is an inward sorrow of thy soul fourmed
by grace / the which comes of forthynkynge of sin / and dread of the high
Judgment / with a steadfast purpose to be confessed / and to do satysfaccyon
after the commandment of the church. It is also a conuersyon of thyn heart
from evil to goodness / From the devil to god / and from vice to virtue
There be many that have contrycyon / but not perfyte. As wha^ thy heart is
touched with the hands of god / by Inspyracyon to make the perfyte sorrowful /
but somewhat or less in as much as thou begynnest to turn. This is called
attrycyon. But when will and desire of sin in every part is fully forsaken
with full sorrow of heart then it is contrycion And so very contrycyon is
the search of sin. Orygen says also / that verey contrycyon is for to
abhor and loath all gaye and superfluous array / and too desire the higher
weeping / and fle slaughter to speak few words / and for to work ryghtfully.
And ever to have dread and inward sorrow in thyn heart for thy sins. For the
more that thou love a thing / the more is thy sorrow when thou doostle se
it. Above all creatures is god to be loved. Then it is most sorrow of his
loss than of all other creatures wha^ you commyttest deedly sin / then thou
lesest thy god. Therore by great contrycyon and sorrow thou must get him
again. For look how much thou have of grace as says saint Gregory / so much
thou must have of sorrow for thy sins The souls that are in bliss they may
have no contrycyon / by cause their Joys ben replete with plenteuousnes of
glory. They that been in hell makes sorrow / but that sorrow is not fourmede
with grace. The souls in purgatory has sorrow fourmed with grace. yet it is
not merytory / in as much as it should have be had here. Thus in this life
mercy oonly helps / but after not. It is blamefully herd says saint
Iherome. that can weep the death of his friend or the harm of temporel loos.
and can not weep and be sorry for sin. Thy contrycyon therefore must be sharp
in that. that thou have offended thy heavenly fader that bodily and goostly
fedyth the in many wyses. and yet must thou be sharp / in that that thou haste
offendede thy lord Ihesu goddis sone of heaven / that with his precious blood
and with his mercy delivered the from the bonds of sin crueltee offendes.
and byternes of the pains of hell. And though our lord said to the. Not
every man that says lord lord shall enter the kingdom of heaven / yet leave him
not but have him to the tavern of contrycyon. and say to him as Dauyd did.
The meke and the contryte heart Lord thou shalt not despise. And then he
shall give the grace here / and Joy when thou ghost hens. The fawcon when he
has taken his pray he desires no more thereof but the heart and there with he
is co^tence. So our lord Ihesu when he had raunsoned us out of hell he
desires no more but a meke and a contryte heart of us. Therefore as the
fauconer or he will give the heart to his fawcon first he will kytte it. and
then take out the blood and wasshe it. So must thou give thy heart to our
lord. First kytte it with the knyf of contrycyon. And then take out the
blood of sin by confession. and after wasshe with satyssfaccyon / and so with
the knyfe of his passyo^ kytte your hertes and not your clothes having in
mind that the blaade of his knyfe was made of the spear head and nails / that
his precious body and heart were thrylled withalle / The hafte was made of the
holy tree of the cross / and the vyrell was made of the crown of thorn that
was about his head whette this knyfe on his blessed body that so hard and
cruelly was tourmentede on the cross that they left no hole Ioynte with
other / make also the shethe of thy knyfe of the white skin of our lord
Ihesu Christ / that was painted with reed blody wounds / so many that from the
top of the heed unto the sole of ye foot there was no hole place of him left
vnscourged. Then with the cords that he was bound with to the pyler. Now by^de
this knyfe to the gyrdle of thy heart. And I doubt not be thy heart never so
hard / and thou this faithfully pry^te in thy mind his passion with thy hard
heart / it will begin to break. Thus may thou learn too suffer repreues for
our lord Ihesu which for the suffered these and many more. There ben.vi.
things that should stere the to great sorrow for thy sins. The first is that
sometime of ye day or night as I said before / bethynke the how thou have lived
/ and when thy sins come to thy mind / have an inward sorrow and remorse
that thou have so grievously offended thy god / thy maker / and redemptoure. The
second that thou be ashamed of thy sin / and else at the day of dome they
shall be showed to the / and to all the world openly / unto thy great shame
and confusyon. The third that you have great obhomynacyon of the fylth of
sins / that thou have thus co^mysed both in the sight of god and man. Seneca
says though I wist yt my sone should be unknown both to god and man / yet
would I abhor and loathe the fylthe of my sin. The fourth is that thou have
dread of the day of dome / and of the pains of hell. Of this day speaks
saint Peter / uneath the ryghtwyse man ye day shall be saved says he. Where
shall then the synnefull man aperethe which breketh daily the hestes and
precepts of our lord. As often and as many times as I do behold ye day
says saint Iherome. I quake in all my heart / and whyder I ete or drink / or
else any other things do / ever me think that the trompe of god sowneth in
mine eeres / and byddeth me synnefull wretch arise and come to the dome The
fyfth is that thou have sorrow for the loss of heaven / and the great offense
done to thy maker. The syxte that thou have a three fold hope. First of
forgyuenes that thy sins ben alone forgyuen the.. Hope also of grace to do
good works / and in them always to increase. And then hope of bliss /
wherewith thou may afterward be rewarded for thy good works / the prophet
said before yt I should wasshe every night my bed with teeres. By this it
seems ye co^trycyon after forgyuenes should be co^tynuall. To know this it is
hard / yet in thy will thou may have contynuall contrycyon / ever in full
purpose too leave / and too loathe thy sin and thus it is needful. For as a
confessoure knew such one that comes so contynually being sorry inward and
outward / he needs never to give him but little penance. For though he had
done great and horrible syn^e he might so venge and bewail his sins here /
that after his death he should no pain suffer in purgatory / yet this sorrow
must be mesurable with a trusty hope that thou fall not in to heaviness of
dyspayre. It must also be general and hole for all sins yet more sharper for
one than for an other after the gretenes is / and it must be done for the
offense done too god / and not only for dread of everlasting pain. This
manner of contrycyon breketh the snares and the chains of the devil. And
releaseth the bonds and oblygacyons of everlasting pain and tourment / and
delyuereth the from the seruage and horrible company of deuylles / and makes
the child of almighty god / and heir of the bliss of heaven / the which
tofore were the children of the devil / and brennynge bronde of the perfounde
pyt of hell. Only contrycyon also avails not / but there as confession and
satysfacco^n may be had. For as we offend god in three manner of wise. In
heart / speech and deed / so it needs that we do our satysfaccyon in three
manners and else the sin is not forgyuen. Only contrycion may avail also
when thou art very contryte / and purposest afterward to abstain the from
all manner of sy^ne. And knowlegest thy sin / as soon as thou may / and
do also due satysfaccyon after the dome of the church and this is the most
sure way. The second washing is confession done of thy mouth. Right as the
soul is now wasshen and made white with sowkynge sorrow / and also with salt
fretynge teres of thyn eyes. So by lowly confession of thy mouth thou must
rub of thy foul spots of sin / that are rusted in thy soul of this
manner of washing speaks the prophet Dauyd saying thus. Thou shalt spring
me lord with ysope / and I shall be cleansed / thou shalt wasshe me / and I
shall be made clean and as white as snow / right so lowely confession done of
thy mouth / to thy curate purges and makes more white thy soul than is any
snow in this world. Se therefore what confession is. Confession after doctors
science is a lawful declaracyon of sin tofore done. And a thing whereby a
preuy goostly sore or sykenes is opened with hope of forgyuenes. Three manner of
co^fessyons there ben. One is in ward in thy soul / for or thou made it /
it was known to god. The second tofore a Judge in hope of forgyuenes of god /
and the third tofore gods vycarye / where preuy sin is pryuely opened. Of
these speaks scypture and said. Tell out openly if thou have any thing to
say or show that thou may thereby be Iustyfyed. The great flagellacyon pain
and passion of our sauyoure and redemptoure is a great remedy against sin be
it orygynall or actual. The virtue whereof is expressyd in the sacrament of
holy church without which there may no man be hole / therefore that
confession is needful preuythe scripture saying thus. He that is proud and
will not obey the precept of the priest he shall be deed / we have it also of
our lord fader of heaven that every man and woman having years of dyscressyon
is bound by one parsone to make confession onys a year of all his sy^nes to
his own curate / That it is also needful reason preueth in this wise. And
thou had trespaced to thy neighbor it were not ryghtful that thou
sholdeste set thine own pain at thy lust. ne he that has wrong neither.
but a mean that could and might set it resonably after the wrong were
declared. The pressed is ordained to be a mean and set thy pains for the
wrong that thou haste done to thy god by thy sin / it needs then that
thou show truly thy trespace unto him / that he may set the / such penance
whereby thou may be able to come to the presence of thy lord god. Also in
every dome that is reasonable / there must be a Judge and a person that is
gylty / and ye preue must other be by preues / or else by wytnes against thy
will or by wylfull knowledge sith the dome of penance is fre and not against thy
will / by cause thou ghost thereto wylfully / then shall not the process of
this dome be in promise / ne in witness but freely in thy propre confession.
And he must be Judge. that may both forgive and condemn. (And that is god)
for he oonly releseth sins And so till he took mankind confession of heart
suffysed / but after he required and asked confession vocyall which is made of
man to man / and for as much as he is not here with us in form of man /
therefore he ordeyneth men to be his vycaryes / that thou sholdeste confess the
to / To whom he gaaf power to bind and to unbind. And thus is confession
needful by reason / promise and holy scripture. Our lord gave power only to
priest to bind and to unbind when he said (Whoos sy^nes ye forgive they ben
forgive / and whose sins ye wythholde / they ben wythholde. yet as by power
and virtue god loses / for there is no power but of god. Christ says saint
Austyne was for us crucyfyed by which man and none other sins are forgyuen.
Therefore our lord gaaf openly the holy gooste to men / gyuynge understanding
that sins are not forgyuen thorugh merytes of men but thorugh the goodness
of the holy ghost. for when he arose from death he said to his dyscyples Take
you the holy ghost / and whose sins ye forgyuen. (As who says) the spyryte
that is god forgyueth / and not ye. And so he that may forgive by man / may
forgive without man) The sacrament of grace (says saint Austyne) God
forgyueth sometime by evil men. but grace alone. He gives but by him self)
yet remyssyon of sin he wercheth booth by himself and by the holy gooste.
And thus no man does away sin but christ alone. Saint Ambrose and other
doctoures says that ye word of god forgyuethe sins. The priest is the Judge.
and yet of himself he has no power / but of him alone that deyed for our
sins. Saint Iherome says that same power that christ gaaf his apostles.
after his resurreccyon / the same has all holy church in bysshoppes and
prestes. But specially to Peter. and to his successors That all should
understand / whoo so parts him from vnytee of the faith / may never be
losed from sin / ne enter in to the bliss of heaven. The priest losed none
verily but God tho that tourneth te penance then he mynystreth ryghtfully
that of the virtue of god / what had it proufyted to Lazare that he went
out of his tomb / but if it had be said / lose him and let him go Christ
by voys raised him from his sepulcre. And so he went for the that was bound
not by might of his fete / by virtue of him that raised him. This same is now
goostely done in the heart of repentaunt man when thou hereste a man
repentance for his sin then he begins to live again / when he
confessethe him then he is brought out of his sepulcre but yet he is not
losed. See therefore of whom and when he losed. Christ says tho that ye have
losed here in earth / shall be losed in heaven Here take heed how he said tho
that is to say no man except / but who so be repentaunt / and ask
fogyuenesse by the church / he shall have foryeuenes. yet though by the
church sin may worthily be forgeuen the / the deed may not rise / but our
lord cry within forth. For that is done within us but of him The dyscyples
loosed him living whom the master raised fro death. For and they should have
raised him deed / they should have showed more strength than virtue. Thus has
holy church auctoryte of her spowse to lose fro me al manner of sin Saint
austyn says that seventy times and seven we ben charged to forgive that is to
say to every man that is repentaunt / and asks forgyuenes / yet may not every
priest generally do this but in time of need. or by auctoryte of the (...) /
or of his bishop for right as a man has power to ete / and has not whereof /
so it is of prestes power / all they have power yet it must be give them of
their soueraynes / when where. and how much they shall execute. There may
no man cheese him a confessor. but the (...) above without auctoryte of him /
or else of them that has power under him. But needs must he be shryuen to
his own curate / yet in certain causes believe of his curate he may. as when
the curate lacks discressyon. Another when thou chaungest thy household and
art a vagabonde. or in peril of death. Or when thou entrest the sea in so
great peril / thou may also by that confess the to a lay man / and have
forgyuenesse. and they that thus here the if thou escape must charge the that
thou show the same to thine own curate. Also pilgrims merchants / and
other goers about / in diverse countrees in the same wise. Other causes there
ben yt thy curate must send the tofore the bishop whereto you must needs obey.
and be sorye yt you have more offend than other have.) The tokens of very
confession are these. The ^^^st is shame when thou shryueste the (says saint
Iherome / were a shamed of all the ways that thou haste gone in sin / Not for
thy confession / but for the fylthe of sin that thou sheweste there. For not
oonly our lord sees it / says he / but also all the holy company of heaven.
Therefore be a shamed. for that makes the / the sooner to have mercy of our
lord. Saint Marye mawdeley ne shamed not for too confess all her sins in
audyence presence of all that were at the feast of her confession and teeres /
therefore brought her to bliss. The second is mekenes in word lokynge / and
chere. with out any stordynes. as the publycane that thought himself unworthy
to lift up his eyes to heaven.) And as Poule also obeyed to the calling of
our lord / So sholdest thou to the bidding of thy goostely fader. And in
no wise tarry thy shryfte for these perils showing. ye that been yet
vnshryuen take good head to this lesson and see what peril ye stand in. The
first is for the vncerteynte of the life. Scripture says that no man /
knows his end. ne how / ne what manner he shall dey. And all is for thou
sholdest in every space and time / and in like wise in every place be ready and
priest for to receive thy death. And also a another is for encreasynge and
multeplyenge of thy deedly sin / for what deedly sin some ever it be and if
that it is not anon done away by shryft he draws an other to him / as says
saint Augustyn. And so as thou encreasest thy sin. Right so thouencreasest
thy pain. Another for dread of tornynge again. For the ferder that thou ghost
fro god by thy long abiding in sin. The harder it is to the after to torn
again to thy good life. Also in great sekenes thy pain is sometime so great yt
thou may not be very repentaunt. It must also be hole / not some to one / and
some to another. This is a great spece of ypocrysye / and this uses much
people / and all for they would be hold holy / and better than they ben. Saint
Bernarde says / that there is no confession / but it be in truth of thy
mouth / prouffytable and clennes of thy heart if thou be seek / and sweet in all the parties of thy body / it is a token of life. And if it be pertyculer it
is a token of death. Right so / and thou tell all thy sins it is a token of
salvation. As when Christ heled the man that the gospel speaks of / he made
him not half hole / but all hole. So when he forgyueth / he forgyueth all /
or never a dele. Therefore hold out thyn heart to thy lord god says the
prophet as water / not as oil leest the fatnes abide / or as milk leest the
whytenes appear / ne as wine lest the savor abide / thou heldest out thyn
heart as oil / that shryuest the of thy small sins / and leuest the great
and ye fat behind in the. Thou heldest out as milk / that by color of
excusacyon make thy sins white. As our first fader Adam did by the woman
Eve / and the woman by the serpent thou heldest out also as wine that after the
leuynge of thy sin thou kepest the sauoure within the thereof / as when thou
delytest the in lecherous words and comunycacyons / or have Joy and great
delight for to se vanytees or auauntest the of lewdness done to fore / and that
is a sin that most greueth god. Therefore hold out thy heart as water that
neither no fatness / color / ne no favor abide after with all the
cyrcunstaunces. As in what manner. what place / what cause / what time / what
age / what estate / how much. how long. why. and where and all such that
agree. Thy sin also it must be naked not made by a messengyre / ne letter.
but with thine own mouth. nor in gaye terms. but in such wise. be it never
so foul that thy confessoure may know the meaning. as do it wylfully. As
the thief that henge upon the cross. And not as Achor. It must also be
faythfulle that thou have full hope of forgyuenes of thy sins by the mercy of
god or thou goo hens accusynge thyselfe and none other. saying with Iosue and
dauyd. I am he that synneth. I am he that did a mys. Not excusing the by
custom. felysshyppe. or freylte as some do. it also in good entente for no
vain glory but specially for the offense done without any feynynge. For
diverse causes is confession profitable. First for the peril of sin that thy
confessoure there shows the. Also for the shame that thou haste there in thy
confession / which is a great relees of thy pain. A another for it shows in
thy concyence a sykernes of forgyuenes By confession also God is gloryfyed and
the deuylle confounded. For who so uses often to be confessyd in what
temptacyon he be He shall not be overcome with the devil. Say^te Austyne
says.) that the oftener that thou art co^fessyd of thy sins / in hope of
foryeuenes / the light liar says he. thou shalt have grace and foryeuenes of
thy sins. Onys a year it is spedfull to make thy confession generalle / And
special in the point of death. And the shame hereof shall be there to the a
great part of thy satysfaccyon.) The third part of penance (as I said
tofore is satysfaccyon. This is grounded in the words of the prophet that
where he said to Naaman. Go and wasshe the seven times in Jordan / and thou
shall be cleansed of all that thou haste defacede with spottys of sin though it
be sokede with bitter sorrow of thine heart and clearly rubbed with confession
/ yet must it have many diverse rensynges after with satyfaccyon. till it be
so clearly purged here or in purgatory that it may clearly appear after in
the syghte of our lord. If thy contrycyon be great here / thy penance may
be the less there. And if it be little thy pain must needs be the gretter.
And so great it may be here that it suffyseth to thy salvation.) Satysfaccyon
after diverse doctoures / is a putting a way of the cause of sin not
taking head of their subgestyons. It is also an obligacio^ done of good works
to god with mekenes. and lownes of heart / after the qualyte and quantyte of
sin This satysfaccyon must be do wylfully without grutchynge. and it must
be plener and general for every sin resonably.) As preuy penance for preuy
sin open penance for open sin. Three pryncypall werkis there ben of
satysfaccyon. Alms / Prayer and fasting. These three our Lord fulfilled in
his passion for redempcyon of our sin. Therefore what alms is / and how it
should be done. I shall tell you. Alms is a lowynge of thine heart with a
wylfull compassyon / to them that been in need / and it is a deed of mercy by
compassyon of thy neighbors myschef There ben three manners of alms One is in
the contrycyon of thine heart for the sin that thou offerest thyself to god A
another by gyuynge of bodily tresoure with thine hond. The third in pity and
compassyon having of thy neighbors myscheue.) Temporalle alms thou may
sometime give of goodis untruly gotten. (that is to say) when thou knoweste not
to whom thou shall restore it / and yet it must be done by counseyle of thy
goostely fader. And tithe not that thou getest by theft. For sometime it is
changed and then he that delyuereth shall ask it again. And sometime it is
changed and shall not be asked again As when it tourneth not to the taker. by
cause they come by theft or robbery raueyn / symony. or vsery And so of them
shall no alms be given. For they must be restored ayene. But when the
having is changed. and shall not be asked again. As gifts of common wymen
and Iogelers / or such other then shall they begyue in alms Also if thou
find a thing of any value after time thou haste done thy besynes / to wit
dewly who owyd it thou shall spend it in alms by counseyle of thy
goostelyfader to all that have need. Also thou shall give thine alms to good
and badde friend and enmye. if thou be of power our lord says Give to every
man that asks the and torn not away thy face says thoby Yet it is said)
give the good man and receive not the sinner (that is to say) Give that nature
be sustained / and not the sin nourysshed Thou nourysshest the sin that
geuest thy good to Iogelers and Iapers. And such that live by Idelnes. and
suffer the pour man to have hungre. and myscheef Such manner of gyuyng is
forbode. If pity says saint Ambrose / shall not be sweet to all much more
plenteuous must it then be to the good. and virtuous in living thou shalt
rather give to thy kynne / or neighbor in their need / and they ben virtuous
/ than to other. Thou shall also give to old men and wymen with child if they
have need rather than to other. And to them that be fall in to great pouerte
and myserye / and when that such pouerte falls or happens not unto any
manner of person thoroughe ryotous garments or array / or pomp of this
present world / yet rather give then the pour be unserved / Open thy heart
to all that ask the for the love of god without dyffyculte. and give it with
charity and with good will. Orellys thou make no dew satysfaccyon for thy
sin. Also with a glad chere and a meke spyryte / so that thou do it for no
vain glory / nor dyspyte / not to the poor / for he is a man as thou art /
and give it hastily / and tarry not from him yt suffers anguysshe says Solomon
/ give it also with dyscrecyon. And if thou have much give much. If thou have
little / give little says Thobye / Thus bodily or goostly every man may give
alms. Ferther more against concupyscence of thy flesh / thou haste fasting
/ hard going and living / and bitter weeping knocking on thy breast / of
knelynge / and sharp dyscyplyne with rods of thyn own hondes / travail of
pilgrimage / trybulacyons / anguysshe / sekenes and such other bodily dyseases
pacyently suffered of the scourge of god all such penaunces wylfully taken / a
dyscrete confessoure will put to the in part of thy satysfaccyon and penance.
Fasting is a wylfull abstynence from mete and drink / whereby the sin is
wasshen / and thy flesh made low for desire of everlasting bliss. Goostly
fasting is from deedly sins and temporal Joy. Saint Iherome says / that
it not prouffytable to feeble thy boody with fasting when thy heart swells by
pride. Some fast for sykenes or they may not ete. Some pouerte / some for
ypocrysye. And some for ye worship of god. And thou must modere thy fasting
that thy stomach be not grieved with to much excess. For little mete mesurably
rempreth and prouffyteth both body and soul / and dysposeth the to goostly
travail. There be some that ete much delycate metes / and more when they
fast. Than they do at two meles wha^ they fast not. And in manner they break
their fast. There is also prayers against pride two manner. One is inward in
thy soul without she wynge of voice. Another also ordained for the three
parties of satysfaccyon against pride. Prayer is a louy^ge desire and appetyte
of thy soul unto our lord god / with speech of mouth / or gaderynge of words
/ to ask good of god with vtterynge of thy voys. Of four fruitful prayers
saint Poule speaks when he says. I pray you first of all things that there
be obsecracyons / oryson / postulacyons / and yeldynge thankynges. Obsecracyons
are when you see in thy soul the multitude of thy sin / and little of thy
merytes. And seeste the horrible pains of hell / which thou may not void
by thine own virtue. Ne durst not for thine own unworthiness make thy prayer
thy self but make supplycacyons by other means. As when thou say Sancta
maria ora pro nobis. Our lord by thy passion deliver us. Oryson is when thou
have forsake thy sin and askeste forgyuenesse by open speech. Postulacyon is
when after thy penance done thou haste a sad hope of forgyuenesse if thou
pray also any thing against thine own speed. as Poule that prayed / that his
temtacyons might be put away. Then our lord will not grant it. the
Some things thou may pray with condycyon. And some things without
condycyon / to have grace and bliss with our blyssed Ihesu Christ / that thou
may axe without condycyon. saint Bernarde saych that thou may ask of
our lord god grace in all goodness to please him / live in him / see his
bliss / and to able thy self to virtues too do him worship. And to be with
him withouten end / yet before this prayer thou must make ready thy soul in
diverse wise. First thou must with draw thy heart from outward business /
being in will to keep thy thoughts / after thy first entente. And thou must
consider also how worthy thou art that prayest and how worthy he is that thou
prayeste for. Thou must also be clean in soul. And if thy prayer be short
let it be done with steadfast hope for a short prayer with a sad hope
faythefully done / is more acceptable to god / than a long prayer feyntely
done without hope / yet to them that been occupied in dyuyne service long
prayer is spedefull. To prayer also with voys is more spedefull / then to
think or to worship. Grysostome says thus.) Thou yt with loud voys prayest
and whysperest / thou suffereste none other to pray about the. And therefore
thy sin and thy pain is increased if it be done wyttyngely. And thy self
not herd of god It must also be done without interrupcyon not to say a verse
or a pater noster / and between Iangle and tell a tale without great nede^ /
ne to haste it to much. Thou must alsoo make it common to place / time and
persons. Poule says) I will that men pray in every place / yet in the
church pryncypally. For our lord Ihesu Christ says) Mine house shall be
called the house of prayer / all times are times of prayer / yet in holy church
ben seven hours specially ordained for time of prayer / which most specially
longen to relygyous men. Our lord before his passion trauayled all night in
prayer. Our blyssed lady and Joseph also rose every night at mydnyghte and
said the psalms of co^mendacyon. And the same did Dauyd and his household
Though all may not do thus / yet auyse them that be bound / and have no
lettynge. It must also be made with other and not all way alone. In that it is
more acceptable to god more pleasynge to aungelys / and more confusyon to the
devil. And the same that thou makeste for a another / is better than that thou
make for thy self / and though that our blyssed lord Ihesu Christ here
not thy prayer anon at thy will / yet he hereth it and grants the happily
that that is more spedefull. A thing that is long desired / at the last it
comes / and that is the more deynte.) It must also be done with a great
devotion. Devotion as the clerks say) is a tenderness of heart / whereby thou
brekest lyghtely in to teeres. And also a will of love lift up to god or to
his heavenly creatures / menynge the inward and outward to the service of thy
lord god Ihesu Christ Such devotion purgyth both boody and soul. And thus
devotion may be known by two pryncypall tokens. One is by gretnesse of the
voys outward / as a great fire is known by the flamme. Another by teeres /
for right as fire dryueth out moystoure fro wete wood / so devotion brings
out teeres of thine eyes in prayers. Well is him that has such plente of
teeres. For he is dysposed to grace. But there ben some that have great plente
of teeres fro day to day in prayer deuoutely redynge or speaking / and yet
will not leave their wicked sin nor travail to withstonde their temptacyons /
nor to know / ne too keep the precepts of our blyssed lord Ihesu Christ /)
Such teeres ben not accept. For dew sacrefyce to our blyssed lord Ihesu
Christ / for and if that thou be full contryte says Aldrede / and trust
faithfully in the mercy of God truly confessed / and willing to do thy
penance / and not in will to return again to thy old) sin. Then says
he such teeres pleasen god. And wasshen away thy sins and more tormente the
devil as says Saint Bernarde. Then all other kinds of torments may do.
Sith devotion must be in every prayer / yet the time thereof should be
pryncypally used in the time of the mass and for four causes. One is for the
presence of our lord god that is there / not oonely by his godhede / but also
by his manhood that he took for the love of man's soul. The second is for
the multitude of aungellys that be evermore present to yield worship to
almighty god. The third is for the great prouffyte / and speed that the body
and soul have / by virtue of the holy sacrament / both to them that been
present. And specially unto them that worthyly and in clean life does receive
him. The fourth is for ye wonderful worship that is there given to man / that
thorughe the virtue of words said of man / the presence of our lord is
had / and the Innumerable nombre of aungellys / so many that no tongue can
tell / nor heart think. Devotion should be also used in time of service that
thou art bond to say. But for vnkunnynge say their service the more hastily
/ for their preuy prayer that they haven devotion to. And the devotion is
little or naught worth. Se therefore now how they soul may be reformed /
and brought ayene to god. Thy soul has mind reason and will Mind for it
should rest in god. Reason for thou sholdeste know god / and will for thou
sholdest love god. But by sin thy mind is unstable / thy reason blind and
thy will crowked. And all is for thou forsakeste thy god. The reformacyon
therefore of thy mind is to bring ayene thy heart that was trauayled with
vain / thoughts / by prayer / redynge and often thinking upon god As of his
Incarnacyon / passion / Innumerable been faytes / and gracyous gifts / having
great sorrow for thy unkindness that thou always show him. The reformacyon
of thy reason is to by leave sadly in the faith of holy church our lord for
our great comfort has give us knowledge in holy scripture / where we may
find all that is necessary and spedfull to our soul hele / not to follow
herin our natural will but to submytte our wit to the rules of faith after
the understanding of holy doctors / and so goostly to be cleansed by the
sacrament of penance. The reformacyon of thy will also it is to withstonde
vices And with a good will truly and faithfully encreace and abide in virtues
for god without any curyosyte of will. that there be no double desire ne no
affection plesynge to the but such as is according to the will of god. Thus
than considered the worthynes of thy soul The horror of thy sin wherwyth
thy soul is thus wounded Take this salve of penance with these three plastres.
Contrycyon / confession / and satysfaccyon. And by^de they^ sadly to thy sore
with the bonds of hope and dread. Hope to have Forgyuenes of thy sin hope of
grace to leave well after. and hope of glory without end to reygne perpetuell
in heaven bliss. Dread also of the pains of hell if thou dyspeyre of his
mercy. For to him it is proper to have mercy and to spare. So that for every
sin (as says saint Augustyne) there is an absolucyon / be it never so
great. For what might be great or more worse sin than to slay our lord
Ihesu Christ. Right as the Jews did / yet there were some of them after that
byleued / and now ben saved. Peter and Marye magdeleyne and many other also
after they had sinned. they were with the salve of contrycyon made hole / and
now ben in bliss. Therefore be thy sins never so many nor so great.
dyspeyre the not but say always with Dauyd. (Have mercy on me lord after thy
great mercy.) Do away lord my wickedness. Man has sinned says saint
Austyne (and christ has redeemed. And so at our lord as says the prophet.
is mercy and plenteuous redempcyon And he shall redeem Israhell from all his
wyckydnesse. Israhell is as much to say) as he that sees god) He sees god
then that lothyth his sin. and by contrycyon and by confession and penance
doing is converted to him That thou may then thus be converted and do
penance for your sins grant he you and me that deyed for us upon ye rode
tree. Ame^.

The general Sentence
GOod men and wymen I do you to understand yt we the have cure of your souls
/ be commanded of our ordynaryes / and by the constytucyons and the law of
holy church / to show to you four times by the year. in each quarter of the
year onys / when the people is most plenarye in holy church / the artycles
of the sentence of cursynge. So that not for our defawte no man nor woman
fall therein. And if any be therein fallen he may thorugh the help of god
almighty and all holy church with shryfte and penance making good for his
sin up rise and him amend / wherefore I do you to understand that cursynge
is such vengaunce taking that it departs a man fro the bliss of heaven /
from howsell / shryfte / and all the sacraments of holy church / and betake
him to the devil and to the pains of hell the which shall endure perpetuelly
without end / but if he have grace of our lord him to amend. But therefore
see that no man nor woman say that I curse them. for it longs not to me /
but to show the poy^tes and ye artycles of the sentence of cursynge. For I do
you well to wit / Who so does against any of these points that I shall
show you. He is acursed in the deed doing of the Pope / archebysshop / bishop
and of all holy church / And that god almighty give you grace for to keep you
out of cursynge / Lysten and here / and I shall thorugh the help of god fader
all mighty to you. Then tell and show. By the auctoryte of god the sone and
the holy gooste and his glorious mother and maiden our lady saint mary / and
the blessed apostles peter and poule / and all the apostles / martyrs /
confessors / and vyrgynes / and the halowes of god I denounce and show for a
cursed all tho that fraunchyse of holy church break or dystrouble / or are
again the state of holy church / or thereto assent with deed or counseyle. And
also all tho that pryue holy church of any right or make of holy church any
lay fee that is hallowed or santyfyed. And all tho that withholde the ryghtes
of holy church / the is for to say / offrynges / tithes / rentes or fredome
of holy church let or dystrouble / or break / that is to say / if any man
flee to chitche or chyrcheyerde who so him out draws / And all tho that
thereto procure or assent. And all thoo that purchasen lettres of any lords
court / wherefore lettynge is made in christian court / that process of right
may not be determined or ended. And all tho that the pees of the land
destrouble.) And all tho the blood draw of man or of woman in vyolence or in
vylonye make to be draw in church or chyrcheyerde / wherefore the church or
the chyrcheyerde is entredyted or suspended. And all tho ye ben again the
right of our lord the king And all tho that werre sustain ayenste the
king wrongfully. And all tho that are comune robbers / reuers or mansleers but
it be themself defending. And all tho that been again the great charter of
the king / that is confermed of the court of Rome And of all tho that false
wytnes bear wrongefully / namely in cause of matrymonye in what court so it be
/ or out of court. And all tho that false witness bring forth in right of
matrymonye / for to dystrowble man or woman Or for to dysheryte any man of
land or tenementes or any other catell. And all false advocates that for mede
put forth any false excepcyons or quarelles thrughe the which the right of
matrymony is for done or any other manner of right instead of Judgment. And all
tho that for mede or favor malycyously man or woman bring out of their good
fame in to wicked. Or make they^ for to lose their worldly gods or honor /
or them put wrongefully to their purgacyon of the which was no fame ne
renown known be fore that time. And alsoo the which malycyously and through
cawtele dystrouble lets or gain says the right presentemente of our
mother holy church mylytaunte here in earth / there as the very patron should
present. And all that thereto procure with word or deed or with false
conqueste / or with other power. And all tho that malycyously dyspysen the
maundemente of the king / to take a cursed man from the time that he has
lain in cursynge.xl. days and no remedy will seek. And all those that
prisoners dystrouble with false Judgment / or false enqueste. And all tho that
their lyueraunce purchase again the right of holy church. And al tho that
mede take for to distrouble peace there love should be and charity. Or strife
mayntene with word or deed and tylle they have yolde again their mede / that
they took of them. They may never be assoyled. And all tho that hold houses /
manners graunges of persons / vicaryes / or of any other man of holy church
against their will. And all tho that any manner good meuable or vnmeuable away
be^e with strength or wrongefully away draw or waste of the which cursynge /
they may not be assoyled tylle they have made satysfaccyon to whom the wrong
is done. And all tho that oony manner of goods with vyolence or malice / bear
out of holy church stedde or abbaye or house of relygyon / which that therein
is laid or done for warandyse or socoure or for to be kept / and all tho
that / that thereto procure or assente. And all tho that them maynteyne or
sustain / and all tho that have laid hand on priest or clarke with malice /
but it be him self defending. And all tho that sarasyns counseyle or help
against crystendome. And all tho that their chyldern wrongefully fader
wyttyngely. Or their childern wytten any other man with malice. And all tho
that varye or flee their generacyons / or their chylderne destroy with drynkes
or with any other craft. And all tho that falls money make or thereto assente.
And all tho that good money clype or shere them to advantage to dysceyue any
man with. And all tho that false the popes bulle^^ co^^terfayte the kings
seal. And al tho that by or selle with false mesures / or false weyghtes /
that is to say to bye with one and selle with another. And all tho that false
the kings standarde them self wyttynge. And all tho that any testamente
dystrouble or thereto procure with word or with deed wherefore the deeds will is
not fulfilled. And all tho that forswere them upon the holydome / willing /
and wyttynge for mede / or for hate / for to do any man or woman to lose their
worldely goods or honor. And all robbers or reuers / openly or preuely / by
day or by night or oony man's good stele / wherefore they were worthy to have
Judgment. And all tho that with hold any man's good that have been spyred
thryse in holy church them self wyttynge. And all tho that dystrouble the
pees of holy church or of the land / and all the kings felons. And al tho
that them maynteyne. And all false conspyratours / and / all false forswerers
in assyses / or in oony other court. And all those that any false playntes
put forth again the fraunchyse of holy church or of the king or of the
realm. And all those offrynges that are offered in holy church or in
chyrcheyerde or in chapel / or in oratory. Or in oony other stead within the
prouynce of Caunterbury withholden or put away in any other place again the
will of the person or vycary or their attorney in the paryshe that it in
offered in. And all tho that their goods away give for dread of death / in
fraud of holy church. Or for to forbere their dettes payenge. And all tho
that such gifts take or thereto help / or counceyselle. And all tho that
let prelates or ordynaryes for to hold consystorye / sessyon / or chapyters
/ for to inquire of sins. And of excess / in good amendment of man's
soul. And all wytches and all that on them byleuen. And all hereykes that
believe not in the sacrament of the altar / that is gods own body in flesh
and blood in form of bread and other sacraments that touchen help of man's
soul. And all Iogelers usurers) that is to say) that if any man or woman lene
their catell to man or woman for any advantage to take be couenaunte more or
less then their own. And if there be any such found in town or cite. The
cite / or the town should be enterdyte by the old law / and another done
there mess nor sacrament used till he were out thereof. And all that wythholde
tithes or wythdrawe their tithes wyttyngely or malycyously to the harm of holy
church or tithes let to be given of all the gooddes / which they ben
commanded and ordained to be given by the law of holy church / that is to
say / of all fruytes of yerdes corns / herbs / the ware / fruytes of trees.
Of all manner beestes that are newynge of wolle / lamb. And cheese in time of
the year / of swannes / gees / dowues / duckes / of bees / honey / wax / of
hay also often as it news. Of flax / of hemp / of wyndemylles of all manner
mylles. Of all manner of Macchaundyse of chafferynge men / and of men of craft
And all those that malycyously or wyttyngely any of these things or any other
with hold the which ought to be give to holy church by gods law to harm
of holy church. And all that thereto procure in word or deed.

Modus fulmina^di sententia^. Prelatus alba indutus cu^ ceteris sacerdotibus in
ecclesia existentibus cruce erecta. ca^delis acce^sis. sta^s in pulpito
pronunciet verba que sequunt^.

EX auctoritate dei patris oi^potentis and beat marie virginis: and omniu^
sanctoru^ excommunicamus: anathematizamus: et dyabolo commendamus: oe^s
supradictos maledictores: et exco^municati sint anathematizat^^ (...)
commendati maledicti sint: i^ villis in campis (...) semitis in domibus: extra
domos: et in oi^bus aliis locis (...) sede^do. Iace^do: surge^do: am bula^do
curre^do: vigilando dormiendo comedendo: bibe^do: and aliud opus facie^do: and
illos a luminibus and oi^bus bonis ecclie sequestramus: and dyabolo da^namus:
and in penis inferni ai^as eorum extinguamus sicut extinguitur ista ca^dela /
nisi resepiscant et ad satisfactionem veniant. Finita sententia extinguat lumen
ad terrore^ pulsantibus campanis.

The bedes on the sunday.
Ye shall knele down on your knees / and lift up your hertes making your
prayers to almighty god. For the good state and pease of all holy church that
god mantene / save and keep it. For our holy fader the pope with all his true
colege of cardynales / ye god for his mercy them mayntene and keep in the right
believe and it hold and increase and all mysbyleue and heresy he less and
destroy. Also ye shall pray for the holy land / and for the holy cross that
Ihesu Christ dyed on for the redempcyon of man's soul / that it may come in
to the power of christian men / ye more to be honored for our prayers. Also ye
shall pray for all archebysshoppes and bysshoppes. And espycyall for the
Archebysshoppe of Cau^torburye our metropolytane. And for the bishop of. N.
our dyocyson that god of his mercy give to them grace so to govern and rule
holy Church that it may be to the honor and worship of him and salvation
of our souls. Also ye shall pray for abbottes pryours / monks / chanones /
freres / and for all men and women of relygyon / in what order estate or degree
that they stand in / from the highest estate unto the loweste degree. Also ye
shall pray for all them that have charge and cure of Christian men's souls / as
curates / and persons vycaryes / priests and clerks. And in especyall for
the person and curate of this church / and for all the priests and mynystres
that seruen therein / or have served therein. And for all them that have taken
any order / that almighty god give them grace of contynuaunce well for to keep
and to observe it to the honor and health of their souls. Also ye shall
pray for the unity and pease of all cryste^ realms. And in especyall For the
good state pease and tranquyllyte of this realm of England / for our lyege
lord the king / that god for his great mercy send him grace so to govern
and and rule this reame that god be pleased and worshypped / and to profit and
salvation of this land. Also ye shall pray for our lyege Lady the queen my
Lord prince. And all the noble progenye of them. For all dukes Earls / Barons
Knights / and Squyres. and other lords of the kings counseyle / which have
any rule and governance in this land. that god give them grace so to
counseyle / rule / and govern / that god be pleased the land defended and to
the profit and saluacyo^ of all the realm. Also ye shall pray for the
pease. both on land and oon the water / that god grant love and charity
among all christian people Also ye shall pray for all our parysshe^s where that
they be on land or on water the god save they^ from al manner of perils and
for all the god men of this parysshe / for their wives / chylderne and meyne
that god them mayntene save / and keep. Also ye shall pray for all true
tythers / that god multeplye their goods / and increase. For all true telyers
that labor for our sustenaunce that telye the earth. And also for all the
graynes and fruytes / that been sown set or done oon the earth or shall be
done / that god send such wederynge that they may grow increase / and
multyplye to the help / and profit of all mankind. Also ye shall pray for
all true shypme^ and merchants / where so ever that they ^e on land or oon
water / that god keep them from all perils and bry^ge the^ home in saafte
with their goods ships and marchaundyses to the help conforte / and profit
of this realm. Also ye shall pray for them that find any light in this
church or give any behestes book belle chalyce or vestemente / surplys /
awtercloth or towayle. lands rentes / lamp or light / or any other
adournementes whereby gods service is the better served sustained and
mayntened In redynge and singing. And for all them that thereto have
counseylled that god reward / and yield it them at their most need. Also
ye shall pray for all true pilgrims and palmers / that have take their way
to Rome / to Iherusalem / to saint Katherynes / or to saint James / or to any
other place that god of his grace give them time and space well for to go /
and to come to the profit of their lives and souls. Also ye shall pray for
all them that be seek or dyseased of this parysshe that god send to them
health the rather for our prayers for all the women which ben in our ladies
bonds / and with child in this parysshe or in any other / that god send to
them fair delyueraunce to their chylderne right shape / name / and
crystendome and to the moders puryfycacyon. And for all them yt would be here
/ and may not forsekenes or trauaylle / or any other leefull occupacyon that
they may have part of all the good deeds that shall be done here in this
place or in any other. Also ye shall pray for all them that been in good life
/ that good them hold long therein / And for them that been in debt or
deedely sin that Ihesu christ bring them out there of the rather for our
prayer. Also ye shall pray for him or her that this day gave the holy bread
and for him that first began / and lengest holds on that god reward it him
at the day of dome and for all them yt do (...) or say you good / yt god yield
it they^ at their need / and for them other would yt Ihesu Christ amend them
For all these and for all christian men / and women ye shall say a Pater noster.
Aue maria. Deus misereatur nostri. Gloria patri. Kyrieleyson Xp^eleyson
Kyrieleyson. Pater noster. Et ne nos. Sed libera. versus. Ostende nobis.
Sacerdotes. Dn^e saluum fac regem. Saluum fac populum Dn^e fiat pax. Dn^e
exaudi. Dn^s vobiscu^. Oremus. Ecclesie tue quesumus Deus i^ cuius manu. Deus
aquo sancta. etc. Ferthermore ye shall pray for all cryste^ souls For
Archebysshoppes and bysshoppes souls and in especyall for all that have be
Bysshoppes of this dyosyce / and for all curates persons and vycaryes souls.
And in especyall for them that have been curates of this church / and for the
souls that have served in this church. Also ye shall pray / for the souls of
al cryste^ kings and queen's and in especyal for the souls of then that have been Kings of this realm of England. And for all those souls that to this
church have hyuen book belle chalyce or vestymente. Or any other thing / by
the which the service of god is better done and holy Church worshypped. Ye
shall also pray for your faders soul / For your moders soul / for your god
faders souls / for you god moders souls / for you brethren and systers
souls / and for your kynnes souls / and for your friends souls / and for
all the souls that we ben bound to pray for. And for all the souls that been
in the pains of purgatory there abiding the mercy of almighty god. And in
especyall for them that have most need and leest help / that god of his
endless mercy less and mynysshe their pains by the mean of our prayers and
bring them to his everlasting bliss in heaven. And also of the soul. N. Or
of them that upon such a day this weke we shall have the an vnyuersarye / and
for all


