A SERMON PREACHED AT PAVLS CROSS THE 24. OF OCTOBER. 1624.

BY ROBERT BEDINGFIELD Master of Arts, and Student of Christ-Church in Oxford.

Oxford seal AC: OX



OXFORD, Printed by JOHN LICHFIELD and WILLIAM TVRNER, for HENRY CRIPPS. 1625.

modern(?) bookplate Academiae Cantabrigiensis Liber



TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFUL HIS VERY WORTHY UNCLE SIR THOMAS RICHARDSON Knight,
Serieant at the Law, grace and peace be multiplied in CHRIST JESUS.
SIR,
LEt me humbly beg of you, that you would be pleased to take this Sermon
into the Sanctuary of your patronage: your free and gracious promise to be the
Patron of the Author, has imboldened him to entitle you so to his issue. The
violence of a wet season denied it some Auditors, which it might have had, your
encouraging command to have a sight of it, and the forcible importunity of
wel-wishing friends have pressed it, and given it readers which I intended it
should not have had. I apologize not, if it be better to preach, it is good to
print: the understanding is not informed, nor the will moved always by the
Ear, but sometimes by the Eye; otherwise the subtle Romanists would unclasp
the Bibles of the Laity, and not deny them to read the Scriptures. I know
your devotions and your imploiment; God and your Country permit you not in the
tearme-time to read a long Epistle. I conclude therefore with my prayers to
almighty God, that as he has endowed you with his more eminent graces and
richer gifts, so he would put it into the heart of the King to reward them,
that your Honors may one day balance your deserts, and that in the mean time
your dwelling may remain (as now it is) the oracle of the city.

From my study in Christ-Church, in Oxford. Nouemb. 24. Your most humbly
devoted Servant and Nephew ROBERT BEDINGFIELD.

ROMANS 6. VERSE 23. For the Wages of Sin is Death, but the Gift of God is
Eternal life through Jesus Christ our Lord.


MY Embassy (Right Honorable, and the rest Beloved) I know not whether it be
fuller of horror or delight, whether it may more amaze or comfort you, the
first part like the severe threats of the punishing Law, searches the wound;
the latter, like the sovereign balm of the saving Gospel, works the cure;
it is equally divided, the first wounds not so deep, but the latter cures as
fast. If the wound be unto death, the cure is unto life: If the wages of sin
be death, the gift of God is eternal life, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

The Text naturally is thus put on sunder, there is a (...), and there is an
(...); The wages of sin is death, there is the (...); but the gift of God is
eternal life through Jesus Christ our Lord; there is the (...). In the (...),
there is first malum culpae, the offense given; sin; secondly, there is malum
poenae, the punishment inflicted: Death, thirdly, there is the Justice and
proportion between the offense and the punishment, it is (...), the stipend,
the wages; fourthly and lastly, there is the certainty of the punishment to be
inflicted, intimated in the verb of the present tense, it is death, The wages
of sin is death. In the (...), there is first life, opposed unto death in the
(...), commended by his adiunct or duration, it is eternal; Secondly, here is
the means of conferring of it on them that receive it, which is not by way of
wages, as death in the (...), but freely and by gift; thirdly, here is the
doner, he that bestows it, GOD. Lastly, here is the Mediator, he through
whom, and for whose sake it is given, Jesus Christ our Lord. This is my model,
these my parts: briefly, God has this day set before you life and death, good
and evil, now that you be not deceived in your choice, give me leave to lay
them open unto you; first, the evil, malum delicti, and malum supplicij, the
evil of Sin, and the evil of death, The wages of sin is death.

Man in his Original and Primitive perfection, being the Son of God, by
creation, as he summed up the world in an Epitome, so was he a living Image of
his fathers glory, De eo quod de terius potiori insidiari soleat. August. lib.
2. de Genesis cap. 8. and praeter Haeretic^s, ^uius sententiae fuit Lactantius,
lib. 2. Ins^itut. divine.
whom he best copied out in his better part, his soul; not that it was ex
traduce, from God, not that the Divinity was rent in two, or divided, so that
that became part of the Divine Essence, as first Philo the Jew doted, and after
him the Maniches blasphemed: there was no trans-fusion, but a creation, no
identity, but a conformity, which was not in substance, but in quality: neither
was the soul alone so glorious, but the body also, which was first made a
house for the soul to inhabit, and not a prison to suffer in; a house indeed
made of clay, but made by the immediate touch of the God of Heaven, a sublunary
body, yet not waited upon by corruption, a subject where contrary qualities did
reside, and yet not a subject over which they might triumph; Lastly, both soul
and body were so united and married together, that corruption being not able to
possess the parts, nor to dissolve the union, the whole man was immortal, and
that not by the dowry of grace, but by the privilege of Nature, not
supernaturally, as were the garments of the Israelites in the Wilderness, or
as Austin coniectured concerning Enoch and Elias, Lib. 1. de peccat. meritu,
and remissione cap. 4.
but per sequela^ naturae, so that immortality was part of his Nature, as well
as his nature was ever immortal; immortal not absolutely or essentially, for
so he had been a God; not by creation positiuely, for so had he been a
spirit; but negatiuely, says the School, and conditionally, he had the
privilege, posse non mori, although he had not the immunity, non posse mori;
as there was a possibility of dying: so it was without a necessity.

I follow not the Sententiaries, which follow not their Master, but are
curiously inquisitiue to know what should become of man, if he had not fallen:
how he should have preserved himself from Corruption, whether by eating of the
tree of life, or by any other means, we know no more then our Grandfather,
Lib. 2. distinct. 23.
and he (says Lombard) Accepit scientiam and praeceptum eorum quae facienda
erant, non accepit praescientiam eorum quae futura erant. We know not what he
should have eaten, to have preserved his immortality, we know what he did eat
to lose it.

Adami homicida gula. The eating of the forbidden fruit dismantled and stripped
our first Parents at once, both of their roabes of Righteousness and
Immortality: that first sin made a breach in the well-ordered Economy of the
soul: prostrating reason at the feet of sense, and enthroning passion in the
chair of reason: there was now no longer harmony between the flesh and the
Spirit; the motions of the flesh, rebelling against the rules of reason, the
stern of reason being neither pliable to the spirit, nor the spirit obedient
unto God: this disorder bred diseases, the summoners and forerunners of death,
so that man was presently retrograded into the element of dust, of which he
was first composed. Death as it was threatened for sin, so was it inflicted
upon sin, The day that thou sinnest thou shall surely die, Genesis 2.17. and the
day that he did eat, surely he did die, the Mother and the Daughter, Sin
and Death, are both of an age, he was afterward but a moving carcass, a walking
sepulcher, Mortuus erat, non mortalis, as a malefactor is a dead man when he is
condemned, before he is executed.

Every sin is of the same nature with the first, and brings death like
that; indeed it murthereth not with the same extent: that was the sin of
nature, and therefore the death of nature, so that afterward women brought
forth children, Chrysolog. Sermon 111.
Vindictae ordine, non naturae. Lucbant peccatum mundi qui mundum non nouerunt
and parentis sui soluebant poenam, cuius vix vitam degustarunt. Other sins
are personal, and therefore the destruction of the person; be it sin in the
root, or sin in the branch, be it the mother and spawne of sin, inbred
pollution, or the fruit and harvest of sin, actual transgression: the first
has many branches, and all deadly, the other has many Species, and all
mortal; in the first there is participatio culpae, imputatio reatus, and
concupiscentia, and all are rewarded with death, even the last, which is not
only the cause of sin, and the punishment of sin, but sin it self; be
it (...) or (...), not only where consent is added to lust, but where lust is
without consent; not only actual concupiscence, but habitual, natural, and
original; not the second motions only, or concupiscentia formata, as the
School speaks; but motus primo primi, and that which is informis: yea,
although it preuenteth the use of reason, although it be resisted by the power
of the spirit: shall the traitor suffer that commits the Treason, and shall
the plotter and contriuer escape? or shall the last escape punishment, because
the first will not offend?

Original sin has not more branches, then actual has species; neither are
these less fatal then the other, whether they be seated in the understanding,
as the darkness of error concerning God; or in the heart and will, as our
irregular thoughts, and exorbitant desires; or in our outward members, as
external actions, whether they be (...), trespasses against the rules of
Nature; not engraven in stone, but imprinted in the conscience; so the Gentiles
sinned, Romans 2.14. or (...), trespasses against the word written, 1 John 3.4.
so the Jews offended both these, whether they be of omission or commission,
not only the obliquity of our actions, but our unlawful surcease from action,
not our words, but our silence also. The Advocate whose lips are sealed up with
a fee of the adverse party; the Priest, not whom Authority, but sloth has
silenced, shall both be rewarded with death, and they therefore deserve their
wages, because they have not done their work. There is no sin of omission,
which is not a sin of commission; si non pavisti, occidisti: he that sees
his neighbors Ox fall into the pit, and helps him not out, he pusheth him
in; not to save a man when we may, when we ought, in the Court of Conscience is
to murder a man. If I should reckon up all sorts of sin, I should commit one
against your patience, yet could I show you none, whose issue is not death.

If the Eye but lusts, mors per fenestras; if the foot but slippeth,
praecipitiu^ est, there are no stairs but fall we must into the pit, and we
should down to the bottom, were it not bottomless. He that does but
peeuishly quarrel, or maliciously hate, murthereth himself, although he
kills not his Adversary: let the Act be wanting, the desire will kill, and
there may be manslaughter, where there is no shedding of blood. 'Twas a witty
speech of one of your ancient Declamators, ^ib. 1. de Civ. (...) cap. 19.
registered by S. Austin, concerning Lucrece being ravished by Tarquin: Duo
fuere, and unus adulterium commisit. I know not whether the Act could be
committed without the sin, I am sure the sin may be without the Act, Et
^pado mach^^ ^rit.
and an Eunuch may be an Adulterer. Less infirmities as well as great
impieties, will work destruction; neither is it certain that Aegypts little
flies were not her greatest plague. The least prick in the least joint
impostumateth the whole flesh, but a moate in the Eye blinds the sight, a
breach in the wall is the conquest of the enemy, and the ruin of the City:
let us not weigh our sins, but number them, if they may seem small, we
cannot count them few. He that offends in one point of the Law, is guilty of
all, James 2.10. Sin like Heresy, is of an encroaching nature; as one
Heresy proves another, so does one sin usher in another, the lesser always
making room for the greater. Our vncatechised trauailer iourneying into
countries superstitious and idolatrous, at the first is only uncovered, and
boweth at the meeting of the Host, it is not good (says he) to give offense to
them which are without; then he ventureth to go to their high places, to visit
their Churches and Chapels, to hear and see their loud blasphemy in their
Liturgies, and the profane pomp of their ceremonies; not that he intends a
change of his Religion, but to purchase a sounder hate of their superstition:
he no sooner hears and sees, but he likes and approves. Lastly, as a sure
pledge of his Apostasy, he returns home, and seduceth others. The grand
Heresies of the Apostate Roman Church, which indirectly and by consequence raze
and destroy the very foundation of Faith, came in by degrees, and the first
stone for the building of Babel was laid long since. Traditions the Mother of
all their Heresies, had with them their right use, until first those which
were temporary and for a season, were taught to be permanent and to endure for
ever; then those which were particular, and bound only some one Church, were
made Catholic, generaly to enforce; after that, without examination, humane
traditions had the same credit, the same Authority that divine, Apotacticall as
Apostolical: Lastly all these were made as authentical as the word written;
give the Pope a primacy, and he will assume a Principality; give him more
honor, and he will have more power.

As in doctrine, so in manners, small things neglected, grow and become big
ones, the tares spring up faster then the corn, and they do it insensibly,
they steal their growth, crescere non videmus, sed crevisse; yet if this were
not so, if lesser slips opened not the sluices for greater crimes to flow in; if
wanton glances were not forerunners of Fornication, nor Fornication a step to
Adultery: if concupiscence would not win consent, nor consent break out into
Act, nor the Act often reiterated, beget an habit; yet were one and the least
of these damnable.

Flesh and Blood may dispute the fairest praetexts for sin, yet black will not
be dyed into white. The Prince of darkness when he transformeth himself into
an Angel of light, it is a iugling, and not a change; so the works of
darkness may have the credit of the deeds of light, they can never have the
goodness: it is in vain to sow fig-leaues together to cover our deformities:
let us distinguish, and mitigate, color, or qualify what we can, that which
is mortal, (and such is every sin) will not be made venial, otherwise every
Popish Casuist, or Roman Schoolman would make venial sins as fast as their
God on earth does pardon them. Possunt excusari a mortali parents, etc.
Parents putting off as well Nature as Religion, cursing their children even to
that height, that they wish them with the Devil, sin but venially, so Greg.
de Val. 3 Tome. 1090 page: Qui iudicium facit in re gravi temerarium, etc. A
Judge judging rashly be it upon life and death, sins but venially. Bonacina
in his second disputation de peccatis, his 3 quaestion, puncto 5. Some lying,
some theft must be venial, when some blasphemy, all if it be but chollerick,
is not mortal, Navar in his Manual, page 91. Yet do these which thus preach
impunity for sin, brand us with the slander of Libertines. The distinction of
mortal and venial, understand it aright, it is none of theirs, but ours: it is
true, all sins even of the Elect in foro iustitiae, in the rigor of justice
are mortal, but in foro misericordiae, by the mercy of God, they are all
venial: legally all are mortal, Euangelically all venial; ratione
peccatorum, they are all mortal, ratione peccantium, there are none not
venial; this is our doctrine, in which there is as well consent as truth, with
them there is no concord; for besides some amongst them which altogether deny
their use of the distinction, as Gerson and Fisher, they cannot agree what this
venial sin should be: some will have it contra consilium, others contra
praeceptum; some state it to be praeter legem, not contra legem, others grant
it to be against the Law, but not against charity which is the end of the Law;
some think it both to be against the Law, and to diminish charity; one will
have it to be sin imperfectly and by analogy, others properly and vnivocally;
you may know it is Babel they are building, by the confusion of their language.

While we thus prove all sins to be mortal, we teach not a parity of
offenses; we are so Catholic, that we are not Stoicall: all sins are
mortal, therefore all are aequall; it is bad Logic: but calumnies must be
proved by such sequels. Virtues have their Climax, much more vices, the School
gives the reason; Illae ad unum tendunt, haec ab uno ad multas mundi
vanitates. The person, the place, the manner, are circumstances which both
aggrauate and extenuate a sin. First the person, the person against whom we
offend, and the person who offends: for the first, less was the sin of the
usurpers in slaying the servants, then in killing the Heir of the Vineyard;
far greater was the sin of the Jews in crucifying the Lord of glory, then that
of their Fathers in murdering the Prophets: he sins with a higher hand that
transgresses against the Commandments of the first Table, then he that
offends against them of the second. Blasphemy of oaths, and profanation of
the Sabbath, although here by the indulgence of the Law, or by the conniuence
of the Magistrate, they escape the severity of discipline, shall hereafter be
punished with extremity of torture. Neither does the person only distinguish
the guilt of the two Tables, but makes degrees of sin against one and the same
Commandment. Homicide and Parricide are both murder, yet the severe torture
which all Nations inflict upon the one above the other, are sufficient evidence
of the difference of the crimes. All murder is censured, is punished with
death, but death has not always the same sting: when she comes to torture a
Parricide, a Rauillac for murdering his King, O how she is dressed like a
Fury, armed with racks, with fires, with strapadoes, with burning pincers,
pulling off flesh to make wounds; with scalding oil, pitch, and rozen to power
into those wounds, with horses to disioint and rent the body: and that the
malefactor may think himself in Hell before he is dead, she tormenteth him in
a furnace flaming with fire and brimstone, making up her tragedy with the
banishment of the Parricides parents, with pulling down the house where he was
borne; and although she spares the lives of his brethren, sisters, and uncles,
yet must they change their names, and all the Rauillacs must perish. Degrees of
punishment are as well after death as in death: the tortures of one damned
soul are differenced from the pangs of an other; he that has bin more wicked,
Mar. 23.15.
shall be more wretched, such shall be the punishment as is the crime: which is
augmented not only by the person who is offended, but by the person also who
does offend.

Greatness and goodness should twin together, no Monarch has license to offend,
no Prince has any non-obstante for sin: neither yet is the Kings praerogatiue
lessened, because he may not sin, it should be enlarged if he could not sin.
It Is the misery of sovereignty, that the offense is always as great as the
offender, the sin as sovereign as the person; a Prince his slips are crimes, a
moat in his Eye is a beam; his blemish is a leprosy; it is the Kings truth in
the beginning of his first book of his (...): the reason is, because he does
not so much commit his sin, as teach it, nec tam delicto nocens est, quam
exemplo. A Peasants sin presently finds it is grave, and is neglected as his
person; but Monarchs vices are always masculine, and beget the like in others.
Let Nero be overmuch delighted in stageplaies, straight the gravity of the
Senate puts on Buskins, Lactant. 5. infiit.
and acts a Comedy. Mores and vitia Regis imitari genus obsequij putatur.
Many do think it against their allegiance, to be holy if their King be
profane; The People will follow their Prince, yea although they forsake their
God to do it, whatsoever Iosuah their Captain, their King, commands them,
that will they do, Iosuah 1.16. Hence is it that the Israelitish renegado
Kings, with their damnable revolts so often apostated the whole land, and made
the Israelites turn Idolaters. As all imitate their king, and so aggrauate his
sin, so do most copy out his Nobles, and augment their crimes. My Lord must
have his followers as well of his vice, as of his person; if he leaves his King
at the Chapel door, he turns not back without his Attendants, who if his
Honor pleases to be Idolatrous, will wait upon him even unto a Mass. As the
Nobles and Peers be so borne, so you honored Lords who judge the Land, and you
grave Fathers the Elders of the City, are so exalted, so placed, ut bona
malaque vestra ad Rempublicam pertineant, your virtues, and your vices are
subjected and inhaerent in your persons; but by these (as the Heavens by their
Influences) you work good and evil through the whole Land. Better no Judge in
Israel then a corrupt one, no Elder then a wicked one; the first gives but
liberty, the second adds encouragement to sin: you see to eminence of your
persons doubleth your crimes, and makes your sins as scarlet, as your
habits. I might enlarge my proof and exhortation with an Apostrophe to the
Clergy, the living Oracles of God, to whom ye must resort for counsel. Hi si
eloquuntur magna and non vivunt; if their lives cry not down sin as loud as
their tongues, they may help to build the Arc, and perish in the Flood: if
they that preach the way to Heaven tread the way to Hell, Hell must be their
portion, and the number of their followers shall add unto their tortures: From
the Clergy I might descend unto the Gentry, from them to every Oeconomicall
Goueruour and Father of his family; and although I stay there, yet let none the
meanest here take heart to offend, for the sin which the meannesse of his
Person lessneth by denying him followers, may be aggrauated by other
circumstances of the place and manner, which I will briefly glance over.

We ascribe no inherent holiness to any place, Bethel may become Bethauen; the
Temple of God, the house of an Idol; the seat of Peter, the chair of
Antichrist; neither do I know whether the zeal of Christendom was right, if
they warred for Iewry as for the Holy land; yet may we justify our consecrated
Churches and Chapels, which being separated for an holy use, may not be
profaned; if the buyers and sellers will trade in the Temple, our SAVIOVR
provides a whip for them; and I would to God the zeal of Authority, in
imitation of that of our God, would whip out the buyers and sellers out of the
Temple; would whip them either out of the Isles, or into the Quier. Good God, to
see how the profane walkers in the time of divine service, when the Quier are
chaunting their sacred Anthems and Heavenly Halleluiahs, are then polluting the
stones with their durty feet, when they should wear them with their
supplicating knees; there are at the same time, some praying above, and some
blaspheming below, and that so loud, that God hears not the prayers for the
blasphemy.

As the Vbi, the place, so the Quomodo, the manner of doing it does much
difference a sin. Men's and propositu^, says the Law, distinguunt maleficia,
whosoever calls his brother fool, is in danger of Hell fire, Matthew. 5.22.
yet does Paul call his brethren the Galatians fools, and sins not, Gal.
3.1. He that kills a man shall surely be put to death, Leuit. 24.17. yet he
that kills a man ignorantly, who^ he hated not before, shall flee unto one of
the Cities of refuge and live, Deuteronomy. 19.4. and 5. that which infirmity
slippeth, must not be censured as that which malice acts; that which is
committed out of ignorance, is not punished, as that which is done out of
presumption. I am no advocate for ignorance; he who is ignorant, let him be
ignorant still, he who affects ignorance, let him perish in his ignorance. In
them that may know, it is a sin, in them that may not know it is a punishment
for sin; it is to none which ought to know, (and all ought) a privilege to
sin: yet if it be particularis, and not Vniuersalis, as the Philosopher;
facti and not iuris, as the Lawyer, inuincibilis, and not vincibilis, as the
Master of the sentences, it does excuse a tanto, although not a toto, it
lesneth the offense, but takes it not away; it still remains a sin, and
therefore liable to the punishment of sin, Death, which is the second part in
my (...).

There is a death unto sin, as well as a death for sin; a death which
puts not Nature in her grave, but Vice: how shall we being dead to sin,
live therein. Romans 6.2. Death for sin is either spiritual, and of the soul;
natural and of the body; or eternal both of soul and body: Anima est vita,
and habet ipsa suam vitam, as the soul is the life of the body, so is God the
life of the soul. The just do live by faith, Romans, chapter 1. verse 17.
Even by faith in the Son of God, Galat. chap. 2. v. 20. Who quickneth them
with his spirit, Ephesians. 2.5. The body may live, and yet the soul may be dead, by
which the body lives: there are some long since buried, which yet live, such
are Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob; for God which is their God, is not the God of
the dead but of the living; so there be now some living which have bin long
since dead. A widow living in pleasure, is dead while she lives; the 1 of
Timoth. 5. and 6. You that live in sin, are already in your graves; I must
therefore bespeake you, as sometime Christ did Lazarus, Lazare veni for as,
come you forth of your graves, arise from death to life, from sin to newness
of life: but my words want efficacy, and my speech has no power to raise you;
Christ Jesus therefore speak that unto your hearts, which I do unto your
ears. De eo quod deterius potiori insidiari solcat.
Where it is in the Septuagint, (...), Philo the Jew would have us read, (...);
for says he, Cain had no sooner slain his brother, but he became dead
himself; and Abel being murdered, was yet alive: if he was not, how did he
speak, how did he speak aloude and cry for vengeance? so he wittily. Let the
dead bury the dead, Matthew. 8.22. let them which are spiritually dead, bury them
which are dead to nature, and the solemnity of their funerals being ended, let
them provide for their own interrring which is at hand, for mors operata erit
mortem, the death of the soul will cause the death of the body.

A death common unto all; it is all men's pilgrimage from the sepulcher to the
sepulcher, from the grave of the womb, to the grave of the earth; all men
shall once die, for as much as all men have sinned, Heb. 9.27. The instinct of
nature, which prompteth every creature to seek it is own preservation, should
teach man not to make love to death, not to woo his own destruction: although
he transgresses not the Law made against robbers who cutteth his own purse,
yet he is guilty of murder who cutteth his own throat: and surely he loves
murder who will act it upon himself, and yet such are all sinners, whose
sins are the weapons with which they butcher themselves: like Saul and his
Armor-bearer, they fall and die upon their own swords. If any son of
Hippocrates pronounces it to be prejudicial to their health, the debauched
Drunkard will abstain from his cups, and the luxurious Epicure will fast from
his dainties: how foolish are they who would shun death, and yet work
wickedness which causes death? There is no other cause of death but sin,
where there is no sin, there is no death, no death of the body, no death of
Nature.

And yet he who had no sin, the Son of Righteousness, had his setting as
well as his rising, and walked into the West; Licet naturae dominus, carnis
tamen quam susceperat legem non recusauit; so that life it self dyed, yet not
necessarily, but voluntarily, tradidit in mortem animam suam; neither was his
death penal but expiatory, he was not stung to death by sin, but he stung
sin to death; by suffering death, he made death to suffer, and got the
victory by yielding. O death where is thy sting, 1 Cor. 15.55.56.
O grave where is thy victory? the sting of death is sin, and the strength of
sin is the Law, but thanks be unto God which has given us victory through
our Lord Jesus Christ.

Christ so delivered his from death, as he freed them from sin; which he
suffered still to dwell in them, although not to reign over them. The
Canaanites remain in the land to prove the Israelites; sin must inhabit in
the regenerate, to increase and try their faith: sift them, you shall find
them so enlightened, that they sit in darkness, so purged that they must be
cleansed, their faith is mixed with infidelity, their wisdom joined with
folly, and their glory eclipsed with shame; to want sin must be a Christians
wish, it cannot be his hope, otherwise he that must always here be militant,
should sometime be triumphant. We may be dead to sin, but sin will not be
altogether dead to us: we may cut it off, but it will bud again; we may chase
it away, but it will return; we may quench it, but it will flame again; it
still approaches, it still entiseth and provoke us; it still strives, but
it is to increase our victory: at last it must have the fall, and be triumphed
over; so may the tyrant weep to see himself prostrate at the feet of them
who were his Captives, Et ad eorum triumphum de quibus diu triumphaverat, se
veteranus hostis pervenisse deploret. Sin is not so in the Elect, as it is in
the reprobate; these either by habit, or resolution, or discourse, are
incorporated into evil, and sin is naturalized in them: the other may
sometime be surprised by force of passion, but their understanding seldom
gives consent: the first serve sin, the other give it only house-roome, or
if they do it any service, it is as the Israelites served Pharaoh, or as his
Gally-slaues serve the Turk; by compulsion.

Damnatum est peccatum si non extinctum. Sin has lost it is dominion,
although it be not cast out; so death is dis-armed, although she be not
removed; she has lost her sting, although she keeps her essence: nay, she
has lost her essence, the form, the life of death is lost, and she is but
equivocally what she was before. As she has lost her nature, so has she
changed her name; to die now, is but to sleep, to rest, or be at peace. Death
to the Elect is but (...), (as Nyssen styles it) it does not so much punish,
as purge and expiate sin, it is a Snake without her sting, a gaole-deliuery,
an earnest-peny of the resurrection, a bridge to pass from corruption to
incorruption, to be wished of all that wish to go to Paradise, not to be
feared at all, because it freeth us from all that is to be feared.

A curious workman seeing his Image of brass, (...). etc. Epiph. in his 2
Book. Aduersus Haereses.
on which he has bestowed his Art and industry, to be spotted and defaced, he
puts it again into the fire and new casts it, which is not the loss, but
the perfection of the Image; so God after he had made man a most elegant
fabric, seeing him polluted with sin, resolved him again into dust, that
he might rise unspotted. When the vessel that the Potter made was marred, he
made of it another vessel, Ier. 18.4. Cannot I do with you as the Potter with
his clay, says the Lord? behold, as the clay is in the Potters hand, so are
ye in my hand, O ye house of Israel; the same chapter and the sixth verse.

Non interit quisquis victurus moritur. This death of Nature is rather a change
then a death, it is not final, quem putas interitum, secessus est; neither is
it total, it is only of the body: death is dieted like the serpent, and can
eat nothing but dust; nay, it is not so much the death of the body, Plin. Ep.
lib. 2. epist. 1.
as of the corruption of the body, Et mortalitas magis finita est quam vita.

(...). Isiod. Peleus: lib. 4. epist. 52.
Happy Martyrs, how their torments pleased them! how they kissed the faggot! and
hugged the fire, as though like Eliah, they had gone to heaven in fiery
chariots! weigh their tortures, and read their constancy, you would judge them
to have been spirits without flesh; if they might seem to be afflicted
because they were heard to pray, they must be judged to have been merry in
their affliction, because they sung Psalms. Their note was the same, although
their pangs were differenced, with the three children in the fiery furnace;
Hieron.
Qui inter frigidos flammarum globos hymnos edidere pro fletibus. They wept not
out an Elegy, as if they had been preparing for their funerals: but they sung
and rejoiced, as if it had been their birth day, and it was their birth day to
eternity. Blessed Martyrs! for if they be blessed who die in the Lord, blessed
must they be who die for the Lord. God says to man, If thou sinnest thou
dyest, Genesis 2; but he bespeaketh the Martyr, if thou refusest to die, August.
thou sinnest. Quod tunc timendum fuerat vt non peccaretur, nunc suscipiendum
est ne peccetur. Death which is the punishment of the Sinner, suffer it for
Gods sake, it is the glory of the regenerate. Et cum sit mors peccati
retributio, aliquando impetrat vt nihil retribuatur peccato: As the wicked make
bad use of the Law which is good; so do the righteous make good use of death,
which is bad; Ipsa poena vitiorum transit in arma virtutis, and fit iusti
meritum etiam supplicium peccatoris.

This made the Primitive Christians so ambitious of Martyrdom, that they did
pursue their persecution; so covetous of ruin, that not staying for the hand
of the hangman, they turned their own executioners, and left their lives now
in the fire, now in the water, like the man his lunaticke son in the Gospel;
who being possessed with a Devil, fell sometimes into the fire, and sometimes
into the water, Mat. 17.14. It Is one thing for death to come to us, it is
another thing for us to go to death; the first may be martyrdom, the second
is murder. We must go with alacrity, but we must stay until we are called;
death which is just in the will, is unjust in the hand; we may not meet it,
although we may attend it: insomuch that it is an argument of force enough to
prove the Books of the Maccabees to be Apocryphal, because they do so much
extol Razis the Father of the Jews for murdering himself. 2 Maccab. 14, 42.


As the true Christian Martyrs be the best of Christians, so be your Pagan
Pseudo-Martyrs the worst of the Heathen; other Idolaters do but worship false
gods; these go about to prove them true, Epiph. lib. 2. Her. 8.
and of these there were a number, even unto a Sect.

Little better then these were the Pseudo-Catholicks if they suffered for their
Haeresies, but indeed they die malefactors, more for sedition, then Religion;
more for faction, then for Faith; they live Papists, but they are hanged
Traitors; and although both Haeresie and Treason might deserve death, yet has
the mercy of our Princes inflicted it only upon the latter: God will reward
both, and every sin, even the least, with death; not with the first death only,
but with the second; not with natural death only of the body, but with
aeternall also both of body and soul for evermore.

Vita hic aut amittitur, aut tenetur. Every one that departs this life is
either sung into bliss by the Angels, or hauled into torments by the devils.
Cypr. de mort. sect. 2.
The Fathers were unacquainted with the new Orcography of the Schoolmen, whose
searching invention has founded as many Regions below the Earth, as there are
above in the Air; the first is their Limbus Patrum, where they faigne the
Fathers to have suffered the temporary pain of loss before Christ's coming;
Tert. lib. 4. cont. Ma^cion.
an Haeresie borrowed from Marcion. and grounded upon this false reason, that
Heaven gates were shut until Christ's ascension, which being disprooued by the
theeue's entrance, Bellarmine takes the Keys, and opens them at his
Passion, and before they were not open; but then was his Passion when he was
slain, which was from the beginning of the world.

The second place is their Limbus Infantum, where they lodge Infants dying
before Baptism, where they torture them with eternal pain of loss. 1 Cor.
17.12
A bloody conclusion of a merciless Religion, which makes not death (as it is
here) a punishment for sin, but sin it self; it is foolish to think, that the
seed of the faithful who are holy from their birth, should be deprived of
inward grace, because necessity denies them the use of outward Sacraments;
when public Baptism may not be had, private is sufficient; if death prevent
this, votall will avail. Sat est si adest mentaliter, cum non potest haberi
sacramentaliter; Thom. part. 5. quest. 68. art, 2.
it is enough if Christian Parents desire it, if they cannot obtain it. The
force of truth made Mr Hooker of this opinion, even where he disputes against
Schismatics for private Baptism. If there were not strength of proof,
charity should make them rather partial, Ecclesiast. polit. lib. 5. sect. 61.
then cruel Judges, and force them to conclude, that many Infants of believing
parents, as they suffer no pain of sense, so do they undergo no sense of
pain.

The third place is their Purgatory, that Apocryphal dream, that Roman
mythology, Dial. lib. 4. ca. 41
a place first offered to be built by Gregory six hundred years after Christ,
upon the false and disproued foundation of venial sins; but they pretend more
antiquity, Dionys. Eccl. Hier. cap. 7.
and would prove it by this false illation, because there was prayer for the
dead, whereas this prayer was not a supplication but a thanksgiving, (...); or
if they did petition, 'twas not for the soul's safety, but the bodies glory;
or if they supplicated for the soul, for the remission of the sins of the
soul, 'twas only for a public justification, for a solemn acquittal and
perfect consummation of bliss: and this not because the event was doubtful,
but as Austin prayed for his Mother her entrance into Heaven, although he
believed she was entered before, Lib. 9. Confess. cap. 13.
and ends his Petition with Credo Domine iam feceris quod te rogo.

There is a fourth place which these men deserve to inhabit for inventing the
other three, which is Hell, the place of the damned, where they suffer death, a
second death, a death after death, a death and yet everlasting. The reprobate
like the Salamander, is still scorched in the fire, but never consumed; the
soul suffers of the body, but dies not, so is the body tormented by the
fire, but perishes not: Illic sapiens ignis membra urit and reficit; carpit
and nutrit; like unto the lightning which is the thunders fire, it so touches
the bodies, Minutius in Dial. Octa.
that it destroys them not, and if the fuel remain, the fire will still
endure. The flames of Aetna and Vesuvius still burn, but never burn out; Ita
poenale illud incendium non damnis ardentium pascitur, sed inexesa corporum
laceratione nutritur. I dispute not whether this fire be material or
metaphorical, whether it be spiritual or corporal, certainly it is furious
and terrible. I desire neither to understand nor undergo it: yet thus much is
certain, as it has extremity of heat to torment, so has it no light to
comfort; it burns, but shines not: how painful it is to sit, how dismal to
suffer in darkness. There is no punishment but it is in Hell, there is no
sense-afflicting torture, but it is there augmented: and yet does the pain of
loss far surmount the pain of sense; it is more affliction to be shut out of
Heaven, then to be imprisoned in Hell; and banishment is worse then death: and
yet shall this also be inflicted on sin, both these, both without intermission;
to make Holy Days in Hell, were to poetize with Prudentius, both without end;
for that Traian was delivered from Hell by the prayers of Pope Gregory, I
believe not, although Damascen brings the East and West to witness it.
Damas. sermon. de defunctu. August de civit, Dei lib. 21. (...). 24
This were with Origin to be kindly mad, and to turn Hell into Purgatory, both
these, both without intermission, both without end; and yet is the punishment
as just as great: for death, even this death is the stipend and wages of sin,
there is a proportion between the punishment and the offense, which is the
third part of the (...).

Qui^.
Facinus est mensura paenae; when misdemeanour is censured with death, when the
malefactor suffers beyond the rigor of the Law, it is cruelty doometh him, and
not Justice; yet must the sentence always balance the crime; if the sin be
impudent, the punishment must be exemplary as is the offense, and an
extraordinary offender must not be hanged upon a common gallows. God his doom
is always impartial, and he does still proportion his vengeance with the
sin: he blesses and curses, he rewards and punishes in analogo; so that
the virtue is charactred in the reward, and the vice may be read in the
punishment. When God promises to build Dauid's House for ever, because he
purposed to build God an House: when Ioseph's brethren do homage unto him as
unto their Lord, because they had sold him as their slave: God so rewards
them both, that he shows the piety of the one, and the affliction of the
othet. Ahab is humbled, and God deferreth his judgments, the reward shows his
humiliation, and shows it to be temporary. Because Vriah falls by Dauid's
sword, Optatus lib. 2. cont. Parmenian.
the sword must not depart from Dauid's House, 2 Samuel 12: because the profane
Donatists do impiously cast the Sacramental Bread unto the dogs, the same
dogs do presently tear in pieces those Donatists: Because Sodom burns
with flames of lust, it is burned with flames of fire, Genesis 19.24: because the
lust is unnatural, the fire is supernatural, and God sends Hell from
Heaven. When you see Absalom's hair to be his halter, you may know it was his
pride; and when ye read that Salomon's Kingdom was divided, ye may read, (and
yet ye need not read to know it) that he divided God's Kingdom. The line is no
otherwise laid to the rule, then God's rewards and punishments are proportioned
to our works, many times thus in special, and in this life, so that (as the
casuists observe) he punishes in the same manner, in the same kind, in the same
place, in the same part, but always in general and hereafter.

1 Cor. 15.
As there are here degrees of grace, so shall there be hereafter degrees of
glory. (...), one star differs from another in glory: some shall but shine
with the brightness of the firmament, others shall glister with the glory of the
stars. All the Elect shall build up the House of God; but the Martyrs only
shall be pillars in the House, Apocal. 2.12. All the Saints shall judge the
world, but the Apostles shall be mounted upon twelve more eminent Thrones. All
the Elect after judgment shall sit in Heaven; but some with joy only on the
left hand; others both with joy and preheminency on the right. In Heaven there
are many Mansions, John 14.2. And though he cannot lodge amiss who lodges
there, yet is one room more glorious then another. If there be not many
mansions in Hell, if the rooms be not distinguished, I am sure the tortures
are. Hell fire is all of one heat, yet does it not burn alike. The same
scorching Sun heateth a Northern man more then a Southern; yea an English man
travailing into Spain, does justly more fear a Calenture then a Spaniard. Let
straw and wood be the fuel of our fire, the heat is more and less. The fuel
of this fire are the sins of the Reprobate; as they are small or great, more
or few, the heat is augmented or diminished; but yet it is always
intolerable. See the proportion; when the least sin is committed, an infinite
Majesty is offended, and therefore an infinite punishment must be inflicted. In
the least sin, God is contemned: and the creature praefer'd before the
Creator: Suarez de legibus lib. 3. 8. number. 21.
Let Suarez distinguish mandatum a manda^te; Legistatorem a lege: there must be
contemptus personae, where there is contemptus operis: and if God be contemned,
let it be materially or formally, directly, or indirectly; Simply, or secundum
quid: Let them modificate it with more not to be understood Metaphysicall
suttleties, the sin must still be infinite, and the guilty must suffer
torments in proportion: which because they cannot do, Intensive simul and
semel: they must do extensive and successive. It Is no disproportion when he
that sins but for a time, does suffer more then for a time: he would
always have lived in sin, who never left to sin while he lived. And it is
proportion that he should never want punishment, who had a will ever to
offend. You see the Justice, yet is not God more strict in fitting the
punishment to the sin, then certain in auenging the sin with the punishment,
which is the fourth and last part of the (...).

If neither Virtue should be rewarded, nor Vice punished, we might with
Epicurus conclude both against God and providence; yet were the persecutions of
the Christians weakly urged by Caecilius in Minutius against their belief. In
Dial. Oct.
And his Dilemma (that their God either could not, or would not succor them;
and so that he was either weak or unjust) was but a flourish, and therefore he
might have spared his Sarcasticall Interrogatory triumph: Qui subvenire
reviviscentibus potest, viventibus non potest? saevitia non est, sed certamen:
The fightings without, and the terrors within, which the Saints undergo, are
their trials, and not their punishments; and do more exercise, then hurt then.
Persecution is not always the instrument of God's fury, but sometimes of his
mercy. They are bastards and not sons who were never corrected: The father
seeing his child swouning, lends him a blow to recover him: The Physician
puts his Patient into an Ague, that he may cure him of a worse malady. God
sometimes casts down, that he may raise up: he sometimes kills, that he
may make alive: and turns the poison to a preservative: Sicut ignis flatu
premitur ut crescat, and vnde quasi extingui cernitur inde roboratur. God then
wrestled with Jacob, when he came to bless him: and put out Readiness eyes, that
he might restore him his sight. Let me be persecuted, O Lord, so I be not
forsaken: let me feel the lash of thy blows, so I escape the smart of thy
fury: so if I be whipped, I will kiss he rod.

As the just do thus enjoy their afflictions, so do he unjust suffer in their
prosperity, and are cursed with their blessings: ^ern. in Cant. Hom. 42.
Certe tunc magis irascitur Deus, cum n^n irascitur. God's hand is then
heauiest on the wicked, when it is lightest; and it is their plague, that they
are not plagued. Veniet ad faelices sua portio, and quisquis vid^tur dimissus,
Sene^.
dilatus est. These happy worldlings must at last have their judgment; and
their judgment will be their damnation. Our sins are our debts unto God, and
his judgments are his debts to our sins: where God owes, he can, he will
repay. He is not like the Heathen's Jupiter, that his Quiver should be empty,
that want of thunderbolts should dis-arme him: The Lord of hosts cannot want
Soldiers to fight his battles: If men of War should be lacking, he has an
army of Frogs, and another of Lice, to discomfite and devour both Pharaoh
and Herod. As the wicked do multiply their transgressions, so does he cumulate
his judgments: and washes away a deluge of sin, with a deluge of water. He
who is omnipotent, is no more powerful then just: and it is as certain that he
will, as that he can revenge; sometimes his wrath is slow, and not upon the
neck of the sin, Number. 25.8.
as Phineas slew Zimri and Cosbi, in the very act of incontinency; yet it
always at last ouertaketh it: and then as he has been slow to wrath, so
will he be slow to lay down his wrath; when he has leaden heels, then he
has iron hands. So that the sinner might wish that the blow came sooner, so it
came lighter.

God judges not like man: our Courts of Justice do censure only known and
open Malefactors: The Judge at the last day will punish, the most close and
secret offenders: Here the hired eloquence of the unconscionable Advocate, or
the false perjury of the suborned witness, sometimes casts a mist before the
eyes of the Judge, that he cannot see: sometimes corruption hood-winkes him,
that he will not see: The Judge at the general Assise, shall be his own
evidence; he shall be Judge, and Jury, and Witnesses: Ipse est qui videt, and
vnde videt. He that made the eye, shall not he see? and he that made ^he
heart, shall not he understand? And as he can both see and understand what he
will, so will he see and understand what he can. There none may escape, here
so few are censured, that most are not quaestioned.

Ille crucem sceleris pretium tulit, hic Diadema. Here you may see the petty
thief, whose accusation (and that perchance false) is but petty larciny, with
chains of iron about his feet; when the grand-thiefe, the state-theife, who
by fore-stalling, engrossing, or by worse means, robs the commonwealth; has
no chains but of gold, and them about his neck. Such are your sacrilegious
Lay-Patrons, those spiritual robbers, and our Jewish oppressing Usurers: The
first, backed by the authority of the Law, begin now to confront the Pulpit, to
quaestion the zeal of the Priest denouncing Gods judgments against them, and
to threaten punishment if they cannot inflict it: so that it is much safer to
commit sin, then to reprove it. Let them therefore enjoy their conquest, let
them triumph that they may rob God freely; At last their punishment will
ouer-take them. Quis enim laesos impune putabit -- Esse Deos? The Usurer has
no Law on his side, yet does he praetend some, and where he finds a
tolleration, there does the covetous Peny-father conclude an allowance. Turn
to the Statutes made against this Citty-sinne, and you shall find it tolerated
with an inhibition; for the Acts which seem to allow it, do some of them
plainly praeface, that Gods Law condemns it.

And God will one day take an account of his Law, and that with far more
terror then he delivered it; At the delivery he did but show how fearful
he could be, at the execution he will be as fearful as he showed to be: when
he shall be a Judge he will inflict death, which he did but threaten when he
was a Lawgiver. The day will come as certain, as it is uncertain when it
will come. Behold the day comes which shall burn like an Oven, and all that
do wickedly shall be as stubble, and the day that comes shall burn them up
says the Lord of Hosts. Then shall the malignant spirit which tempted to
sin, be a tormenter for sin: Then shall the amazed reprobate stand between
his sins accusinng him, and God's Justice terrifying him; below him shall be
his punishment, above him his Judge, and he equally trembling at the horror of
the one, and the wrath of the other: within him his conscience, without him the
world shall be on fire; Quid metuat qui ad ista non trepidat? Who hears this,
and yet dares to sin? what pleasure of tentation can counteruaile this
horror of event? who now is not frighted, who would not be won from
wickedness? who now is not drawn, who could not be before allured unto
repentance? let us therefore accept no object but of sorrow: let us, because we
are fallen by nature, hasten to arise by grace, that we may turn the sentence,
from Go ye cursed, into Come ye blessed: that death may be changed into
life: this everlasting death, into eternal life, which is the first part in
the (...).

To have any conceit of life but good, is now as well impious as Stoicall;
since eternal bliss is compared to it. Yet does this life of glory so far
surpass the life of nature, as the second death is worse then the first: Hence
it is that many who fear not death, fear to die after death, and they who are
hungry to loose their lives, are yet afraid not to find them being lost. I
should now from this mount, as God did from mount Nebo unto Moses, show you
the land of Canaan, and discourse of, though not express, the joys of this
eternal life: Joys in number infinite, yet are they summed up in the
Beatificall vision; and you might see them all, could you see God. How often
has the devotion of many not superstitious Pilgrims, with wearied paces
measured the way from every climate to Jerusalem; who have recompensed their
tedious travels, only with the sight of the ground which our Savior trod,
and the visitation of the Sepulcher where he lay? how were the wise men
ravished with contentment, when the star had brought them to see Christ but
in his Cradle? when he came to be of age, and began to preach in the City;
Videres referta tecta ac laborantia: when he took house, there was such a
crowd that the sick of the palsy could not get in, except the house had bin
vnroofed: when he iournied from Jerusalem, migravit ciuitas, the City was
dislodged, and ran out of the gates: The Sick and all, Qui neglecto medentium
imperio ad salutem sanitatemque prorepebant: Plin. Paneg.
So that the concourse of the people made a narrow way to Christ, as well as to
Heaven: The press was once so great, that there was no ground left for Zacheus
to stand on: for he needed not to have climed the tree, to look down upon him
that was higher then the clouds. If these were happy, (and happy they were:
happy were the eyes which have seen that which you see, Luke 28.10) who thus
saw Christ on earth, and in the form of a servant, happy must they be who
shall behold him in Heaven, and in his glory. There must be all the objects
both of love and admiration. There shall internal bliss be joined to
external faelicity; where there shall be added the Contemplation of his
Divinity, to the sight of his Humanity. Then shall every sense enjoy it is own
delight; then every faculty of the soul shall be fully satisfied; satisfied,
but not glutted: Vitae fontem and sitientes haurient, and haurientes sitient:
There shall be hunger without want, abundance without loathing. The Saints
shall still have what they desire, but they shall still see more to be desired;
what here we can neither in wish seek, nor in imagination feign, there we
shall beyond hope be possessed of: neither shall this joy be more full then it
shall be universal. Here one part of the Earth is not illuminated, but the
other is darkened: The Sun rises not, but the Moon goes down: All the Stars
though they shine with the luster of the Sun, yet can they not be seen for the
luster of the Sun, so that they are eclipsed with their light. Here the joy
of one, occasioneth and breeds the sorrow of another: there Et si dispar sit
gloria singulorum, Austin. med. cap. 25.
attamen communis est laetitia omnium. Me thinks while I dilate of this glory,
I find my self in the same temper with Peter, James, and John, those three
Disciples when they saw a glimpse of it in the transfiguration of CHRIST on
mount Tabor, and must cry out with the first of them. Math. 7.4.
(...); It Is good for us to be here; and I would build Tabernacles too for your
attentions to reside in, but that my discourse may not be like this life
everlasting, which is the adiunct or Duration.

The life of Nature if it be sweet, yet it is short, and if we may love it, we
cannot keep it; vivendo decrescit, and transeundo nosterit: So that our age
begins not to increase, before it decreaseth. This life of glory is more
glorious, because it is lasting; if there were any thought of ending, there
could not be a full power of inioying it. In Heaven there is no time, there is
no distinction of time: there are no years, nor days, nor nights, or if there
be, there is but one day, a day without a night, Aeternitas unus dies aeternus
est: and one day in thy Courts O Lord, as it is better, so it is longer then a
thousand. Consideremus magnitudinem praemij, si considerari possit quod
immensum est: Let us a little meditate on the unlimited greatness of this
reward, and we shall find, that no treasure of our best works can ever
purchase it; It Is a reward, not of merit, but of mercy, not of debt, but of
favor. It Is so a reward, that it is a gift, which is the second part of the
(...).

The words are in the original (...), the gift or grace of God. The modern
Popish Schools have so highly magnified the arm of flesh, and ambitiously
extolled the nature of mankind, that they have blasphemously opposed the grace
and mercy of Christ: See how the little worms swell; see how corruption
disputes for the freedom of the will: not for such a freedom as Austin
proved against the Manichees, or the Greek Fathers evinced from the Stoicall
Christians: They argue not that the will cannot be carried violently, but that
it may be moved necessarily; neither is this necessity from which they would be
freed, a fatal or absolute necessity; they hold it not enough that a man be
(...), except he may be (...); they account not that freewill which depends
upon the free will of God. They place it in the indifferency of Election,
giving it ability to choose, to refuse, good, or bad; and that not only in
things which are natural and moral, but in those also which are spiritual:
Biel. 3. sent. did. 27.
still making the liberty of the will as large as the object. These are their
blasphemies, that the will is a faculty merely Active; and this they conclude
against their own Aquinas, that by their naturalls, Suarez de auxil. Divine.
great. l 3. c. 2 number. 2.
they can do works acceptable unto God; that without spiritual help, they
can for the love of God sorrow for sin; most of the^ indeed tower not so high,
but they require the help of exciting grace: Some outward only, so did
Pelagius; some inward too, so did the semi-Pelagians; at least to be
profitable, if not necessary: and those do no more; Ibid. lib. 3. cap. 4 number.
12.
for they yield not any Physical efficacy or real working by infusing any
power of consent, but only a moral determination in propounding some object of
fear or love: they hold the necessity of grace, but they hold they merit the
grace which is necessary: and when it is offered, they may choose whether they
will accept it: It Is in our power to reject or receive any inspiration of the
spirit: so the Tridentine Conventicle in their 6. Sess. 5. cap. 4. Canon,
making grace Instar advenae, like a guest whom we may choose to let in; like a
garment which we may refuse to put on: like a suasory or eloquent oration,
which we are not forced to consent unto: They never speak of grace and the
will, but with blasphemous similitudes: They match them together, yea they
sometimes praeferre the last, making the will the agent, and grace to
instrument. See Pelagius returned from Hell, only a little disguised, and
therefore the better able to seduce. What Maxentius sometimes spoke of Faustus,
give me leave to conclude of these, Dum nolunt videri Pelagiani, accuratius
Pelagij errorem fouent, quam Pelagius pepererat: Upon this ground of free will,
is built the proud Haeresie of the Roman merit, their immunity from sin; not
only from the punishment, but the guilt of sin: their satisfaction, a thing
most derogatory from Christ's passion: the treasure of their Church, the
supererogated works of their Saints departed, are true corollaries from this
false position: Religion cannot teach them how Christ's merits may be imputed
to us: Covetousness persuades them that the merits of one man, may be conferred
upon another: And I believe them in their tenet, the merits of one man may be
conferred on another; the sins of our forefathers may be visited upon us their
children; see our merits, Damnationis sunt, non liberationis, they may cast us
down to Hell, they cannot lift us up to Heaven.

The sacred volumes euery-where oppose these Popish Pharisees in their
high-towring thoughts of meriting, still throwing down this top of Babell, and
with a critical precisenes giving all unto grace; When we were children of
wrath, Ephesians. 2.13. Enemies to God, Romans 5.10. reprobate to every good work, the
same Epist. the 8.1. Then was our election of grace, Romans 11.5. our vocation
was according to grace. 2 Timoth. 1.9. Faith was given us, Philip. 1.29. and
our justification was gratis. Romans 3.24. Nemo quicquam agit ad seipsum
generandum; no man is his own father, and begets himself; it is as good
divinity concerning man's regeneration and second birth, as it is Philosophy
concerning his first: and as we are justified freely by grace, so by grace also
shall we be freely glorified. Heaven will not be taken by violence, neither
shall they who shall wear the Crown of bliss, ever win it; they shall never
be saved who will be their own Saviors: we may inherit, we cannot purchase
this Kingdom; by industry we cannot, by birth we shall obtain it. Jacob might
have lost the blessing, had he not put on the garments of his brother Esau, and
so shall we to, if we be not clothed with Christ's righteousness, with the
righteousness of our elder brother as with a garment.

If our good works were perfect, yet are they not our own; if they were our
own, yet are they not perfect; if they were both perfect, and our own, yet
could they not merit: still the reward is of mercy, so says the Law, Exodus
20.6: so the Gospel, Romans 8.18. Our good works are not our own, and Nature's
great secretary his position is only true of the works of Nature, Arist. 5.
lib. Ethic. cap 3.
Hominem esse (...); we work not, but God works in us. Quoties enim bona
agimus, Deus in nobis atque nobiscum, ut operemur, operatur; as it is in the 9
Canon of the 2 Council of Arausica: to which I add concilium Mileuitanu^ the 5
Canon, because it has the approbation of two Roman Popes, Innocentius, and
Caelestinus: Our works are not perfect, the myrie channel muddeth the water
which runs through it; the unclean vessel makes the wine unsavory which is
within it: what God works in man, is blemished by the pollution which is in
man.

Tutissimum est fiduciam totam in sola Dei misericordia and benignitate
reponere, Bellarmine in his 5 book de Iustificatione, 7 chap. 3 proposition:
how? is it safest to put no confidence in merit, and yet is it no danger to
teach merit? will they believe that which they dare not hope? Christ has
merited our salvation, he has not given us power to merit it, he has
satisfied and paid our debt, he has not given us wherewith to pay or
satisfy; neither is our modesty humble enough, if we confess we have received
the power of meriting, except we deny all power to merit. The enemy of grace
acknowledged that he had received his soul, and the faculties of his soul;
his will, and the ability of his will, from God; and yet was he still an enemy
to grace. So do the Romanists still oppose Christ's merits, although they
derive their power of meriting from his merits. If I would confirm this
doctrine with the strength of authority, I could cite a cloud of witnesses,
nursed in their own School, Durand, Pighius, Eckius, Gregorius Ariminensis,
all confessed by Bellarmine in his 5 book de Iustificatione, 16 chap. to whom
may be joined Marsilius, Ferus. Faber Stapulensis, Stella, all rightly quoted
by our reverend Bishop, in the 2 book of his Protestants appeal, 11 chap.
besides the many blots which their frequent expurgations have made in most of
the ancient Liturgies and Fathers, which are as good testimonies as these men's
writings: Nay, it is most true of Cardinal Bellarmine himself, which Kemnitius
observes of most of your Romish Doctors, that in this argument, as he is an
heretical disputing Jesuit, so is he a most Orthodoxe meditating Protestant.

Whose doctrine is not, as the Papist maliciously imposes, the vice of the
Libertine; we teach indeed that the righteousness by which we are justified,
is not inherent but imputative; that it is not ours, but Christ's; or if it be,
it is made ours, and not within us: that on our part faith only is required,
and that also' to be the gift of God. Elegit eos quos voluit gratuita dei
misericordia, non quia fideles futuri erant sed vt essent, ijsque gratiam dedit
non quia fideles erant sed vt fierent: Lombard in his first book, and his 41
distinction. Yet do we affirm that this faith which alone justifies, is
never alone, Sola fides sed non fides sola, as the School critikiseth; faith
justifies without works, and yet is not the faith which justifies without
works. Faith without works is dead, and faith which is dead cannot give life,
eternal life. It must be lively and active, operative and fruitful; we deny
it to be faith in the Puritan phrase, that is a naked faith; so that we require
of our good works, although not a meritorious dignity to justification, yet a
dutiful necessity to sanctification. God begets not children to the Devils
image: your carnal Gospellers, bastard Christians, and pseudo-professors, are
so far from being the sons of God, that they are not his servants. This is
our doctrine, this our practice: for (thanks be unto God) our Land is almost
as rich in charity as in wealth: superstition was never more bountiful then is
Religion, witness the Catalogue of our Founders and Benefactors, with new
additions now so enlarged, that the Preacher is forced to be unthankful, and
cannot remember them. Our Colleges newly built, and now in building, our
Lectures daily multiplied, our Libraries completely furnished, our poor better
provided for by charity then by Statute; and yet well by Statute, were the
Statutes well executed. Our Hospitals lately Founded, and yet not so lately,
but they begin already to be abused. I am afraid some of them are so sick,
that it were charity to visit them. You who have power and authority, you whom
God and our Benefactours have made Visitors and Ouer-seers of their liberality;
let me beseech you in the bowels of Christ Jesus, that you would not suffer
that which bounty has given, to maintain luxury, or that which has been
dedicated unto God, to be conferred upon them, who doing the deeds of
darkness* and that in the light, profess themselves to be the children of the
Devil: so shall these houses of piety be as richly endowed with your care, as
with their Founders Revennues, and you shall be as bountiful as their
Benefactors without expense. I have now showed you the way how eternal life is
conferred upon us, it is freely and by gift, it is but Ask and have: and I make
no quaestion but that ye are willing to petition for it, that therefore ye may
know to whom to direct your supplications, I must show you the Author, who is
God. Eternal life is the gift of God, which is the third part of the (...), of
which is a syllable.

Life as death is natural, spiritual and eternal, there is a life of Nature,
a life of Grace, and a life of Glory; and God who is the Prince and Lord of
life, Acts the 3, and 15. is doner of them all. First, of the natural, In him
we live, and move, and have our being; Acts 17.28. Then of the spiritual,
Nevertheless I live, yet not I, but Christ in me, Gal. 2.20. And lastly, of
eternal life here in my Text. And God here is no one person, but the whole
Trinity, when the Creator conferreth a benefit upon the creature; then as the
Father gives, so does the Son; as both, so does the Holy Ghost. Opera
Trinitatis ad extra sunt indivisa. You have the Author, of whom ye may with
confidence beg it, with certainty obtain it; for ye have a powerful Mediator
Jesus Christ our Lord. But the gift of God is eternal life through Jesus
Christ our Lord, which is my last part, of which in a brief conclusion.

Christ is our Mediator, as he is God and man; God incarnate, the person, by a
different act and operation, but in one and the same perfection proceeding from
both his natures, his humanity suffered, his humanity satisfied, but that his
humanity could suffer, could satisfy, was from his Divinity. Had he bin only
man, the Jews had neither reviled, nor blasphemed, when they scoffingly said,
He that saved others, let him save himself. We are neither Manichees, nor
Arians; we neither deny the humanity, nor oppose the Divinity; we embrace that
of Timothy, Tim. 1. 2. and 5. There is one God, and one Mediator between God
and man, the man Christ Jesus. But we must have S. Austins Commentary. Sed
neque per ipsum liberaremur vnu^ mediatore^ Dei and hominum homine^ Iesum
Christu^ nisi esset and Deus. In his Enchridion, his 108. Chapter: If Christ be
Mediator according to his Godhead, then can none be mediator who is not God;
our Pseudo-Catholickes are not more Idolatricall in any point then this;
although they labor to distinguish themselves into the truth, by saying they
have but one mediator of redemption, although they have more of intercession:
one chief Advocate, although many secundary, that their prayers are directed
unto God; Tanquam per eum implendae, to Saints only, tanquam per eos
impetrandae, Aquinas 2.2. the 83. quaestion, and the 4. Article; while they
pretend they worship God in the Saints, they worship the Saints as God.
Certainly their practice in this is worse then their doctrine, and yet is
their doctrine so bad, that Bellarmine is ashamed of it, and weakly excuses
it, saying, Their words are not their meaning, De beatitudine sanctorum, his
17, Chapter, and his 1. proposition. I will not offend your ears with their
blasphemous phrases, every where inserted in their Missals and Liturgies.
Christus, say they; caput gratiae Maria collum, and they join her milk with
his blood. I have trodden the Vine-presse alone, there was no man with me. Esaw,
the 63.3. true, no man but a woman there was, the blessed Virgin; so there
sottish, as well as blasphemous gloss, it is not he but she, that shall
break the Serpents head, Gen, 3.16. not ipse but ipsa; so it is translated, so
allowed by the grave Fathers of Trent. We are no more saved by Mary, then we
were condemned by Eve; salvation is only by Christ, Per Iesum Christum Dominum
nostrum, though Jesus Christ our Lord, as all our Collects run, and by him
we shall be saved, he has a double right to this eternal life; the first by
heritage, the other by conquest: the first for himself; the second for us.
Mercy has given way to Justice, and Innocence has suffered; Justice shall
give way to Mercy, and the guilty shall be saved. Let us therefore beg with
alacrity. Quid non dabit petentibus, qui seipsum dedit non petentibus? Give us
O God, this eternal life, even for thy Sons sake, our Mediator and
Advocate, Jesus Christ our Lord.

Amen.
FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page 22. in marg. r. part. 3. p. 37. l. 25. r. (...). in marg. r. lib. 3. cap.
5.


