NEVVES FROM Millaine and Spain.

The Copy of a Letter written from Millaine to Venice, by Signior Padre,
concerning a strange Prince, called Prince Mammon, who is lately come into that
State.

A Proclamation made in the name of his Majesty of Spain, for the search,
finding out and apprehending of all such persons, as shall be suspected to be
sent out of Millaine, by Prince Mammon and his confederates, to work the ^^e
vi^^any in these kingdoms, as the^ have ^one in the S^a^e of Millaine, by
their Devilish powder.

A Letter written from S. Lucas, concerning the Justice and execution in
Millaine, done upon two of the principal Conspirators in the dispersing of
infectious Ointment and Powders made by the devil.

Translated out of the Spanish Copy.

LONDON. Printed for Not. Butter, and Nic. Bourne, 1630.

THE COPY OF A LETter, written from Millaine to Venice, on the nineteenth of
September: Nouo stilo by Signior Padre, as follows.
THE great wonders we see in these our Times, press me to impart the same to
you, that you may be truly informed what has happened in the City of Millaine,
within this fortnight: whereof I will set down nothing, but what I have seen
with my own eyes. On the sixth of this instant Month of September, here
appeared a Spirit (for so I must call him) that took upon him a humane shape,
which calls himself Prince Mammon, he seems to be about the age of fifty
years, he wears his beard very long and square cut, he is neither lean nor
fat, great nor little, high nor low, the color of his skin is neither white
nor black, but is a man of a midling stature, and of a very clear complexion.
At his entrance into the City, he appeared in a very fair Caroach of green
Velvet, embrodered within and without with Gold, Pearl, and precious Stones;
which Caroach was drawn with six such Horses, as nature never flamed goodlier
Creatures, all trapped with rich imbrodered Harness, suitable to the Caroach;
he was attended with sixeteene Footmen, young, proper, and beardlesse, who
with the Coachman and postilian were all suited in Liueries of green Velvet,
imbrodered with Gold, Pearle^s and precious Stones, suitable to the Caroach and
Horses. The Horses seemed like Turkish lennets, and were of such a composure
for color, and shape so vndescriable for curiosity, that there was no
imperfection to be found in them; because, when so many excellencies meet
together, they make a thing Supernatural. This Spirit thus humanized, rode
through the City, in the State and Equipage of an Ambassador, in a slow
motion, till he came to a goodly Palace of the Earl Triuolehet, which is
soitua^e in the Roman Street, where he commanded his Caroach to stay, and
finding the doors thereof fast barred up with locks and, iron bo^ts (the said
Earl having left his said House, for fear of the infection of the Plague) he
commanded his Servants to enter, but being told the doors were fast, he
alighted, and came to the doors, and immediately without any violence the
doors fl^w open, and he entered, and furnished the same House with forty Beds,
for himself and his retinue, where he gave great entertainment to all that
came, and cured all diseases; but especially the Plague, which at this time
rages very sore in this place. He can transform his shape at his pleasure,
and day and night he trauaileth through this City: And when he visits the Soke,
he asks them, whether they will be healed, and do such things as he shall
require of them to do: if they say they will, he heales them immediately, but
if they refuse, or stick at the motion, he strikes them with a Rod that he
has in his hand, and the party so struck dies presently, as it has happened
to many in this City. This being known to the State, they consult with the
Prelates; namely, the Cardinal and Bishop of this Diocese, and when the
Senate of the Clergy had attempted all ways, both Spiritual, and Temporal,
that could be imagined, for the chasing hence of this Fury, and could not do
it: at the last they concluded, that it was the will and pleasure of the
Almighty God, to permit and suffer him to be there; for this I know, that after
they had sent the Marshall with 200 men, well furnished with Pistols, and other
munition to apprehend him, imagining him ^o, be some Witch, or such like
Impostor, he suffered himself to be attached and carried to the Prison gate,
where he made himself invisible, and so got out of the Officers hands, and
shortly after, he was found at his Palace, feasting and entertaining such as
came to him* Moreover I heard, that hereupon the Cardinal with the consent of
the rest of the Clergy, determined to summon him to the Cathedral Church of
the City, to, give an account to them, what he intended there to do: which
Summons was given on the Friday fortnight after his appearing in the Ci^y, as
he was riding in his Caroach; unto which Summons he did yield obedience, but
with this Prouiso that the said Cathedral might be adorned in sitting manner,
to receive a Prince of his Honor and Dignity: for (as he affirmed) he was a
Prince or 15. Legions, whereupon there was prepared to receive him, a Sumptuous
Cloth of Estate, with Chayres and Cushions su^^able, and under his feet was
laid a curious Carpet of Tapestrie: wrought with silk and gold. The night of
lowing his, Summons, and preceding his Appearance, he seemed to scatter much
Dust in the said Cathedral, and in the Greek Street, where he knew the most
of the People of the City would be, by which means it is conceived* that a
great number of the people were infected; for the next day following, there
dyed of the Plague between 6. and 7000. of this City; but at the time prefixed,
he being come unto the Cathedral, where all the learned of the City were
assembled, he was interrogated, and unto four of their Que^tions he made
direct Answers. But then said, it was Nobleness, and Prince like to vouchsafe
to answer, and therefore of his Benignity and humane Clemency, he had answered
accordingly; but said he would not further answer them, unless with more; and
greater authority he were compelled thereunto. Whereupon a Post is dispatched
for Rome, that the Popes Authority may be had.

But after they had stayed all further questioning of him: voluntarily, and of
his own accord, he fell upon a serious discourse of the high mysteries of the
most sacred Trinity, delivering such truths thereof, as their own Judgments
and understandings could not choose but ratify, wherein he showed such great
learning, that all that were present, and could not understand him, stood
amazed and astonished to hear him: Which discourse when he had ended, he
took a sollemne leave, and weekly departed to his Palace, aforesaid. By
which time the Earl ^riuoleheos, hearing how his house was entered, returned
thither full of indignation, but when he came in presence of the Prince, he was
stricken with such awe and reverence, that his anger turned into Courtly
Complement, saying* he was infinitely bound unto his Highness, that he had so
honored him, as to make use of so mean a Cottage to be his receptacle:
Whereto the Prince rep^ied, that he would not prove ungrateful, and there
with took a Vial of clear water out of his pocket, and said to the Earl, I
give this liquor to your Honor, which you must esteem as dear as your own
life, the virtue where of, is this; that if you take a drain thereof in pure
wine every morning fasting, neither you, nor your Court, shall be in any danger
of the infection of the Plague, but may without fear lay your hand upon a
running sore. We shortly expect the return of the Popes Authority, which we
believe will be here with the next Post, and after that I shall inform you of
many, and almost incredible things: the Prince continues both night and day
passing through all the parts of the City, at his pleasure: he spends liberally,
and eats and drinks plentifully, and when he will, he can, and does go
inuisibly, and when he thinks good, resumes his humane shape. I have many
things to write unto you, which I am forced to omit, until the next Post, and
in the mean time I kiss your hands.

Millaine the 19. of Septem. Nouo Stilo. 1630. Your assured, S. Padre,

The Lord Don Diego Ilustado de Mendoca, Knight of the Order of Saint Iago,
Steward of the household to the Queen our Mistress, Viscount of Corzana,
Assistant and Campmaster general of the Soldiers of this City of Civil, and
the jurisdiction thereof, for the King our Lord: makes known unto all the
neighbors, dwellers, and inhabitants, living and being in Civil, how his
Majesty has sent his Royal Provision, or, Edict dispatched by the Lords of
his Royal Counsel, which speaks on this manner.
DOn Philip, by the Grace of God, King of Caslile, of Leon, of Arragon, of the
two Sicilies, of Jerusalem, of Portugal, of Navarre, of Granada, of Toledo, of
Valencia, of Gallicia, of Maiorca, of Civil, of Cordennia, of Cordeua, of
Corcega, of Murcia, of Iaen, Lord of Biscay, and of Molnia, etc. To you Don
Diego Ilustado de Mendoca, Viscount of Corzana, and our Assistant of the City
of Civil, and our Lieutenant in the same Office, and to every one of you, to
whom these letters shall be showed, Greeting. Know ye that we have bin given
to understand, by persons zealous of the service of God, and of us, that
certain enemies of Mankind do conspire how to sow and disperse those powders
or dust here, which has caused so rigorous a pestilence in the State of
Millain, and in other States allied in friendship to this Crown; and that for
the same purpose are come into these kingdoms certain persons, whose pictures
and marks be in the power or custody of us, and of the Governor of our
Counsel. And because so enormous and horible a crime could not be intended nor
executed by any but by such as having given themselves to the Devil, do
endeavor to destroy the whole race of Mankind; and seeing it is just, that
they have condign punishment, if temporal torments may suffice for so hainons
and exorbitant a crime. And because it is agreeable to the service of God and
of us, as a thing so important for the good of our kingdoms, to use all means
for the searching out of those persons, who are come to perpetrate the said
crime, and for their apprehension, so that no man may hide or conceal them; by
the deliberate advise of us and our Counsel it was agreed, that we should
send these our letters unto you for the same reason and we hold it for good.

Wherefore we will and command you, that so soon as it shall be delivered unto
you, you cause it to be proclaimed in the said City, and in the towns, and
places within the jurisdiction thereof, that we promise presently to give, and
there shall be given 20000. Ducats, besides other honors and savors to all
and every person and persons, as well natives as strangers, who either
personally by themselves, or by papers, or letters, shall man fest, declare,
and bewray unto you, and those other Justices of the towns and places of that
jurisdiction, the persons which are come to commit the crime, and have
conspired so to do. And in case the person which shall make the said discovery,
be one of the accomplices, if he come in voluntarily* and give notice of the
rest, the said reward of 20000. Ducats is promised, and shall be given him;
and besides, from that time forward, we give and grant him immunity and pardon
of the said crime or any other crimes whatsoever, be they never so heinous, or
grievous so merly committed by him, and we do free him and his goods from the
danger of the same, to the end that no Judge, or Judges of these realms may
have power to proceed against him or any good of his And a^l and every person
and persons of what estate, quality or condition soever, which have or shall
know or understand or have heard in any sort, what persons have conspired and
do conspire to commit the said crime, or shall know, or understand, any thing
concerning the same matter, shall come and reveal the same unto you, and to
the Justices of the said towns and places of that precinct, within two days
after they be accquainted therewith, upon pain of loosing their lives and
goods. And for as much as from the first day of August of this present year,
we have notice given us of many strangers entered into these our kingdoms, and
that by their entrance and abode, there may be much hazard and occasion of
scarcity of bread and other provisions: we will and command, that within three
days after the publication of these our letters, they depart out of the said
City and place of the same jurisdiction, and within 15. days out of these our
kingdoms, upon pain of their lives, unless they have obtained the license of
us of our Councels therein to abide, which licenses shall be given the^, the
cause and necessity of their stay being examined; except those who are come to
inhabit and people the Country, and for the same cause shall be admitted into
many other places. We do also command, that of the said strangers which have
arrived since the first of August, you make a register before they depart, and
that you strictly examine them of the cause of their coming into these
kingdoms, without troubling them with any other judicial act, unless out of
the confession of themselves or others, there resulte a nec^ssity of a
Judicial proceeding. And you shall give them there certificates and
Passeportes, sitting down the place from whence they depart, and the marks
which they bear about them. Which perform they must, upon pain of loss of
life and goods; which punishment shall irremissibly be executed against all
that shall disobey the aforesaid order or any part thereof. And those Natives
or Strangers which shall receive, or harbor, and shall not discover those that
have come in since the said 1 day of August of this year, or shall hereafter
come in, do incur, and fall into the same punishment without possibility of
remission or moderation, for so is our will and pleasure. And whereas we are
given to understand, that many strangers are newly come into these our
kingdoms, by reason of the sterility and want of victuals in other Kingdoms
and Provinces, and for fear of the contagion and pestilence which reigns
there, in respect of the danger they bring along with them of infecting these
kingdoms with the said contegion and pestilence; we command under pain of
death, that none of the said new come strangers, shall enter into any part of
our kingdoms, although he be a continual passenger, unless it be found that
he have immediately before aboade, in a place known to be void of the suspicion
of the Contagion forty days together, and unless he have obtained your
license, which you shall give him, having examined the cause, and necessity of
his coming, and shall name therein the Port by which he entered. And as
touching those strangers which were in these our kingdoms before the said
first day of August, it shall suffice them to get license and certificate from
the Justices of the place where they have resided, who are to admonsh them not
to enter into this our Court without the license of us or our Counsel, upon
pain of their lines. In the said prohibition are not comprised those Carriers,
which come with dispatches from far parts unto our Royal person. And you
shall both day and night keep so strict and vigilant a Guard upon that City,
and upon the towns and places within that jurisdiction, and upon the parts
thereto belonging, as that no stranger may enter, but with such license, and in
such manner, and form, as is declared and intimated in this our letter and
provision. And the same also is to be understood of the natural subjects of
these kingdoms, which shall come from foreign parts. And those strangers
which we command to depart these our kingdoms, must take their certificates
according as they have been registered.

Those that shall departour of this our Court, being Flemings of the low
Countries, and high Dutche before the Conde de Sora, Captain of the Archers of
our Guard, and of our Counsel of Flanders. Those of the French nation before
the Conde de Castrillio, one of our counsel of estate, and of our Cabinet
Counsel. And the Subjects of Great Britain before the Conde de la Puebla de
Maestre, of our Counsel of State, the Governor of our Counsel of the Indies.
And the Neapolitans, Sicilians, Millanesses, and Italians before Don Joseph de
Napoles, Regent of our Counsel of Italy. In which Registers and certificates
so to be taken out by them, it must appear, that they have presented
themselves with the same before the Lincetiat Don Antonio Chumacero de
Sotemayer, Alcalde of this our house and Court. From whom he is to go,
carrying his reason and cause with him in the said certificate and register:
and you shall not admit them in any other manner, but shall detain them till you
have given advise unto those of our Counsel. And we command that no Merchant,
or Factor, or any other person of what estate, quality, or condition soever, to
whom letters or bills shall come directed foreign parts, of money to be paid
thereupon, may or do pay any sum of money by virtue thereof, nor shall
accept the same from the person in favor of whom they were sent, not from any
other in his name, without first making you out said assistant acquainted
therewith, upon pain that doing the contrary, such punishment shall be
infflicted upon him and his goods as may be answerable to his crime, and both
parties shall be accounted Accomplices and guilty in the act. And the sum being
small, or the person known, in full satisfaction you may give license to have
it paid: and in most cases you shall adulse those of our Counsel. And we
command you to make a register of all strangers which shall be found in that
City, or those towns and places of the same jurisdiction, setting down the
time how long they have been here, and their business, and that none depart
thence without your license and passeport, putting it upon record in the
Register, which shall be made for that purpose; for making of which Register
commanded by us you shall not raise any fee; and the Notary before whom it
shall be past shall take a quarto only of each person. Fail you not of doing
this upon pain of our displeasure, and of forfeiting 20. thousand Marauedis to
our Chamber. Given in the Town of Madrid the 4. day of Oct. 1630.

Don Alonzo de Cabrera The Licentiate Don Fernando Ramirez de Farina. The
Licentiate Don John de Cheues and Merdeca The Licentiate Alarchon. Ilazato de
los Rios Angulo, Secretary of the King our Lord, and Notary of his Chamber,
have caused it to be written at his commandment, with the consent of those of
his Council Registered, Don Diego de Alarcon, Chancellor* Don Diego de
Alarchon. Concordateum originale.

And the said Vicount Assistant, commanded the said Royal provision to be
proclaimed in the place of Saint Francis, and in the Exchange of the said
City, as the most pablique and most frequented places.

July 13. 16^0. Sentence executed i^ Millaine, upon Gillermo Plateo and Iuan
Xacome Mora Barber: Authors and principal guides to those that entered the
contagious plague at Millaine (both naturals of the said City) with a certain
powder and ointment.
IN primis, that they be carried to the accustomed place of execution, and
torment with burning tongues, in all places where they have intended their
deuilish project, by conueying aed strowing their contagious and pestilent
powder. And before the said shop of the said Barber Iuan Xacom Mora, to cut of
both their right hands, and afterward put upon the wheel of torment, and
their to break the bones of their arms and legs, and there to hang upon the
top of the wheel ^. hours alive, and afterward their skin to be flayed off
them, and their bodies burnt, and the ashes thrown into the River; the house
of the said Barber Mora, to be raced to the ground, and in the place a pillar
erected called Infamous, with this Epitaph, William Plateo and Xacom Mora, for
being Traitors to their Country and City augmenting the Plague with inventions,
were here executed. At their going to execution, to carry before them two
Trumpets declaring the Treason, with a sufficient guard accompanying them, and
the stage whereon they are executed, fenced about with Rayles, to prevent the
wicked intent of their accomplices if any should intend to infect the place: to
proclaim that those that are shut up in their houses upon suspicion of being
infected, that they come not forth to be executed until July 13.

The Governors son of Millain was apprehended, whom the aforesaid Barber
Mora confessed to be one of their accomplices, whereupon he was committed to safe
keeping with a guard, Since it is reported, that he was secretly made away
with poison, either by his friends, or some of his accomplices.

The Senateur M^unty, is occupied night and day, only in examining of
suspicious persons, of which the prisons are full, and there are above 15^0.
persons found guilty. The said Senator does the office of an Inquisito^n,
Notary, and Judge, and afterward gives account thereof to the Senate Much
diligence is used and with great secrecy in the aforesaid matter, thereby to
prevent it from their accomplices notice what they are; because they are of
several Nations. It is imagined that there will be a great and severe
execution. Also it is reported that now there is no Justice in Millain
Superior or Inferior.

The Governors son above mentioned Charles Rose Knight of the Order of St.
John, a Spaniard, Nephew to the President of the Contration in Sivill, is said
to have got away and fled to Rome, with 20 others of the accomplices, and that
the Pope delivered him to the Millanesses, and that they did expect him in
Millain hourly. But this of his taking in Rome is contradicted, and it is
reported that he and his companions escaped thence, and took their journey for
Spain, so that now in Madred great vigilance and search is made to apprehend
them.

Before the execution of the aforesaid Plateo and Mora, the accomplices had
intended to undermine the prison, with a determination to have blown up their
infernal fraternity to prevent their discovery. But the Mine was discovered,
and their project frustrated, and diverse of them apprehended.

Also, before the execution of the aforesaid, they were demanded by the
Justices and Churchmen, what preservative they had to defend themselves from
infection, and if they could make an Antidote against it. They answered that
nothing could be invented of efficacy sufficient to withstand the opperation
of that pestiferous ointment, and powder: for that it was made by direction of
the Devil.

There is prisoner a Master and treasurer of the bank, for having paid above
100000. ducats, to several persons, who were hired to disperse the infection
with the ointment and powder.

The aforesaid executed persons likewise declared, that whosoever did once
receive money to disperse this contagious venom, cannot abstain from putting
it in practice upon every one he meets, yea even his own Father, For this is
the Compact they have made with the Devil, and in the performance thereof,
stands their own defense or Antidote, against the operation of the contagion
against themselves.

They have asked license of the Commissioners of the Inquisition, to make a
preservative for the City by Magic Art, but was not granted.

At a solemn Procession which they made in Millaine with great Devotion,
thereby to appease the wrath of God (as says the original) and that he would
vouchsafe to deliver the City from so great a danger, the Delinquents strowed
their Pestiferous powders about the streets, so that there dyed upon that
occasion above 10000 persons.

They have brought to Millaine horse-loades of these powders, and at the entry
of the gates, and to pass them by the custom house, they did enter them for
gold wire, and for such paid they custom, and past clear.

These pestiferous powders, are said to be made with Invocation of the Devil,
who has written upon the gate of the Presidents house in great letters, Do
what thou caust, for by the day of Saint Michaell there will be few people
left.

Those that spread the contagion in Millaine, carry about them little bottles
of their pestilent powders, and all those they can come at they be sprinkle,
and upon whomsoever it falls only upon the clothes, he is infected and dies,
so that in Millain it is prohibited to wear cloakes, or long garments, because
if they touch it, but with the hemme of a cloak, or a long garment, they dye.

There is above 10000. Confederates, that have all received money to be
employed in executing this abominable and infernali act, and the number of them
increases daily. There is already dead in Millaine above 80000. and there
dies daily above 1500 persons, insomuch that the dead bodies lie in the
houses, and none to fetch them away and give them burial, and though the City
be rounded day and night with companies of horsemen, yet the contagion
increases. The Clergy are all dead, and the Churches become desert.

In Fortona which is near by, the contagion is not yet entered, but the people
are much terrified, they have cut the ways, and keep straight watch
nevertheless, and will not suffer any to enter. Millaine, Parma, Padua,
Cremonta and Placentia, are wholly depopulated, and diverse other neighboring
towns. It is not come to his Majesty's Camp. There is not a French man dead,
nor Venetian, neither is the infection come to any town of theirs. The State
of Venice is part in the infection. The holy Father as says the original)
has entered a Capital process, or suit in law against the Devil and
nominated a Fiscall or Officer to accuse him, and a Procurator to defend him,
and has aggrauated his punishment, to induce him to appear, and declare, what
moved him to work so great a mischief, and of the contrary what will follow.

Thus much the 13. of August. 1630.

Translated out of Spanish verbatm.

I am persuaded the most part of it is true. For they write from Madrid, that
there is now come to the Court with the Protraitures and signs of some of this
Confederacy which are come for Spain, with an intent to disperse the contagion
in those parts, so that great diligence is used to apprehend them, and
throughout all Spain a most strict watch, and no man, stranger, nor natural
of the Country, can pass from Town to Town without a Passeport from the
Mayor declaring his person, age, and signs, and his business every Family is
registered, and every housekeeper, Inne-keeper and private man is bound upon
pain of 500. Ducats, not to receive one of another Town into his house, nor
without his doors, till he carry him before the Commissary of the Inquisition
to be examined. Yesterday here was a proclamation published, that all strangers
arriving in any Ports of Spain, since the first of August last, should within
3. days repair a Shipbord, and all Shipping arriving since the said time,
should within 15. days depart the Country, upon pain of death, whereunto
diverse have opposed and dispatched away to the Court, in the interim till the
sixteen days be expired. There can but only the Master and two more of a
Ship come a shore, neither can they come a shore alone, but the counsel of
this Nation, or some of the principal Merchants whom here the Duke, in other
places the Major, nominateth ^mu fetch them ashore, and carry them aboard, and
keep them company while they are a shore. These things put all Trade to a
stand. God grant all to his glory, and us grace to make a good use thereof.
They report the sickness is at Lysbon. Yesterday here was taken a French man,
and tormented and shall as it is thought be burnt, for making of false gold,
and false pieces of eight.

St. Lucas the 18. of October, 1630.
FJNJS.

