THE CVSTOMERS REPLY.

OR SECOND APOLOGY.

That is to say, An Answer to a confused Treatise of Public Commerce,
printed and dispersed at Midlebourghe and London, in favor of the private
Society of MERCHANTS-ADVENTVRERS.

By a more serious Discourse of EXCHANGE in Merchandise, and Merchandising
EXCHANGE.

Written for understanding Readers only, in favor of all loyal Merchants,
and for the advancing of TRAFFIC in ENGLAND.

AT LONDON, Printed by James Roberts, dwelling in Barbican. 1604.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE THE LORD BVCKHVRST, L. High Treasurer of England. The
Lord Henry Howard, L. Warden of the Cinq-Ports: and the Lord Cecill of
Esenden, Principal Secretary of Estate to the Kings Majesty, and of his
Highness most honorable Priuie-Counsell.
THE NVMBER IS BUT small, (at least not very great) of men so senseless or
weak of judgment, but general inconveniences they readily see, and can
easily discern. Notwithstanding, to find out the grounds of public harms,
and the means how to cure them, is a study so intricate, and a practice so
dangerous; that wary men hold it safer to provide for private ease (in regard
of the times) then to busy their wits for any common-good.

But how advised soever, and respectively wise in this kind, the most sort
seem to be, as wishing only that all might go well, though not long of
themselves: few or none are found of so still a temper, as not to complain,
when public greefes work their own sencible smart.

Such then as by long and extraordinary patience supping up their private
wrongs, have endeavored to give way to the stream of public contumelies, in
hope of better days: must needs be excused if compelld at the last by
lawless necessity, to refer events to GODS providence, in discharge of
their Duties to Him, their Prince, and Country, they undertake the defense of
their own reputations in a Cause public and general. The rather, when as
without purpose of offense toward any, their Intentions appear, to give only
a reason of such Disorders in their present Functions, as for want of serious
Inspection, or true Information, have hitherto by Jealousy and misconceit,
yielded matter and occasions from time to time of their special Disgraces and
obloquie.

Such and none other, was the drift and scope of a late Discourse of the
present Estate of Customs, not so publicly printed, as privately directed To
the Grave and godly wise in highest Authority, by the Title and Inscription
of THE CVSTOMERS APOLOGY.

But. Pro captu Lectoris habent sua fata Libelli. For the book being written
for understanding Readers, and so digested, that by reading alone, without
passion or partiality, such might be their own and only Judges; has
notwithstanding, by the Ignorant been lately censured, and strangly mistaken.
Vainly striving to commend and make good that within Book, which never was in
question: and maliciously urging some things without Book, that never were
meant by words nor writing to be defended. But with such success as still
befalls Folly, who delighting to see her own shadow dance, has not the grace
to conceal her own shame.

About such time as by the goodness of GOD, the light of the Gospel began to
lay open the Errors of Superstion in these parts of the world, and by the hands
of our Sovereigns to disperce them in this Kingdom: many Questions were
moved to uphold sundry points of the Popish religion; but none so hotly
disputed for the time, as that which they term the Sacrament of the Alter, and
Praying to Saints. Whereof amongst others, a certain young Scholar more
confident then wise, having undertaken a serious Defense: as one sick of love
with the thing he had begotten, and ambiciously affecting the publishing of it;
entreated a learned friend of his, and well-minded to the Cause, to read it
over. The request was performed. But looking for Arguments sitting the
Question, When nothing was found but a needless labor, to approve and
maintain by the Catholic CREED, That JESUS CHRIST, was the true SON of
GOD, very GOD, and very MAN that redeemed the World: And that there was also a
COMMUNION OF SAINTS. The Book was returned without applaude, or show of
satisfaction.

RIGHT HONORABLE. Such has been of late years, the success of a like
learned Writer, who printing, A Treatise of public Commerce, in favor of the
private Society of the Merchants-Aduenturers, has with much a-doe, and a
heap of silly words, (far unfitting the gravity of his Theme) endeavored
to persuade his Readers, That Traffic rightly ordered, is the honor of Kings,
and prosperity of Kingdoms: And that Merchants in that respect, were to be
cherished, favored, and encouraged in all Commonwealths. Quia VITA CIVILIS IN
SOCIETATE POSITA EST, SOCIETAS AVTEM IN IMPERIO ET COMMERCIO.

It is strange to observe, what strong apprehentions are able to work in weak
men's brains. For as a plain simple man was sometimes persuaded, that if
Pontius Pilate had not been a Saint, the Apostles would never have suffered
his Name to stand in the Creed: so this Treatise-Writer, by a strong
imagination of the Merchant-Adventurers extraordinary deserts: seeing the
admirable effects of the golden blessings of England, by turning Creekes into
Ports, Read the Treatise printed at Midleburgh, anno. 1601.
joining Ports unto Towns, raising Towns into Cities, and enriching whole
Countries with Artificers and Trades, Mariners and Shipping. Applauding
withal, their singular happiness, and great good fortunes, to have the managing
thereof within themselves. Commending their The Merchants Adventurers, boast
themselves to be able to make and divert a Trade, at their pleasures. Page, 23.
dexterities, in disposing, diuerting, dividing, mincing, abridging,
restrayning, and lastly confining the Store and Staple thereof within the
Walls of some one two Towns for best advantage in Mark this well by the way,
for herein lies hid, The Pot of Roses.
Foreign Countries, culloured with the Title of their special Mart-Townes.
And above all things extolling their excellent wits, and absolute cunnings, in
moulding Laws by mere Discretion, to hold all men under, and themselves
above. Only for sending or sailing cross the Seas from Coast to Coast,
without hazard of their Persons, or loss of their Goods more then usual and
ordinary. And for wearing Page, 154. 155. 156.
Chains of gold about their Necks, Caps and green Feathers, Hats and white
Feathers, Buskins of purple Velvet, guilt Rapiers, Daggers, Bridles, Stirrops,
Spurs, and such like, at Tryumphs, and public meetings. But specially for
feeding, maintayning, and setting At Antwerpe. 20000. About Antwerpe, 30000. In
Flaunders, 60000. Page, 24.
thousands on work beyond-Seas, when God knows the wants, and hears the
cries at home: would feign persuade others, (being bound to admire them
himself,) That their Governor is for Skill the Pontius.
PILOT, for Gravity the Judge, and for Wisdom the Oracle of all orderly
Commerce. Their private Talmud.
DECREES, above COMMON LAWS, and FORRAINE-TREATISE. Their particular Synhedry.
SYNODES, above GENERAL COVNSAILES, and their Synagogue.
SOCIETY a COMMUNION OF SAINTS. Pronouncing all that dislike, distaste, or
distrust their Doctrine, for EN TER-LO PERS. That is to say, All English,
Christian, and loyal Merchants, Crucifige.
Scismaticks, Heretics, and Infidels, unworthy to breath Common-ayre, or live
in any Commonwealth. Concluding strongly withal, That these Men thus put in
trust with the credit and Cream of the Kingdom, (our Cloth,) must needs be
holden more loyal to their Prince, more serviceable to the State, more welcome
to their Neighbors, and therefore more to be honored, then any other Men,
with a Name above all Names, of MERCHANTS-ADVENTVRERS.

With this and such like stuff the Book being confusedly fraught, (cuius
contrarium verissimum est,) might well have been suffered to have dyed in the
birth, if withal it had not been mingled with aspertions of obloquy and
untruths against CVSTOMERS of the Out-Ports of the Realm.

CVSTOMERS. A kind of Creatures capable of Religion as well as Reason: free Men
by birth, and of best education. Men every way happy, save in their Names and
Callings: and in nothing more wretched then in the Places of their Functions.
The Out-Ports of the Realm. London the only Port of England. all other Ports
are counted but Out-Ports, to London.
O holy LONDON! Men I say, that being by the curious eye of the Law, Chosen of
the best, and placed in the rank of the most sufficient that Wisdom can
find, or choice afford; would feign retain the reputations, The Law is as
careful in the choice of a Customer, as of a Shriefe of the Shiere.
if not of Saints, yet at the least of Christians, and plain honest Men.

To let it therefore in some sort appear, that it is not enough for Men
affecting their own good and credits by Traffic, to value their worths by
disgracing of others; and that by such kind of Imputations and Shifts,
Customers are no Prophets; to guess by the Goods, of what Nation the Owner is,
it being a mystery among Merchants, to lend hands, and culloure one another
dealing.
as none but Merchants (perhaps themselves that thus byte and whine,) only or
most usually commit, and is not in the Customers power to prevent or amend:
that which ensues, has been wrung from them by way of further Defense. For
though it might be said, That to answer all private oppositions were
fruitless, and to no end: yet least he that runs alone, should still think
himself foremost: to satisfy Wisdom and Authority it self, The Treatise
has been twice printed at Midleburge and London, and dedicated to the Lord
Cecill.
I have been provoked (by words and writings) out of other Men's labors and
former experience, (as by way of witness) to make good that for Traffic, which
the Apology before did but tenderly touch, and briefly set down.

Besides. Not to show the decay of those Effects which both maintain Customers
Credits, and give Essence to their Functions, by the occasions of the Ecclyps
in their Cause Efficient: were wittingly to betray the general good of all
Men, and worthily to set down in perpetual obloquy. And public slanders are
not washed off but by public Defense.

For TRAFFIC therefore: Customers being bound, and bold to contend, the
advancement whereof, like Honey in Hiues, increases Customs. The childish
commendation of Traffic, by the Treatise-writer. Page. 3.
Not that Commerce, which children as soon as their tongues are at liberty do
season their sports by: Nor that which Weomen among themselves do chop and
change by: But that TRAFFIC whose Laws at the Standart of Equity, wey out
Order, (not by private Discretion, nor partial Affection) but by the weight of
general Justice. Whose Merchants are Persons all every where Loyal and
friendly. Whose Ports and Staples at home, Markets and Marts at home and
abroad, are places for access conveniently easy, and for safety generally
free. And whose Merchandise, for Matter honest, for Use profitable, by Nature
admirable, and by Art made amiable, is at all hands vendible only for the
Goodness.

That TRAFFIC, I say, whose divine Elixar Goodness, the quintessence of
Nature and Art applied to Materials, breeds Mysteries in Trades, turns
Trades into Metals, and all Metals into pure Silver, and fine Gold. The
restauring power whereof, easing all griefs in Sores, suppling all Sores in
diseases, and curing all Diseases in particular Members, holds the whole
Bodies of Kingdoms in health. Lastly: That TRAFFIC which concerns Kings and
Kingdoms, whose seat is every where the Sovereigns bosom. Whose voice well
tuned, is the harmony of the World, To whom Courts and Countries owe fealty
and homage, the meanest Subjects feeling her care, and the greatest Princes
subject to her providence. Whom both Noble and unnoble admire, as the Nursse of
all their earthly honors, prosperities, peace and joy. To the end, I say, that
by other men's complaints, as well as Customers, the world may see how hunted,
restrained, monopolised, and ill beholden, that TRAFFIC is and has been to
all private Societies. In the Fore-Ranck whereof I set the This is here added,
only that the Treatise-writer might examine the grounds of his own folly or
frenzy in taxing Customers as friends to the Haunces, by speaking against his
Merchants-Aduenturers. To whom, as to Subjects, only for their Sovereigns
sake, they wish all kindness and love, but reverence neither as absolute Princes.
HAVNCES, (that being but Subjects a part and a sunder under several
Sovereigns; yet combined together, dare contest with Princes:) and these our
MERCHANTS-ADVENTVRERS, as her two most wayward and wrangling children. Who
preferring particular Decrees before general Treatise and Laws, and with
public weapons maintayning contentions for private wrongs; in steed of Order
pretended, breed nothing but complaints at home, confusions within themselves,
endless troubles to grave Counsels at Counsaile-Tables, and unkind Iarres
between Kingdoms, States, Allies, and foreign Neighbour-friendes.

Leaving therefore the TREATISE-WRITER to believe still in the CREED, whose
Articles are certainly most holy and true, though Pontius Pilates Name stand
for no Saint: And the MERCHANTS-ADVENTVRERS to the Story of ISIS. Whose Image
of gold it was that men so admired, in all places where it came, and not the
beauty of the Beast that bare it. I refer your Wisdoms and Honorable
patience, to the Counter-Treatise following: being a plain Demonstration of
that Canker of Commerce, MERCHANDISING-EXCHANGE. I say a clear detection of
that Contempt of Laws, Disdain of Equity, Scorn of public Magistrates,
Dishonor of Princes, and Mystery of Iniquity. And a lively Description of
that VSVRIE.
Monster of CREETE, devouring as it were by yearly tribute, the bodies of Men,
and souls of Christians. His hatching and brood, his Muces and haunts, his
Practice and Shifts, his Shape and Name, under the Title of
MERCHANDIZING-EXCHANGE. The Laborinth of whose inextricable Errors, none may
safely enter, and whose Person none can encounter and quell, but fatal
THESEUS, assisted by the thread of address and Counsel of ARIADNE. A work
sometimes proiected to give light unto others, Lordships and these our days
withal.

And since the case of Customers stands so far preiudged, that even their
Cries seem but Echoes in the Out-Torts.
Deserts, round about the Plains, near the FOREST OF SHIFTS, the sound
whereof most men pass by but hear not, many hear but understand not, some
few understand but regard not, and no man pitties. And that their painful
Apologies are left to the Ignorant, to prostitute publicly, and turn into
Sin: whilst they sit still in silence, like Barnes so ding'd that they dare
not greit: Let Experience tell IELOVSIE, how she torments TRAFFIC, by clogging
her Custom service.
Service with swarms of such Instruments as love her Customs, but as Rats do
love Cheese. And let Nature tell SVSPITION how TRAFFIC appeals. That whilst
her Custom houses.
HOUSES as Places infected, or haunted with Sprites, are either abandond, or by
Extremities made subject to Shifts: The Free Will Offerings. The Effects of
Loyalty. The True-loue-knots, knit between Subjects and Prince. And Tokens of
Customs.
Affection (religiously moved in Minds, admiring the glorious OBJECT of their
own welfare and Good) from the hearts of her Merchants, humbly presented to
Sovereign Dignity, and to None other due. Become now set to sale. As if
franck-harted Love, and true-louing Loyalty (the Homage of Subjects, and Honor
of KINGS.) Were Things transferrent from that Prerogative which gives them
life and Being. Or subject to Exchange. Or vendible for Money. Or fit for The
Farming out of Customs, offensive to Nature: and unto Traffic merely
Heterocliton.
FARMORS. Dryuing TRAFFIC thus from the Lyme-kill to the Cole-pit: every way
decaying her PORTS, Et Licentijs sumus omnes deteriores.
and disgracing her Servant.

But as inveterate Errors, hold still their advantage, and are never
overthrown, till from Signs unto Causes, by Effects it appear how the World
in Matter of TRAFFIC has been abused, ouer-ruled, and ouer-seene: So when
TRVTH, the Daughter of TIME, by practice and proof shall be brought to light,
then shall Ignorance and Impudency stand both confounded, and IELOSIE herself
see that in Customers virtue is not vice.

For if it be true that Truth has sworn, Customers have written, and
Experience confirms. To wit: That look what the Soul is to the outward
actions of the Body, in ordering each Member, so as to Nature seems fittest
for the good of the whole Man: the same is TRAFFIC in disposing Mysteries and
Trades to the behoof of the Commonwealth. The The King.
DAY STAR is risen, and the The Prince.
DAVVNING appears, which giving life to our Hopes, makes us breath out thus
much, and say: The time may come, when this hearty zeal of ours to our
SOVEREIGNS honor, and his Peoples happiness, may be better regarded, and
deserve not only thanks and good words, but make all men confess themselves (
Merchants at least) to owe as much to these weak endeavors of CVSTOMERS, even
those of the despised Out-Ports of this Realm, I say not as one Port, one
Town, or one City of London, but many Ports, many Towns, and many Cities
like London, and all their wealth besides are worth, some few private,
particular, and preventing Persons excepted. The Censure whereof I most humbly
submit to Judgment and Wisdom, with this Caution and final Conclusion. That
TRVTH lies deep, and few there are that undertake the toil to delue till they
find her. And though Public harms and private Disgaces to men of my
Calling, have singled me forth, and pressed me forward to work thus alone,
for the Common-good; the burden whereof makes me cry aloude: I must confess,
that in these Apologies, and forced Defenses, (accusing no man, for that was
the Devils part from the beginning, nor at war with any but Sin and
Dishonestie) Nil magis in Votis nec habui, nec habeo, quam vt inter plures,
aliquos inveniam, qui de istis judicare queant. Iudicare autem non possunt nisi
vtcunque Literati, aut Rerum vsu periti. Ex hijs satis mihj pauci Lectores, sat
erit si vel vnus: In Appealing therefore to the GRAVEST and WISEST in HIGHEST
AVTHORITY. I have thought it meetest and safest for triple respects, to present
my self, and my poor service, to your honorable Lordships, by whose special
favors next GOD and my SOVEREIGN, I am that I am, and so desire to be known.

Your LL: by several Duties. deuotedly bound. Tho: Milles.

THE CHAPTERS CONTAINING the matter handled in this TREATISE.
A Preface or Introduction to the Matter handled in the Treatise of Exchange. 1
The Antiquity, necessity, and use of Lawful Exchange, and a Description
thereof. 2 How Merchants have devised and introduced another kind of Exchange,
called Merchandising Exchange. 3 The Compacts and Conditions commonly agreed
upon in Merchandising Exchange. 4 The terms of Art proper to Merchandising
Exchange, by diversities of Times, and Distances of Place. 5 The Diversity of
prices of Money current in Merchandising Exchange, according to the Distances
of Place, and difference of Times. 6 The manner of raising the valuation of
Money in Merchandising Exchange. 7 The Difference between the Lawful
Exchange, and Merchandising Exchange. 8 The first standing Banks and Pillars
of Merchandising Exchange. And a Description thereof. 9 Three Practices, and
five Abuses hurtful and pernicious to all Commonwealths by Merchandising
Exchange. 10 How and by whom the practicing of Merchandising Exchange, is the
Cause of all excessive prices in Commodities and things vendible: to the
preventing and perverting of all lawful Traffic and orderly Dealing within
the Realm and Commonwealth of England. An Abridgement of the special
Inconveniences to this Realm of England, handled in the foresaid tenth
Chapter. A general Conclusion.
A TREATISE Of EXCHANGE in Merchandise, and Merchandising EXCHANGE.
A Preface or Introduction to the Matter handled in the Treatise of EXCHANGE.
ALl things whatsoever tend naturally to some End. Which End being the
Perfection of that for which it works, is only attaind unto by apt and fit
Means. That which appoynts and moderates fitnes and Form in working, is
termed a Law: by which, as by Rules, the World and all things therein are
distinguished and stinted. Which Limitation is both the Perfection and
Preservation of the Things themselves. Measure therefore working by
Proportions, is the way, to Perfection. And since nothing does perrish, but
through the too much or too little of that, the due proportioned Measure
whereof does give Perfection; Measure is also the Preservation of all Things.
For to Proportion, Excess and Defects are opposites. Justice then being the
foreconceiued End of all Actions, is prescribed and perfitted by Laws, and
preserved by Measures. Which being the Heavenly charge of Earthly Princes;
sets forth and lymits their Soueraignties and Prerogatives sacred and royal,
otherwise (in regard of their humane Substances and qualities) transce^dent.
For it is said, They are Gods in regard of Justice, but their Persons shall die
like Men. Justice is Distributive or Commutatiue. Commutatiue Justice encludeth
Traffic. The end of Traffic is Equality in supplying Necessities, vt quod
vspiam nascitur Boni id apud omnes affluat: either by bartring wares for wares,
or by some Midds or Means certain and indifferent to prevent Advantage.

The End therefore in Traffic being Equity, and the use Exchange; the
Measure is by public Consent of all Nations called Money. And as the Standart
of all kind of Measures for general Justice like Vrim and Thummim is the
Princes charge only: giving thereby Weight and Content, Length and Breadth to
all Proportions: So the coining of Money and the valuation thereof, being a
Measure of principal Excellency and peculiar to Traffic, is immediately, Vni
soli et semper, an essential part of Sovereign Authority. Out of which
Premises, this must be concluded. That either to coin Money, or being coined
to alter the true Valuation thereof, in what kind soever; is in Subjects
whosoever, when and wheresoever, to presume upon the Majesty of Sovereign
Princes, to profane the Sacred Seat of Justice, to contemn public
Authority, and in Traffic to prevent and pervert all order and Equity. A
Capital sin against God and Nature.

Thus much only being added by way of Preface, by the Customers of the
Out-Ports, who for the Effects sake are every way bound to advance the Cause:
That which follows of the Matter and use of Traffic, is proper to Merchants.
Hear therefore a loyal Merchants experience, writing in his own Style and
Phrase of Exchange in Merchandise, and Marchandising Exchange, in Order as
follows.

Tractent Fabrilia Fabri.

CHAP. I. The Antiquity, necessity, and use of Lawful Exchange, and a
Description thereof.
IT IS APPARENT TO SVCH AS are conversant in Records of time and old Writers,
that the exercise of Exchange is a thing of greatest antiquity: borne with
Traffic it self, and as it seems, begat the first Names and Titles of
those which are called in Latin, Numularii, Argentarii, and Colybistae, that
is to say, public and common Exchangers, and Commutors of Bullyon, strange
and foreign coins to all manner of Strangers, for the lawful and current
money of those Countries and Commonwealths, where the said Exchange was
proportioned and authorized by the Princes and Governors of the same.

And because the Office of Exchanging, and courtesy of lending money in a
Commonwealth, after an easy and tolerable reckoning, is very necessary and
expedient. The old Civil Laws did grant and permit to this honest kind of
Exchange, a certain rate in the hundred by the year, for th'interest of such
money as was lent to such as had need.

And a certain exercise and use of the same was sometime allowed and admitted
in England, as when the Tables of Exchange were set up, and erected in diverse
Towns thereof, in the time of King Edward the third, and other Kings reigns
succeeding him.

The Exchangers and Keepers of which Tables, did change to all manner of
Foreign Merchants and Strangers, which resorted thither: as well Bullion, as
all foreign coins and Moneies which they brought thither for the current
Money of the Realm, according to the Princes just valuation thereof.

And this manner of Exchange, seems also to be the first occasion of the
erecting of those shops of Exchange, which at this day be called in Spain and
Italy Cambios and Bancos, which at the first institution of them were appointed
for great safegarde, and commodity of such as had Money, for that they might
without danger lay into the said Cambios and Banckes (as it were in Deposito)
what sums of Money they would, for the which the Cambiadors and Bankars would
be answerable, as for a thing deposited, and committed to their custody, and
would also make payments thereof, according to the order of the said Depositor.
Which farther did use to change Silver for Gold, and all manner of foreign
coin and Money, for the lawful and current Money of those Countries, and that
according to the lawful valuation of the same. And moreover, by these
Cambiadors or Bankars, sometime there was ways and means taken, to make
Exchange of Money, from one Country to another: for such as had occasion for to
travel and pass Countries. Likewise according to the just and public
valuation of such coin and Moneys, the reward and salary of Cambiadors for
their labors and pains in keeping Money, Exchanging white Money for Gold, or
foreign coins for the lawful and current Money of Spain, within this thirty
years, was not above two and a half in the thousand, for the space of on
Fair, which commonly endures there six weeks, and this interest and gains
amounts not above three in the hundred for the whole year.

This manner of Exchange is not only to be suffered and permitted in a
Commonwealth: but as it appears, very necessary, expedient, and commodious
to the same: not only for the exchanging of Bullyon and coins within the
self same Realm and Commonwealth: but also for the passing of Money from one
Country to another, for such as have affairs to travel Countries as the
Ambassadors of Princes do: whereby be diverse perrils avoided that they should
run in, carrying of ready Money about them. So that the said Exchange be not
practiced of such as traffic Merchandise, and will employ their money so
exchanged again in wares and commodities to be returned into their own
Country. For to all such the said Exchange was always prohibited in England,
as a thing discommodious and pernicious, both to the Prince and Commonwealth,
as may appear by diverse Acts of Parliament, provided to that end.

EXCHANGE described.
Exchange therefore is a certain lawful kind of commutation and changing of
Money, appointed by the public authority of a Commonwealth, either for the
changing of Bullyon strange and foreign coins brought thither, according to
such valuation as the said Bullyon and coins have, or be esteemed at, by the
common authority of the same Commonwealth and Country.

Or else it is a certain means, for the commutation and exchanging of Money
from one Realm or Country to another, according to the just and lawful
valuation of Money priced and set forth by the public authority of such
Countries and Realms.

CHAP. II. How Merchants have devised and introduced another kind of Exchange.
BUT under the coullor and pretense of this lawful Exchange and commutation of
Money, Merchants of late years have devised and brought up another manner of
Exchange of coin: to the which they do also commonly give this plain and
simple name, Exchanging: when indeed it is not so, but a mere faeneration,
and a making a ware and merchandise of Money: for that in the same, and by the
same they buy and sell, raise and abate the price of Money, as well as they do
raise and abate the price of any other vvare and Merchandises they traffic in.
Wherefore it is not to be called simply Exchange, but properly and aptly to be
called the Merchandising of Money.

Yet because that through the practice and policy of Merchants, specially
trading and frequenting the Marts of Antwerpe, and the Fayres of Lions, for the
passing of Money from place to place by the same, which also is done after a
certain sort and kind of exchanging and commuting of Money, it may
conveniently be called and have the name of Merchandising Exchange. Forasmuch
as Money passed and exchanged after this way and manner, must be paid again
according to the conditions and compacts taken and agreed upon with the
Merchants, for the price and valuation thereof: and not according to the just
and lawful valuation it has by any public Authority of that Commonwealth,
which is author of the said Money: the which temerarius alteration of public
coins and monyes, is the principal foundation of the said Exchange; and of
the gains and lucar proceeding of the same: for the love and greedines whereof,
the other lawful Exchange is exiled and expelled both out of Spain and
Italy; and through the frequenting thereof, the trade of Merchandise is
corrupted in all Countries, and specially in England, by the busy practicing
thereof of Merchants between Antwerpe and England, which have brought many
inconveniences unto this Commonwealth, and be thereby the only Authors, why
all manner of wares and Merchandises bear such excessive prices as they do at
this day within the Realm, as hereafter shall be declared, by the opening of
certain circumstances essentially appertayning to the same Exchange, without
the which it can neither be understood nor practiced; and so shall it evidently
appear, that all th'inormities disordering the prices of all manner of things
vendible in the Commonwealth, have their original from thence.

CHAP. III. The Compacts and Conditions commonly agreed upon in Merchandising
Exchange.
FIrst, the taker and Receiver of Money by this Exchange, must compound and
agree with the Deliverer of the same, at what distance of time the said Money
shall be paid again in a foreign Country or City appointed for the payment
thereof, for there be three kinds of diversities, and Distances of time most
commonly in use at this day amongst Merchants, for the repayment of such Money
as is taken and delivered by this Exchange.

Secondly, the taker and Receiuor of Money by this Exchange, must compound and
agree with the Deliverer thereof, to make payment again in the foreign
Country, according as the same Money received is valued by the Merchants, to
be worth in the current Money of the same foreign Country, and according to
the price and valuation the said current Money has in this their Merchandising
Exchange, and not after the Princes just valuation of the same Money.

CHAP. IIII. The Terms of Art proper to Marchandising Exchange, by diversities
of Times, and Distances of Place.
THe first kind of diversity, Merchants call the taking and delivering of Money
at sight, At sigh.
the custom whereof in this Exchange and commutation, co^pelleth the Receiuor
of the Money upon a little Scedule or Bill, containing the sum and value of
the foreign coin and Money, which must be paid again to the use of the
Deliverer, immediately as the said Scedule and Bill shall be showed and
presented by the Deliverer or his Factor, to the Factor or Servant of the said
taker and Receiuor of Money, or else to his own self.

The second, is to take and deliver Money by or at Vsance, and the custom of
this diversity compels the taker of Money by this Exchange, upon his Bill
or Scedule to pay the value thereof again in foreign coin or Money, at the
end of one month next immediately ended, after the first day of the making of
the Exchange, in the Town or City appointed thereunto in the say Scedule:
either by himself, his Factor or Servant.

This space of time of one month, is limited for this second Distance of time
in this Marchandising Exchange, Vsance.
called Vsance, between London and Antwerp, and other Marting Towns
there-abouts, by the Bankers and Exchangers of the same Exchange.

The third is called Double Vsance, Double Vsance.
by the use and custom whereof, the Taker and Receiver of Money by the same
Exchange, is compelled by his Bill or Scedule, to pay the value thereof again
in foreign Money at the end of two months next, immediately ending after the
day that the Money was first taken up by Exchange, either by himself, Factor,
or Servant, in the place appointed and assigned thereunto by the said Scedule.

And here is to be noted, that these two latter Distances of time, be made
longer and shorter for the payment of Money taken up by the same, after the
diversity of any of the said two kinds, according to the Distance of the
Places, for the which the say Exchange is or shall be made at any time.

CHAP. V. The Diversity of Prices of Money current in Merchandising Exchange,
according to the Distances of Place, and difference of Times.
LIke as the time and spaces limited to every diversity and Distance of time
and place, of this Merchandising Exchange, differ and vary one from another,
between England and Antwerp, and other Marting Towns thereabouts: so has
the english pound passed by this Exchange, between the one Country and the
other, at diverse and sundry prices, differing one from another, according to
the time it is Exchanged for, from the one place to the other.

First, the price of the English pound Exchanged at sight, differs from the
same pound valued by any Prince or public authority, ordinarily four or
five pence in the pound.

Secondly, the price of the english pound Exchanged for Vsance, differs from
the same pound delivered, and taken for sight, ordinarily five or six pence in
the pound.

Thirdly, the price of the same pound taken and Exchanged for Double Vsance,
differs from the pound by Vsance, vi. or vii. pence: so that an English pound
Exchanged by this last distance of time, differs in price from a pound taken
up by the first difference of time, xii. or xiii pence in the said pound.

Many other diversities, as well of Times as of Money, be and may be practiced
and exercised in this Merchandising Exchange: Whereof to discourse
perticularly, were too long and tedious: for so much as this brief declaration
of these diversities before recited, may suffice not only for the perceiving
and understanding of the same: but also for all other that be, or may be
practiced in the said Merchandising Exchange, for as these three prices differ
proportionally one from another, according to the rate and distance of time: so
do all other prices thereof, according to the proportion of time they be
passed for.

CHAP. VI. The manner of raising the valuation of Money in Merchandising
Exchange.
FOrasmuch as the just and lawful valuation of Money cannot maintain this
subtle Merchandising Exchange, every piece of Gold, and great piece of
Silver, set forth and current in any Commonwealth, is always of more
valuation after that it is current Money in this foresaid Exchange, by two
pence, four pence, or six pence in a piece, more or less, according to the
quantity and substance it is of, then it is by the Princes, and public
authority of the Country where it was first coined.

Which policy in raising of Money, is cheefely practiced of the Bankers of
Antwerpe, to allure Merchants of all other parts to bring thither ready Money,
and therefore make they the coins of all other Countries, more worth with
them, then in any other Country else, although they be not so allowed and
excepted by the authority of their Country. Yet being thus valued by them,
they be made the common current Money to buy and sell all manner of wares and
Merchandises there trafficked, and the way to pass and practice their Exchange
with.

And because they will not have the Princes Lawful Money to be the mean to buy
and sell all things with, they compound in all their Contracts, Bargains and
Exchanges, to have the payments made in this their Invented Money, which they
call, Current Money in Merchandise: And furthermore, by this licentious
liberty that they usurp in prising, and valewing all Princes Money, they make
many sorts of Money current amongst them, which common Authority does not
permit nor allow to be payable nor current in the Country. Whereby they have
greatly increased and advanced the trade and concourse of Merchants in those
parts and Countries: notwithstanding, therewithal has proceeded the greatest
occasion, of the excessive prices which reigns upon wares, Merchandises, and
commodities, in all Countries at this day.

CHAP. VII. The difference between the Lawful Exchange, and Merchandising
Exchange.
IN the Exchange which before is called tolerable and lawful Exchange, the
price and valuation set forth by public authority, is chiefly to be
considered and regarded in the Money Exchanged thereby, to the end that a just
and equal payment, may be made again thereof to the Party that delivers
his Money by the said Exchange.

As for example, if the Ambassador of a Prince had need of 100. li. English to
be paid him at Antwerp, and would deliver his 100. li. in London, to have the
just value thereof paid him again in Flemish Money, at his or the coming of
his letter to Antwerp.

Here is to be considered only, what and how much the English pound is worth
Flemish, by the Princes valuation of those parties, the valuation whereof is at
the least xxii.shillings and vi. pence Flemish, after which valuation the
hundred pound English shall make Flemish 112. li. 10.sh. Likewise, if he would
have a 100. Crowns of the sun, paid him in Paris in France, for the value
thereof delivered in London by the Exchange, for so much as it is known, that
the French crown is valued in England at vi.sh, English; and in France it is
valued by the Prince at 50. sous; now vi.sh. in Enlish after 2. sous and a
half for the English grot, amounts to 45. sous in the crown, so that a
hundred crowns amounts to 4500. sous in French, and after the French
valuation of the crown, they amount to 5000. sous, so that for a hundred
crowns at the value thereof delivered in England by this lawful Exchange, he
ought to receive in France, 111. crowns, 5. sous, as he does at Antwerp for
his 100. li. a 112. li. 10. st. Flemish: and this Exchange may be made without
the Merchants three diversities and distances of time, very well, truly, and
justly, because neither party seeks to buy and sell Money thereby, but to
commute and Exchange it, according to the just value given to the same, by the
Princes and common authorities of both Countries. So that neither the Taker nor
Deliverer shall have any more or less, then that is due to them, although the
Deliverer of the Money do tarry, or be contented to tarry 15. or 20. days for
the receite of his Money, the Receiuor receives no damage nor hinderance
thereby, but rather commodity and profit, nor yet the Deliverer, if he have
his Money to serve his purpose at the time appointed, so that here is no
necessity of interest to be paid to any party for the forbearing of Money.

And surely this was only the use and custom of the Exchange at the first
beginning thereof, to the which if it were restored again, the Princes
Ambassadors of England, lying in France and in other places should not leese,
7. or 8. in the hundred, for two or three months space, in taking up of Money
for Parris, to be paid again at Antwerp, and from thence at London by
Merchandising Exchange, to do their Prince and Country service, but should
rather be gainers by the lawful and honest Exchange, as reason and conscience
declares they should be. And yet notwithstanding might the Banker and
Cambiador be allowed for his pains and labor, for the receiving and paying of
the Money, somewhat after the old manner of Spain and Italy, which is after
the rate, of three in the hundred for the year, and so should he not be evil
paid therefore, nor yet the Payer and Deliverer of the Money by Exchange over
burdened and charged, as they be now a days eaten out of house and home by
Merchandising Exchang, if only this lawful Exchange were restored again, for
the passing of Money from Country to Country.

Contrariwise, in this corrupt and crafty Exchange, and commutation of Money,
the said public valuation of Money is altogether neglected, secluded, and put
out of mind, and only the price and valuation, that Money has given to it by
mere chance in the same Exchange, considered and passed upon: and so neither
can equallity nor indifferency be observed in the payment again of the Money,
taken and delivered by the same Exchange, but that one of the parties must be
burdened thereby, nipped and oppressed, for that it is bought and sold at
lower and higher prices then it ought to have by public authority, according
to the pleasure of Merchants seeking lucar and gains thereby. As for example,
if one in London would have a hundred crowns paid him in Parris by that
Exchange, first, at his delivering in London of his 100. crowns, he must
compound and agree with him he makes his Exchange withal, how much English
Money he shall deliver in London, for every French-crowne to be paid in Parris
again: for the Princes valuation will not serve, but he must agree upon a new
price of English Money for the said crowns: so where it is worth in England by
the Princes valuation but vj.shillings, the Exchanger will have six shillings
four pence, or six pence, or peradventure a noble, according as the occasion
of Time serves for every crown to be paid in Parris, and sometimes more.

So that, where by equity and conscience, which is known by the Princes and
public valuation of the crown, the Deliverer of the Money in England, should
receive for his hundred crowns delivered in England, a hundred and eleven
crowns and five sous at Parris, he now by this Merchants Exchange, shall
receive at the most not above 105. crowns, or 102 crowns, and sometime less
then the hundred crowns. So that by this one example, appears sufficiently
what a difference it is to pass Money by the Lawful Exchange, which is ruled
and ordered by the stable and constant price given to Money by public
Authority, and by this other fallible Exchange, depending only upon the
alterable price of Money, given after the instable affection of covetous
Merchants.

CHAP. VIII. The first standing Banks and Pillars of Merchandising Exchange.
And a Description thereof.
THE first and principal pillar of all, may Rome most worthily be taken and
reputed, where such great rapine, Usury first hatched in Rome.
avarice, and other filthiness if so in common use, that it is figured in the
Scriptures by the Beast and Harlot, with whom all the Princes, Merchants, and
rich men of the Earth have committed abomination, and of whom they have
learned the love of Money, that is, Idolatry: Whose Antichristian Princes and
Governors, by reason of the Anates, and other great tributes exacted,
specially of the Ecclesiastical persons of all other Realms, invented this
Commutation and Exchange, as the most expedient and commodious mean for the
conueying of their revenues unto them; so that the holy Fathers began first
in the Babilonicall Rome, the erection of a standing Banck for the Traffic and
Merchandising Exchange, by which means it has ever since been in exercise,
for the transporting of Money as a ware and Merchandise, by the ministry of
Merchants, from all places of Christendom to the City of Rome. Rome,
Unto the which in continuance, the said Merchants being so delighted with that
trade, have devised to adioyne three other Cities for Standing Bancks, and
Pillars of the same Exchange, as Venice, Lions, and Antwerpe: Which four
places, be therefore called Standing-Bancks, Venice, Lions, Antwerp.
because the Exchangers and Bankers thereof, do exercise the same Exchange
publicly, and have their open shops for the same purpose at this day in all
the said Towns; and moreover, they have as it were some kind of Warrant,
Liberties, and Preuiledges, from the Superior Powers of the same Towns, for
the more sure and safe Traffic therein.

By which Preuiledges, (at the least in these other three Cities) under the
pretense and couller to be lawful Exchangers, and honest Merchants, all honest
trade of Merchandise is corrupted throughout all the Towns and Regions of
Europe: but specially in England, all manner of wares and Merchandises, and
other commodities of the Realm, be grown thereby to excessive prices; from
whence also spring daily more and more abuses and absurdities, in the Trades
and manner of all sorts of Occupiers throughout all Christendom.

The Description of Merchandising Exchange.
Therefore Merchandising Exchange, is an unlawful commutation of Money made
between parties, upon certain subtle compacts and conditions for the
passing of Money from one Country to another, according to the private
valuation given by Merchants and Banckars, to the coins and Moneys of all
Princes and common Wealths; devised and invented of them, only for their
private benefit, and gain, to the confusion of all good order in
Merchandising, and the corruption of all honest occupying and Traffic in any
common Wealth.

CHAP. IX. Three Practices, and five Abuses hurtful and pernicious to all
Commonwealths by Merchandising Exchange.
FIrst, Merchants do make thereby all Princes coins and Moneys, to be as
wares and Merchandises, buying and selling the same for more and less price,
as well as any other kind of ware and Merchandise they traffic in, contrary to
the nature of Money, and also the Laws and Ordinances of all Princes and
Commonwealths, by whose authority only, coins of Money ought to have their
price and valuation, and that unalterable, for the preserving of an Equity in
all things vendible in the Countries and Commonwealths.

Secondly, Merchants do use by that means to serve their turns of Money from
one Country to another, therewith to buy wares and Merchandises: by which
policy, they hinder Princes and Commonwealths, of such toles and customs as
they should pay to them, upon their wares and commodities that they would bring
and convey into their Dominions and Countries to do their feate with, if this
Merchandising of Money were not: whereby also many Merchants do coullour the
conueying of ready Money out of the Realm of England. And specially it is a
great let, impediment and hinderance to the bringing in of Bullyon into this
Realm, which all foreign Merchants were wont to do, when the commodities of
the Realm were vented and uttered at Callice, or at the Staple towns within
England, before the two Societies of English Merchants began to usurp such
Liberties for the Traffic, as they pretend at this day to enjoy by lawful
Authority.

Thirdly, Merchants at this day do practice to buy and sell only according to
the price and valuation that Money has, by the disorder of this
Merchandising-Exchange: and do omit and pass over the just and lawful
valuation of Money given; and set forth in every Country by the Prince and
common authority thereof; Money being the only mean to preserve a
mediocritie and an equality in the prices of all things vendible, in any
Country or Commonwealth, and so have they been the occasion why the prices
and estimation of all manner of wares and commodities be so excessiuely
inhaunced and risen in the Realm of England at this day.

1. First, by the occasion of this Exchange, Usury.
many persons in diverse places, before entangled and wrapped in and with heavy
burdens, biting, and inextricable Vsuries.

2. Secondly, it causes the Traffic, with the use and custom of borrowing
and lending of Money in a Commonwealth, to be hard, dear, and scant, which is
a very necessary and expedient thing to be liberally, frankly, and freely used.

3. Thirdly, it gives occasion to all manner of Occupiers, although they follow
no just and lawful trade of Merchandise, to set their prices of their Wares
after such sort and rate, that their gains thereby may pass and exceed, not
only six and eight in the hundred, but also twelve, for a small time.

4. Fourthly, under the color thereof, not only the Bankars of Antwerp, and
Lions, with such like Usurers, openly, and by profession practicing Usury, do
exceed the Limits of all honest and lawful interest, in letting or lending
out their Money, but also all other covetous Persons, having Money by them, by
the example of these Exchaungers, either publicly, or privily, either openly
or secretly, seek the means and ways, to put out their Money for the like
gains, pretending and alleging for their excuse, that they put and let out
their Money, in company with these Exchanging Merchants and open Usurers, upon
common gain.

5. Fifthly, many Merchants, especially such as have grown to great wealth and
riches, be and have been by this means allured and entised, to give over and
neglect all manner of honest trade of Merchandise, and buying and selling,
whereby they have been and might be profitable and commodious to there common
Wealth: and to follow this filthy, unlawful, and too far exceeding gain
and lucar of practicing wicked Vsurary, chopping and changing of Money, and all
for the hope they conceive thereby, to obtain and get both a more abundant and
certain gains, and that also with less labor, charges, perrill and adventure.

CHAP. X. How and by whom the practicing of the Merchandising Exchange, is the
Cause of all excessive prices in Commodities and things vendible: to the
preventing and perverting of all lawful Traffic and orderly Dealing within
the Realm and Commonwealth of England.
THe necessity of conseruing an equallity in contracts of buying and selling,
and a fit means for the exportations, and importations, of things necessary
and commodious for a Common Wealth, has caused all wise and politic Rulers of
Regions and Countries, to judge the use of coined Money; signed with some
public figures, notes, and carrects, to be the most convenient thing that
could be devised. In like manner has it been judged, and thought no less
expedient and necessary, by all such wise and experienced Men, that the same
coins and Money should have their indication, valuation, price, and
estimation, only by public Rulers and common authority of every Common
Wealth: from the which no private Person, Order, or Society in the same, may
or ought to swerve or vary, nor alter, under capital pain. For So Much as the
said public valuation, is as it were the essential part, whereby any kind of
matter, substance, or metal, is received and accepted for Money, and for a
lawful mean to buy and sell withal, in every well ordered Common Wealth. And
whereas the valuation of this common, and lawful mean of price, is not well
known, or not worthily accepted, straightly and duly observed, of all manner
of Persons, Societies, and Orders, there does experience teach, that thereof
follows confusion and disorder, with excessive and immoderate prices in the
commutations of all things Vendible in the Common Wealth.

As for example, when a Prince or Ruler of any Country, does decry and disalow
any kind of coin and Money, which he has suffered before time to be current,
at a certain price and valuation throughout his Realm, the same coin
immediately as it is so decried, leseth the estimation it had before, and is of
no value to buy any kind of ware with, amongst all the common people of the
same Realm; so that few or none will receive the said Money for any manner of
ware, though one would offer it at much lower price then it was before current
for: and if it chance any do bargain to take it, they will raise and inhance
the price of the wares they utter, much above the ordinary price thereof, and
all because it lacks their Princes and common valuation of their Country. In
like manner do the common people of all Countries, esteem foreign, strange,
and unknown coins brought unto them, not valued by the common authority of
their Country, how fine and pure soever the matter or metal of them be, only
(as is said before) for lacking the public valuation of the Country. Whereby it
is apparent, that the Princes and public valuation of Money, is of so great
efficacy and authority, in every civil Common Wealth, that not only it makes
it a mean to buy things withal, but also it preserves a moderation,
equallity, and indifferency in the prices of all things, so bought and sold
between party and party. Therefore is the said valuation solemly, and (as a
man may say) religiously to be kept and observed of all manner of sorts of
persons in a Common Wealth. And the Alterars and Changers of the same by their
private authority, are worthily to be reprehended and reproved, how craftily
and subtly soever they do it, for the manifold inconveniences they thereby
bring into their Country: With a number of which, the Common Wealth of England,
is sore troubled at this day, through the frequent practicing of Merchandising
Exchange, by the two Societies of Merchants Staplerers and Adventurers of
England, between their own Country, and the Marting Towns of Flanders, with
slights, crafts, and subtilties: continually thereby altering the price and
valuation of their Princes coin; by the occasion whereof, all manner of wares
and commodities only sold in the Realm of England, be brought and grow to such
inordinate and excessive prices, as they bear at this Day: for the proof of
the premises, this reason may be first made.

Before this Merchandising Exchange was practiced by the English Merchants
Staplers and Adventurers, between the Marting-Townes of Flaunders, Brabant,
and their own Country, in the traffic of Merchandise to and fro, no person
complained upon any manner of Merchandise, or commodity of the Realm, nor of
foreign Realms brought into England, did at any time grow or arise to
inordinate or excessive prices: yet were the commodities of the Realm
abundantly and plentifully, yea, more liberally exported and transported into
all foreign Countries, then at this day. But there were not in those days so
many foreign wares brought in again into the Realm, as be at this day. For
from the reign of the famous King Edward the third, in whose days the trade
of Merchandise began cheefely to be exercised in England, unto the end of
Edward the fourth, which is the space of above 150. years, Acts of Parliament
were provided, thereby forcing all manner of men that occupied and fold the
wares and commodities of the Realm to foreign Merchants, to raise and keep
up the prices of them, and penalties laid upon those which went about to
diminish and bring down the prices of them.

And in all this space of time, not only Wool and Felles, Staples wont to be
always in England, and not beyond Seas.
were Staple wares at Callice, and other Staple-townes, in England, and at
length, Broad-clothes transported into Flaunders, and Brabant; but all other
manner of commodities of the Realm, as Leather, Lead, Tin, Butter, and
Cheese, Free transportation of home Commodities, natural for Traffic, and
beneficial for the Commonwealth.
were Staplewares, and freely (only paying the Kings custom for them)
carried and exported out of the Realm into all foreign Realms. But sithence
these two Societies of English Marting-Merchants, practicing the Merchandising
Exchange, have made the exporting and transporting of the commodities and
Merchandises of the Realm, to the Staple of Callice, and Marting-townes of
Brabant, a private trade to themselves, the Princes of this Realm have been
constrained to restrain and prohibit, not only the going out of certain of
the aforesaid commodities of the Realm; but also have been compelled to
study and devise means by Acts of Parliament, to bring and keep down the
prices, as well of the commodities of the Realm: as of all foreign Realms.
Therefore it must needs be concluded, that Merchandising Exchange, and the
practicing thereof, is the occasion of this great inconveniencie and Mischief
reigning in the Commonwealth of England. By the reason whereof, all things be
grown to excessive prices.

Also, since these two afore-saide Companies of English Merchants usurped these
Liberties and Privileges to themselves, that the one of them should transport
only Staple wares to the Staple of Callice, and the other Broad-clothes, Note,
Staple-Townes being called Mart-Townes, began the decay of Trades and Towns
in England.
with such other Commodities, unto the Marting-Townes of Brabant, the most part
of all the good Towns of the Realm of England have decayed and come to ruin,
which partly has come to pass, by the reason that many kind of Artificers,
which were wont to inhabit the said Towns, maintain and make th^e
prosperous by such artificialls as they made there: by the means of these two
fraternities of Marting-Merchants be utterly destroyed and consumed, for that
they were notable at length to live by their arts and labors, these foresaid
Merchants devising and causing the like Artificials as the said Artificers made
in England, to be made in foreign Countries, and were by them brought and
transported into England, and sold better cheap somewhat, and lower priced
then those of English making might be aforded. Thorough which occasion, the
English Artificers in continuance were worn out, because none were brought up
under other, to follow their said Art and workmanship, that they exercised,
for so much as they perceived, that they should not be able to live by such kind
of labor in time to come; because the foreign workmanship was more regarded,
and sooner bought then theirs. Partly also they have been the destruction,
decay, and ruin of the said Towns, by taking away the trade of the Staple
from the said Towns, for the utterance of the commodities of the Realm, which
for the most part of all the time, Staple Towns always within England, made
the Realm full of Traffic.
from Edward the third, to the end of Edward the fourth, were kept in good
Towns of England, or at least shipped from them when the Staple was kept at
Callice, by the occasion whereof, there was so great resort of people unto the
said Towns, that thereby they were enriched, and daily prospered and
flourished. Wheresince, for lack of like resort and traffic, and the
destruction of the foresaid Artificers, they be altogethers ruinous and
decayed, and never like to be restored, so long as these Merchants enjoy their
usurped liberties.

Moreover, since these two Societies of English Merchants, usurped unto them
the private exportations of the commodities of the Realm, The hindrance of
bringing in of Bullyon.
the liberal, usual, and daily bringing in of Bullyon into the Realm by
foreign Merchants out of all foreign Realms, to buy the commodities of
England, has decayed and ceased; and severe and great punishments and
penalties be provided by the Princes of such foreign Realms, against all them
which shall attempt the conueying of any such things out of their Realms into
England: Where in times passed, they most gladly suffered and concented unto
it, for that it was openly known, to all Princes and Rulers of Commonwealths
in Christendom, that what kind of Merchant soever, Staples ever kept within
England.
resorted into England to the Staple-Townes, for the and carrying away of the
commodities and Merchandises thereof, were bound by the Acts and orders of the
Realm, to pay for them at the said Staples, in ready gold and filuer before
their departure from thence; as may appear by diverse Acts made in diverse Kings
days, from Edward the third, unto the end of Edward the fourth: and therefore
at that time were all Princes well contented, to suffer their Merchants to
carry their coins and Bullyon into England.

Which manner of Traffic, continued between England and all other Realms,
till that these Merchants became to be a private Society, and so within a
while after, compounded and agreed with the Merchants of Holland, Zeland,
Brabant, Flanders, and other Countries there-abouts, which were the buyers of
the Staple-wares, to receive their Money for such Staplewares, as the said
Staplers sold them at Callice, in Flemish Money, at the Marting Towns of their
own Countries, rating, setting, and valuing the English pound, at a certain
stinted price of Flemish Money, for ever thereafter to be paid unto them,
after the said price; which was a drift driven of the said Staplers of England,
to bring to pass this Exchanging Traffic, to the intent they might make the
return of their Money, from thence into England by Merchandising Exchange:
whereby they made a reckoning, much more to their private gains and lucar,
then to be paid in ready Money at the Staples of Callice, or any place of
England, according to the old custom, although that manner of payment was
much more beneficial, and commodious for the common Wealth of the whole
Realm, which they passed not upon, neither yet do, so they may gain and get
Money.

And thus the fair Lady Merchandising Exchange, enticed and allured the
Merchants Adventurers of England, Staples called Mart Towns, a deceptio Visus,
to turn all Traffic beyond Seas, to the ruin of England.
to procure themselves in fraternity, and to seek means to plant their
Marting Towns in a foreign Realm and Country, for the utterance of the
commodities of the Realm, because they might make their return and
employments, from thence into Englang, by the reckoning of Money current in the
said Merchandising Exchange. And by this means, ceased and ended the franck
and free bringing in of Money, and Bullion into England by foreign and strange
Merchants, after the English Merchants had nusseled themselves in the Marting
Towns beyond the Sea, so that now a days, no Money or Bullion is brought
into England by Merchants, but secretly, and as it were, by stealth, and for
the respect of private gains and profit, which they find thereby, after the
reckoning they make thereof, by currantnes of Money in their Merchandising
Exchange.

Item, when it pleased that famous Prince, Henry the eight.
King Henry the eight, upon good considerations and purposes, and for the great
benefit of his people, and common Wealth, to augment and increase the
valuation and price of his coin and Money, throughout all his Realm, within a
little process and countinuance of time after, it chanced by the malice and
wickedness of men, such a quantity of currupt, and drossy coin of Money, to be
brought into the Realm out of foreign Countries, by the Ministry of
Merchants: (as it has been supposed, thought, and gathered by certain
cercumstances) which Money being current, as well as the true and lawful
Money, amongst all manner of persons within the Realm, by the reason of the
likeness of the fashion, and form that it had with the true and lawful Money,
caused many inconveniences to rise thereby at length, to the whole Common
Wealth: for such a marvelous desire and hastynes, entered into all kind of
Occupiers, by the lothsomnes and hatred they conceived of the said Dross
coin, to bestow it upon one thing or other, that thereupon began to grow
some disorder of prices in all wares and commodities, sold in this Kingdom:
which being first perceived by the Grave, and Fatherly Governors of the Realm,
in the reign of blessed King Edward the sixth, they consulted together for the
devising of some ways to be taken, to avoid the said disorder so begun and
sprung. And the best means for that purpose was thought by their wisdoms, to
be the deminishing, of all the white current coin and Money of the Realm:
intending by that means at the length, to have utterly banished from thence
all such counterfeited coin, taking leisure withal study and care, to do it
with as much ease, and as little loss to every State and condition as could be
devised. But before this their godly and most lawdable purpose, could be
brought to effect, when it was yet but in talk and consultation, and only a
rumor bruted and spread abroad that such a decry of Money should be; The
Merchants Adventurers prepared withal speed possible, The Merchants
Adventurers, private shift to prevent the Princes purpose for the common good.
Armor and defense against the loss, which they feared their State should
fall into thereby, when indeed every person of the Realm, ought to have borne
with a very good will the said loss, for the redressing of the said disorder
so sprung up in the Realm, in the prices of all things, bought and sold
between party and party: according as the prudent and wise Counselors of the
Kings Majesty, had devised and purposed to have brought to pass, and as the
rest of all States of the Realm would have yielded unto: if the Merchants
Adventurers, had been destitute of their Exchange. But greedy lucar and
private gain, could not suffer their covetous hearts to bear any little loss
at that present, though it should in the end have turned to the common benefit
of all the Realm. And so forsooth without further help, they used the policy
of Merchandising Exchange, their practice wherein was as it were, to disualue
and decry the price, of the English pound in current Money by the same
Exchange: for the passing of Money thereby between England, and their
Marting-Townes. Which pound had been current amongst them, two and fro in the
said Exchange, until that time, between 26.sh. and 30.sh. Flemish, but then
suddenly they decried and disualued it to 16. and 17.sh. Flemish; and at
length, to 13.sh. Flemish, before the alteration of the coin was proclaimed:
by the which occasion, the prices of all foreign wares and Merchandises, rose
excessiuely in England, as of necessity they must, for the less Flemish Money
is allowed for the English pound at the Marting-Townes, at the other side the
Sea in their fouresayd Exchange, the dearer and the higher prices must all that
Country wares bear, bought there to be transported into England, which for
the respect of the base price of the english Money, must needs be sold after
the like rate in England. For whereas before until that time, the English
pound had been worth at the said Marting-Townes, at least, 26. ss. Flemish,
then by this abasing of the Exchange, 26. ss. Flemish was brought to be worth
at the end, 40. ss. English, because the said English pound was no more in
value, but 13. ss. Flemish, in their Merchandising Exchange, by which means
the thing that cost but 13.sh. Flemish, was sold between 20, and 26. ss.
English, in England: which manners of Sales, must needs cause all manner of
Flemish wares to bear excessive and inordinate prices there, which immoderate
prices of strange and foreign wares, were sufficient cause to be alleged, why
all the commodities of England, did first arise to such prices as they do
still bear, even at this day: because so great a quantity, of the said
Flanders wares were brought thither, and be in so great use, so much bought
and spent, of all manner of sorts of persons in England.

Yet notwithstanding, the said Flemish wares were not the next and principal
cause, that the English commodities did so rise and exceed in price: but rather
the two Companies of English Merchants, the Staplers and Adventurers, for they
made so gainefull reckoning at their Marting-Townes, by returning home their
Money by Merchandising Exchange, that they past not what price they gave and
paid for the commodities of the Realm in England; for the Staplers made above
28. ss. Flemish of every pound English they sold their wares and Merchandises
for, by an old composition taken between them and the Merchants of those
parts, by the which manner of reckoning, they got above 60. in the hundred in
England.

The like reckonings made the Merchants Adventurers, by the sales of their
commodities, although their gains were not so certain, because they had no
such composition with the Merchants of those parts, as the Staplers had. Yet
sold they after such rate, that they made of every English pound, between 26.
and 28.shillings Flemish, all the while the Exchange came from thence,
Admirable Usury, after the rate of 400. pound, or 500. pound, made of 100.
pound in one year.
between 16. and 18.sh. for the English pound. And so amounts their gains
to above 50. and 60. in the 100. for a Months space, or at the most, for the
space of one Mart, making and returning home their Money by their Exchange.
During the time of which Exchange, there was such a speedy and quick traffic
between England and the Marting-Townes, and all for the love of this lucar and
great gains, that no commodity in England transportable for those parts,
could lie by them unbought. And this means and practice of the two Companies
of Merchants, in following the Traffic and Merchandising Exchange, was the
principal cause, why both foreign wares, and English, grew to such excessive
prices in England. For when all other sorts and conditions of persons of the
Realm, perceived, that the bettering and amending of the coin of Money of the
Realm, was nothing esteemed amongst the Merchants, but rather less regarded,
as though it had bin less in value then it was before, for so much as they daily
increased the price of the wares they brought from the Marting-Townes to be
sold in England: All other States likewise, began to pass and set nothing by
it, and so rather couited to bestow it rashly and unadvisedly in one thing or
other, what price so ever things did bear, then discreetly and warily to
foresee and look aforehand, how they might bestow it, for the bringing down
of the immoderate prices that euerything was grown unto, because they were
persuaded, that the said English coin, was no more worth then the Exchanging
Merchants valued it at. In so much, that the Clothiers which came to
Blackwell-hall, set their pices on their Clothes, according as they learned of
the Merchants the price of Money came from the Marting-Townes in their
Merchandising Exchange into England, and not according to the valuation thereof
given and proclaimed by their Prince. Merchants govern the Commonwealth.
So that Merchants brought all men to follow their bow, as concerning the
estimation of English Money, where they in the mean season, passed not what
they gave in England for the Commodities thereof, though they sold them to no
profit at the Marts, because the returning of the Money from the Marting-townes
by their Merchandising Exchange, was so profitable and gainefull unto them,
during this base and low price of Exchange.

Likewise, whereas the Queens Majesty, Elizabeth.
by the advice of her prudent and grave Counselors, moved with great love,
zeal and pity toward all states of persons, but specially toward the poorer
sort, oppressed and burdened with the excessive prices of all things vendible
within her Graces realm, which sprung and rose (as the common fame went) by
the occasion of the Drossy and monstrous Base-Money, current and set forth, or
at the least way, permitted to be current and set forth, by her Graces
predecessors throughout the Realm: like a most godly and loving Princess,
has taken away and abolished, all the said course and Drossy Money and coin,
and for it restored as fine silver coin, as ever was current in the Realm
before, or rather finer; hoping, meaning, and intending thereby, to have taken
away therewith, the corrupnesse and drossines of prices, which likewise all
things sold in her Majesty's Realm at the time was corrupted with: As without
doubt (if no subtle policy had come between, to have let and stopped her
Graces wholesome purpose therein) it would have effected. For some likelihood
thereof began a little while to appear, by the falling of the prices of
victual at the Markets, when it was first noised and bruted abroad, that by a
certain day appointed and limited, no Money but such as was of fine Silver, or
Gold, set forth by her Majesty, or by her Graces Predecessors, should be
paiable or current thereafter, within the Realm: and that all the drossy
coin, should be brought to her Mint of London, where every man should receive
for the same pure and fine Silver Money of her Graces coin: whereat all
persons much rejoiced, although for the present every state of the Realm knew
they should receive a loss thereby. Yet the consideration of the benefit that
was to a good will. But here blind covetousness, with greedy gain and lucar
reigning in the Marting-Merchants, stirred up their wits to practice their old
subtle policy for the saving of their state from loss, which was to bring
down and abase the English pound in their Merchandising Exchange, for the
returning home of their Money into England from their Marting-townes at the
other side the Sea; and as they did before, in the blessed time of King Edward,
so now at the first brute and rumor of this Queens most noble and ever
praiseable enterprise, they caused the price of her pound of Money to be valued
in their Exchange but at 16. and 17. ss. Flemish: by which occasion, as it came
to pass before at other reformations of Moneys, the prices of all those
Country commodities, and also of all other foreign Nations and Countries, did
not only keep their old excessive and dear prices in England, but did rather
increase and wax higher, and so did likewise the commodities of the Realm
follow after, not only because foreign wares did so, but specially for the
hastines men made to bestow their Money upon them, by the examples of the
Merchants Adventurers, who spared not to buy all manner of wares transportable
beyond the Sea, at what price soever was demanded for the^, for that this
returning home of Money by Exchange, made them great gayners, and would be a
way and mean, if the worst fell, to keep and save them from all loss and
danger in the fall of the Money, which all other states and conditions having
their traffic within the Realm, looked to have sustained and borne by the
reformation of the said Money, which these Merchants Adventurers did provide to
avoid, through this their peculier traffic and practice, by tossing and
turning their Money, between England and their Marting-Townes, by the said
Merchandising Exchange.

For although the commodities of the Realm, which they transported to the
Marts, rose from 4. li. to 6. li. and 7. li. English, yet might they sell them
at the Marts, as good cheap as ever they did, and be greater gainers then in
times past. For so much, as though customably they did make before times 30. and
34. ss. Flemish of a pound English in their sales, after which rate, they made
6. and 7. pound, 8. ss. Flemish, of 4. li. English, and so 150. pound, and 160.
li. Flemish, of a 100. li. English, yet because they returned their Money by
Exchange at that time after 28. ss. and 30. ss. or 32. ss. Flemish for the
English pound, their gains passed not above 13. in the hundred. Where now
selling their commodities at the said prices of 6. and 7. li. Flemish, though
they paid also for them so much in England of English Money, (after which
reckoning they did or do make of 100. li. English, but 100. Flemish) yet
returning home their Money, after this reckoning and low Exchange of 16. and
17. ss. Flemish for the English pound, they got between 17. and 25. in the
hundred, notwithstanding they sold not under 24. and 26. ss. Flemish for the
pound English during the said low Exchange: after which rate, although they
made but 120. and 130. li. Flemish of their 100. li. English, yet made they in
England at the return of their Money, by the foresaid low Exchange, above 150.
and 160. li. English of their 100. li. transported first from thence to the
Marts. By which manner of reckoning, their gains rose to above 50. and 60. in
the 100. for the space of one Mart. And so by this policy of Merchandising
Exchange, Merchants Adventurers have not only saved themselves at all falls of
Money passed in England, and have hindered the Queens Majesty's purpose, Note.
for the bringing down of the excessive prices of things, in the utter
abolishing of all the drossy and corrupt Money in the Realm: but
there-withall, they have been evermore the occasion and Authors of the
disorder, and of the raising of all manner of wares and commodities in the
Realm more and more, to such excessive and inordinate price, as either they
have borne or do bear at this day; neither is there any other kind of State
or Persons in the Realm, that either could have devised, or else that went
about to frustrate her Majesty's purposes, in reducing all the base coins to
so pure or fine substance or matter, but only these Merchants Adventurers, by
the practice of their fraudulent Exchange: for all other manner of persons of
the Realm, would gladly have borne the loss of the Money, according to the
Queens Majesty's meaning, because they perceived, that they should thereby
thereafter save more for the buying of things at moderate and reasonable
prices, then they should lose by the reformation of the coin; for the cause
being taken away of those excessive prices (which was as all men said, the
drossy and base coin and Money of the Realm) the effect which proceeds
thereof, must needs also have ceased and vanished away. But seeing it has not
so come to pass, men must needs say and confess, that some other subtlety
and policy, besides the foresaid drossy coin, Merchandising Exchange.
has caused this inordinate prices, which is Merchandising Exchange; practiced
by Merchants Adventurers, as is heretofore proved.

ITEM, the same practicing of Merchandising Exchange, is the means whereby all
things does continue dear, and at high prices still in England: for like as is
before declared, the Merchants Adventurers, for their own private lucar and
gain, by the policy thereof, caused all things in the Realm to rise to
immoderate and excessive prices: altering the valuation of the English pound,
without reason or equity, by disualuing, and bringing down the prices thereof,
far under the value it ought to have had in the said Exchange: which policy
they invented, at the fall of the Money, to prevent the loss their State and
Company should have received thereby.

So after the fall was proclaimed in England, for the love of the like private
gains and lucar which they had tasted of so sweetly at the same time, ever
since they have kept the price under the sum of Money it ought to be worth
in the same Exchange, and thus passing and returning their Money into England
unjustly and without equity, they stay all manner of wares and commodities, at
the unreasonable and excessive prices they first brought them to, or rather do
raise them higher.

For never since the Queens Majesty, reduced all the corrupt coin of the
Realm to pure and fine Silver, the price of the English pound has come from
the Marting-Townes into England, above 22. ss. 2. pence Flemish, at Vsance by
the said Exchange, where before till the first fall was noised in England, the
coin being most drossy and corrupt, the price of the said pound came from
thence between, 26. and 28. ss. Flemish. To the which price the said
Merchants, should do their endeavor to bring it again, rather then as they
do, keep it at so vile a price, and far under the price that it is
esteemed, and valued to be worth, in valued Money of that Country, set forth
by the Prince thereof, forasmuch as all the Money of the Realm, Mark well the
use and advantage which the Merchants Adventurers, make of their special Mart
Towns, beyond the Seas, to the good of their Country.
is now so fine and pure. But greedy lucar has no reason, which causes that
both the Merchants Adventurers of England, and also the Merchants of the
Marting-Townes, do (as it were) by a conspiracy between them, keep the value
of the English pound, at so unjust and vile price in their Merchandising
Exchange; for by reason thereof, do the Merchants of those parts sell there
wares to English Merchants, for marvelous much more gains, then ever they did
before, and buy the commodities of England again of them as good cheap, as
ever they did at any time before: likewise the said Merchants of England, gain
and get much more then every they did, whether they make employments of their
Money home in wares, or in Money by Exchange from the Marting-Townes.

Therefore it appears, that as this base, vile, and low price of the English
pound, in their Merchandising Exchange, did raise at the first, all manner of
wares and commodities, to immoderate and excessive prices in England: so by the
same Merchants, having gathered so sweet and pleasant gains, do they stay
and keep them at those said immoderate, and excessive prices, from the which
there will no way be found to remove them, so long as the Merchants may
liberally at their pleasure, vnder-price the Queens Majesty's coin of
England, in their Exchange: and so trade and Traffic therewith, between
England, and the said Marting-Townes, because of the great commodity, gain,
and profit the Merchants of both Countries receive by the same.

Moreover, the Queens Majesty of England, receives great loss and damage
at the Merchants hands, by taking or providing Money of them by this their
Merchandising Exchange, according as they practice it now a days: for where
the Merchants Adventurers, and Staplers of England, esteem the English pound
in their Merchandising Exchange, not above 22. ss. 6. pence Flemish, from
London to Antwerp, at Vsance, yet is not that the true and just valuation it
ought to have in current Money of the said Exchange, for so much as by the
public valuation of that Country Money, proclaimed by the commandment of the
Prince, anno. 1559. the English pound of Money is esteemed to be worth, of the
same valued Money, 22. ss. 6. pence Flemish at least, which valewed Money is
better by 6. pence, and 12. pence in a pound, then the current Money by
Exchange.

So then, when one delivers Money in London by Merchandising Exchange, to be
paid again at Antwerp, at sight, he ought to receive there for his English
pound of Money, at the least, 23. ss. Flemish, of this Exchanging Money, and
after the Order of Merchants, in the said Exchange, if it be delivered for
Vsance, he ought to receive 23..sh 6. pence Flemish.

Neither can the Merchants give any good reason, why the price of the English
pound in their Exchange, should be esteemed at this day but at 22.sh. 6. pence,
seeing it is no less worth in the valued Money of the said Country.

For after their old Order of their Exchange, when the English pound was
valued in those parties to be worth 26.sh. 8. pence Flemish of the Princes
Money, the said pound in currunt Money of that Exchange, was worth 28.sh. so
that then their was 4. Grotes of Exchanging Money allowed more to the English
pound at the least, then of valued Money, yea most commonly it came from thence
into England, by their Exchange at 30.sh. Flemish and sometime at 34.sh. of the
said Money, and from hence it went at a more and higher price in their said
Exchange.

Therefore according to the proportion of the prices of Money then, and now at
this day: the price of the English pound from hence ought not to be under
23.sh. 10. pence, and from hence at 24.sh. 4. pence, for from hence by the
Order of Exchange, unto the Marting-Townes, the price of the said pound is
higher and more worth, then from thence hither commonly, by 6. pence Flemish.

Wherefore if truth and equity were used in this Merchandising Exchange, or if
the foresaid English Merchants frequented the Marting-Townes beyond the Sea,
for the preferment of the Common Wealth of their Country, and not rather
altogether for their own private gains and lucar, they would never maintain
this piraticall Exchange, that they practice now a days, esteeming the English
pound to be less worth of their Exchanging Money, then the Prince allows it
to be worth of his valued Money, which was never seen before these days.

For seeing their Exchanging Money is worse by 6. pence and 12. pence in a
pound, then the Princes valued Money, why should not more thereof be given and
allowed for the English pound, then of valued Money according as it has been
accustomed, to be ever here before when the Prince of that Country allowed
26.sh. 8. pence of his valued Money for the English pound.

Therefore that the Queens Majesty, might be exonerated of so great loss,
when her affairs do require the foresaid mean to provide Money, and to the
end some way of reformation, might also be provided for the redressing of the
excessive prices, that specially all foreign wares be sold for in England: the
foresaid Merchants Staplers and Adventurers, would be by some order compelled
to bring the English pound, to this aforesaid just price and valuation, it
ought to have in their unjust and polling Exchange, and then shall they bring
the Sales of their commodities, at the Marting Towns to be sold at 26. and 27.
ss. Flemish, and upwards for the English pound: for the Sales of their wares
must be 2.sh. in a pound above the price it has in their Merchandising
Exchange, or else shall they make no reckoning to live by.

And so after this reckoning, raising the price of their Exchange, shall they
be able to sell in England, and afford all foreign commodities, 25. in the
hundred better cheap, and under the price they sell them now a days: which
reckoning shall induce some manner of reformation, in the disordinate prices
which all wares bear at this day, to the great ease of all the Common Wealth.

After the same sort, when the said Marting-Merchants venture into Spain,
although they can devise no such way and means to practice their Exchange
thither, as they do to there Marting-Townes, yet by the example thereof, they
occupy in that Country as subtle practice, and as injurious, and hurtful to
the Common Wealth of their Country, as their Exchange.

For when they bestow xx. Nobles in the commodities of England, to be
transported into Spain, at the coming thither withal, they make not their
reckoning to sell their wares, to make their English Money good again in
Spanish Money, that is, to make of every English Noble 15. Rialls of plate, and
of every 5.sh. English. 11. Rialls, or a single Ducate of Spain, which were to
make of every pounds worth of English wares, 4. Ducates in Spanish Money: but
they make their reckoning to sell their wares there, as the Ducates were valued
in England, when the coin and Money of England was most base and drossy, after
the reckoning they make of an English Noble, but. 11. Rialls or a single Ducate
in Spain.

So where they should sell the 20. Nobles English, for 26. or 27. Ducats
Spanish, if they were profitable Merchants for their Country, with some gains
toward their charges, they content themselves now a days, rather then fail,
to make of the 20. Nobles English, but 20. Ducats Spanish, and so turn the
matter clean contrary, devising aforehand at their returning home into
England, to make by the Sales of such Spanish wares as they bring into England,
not only 20. Nobles English, of 20. Ducats Spanish, but within these few
years they have priced Spanish wares after such sort, that they have made of
every Spanish single Ducate, between 8. and 10.sh. English.

Which unreasonable reckoning they were most diligent to make, when the English
pound was most vily priced in their Merchandising Exchange: and that was
always at such time as when either the Queens Majesty that now is, or any of
her prodecessors: were most studious by the abolishing of the said drossy and
base coin then current, to have brought down the excessive prices by their
subtilty, raised upon all things in England.

For at such times, the said Marting Merchants have always thought best and
most fittest to take occasion to raise, and enhaunce the prices of all manner
of things in their own Country, to the intent thereby to decline and avoid
the loss that should be borne by the reformation of the coin and Money, and
therewithal did they venture most busily, their own Country commodities into
Spain, in greater number then ever they were wount to do before, and all
because of this new manner of reckoning, to make of every Spanish Ducate 8. or
10.sh. English, in the Sales of those Country wares.

Through which occasion, they have also raised the commodities of that Country,
to double and treble the price that ever they were wont to be sold for in
Spain: insomuch, that the wise and discreet men of that Country, wish that
the Marting Merchants might be kept from the trade of that Country, two or
three years together, Note.
for then they say that the Wines of those Parts, would not be much more
worth then the caske they be put in: And so likewise of Oils, and other
commodities thereof which now be unreasonable dear: and yet do they sell
their own Country commodities in that Country, not only as basely and low
priced as ever they did: Note.
but also have brought them to be in no regard or estimation throughout all
the country, where they have brought all those Country wares to be sold in
England, for thrice as much as a foretimes they were wount to be sold in
England, which be unreasonable and excessive prices.

Yet can they not well sell them under those prices to be any gayners, they
leese so much in the Sales of their own commodities which they sell in those
parts, although they needed not to do so, if they kept any Merchantlike Order
in the transporting of their commodities into those parts: and in the Sales
thereof at their coming thither, as other Merchants of the Realm have done in
times past, when they made ever reckoning to make in the Sales of their
commodities in that Country, 15. Rialls of plate of every English Nobles worth
of ware they brought thither, which gains is sufficient toward the charges.

So might wise and discreet Merchants do now at this day, as well as they
which were wise in times past did; for the commodities of England, be as
necessary and commodious for the Country at this day as ever they were before,
and therefore would they give for them This Treatise was written about the time
of the Colloquy of Bruges, which was holden in aunis, 1564. et 1565.
as much Money as ever they did, whereof I poor and plain WRITER of this
Treatise, have had good experience, even in these days.

An Abridgement of the special Inconveniences to this Realm of England,
handled in the foresaid tenth Chapter.
FIrst, that from transporting of the Store, and translating of the Staples
(sometimes held at Callice and other good Towns in England) to private
Mart-Townes in Foreign Countries, has proceeded the principal occasion of
the ruin and decay of most of the Ports, Havens, Towns, and Cities of this
Realm, and the overthrow of sundry Artificers and Trades dwelling within them,
most necessary to have been maintained for the general good of the
Commonwealth, and special relief of the poor.

Secondly, That Merchants by the Vnderpricing of the coin of this Realm in
there Merchandising Exchange, at their private Mart-Townes, have been the
impediment, that neither the Queens Majesty, nor her Predecessors, could
bring to effect the thing which they went about, by reforming and refining the
drossy and loathsome coin, and Money current in the Realm.

Thirdly, the said Merchants, by the practicing of their Merchandising
Exchange, were the original cause why all manner of wares, Merchandises, and
commodities, as well of the Realm of England, as of all other foreign
Realms, rise to huge, immoderate, and excessive prices.

Fourthly, that all the excellent and necessary commodities of England, be
unprofitably exported and transported into foreign Countries at this day,
for so much as by the occasion of their Merchandising Exchange, they be better
cheap sold abroad, then they cost in England; to the great disorder, and
hinderance of the Commonwealth.

Fifthly, the Queens Majesty is greatly defrauded by the said Exchange, when
her Majesty's affairs do constrain her to provide Money by that means at
the foresaid Merchants hands, (contrary to the truth and valution of her own
coin) and so likewise be her Ambassadors, sent in her Majesty's affairs and
messages into any foreign Realm, when soever they have need to provide Money
by the said Exchange.

Sixthly, by the practicing of the said Exchange, all manner of Gold and Silver
is continually conuaied, carried, and transported out of the Realm, and is the
let and impediment, why neither Bullyon of Gold or Silver, is so liberally and
freely brought into the same as in times past it has been.

Seauenthly and lastly, the said Exchange causes, through the vile, base, and
untrue valuation the foresaid Merchants keep the English pound at in their
foresaid Exchange, being so far under the price it ought to have; that these
immoderate and excessive prices, which they have brought all things to be sold
at in England, cannot be diminished, brought down, or mittigated, to moderate,
reasonable, and indefferent prices.

A general Conclusion.
THis Treatise thus ended, has for warrant and Credit these four
Circumstances: probability of Reason, plains of Style, special Experience,
and Time of writing. From whence this Conclusion being drawn, is hereunto
added. That KINGS and KINGDOMS are heavenly Relatiues. And TRVTH has said it,
That the Desire of Money, is the root of all Evil, and that Covetousness is
flat Idolatry. Which standing most true, 1. Tim. 6.15. Coloss. 3.5.
it follows by Consequence, that MERCHANDISING EXCHANGE is that Laborinth of
Errors and prinate Practice, whereby (though KINGS wear Crowns, and seem
absolutely to reign) particular BANKERS, private SOCIETIES of Merchants, and
Couetuous Persons, (whose End is Private gain) are able to suspend their
Counsels, and control their Policies: offering even Bounty to KINGS, the
Fountains of Goodness, and lending Money to Sovereign STATES and EMPERORS
themselves, that only can make Coin, and should have to give largely, and
lend unto others. Thus making KINGS to be Subjects, and VASSALLES to be Kings.
Such has been the strength of that Stain and Stay of Piety, that contempt of
Justice, that seed of Dissension, that world of Wars, and Art of
Witchcraft, VSVRIE. Such is and will be the power thereof at all occasions:
till KINGS and COVNSAILERS take their own Charge in hand, and (next to
RELIGION that sanctifies all) relieve and maintain the Nurse of JUSTICE, that
rectifies all. To wit, freeborn TRAFFIC, I mean in ENGLAND, and English
TRAFFIC.

In Magnis voluisse sat est, sunt caetera DIVVM.


