Nil magis in votis nec habui, nec habeo, quam, vt inter Plures; Aliquos
inveniam, Qui de Istis iudicare queant. Iudicare autem non possunt, nisi
vtcunque Literati, and Rerum-vsu-Periti; Ex His, satis mihi Pauci LECTORES, sat
erit si vel VNVS.

THE MYSTERY OF INIQVITIE.

Plainly laid open by a Lay- Christian, no professed Divine, out of TRVTH in
Humanity, and Rules of Natural REASON.

Whereby The World may See, Read and Understand, The Proud and Vain Comparison
of a Cardinals Red-Hat, and a KINGS GOLDEN CROWN.

Always provided, In Reading, Read All, or Read nothing at All.

Magna semper VERITAS, Praeualuit et Praeualebit.

1611.

MAJESTY must be seen, and SOVERAINTIE must subsist; if SVBIECTS will be
happy.
In Regimine Ciuitatis. In Republica gubernanda, et in Orbis imperio; minimum
est quod possunt Homines; in causa Religionis multo minus. Magna Magnus
perficit DEVS.

HE, whose only will and absolute Power, could work so well that all he made
became like HIMSELF, Valde bona exceeding Good. Genesis Cap: 1. Verse. 31.
(Et vidit DEVS quod omnia quae fecerat erant valde bona.) GOD I say, GOD I
mean, and GOD the third time, though ONCE for ALL: whom only to know, is
everlasting Life and joy but to hear, and make mention of his Name, being a
law to Himself; of his own Perfection does likewise perfect all he wills or
does. His GOODNESS being the Form wherein all things are well made, from which
to swerue, is to turn again to nothing, and which in Him as the Fountain,
we must admire, and most of all affect and desire in our selves.

Thus GOODNESS becomes the glorious Center of DEITY it self, from whence all
Circumferences both in HEAVEN and EARTH, derive not only Essence and
Subsistence but happiness in Being.

From hence it is, that out of Learning and zeal to religious rightes, some
godly disposed have seemed to observe a kind of Free-trafficke, and mutual
Comers between the Throne of HEAVEN and the Church upon EARTH for the use
Goodness. All heavenly Inspirings downwards, and all holy Desires vp-ward,
being as Angels or Merchants between GOD and US. That as his Doctrine does
teach HIM for our supreme TRVTH, so our Prayers might confess HIM to be our
Soueraigne-GOOD, and our Faith from above, belaying our happiness; our Charity
below, might work out our Salvation by the Medium CHRIST JESUS, both GOD and
MAN. Faith I say, apprehending the mercies of the FATHER for the merits of the
SON, by the working of the SPIRIT, the Fountain of all Graces and Mother of
Obedience.

But this Height and Depth of GOODNESS we leave to Deuines. This fittes not our
Traffic and lower Comers, the length and breadth thereof, must lay forth our
Lessons which are but Customers, that giving GOD his due and our SOVERAINE-KING
his Right, All might become happy. Ignorance. What Publicans, and Sinners, and
Customers and All? Customer. Yea, even Sinners, and Publicans, whom Customers
you call. Jealousy. But how? I pray you? And what makes you think such may
become happy? Customer. Humanity and Reason. For if TRVTH and GOODNESS
subsisting together by the name of DEITY, made Man a model of Perfection like
it self, for the use and good of All: and GRACE begetting BOVNTIE by the
GOODNESS of it self have fixed Majesty and Sovereignty in the persons of Men, by
the name of KINGS, for all Subjects weal; why should not Customers rejoice
among the rest? Suspicion. Why? Because Publicans and Sinners are seen daily
to conuers, Customers and Searchers live together, and ought to concur.
and keep company together. Customer. And so are Customers compeld for to do.
Ipocrisie. But Publicans are Sinners, are Customers so too? Customer. Else were
they but Liars, if they should not say so; but Sinners by nature are those you
call Men, and by the grace of GOD those men become KINGS, and KINGS become
Christians: And such by Grace and GOODNESS are Customers too. Impudence. Are
Customers then Christians? Customer. Yea, and Kentish-men too, for Kentish-men
are Christians where-euer they go. Discretion. If Customers be Christians,
then may they be honest, and so become happy, but Publicans will lie. Customer,
So must Discretion too, when Ignorance commands, and Jealousy stands by. But
as a Publican, turned Christian, Saint Matthew the Evangelist sometime a
Publican.
became so true a Brother, that he taught the foundation of Truth unto other:
So were it, or might it be, that docible persons might be suffered to learn,
Publicans at this day, both could and would teach Sinners to become like
themselves, neither Saints nor Hipocrites, nor deep professed Deuines, but
humbly minded Christians, and plain honest men. Envy. Admit they be
Christians, and that some prove happy in regard of their PLACE, LONDON.
yet they of the OVT-PORTES how dare they show their face? Customer. Where
Ignorance and Envy are seen to embrace, Questions answer Questions, in the
same words and case. Then why should the OVT-PORTS be so subject to Disgrace?
They seek to see one Majesty and one Souerainty subsist; they serve all one GOD
and one KING at the least. Malice. Why? their Breathes infect the Air, and
their Places seem accursed. Customer. If Malice had not said so, then Envy
would have burst. Slander. But their Names are sufficient to turn Virtue
into Vice, and Truth into Lies, as matters now stand. Customer. So the world
has been told (indeed) and long borne in hand, as words are mistaken, 1.
Customers collect in the Custom Houses.
both by sea and by land, for as [1] Publicans and [2] Sinners, are two
several words (spell them who can;) so, 2. Searchers and Wayters, attend at
the Waters side.
imply they a distinction both in manners and Man. But Ignorance! Ignorance!
that Midwife of Idolatry, and Nurse of Superstition, has ever been likewise
the Mother of all Errors, as well in Humanity as Divinity it self; in Justice
as Religion; injurious even to GOD, as well as his LIEVTENANTS, and therefore
no friend to Customers. But as, Priuatio presuponit habitum: and sickness
implies a habit first of health: so Errors breeding mischiefs, begat those
Inconuenie^ces, which threatening our confusion, tell us notwithstanding
(unawares to themselves) of a way to Order, that leads to Perfection, which we
hope now to learn: The KING and PRINCE.
For our DAY STAR is risen and the DAWNING of our Day, that in good time will
scarre them, or amend them as they may. ENTHVSIASME. Now alas poor man, how
art thou beset by Ignorance and her fellows? Yet be not dismayed, what though
inveterate Errors hold on their advantage, till from signs unto causes by
effects it appear, in this lower kind of Traficke, and worldly Comers, how
the names even of KINGS, as well as Customers, are subject to abuse: yet when
TRVTH the Daughter of Time shall once but appear, and put her self forth;
then Ignorant Discretion and Impudency too, shall stand both confounded, and
Jealousy her self see, that Customers are Men capable as well of Religion as
Reason, if they be but well taught. Now be not afraid, for TRVTH and GOODNESS
are so lincked together, that where both of them are not, there can be
neither: and GOD being GOODNESS, his TRVTH stands still by thee, and his GOODNESS
calls thee forward; therefore keep on thy course, thy meaning is honest, thy
purpose is loyal, and thy vows are all divine: thou shall not tread amiss,
let not thy heart decline, and take thus much on-wards, that all sides have
yielded, TRVTH must prevail. Customer. Is TRVTH then at hand, and is it GOODNESS
that cries? Then let Ipocrites dissemble, and Impudence make lies: let
Jealousy go sleep a while, and Suspicion take some rest; let Ignorance hatch
Errors, wherein Mischiefs make their nest; send Pride to the Pope, and let
Cardinals play the Fools; send Popery to the Devil, and Discretion to the
Schools. Couetyse gains nothing by Men of my Place. And Ambition will scorn
to strive with Disgrace. Then, Danger stand aside, since Goodness calls me to it.
If ought do put me by, it is Wisdoms hand shall do it.

They therefore that have Eyes to See, let them be pleased to Read, and that
have Ears to Hear, let such Men understand, what an humble minded Customer,
by the Letters of his ALPHABET and Lines of his own PRIMER has been able for
to spell.

In my beginning thus, GOD be my speed;
With TRVTH to stand still, and with GOODNESS proceed.
ALL MEN by nature desire to be Happy, and aim (at the least) at their highest
Bliss; but the Affections of all, being best seen, and known by their
Objects and Ends: as the highest Object (next God and his Church) is the HONOR
of our SOVEREIGN, and GOOD of our Country; so there can be no Endeavor more
serious and important then to amplify the One, and to further the Other; that
MAJESTY may be Seen, and SOVERINTY at all hands made able to Subsist.

Now by GOODNESS only, all things are seen and known to Subsist both in
Heaven and Earth: and GOD being GOODNESS whose seat is Heaven and the Earth but
his Footstool: for Caelum Caelorum sibi-Ipsi assumens Terram reliquit Filijs
Hominum. Psalm. 114.
In this respect we call our Sovereign Good: and his LIEV-TENANTS, our Earthly
Gods, or Sovereigns per aual as Himself is per amount.

Thus as KINGS and KINGDOMS, prove heavenly Relatiues, so SOVERAINES and
SVBIECTS, for GOD our Sovereign, is a GOD of Order, and not of Confusion.

If GOD then, the very Fountain of GOODNESS or GOODNESS it self, from whose
only Essence grow all our happy Beings, both SOVRAINES and SVBIECTS, out of
Love to Order, and Hatred to Confusion in the depth of his wisdom, have set a
distinction between Souerainty and Subjection for the GOOD of All: it must
needs be by some absolute Powerfulnes, that is proper unto KINGS.

Now, as Omnipotency in GOD is Essential with his GOODNESS: so the Bounty of
KINGS must set forth their Greatness. And seeing that, that selfe-subsisting-
Goodness, that Calocagathia and universal influence of Profit and Pleasure,
wherewith DEITY still woorking the benefit of All, to His own Eternal Glory
and Man's immortal Bliss, is by a like consent of Nations made fixed and firm
in the Finenesse and Pureness of Gold and Silver, by the name of Bullion, that
Majesty among Men, may have wherein to be seen, and Soueraignety Subsist: a
Heavenly Will and Wisdom to extend those Materials by Number, Weight and
Measure; that the worth of it self, may warrant the just value of all things
besides, for general behoof, commutatiuely; must needs be that Power which
visibly demonstrates, what Person is the Sovereign, and who is but a Subject.
For as by GOODNESS, Men first become happy, both Sovereigns and Subjects, the
same fixed in Bullion, makes Men to be KINGS, and Bounty by Bullion makes KINGS
to be GODS: Ius Moneta, Princi atus Insigne praecipuum est, and MAITSTATEM
oculariter ostendit. Iacobus Bornitius Lib. 1. cap. 8.
so Money made of Bullion to extend GOODNESS by, representing every where, even
visibly to the Sense and Eye, by their own stamps and marks, both the name of
the Person, with the Title and Inscription, of Him or Them that made it: and
Exchange extending Bounty by the Greatness of it self, shows how Sovereignty
may Subsist, and Subjects become Happy; whilst each Supports other by mutual
Supplies for reciproke Ends: The Sovereign graciously beholding the
prosperity and wealth of all his Loyal Subjects, as the only Mirror of his
own Greatness and Honor; and the Subjects Religiously admiring the Majesty of
their Sovereign as the glorious object of their Welfare and GOOD.

Thus Bullion being made the Body and Blood of KINGS, Money the Medium between
Subjects and their KINGS, and Exchange the Heavenly Mystery that ioynes them
both together: Coynage out of question, Omni Soliet Semper, by their right unto
Bullion, and use of Exchange, is the true Catexochen of all Earthly Sovereignty
and Kingly Dignity.

Coynage I mean, but not of the Articles and Rules of our Faith in matters of
Religion, to direct our Consciences the way that leads to Heaven, for that
belongs to GOD himself, our Sovereign per amount, being altogether Spiritual
and merely Divine: but Coynage of Money in the matter of Justice, to keep
fraud from shelter, in the Actions of Men peculiar unto Kings our Sovereigns
per aual, being altogether Temporal and merely Civil. That as GOODNESS by
infusion shows the Powerfulness of GOD over all his Creatures, so Bullion by
Consent, the Greatness of Sovereigns over all their Subjects. And Religion
tied to Justice by the twine of one TRVTH, having KINGS for their Protectors,
at more Temples then Saint Peter's, and more Staples then Rome, might help
Catholics up to Heaven, though Papists This is meant only by the obstinate
and wilful, but not by Superstiuous Papists, whole Consciences seduced by the
Witch craft of Rome, may be relieved by their hearty Repentance.
go to Hell. Each KING in this respect, (as Joshua was by Moses to Aaron and
to Hur) for defense of their Subjects, being Supreme Head and Governor,
within their own Dominions, both of Church and Commonweal.

These Premises standing sure, that is to say: If GOD himself our Sovereign
per amount, both Alpha and Omega, as infinitely Wise, as eternally Just, knew
what he had to do in Coining Heaven and Earth. If his Will, that is Omnipotent,
had power to perform, and his skill without a Pattern, did know what Method
meant, The Majesty of GOD seen in KINGS, and Soue raignty in KINGDOMS.
in making Man a model of Perfection like himself, and by KINGS as by
Lieue-tenants to make use of all the rest, that his Majesty being seen in the
Beauty of the World, Vt DEVS in Homine MAIESTATIS sua Imaginem posuit, sic
REGES in Nummo.
his Sovereignty might Subsist in the Goodness of his Work, by this
Powerful kind of Coining: the Bishop of Rome being Originally, and indeed but
a Subject, as both Saint Peter was and others were before him: let Bellarmine,
or the Bishop there himself (for Bishops must have Consciences, though Popes
may have none) resolve the Christian Emperor, Kings and Monarks of the World,
by what warrant authenticke Divine or Humane, the Popes of later times usurping
their Pre-eminence came first to Coin Money, and by a Jewish kind of Usury, to
disturb their Exchange.

For if Omne quod efficit Tale oportet esse magis Tale, how has a Subject, but
a Resident of Rome, and the Emperors own Vassal, so raisd his own Person, as
not to rank with Subjects of the highest Degree, but above Gods anointed and
all that may be Sebasma Sovereign? Or what Power has been able to make a
simple Servant, and a bond-slaue unto Sin of greater ability then were his
Predecessors, or JESUS CHRIST himself (his pretended Lord and Master) that
being to pay Money for himself and some other, disclaimed this Sovereignty.

All Ages more or less, at one hand or other, have inuey'd against his
insolent Intrusions by Couetise and Pride, as well upon the Hyerarchy as the
Temporalty of Kings, The Art of Impiety sufficiently laid open. But the Mystery
of Iniquity, never yet directly undertaken.
being indeed blasphemously injurious unto either, (wherein our Sacred
Sovereign has of late excelled Himself and all that went before him.) But in
this kind of Pride and Covetous Presumption, I never yet could see any (...)
come near him. This being indeed, the very Art of his Impiety, and Mystery
of all Iniquity.

For, as by Massing Priests and Jesuits, he has damnably profaned our
Eucharisticke Sacrament of the Body and Blood of CHRIST, (the Life of true
Religion) making Creatures (Bread and Wine) to be Gods, and Godliness a
merchandise to be bought and sold for Money: so by Bankers and Jews making
Usury the means to draw home his revenues for all kind of Sins, he makes
Money seem a God, that is but a Creature unto Kings, and Subjects like himself
presumptuously rebellious, keeping Sovereigns from the practice of their
Christian-like Exchange, (the Life and Soul of Justice) in contempt of Laws
and government both of GOD and KINGS.

Now then, as without all Dispute or Question, it is generally concluded in all
the Christian World, that to Coin new Articles of the Faith, in the matter of
Religion, or to alter the Eucharist from the first institution by what Creature
soever, is a Sin against the Majesty of God and his Church by the name of
Heresy, so to Coin Money in the matter of Justice, or being Coined to clip
the valuation that Sovereignty has given it in Subjects whosoever, how or
wheresoever, is to eclips the Majesty of Sacred Kings and Counsels, to
profane the Seats of Religious Justice, to contemn Authority and to prevent
and pervert all Order and Equity in the lives and conuersations of
Christian-Ciuill-Men by the Title of High Treason.

Of this I say, let the Bishop of Rome himself bethink him seriously before
he speak, and then speak as he thinks, and let Bellermine advise him well
how to frame his Answer without Equivocation, Guilty or not Guilty.

For if Coining, and Creating prove merely Synomas and mean but one thing;
then is there a third kind of Coynage, by a power likewise absolute in
disposing of Honor by the Great nes of it self, which being proper to none but
Sovereign Kings, is abused and disgraced by the Bishop there and Conclaue,
in creating of Nobility and Titles of Dignity, beyond the rules of Order and
degrees of Goodness, Nuns. Monks. Anchorites. Eremytes. Deacons. Mass-
Priests Friars. Jesuits. Cardinals. Popes.
turning Men into Beasts by solitary Lives and solitary Drones to places of
credit; drowning Honor of Priesthood, in Monks, Anchorites, and Eremytes,
ourfacing Clergy Prelacy, by Wry-neckt Chaplains, Iesuists and Friars,
profaning Sacred Majesty, by Card-nal Deacons and Parrish-Priests of Rome, and
disgracing Sovereignty by a Hyerarchy of their own. Thus making Cardinals to
be Checke-Mates with KINGS; and the Popes more then Monarks or Emperors
Fellows, to blow up Kingdoms and tread Empires down.

The Issue therefore of the Enditement must wholly rest in this, whether POPES
of themselves be Sovereigns or Subjects, or both, or neither. For if Subjects,
then let Bellarmine be silent, or have his tongue cut out, while the Bishop
on his knees, by suite and submission to GOD, and his LEIVE-TENANTS make means
to get his pardon, of the Emperor at least. But if he challenge Sovereignty per
amount or per aual then in what Court of Chiualry, in Heaven, Hell, or
Purgatory, he will stand to be tried for all degrees of Honor, and names of
Nobility, that the Christian world affoordes are thus to be coined.

All Titles of Nobility, and Rights of Pre-eminence, being severally derived
from three general Fountains, viz. Divinity, Humanity, and Distributive
Justice; are either Celestial, Morrall, or Politic and Civil.

1 The first from Religious Imputation being hid from the World, Glory.
makes Christians only Glorious by Faith with God in Heaven.

2 The second, from Virtuous Infusion makes honesty most Honorable, Honor.
and Virtue still admired by Good-woorkes among Men.

3 The third, from absolute Affection, in Soueraigue Love and Favor, Nobility.
makes Subjects Enobled, respectively abroad, but properly at home, for
services performed in the Church or Commonweal.

The First being Eternal, and the Second Immortal, by a kindered all Divine,
Fame.
makes mortal Men remembered, and by Fame to live for ever.

But the Third (whereof we are hear to speak) being merely positive with
Kings within their Kingdoms, though by nature it be diverse, as tide unto the
Customs of Empires, Kings and Crowns, admits notwithstanding this general
definition. Quod sit qualitas vel Dignitas, qua quis Legitime a Plebeia
condition eximitur et per Gradus erigitur. That it is, a qualified Dignity,
whereby a Man exempted and raised by degrees, becomes lawfully preferred above
the Common People. And dividing it self into Dative and Native (for Violent
and Intrusiue have here no Art nor Part as that of Nymrod, the Son of Chus
the Son of Cham, the second Son of Noah, so called, Quasi auarus Dominator
or greedy Cormorant, was the first that domineerd in Eabilon, and violently
framing to himself an Empire over al his Neighbors, for his cruelty in
punnishing, is in scriptures called Robustus venator, mighty or noble Hunter
before the Lord, as committing violence even in the presence of God, and
therefore odious both to God and Man.
Nimrods was) becomes withal so successiue, and Hereditary, Vtper Titulos
numerentur Aui semperque renata Nobilitate virent et prolem fata sequantur
continuum propria s^ruantia lege tenorem. Whereby it stands distinguished from
the other two.

In the First, even on Earth we admire the Heavenly Majesty of Goodness fixed in
Deity by Religion and Picty, Nobilitas Theologica.
in our holy Contemplations.

In the Second, we behold the visible Pr^heminence of Greatness in Manhood by
Justice and Prob^ty in our honest Conuersations. 2 Nobilitas Philosophica.


And the Third demonstrates the wonderful Prerogative of divine Grace and
Majesty in human Sovereignty, 3 Nobilitas Politica.
that of it is own infused Bounty and fixed Honor can so wisely discern, so
justly value, and so prudently transfer, the Reputation and credit of Piety and
Probity, by Enseignes of Gentility, and Titles of Nobility by Degrees upon
others; that as Names do sever Men, so Arms to demonstrate and distinguish
Families.

Of this kind of Nobility, Cice pro S^^lo.
the wisdom of the Heathen have left thus recorded. Omnes boni, Nobilitati
Politicae semper fauerunt, tum quia vtile est Reipub. Nobiles esse, maioribus
suis dignos, tum quia valet apud Nos etiam clarorum virorum, and been de Repub.
meritorum memoria. The peculiar Grounds of Nobility Pollitical and Civil, most
proper to judge by, and resolve the questions of Secular Sovereignty, whereof,
read Tractatum Nobilitatis Politicae vel Ciuilis Londini excusum, 1608. and
1610.


That Majesty then, which with Men may be seen, and that selfe-subsisting
SOVERAIONTY, whose Love and Affection, can make Subjects Happy; being the
glorious Object of Welfare and Good, that we seek to behold and set forth unto
others: we are not here to call down those glorious Titles and Celestial Orders
of Seraphini Inflammati, Cherubini illustrati, Thoni Gloriosi, Dominationes
Clarae, Principatus Inclyti, Potestates mirandae, Virtutes benignae, Archangeli
Sancti, nor Angeliboni, that attend upon Majesty in the highest Heaven.
Neither need we call back those ancient Patricij, and Grave Senators, that as
Men sent from Heaven, the old Romans did admire, whom time has now made
common, in all our free Cities: much less those Greekish Titles of Greatness
and Honor, that swayed the Empire after Constantines times, Sebastos,
Sebastocrator, and Caesar at the last, nor Panhypersebastos, that commanded all
the rest, being now forgotten and long ago forlorn. But as the Turks in the
East, and the Popes in the West, have confounded the world, we are to observe,
how Majesty forsaken of those wandering Empires, and great patterns of Pride,
has fixed her self still in the Monarchies thereof, and Sovereignty seated in
the Thrones of our Kings. Nothing being found more Powerful in it self, more
Gracious of it self, nor more to be admired for use in Nature, for practice by
Nations, or as it is extolled by the Scriptures themselves then Regia Dignitas
and Potestas Regalis: for even the ancient Romans in their first Tipes of Honor
(in bonum Ciuitatis) held the Regal power highest till Tarquines time, by whom
it was defiled. Kings, Consuls, Diclat^^s, Decemuir^, Tribunes, Emperors.
Dictator fell in next to Consuls, and the Chiefetaine of their Armies, was but
Imperator, whom we call Emperor.

Great Caesar himself, even that Julius Caesar which triumphed over Pompey,
after the battle he fought at Pharsalia, refused that of Emperor being so
saluted, and chose rather to be called Dictator summus, the Title of a King,
being yet odious in the City. But when he undertook the Parthian wars, he
affected that of King before all the other; affirming the Sibilles had so set
it down, that the Parthians were no way to be conquered, but by the hand of a
King.

The Dictators Pre-eminence being equal with a King and the name but only
changed was afterward altered to Magister Ciuium, whom at this day the
Germans do term their Burgue Master, and the Romans themselves, in
Italian-Latine since, did call their Banderezo, Bonefacius. 9 1400.
ill the Popes from Auinion to renew their gainful Inbile were recald again
thither, and by surprising Saint Angelo, made themselves absolute Lords both of
and in Rome.

The Title of Emperor, at the first being but a^ Office in the Wars, and a
naked name; began at last ambiciously to swell, and excel all the rest, though
now so dejected or eclipsed at the least, B^aiesta Regia.
that the Majesty and Honor of our Christian Commonweales, stands fixed again
in Kings, and in their Persons only now properly seen. Whereof four ab
antiquo, and none but four, are said to be anointed, ENGLAND, FRANCE,
JERUSALEM, and SICILL.

From hence it is obscrued, Choppinu de ^omano Reg^^ Fr^nc^a.
that as the French do vaunt themselves, their Kings within France, have
stilde themselves Emperors: so Chassancus says of England, that our Kings
are Monarks.

And as the Titles of most Christian, Kings of Great Britain Monarks.
may well beseem the French, and that of most Catholic the later Kings of
Spain: so de facto et de iure, to stand forth as Champion of the truly
Christian, Defenders of the true Christian Faith.
Catholic and Apostolic Faith, is an Honor due to this day to the Kings of
Great Britain, though the Popes out of Pride had never sent nor begot it: for
holding their Kingdom obnoxious unto none but Sovereign DEITY; they derive
the same by inheritance immediately, Gratia Dei.
from the infusiue Grace of God, confirmed by their Subjects full and free
consent, at their Coronation, Fountains of Honor and Political Nobility.
Consecration and special Inunction, whereby as Gods Lieue-tenants and our
Fountaynes of Honor they beget Generosity and create Nobility, by the rules of
Order and degrees of Goodness in the Persons of their Subjects at their own
Wills and Pleasures.

These are our Objects of MAJESTY and Love, whose native Serenity by divine
infusion, Serenissimus Rex.
drawing darkness into light, rayseth baseness in humanity to Gentility and
Honor, making GENTLEMEN to be SQVIRES, dubbing Squires into KNIGHTS, turning
Knights into BARONETS, and Baronets into BARONS, Barons into VICECOVNTS,
Vicecounts into EARLS, Earls into MARQVISES, raising Marquises to DVKES, and
creating Dukes into PRINCES, KINGS-SONNES and greatest PEERS, and making all
their Subjects happy in beholding the MAJESTY of their own KING and SOVEREIGN.

These are they that making, (I say not Honesty, for that is Infusiue; nor
Religion, for that is Divine, but Honest-Men still honored, and Religious
Persons re^erenced, by the only Grace of GOD and twist of one TRVTH, become
Supreme Protectors (as heads of one Body) of all and every Subject both in
Church and Common weal within their own Dominions. These I say, are our
Sovereigns per aual, in whom as in Men by Grace become GODs, we see the
lively Idea of our Sovereign per amount, and by whom we receive daily our
greatest Earthly Honor Happiness and Bliss.

Thus though we woorship our Gentility, Worshipfully Noble. Honorably Noble.
Graciously Noble. Maicstically -- Sacred. Gloriously -- Deified.

though we Honor our Nobility, though we reverence our Clergy, call all our
Bishops Honorable, and every way hold Gracious, the Highness of our PRINCE, by
the rules of Order and degrees of Goodness, yet we admire Majesty in none but
the Persons of our KINGS, and the Glory of All in All, in GOD himself, Ego N
in Christ Deo Fidelis. Imperator and Rex ^oma or^m, manu propria subscripsi.
Cur^^alat: in Coronatione Imp: For. 179.
our Sovereign KING of KINGS. For Sovereignty subsisting per amount in Deity,
and per anal in Humanity, is on Earth no where seated, but in the Thrones of
KINGS, no not in the Emperors, but as he it invested with the Powerfulnes of
Kings.

And thus Sacred Majesty, the Daughter of Honor and Reverence, and Mother of
true Nobility, a magnitudine and decentia from Greatness and Decorum has at
all hands on Earth been respected as a God, not alone by Christians, but by
the Heathen themselves.

Magnus honor, placidoque decens Reuerentia vultu, Ovid Fast.

Corpora legitimis imposuere Toris.
Hinc sacra MAIESTAS quae mundum temperat omn^m; Sacra Maiestas.

Quaque die partu est aedita MAGNA fuit.
Nec mora consedit medio sublimis Olympo,
Aurea purpureo conspicienda sinu.
TYRANNVS, Tyrunnus.
was sometimes a Title of Souerainty and highest Pre-eminence, over Cities and
Countries; a Tipe of Honor and Fountain of Nobility (much like or equal to
Kings) not raised by ambition and tumultuous Consent, but for approved Goodness
moderatly preferred, and for Powerfulnes and wisdom willingly obeyed by the
name of Tyrants; whose Majesty Men reuerenc't, and Subjects Love admired, as
appears by this. Pars mihi Pacis erit dextram tetigisse Tyrranni: Aenead. 7.
but as Insolency began to abute this Command, turning Lust into Law, and Law
into Opression, the name of a Tyrant grew a Title of Dishonor, odious at all
hands, and to Subjects a Terror. Nec vero huius Tyranni quem Armis
oppressapertulit Ciuitas, Cice. off. lib. 2. Metam. lib. 1.
interitus declarat, quantum hominum odium valeat ad Pestem delendam;
sedreliquorum similes exitus Tirannorum. And; Arcados hinc seeds and inhospita
tecta Tyranni: but Majesty stands fixed in the Thrones and Crowns of Kings.

Parergon.
THus among all the Attributes of Honer and rights of Pre-eminence due to
Sovereign Sublimity that the Christian world affords Politically; we find
Majesty fixed in none but in God and Kings. For as Astra Deo nil mai^^habent,
so, nil Regibus ipsis Terra colit. In God as All-sufficient our Soneraigue per
amount and only King of Kings, for the Good of all in All. And in Kings as his
Lieutenants, our Sovereigns per aval or Gods by Commission for all their
Subjects weal.

Now as to see sacred Majesty subsisting in Sovereignty by Goodness still in
God, and Bounty still in Kings, is the greatest happiness that only Man may
hope for, and Christian Men obtain: and Reiigion and Justice being the surest
Guides to either, so Truth the only Standard that holds them still together
(for where both of them are not, there can be neither) shows Kings to be
^reteclors both of Church and Commonwealth, and Sovereigns over Subiests,
within their own Dominions.

If then ^eges a regendo, qu^a suis tantum imperant ex legum p^aseriptis, be
those men we style King, and si secus pro libidine euadunt in Tyranuos. Let
Obtruders and Usurpers with all their adherents like Nim^odizing Tyrants, make
Violence their Loadstone, Extremity their Compass, and Fortune the guide of
all their best Endeavors; their Maresty by consequence must turn to their
sname, and their Sovereignty, confusicn.

But Justice of her self, and singled forth alone, being Distributive and
Commutatiue, and that which is Commutatiue, the same we call Traffic, and
Traffic the high way that leads us up to bliss. Yet since our highest
happiness and summum benum, which Christians only find by Truth in Religion
resides in Heaven, all earthly Greatness else being mortal and vain, and
that Kings themselves transcendent, as Gods upon earth in regard of Justice,
yet die like other Men: As our Method on earth begins and ends with Bounty,
that^s to say with Greatness, so in Heaven with Goodness. In regard whereof,
the Writer hereof wishing ^l Grace and Favor from Sovereign Power and Greatness
to the studious of Truth and charitable Readers, being moved by good Order to
set forth a pattern or Idea at the least, of his own observation (Divines can
do it better) a well of that Angelical Nobility or summum Bonum which we called
Celestiali, as Morrall and Ciui^l, to express the^^by the happiness of Subjects
borne or brought up in England, Scotland and Ireland, by the name of
GREAT-BRITAINE, above all parts of the world, without excepting any, either
public or private, for Truencsse of Doctrine in the Christian, Catholic and
Apostolic Religion, there daily learned (or taught at the least) in all
Cathedral Temples, public Parish Churches, and private Chapels. And in
justice Dislributiue for Meum and Tuum fundamentally seated in the Hals and
Courts thereof subalterne and Sovereign at Terms and Times prefixed (The
Court of Chualry wants but her Judges to decide points of Honor and prevent our
Combats) is forced by the way as tenderly as he can, to touch the distemper of
Justice Commutatiue (our wandering Trefficke, tired as it were with Embargces
beyond seas, and Extremity at home) for want of Mints and Staplet to fix her
self in, as Religion sits by Truth at her Alt^rs and Temples. The disorder
whereof disturbs all the rest, and bemoane withal (as he dares and may) the
strange imputations still cast upon Customers, for all their endeavor on
Trafficks behalle: Whose Oaths notwithstanding at their first admission drives
them still forward: their sunctions affocrding more true understanding of the
State of the Kingdoms wherein they are borne to live, then all Schools of
Learning, or Tully de Repub. if it were to be sound. All briefly trust up in a
short Dialogue, between Truth and a Customer here meeting together: Which it
the Reader like not, or think much to peruse, he may pass it all over by way
of Parenthesis, or like a Parergon, and tu^^e to the Assumtion and Conclusion
upon the former Fremisset, for the orderly Creating of Christian Nobility
T^^listicall and Ciu^l, and observe by the way, the disproportioned Comparison
of a Cardinal of Rome, between a scarlet red Hat, and a Kings golden Crown,
the answering whereof begot this Treati^e. That the Popes, the Patriarks, the
Bishops there, and Paulus 5. himself may lay their heads together, and be
made to see at last, how far they stand beholding to their flattering
Cardinals and lying Iesults.

Now, all that have the happiness, to be Enobled at the least, receive it
first and last from God and his LIEVTENANTS whose only Grace and Greatness are
the grounds of all our Credits. For as at first, of nothing His GOODNESS gave us
Being, so his Grace did make us Men, and being made Men, we were borne
forthwith to Work, that by Working we might Eat, and by Eating Live, to do
some Good or other in the Church and Commonwealth; whereby our Names once
known, our Callings honored, and Posterity respected, we might at last
Obtain to see his height of GLORY, the Tipe of all our Bliss.

Obtain I say, Theword Merit, used for obtain (the foundation of Pride in
Popery) here beaten down and corrected.
not Merit, for how should we deserve, that in our own beginnings had neither
Art nor Part? and being made Men not Beasts, had no minds at all to work,
nor skill to proceed when we had Will to be doing, without the help of HIM that
gave us first our Being? whose Will being the motive of all his own Endeavors:
his Word the means, his Wisdom the Way, and his Justice the Bounds of his
own Greatness and Honor; his Mercy notwithstanding to seek and find us out,
when we had lost our selves, seeming Greater then Him self, may be Matter to
muse on, but notto express and Admire that GLORY we cannot merit.

All this is true I know, for GOODNESS tells me so, A Dialogue between Truth and
the Customer, here meeting together.
that cries and calls me forward, and the Bible sets it down, whose words are
all our warrants, but here lies all our misery, and hence is all our woe, who
dare tell proud Popes, presumptuous Cardinals, and profane Conclaues so? who
dares bell the Catte? Truth. Mary that dare I. Customer. Oh Sacred Truth! is it
thou, was it thou so nigh? Truth. Why shrinckst thou so? why do thou from me
fly? Customer. Least by my stay, Truthes-selfe should seem a lie. Truth. Come
nearer Man. Customer. I dare not. Truth. Why? Customer. For Shame and Disgrace.
Truth. Customers in Disgrace.
Shame them befall that Shame deserve, thy Shame does argue Grace. Customer.
For want I starve, and die for pain. Truth. Want Conntenance and Main^e nance.
Thy working shows thou should obtain. Customer. I dare not ask in any
case. Truth. Assai domanda chi ben seruendo tace, but what art thou? come near
and tell me than. Customer. A Publican to Sinners tide, a despisd and wretched
Man. Bear others Faulrs.
Truth. None wretched are, but such as God does hate. Customer. A Customer
whose Credit's out of date. Truth. Out of Credit
What Port and Town? Customer. SANDWICH hereby. Truth. O! SANDWICH loyal
sometimes my resting place, The Staple of Kent kept at Sandwich temp: Edw. 1.
and 2.
though now the Pit lie dry, for there I was a while, and there dwelt I, till
cross the Seas I was conuayed awry, and morgag'd was for fifteen years.
Customer. Sweet Truth tell where. Truth. At BRVGRS Town by Sluice in Flanders
whence, Transported thence to Bruges by K. Ed. 3.
Pride and Ingratitude conspired and drove me thence. Customer. From Bruges
whether? Truth. To KENTS great Honor and Christians special Glory, for KENT
and CHRISTENDOM were never seen to varry. Customer. Where there sweet Truth.
Truth. To CANTORBVRY. Customer. To CANTORBVRY? Brought back from Bruges and
settled at Cantsrbury.
why thither bound am I. Truth. To what Place there? Customer. To the Austen
Friars, but why siniles sweet Truth? Augustine Friars Fatal to Popes
why laughes she tell me why? Truth. Why MARTIN LVTER man, was an Austen Friar,
that told the Emperor to his face the Pope was a Liar; but what seek'st thou
there. Customer. 1 Customs. 2 Mines or Staples.
My Soueraines [1] Quitrents, his Great [2] Demeanes and whole Estate, that
sometimes Stapled were by the Northerne-Gate. Truth. It Is true poor Man, the
Name remains, I remember it well, though now so clean forgot, that none can
tell. Customer. But what became of all that wealth and store? Is It clean
forlorn, shall we never hope for it more? The Staples removed from Canterbury
to Callis, and thence into Flanders and the Netherlands bred Disorder in
Traffic at home in England.
Truth. Yes, God forbid but it should return, and be restord to whence it
went, for being packt up, it was to CALLIS sent, where Traffic since exilde
and wandering up and down, has welcome been to Cities, Ports and Towns,
all Flanders thorough: but tyrde at last, cries home-ward now, Desires now to
be called Home upon the Truce of the Hollanders.
and wants but passage to her own Ressort and dwelling, whereon depends a
Tale, may be worth the telling. Customer. How? where, and when? Truth. Have
patience (Man) and ply the work a while, to redeem the time and tediousness
beguile, that what thou can not merir, thou may obtain, being borne to
work, hark GOODNESS calls again.

Customer. Man borne to Work.
Is Man then borne to labor? Truth. As sparks fly upward, for Man is but a
spark, a smoke or a lighter thing. Customer. Customers Penury and Want. for all
their Labor.
And labors he to eat? Truth. Qui non laborat, ne manducet, why sighs thou
Man? Customer. I feed on Leekes and drink cold water. Truth. What rack poor
Man? it makes no matter, Customer. But by meat alone, it seems (you say) we
live. Truth. Not so, Non solo pane viuit homo, but by Grace in Meat and
Eating. Customer. No marvel then if Solomon that was so wise did wonder, to
see bodily labor shund by the Sons of mortal Men, since GOD has so decreed
it: but though we live to labor by a Power in us inherent; how work we then
so well that we may obtain? Truth. By a Power that is infusiue from Him that
sits above, and draws you up unto him. Customer. What way? what means? Truth.
By attentive hearing, and often reading his Sacred written word: with
meditation and Prayers. Customer. O Fools! that teach Free Will by proud
Conceits of Fancies and Traditions! No Freewill in Man to Goodness since his
Fall.
what have we, we receive not, but Avarice and Ambition? O Sinful Deceit,
and deceitful Sin, by Couetise and Pride, then whether do you drive us? and
what are all our Merits, but Shame and Confusion? for as the love of Money is
said to be Idolatry, and Couetyse in that respect the very root of evils: so
Pride by Presumption turns Men into Beasts, and Angels into Deuels. O Couctyse
and Pride! vt transuersa cogunt mortalia pectora secum.

But Heaven we see is merited at one hand or other, and that by Man. Truth.
Most true, for GOD himself, for the Love he bare to Man, came down from
Heaven, became a Man, and lived on Earth, so base and vile degree, that his
life by death, did well deserve it for you: the God and Man CHRIST JESUS, his
life so your life, and his works imputed yours; that he holds you by the
hand, to draw you up thither. Customer. O height of Happiness, and Degree of
Dignity! what Creature is capable of so great a Bliss? Truth. The Soul of
Man. Customer. O blessed Souls, that are so prepared, but who can bestow it?
Truth. Gods only Love, and freely woorking Spirit. Customer. O happy estate
who can apprehend it? Truth. The Just by Faith. Customer. O Justifying Faith,
who is able to expect it? Truth. Hope. Customer. O comfortable Hope! who is
able to declare it? Truth. Charity. Customer. O sanctifying Charity, and bond
of Perfection! but who can discern it? Truth. The eye of Grace, if thou can
but desire it. Customer. O infinite Happiness, how should I affect it? Truth.
By reciproke Love. Customer. O heavenly Love! how might I obtain it? Truth. By
Patient humility. Customar. Vincit qui patitur.
O Conquering Patience and Glorious Humility, that by sufferance and
Lowliness, are able to attain to such a height of Dignity! but how? Truth. By
Obedience. Customer. Whereto? Truth. To the Rules of Conscience. Customer. But
my Conscience does accuse me, to be bond-slaue to Sin, the bane of all Bliss.
Truth. Yet do not despair. Customer. What means to avoid her? Truth. None,
she is borne and bredde with thee. Customer. What remedy then? Truth.
Watchfulness and Prayer. Customer.

Tu mihi Sum opifex rerum cor fingito purum,
Et recti inspira renouatum pectore amorem.
But the Devil is at hand, and somewhat He would have. Truth. Tell him all thy
debts are paid, and bid him walk a Knave. Customer. O infinite Bounty, who is
able to deserve it? and where are all our merits? Truth. See the Annotations
in the Rhemish Testament, upon the sixth to the Hebrews (God is not unjust)
In the Rhemish Testament and Religion hatched at Rome. Customer. O damnable
Jesuits, and Doctrine fit for Devils, that in challenging-wise, dare print it
to the world, that God is no God, for he must be unjust (as they say and
teach,) if he give us not Heaven for our own Demerites: but God being always
Just, or Justice it self, and I so borne to Sin, as smoke flies upward,
stand subject st^ll to die: wretch then that I am, who shall deliver me from
this body of Sin and Death? Truth. His Mercy, Pre-eminence of Justice.
Prerogative of Mercy.
for though his Justice by Pre-eminence, may abide no Sin; yet his Mercy by
Prerogative, has a saving Power. Customer. Which way? Truth. By thy dying unto
Sin and living righteously. Customer. But how may that be? Truth. By
Contrition, Confession, Desire to amend, and Hope of Pardon, for the merits of
his own and only Son, whose Death having satisfied the Justice of his
Father, his Blood has washed away, and Purged all thy Sins. Customer. O
Dreams then of Purgatory, Popish Purgatory, a Fancy to fear Fools.
and torment fit for Fools! Truth. Yet be not high minded, and do not
presume. Customer. What means to restrain and keep our Fancies down? Truth.
A serious Meditation that you are but Men, with Fasting and Prayer. Customer.
What Comfort to support us, being still so beset with Sin, Death and Hell?
Truth. Gods ever saving Grace, Adoption is here set down, but to show Reason
in Humanity, how and when MAN first comes to feel and understand h^s own
Happiness in and by CHRIST; which GOD had reserved for him by his mere and
speci^ll Grace, in the purpose of this Will from all Begian^ng.
and sanctifying Spirit, who seeing thy Humility, and hearing thy Prayer, for
the Love of thy Savior, adopts thee for his Son. Customer. What Bond does so
bind him, being Free of himself, as to love whom he list? Truth. His
written Word and Promise, proceeding from the Essence of Deity it self, and
Pend by his Spirit without Equivocation. Customer. What Seals to Confirm and
warrant it unto us? Truth. The Prints of the Wounds, in his Hands, Feet and
Side, that are still to be seen in his Crucified Body. Cuflomer. What Pledges
to assure us that we shall meet together? Truth. The Sanctified Elements of
Water, Bread, and Wine, whereby being first conjoined to the Mystical Body of
his true Christian, Catholic, and Apostolck Church, he after entertaines thee
for a lively working Member of his own Flesh and Blood. Customer. But my
Savior being in Heaven, and I still on Earth; what Hand but his own can help
me up thither? Truth. His Apostolic Prelates and Pastoral Ministers, by
Virtue of their Orders and his High-Co^mission; their Voice, his Voice, their
Hands perform it for Him: for Quod per alios facit, per Ipsum fieri dicitur.
Customer. O profane Popery, that turns Creatures into Gods and Masses into
Idols! but what must I do? Truth. Repent and amend, and believe the Gospel.
Customer: O I thank my God then, for his Grace in Jesus Christ: but I am ever
sleeting and subject to relapse, and his Justice laid to Sin, consumes lire
Fire: Truth. Though his Justice have a quickening Power, to set forth his
Greatness in preferring of Man-hoode when he first made you Men, yet his Grace
it is relieues you all, and his Mercy makes you Live, for his Love is
Everlasting, his Affections all are Free, and GOODNESS is his Name: so that
howsoever Justice stands Preheminent as touching your first Being, Preh^minen^e
and Prerogative rightly distinguished, by Justice and Mercy.
to Save or Destroy; give Mercy the Prerogative, and thou can not swerue.
Customer: O Sacred Prerogative, and mild word of Comfort, by whom all our
Vowels, retain their full Sound, Prerogative.
and all our Mutes and Liquides are taught to speak and stand, the Preserver of
our [a] Wealths, of our [e] Liberties, of our [i] Lives, Prerogative used for
Pre-eminence, the cause of Capital Errors in the Church and Commonwealth.
of our [o] Honors, and the [u] Peace of all our Land! how often art thou
mistaken and abused for stern Pre-eminence? Truth: But show thy recipiscence
by a fervent kind of Prayer.

Customer
Ah Deus immensum clemens, Psalm. 51.
miserere precantis,
Et quaecunque tuo bonitas in pectore regnat,
Seruando huic misero se protinus exerat omnis.
2 Elue me sceleris pollutum crimine tanti,
Elue, peccatique iube euanescere sordes,
3 En sceler a agnosco, scelerum Noctesque Diesque,
Ante Dies versans me lurida terret imago,
4 Res etenim proprie tecum mihi: te Deus vnum
Offendi infaelix, quem non fraus vlla fefellit,
Sublimi e solio meque and mea facta tuentem,
Vt si pro meritis Iudex mihi sederis, eheu
Damnatus iustas subeam te Iudice paenas.
Me Genetrix etenim grauida quum ferret in aluo,
Iam pollutus eram, siquidem me tempore Matter,
Et pariter sordes concaeptas fouit eodem,
At contra, integritas synceri pectoris vna
Gratia tibi, nec eras alios mihi Doctor in Vsus,
Ingratum quondam tua quum me arcaua doceres.
Ah Deus hyssopum hic adhibe, and quaecunque tenaces,
Abstergunt maculas, vt crimine purus ab omni
Emergam, paenitusque ablutis sordibus, ipsas
8 Exuperem candore Niues: fac nuncius aures
Impleat vt melior, recreent fac gaudia mentem,
Ne semel absorptis peream maerorc medullis.
9 Iratos auerte oculos, potiusque benignus,
Multiplici dele Contractas crimine labes.
10 Tu mihi Sum Opifex rerum cor fingito purum,
Et recti inspira renouatum pectore amorem.
11 Ne me, ne Miserum Dcus abijce, neue repu^sum
12 Afflatu sancto spolia, quin certa salutis
Gaudia restituas, ut qui me heroicus olim,
Se creuit reliquis, porro quoque Spiritus ornet.
13 Quo Duce fretus ego errantes per deuia multos,
Voce regam, mutatosque in contraria flectam.
14 Alme Deus, Deus in quem tota mente recumbe
Ne meritas a me poenas pro immanibus ausis,
Et tanta heu scelerum patrata cedo reposce.
15 Da potius vt lingua valeam sidibusque canoris,
Te canere, in veniam promptum fideique tenacem.
Os mihi tute aperi tu dirige labra loquentis,
Vt tibi promeritae persoluant laudis honores,
16 Ecce tibi non ara placet, non victima flammis
Infumos abiens, alioqui haec larga dedissem,
Et pridem crebris onerassem Altaria donis.
Sacra igitur meliora fero quae spernere nunquam,
17 O bone consuesti, deiectos nempe dolor,
Attritosque animos, peccati et saucia sensu
Pectora, triste, unique tibi medicabile vulnus,
18 At tu consueta pergas bonitate Syonem
Amplecti, selecta tibi dum mania surgant.
Tum nos rite tibi solennia vota feremus,
Liba, merumque simul, Consecratumque, cruorem
Fumabitque tuum solidis Altar iunencis.
Truth. What? how now Man? what do thou feel? how fares it, well? Customer.
Magnasemper veritas, praeualuit and preualebit, The inward joys of a Christian
unspeakable.
I feel such joys, as I cannot declare nor tell. Truth. But do thou
believe what I told thee before? Customer. O I do believe (LORD) yet help mine
unbelief, for I am troubled sore, for by Faith in looking upward, I am forced
to confess, O my GOD thou art true, and O my Soul thou art happy; but my
Frailty looking downward compels me to cry. Nilsum, nulla miser noui solatia,
Massam
Humanam nisi quod tu quoque CHRIST geris.
Tu me sustenta, fragilem tu CHRIST guberna,
Fac vt sim Massae surculus Ipse tuae.
I nothing am, and in my self no Comfort find but this,
That Christ the Mass of humane flesh has taen and joined to his,
The^ hold me Christ and grant withal, that this frail flesh of mine,
A twig at least may bud and branch, from that great Mass of thine.


Truth. Now I see thou do believe, for thy Prayer shows no less: then
work well withal to confirm this Grace. least Faith prove idle, How Faith
alone does Justify.
How Faith and Works concur.

therefore work I say apace. Customer. Then Faith, I perceive in the action of
Salvation, stands sole without Works, because of Free Grace; but in the Party
saved, both must concur together. But who can Work, where Matter fails, As
no Church has no Tithes,
And no Court no Quittents,
So no Staples no Customs,

and Form does no way fit? Or who can Pipe well that wants his upper Lip?
for though I still be tide to work my task in Clay, my Straw is clean gone,
and my stuble taen away, whilst idle Taske-maysters accuse me to my Face,
whose Credits have no Being, but in my Disgrace: but that which grieves me
most, For no Staples, no Traffic.
No Traffic no Mines.
No Mines, no Bullion.
No Buillion, no Mints.
No Mints, no Money.

and feign I would resist; our Traffick's deadly Sick, and cannot long
subsist; for her Pulses fail, her Face is pale and wanne, I mean her Mintes
are dead, and my Sovereigns Quitrents gone, and none seeks whether. Truth.
They went from the Altars of Unity and Truth where I now dwell. The Staples of
Kent kept at Cantorbury maintaind a Mint near Christ-Church there, as others
did elsewhere.

Disorder of Justice Commutatiue, (Traffic) for want of Staples: the occasion
of Prohibitions, and dryness between Religion and Justice Destributiue.

The King only and the Counsel, can and must restore our Staples.


Customer. Where Is that sweet Truth? Truth. By my glorious Temple and seat of
Fame. Customer. See see, I thought it was not idle, that it bore CHRIST'S name,
O that our Soueraign would bring our Staples thither; Religion and Justice,
might then hold hands together, and Righteousness and Peace would kindly kiss
each other, which now contest by personal defectes, about Tithes and
Tributes. Truth. Then work I say still, and believe well withal, for GOODNESS
can, and WISDOM will effect it. Customer. I would if I could, but my Credit's
clean gone, and I am almost tired, thus working still alone. Truth. Customers
out of credit, their oaths at their admission compelles them as they may and
dare to cry out for Staples to mantaine Traffic, as our Churches do Religion.
In space grows Grace, hark GOODNESS calls again, and thou must persevere.
Customer. Then Sanctify my wits (TRVTH) and bless thou mine endeavor, for I
work in fear. Truth. Why so poor Man? thy Soul is so beset with vows that
are Divine, thou shall not tread amiss, let not thy heart decline. Customer.
Then Danger stand aside, TRVTH must prenaile, and GOODNESS calls me to it, if
ought do put me by, it is WISDOMS hand must do it.

Now GOD from whom all holy thoughts and best endeavors grow. Invocation
and Prayer of Customers.


Make me possess that perfect Peace, the world cannot bestow,

And that which in my self I see, no hope at all to gain,

Grant that thy Grace by Faith and Works, may help me to obtain.

Obtain therefore I say, and will still pray to obtain, so great a blessing,
to praise and thank GOD for it, Infusiuely from DEITY by Grace in JESUS CHRIST,
and Respectively from MANHOOD by General Consent.

For happy are those Subjects all, whose honest Endeavors have raised their
Conditions to such degrees of Credit, The Happiness of England for the trueness
of Doctrine in the Christian, Catholic, and Apostolic, Religion,
before GOD and his LIEV-TENANTS. Twice happy are those Christians that dwell
where this Doctrine is constantly defended, freely put in practice, and
publicly taught. And thrice happy GREAT-BRITAINE whose IOSVA, And Bounty of
the Sovereign.
thus maintains both Church and Commonwealth.

Come therefore Subjects all, come home I say from ROME, and here prostrate
your selves before the Glorious Object of your Welfare and Credits. To day if
ye will hear his voice, Summons all Popish English Fugitives, to come home,
and all Recusant Catholics, to conformity.
harden not your hearts, after fifty years and more: that sti^mecked Jews and
unbelieving Turks admyring your Happiness, may learn by your Obedience to
groan for like Grace, and poor seduced Catholics may see how Proud Popery
has long time bewitched them with the Doctrine of Merits.

Now see what has past, and so have to an end.
These grounds being furely laid, that is to say, if of all worldly happiness,
the meanest be but Wealth and Reputation chief, Honor being held a recompense
for all our loss besides: If all quit their Livings for Liberty to work: If
all forgo their Liberties for the purchase of their Lives: if Wealth, Liberty,
Lives and all seem nothing to our Credites. In a word, if GOD so prize his
Holy Name, that he is icalous of his Glory, to show how his LIEV-TENANTS should
be curious of their Honor: Let Bellarmine or the Bishop of Rome himself (for
Bishops may be honorable for virtue and Generosity, though Popes be nothing so)
resolve the Christian Emperor, Kings and Free Monarkes of the world, by what
warrant authenticke of Regal Lieue-tenancy, the Popes of later times usurping
their Thrones, became Coyners of Honor, and by their Heathenish Idolatry,
keeping Jews from Christianity, tread Emperors under feet, in despyte of Kings
and Crowns?

For if this be true, that A quo Dominatio, ab eodem Nominatio, and Honor
subsist, in honorante, and not in honorato: how has a Creature of a Conclaues
mere Creation, and a vassal to his Sovereign so ra^s'd his own Condition,
as not to rank with Gentlemen in the height of Generosity, but above the
Noble Emperor (sometime his Lord and Patron) and all that may be Noble, his
Wry-neckt Chaplaynes held equal with the Honorable, and his Godfather
Cardinal, made cheek mate with KINGS? or what Power has been able to make the
private meetings of a cluster of Subjects unto several Sovereigns, combined
together in a Laborynth of confusion of greater reputation, then were the
Twelue-Apostles, or Saint Peter himself? the rock of all their Credit, or all
the Christian Bishops in the first four general Councels? that being to chose
a Primate, disclaimd this Popish Sovereignty.

For if all Earthly Sovereignty grow by Gracious Infusion and General Consent,
where the Place is not public, and the Persons prinate Men: no particular
Choice can beget such a Majesty as belongs unto Kings, Gods own Lieue-tenants
by immediate Commission. The Bishop then being indeed but a Subject as both
Saint Peter was, and others there before him for three hundred years together.
The Pope may spell Father, prove a Patriarch or a Prelate in the Church by
Sovereign Grace and gift; Papa Pater Sanctissimus.
but no Sebasma Sovereign of Nobility and Honor.

But Secular Honor and Civil Nobility we see both, here intended or protended
at the least, whereof if the Master fail, how shall he transfer it by
Titles unto others, for Dignitatem Domini sequitur conditio Serui.

By Honor, here I mean not such as Pride conceits and Flattery bestows upon
Idleness and sloth; but such as Gracious infusion, does ingenuously beget, and
Honesty makes Honorable for virtuous Endeavors. Nor such Nobility as being
mistically Coined, and confusedly obtruded, consuming like a Comet, still dies
in the Birth, and is good for nothing: but that which Kingly Majesty by
Greatness and Decorum, politically Coins, and orderly creates for Subjects
credit. If then the Pope be neither Glorious for Deity, nor Honorable for
Humanity, by his needless or bootlesse or idle kind of life, for want of
Kingly Majesty by Infusion and Consent, nor enobled himself by some former
Creation: what shall be said of Cardinals his Selfe-Creating-Creatures, and his
own Maister-vassals? or what can those Titles be, he bestows upon his
Betters, but Dreams, or Disgraces, or Matters of Jest. For who smiles not to
read of a King of Fraunces Son, a double Earl at home, Charles Earl of
Aniou and (...) uince, second Son to Lewt (...) Brother to Saint Lewis, Fr^^^
Kings, made a Senator of (...) the Pope.
by Marriage and by favor of a Pope? And who laughes not at the Titles he
sends unto Kings, that by Virtue of their Places were their own before? as
most Christian, most Catholic, and Defender of the Faith.

Now if Cardinals in their Conclaues, have no power to make Sovereigns, being
diversely Subjects and private Men themselves; nor the Popes infusiue Majesty,
the Mother of true Nobility, nor Honesty the root of all Honor, by the virtue
of their Creation: what Subject once enobled, would not scorn to be rancked
with a Popish-Parish-Priest or a Deacon of Rome? such as Cardinals are but, or
should be at the least, by their first Institution.

Besides Nobility political being Dative and Native, which nothing can Create
but the mediate or immediate favor of a King descends to posterity. Est
aliquid Clarus Magnorum splendour Auorum,
Illud Posterit as aemula calcar habet.


And these Men never Marry. God himself has set it down, for the Good of
Mankind, at his very first Creation, that he should not live alone, and these
prohibit Marriage, the bed of all our Honesties, by God and Men so honored. How
then grows Nobility, where the Grounds are so barren, Popes and Cardinals
beget none but Bastards.
and the roots themselves rotten, per Filios Terrae?

And how should Majesty be seen, and Sovereignty subsist, in the Miter of a
Pope, or a Cardinals red Hat, but by way of Intrusion? For though Papa sound
Father, and Cardinals may spel Sons, yet Nobility grows from Majesty, as
Honor is tide to Honesly, and Homage unto Crowns.

It they plead Prescription as all Obtruders do, for the Popes themselves do
show that from the beginning it was not so. TRVTH speaks it boldly, and dare
tell them to their Faces, that, though Meum and Tuum in cases of profit, be at
all hands circumscribed: yet in Points of Honor, Nullum Tempus occurrit Regi.

Now let RELIGION pass by, with all her Graue-Deuines, and let Sense and
Reason stay, to see and discern how these things hang together, that
Conscience may Judge.

GOD sets it down in the depth of his WISDOM, for the use of all his
Creatures and Good of Mankind, as plain as may be spoken: It is not fit nor
good that MAN should live alone, and made him a Helper like unto Himfelfe, Gen
cap. 2, 21.
commended Marriage and gave it his blessing, that such as would forbear it for
fear of encomber, might not lull themselves asleep in a deadly sinful
slumber. These accurse Marriage and bless solitary lives, teaching, that once
may prove honorable, but Bygamy like Heresy is every way profane; and in the
Church make it blasphemy to be known to have Wives.

GOD bids Nature keep Order, that Grace might give Honor and Happiness besides
Infusiuely. These put Nature out of Order, that Shame might betyde her, by her
own Demerites ambitiously.

GOD to teach Nature, The Perfection of DEITY. 1 GOD the Father. 2 GOD the
Son. 3 GOD the Holy Ghost.
how her beauty lies in Order, and her way to Order; Number, by due
Proportions, shows her all his Will and Pleasure, and the bounds of all her
bliss, both in Heaven and Earth, The Perfection of HVMANITY. Election. 2
Creation, 3 Redemption, 4 Vocation, 5 Justification 6 Sanctification, 7
Glorification.
is contained just in Ten; that even Reason might perceive how all Perfection
both Divine and Human, is but Three and Seven: These seem to take GOD tarde
in his own words and Art, and to teach Nature better, till her Ten is too
many, The Second Commandment lest out in the Decalogue, taught in the lesuists
Cathechisme, dedicated to the young Dolphin of Fr^nce now King.
that Nine may suffice, and to do GOD Disgrace, take One to themselves, and
rob him of his Tithes.

GOD hates all Couetise, as the root of all Evil, and forbids Adultery. These
allow Dishonesty, and by public Authority, maintaining the Stews; from
Whoredom and Adultery raise infi^ite reue^newes: teaching, Sinon cast tamen
caute, is a caution sufficient to hood-wincke GOD, and bleare all men's eyes.

To avoid Pride and Idolatry. GOD tells and forewarnes us of the Sin of
Witchcraft, that Love hydes in Money, and Himself takes no Coin. These
magnify dead Images in all Churches and Chappelles, and to maintain Ambition,
make Rome the Head Staple of Pride and Superstition, and sell all Sins for
Money.

Thus GOD commands one thing, and these command another, The two Sacramnets,
Baptism and the Eucharist.
but still the contrary: now (leave our two Mysteries which they multiply to
seven,) let Reason speak out, that Conscience may judge. Whence can this
controling and countermanding Power, be any ways derived, but from the Diuill?

No marvel then, if Pride and Ambition, bewitched first by Couetyse and puffed up
by Flattery, bear the world flil in hand, that the POPE being Homo Caelestis,
and Angelis Terrestris a Semi-GOD at the least, must needs transcend the
Emperor as the SUN does the MOON, that Presumption and Conceit might rank
Cardinals with Kings. But see how TRVTH preuailes, for this falls in withal;
that as the Pope by this rule, must needs prove either a Deified-Creature, or
a Damned-Spirit; that deriuing Majesty from beyond the bounds of Nature, can
raise his own Sovereignty above GOD and KINGS: so the Cardinals by
consequence (whatere become of Conclaues) can be no better then Polypragmaticke
Iesuists, Masse-mongrel-Deacon-Priests, or false-harted flattering- Friars.

But their maine shift and refuge, their Fort of Saint Angelo, and Vatican
Palace, is Constantines donation, whose Favors they feign to be the Ground of
this their Greatness, and make possession now of the City of Rome it self
(by what Title soever) a Plea sufficient against all Right and Reason. But how
this hangs together, Experience best declares; for besides that, Ornanda potius
est Dignitate Domus quam ex Domo Dignitas vtcunque quaerenda; Nec a Domo
Dominus, sed a Domino Domus est vbiuis honestanda: As bounty shows always the
Greatness of the Giver, so Protection and Direction, demonstrates the Emperors
for Sovereigns, and the Popes for Vassals: for it is so apparent, that none
have yet denied it, that the Great Exarchi, Toparchi, Comarchi, Spatharij,
Consules and Presides were the Emperors own Lieuetenants all the Empire
thorough: witness their Exarchat of Rauenna, that like Panhypersebastos, or
Vicare General, set Magistrates even in Rome and all Italy over, by the names
of Duces, Comites, Prefecti and Principes: besides, who first gave Fees and
Inuestitures to bare Titles of Honor? who first raised Dukes, Marquises and
Earls, from Functions unto Dignities, and Titles of Inheritance as well as of
Honor? Constantinus Magnut, ne alit^^ quam sancte and legitime hoc Regale
vteretur, essigiem su^m nummis inseulpi volu^t, vt Hominis De^^ flexis genesis bus
inuocantis praese ferree. Moneta autem dicta, quod moneat ne quid fraudis in
Materia, signo vel pondere fiat.
Vice-Counts and Barons to be known by their Baronies as well as by their
Names, but Emperors in their Turns? But that which answers all, and puts all
out of doubt, whose Powerfulness and Picture, gave warrant to the Standard and
Currantnesse of Coin, but the Emperors alone all Italy through? when the
Popes were but Subjects, Confessors and Residents in Rome, famous yet for
nothing, but Sanctity of Life, Poverty and Patience in their Martirdomes, and
daily Persecutions three hundred years together: and dated their Bulls and
public Writings by the Emperors Names and Reigns: as, Imperante Carolo
Domino nostro.

1 But how by tract of time, as the Empire grew divided into East and West, the
Church withal (both Greek and Latin) declined her first Integrity.

2 How whilst the Popes became Proud as Prouender did prick them, their
Greatness still increasing by the bounty of Emperors, Superstition and
Heresy, Contention for Supremacy, first between the Patriarch of
Conflantinople and Rome.
eclipsing Christianity and Couetise and Pride contending for Supremacy, made
Religion but a Cloak for the Churches Impiety, and Justice a pretense to work
out Improbity, Emulation, East and West began first to kindle.

3 How the ruins of the East by Turkish infidelity, Patriarcha quasi Patrum
Princeps vel Pontificum primus. Hij Quatuor tantum in initio fuere: Romanus,
Antyochenus. Alex andrinus, et Hyeresolymitanus, postea translata Bysantium,
Imperij sede, additus est et Constantinopolitanus.
made a way for the West to enthrall Christianity by a Jewish kind of Usury:
the Popes drowning Patriarks by the Greatness of themselves, out-facing godly
Bishops by sects of Monks and Friars, and by Guelphes and Gibellines
distracting Italy confounded the Empire.

4 How Idolatry by the Mass, in stead of the Eucharist, (the Soul of true
Religion) and Extortion by Usury, in stead of mild Exchange (the Life and
Soul of Justice,) disgracing all our Credits in the eyes of the Jews: made
Popery by Pride, first an Art of all Impiety, and Usury by Money, a Mystery of
all Iniquity: whilst ANTE-CHRIST himself, that Son of Perdition and Man of
Sin, (the POPE) profaning heavenly Deity, dispising all Humanity, out-facing
Sacred Majesty and disgracing Christian Sovereignty, to the Shame of all
Nobility, confounding Emperors, killing Kings, and blowing up Crowns, has
raisd himself in Rome.

5 How Rome it self grown miserably poor by the absence of the Popes, whom
Factions and Scismes had seated at Auinion for threescore and ten years
together, was forced at the last, against a year of Iubile, to entreat their
return and recall them thither: The Castle Saint Angelo surprised by Pope
Boniface, 9. in a year of Iubile. 1400.
where surprising first their Castle and chiefest strength, altering all their
Laws, changing their Government, putting down their The Name and Title of the
Chief Magistrate in Rome.
Banderezo and bridling the People; they became not only Popes, but like Kings
and Sovereigns absolute in that City.

In a word, how Nymrod-like the Popes out of Factions and Pride still sharing
for themselves, made the way plain for others by Apostasy and Intrusion, to
become their own Caruers, in the honorable Charges committed to their Trust;
and by Tyranny and Oppression mantaining their Greatness, to blow up the
Empire in Italy at the least. First disgracing the Emperors, by altering the
reverence of their Style and Dates, in all Bulls and Writings, from, Imperante
Carolo Domino nostro, to Anno Pontificatus nostri, etc. Changing their
Standard, defacing all their Moneys, by holding it for Bullion, and at last
with their own Marks and Faces to stamp their own Coin, making Rome withal
the Staple of all Christendom, for Whordome and Pride, a Sinagogue of Sin
and all abomination: where all became vendible for ready Gold and Silver,
prostituting GOODNESS and her Handmaid EXCHANGE, to Extortion and Bribery and
all baseness besides: making VSVRY the means by Bankers and Bawdes to draw
home their Revenues, corrupting True-RELIGION, Equiuocating Truth, and
debaushing Justice to the shame of Christianity before Infidelles, and Turks,
and Glory of the Jews: deserves a Court of Cheualry, COURT OF CHEVALRY.
for Heralds to blasen, and Kings of Arms to understand, that as our Joshua in
Great-Brittain has already begun, so a David in France, a Josias in Spain, an
Italian Ezechias, and a German Constantine, might judge the shameless
Insolence of this Monster of Rome, that holds all for Idiotes or Nouices at
the best; that think by Disputation to set up or pull down, the Greatness of
their Sea by deriuing the same from Christ and his Apostles; whose Power
subsists in Cities, Countries, and infinite Riches, that their Ancestors have
gotten by dissension of others.

Thus far when the Customer by opening the Enditement had made it plain and
clear to all men's understanding of Common sense or reason, that Coining and
Creating belong to none de Iure, but Sovereign Sublimity as it is in God and
Kings. In God as per amount and Sovereign King of Kings, and in Kings per aual
within their own Dominious: Experience standing up in the Emperors behalf (as
Kings sometime of Italy wheresoever their Persons have been pleased to reside)
and undertakes to prove it de facto, in Italy it self and all the Empire
through, as well by authenticke Evidence, yet extant of record, Classical
witnesses, and the Coins themselves, as the Popes own confession to his
Friends in private, without Rack or Torture, in manner following.

Serenissimi REGES IVDICESQVE Sacratissimi.
Romani Imperatores vt in cudenda moneta non minimam Maiestatis suae partem
posuerunt, Evidence for the Emperor against the Pope.
eique gloriae suae monumenta su^mo studio and ambitione posuerunt, hac
Inscriptione S A. D D. N N. AVG. and CAES. (viz.) Nota. That all the ancient
pleadings in the Courts of Cheualry were by Bills and Replies in French or
Latin. Scripti^.
Salus Dominorum nostroru^ Augustorum and Caesarum. quodque Institutum
posteritas subsecuta constanti deuotione obseruando diuersis modis expressit:
it a postquam Christo Domino nomina sua dederunt, omissis prioribus illis e
Gentilitate petitis figurarum Characteribus, Religionem veram Numm is etiam
co^secrare volueru^t. Co^stantinus enim Magnus ad fidem conuersus Effigiem
suam, sic Nummis insculpsit. CONSTANTIN, P.F.AVG. (Constantinus Pius Faelix
Augustus:) Et altera part VIRTUES AVGVSTI. M. Posteavero, ipsum Dominum
Christum Imperatori ad Latus, and Diadema capiti, quasi manu sua imponentem ad
exprimendum Titulum illum (...), (a Deo coronati.) Et auersa nummi part Librum
vitae tenentem Christum solum. Et alij cum Imperatore Christum, his verbis.
JESUS CHRISTVS REX REGNANTIVM. Alij Christum Iesum, litteris m^iusculis. IRSVS
CHRISTVS EMMANVEL: et auersaparte, JESUS CHRISTVS BASTLEVS BASILEON
insculpserunt.

At Romae Imperio declinante, and barbaris Nationibus (Gothis nempe,
Longobardis, Francisque) invalescentibus; quan diu Imperatores apud Nouam Romam
(Bysantium scilicet) residentes, et Exarchas suos Rauennae tenentes aliquatenus
in speciem saltem recognoscebantur (nam per annos illoru^ Imperij, indictiones
et tempora vel ipsa Roma co^putare solebat) eorum etiam moneta Bysantij quam
vis cusa (Bysantij and Bysantini exinde dicti) per occidentales Prouintias
Italia^ scilicet Galliam and Germania^ frequentissime vsurpabatur.

Nec deerant postea Francis qui Galliam and Germania^ tenebant Imperante
Iustiniano 687. Denarij, Solidi, Librae and Fertones, (Vierdings Germantce) id
est Marcae quadrantes, quibus omnia per marcas computabantur.

Sed omnibus his Augustiores et frequenttores per Italiam fuisse Bysantios
illos constat; etiam quum Caesarum Constantinopolitanorum authoritas, Romae
imminuta esset et pene eviluisset, Pontificibus ex little decremento potentiam
suam stabilientibus. Nominatim autem Leonem Isauru^ Ichonomachu^ dictum, 717.
quod Picturas Synodicas, Sanctorum et Sanctarum Statuas, Imaginesque e Templis
erasisset, post Constantinum Papam Gregorius, 2. eo nomine haereseos
condemnauit, and cum Populo Romano statuit, ne Nomen Imperatoris iam haretici,
in Chartis aut Figuris Solidi, vel nummismatis postea imprimeretur. Vnde nec
Effigies eius pro more in Ecclesiam amplius introducta, nec Nomen ad Missarum
solennia prolatum fuit.

Horum tamen Bysantiorum semper in annalibus eorum temporum, Diplomatibus,
Bullis, Fundationibus, omnisque generis Instrumentis, mentio freque^tissima fit
et vsus diuturnus vt in confirmatione Henreci 4. 1057. apud Trithemium in
Chron. Hirsaug Super haec omnia, Comes saepedictus Apostolicum priuilegium
acquisiuit, et constituit v^ vnus aureus quem Bysantium dicimus, singulis annis
Romae ad Altar Sancti Petri persolueretur. Et in ipso Priuilegio Gregorij P.
P. quod sequitur. Data annua aurei Bysantij pensione postulauit. Et apud eundem
in Bulla Vrbani P. P. 1095. Ad Indicium percaeptae huius libertatis a Romana
Ecclesia, Bysantium aureum Palatio Lateranensi persoluetis.

Et in Historta Florentina a Theodoro de Nehem. edita, in Conrado 4. 1250. sic
habet. Promittentes maximam Bysantiorum summam dictis Gallis, si ab eadem
obsidione decederent.

Hij etiam sunt quos Francogalli, Bes^ntz d'or dixerunt, quorum mentio
notabilis in Historia Sancti Lodouici 9. Regis, cap. 42. Que si, la Royne
vouloit bailler deux cents mil Bezants d^or, quelle deliure roi^ le Roy en ce
saisant. Et in quadam Ludionis fabella cui Nomen Courte-barbe. Tenez le vous
done ce bezant. C'est a dire vne piece d'or vailant euuiron un angelot
d'Angleterre.

Quorum omnium fidem faciunt Eusebius. The vvitnesse^ to the ^un^nce.
Anthonius Augustinus. Anast asius Bibliothecarius. Paulus Diaconus. Ado. Beda.
Platina. Theodorus Nehemius. Trithemius. Massonus. Marquardus Freherus. and
Iustus Lipsius, lib. 3. de Cruce et alij quamplures; Cotholici, Christiani
omnes, and Authors classici, et ipsa nummismata, etiam number visu digna
Testimonium per hibent.



Sedsimpliciter magis and ingenue (hoc est honest) quam caute Paulus 3. P P.
et Pontifex maximus, The Popes own voluntary confession in private.
quum de summa ipsius Potestate inter Familiares mentio aliquando incideret,
ridereillos visus est, and Scholasticos, rerumque rudes appellare, qui a
Christo eam tam auxie peterent. Cuius se possessionem solam, optimum et
firmissimum Titulu^ habere dicebat. Qua^que viribus opibusque summis,
Ciuitatibus munitissimis and potentissimorum Principum sibi coniurantium
auxilio, tueri and defendere possit, etc.

To all this Paulus 5. now as Pope stands mute, and as Bishop there says
nothing; but Bellarmine for Cardinals and the Jesuits for themselves
confusedly reply, the Enditement lies not even. That the Pope holds no
proportion with God nor his Lieutenantes be they Monarks, be they Kings; for
the Ensigns of his Diocese, now soar and are displayed above the Eagles
wings. That Popes are so transcendent, as, their Cardinals may be Monarks, if
Monarks be but Kings, at least if they will. That none but Publicans and
Customers, men void of sense and reason, or Kentish-men and Christians dare
accuse the Pope of Treason; If any call him Heretic, above the pains of
Purgatory, great shall be their woe, for Jesuits will dispute it, and
Cardinals can confute it, in despite of who says no. Though Kings set up
their rest, and Bishops do their best, nay though Goodness do suggest it, and
Truth do still protest it, and the Word it self say so.

So that tell Cardinals now and Iesuists. In the beginning was the Word, and
that Word was with God, and God was that Word. And they can equivocate that
Word with Traditions, and God with the Pope, whose Power controuling all, and
controulable by none; shows him All-sufficient, and God can be no more. Tell
them of Written verities, and they reply, such Scriptures have no Credit, but
what the Fathers lend, and those Fathers from the Church did formerly borrow.
That the Church being always visible, The Pope always provided of mo Bishops
in Italy, then in all Christendom besides.
sits no where but at Rome: That Rome alone is Catholic representatiuely
where the Pope sits as Head, for her Bishops are so many, that they furnish
General Counsels of themselves, and need no more, or sway them at the least:
and her Cardynals make the Conclaues wherein Popes become coined. That the Pope
but once Created is Ipso facto, so Omnipotent both in Church and Commonweal,
that his Mass controules the Eucharist, and his Usury scorns Exchange: so
that the Pope being All in All, whose Sentence cannot Err, must needs be God
Himself, let God and his Lieu-tenants be what they can and let their words be
what they shall. But Magna semper veritas, and see how TRVTH preuailes; for
howsoever he shifts it off, for the point of Heresy whereof he stands
endited, that the Eucharist is mistaken or not rightly understood, Deuines have
laid it open, that his Mass was never heard of by Christ nor his Apostles;
besides the distraction he has made of the second Commandment, and
multiplying of Sacraments, the one Felony toward God, the other Burglary to
his Church, is more then Mesprision or Praemunire at the best. But in the point
of Treason his own Picture does accuse him in the stamps of his Coin, The
Popes Majesty found guilty de Facto, both of Burglary, Felony, and
High Treason: if his Sovereignty de lure or the Bishop do clear him.
and his Majesty standing mute, has silently confessed de facto et de Iure,
he stands every way Guilty; if his Sovereignty do not help and make him to
subsist, to the which he now appeals.

Now a Sovereignty it seems they have or challenge at the least, such a one as
it is, and a Majesty withal, but how the one may be seen, and the other does
Subsist per amount or per aual, I mean over Souls or over Bodies, or over
both or over neither, in Heaven, Hell, or Purgatory, or on Earth, is now to
be decided: for Cardinals make the Conclaues, where the Popes become Coined,
and the Pope Creats those Cardinals that furnish the Conclaue. Now read we but
this Riddle, and then tell me what it means. Pope Leo 10


A Conclaue of Cardinals (some forty at the least) laid all their heads
together, and went and Coined a Pope; Dissidebat autem Leo Pontisex a
Cardinalibus Juiconturauerant in ipsius necem ita quidem vt exil^o quibusdam,
alys teterrimo carcere mulctatis, triginta vnum crearet eodem tempore
Cardinales nonos, partim sui mumendi partim pecu^^^ conflandae causa.
whom when they had Created, they meant to have undone. Quia Papa quem
fecerant, erat valde Malus: but the Pope thereof forewarned, by way of
Praemunire, Bannishment, and some by woorser means, preuents their Desseings,
and Coined one and thirty new Cardinals of his own stamp and fashion.

Thus the Pope being Created, became a Creator, and the Cardinals by their
Coining begat their own Confusion. Now where sits Sacred Majesty, in the
mids of such profanesse and Chair of pestilence? and how Subsistes
Soueraignety per amount or per aual? where Subjects at al hands are suffered to
be Coyners?

Alas poor Conscience, The words of a Cardinal of S^^^^, coming from a
Conclaue.
how was it thou tormented at the Coining of a Pope? and forced to cry out,
siccine fiunt Pontifices Romani? Bidding Rome farewell adieu, and shaking off
such company as Christ never heard of, and Saint Peter never knew. A warning to
the Bishop of Rome, to take heed the Pope accuse not him of treasoo, and give
him the slip.
Let the Bishop look about him, least the Pope give the slip, and wipe's nose
on his sleeue, since the question stands of Coining, for what can the Papacy in
reason be reputed, but a Metaphisicall Subsistence of a Spiritual Sovereignty,
over Souls, The Pope has no Kingdom in Heaven, nor on earth, Ergo no Majesty
nor Soueraingty in either.
or over Bodies, over both or over neither, not on Earth nor in Heaven, for on
Earth it cannot be, (where Kings only Coin, both in Number, Weight aad
Measure, by the rules of Justice) for fear of High Treason. And in Heaven it
may not be (where God alone Creats both Faith, Hope, and Charity, by the rules
of true Religion) for fear of Heresy; but in Hell by possibility, where the
Devil and he jointly, neither Coin nor Create, but Equivocate together, or a
place in the Air, such as pyning Purgatory is by Dreams made to be. And a
Majesty so exceeding the bounds offense or reason, that the greatest Fools
adore it most, and the fowlest Spirits admire.

Now where Hell is, and what is done there, the Jesuits best can tell, The
Jesuits (Caeca obedie^tia) sworn to perform all that their Generals enjoin
them, when, how, and wheresoever instantly.
that coming last from thence are so quickly here and there, and are sworn to
their Abaddon without doubts or questions, when he sends them far and near.
These are those Locustes, whose Wings and Tails compared to their Faces,
shows their Monstrous generation. These like Amphibij by creeping on the
Earth, by their dyuing in the Waters, and their flying in the Air, can be
Contrymen and Courtiers and Churchmen too: Let Soueraynes shun their
companies as they love both Souls and Bodies, and let all Subjects hate them,
as they love their Soueraines lives. These I say stincke of Gunpowder, and
carry about the smoke of the bottomless pit, where ere they ride or go; but
where Purgatory Hangs, Lies, or Stands, puts us all to School, Bellarmine
sends us to Bid, to learn and spell, our Woorshipfull Countryman, dead nine
hundred years ago: But as honest a man as he, and of a later transgression,
Matthew Paris, Hist. Ang. fol 288. The tale is told by Turkill of a great Noble
man in England, who dying without shrift, his Soul being come to Purgatory
(while he was there) was ridden by a Devil like a Post horse in most terrible
wise.
tells of one Turkill, whose body fell asleep, and his Soul stole thither,
whose relation alone, is enough to set a Fool besides his wits, and make our
leanest Post-horsses hold up their heads, if they could but read Latin, though
they did not understand it, to hear how Rich and Great men's Souls are
spurgald and tired, without pity or mercy, by those vilanous Devils and
ranck-riders there.

If this then be the Sovereignty that Cardinals Creat and Conclaues Coin; what
can Popery be, but a Doctrine of foul Spirits and suggestion of the Devil, to
bewitch Souls and Bodies by turning Piety into Heresy and Loyalty into
Treason, as they grow discontented, unresolved, or hang in the Air. And in all
this possibility what can the Pope challenge (I speak to sense and reason) in
his height of Hope and Pride, by virtue of his Creation both for Majesty and
Sovereignty, (till Purgatory be found) but by way of competition a
Ioynt-patency or Reuersion of the left hand of Sovereignty, to sit and command
in one Seat of Pestilence, and one Chair with the Devil

Now let the Bishop there take heed, The Bishops Conscience summoned as a
witness about the Popes Sovereignty.
least the Pope by Equiuocating, play the Witch or the Iugler with him or his
Picture. And as the case now stands, let him bless himself, and think before
he speaks, and then speak but as he thinks, as his Conscience shall advise
him without mental reseruations (for Bishops must have Consciences, though
Popes may have none) even in ordine ad spiritualia by the Jesuits own
Diuintiy, The Jesuits main Distinction whereby they prove the Poper
Sovereignty, above the Emperor and Kings.
what can the Pope himself be (if in Heaven he prove no Angel, and in Earth,
he be no Subject, nor God nor King in either) but that Antichrist of evil,
half a Saint and half a Devil, for he works not in Gods name. Or the
Minotaure it self, half a Bull and half an Elfe, for he roares like the one
and speaks like the other; or a Wolf at the least, half a Dog and half a
Beast, for he bears the name of Guelf, Guelfe in Dutch is a Woolfe.
and hunts after Gibellines; or an Idol at the best, coined by Cardinals and
the rest, which though it seem like something, yet of it self is nothing, for
Nullum simile is Idem, and by the rules of Popery, Idolum nihil est.

Thus the Pope for his Sovereignty, finding no where to subsist in Heaven nor
in Earth, The Pope of Rome, leaves the Bishop of Rome to answer for all.
appeals down to Hell or to Purgatory at least, and leaving his Majesty to
outface the Emperor in the stamps of his Coin, says the Bishop there must
answer to the whole Enditement.

Now Sovereignty leaving Majesty thus to shift for it self for want of
Subsistence, The Bishop found guilty of High treason, by his own name and
picture found stamped on the Emperors Coin.
and Majesty without Sovereignty no where to be seen, being nothing of it
self but Pride and Conceipte, in the height of al Presumption (Coynage.) The
Bishop being a Subject, and Coining for himself, becomes de facto by
consequence guilty, if not of Heresy, at least of High Treason.

What lets then, that the sentence is so long with-helde and staide, but the
mercy of the Judges and Delinquentes intercession, if he look for Grace?
Then let Bellarmine be silent, The Bishop advised to crave Grace and pardon.
or have his tongue cut out, whilst the Bishop on his knees, by suit and
submission, make means to get his pardon, For want of Grace turns Antichrist
himself.
from God and his Lieutenants, or of the Emperor at least. But this he seems
to scorn and turns ANTICHRIST himself. For instead of Grace, out of Pride
and Presumption, Takes the Popes part, and withstands the sentence by secret
shifts, and open Rebellion: and without sense or reason, accuses Kings of
Heresye, to keep himself from treason.
he sends Titles unto Kings in jest, to blow them up in earnest; and accursing
Sovereigns, sends blessings to their Subjects, yet makes a show to love them
both for members of the Church, but as Wolves do love the Moon.

Car les loups (ce dit on) caressent bien les lunes a tous coups,
Mays Dieu vueile garder la nostre bien des Loups.
For Wolves they say, desire the Moon, to pat her in their paws,
But God forbid, our Moon should fall, or come too near their claws.
Au Loup pourtant Subjects, Monarchs tous and Roys
ca Chrestiens Catholics, Estats trestous, en sum
ca ca, tous Princes Libres Defenseurs de la Foy,
Venez tous a la chasse du Loup-Garou de Rome.
Here therefore Subjects all, here Kings and Monarchs either,
Here here ye Princes free, and States both all and some:
Here Christian Kings and Catholics, come now join hands together,
Defend with us the Christian faith, and rowze this Wolf of Rome.
For blessed be the Memories of our Princes and our Peers, that heretofore
withstoode him; The KINGS Book and Premonition to all Christian MONARCHS etc.
and thrice blessed be the learned hand of our Sovereigns late endeavors, that
so constantly pursues him; in whose behalf and happiness, for the Church and
Commonwealth, MY heart does take in hand, some godly song to sing, Psalm. 45.

The praise that I shall show therein, pertains to the King.
My tongue shall be as quick, his Honor to endite,
As is the pen of any Scribe, that uses fast to write.
O fairest of all Men, thy speech is pleasant sure,
For God has blessed thee with gifts, for ever to endure.
About the gird thy sword, O King of God elect,
With honor, glory, and renown, thy person pure is decked.
Go forth with godly speed, in meekness, truth and right:
And thy right hand shall thee instruct, in works of dred and might.
Thine Arrows sharp and keen, their hearts so sore shall sting,
The folk shall fall and kneel to thee, yea all thy foes O King.
Thy Royal seat and Crown, for ever shall remain,
Because thy Scepter and thy word, does righteousness maintain.
Because thou love the right, and do the ill detest,
God, even thy God has nointed thee, with joy above the rest.
etc.

It may be by this time, that Bellarmine is angry, or laughes at the least, and
thinks I play the Fool thus to deal with edge Tools: but if that will
content him, I consesse no less, and thank God for my Ignorance, that never
yet was taught cum ratione insanire. If any thing here wring him, let him
thank himself that gave the first occasion, and is apt to reply in so idle a
question: for how should a wiseman, wisely, or in serious sort dispute so fond
a comparison, as a Cardinal with a KING? the one being known by his Hat, the
other by his Crown, except he hold men Idiots, or the world that has been
hood-winckt, ought still to be blind. The reason of the Popes
Triple-Mytred-Crowne.
The Pope may show some reason for his Triple-Miterd-Crowne, both in matter
and in form for 3. kingdoms that he holds, or pretends at the least. The
first, as King of Italy, where indeed he is Great, by way of Intrusion and
possession of Rome. His three pretended Kingdoms.
The second, a Ioynt-patency by way of Competition to the Kingdom of Hell. And
the third of Vtopia alias Purgatory, by conceited inheritance, a Kingdom of
his own; but to write, say, or think, that Cardinals must be Kings, or the
meanest Kings Fellows, because they wear red Hats, is a Doctrine as fit for
Fools to laugh at, as wisemen to believe, at least no where found in the
Catholic Church or Creed. But they wear them on their Heads, as Kings do
their Crowns, Ergo; so Kings fit when they ride both in Coach, or on
Horssebacke, even as Cardinals do; shall I therefore conclude, that Kings are
either Cardinals, or Cardinals Fellows? No, for if vllum simile were Idem as
Nullum is, then might Fools be Cardinals fellows, and Cardinals too.

As for Jesuits, leave them to their Gunpowder and plots of High Treason,
they are smelt-felt, or heard of, to their own Confusion, where ever they go:
to their Ruffian-like raylings, say little, or say nothing, and to their idle
writings always say no, for if TRVTH cannot prevail, nor Reason serve their
turns; look but to their Fingers, and silence is enough, or two words may
suffice, Nothing and No. But this in sober sadness, to their Art of Impiety,
and Mystery of all our Woe: I speak out of Confidence, TRVTH bids me say so; I
hate no man's person, and I envy no man's place, This is not meant here by any
man, that out of Conscience seems only seduced by the Witchcraft of Rome. No,
not of the Bishops there, for the names sake of Popes; of whom sundry have
dyed Martyrs, Confessors, and good Christians: for that were to put my finger
into the eye of Gods Mercy, and to bound his Prerogative, whose Nature and
^roperty sees the fu thest off, and finds us out for his own names sake in
Christ, even then, when in the eye of the world, we seem to have forsaken Him,
and lost our selves.
but to the shameless dishonest, TRVYH tells them to their face. If any be so
desperate or wilful at the least, to make Ship-wracke of his Conscience, play
the Fool, or turn Beast: Si mundus vult decipi, decipiatur in nomine Diaboli.
If any love deceit, and like to be abused, let them be so still, in the Popes
name and the Devil, as they sit together; for God abuses no man for Love nor
Money. And for my Sovereigns Honor, as by Oath I am bound, I am bold to speak
alowde; Come down you Perching Parasites, that by flattering your Popes,
become puffed up with Pride, and knowing your selves but Deacons, and far from
Bishops Fellows, yet rank your selves with Kings; whose Chappelles are more
honorable then your Conclaues are at Rome. But for you that are descended from
Princes and Peers, or more worthily advanced, by your Sovereigns Love and
Favor, Nor against any, ennobled by birth, or Sovereign favor.
then by Popes you can be, though you were their Sons or Heirs, their
nearest Nephews or Darlings most dear, to you I speak with reverence. Do you
your selves but right, that do your selves most wrong, or Qui sordescere
cupiunt, sordescant and adhuc. For if Truth may stand for Truth, and
Cohsequence show Reason; what can a Cardinal be, by that which has been
spoken, but a Monarke in conceit of A petty village in Normandy the owners
whereof, were by French Kings freed from all Homage by the Popes command.
Yuetot at best? half a Sovereign, half a Subject, for he ranckes himself
with Kings: or an Hermophrodyte, half a Priest, and half a Deacon, for he
equiuocates with either: or a prodigious Meteor. In Terris minitatem Regna
Cometen, that blazing in the Air, infecting others, consumes it self, and
turns at last to nothing.

For being some seauenty six Cittes, Po^tes and Towns of several Languages,
several Countries, and every way Subjects to several Sovereigns; The Han^ces.
yet meeting there together, by shifting of Treaties, they disquiet often times
the Emperor himself, and contest with Kings, Queens and Princes.

And being put in trust with the Credit of our Land, (CLOTH) having brought our
Clothiers to distress, themselves into a Labytinth, Merchants Adventures.
and the Trade to Confusion, yet by dealing out of sight to hold all Men under,
and themselves still above, call all men Enterlopers but they and their
Company: and cry out against our Staples, for fear of our Shipping; as if the
multiplying of Coaches, were the ruin of Wheele-Wrights, or diminishing of
Wheels.

And where Merchants Farming Merchants become so Free themselves, The
Undertakers of Subsidies and Customs to Farm.
that out-running our Laws to make have to Consusion, they Plough up the
Dead-Mould (as it were) of Traffic, to get a Mass of pryuate Wealth, by
doing a world of harm.

And finding our Trafick, nigh Pulslesse, Spiritlesse, and almost out of Blood;
The New East-Indian Companles.
like consident Empiricks that seek but private Profit, at one hand or other
offer sxe Pence in the Pound, to powder her with Pepper, and turn her into
Mummy.

Sovereigns suffer Subjects to be Coyners. KING and PRINCE.
But our DAY STAR is risen, and the DAWNING now appears: and as Nullu^
violentum can be Perpetuum, so must it befall this Sovereignty of Rome. For as
by Babilonians the Medes were subdued, the Babilonians by Persians, the
Persians by Macedonians, and they by the Romans, and the Romans yield to none
but to ANTICHRIST himself; so, as our SUN begins to shine, Antichrist is gone.

The Devils own Prophecy of Romes destruction, to be read backe-ward and
forward.
SIGNA TE SIGNA TEMERE ME TANGIS ET ANGIS.
ROMA TIBI SVBITO MOTIBVS IBIT AMOR.
But SOVEREIGNS may subsist, though Conclaues go down, and MAJESTY may be
seen, though ANTICHRIST be gone; I mean Kingdoms may stand, what ere become
of Rome, and Kings may continue, though Popes be overthrown. But how? not as
Men, but as GODS, by their Power and Commission. For as DEITY subsists by the
power of Creating, so KINGS become GODS by their Powerfulness of Coining. The
difference is but this: That of Nothing GOD made Allthings, by the GOODNESS of
Himself, and KINGS must have Matter to fix GOODNESS in, that their Bounties
may be known. GOD without a Pattern, and KINGS for a President, have GOD for
Example.

Thus as of Bullion, KINGS only Coin Money, and Money made of Bullion,
maintains their Exchange: so their Bounty shows their Greatness, and makes
their Subjects Happy. For as GOD in the Eucharist; imparts his own GOODNESS,
that is to say his Greatness, that is to say Himself by means of Bread and Wine,
for the good of Christians: so KINGS by their Exchange impart their own
Bounty, that is to say their Greatness, that is to say Themselves, by means of
Gold and Silver for Subjects weal. Let all that have Eyes and Ears, but
read and understand, and let KINGS above all things be Careful, not so much
of Money, for the names sake and Form, for therein lies Idolatry, which GOD so
detestes, as of Matter, whereof to have always to stamp their own Coin,
that Majesty's may be seen. Be Zealous, not so much of Matter, as it is but
Gold and Silver, for thereby grows Couetise the root of all Evil, whereof
God so fore-warnes; as of weight and Goodness (in regard of their Bounty) in
Finenesse and Pureness by the name of Bullion: be Curious, not so much of
weight and Form, as it is but Bullion, for that begets Pride, which God still
Confounds, as the use and end for which it is made to be current in Money, in
regard of their Sovereignty to maintain their Exchange. And lastly, but
cheefely to be as Jealous of their Standards, namely (TRVTH) both in Number,
Weight, and Measure, as of their own Essence, for therein lies their Honor,
that shows them to be Kings. For what have Merchants to do, that live by
buying and selling, and so by buying, as to sell for private gain, by
presuming upon Sovereignty, and profaning Sacred Majesty, to make use of their
stampes, though the Bullion be their own? Or what have Goldsmiths to do with
the Pix, in Matter of Coin? Neither is it enough, fit, nor conuenienr, for any
that are wise, or would be so taken, to say in jest or earnest, and affirm it
all one, to sell Bullion for Money, or to Coin it himself, and pay for the
Coynage, and laugh at Exchange; except to justify the Pope, and Patronize
Usury, he mean to make it good, that Subjects may be Coyners; the state of
all the enditement and question now in hand. Eats God the flesh of Bulls, or
drinks the blood of Goats? Looks he for Profit, where all is his own
beyond praises, vows, and hearty Thanksgiving? and shall Kings take wages of
the selfsame Money, that none but they can Coin? or farm their Honor? Now
Kings are Gods, therefore Tractent Fabrilia Fabri.

In the mean time, let Sovereigns call home Subjects, or take them down at
least, that Cardinals may be known; keep Cardinals from Conclaues, and
ANTICHRIST is gone, keep Conclaues from Coining, and the Pope may prove a
Bishop of a Dioces, or a Patriarch again: and keep Popes from wandering
Iubiles and Rome, at least Pride is overthrown.

So shall the Idolatrous Mass, that Art of all Impiety, give place unto the
Eucharist: and Jewish Usury, that Mystery of all Iniquity, fall down before
Exchange; and Religion and Justice, holding hand in hand together, shall make
all men see and know, and the world understand, Vera Ars Regnandi.
that VERA ARS REGNANDI being only that of Coynage, whose Mystery is Exchange,
is fit for none but Kings, Justice by Pre-eminence, and Mercy by Prerogative,
being the Matter and the Form, that give Essence to their Crowns.

In a word, Majesty shall be Seen, and Sovereignty shall subsist, as in GOD,
so in KINGS. For GOD shall be Glorified, his KINGS shall be Honored, their
NOBILITY Respected, and MEVM and TVVM in Subjects, make Allin All so Happy,
that each shall hold his own with Prosperity and Peace. Ignorance. What
Publicans and Sinners, and Customers and all? Customer. Yea, even Sinners and
Publicans, whom Customers you call. For look what Tithes are to the Church
and Quitrents to a Manor, where Diocesses are bounded, and Demains are made
known, so shall Customs appear, whose names are now used but as Gold to
hide Pills; and Subsidies show so needless or seldom at the least, when our
Sovereign shall subsist by the Greatness of his own, and be helpefull unto
others; that Imposts, Impositions, all Rates by discretion, Taxes and all shall
be packt up with Usury, sent after the Mass, and transported toward Italy,
and so to Rome by way of Flaunders home, from whence they were but borrowed,
whose Greatness most subsists by such kind of Revenues. Now help KINGS to
Bullion, and they will make us Happy: always provided, that Subjects be no
Coyners.

Bullion? Is Bullion then a matter of such consequent Importance, and important
consequence, that being but one word, it encludes us All in All? will not
Money serve our turns? No surely, without doubt, debate, or question. For
Money made of Bullion, being a Creature unto Kings, as Kings are to God, in the
hands of Subjects, becomes it self admired and adored for a God, whose
Powerful operation (without some Grace Divine) by selfe-conceited Greatness,
begets Pride and Presumption in the hearts of sinful men, turning Truth in
Religion to Conceits, and Heresies and Equity in Exchange, to Extortion and
Usury, the Mystery of all our woe.

Besides, Money of it self, without Bullion to supply, is but water in a
Cesterne, that by use becomes exhausted, or being but let alone, consumes it
self by stinks and putrefaction. For Bullion being the Fountain, Money is but
the water, and Exchange the very River that serves all private turns, and
Bullion being the Sun, Money is but the Beams, and Exchange the very Light
that makes the World to see. So that help Kings to their Bullion, and Subjects
shall be Happy, at least in GREAT BRITAIN, where BOVNTY now commands, for BOVNTY
must direct us to the Island of Exchange, the Seat of worldly Happiness:
Perfection dwells in Heaven.

Exchange? have we spide out Exchange? then hail Masters, Merriners, and
Mates at all hands; call up our loyal Merchants, true Patriotes, Enterlopers,
Publicans and Sinners, and Customers and all, and be of good cheer: belay well
the Bowlyne, keep your Tacklines tight and sure; aloof, aloof with the
Main, for fear of the GOOD-WINS, I seem to see our Island, for the Fore-lands
appear, CASTOR and POLLVX threatening both together, did boad us good-lucke;
our Bark is strong enough to bear out al her leakes: our Load-stones prove
good and our Compass is true, therefore aloof I say with the Mayn, by this
Cape of Good-hope, to the Harbor of safety and Heaven of all our rest: Bear
up (I say) Steere-man, PALINVRVS ports our Helm, bid Merchants now stand by,
the wind is turned North, and our storms are almost gone: Veere out the
Mainsheat, clap all our Sail clothes on: and hasten we by all means to this
Island of Exchange. For reliquis tantum Sinus est and statio malefid^ Carinis.

Thus far I have been able by the GOODNESS of GOD, (being subject to
correction) to touch and make good that part of mine argument, where Bullion
and Exchange fell in to be handled, for our Sovereigns behoof, to show how
Masses and Usury (the foundations of Popery) being hatched both together, by
Echpsing the Empire, have poisoned all Christendom, and though ranging far
and near, yet keep residence at Rome; by whose ill example, Subjects have
elsewhere been taught to be Coyners: that having thus far gained on that
Minotaur of Crete and his Doctrine of Idolatry, by reducing of the Eucharist to
the first Institution and true use thereof; to the Glory of God, the Comfort of
all Christians, our own special Happiness, and Honor of our SOVEREIGNS, in
this Isle of GREAT BRITAIN: So now to abate his Pride in the practices of
Usury, by restoring our Exchange; seems a work preordain'd, and by God
himself laid out, for our THESEUS to begin, and other KINGS to follow: for
his Storge still to Justice is every way good, his love is ever constant, his
affections all are free, and BOVNTY is his Name, had he but his own in the
right of his Bullion. For Bullion then at all hands, let us now apply our selves
and do our best endeavors. Wherein, that which now follows, might serve for a
Lantern to give light at the least, and Usher out the way to AVTHORTY and
WISDOM. But Customers are poor, out of heart, out of friends, and their
Credit's undone. (I mean those of the Out-Ports, for I slander not London)
their Lamps are but dimnesse, their Writings are hidden, and their plainness
dislik't has been graciously chidden; yet such at it is, since GOODNESS like
the Tide; cries on, on, still forward, and TRVTH is at my side, without purpose
of offending the most or the least, I will lend it but to LOYALTY to read and
digest: for help Kings to Bullion and their Subjects must be Happy, always
provided that Subjects be no Coyners.

Ignorance and Impudence contesting together against Truth and Reason, the one
being unapt to believe and conceive, and the other as unwilling to hear and
understand; how Usury obtruding into Exchanges Scate, to the raising of
Subjects, and abasing of Kings, by engrosing their Money and fore-stalling
their Bullion; have bred much disorder in the Church and Commonweal, and have
made it a question of a serious disputation, how to hold the Gold and Silver
that is gotten already within any Kingdom, and draw more unto it. Some by a
steadiness of the Standart, would have all Coins made current, a Penny in an
ounce of Silver, and two pence in Gold, above their own, which serves for a
shift, but it works no miracles: Others propound the abasing of our Coin,
which of all bads is woorst. But when all is said and done, which can be
denised, Truth still makes it good, there is no way to Traffic, by whose help
alone all wants are so supplied, as a waste will be so needful, that it shall
not be regarded. Whereupon grows the Question, between Opinion and Conceipte,
for Art and Nature, about Traffic here in England: namely, how our Traffic
should be able by perpetual supplies, to afford more Gold and Silver, then
all the Mines of the world, which experience thus resolves.

King Edward the third, informed of his right to the Kingdom of France, and
intending by Conquest to make his Title sure; This Contract bears date, Anno.
Ed. 3. K^gis Ang^^, 14. and Franci^ prime, (...) m^rcredy apres mi-q^aresme,
1340.
by means of Jacques d' Artueill, entered into Contract with Gant, Bruges, and
Ypre, in the name of all the rest, for ingresse and regresse by way of Flanders
thither, on these heads and grounds. To give them in ready money (to provide
for their frontiers against the French) at four payments within the year,
seven score thousand pounds; when the ounce was but five Groates, which now is
five shillings, such then was his Bullion. To defend their Ports by Sea,
against all invasion as well as his own, such then was his Shipping; and to
transport the Staple of Kent, from Sandwitch to Bruges for fifteen years.

Thus assured once of Flanders, in ten or twelve years, he triumphed over
France. First before Crecy by the ruin of their Nobility. Then by winning
Callis, the very key of their Cabinet and entrance of that Kingdom. And
thirdly, near Poictiers, where he took their King prisoner; besides the
battle at Sea by Sluice, where himself was lightly wounded, such then was his
Navy and force both by Land and Seas. But finding by this time his Fortunes to
fall, and that for lack of Money; that his money fayl'd, because his Mints did
cease; and his Mintes to stand still but for want of Bullion: and his Bullion
to be missing with the Load-stones of his Mines, then in morgage at Bruges:
Experience now taught him the woorch and use of Staples, the pawning whereof,
was the wealth of all this kingdom, and that Kent alone did sway the good or
ill of England: for who would seek ought of Englands in England, when from
Kent, he might find it transported to Brugis?

Now, Their proverb at this day not forgotten, that if an Englishmans Father
were hanged at Brugis Gates, the Son between his legs would press in thither.
as England thus grew poor, disordered withal, and the King still in want:
Flanders waxt wealthy, and Bruges wanton, and proudly disdainefull both of him
and his, in greatest need; who finding their humors to be next unto
themselves, upon occasions of advantage, and having Callis now to friend, as a
Port of his own; being forced to retire, he gave way to the time, and took a
new Lesson.

To reform his former Errors, before the end of 15. years, 27. Ed. 3. It is
admirable (to read the Statures) to see how serious the King was to sert^e his
Staples at home.
he recals his Staples, and in Cathedral Cities of the Maritimeshires, he
replants them all at home. In Ireland four, at Dublin, Waterford, Cork, and
Drogda. Wales had Carmarden. Newcastle, York, Lincoln, Westmmster,
Canterbury, Chichester, Winchester, Exceter and Bristow, were appointed for
England.

Each Staple had his Head-Port, and each Head-Port had his Members, that
Traffic might find order, and sit by Religion in the beauty of hit
Sanctuaries, near Temples and Churches in all parts where she came. The
Head-ports were these: Newcastle by situation was both Port and Staple. York
had Kingston upon Hull: for Lincoln lay Saint Buttolphs, by the name of
Boston. Yarmouth served Norwitch, as London then did Westminster: Sandwitch
fitted Cantorbury, Chichester feru'd it self, with Exceter and Bristoll, as
did Newcastle, and the Head Port of Winchester was worthy South-hampton. All
Merchants, Allies, and Friends to the State, were at all hands bid welcome. All
Arts were entertained, but especially CLOTHING, Se Lipsius Louamum, of the
dissension between the Earl there, and the Town of Louayne. Lib. 2. cap.
5,13^. and Cap. 12. 1372.
which as then from Louaine, began to fly hither, with Places of Residence,
Immunities and Privileges, besides stipends and wages, to assure them being
here. All kindness was too little, no favor seemed too much, and the Law made
it felony for any, to transport wool, and none to wear Clothing Wrought and
Dyed beyond Sea, but the King and his Queen, and their imediate Children, the
matter was confiscable, and the Persons imprisonable, at the Kings will and
pleasure.

Thus Traffic maintained our Staples, and our Staples held up the Credit of
our Load-stones, whose virtue drew in Bullion, whereby our Mints coined Money,
Several Mints in England.
and made Gold and Silver current in more places then one. As Durham, York,
Cantorbury, Winchester, Exceter, and Bristoll. Each had his proportion,
according to the Pix as well as London: our Ports were full of Shipping, and
the Customs like Quitrents, were certain to be known, by the Merchants own
prices, which they paid at the Staple, by indented Certificate, that jealousy
her self had no cause of suspicion, or use of Books of Rates, or rules of
discretion, the Ports and the Staples controlling each other.

But as Callice grew a thorn, The French offered for Exchange of Calits,
quatorze cent Valle, and trois mil Fortresses, non mees en vne roll, by Du
Tillets Recueil de Traittes. Fol. 92.
which the French could not endure, was often upon bartring, and subject to
surprise: King Edward to marry Callis and England assuredly together, removed
the Staple of Kent from Cantorbury thither: but foresaw not the disorder he
wrought himself at home, for want of the Mines that served his Mints of
Bullion. For as Callis now coined all, England feign to make Statutes to draw
Money from Callis.
and our Merchants out of sight, undertaking the Garrison, by one pretense or
other (combining together) found means to farm the Staples, and so by
consequence the Customs, converting Exchange to Extortion and Usury, The
Original of Societies of Merchants.
and by Companies and Conclaues, sought how to raise themselves, above the
rest of their fellows: long known by the name and style of Merchants of the
Staple, but out-faced at the last by a stronger Society of Merchants
Adventurers.

When Callis was lost, these trust up our Staples, and returned all to
Bruges, whence Pride and Disdain remoou'd them to Middleborough, from
Middleborough to Barrow, and from Barrow up to Antwerp, where what good they
did to thousands by wronging more then millions of brethren of their own, See
a Treatise long since written, in admitation of the Traificke of England, but
lately printed at Middleborough and London, by one Wheeler in favor of the
Merchant Aduentuters, and cold, A Treatise of Commerce.
for these fifty years and more, as they have not let to publish to their own
Pride and Shame: so let Indian Mines, but speak, that have paid for the
trial, and let England consider, how needful it is to call our Staples home.

Thus experience makes it good, (between Flaunders and Spain) for Englands
behoof, The only tossing of English Staples up and down the Netherlands, but
since the loss of Calaye, has so warmde the blood of Burgundy, that Holland
alone with Zeland hand to hand, mating the Power of Spain; has made Pride it
self (after forty years Wary) crave Peace, and glad of ten years Truce,
for all their Indian Mines.
that the Mines of the East, and the Mines of the West, the Mines of the North
and the Mines of the South, and the Mines wheresoever, may promise much at
first, and yet fail us all at last, but the Grace of GOD fayles never.

For, if all our Subsistence still grow from his GOODNESS to set forth his
Glory and our dependence on him; and those Countries be reputed most wealthy
and most happy, that are ablest and aptest to spare and transport Commodities
of their own; then may this Island rejoice above the rest. And if GOD by his
wisdom have so disposed of Goodness, that no place is extant, so absolutely
blessed, as in all points to stand and Subsist of it self, that by charitable
Traffic (bounded by Laws, Treatise, Leagues, Oaths, and Decrees) all wants
might be supplied, according to Reason, Prudence, and Policy; which with us
here in England, has evermore aimed at the increase of our Shipping: since
Victus and Vestitus gives Law to all the rest; then most happy GREAT-BRITAINE
both by Sea and by Land. Bona si sua Norit, and had but her Staples
commutatiuely, as Justice has her Courts distributiuely, and Religion has her
Temples.

For, this Kingdom by Nature being no ways possessed of Gold and Silver Mines,
the wisdom of the State has ever found it needful, to supply that want by
Art, in the chiefest materials that the soil it self affords, made vendible
to al for ready Gold and Silver, at places like sanctuaries, for immunity and
freedom, famous to the world by the name of Staples.

Thus as Denmark has her Sound, France, Wine and Salt, so England turned her
Wooles, Wool-felles, Tin, Lead, and Leather, into pure Silver and fine Gold.

From the Conquest downe-ward to Edward the third, our Wooles bare greatest
sway, who to purchase his passage to the Conquest of France, engaged the
Staple there of at Bruges (as aforesaid) for fifteen years; but finding by
experience, the true use of his Wooles, he became the first that taught the
benesite of Clothing, retired his Staples, and replantes them at home.

A happy beginning if it had bin well continued, but his care to tie Callis and
England together, made him soon out-shoote his mark: for by remoouing the
Staple he had settled in Keut from Cantorbury thither, he dreyned all the rest,
The long dissension between the houses of Lancaster and York.
and so lost his Mints at home for want of Bullion, which the times then
succeeding, had no leisure to consider.

Thus as Hysteron grew Proteron, our Ports to secke of Staples, having lost
withal their Customs, as Quitrents must fail where Demaynes are shrunk or
gone; our Kings being put to shifts, were forced to seek aid by Subsidies, as
well on Lands and Goods, as of Tonnage and Pondage, from the love of their
Subjects, whose wants at the first were gladly still supplied, but the ofter
the worse; for in the Elements of life, and vital subsistence, Religion bids
Reason provide first for Nature, and be still next her self; distresses being
dangerous (if not deadly) when the blood is retracted, and the heart wants his
own.

Here Merchants found the means still dealing out of sight, The occasion and
Original of Companies and Prinate Societies.
by Companies and Societies to prey upon the public and attend their private
ends, who since the loss of Callis, tossing Traffic up and down, have so
warmd the blood of other lands, and starved their own at home, that now it is
a question how to make her pulses beat, and know the use of Staples. O! that
ever Merchants should sit so near our Helm!

But since privation still presuppones a habit, and from confusion perfections
self is drawn: as my standing makes me see, so my seeing moves my Conscience
to do my best endeavor, to revive the memory of our ancient Stables, upon the
subject of our Clothing, that by this Idea holding out the candle, I might
Usher the way for Anthority and Wisdom, to take the same in hand: for
howsoever the Conscience of my calling, and special duty besides (as his
Majesty's sworn Servant) have singled me forth, and pressed me still forward,
by one occasion or other: Quo fato nesc^o, sed non sine Numine, as my hope and
comfort is, His Maicsties special command to prosecute the Title of my former
Acroamata, was the cause of writing this.
to presume thus with my pen, to wish and further; yet I every way conclude,
that none can undertake, but the Grauest and Wisest in Highest Authority, to
promise and perform it.

For a Staple I mean where our Sovereign still subsisting by the Goodness of
God as Religion in her Temples; so his Majesty may be seen by the Greatness
of himself Cathedrally. Where his Justice may discern of the actions of men
Commutatiuely; as it does in his Courts Subalterne and Sovereign
Distributiuely.

Were Traffic once but fixed, See Traffic speld in the Customers Alphabet
and Primer.
whose Nature still beautiful, shall by Art be made so amiable, that her
Loadstones drawing in Bullion, shall make her admired both in Matter, Persons,
Place, Order, and End, all the world over.

For her Matter being prepared between Nature and Art, Matter.
shall be made truly vendible by Good, Better, and Best, for all peaceable
Commerce for ready Gold and Silver.

Her Merchants so loyal or friendly at the least, Persons.
that Traitors and Enemies shall find no Commerce for all their Gold and
Silver.

Her Place so convenient for egresse and regresse, Place.
by Water, Sea, and Land, that safety and immunity shall warrant and protect
both the Matter and the Persons of all that buy and sell there for ready
Gold and Silver.

Her Order still fitted to the foreign contracts, Order.
and the Statutes of this Land, shall admit no disturbance by private
discretion, or partial affection, to Matter nor Persons, for any Gold or
Silver.

And her End withal so happy, End.
by drawing in of Bullion, and our Shippings increase, that GOD shall have his
Glory, our Sovereign King his Honor, and the Staple by her Seals giving
Honesty her own, in every man's endeavor, with reputation and credit; shall make
this little Island a pattern to the world, of Religious Justice, by Prosperity
and Peace.

In a word, See the true Pattern of a Staple, in the Customers Alphabet
toward the end.
the Rules of such a Staple being drawn but from the practice of foreign
experience in the subject of our Clothing; these profits being demonstrable,
must consequently follow.

First all our Wooles, the wonder of the world, (so beneficially made and did,
as we see them beyond Sea) being made into Cloth; shall be wrought all at
home, by Clothyers, Wool-men, Carders, Spinners, Weauers, Fullers, Sheere-men,
Hatters, Cappers, and Dyers of our own.

Our Clothes now despised for want of true making, shall then become desired,
and Strangers glad to fetch them for ready Gold and Silver, for, Vino
vendibili, nil opus erit hedera.

Our Traffic freed from Practices and Embargoes beyond Seas, whereto she is
so subject by wandering still abroad.

Our Fayres, and our Markets, shall be every way revived, rude Places made
civil, and the Poor of all sorts by their own labor relieved, three special
blessings of inestimable value.

Many Statutes for Drapery, Idleness and Roguery, will become disburdened and
prevented, that being sooner enacted then well understood, prove easier to
devise then experience can practice.

The whole Realm will be enriched by working our Materialles all orderly at
home, and our Ports by daily Traffic filled with Merchants, Mariners and
Shipping.

The Customs like Quitrents made certainly known, from Subsidies, Aids and
all Impositions, so willingly paid and truly answered, that Iealosie her
self shall set down contented, when, without possibility of fraud, the Ports
and the Staples shall each control other.

And above all, though last and least observed, our Bullion (without which no
Kingdom can stand) shall be brought directly to our Mints, and there made
current Money by immediate hands, and our Staples made perpetual Mines of
pure Gold and Silver.

Thus our Religion and our Justice shall no longer contest before our Dread
Sovereign by personal defects, Prohibitions.
about Tithes and Tributes; but like Aaron and Hur, support Moses at the Mount,
whilst our IOSVA hand to hand, in defense of the Faith, confound both Amalech,
his Fautors and Followers. I mean our KING and Sovereign to the example of
all others, thus made Powerful by his Bullion, to stamp coin of his own; as
the Sea affoords water for all streams and Rivers, and by a native kind of
homage receives it back again: so all men endeavoring by willing courses and
perpetual motions shall serve and work for Him; and Himself made able to
make all his Subjects happy by the Bou^ty of his Exchange: shall cut the throat
of that stayne and stay of Piety, that contempt of Equity, that Baud of
Bankers, that Art of Witchcraft, and mystery of Iniquity (Usury) whilst the
Grauest and Wisest in highest authority take their own cause in hand, and next
to RELIGION that sanctifies All; attend and intend the relief of TRAFFIC
(the norice of all our Commutatiue Justice) that rectifies All. I mean in
England by English STAPLES the first step toward Heaven, and our Summum
Bonum.

TRAFFIC! O the height, the depth, the length, the breadth, the compass, and
profundity of this one and only word! more fit for WISDOM to read, and
ELOQVENCE to utter, then our weak brains to spell! For if TRAFFIC be the
hand that lays out all men their work, prouides all men their food, and
pays all men their Fees; I mean if TRAFFIC be the way that leads us all to
Bliss: ought She not at al hands to be seriously supported, that so supports
us All? and her willing disturbers, and witting Peruerters held as Enemies to
ORDER, that is to say, to GOD and NATVRE? When we think but on TRAFFIC it
reuiues us much, and could we but find Her, then All were our own. But see
where She comes, and her OVT-PORTS in sight, all Tired as it seems, and in
woeful case and plight. Traficke shows her self, with the Out-Ports.
Now alas poor TRAFFIC, from whence may thou come? from Purgatory sure, or
some woorser Place; Rome. What may be thine Errand? to complain at the least,
and see thy SOVEREIGNS Face? Woe is me, thy Servant have no Credit, being
dead in Disgrace: therefore speak for thy self, lo, see where HE sits, be
bold and go try HIM, JUSTICE and MERCY stand both at his side, his BOVNTY sits
by him.

TRAFFIC all wrung and spur-gal^ back and sides, with the four Sons of
AYMON, that sit and ride like Cardinals, without Bit, Bridle or Guide, save
Ignorance before, with a whip in her hand of her own contriuing, and Impudence
be hind, and a world of Societies, that following by Companies, undertake to
beat Her forward, falls prostrate on the Ground, (for kneel she cannot, her
knees are so broken) and bemoan^s her self in this manner.

"Si placet hoc, Quid Metam.
meruique quid o tua Fulmina cessant
"SVMME DEVM? Liceat periturae viribus ignis,
"Igne perire tuo, clademque Authore leuare. etc.
O KING of CROWNS, if this be so thy Will and my desert,
Why do thou stay with deadly dint, thy thunder down to dart.
And if that needs I perish must, by force of fiery flame,
Let thy Celestial fire (ONING) I pray the do the same.
A comfort should it be to have THEE, Author of my Death,
I scarce have power to speak to THEE, the flam: so stops my breath.
Behold my singed hears and all, behold my bleared cies,
See how about my scorched face, the scalding embe^s flies.
Is this the Guerdon wherewithal thou quitst my fruitfulness?
Is this the Honor I receive, for all my plentiousnesse,
And Duty done with true intent? for suffering so the Plough
To draw deep^ Furrows on my back and takes to rend me through.
In that I still from year to year continually am wrought,
In giving Fodder to thy Beasts and Cartel all for naught.
For ye ding Corn and other Food, wherewith to f^ede Mankind?
And that to Honor THEE withal, swe^t Frankincense I find,
But put the case that my deserts, destruction seem to crave,
What has my brother SEA deserved, and RIVERS al^ to have?
Why se^me their ^ydes and PORTS to fall, and Ebbes retire so low
And shun thy Skies whereto they ought to fly and nearer flow:
But if thou neither do respect, my brother SEA nor ME,
At least regard THY-SELFE and THRONE, look round about and see;
How both thy Poles begin to smoke, which if the fire appall,
To utter ruin be thou sure, thy Palace down will fall.
Behold how ATLAS gins to faint, The COVNSELL-TABLE.
whose shoulders though full strong,
Will not be able to vp-hold the sparckling A^s-tree long.
If SEA and LAND and PORTS do fail, if HEAVEN it self do burn
To old confused CHAOS then of force we must return.
Put to thy helping hand therefore, and save the little left,
If ought remain, before that all be quite and clean bereft.
The OVT-PORTS following TRAFFIC as shadows do their Body, bemoane
themselves in this wise.

If Traffic be the assured practice of that mystical Philosophy wherein so
many wits have spent themselves, Lapis Phylosophicus.
and blown the coals in vain, whose heavenly Elixar; Goodness, the
Quintessens of Nature and Art by Divine Sublimation applyde to Materialles
begets Mysteries in Trades, and purging all dross of Deceit from Trades,
turns Trades into Metals, and all Metals into pure Silner, and fine Gold.
Moreover,

If Trafick be that general Restoratiue, Vniuersalis Medicina.
which easing all Griefs in Soars, suppling all Sores in Diseases, and curing
all Diseases in particular Members, holds the whole Bodies of Kingdoms in
Health. The sacred rules whereof, as no profane Covetous could ever comprehend
nor confident Empericke attain to practice; so none of private Descretion or
partial Affection, may presume to alter or any ways control: as being a
Doctrine and study peculiar to the GRAVE and WISE, only in highest Authority,
and for PRINCES themselves. Namely,

If Traffic of her self be both outward and inward, of things bred at home
or set from abroad; and those Kingdoms reputed most wealthy and most happy,
that are ablest and aptest to spare and transport Commodities of their own,
wherein this Island may compare with the best: since no place is extant so
absolutely blessed, as in all points to stand and subsist of it self that by
the benefit of Traficke, bounded by Treatise, Leagues, The Use and End of
Traffic.
and Decrees, all wants might be suppled according to Reason, Wisdom, and
Policy; which with us here in England, has evermore aymd at the increase of
our Shipping.

This Necessity then of mutual Commerce, by the malice of the Times, being
many ways envied, and by Enemies abroad very often interrupted: if withal it
become disturbd among equals at home, when the General is wrong, Particulars
grieved cannot but groan.

But so it is (most Grave and most Wise, in highest Authority) that such of
late years, has been and yet is, the state of dealings and Trades within our
selves. For the City of London, as the Liver in the Body, receiving the Chylus
from all parts of the stomach, by detaining the blood from the rest of the
veins, is both distempered in it self, and injurious withal to all her
fellow Members.

In which Estate, though the Kingdom seem engaged and deeply interest, as it
may be the case of every private Subject; yet the Port-Townes in special,
consisting of Artificers and Tradesmen, Masters of Ships and Mariners, do
most grieve and therefore complain.

That albeit as Subjects, vnder-lying the first brunts of all Forrayne attempts
and troubles, living under one and the self same laws, ready at all
commands, both by Sea and Land, as other Towns and Subjects of the Kingdom
elsewhere are; and as liable to all Customs and Subsidies, Fifteenes and
Loanes, (the Cinq-Portes by wisdom found meet to be excepted) as London it
self is every kind of way, for the proportion of their several Abilities: yet
contrary to the Liberty of English-Freeborne Subjects, they are abridged,
envied, and as it were, held unworthy the very superfluities of that Cities
abou^dance, to their manifest decay, for want of Free Traficke, in their
Inhabitants, Mariners, and Shipping; and that all things being drawn into
private Societies, are there so engrosed, that England seems but London, and
London likewise seems abridged in it self.

In which distress, the Port-Townes, appealing in all humility to the PRINCE:
their only comfort is, that alb^it his MA: as a Father of all his Children, in
his Love and Affection (as well may beseem HIM) stand gracious to some, more
then all the rest: yet that his Storge and inclination unto Justice, affoordes
bread to the meanest, and intends at least that all should enjoy their
Birthright, to the general Treatise of Intercourse abroad, and Common-Lawes
at home; to grow up thereby to live to his service and the Commonwealth.

Let not London therefore, though furseting of favors, envy her Fellow
Subjects to breath common air, living under ONE, and HE so good a SOVEREIGN.
And in London most specially the Society of MERCHANTS ADVENTVRERS. For such
reasons as formerly have been touched and laid down.

Now such being the State of Traficke, in the Out-Ports at least, fit for the
Grave and Wise to know and consider; the reformation whereof, though none but
Authority may promise and perform: Yet as necessity compels, so common duty
makes it lawful for all to wish and further. Unto whom therefore the
Port-Townes aforesaid, for themselves, their next neighbor Cities, Towns,
Parishes, and Friends: in all humble Submission by way of remembrance, exhibit
this petition.

"Qui Reipub. Cicero offic. lib. 1.
praesunt, Duo praecepta teneant, vnum vt Vtilitatem Ciuium sic tueantur, vt
quioquid agant, ad Eam referant, obliti Commodorum suorum. Alterum, vt totum
Corpus Reipub. current; ne, dum Partem aliquam tuentur, reliquas deserant. Qui
autem Parti consulunt, Partemque negligunt, Seditiones and Discordias inducunt.
Nam ex co fit, vt alij Populares, alij Optimi alicuius studiosi videantur,
Pauci Vniuersorum.

The Out-Port, having ended, appeald their CVSTOMERS, and called them for
witness. Whose Coats broken at Elbowes, and Hose out at heels, had made them
retire, and were loath to come forward. But after TRAFFIC and the OVT-PORTS,
as the CUSTOMS came in Question, were sought for, and found to be missing: the
CVSTOMERS by consequence were commanded to come in: who like Poor Scholars
with their Books in their hands, but daring not to speak; by way of Account,
frame Ciphers with their Pens, and make signs in this manner:

If Happiness be that State, which all men so desire, al aiming at the least
at their highest bliss; and Religion and Justice our furest stays to stand
to, and safest helps to find it. That is to say: If Religion by Sanctifying
our Wits, and by reforming our Wills, to clear our Understandings, belay
our Summum Bonum against our Ghostly Enemies, Sin, Death, and Satan, by
faithless Desperation. And Justice by protecting, our Livings, our Liberties,
our Lives, our Honors, and the Peace of all the Land, against Nymrodising
Tyrants, and all their Adherents, by Violence and Obtrusion.

I mean, The Use of Religion.
If Religion serve to settle the Tranquillity of our Minds, by holy
Contemplations; to fill our Souls with Joy, by Faith in Jesus Christ; to
increase our Heavenly comforts by the Word and Sacraments, to separate our
Callings by the name and style of Christians, and to edify the Church by
Doctrine and good Life. And Justice serve to warrant the Use and Perpetuity of
all our worldly wealth, by honest conuersions: The Use of Justice.
to confirm our Christian Liberty by Grace and Obedience, to prolong our Lives;
by (...), Love, and Loyalty, to maintain our Credits by Charity, among men,
and to protect our Peace both in Church and Commonweal, by Piety and Probytie:
maintaining (as it were) a kind of free Traffic, and mutual Commerce,
between the Throne of God in Heaven, and his Church upon Earth, by Doctrine
and Prayer, for the use of Goodness: Alheauen by Inspyrings downwaids, and all
holy Desires upwards, being as Angels or Merchants between God and Us.

In a word: The End of Religion.
If Religion serve to strengthen the meek and humble minded, or leave to
Reprobation the proud aad perverse, in the vain Immaginations of their
obstinate hearts. The End of Justice.
And Justice to protect the possession and fruition of all our Meum and Tuum,
as well in Tithes as in Tributes; that our Faith above with Deity, belaying our
Summum Bonum, our Charity in humanity, might work out our Happiness, by the
Medium CHRIST-IESVS, both GOD and MAN: Faith I say apprehending the Mercies of
the Father, for the Merits of the Son, by the Working of the Spirit, the
Fountain of al Grace, and Mother of Obedience: nay, If GOD be GOODNESS and
GOODNESS, be TRVTH, and TRVTH be to be believed, as Christians are taught; the
Comforts out of Question must needs be very great, where Men may dwell in
houses whose foundations are laid on such assured grounds. In which regard
(forsooth) we poor despised Scholars (disgraced Out-port Customers) want
words to set forth our Joys and Conceiptes of the Goodness of GOD, and
Bounteous Disposition of our KING and sacred SOVEREIGN for the stays of
Religion and Distributive Justice in these our happy days: but were those The
High Censtable and Earl Marshall of England: Judges in the Court of CHIVALRIE.
Patrons of Honor, whom Mercury should scrue, by APOLLO found out; and the
rooses of our Schools made Wind-tight and Water-tight in the breaches and
wants of Commutatiue-Right, we would then write Verses in praise and
commendation of our Prince and our Peers, and sing Alleluya to the Great KING
of Heaven.

For Justice being Commutatiue, as well as Distributine, and Commutatiue Justice
the same we call Traffic, and Traffic the high way that leads us all to
Bliss: so it is (most GRAVE and most WISE in HIGHEST AVTHORITY) that whereas,
by the Rules of Religion, and Distributive Justice, there either are or should
be, as well Tributes of Homage, as Attributes of Honor, Heues^um and Vtile:
transcendently due to Sovereign Sublimity, even in Earthly States as Gods
among Men, that Honestum on the right hand, and Vtile on the left, holding
hands still together, Majesty and Sovereignty might be seen and subsist both
in Greatness and Bounty, by the Bounds of their Reuennewes: namely, Customs and
Subsidies.

Customs, of their own by personal Right, as wreathed to their Crowns, by
Necessity it self, for their Greatness and Honor. And Subsidies of their
Subjects, as Tokens and Effects of Loyalties Free Will. The First to
demonstrate to the eye of the world, that formal Distinction and ordinary
observance, that sets the true difference between Sovereignty and Subjection,
for reciproke Good of either. The Second, to express the frankenesse of Love
that ought to proceed from the hearts of their own and peculiar People for
Subjects weal. In a word; The First, as Tithes due to Deity so Needful of
themselves, as not to be defrauded, much less denyde: The last, as Oblations
of Denotions, so tide to Free Will, as may be required, but none may compel.

And whereas moreover, Customs in this kind and Subsidies both, as honorable
Effects of that weighty Cause (Traffic) whose Actions being conversant about
no meaner Objects the^ Sovereigns Greatness and Subjects Wealth, require
Collectors of absolute trust; men truly Religious and honest indeed, as
Customers are every way intended to be: And the Place of a Customer in that
respect, held a Function so Honorable or Honest at the least, and a Charge of
such import, as none should obtrude on at adventure, or undertake in Jest; but
such as Nature has fitted, and Authority admitted, in lawful manner: All this
notwithstanding (most sacred IDEAS of MAJESTY and WISDOM) since contempt of
their Persons, Of the Rank and Reputation which Publicans, alias Customers,
belde among the ancient Romans, even when the Empire was greatest and best
goue^ned, readbut (...) (...) where be uses these w^rdes. Florem Eq^^tum
Romanor^m, Or^amentum Imperij, Firmamentum Reip: ^ub icanoru^ Ord^ne cortiner^.
And Ad Quintum Fratrem, de Regimine Asianae Prafectarae, mulea de Publicanoru^
Digmtate and quanto fuerint Respub. adiumeneo disserens, concludes at last, Si
Publicanu aduersemur, Ordinem de Nobu optime meritum andper Noscum Repub:
contu^ctum, a Nobu and a ^epub: disiungimus And Eidem Q. Fratr^lib. 1. He
seems to rejoice in the mild disposition of the C^stomers of that time,
saying. Non esse Leniores in Tr^^us^ ex^ge^du Graecos, quam nostros ^ublicanos.
Hin^ enim est quod Ca^nij nuper omnes ex Insulis quae erant a Sylla Rhodijs
a^tributae, consugerunt ad Senatum, vt Nobis potius vectigalia ponderent, qu^m
Rhodijs. Vicesimam tantum part^me ^rum rerum quae exportabantur, ^ort^^ij
(^ustomes) and rectigalis (Revenues) nomine capiebant. A Les^on in our days
most worthy the noting And it is appatant to all that l^st observe it, That if
Tully himself h^d not been very studious both of ^ustomes, and much
conversant with Customers; he had ^euer been able to endyte those two Golden
works of his, called Tullies Offices, and Tulty de Repub. The First, like a
Christian Encheridion of Honestum and V^ile, shows all men, even at this day
the Rules of true Ciuility, and foundation of Christian Policy. The Last
likewise able to make any man a wiseman in one days only reading, (as honest
Aikam and learned Sturmius do both believe and write) if it were to be found.
An Idea whereof perhaps may be seen in our Customers Alphabes and Primer,
1608. and laid up in Sir Th^^ Bodleyes Amalthaean Vat^c^n at Oxford: though
Cardinal ^ooles 2000 Crowns mist it at Cracouia in Poland, when he sent to
seek it thither, where he he^rd it was concealed. And to see his love to
Customers, and withal, his true care of the State wherein he liu^d, by ^eating
down so seriously the Conceit of the wisest among Men in those days, that in
favor of the Exchequire, sought to raise the Reuennewes by Vtile without
Honeslum, And his falling ou^ with M. Cat^ his de^^est Friend in defense of
Customers; Read the third^ Book of his Offices in these words. Non igiturv^il^
ilia L: Philippi sententia, quas C^^itates, pecunia accepta. L. Sylla ex
Sena^us Consulto liberavisset, vt hae rursu^ vectigales fierent. At aucta
(dicent) inde victigalia; vtile igitur. Quorsque tandem audebunt dicere
quicquam vtile quam non prius honestum? Nullam autem pestem maiorem vitae and
Societati hominum posse contingere dixerim quam coru^ Opinio qui ista
distraxerint. Potest ne vlli Imperio quam Gloria fultu^ esse debet and Soci^rum
beneuolentia, vtile esse Odium and Infamia? Eg^ autem cum M. Catone meo saepe
dissensi. Nimu enim praesracte and obst nate Aerarium vectigaliaque visus est
defendere and omnia Publican^ negare. Cum quibus sic agere, vt cum Colonis
nostris deberemus, eoque magu, quam eius Ordini^ con^u^ctio, ad salute^ Reipub.
pertinebat. Male etiam Curio quum causam Transpadanorum aequa^ ^icebat, semper
addchat, VINCAT, VTILITAS, etc. Read him also ad Memmium Epist. 10. Terentiu^m
Varronem M. Bruto co^mendantem: Quia mature se contulit in Societatem
Publicanorum; cuius Ordin^s mihi antca commendatissimi, Causa, fecit amicitiam
nestram multo firmiorem. Et Caesari amantissimos Publicanos ad A^ticum a^^t.
Epist 7 Et nominatum homtres amplissimos Publicanos appellat. Epist. 65 And
above al, to show his acquaint ince and judgment in Custom Causes, read him
but In Verrem. lib. 2. de Jurisdiction Siciliensi toward the end, at these
words Nam quam in Publicanoru^ Causis plurimu^ aetatu meae versor.
vebementerque illum Ord ne^ obseruo, satis co^mode mihi videor eoru^
consuetudine^ vsu tract indoque co^uisse. And who reads the words following,
and observes his proceedings with L Vibius, the head Customer of Syracusa would
say himself had bin a Cuostme^ But when Judea by Conquest subdued, becam a
Province of the Roman Empire, and I^rusa em it self was made subject to Rome:
Tributes (which Cicero, in Oratione pro Flacco calls Aurum Iudaicum) turned to
Impositions, were made Curss^s of Divine Justice to keep Jews under: who in
respect of their former Freedom, called all the world Gentyl^s, and having lost
their Liberty in hatred of their Tr^bute^, held Publicans for Ethnickes and
greatest S^nners, as well those born in Judea as sent from Rome, namely
Matthaeus and Zachaeus: so that till them none but jews hated Customers, in
regard of their Tributes. And as their Adjuncts then (called ( Socij. Praedes,
and Mancipes) instead of Tributes, fell in love with Aurum Iudairum, and Kerum
suarum plus aequo satagentes, were at a I hands called Publicans Catexochen, so
at this day the Customer bea^e the blame of all.
and neglect of their choice, gave Jealousy occasion to Suspect their
endeavors, Ignorance and Impudency obtruding in their Places, both in
Countenance and Maintenance, supplanted their Credits. First, by Comptrollers,
then by Supervisors; lastly, by Farmers, and Undertaking Huxters, besides
Searchers and Wayters, God knows how many.

But howsoever in this sort they live now out of savor, as Objects of
Disgrace, and public ^^^under: yet theeye of the Law still constant in her
choice, calls them kindly by their names. Not Publicans in scorn as Ignorance
seems to do, not Sinners in despite more then other men, as H^pocrisie
dissembles, nor doubting of their Christendom, as Impudency does (since none
Jews and Turks, are found to spurn at Tributes) but Customers and Collectors
of the Customs Great and Small, The curious intention of the Law, in the
choice of Customers.
and of the Subsidies that grow by Tonnage and Pondage; and culles them
withal, as curiously forth (as Sheriffs in their Shyres) from among the best
and most sufficient that Wisdom can find, or choice afford: as Persons most
fit to wait and tend on Traffic, and in collecting Tributes most likely of all
others, To deal kindly with the Subject, and justly with the Sovereign.

But as in Religion, and the service of God, there is nothing more distracts or
disturbes the minds of men, then a misunderstanding and diversity in
Conceits, about the word it self, (Church) so fares it in Traffic our
Commutatiue Justice, for the terms and use of Tributes. Namely those
personal Rightes, like Adoration and Tithes [Customes] and those voluntary
Gifts like Oblations of Free Will [Subsidies] but cheefely Customs.

For Customs I mean, but not such Customs as the conquering Romans devised
and imposed, Judea, now the seat of Turkish Infidelity, and Christians slavery.
upon the stubburn and stifnecked Jews, whose Tributes were cursses of divine
Justice, to keep them under.

Nor such as Tyranny inuents and imposes on Subjects inthrald, Italy, the
Seat of Exactions, and Vsuries Kingdom.
to stand alost on, and raise it self by.

Nor such as tumultuous wars have made our next Neighbors, The Netherlands,
the Seat of Excises, and Traffickes Purgatory.
impose upon themselves, for defense of their Consciences, their Lives and
Liberties.

But such Customs as Mildness and Mercy, England, the Seat of Marchandice,
and Traffickes Paradise.
to relieve our neighbors, our Allies and our Friends, the Wisdom of our
State, has invested our Kings, to maintain the Sovereignty of our Kingdom
by.

Such Customs as demonstratiuely showing the real possession and actual
protection, our Sovereigns have and hold of every man's wealth, leave
notwithstanding to each of their Subjects, his Meum and Tuum, and full use of
his own.

Lastly, such Customs, as like Tithes of a Church, or Quitrents of a Manor,
show the power of the Lord, and Greatness of the Owner, the defrauding
whereof, does worthily forfet both protection and possession of the immediate
Freeholder.

For Customs of themselves, Customs deseribed.
and properly taken, are those Leniore^ Tribut^, easy sums and payments of
ready current money to Customers at their Ports, by Merchants, allied to the
State, for such Staple-Commodities, as being orderly bought and sold, and for
Number, Weight and Measure, sufficiently censured, before they cross the Seas,
for our Soueraigns Honor and Countries Credit; by indented Certificate and
Staple-Seale, come warranted thither.

But as the Stuard of a Manor that sits to hold a Court, for want of the
Rowles and Authenticke Records of his Lords Revenues, can neither know the
Tenants, demand their Quitrents, nor understand their homage, how each man
bounds his Fee or holds his own: So fares it at this day with the Customs and
the Customers, in the Out-Ports of this Land: For though their Temples stand
upright, and Churches may be seen; yet their Staples being dissolved and
transported out of sight, from whence their work should come, though Religion
have her Altars for Unity and Truth; yet Traficke being distracted, the King
wants his own, and we like to Pipers that want their upper lips, would
gladly call for Customs, but know not where to find them. For as no Church
can have no Tithes, and no Courts no Quitrents, so no Staples, no Customs.

By means whereof, Necessity overtaken, makes bold with Free Will, and to aid
Prcheminence, transcending to Prorogatiue, turns Customs into Subsidies of
Tonnage and Pondage. As i^ Pre-eminence and Prerogative were merely Synonimas,
and meant but one thing, and bounding Justice that lays out all our Rightes,
were that boundless Mercy which makes us al to live, and Mercy it self but a
word of profanesse, or some ordinary thing.

Thus whilst our Grave Masters and Moderators, of our Schools have been
busied and distracted with higher points f Learning; out Staples turned to
Mart-Townes in other Foreign Lands, our Customs are confounded; and we like
Bears at Stakes, seem fit for nothing but bayting and beating. But that which
grieves us most, and of all seems most unkind; our PATRON hereby wants, and
his Bounty No marvel, if Customers live still disgraced, for holding Honestum
so before Vtile, as both might go together; since Bounty it self in Kings
becomes hindered and distasted; without which in Sovereigns, no Subjects can
be happy. Shall Piety tremble to say, God may be too Good? And shall Loyalty
limit or tax Bounty in Kings? If omne Bonum, be sui diffu siuum, and quanto
communius eo semper meliut: As God is most Good, Infusiuely, being Goodnessent;
self; so help Kings to fixed Goodness (Bullion) for that is their Essence,
but keep Subjects from coining, though the Bullion be their Own.
is undermined, without which in Sovereigns, no Subjects can be happy. For his
Loadestones being transported, and his Golden Mines of store, his Coin begins
to fail, and his Mints do stamp no more. His Ports run all to London, where
his Treatise keep men under, his Megazines in Holland, makes all the world to
wonder. The only Shipping of Helland compatable with all Christendom.
Whose Ships and strength at Sea so great, so huge, so strange; shows how
Trafick furthers Shipping, and how Usury checks Exchange: and all because
Subjects are suffered to be Coyners.

O Usury and Ambition, how far are you to blame? And Avarice with Pride, go
hide your selves for shame: Till our Staples be found. For if alery out on
Couetise, and that with great Reason, since God has pronounced it the root of
all Evil, and the secret love of Money to be flat Idolatry; which being still
bad in Subjects, must needs be woorst in Kings: How great then might out
happiness appear, to have BOVNTY himself now li^e and dwell among us, had his
Traficke but her Staples, as his Justice has her Courts, and Religion her
Temples. And what hearty remorse ought it to move, to see both Him and His
abridged and deprived of the principal means to practice their virtues.

Great there fore, Greater, and Greatest of all, must their accounts be both to
God and Nature, that preposlerously perverting their proper Materialles, turn
their best helps for Bullion to their private advantage, to the intolerable
dislurbance both of Court and Country, and almost unrecoverable wrong, to the
King and his Crown; whereof Customers wanting words, have made signs with
their Pens, and yet are still apt to groan in this manner.

O that our T^ngue^ or Pens were able to express,
Or had the Golden gift, to make men understand,
Those great and stroog Effects of Heavenly happiness,
Exchange at Staples would work by Boun^^^^ hand.
Our Traficke th^n a home, would quickly bliss our Land.
For Instice and Religion should sit so near together,
That Righteousness and Pea^e might kindly kiss each other.
And Kings elsewhere might learn by this Idea made,
What Heaven it self dothboad, by this our Kingly Trade.
Yet MAJESTY must be seen still, for all this Disorder, at one hand or other,
and SOVEREIGNTY by all means made able to subsist, if SVBIECTS will be happy;
and Customers are sworn to do their best Endeavors.

There Is a Place in this Land, Transiti^, from Customs to Subsidy, by a Simile.
where a Great-Man does dwell, in whose beautiful Garden a stately Fountain
stands, at the raising whereof, Art seemd to strive with Nature, and both
excel themselves; the Spring and Stream still plentiful, fill all the empty
Cisternes of the Tenants adjoining, with a Cock in pryuate, to stop or let out
at pleasure. By tract of Time, corruption abroad or neglect at home, the Spring
becomes perverted, the Stream runs wast, or the Fountayn's out of frame, that
the Lord of the Soil, who should relieve others, by the Bounty of his own;
wants water himself, and crauesayd of his Tenants; whose Cisterns conteyne no
more of themselves, then his Current afforded and Conduct controld. His wants
at the first are gladly supplyde, but the ofter the worse: for in these
Elements of Life and vital subsistence, Religion still bids Reason provide
first for Nature, and be next her self, Distresses being dangerous, if not
deadly, when the blood is retracted, and the Heart wants his own.

This might help us a little (till our Staples be found) by Meum and Tuum, to
compare and demonstrate between Customs and Subsidies, both the want of the
one, and the use of the other. But here we stand doubtful and mistrustfull of
our selves, and seek rather to be taught. For though, To do as to be done to,
be a Rule sufficient, for Meum and Tuum in equal Commerce: seeing ^oue first
descendent though reciproke at the last, and Charity next it self, though
Subiests live by Grace; we desire to be instructed, in Collecting these our
Subsidies how to wade uprightly between the Sovereign and the Subject, that
Honestum and Vtile night still go together, and maintain Free-Trafficke. For
whilst our Staples were at home, so joined to our Ports, or so near together
that each controlled other; our Loadstones drew in Bullion for our Mints at
hand to Coin, and reading by Certificate, as well in quallity as quantity, what
the Merchants there had bought, we could call for all our Customs, before they
crossed the Seas, by their own accounts and price, without Fraud or Couin, or
other Books of Rates, but in Pondage and Tonnage we know not what to take, and
therefore seek to learn.

For, "Haud Natura potest Iusto secernere Iniquum,
"Nec vincet ratio hoc, tantundem vt peccet, Idemque
"Qui teneros caules alieni fregerit horti,
"Et qui nocturnus Diuum sacra legerit. ADSIT
"REGVLA Peccatis quae poenas irroget oequas,
"Ne scutica dignum horribile sectere flagello.
It is not in Descretions hand to stay,
Or hold the Scales of Good or Ill upright;
Nor is that Reason good that makst all one, by day
To crop a Neighbors Garden- Leekes, and rob a Church by night;
A RVLE must guide the Whole, to keep the Parts from swaruing
And punnish faults in every one, according to deserving.
And not to think, that every slip;
Like deadly sin, deserves a whip.


For if Soueraigue Dignity, be that Sacred Object, which True-Louing Loyalty is
apt to admire, and still seeks to Honor with her kindest tespects (such is all
Subsidies, either are or should be) who can be capable of so great a Glory by
personal Right, but Kingly Majesty? and who can accept of so great an
Affection, but the eye of Grace?

If these our Subsidies of Tonnage and Pondage, be of the kind of those
natural respects, which Love is desirous, and Loyalty does offer, to honor
our Sovereign by, besides his Customs; who can impose them but Loves own
Affection? who can esteem them but the hand of Mercy? and what can increase
them, but Cheerful alacrity in the Giuers Mind.

Lastly, if Tonnage and Pondage be those honorable Effects of Assection, Love
and Loyalty, which Merchants, exceeding their other Duties, with Joy present
and Mercy takes; who shall dedilate their proportions by Number, Weight, and
Measure, for the mutual behoof of Love and Grace? Who I say, can teach us
this part of our Lesson, but the Grauest and Wisest in Highest Authority,
namely, how to deal justly between the Sovereign and the Subject.

For Cheerfulness and Alacrity being inducements unto Grace, (the heart and
Essens of all Subsidies and Aids, as coldness in Affection makes Presents
little worth) whilst we sought to further, and by often returns at all hands
to increase, to our Patrons Honor, Hoc aute^ de quo nuuc agimus, id ipsum est
quam VTILE apellatur, in quo verbo, lapsa consuetude, deflexit deuia, ^oque
sensim deducta est, vt Honestate^ ab VTILITATE secernens; HONESTVM aliqud
constituerit quam non sit VTILE, and VTILE quam non sit HONESTYM: qua, nulla
pernities vita Hominum p^tuit afferri. Cicero Offic. Lib. 2.
and his Peoples Good, that Honestum and Vtile might still go together, by the
rules of Right and Reason: we are checked and Controld by Court-Rowles, and
Court-Rules, and taught to believe that Honesty in this case has naught to do
with Profit, Discretion commanding the most for the King: As if Honor here
were bootlesse and Meum and Tuum needless, or some idle thing, and Public
Utility were meant by Private Gain.

We contest in nothing, but every way willing and desirous still to learn; The
ground and occasions of Customers Disgrace.
our mild Disposiitions are scornd and despisd, our Truth is held for Error,
our Virtue Vice, and for crying but ADSIT REGVLA, We are dingd so like Barnes
that we dare not greet.

Our Adjuncts steed us nothing, but eat up our victuals, and spend at our
cost, or wrangle out Disorder by a greater Confusion, for our Socij by
Controlling, can teach but Actum agere; Our Praedes Ouer-seeing us, said
Halfers were good Fishers; Our Mancipes in Searching live best by pudled
Waters; and our Hushers at all hands cry the most for the King: So that, as a
Lord of a Manor that seeks to make his best by Servants of his own, having
Grounds most excellent, fertile and Good, forbids them still the Plough, and all
means besides of manuring their soyles, and observes no seasons: whereby their
wills wanting freedom to do their endeavors, they make none other yield then as
Nature affords. At the end of his harvest, falling out with his Servants, he
farms the lands unto Strangers, who nearest to themselves, first serve their
own turns, and in raising their Rents, by ploughing up the Dead mould, make
spoil of the Grounds: so fares it at this day with the Ploughmen and Fallowes
of the Fields of our Reuennues. And no marvel at al. For where things are past
over without Distinction of Times, Persons nor Place, whose ever be the fault,
the Actors next hand still bears all the blame.

For the Cause at first mistaken, and the Service being unknown, bred Error in
the Matter, and Confusion in the Form, whereof Ignorance taking hold, accuses
the Customer, as Actor next hand, and only bound for all. Necessity, for
relief, first fitly found out the use of a Searcher, but his looseness and
Liberty (ne quid apperius) made Iealousye and Suspicion devise a Comptrouller.
His needelesse and bootelesse calling, gave easy way to the four late
Super-viso^s, and their Braine-sicke Retinue, whose confident Presumption
combyned with Ignorance, made them undertake, as they knew not what, so to go
forward they cared not how by Opinion and Conceit, to cure all sents of Leekes
and Onions, by eating Garlic; the very smell whereof bred Offenses,
Contentions, and Complaints of the Persons.

Clodius accusat Moechum. Catilina Cethegum,
Quis tulerit Gracchos de seditione querentes.
The Mischiefs whereof, though Merchants and Customers divide cheefely
between them; the general Inconveniences, extend to the Sovereign, and all
loyal Subjects. By the Importance whereof, the Grave and Wise only in Highest
Authority, may be pleased to consider. Quam frustra fit per plura quam fieri
debet per pauciora: and remember withal: That none prove Saints for seeming so
to others,
Since all are but men, and all have sucked their Mothers.


For, Faults there are no doubt, ever were, and ever will be many, Perfection
knows no Residence but Heaven. And who says he has no Sin, shall prove the
greatest Liar.

But whilst our Huishers cry, the most for the King,
Couetise and Pride fall at odds each with other:
And Profit turning private, holds Honor for nothing,
Where Honestum and Vtile should still go together.
Qui Paria esse volunt peccata, Ipsique laborant,
Cum ventum ad verum est, Sensus moresque repugnant,
Atquee ipsa Vtilitas. Iusti prope Matter and Aequi.
All faults are made alike, yet they themselves are dumb,
When Truth in question falls, Each Finger seems a Thumb,
For as Honor wants a Place, so Mercy finds no room,
And Profit holds the Seat alone, where Just and Right should come
And now at last, as they that are not apt by discourse of Wit and Reason, to
believe that Fire is hot, best learn it by their feeling: Since Experience
makes it good, and the time has laid it open in the practice of others, that
our greatest Imputation, our supposed Sacrilege, our horrible sin, was our
greatest virtue, though Ignorance and Jealousy had no will to conceive it;
namely, since our four late Supervisors, that for 1700. pound a year, some
fourteen years together, undertook to mend the Bible, and correct
Magnificat, but left the Plough at last with shame enough to Farmers: And those
Farmors now themseldes, ploughing up the Dead-Mold of all our best Fallowes,
even for their own avail, are compeld to confess by their daily Bills of
Store. Fowring allowances, and other earms of Art, drawn from Necessity, that
Traffic must have favor: let Auditors declare it, and let Truth be heard to
speak. That God did put as much (if not more) Profit and Pleasure, besides
Hearts Ease and Honor for our Sovereigns own behoof, in the mild endeavors
of Customers (Deductis deducsendis) so long as they were trusted, by Favor and
Love; as the Devil is able and wont, and ever will be ready, to mingle Care
and Cumber, Loss and Shame, in the turbulent undertakings of Extremity and
shifts, for private Gain.

And since those Ethnicke Romans, Cicere. ad Q. Frat: Lib. 1.
by the only light of reason did hold it for their Glory, that in Tributis
exigendis their Publicans were found to be Gracis Leniores: Let not Christian
Policy come short of Infidelity, in Mildness and Mercy to their Neighbors
and Friends; but send away Extr^mity with all her fraud and shifts to their
native homes and residence. Let Italy have her Imposts, together with the
Stews; leave Tyrants to Obtrusion, and Extortion to the Jews: Send Pride to
the Pope, and the Mass away to Rome, with all kind of Usury, by way of
Flanders home. And help Kings to Bullion, that their Bounties may be known.
For as God by his Goodness makes al his Creatures happy; so Kings by their
Bounty and Staples of their own, at least in GREAT-BRITAINE, where BOVNTY now
commands. I mean at home still in England by English Staples; or else farewell
sweet Traffic, and with her farewell Customs, with whom farewell Justice, so
farewell Religion, and then fare well All.

Here the Customers of the Out-ports standing mute and amazed, like Ciphers in
August, or like to those Brick-makers that fometimes wrought in Egypt, groaning
for their Traffic, grieved for their Ports, and tired as it were like those
Spur-galde Souls of Purgatory, with the sternenesse of their Huishers and
Ignorant Adjuncts (that wrangle like Hetroclytes, Customers says before set
down, here show their Charity.
with the very Rules of Grammar) accusing no man, for that is the Deuilles
part, even from the beginning, nor at war with any, but sin and Dishonesty;
forgiving All, as they would be forgiven, and praying for the KING, for the
QVEENE, for the PRINCE, and All the ROYAL ISSVE; Their Devotion and Prayers.
praying for the Clergy, for the Nobles and the Commons of this Land. In a
word, praying for the Church and for the Co^monweal. And lastly for Themselves,
not presuming upon Merits, but by way of Apollogie, pray humbly to Obtain their
Soueraigns Grace and Favor; and withal, to be discharged of all former
Imputations laid by Ignorance and her Fellows; Namely, Jealousy, Hypocrisy,
Impudence, Malice, Envy, and Slander upon Them and their Callings. Their easy,
honest, and lawful Petition.
For by the Law of Nature and Nations both, Imputari non debet Ei^per Que^ non
stat, si non facit quod per Ipsum est faciendum. The reason being added
withal; Quia culpa caret, Qui scit and prohibere nequit.

In the mean time; Since nothing preuailes but the GOODNESS of GOD and BOVNTY
of KINGS, to make ALL in ALL, It is the Disorder of our TRAFFIC at this day,
that makes our RELIGION and JUSTICE, contest so together, shaking the most
happy foundations of Truth, in either. For if Probity fail in Actions, what
shall Piety perform in the Consciences of men? How shall Faith build up, if
Works pull down? Attend TRAFFIC therefore in time, and the unnatural Disputes
about Prohibitions will end.
happy:

Let TRAFFIC be relieved,
Of GOODNESS long depreeued,
And let TRVTH be still believed,
That SVBIECTS may be blist;
For TRAFFIC out of thrall,
Makes KINGS be seen of All,
(What e're to POPES befall)
And SOVEREIGNS to subsist.
Thus, Magna semper VERITAS praevaluit and praeualebit. And, Magna MAGNUS
perficit DEVS.

In MAGNIS voluisse sat est, sint coetera DIVVM.

THO: MILLES.


