MINVCIVS FELIX His dialogue called OCTAVIUS.

Containing a defense of Christian religion.

Translated by RICHARD JAMES of C. C. C. OXON.

OXFORD, Printed by LEONARD LICHFIELD, for Thomas Huggins. 1636.

TO MY LADY COTTON, Wife unto Sr ROBERT COTTON of Conington.
MADAME I have received many favors from you, and do in thankfulness
present unto your Ladishippe this my translation of Minutius Felix his dialogue
which consists of three speakers, M. Minucius Felix, Cecilius Natalis, and
Octavius Ianuarius. The one is judge, the other produces in a flourishing
oration all the arguments of the Gentiles against Christian religion, and the
third makes unto them such clear answer as I believe it will rejoice a
Christian reader to understand. Wherefore as the better sort of Greeks,
Romans, Italian, French and others have taken a pleasure to render unto their
own nation what they found worthy in other languages, I in this little piece
have followed their example, annecting unto it something of my own, for
nearenesse of subject, pray Madame let either have your acceptance, and know me

Your faithful servant RICHARD JAMES.

To the Reader.
Whosoever peruseth this little book or any other of ancient times, it
behooues him to use sobriety in his understanding, least he miscarry either in
doctrine or discipline. For example, Minutius says, the primitive Christians
had no Temples: you must not therefore collect, that we ought to worship God
only in fields or private houses. They had not indeed, Delubra, Temples of
Jdolatry: wherein the Gentiles used as Prudentius has it deasciato supplicare
stipiti to make their orizons to a piece of hewd timber, yet as it is apparent
out of all antiquity, they had according to the sufferance of times, (...)
houses built to the honor of our Lord and Savior, (...), Cathedral Churches:
(...), houses of prayer, oratories: (...) stately piles of building, in which
they did meet to solemnize the duties of Christianity, and to hear the
religious instructions of their prelates: More for the present I have not to
say. Let all things be done decently and in good order. This is a necessary
remembrance from the Apostle, and so I wish the health of body and mind.

M. MINVCIVS FELIX HIS OCTAVIUS.
COnsidering and calling to mind the memory of my good and most faithful
companion Octavius, I was possessed with so great a sweetness and affection of
the man, that I even seemed to return unto times past, and not only to
recollect our conversation by way of remembrance; the contemplation of him
being not so much withdrawn from my eyes, as it is enfolded in my breast, and
inmost senses. And certainly the worth of that excellent holy man was such, as
it must of necessity leave with me an infinite desire of him. He had a
flagrancie of love toward me, our wits bore consort as well for recreation as
business, and we ever willed and (...), the same things. You would have
thought us one soul divided into two bodies. He was alone private of my loves,
and companion of my errors; and when, the mist breaking out of profound
darkness, I did rise unto the light of wisdom, and truth, so far he was
from forsaking my society, as to his greater glory, he did run before, to
direct me the way. And when my thoughts had run over all the age of our
familiar acquaintance, the intention of my mind did more especially abide upon
that discourse of his, by which, in a most grave disputation, he did reform
unto true religion Cecilius then adhering to superstitious vanities. For cause
of business, and to see me, he had taken a journey to Rome, leaving his house,
wife and children, and that which is in children most lovely, their yet
^nnocent years, when they strive at half words, in a language more pleasing,
by the pretty breach of their tripping tongues. I cannot with words express
unto you, how this arrival of his did ravish me into an excess of gladness,
especially the unexpected presence of a most dear friend: Then after a day or
two, when frequent vsance had taken off the impatience of our desire, when we
had learned from mutual relation what we knew not of each other in time of
absence, we did agree to view Ostia, a most pleasant City, because for drying
up the humors of my body a fair and apposite cure it is, to walk by the
waves of the Sea. It was vacation from all judicial cares, by reason of the
Vintage; and the approaching of Autumn, did somewhat temper the air from
estival heat. So then upon break of day, when we went forth to pace upon the
shore, the air gently breathing vegetation to our members, and the soft sand
with a fine pleasure somewhat yielded to the impression of our feet, Cecilius
spying the image of Serapis, as superstitious people are wont to do, lifting
his hands unto his mouth, made them kiss his lips. Then spoke Octavius. It Is
not the part of a good man, brother Mark, so to neglect him who is always
both at home and abroad ever by your side; as that you should suffer him
through vulgar blindness, in clear day to stumble at stones, howsoever they
be shaped into image, smoothed with oil, and crowned with flowers; when you
know that the infamy of such error, does no less fall on you then him. And
with such discourse of his, having passed over half the space of the City,
we had now gotten upon the open shore, where the gentle wave, as if it took
pleasure to strew us a fair walk, did level the outward sands: The Sea when
the winds are all laid, is nevertheless restless in it self, and although it
came not on, with white foaming billows, yet had they a curled wallowing
course. There wandering up and down, we did much solace our selves, and did
endanger the ouerflowing of our feet, in the brinck of the Sea, which would
play up her waves, and again ^lyding back, receive them into her own bosom.
So in a stealing quiet pace making forward, we forgot our way with discourse,
along the easy bending of the shore; and this discourse was, a narration of
Octavius, opening the course of navigation. But when we had thus talked out a
sufficient journie, turning our steps, we did again pace over the same way.
And when we came unto the place where little boats drawn up from the water
lay on rowlers, to preserve them from occasion of rotting, we saw Children
sportfully contending who should skeere shells farthest upon the top of the
Sea. The sport is to gather up from the shore a round shell, smoothen. with
the beating of the wanes, and taking of it flat in their fingers to make long
circling ejaculations upon the water, the shell razing, gliding, or leaping
there, so long as it has force of motion; and that child bears the victory
whose shell does glide farthest, or leap more often. When therefore all of us
were taken with the pleasure of this spectacle, Cecilius only intended nothing,
neither would he laugh to see this contention of the children, but by silence
anxietie and by-walking, also in his very visage he seemed afflicted with
something which we knew not. Then quoth I, what is this matter? why do we not
find in Cecilius his wonted alacrity? why do we not see that cheerful
countenance which he uses to preserve in times of greater residue? Then he
replied, I have indeed been a good while bitterly vexed, and bitten with our
Octavius his words, when invectiuely he reproved you of negligence, that he
might more cunningly put on me the greater scorn of ignorance. Therefore I
will go farther. I have to do with Octavius upon the whole subject, if he be
willing to dispute it with me, who am a man of that sect which he so much
under values. Surely he will quickly know how far more easy it is to prate
amongst Gossips, then to try his wisdom with a man of an opposite
understanding. Then on this terrace of rocks, made to defend the incursion of
the sea from the bathes, let us sit down, that we may both rest from our
journey, and the better intend our disputation. He had no sooner spoken the
word, but we sat down. I in the midst, ambitiously protected with them on
either side, not by way of obsequiousness, order, or honor, (since freindship
does find or make equality amongst men) but as an Vmpire, the better to hear
both, and to keep two earnest disputants asunder. Then Cecilius thus began.
Although brother Marcus those things of which we shall make inquiry, seem not
to you ambiguous, who having been diligently conversant in both kinds of life,
have refused the one, and approved the other, nevertheless for the present,
you are so to order your mind, that you like an equal judge, hold the skales,
propensive unto neither side, least the sentence you shall pass, rather
proceed from your own apprehension then the force of our arguments. Wherefore
if you sit here as a stranger, and ignorant of either party, it will be no
business to show, that all things amongst men are doubtful, uncertain,
pendulous, and rather probable then true, to the less wonder of many, who
weary in the clear search of truth, rather quickly yield to any opinion, then
persevere in a pertinacious diligence, to find it out. Wherefore with
indignation or pity we ought to look on some; who vnstudied, illiterate,
uncunning in all arts but sordid, dare peremptorily decree maxims of Divine
Majesty, wherein Philosophy it self, through so many ages and variety of
sects can but yet deliberate: And not without cause; since humane mediocrity,
is so far from reaching Divine things, as those things which are above us in
heaven suspended and sublimated, or hid in the profundity of the earth beneath
us, no ability have we to know, it is not permitted to search, neither religious
to question. And enough happy, and enough prudent, we may deservedly be
accounted, if according to the old Oracle of wisdom, we be familiar in the
knowledge of our selves. But since over indulgent to a mad vain curiosity,
we will needs wander beyond the limits of our mean condition, and transcend
with a bold desire even heaven and the stars themselves, let us see whether
we may a little stay this error with an earnest and undaunted disquisition. If
the seeds of the elements do naturally come together, and condensa^^
themselves, why must God be here an author? If by casual concursion, the
members of the universe do join, are digested, and formed, why must Divinity
contriue the work? If fire kindle the stars, and the celestial matter
sublime it self, if the earth have foundation in his own weight, and the sea
flow out of moisture, why is this religion, this fear, this superstition? Man
and every creature that is borne, has his being from breath and nourishment;
this is the voluntary concretion of the elements into which man and every
creature else is divided, dissolved, and scattered. So all things return into
the fountain of themselves, with a natural revolution, without artificer,
judge, or author. So we every day see new Suns, from the elementarie seeds of
fire collected together, new clouds, growing from the exhaled vapors of the
earth; these rise, thicken, and coagulate in the air, then with their own
weight fall down into flux of rain, blast of wind, and storm of hail, or in
collision make rolling claps of thunder, flashes of lightning; and if boults
fly out, they fall any where, rush on mountains, bear down trees, touch
Temples no less then profane houses, strike impious men, and often the most
religious. What shall I speak of tempests alike various and uncertain,
without order, without examination, hurling impetuously where they light. In
shipwreck alike destiny mixeth the good with the bad, and confounds their
merits; fire discernes not the innocent from the guilty, and when any tract of
heaven is infected with pestilent contagion, all die without difference. When
the fury of war rages, the best people fall soonest, also in peace many
times wickedness is not only equaliz'd but exalted above virtue, and in many
wicked, a man knows not whether he should more hate their impiety, or bless
their fortune. But if the world were governed by Divine providence and
authority, never should Phalaris and Dionysius merit a kingdom, Rutilius and
Camilius be rewarded with banishment, and Socrates with poison. Behold the
trees laden with fruit, the fields white unto the harvest, these and the
full-growne vintage are corrupted with showers, or beaten down with hail. So
is truth either hidden and kept to us uncertain, or, that which is most
credible from these diverse lubricities of chance, fortune free from all laws
does seignorize the world. When therefore either fortune is certain, or nature
uncertain, how much better is it, and more venerable, to receive the
discipline of our Ancestors for tradition of truth, observe the religions left
us by them, to adore those Gods, which thy Parents have from thy youth
familiarly taught thee to fear and know, then to sit in judgment upon the
Gods. Let us believe our first Parents, who ye^ in the simple infancy of the
world, did deserve to have the Gods, or their Princes more favorable unto
them. And by this means through all Empires, Provinces, Cities, we see them
have their several national sacred rites, and to worship their municipall
Gods the Eleusinians C^^es, the Phrygians, the great Mother, the Epidaurians
Aesculapius, the Chaldeans Belus, the Syrians Astarte, the Tauricians Diana,
the Gauls Mercury, the Romans all. So has their power and authority subdued
the circumference of the whole world, propagated their Empire beyond the course
of the Sun, and limits of the Ocean; Whilst with their arms they exercise a
religious virtue; whilst they fortitifie the city with sacred religions,
chaste Virgins, many honors and titles of Priesthood: whilst beseiged, and all
taken but the Capitol, they still worship those Gods, which some would in anger
have despised, and through the troops of the Gauls, wondering at their bold
superstition, they pass naked of weapons, but armed with a worship of
religion: whilst now captive in their own hostile walls, and victory pursuing
execution on them, they still reverence their conquered Deities; whilst from
every quarter they seek foreign Gods, and make them their own: whilst they
set up altars to unknown Gods, and spirits, and do entertain the sacred
ceremonies of all nations, they deserved their Empire. This perpetual course
of religion has hitherto remained, not broken with antiquity but increased.
For age uses to give to ceremonies and temples so much more sanctity, as they
have augmentation of years. Neither yet, (for I dare here yield to make the
search, and so err with more authority) did our ancestors in searching
entralls, ordaining rites, or dedicating temples, rashly spend their labor.
View the memory of books, and you shall quickly find, that they did initiate
themselves into the rites of all religions, either to gratify divine favor,
to divert imminent anger of the Gods, or to assuage it being in full rage, and
fury. Witness the Jdean mother, which at her arrival approved the chastity of
a Matrone, and did free the city from hostile fear. Witness the consecrate
statues of Castor, and Pollux, as they showed themselves in the lake, their
horses all in a heat panting and foming, when they reported our victory over
Perses, the same day he was overcome. Witness the iteration of the great
plays in the Circus, to reconcile the offense of Jupiter, according to the
dream of a vulgar Citizen. Witness the ratified devotion of the Docians; and
witness Curtius, who with leaping himself down on horseback, into the
swallow of a prodigious deep gulf, made it again fill up. And more often
then we would, our contempts of augurie, have made manifest the presence of
the Gods. Thence is the name of Allia dismal, thence did Claudius, and Iunins,
in their sea-^ight with the Carthaginians, suffer a cruel shipwreck. And to
make the river Thrasymene ^un high and discolored with our blood, Flaminius
contem^ned the prediction of the ^irdes: and to make us new work for the
recovering our Ensigns from the Parthians, Crassus did scorn, and deserve the
Priests holy impreca^ions. I omit many antique memories, of the birthes,
gifts, and munificence of the Gods, I neglect the Poets songs, I pass over
many destinies foretold by Oracles, least antiqui^ie may seem unto you
ouer-fabulous. Behold the Temples, and statuary houses of the Gods, with which
the City of Rome is protected, and beautified: they are more glorious and
rich in dressing and gifts, then venerable with their Deities, dwelling,
abiding, and ever ready for present help in them. From thence Prophets full of
God, and participating the divine nature, gather predictions of things to come,
forewarne evile, give cures for diseases, hope to the afflicted, solace in
calamities case in labors: also in our steep there, we see the Gods, we hear
them, we acknowledge their presence: how soon o^ in the day we deny, violate
thee honors, and forswear b^ them. Therefore when in all nations there
remains a firm confession of the immortal^ Gods, although their cause and
original be uncertain, I can brook no man, who puffed up with I know not what
bold irreligious wisdom, dare attempt to dissolve and elevate this religion
of ours so old, so useful, so preserving humane society. Away with Theodore
of Cyrene, and with Diagoras Melius before him, upon whom antiquity puts the
name of Atheist, both which in their doctrine of no Gods, took away all the
reverent fear and awfulnesse, ^y which mankind is governed. These men in their
discipline of impiety, although ^hey dissemble Philosophy, shall never be
reputed with ^e. When the Athenians did banish out of their territories,
Protagoras of Abdera, who disputed rather indiscreetly then profanely of
Divinity, and did in their assembly burn his writings; (you will suffer me to
prosecute my undertaken action with a free zeal) must not we mourn to behold
men, men I say of an incurable, illegal, and desperate faction, so to forage
upon the Gods? who with a collection of people drawn from utter baseness, and
with credulous women easily falling in the imbecillitie of their sex,
institute a route and profane conspiracy, which in their nocturnall
congregations, by solemn fasts, and inhumane feasts, things not of Sacramen^
but expiation do league together, a lurking and light avoiding nation, full of
prate in Corners, and dumb in fair assemblies. They despise our Temples as
graves, they spit upon the Gods, and deride our sacred Ceremonies. If a man may
speak it, these miserable creatures with pity behold the honors of our
Priests, and half naked scorn our Purple. O their wonderful and incredible
bold foolerie. In fear of uncertain future torments they despise all present,
and here they fear not to die, for fear of dying after death. So does fear
and false hope flatter them into a comfort of living again. And now as evil
things grow in greatest abundance, pernicious manners creeping in, these men
have gained every where in the world terrible assemblies of their impious
combination, a combination accursed and to be plucked up by the very roots.
They know themselves by secret marks and tokens, they are in love almost
before they know one another, and promiscuous lust is with them a kind of
religion, for they are all brothers and sisters, so that by intercession of so
holy a name, common fornication must of necessity be with them incest. So does
this vain mad superstition glory in being criminal. Neither would wise
discerning common fame, (if there were no subsistencie of truth) report these
horrid things of them, things not to be uttered without a preface of honor to
the hearers. I hear that amongst all filthy beasts, from what persuasion I
know not, they worship an Asses head, like worship like manners. Others report
that they worship their Prelates and Priests privy members, adoring the nature
of their spiritual Parents. Peradventure this suspicion may be false, yet it
well agrees with a secret nocturnall solemnity. But those which say their
worship to be a man put to death for criminal demerit, and that they worship
the horrid similitudes of his cross, these fit those wicked lost people with
alters in a good congruitie, making them adore that which they deserve. Now of
receiving new comers into their sect, the report is not so detestable as
notorious. An Infant is covered over in meal to deceive the Novice, and set
before him, then is he provoked as it were with harmless strokes to stab into
the meal, and so by concealed wounds the Infant is killed. O horridness! this
Infants blood they lick up, and divide his members amongst them; with this
sacrifice they are imbrued into a league, and by the guilt of murder give
pledge unto mutual secrecy. If this be sacred, what is sacrilegious? And the
manner of their feasting is well known, all men every where report it, and it
is famous in the Oration of our Certensian Fronto, upon a solemn day they come
together to feast, with all their children, sisters, mothers, people of all
sexes, and all ages. There after much gluttony, when the banquet is warm, and
the fervencie of incestuous lust is set on fire with wine, a dog tied to the
candlestick, is by scraps cast beyond the length of the line wherewith he is
bound, provoked to leap impetuously forth, and then the discovering light being
ouerturn'd and extinguished, each takes his fortune in the impudent darkness,
wherewith to satiate their abominable appetite, and so are they all if not in
deed, yet inconscience alike incestuous, all desiring that which is by any
acted. Advisedly I pass by many things, since what already is related is more
then should be, true in all, or the greatest part, as a man will easily
believe from the obscurity of this impious religion. For why should they
otherwise strive with all diligence, to hide and keep secret that whatsoever
it be which they worship. Sins reserve themselves, and things honest rejoice
in the public view of men. Why have they no altars, no temples, no known
images of their worship? Why dare they not speak openly, and make their
Congregations freely, except that which they worship and conceal so narrowly
were either a matter of punishment or shame. Or from whence, who, or where is
he, their only solitary and destitute Deity, whom no free nation, no
Empires, no Roman superstition ever heard of? The miserable tribes of the
Jews, they indeed, and they alone worship one God, but they do it openly with
temples, altars, sacrifices, ceremonies; whose vigor notwithstanding and power
is so nothing, that the Roman Gods have taken him captive with all his nation.
And what monsters, what prodigies do the Christians feign? That God whom they
can neither show nor see, they make inquisitiue into all the manners of men,
all the deeds, yea even into the very words and secret thoughts of all, posting
every where, and every where present. They will have him troublesome, unquiet
and impudently curious, standing by at all acts, intererrant in all places,
when no sufficiency straind with a universal care can intend the service of
every particular, nor distracted with particulars can suffice for an universal
preservation. Why, and to the whole earth, even to the Heavens also and the
Stars they threaten a combustion, and prepare a ruin, as if the eternal
order of nature appointed by Divine laws might ever be troubled, or the
league of all the Elements broken, and the heavenly frame divided, all this all
in whose continent and embracing circle we have our being, should be
subverted. Nor contented with this furious opinion they hang and knit unto it
other old wives fables; how they shall be borne anew after death, when they
are ashes and cinders; and I know not with what belief they assure themselves
in their lies; to hear all, you would think they were all ready in a
resurrection. A pernicious evil fancy, and a double madness! they denounce
utter confusion to the Heavens and Stars, which we leave as we find, and to
themselves dead and extinct, for as we are borne we dye, they again promise
eternity. And for this reason they hold funeral fires in sepulture a damnable
execration; as if our bodies although saved from flames, should not with years
and ages be dissolved into earth; as if it were a thing material, whether the
beasts of the Forests did tear, or the fishes of the sea consume, or the
earth cover, or the fire subdue our dead carcasses; when any sepulture, if we
did feel, were still a punishment, and if we feel nothing, then must a
flaming burial be in her celerity the best cure of rottenness. So deceived
with this error, to themselves good men when they are dead they promise
perpetuity of life, and to others as impious, sempiternall torments. Much here
might be added; but I will hasten my discourse, having already sufficiently
declared that even they themselves are the most unrighteous people. Nay if we
should also grant them the title of righteousness, you or the greatest part of
you agree in sentence, that innocence of life or guiltiness ought to be
imposed upon a kind of destiny. For whatsoever we do, as some addict the
cause to destiny, you lay it upon God, and use to say, that your sect receives
not voluntary but the elect? Wherefor^ you must needs have an unjust Judge,
which does punish in men not their will, bu^ fortune. Yet I would fain^ learn
of you, whether we^ must come to this your resurrection without our body or
with our bodies, and wit^ what bodies, the same, o^ with some innovation o^
them? If without the bodies, for all that I know, out of a body, there is
neither mind, nor soul, nor life: if with the body, is not that already
moultered away? With another body? Then is there a new man borne, and the
former not repaired: and yet in the flux and course of so many hundred years
and ages, what one with the earnest fortune of Protesilaus has returned from
any infernal treasuries of death, with permission of some few hours new
liuely-hood, that we might believe resurrection by example. All these figments
of braine-sicke opinion, and these foolish comforts, sported out by deceitful
Poets in a sweetness of verse, you in an over-credulity have taken up a new,
and skervily imposed them upon your own God. Neither will you learn
experience from your own present sufferings: In them you might see with what
vain hope these promises feed their belieuers, and you might deem by the
misery of your life what were more probable after death. Behold the greatest
part of you and the better as you say are cold and hungry, you have no wealth,
you pine with want and famine; and does God suffer this, does he dissemble, or
will he not, or can he not help his good people? He is then disable, or
unjust. Thou which do dream of an immortality after thou art laid in the
grave, when with danger thou art shaken into a cold fear, when thou do
burn in a fever, when thou art tormented with pain, do thou not then
feel thine own condition, do thou not acknowledge thy fragility? Alas
poor miserable man, infirmity thus convincing thee against thy will, yet no
confession! But these are common miseries. See terrors upon you, executions,
tortures, and now you must undergo the Cross, not worship it, you must also
be burnt up in fire, which you foretell and fear. Where is the God, who will
help you to live again, can he not save you alive? Do not the Romans
without your God sway their Empire, command and enjoy the whole world, and
domineere over you? You in the mean while pensive and sorrowful, abstain
from honest pleasures, you come not to any spectacles, are not present at our
pompes and triumphs, our public feasts are without your company, our meats
and drinks offered at the Altars you abhor, and all our sacred sportes, and
so seem to fear those Gods you deny. You weaue no wreathes of flowers for
your heads, you honor not your body with sweet perfumes, but reserve their
unction for funerals, which nevertheless you refuse to adorn with garlands;
pale chivie people, and deserving pity, but the pity of our Gods. Miserable
men, you do not yet rise again to life, and in the mean while you live not.
Wherefore if you have in you any wisdom or shame, leave of searching the
regions of Heavens with their fatalities and secrets. It Is enough for you to
look before your feet, especially being unlearned, unpolished, rude and
rusticke. They to whom is not given power of understanding civil things, must
of necessity be farther disable for disquirie of things Divine. Also if any of
you lust after Philosophy, the best of you may if he can, imitate Socrates the
very Prince of wisdom, whose known answer it is when he was at any time
demanded of celestial matters, that which is above us is to us nothing, and
therefore worthily did he from the Oracle receive the testimony of singular
wisdom, which he before aprehended of himself, tha^ he was therefore
preferred before all others, not because he had comprehended al^ things, but
because he had learned that he knew nothing. So is chief wisdom the
confession of our own vnskilfullnesse. And from this fountain did flow the
secure ambiguity of Arcesilas, Carneades much after him, and of the greatest
sort of the Academickes in questions of high nature, and in this kind the
unlearned may safely, and the learned gloriously play the Philosophers. The
slownesse also of the Melian Simonides is it not admirable and worthy to be
followed? Who when he was asked by the Tirant Hieron of what essence and
quality he supposed the Gods to be, required first a ^ay of deliberation, the
next ^ay following got a proroga^ion of two days more, and again a like
addition to that, and then when at last the Ti^ant enquired the causes of so
great delay, made answer, ^he more time he spent in the ^nquisition, the
more obscure did this truth appear unto him. And in my opinion things
doubtful are to be left as we find them; neither in a deliberation of so
many, and so great persons, may we without empeachment of temerity and
boldness bring in our judgment on either side, for fear least we either
destroy all religion, or induce for worship old wives superstitions. Thus spoke
Cecilius, and then smiling, (for the flux of a long oration had allayed the
tumor of his disdain) to these things said he, what reply dares Octavius, a
man of Plautus like progeny, of bakers the first, and the last of
Philosophers? I said, forbear to sport on him, for you do not worthily to
triumph in concinnity of speech, before he has fully ended his declaration on
the other side, especially when your enquiry aims not at praise but truth. And
allthough your oration has wonderfully delighted me with the subtle variety
of it, yet I consider deeply not only for this action, but for the whole kind
and manner of disputation, that many times, by the ability and power of the
disputants eloquence, even things of clear truth seem to change their
condition. This is well known to happen by the easiness of the hearers, who
seduced with a delicacy of words are taken off from an intention of the things,
assenting without examination to all that is spoken; not discerning false
things from right, and unwitting, that truth may be in that which seems
incredible, and falsehood in the greatest appearance of truth. Therefore the
more often they believe earnest assertions, more frequently are they again
convinced by skillful men, and daily beguild through their own rashness,
transfer the fault of judgment into a complaint of uncertainty, and at last
condemning all things, had rather suspect any thing, then put themselves to the
difficulty of judging, whether things be false or no. Wherefore we must have
a provident care least with such we run into a hatred of all enquiries, and
at last break forth as do many of the more simple sort, into an execration
and hate of men also. For these vnheedfull credulous people when they are
circumuented by those whom they esteemed good men, for fear of a like error
now suspecting all things, distrust those as wicked also, whom otherwise they
could approve for persons of excellent goodness. Since then in every matter
there be who dispute on both sides, and truth is most often obscure on the
best, on the other lurkes wonderful subtilty, which often with a copiousnesse
of eloquence does imitate the certainty of plain evidence, it behooues us to
ponder all with diligence, so as we may give subtle argumentation her due
praise, yet make choice of those things which are right, them only approve and
entertain. You depart says Cecilius, from the office of a fair judge. For it
is very injurious for you to infringe the force of my action with interposing
so grave a disputation, when Octavius is yet entire and unblemished in what he
shall reply. If that, say I, which you have in your declamation made so foul
can be refuted, then is this remembrance of mine brought in briefly for the
common good of us all, that we may deliver our judgment from an exact
examination, not swayed with blastes of eloquence, but with the solidity of the
things themselves. Neither will I any longer stay our intention as you
complain, since if you please to give a fair silence, you may soon hear the
answer of our Ianuarius, who seems with joy to prepare himself. And then
Octauius: I will, says he, speak according to my ability, and use all my
strength, yet must you endeavor with me to wash of with a flood of true words
his most bitter aspersion of contumelious reproaches. And without dissimulation
first of all I must say, that my Natalis has not delivered his opinion with
constancy, it has erred, it has flowen out, bin ready many times to slip
from it self. For he varies sometimes in a belief of the Gods, sometimes in
a deliberation, peradventure to the end that by the uncertainty of his
proposition, the intention of our reply might with the less certainty come
home unto him. But I will have no craft in my Natalis, I do not believe it,
cunning trade wit is far from his simplicity. How then? As he that knows not
the right way, when he comes where the way parts into diverse turnings, he
stands doubtful, dares not choose any, nor approve all; so he who has no
stable judgment of truth, dissipates and scatters his doubtful mind with
infidelity of suspicions. No miracle therefore if Cecilius be also tossed,
tided, and waved up and down, in so many repugnant contrarieties. From which
to set him safe I will convince and reprove all his diversenesse with a
discourse that shall accept no proof or confirmation but from truth only, he
shall no more doubt, no more wander. And because my brother broke forth to say,
how ill he took it, how he did stomach, disdain and grieve, that illiterate
poor ignaroes should dispute of celestial things, let him know that all men
of what age soever, sex or dignity, are begotten capable, and able of reason
and sense, and have not by fortune, but nature an endowment of wisdom: and
that Philosophers themselves or whosoever by invention of arts hate attained
famous memory, before by the solertiousnesse of their mind they got this
glory, were in appearance illiterate, halfe-naked Plebeians; that wealthy men
even staked unto their riches, do rather consider gold then Heaven: and that
these our poor men have found out wisdom, and delivered all discipline to
posterity. Whence it appears, that wit is not an escheat of wealth, not
compassed by study, but proceeding from the very information of the mind. Nor
are we therefore to chafe or greiue, if any man whosoever he be, do search
after divine things, conceive, and open his sentence: when not the authority of
him that argues, but still the truth of the disputation is to be required: and
by how much the speech is the more unskillful, so much more illustrious is the
reason, not varnisht with a pomp and grace of eloquence, but sustained as it
ought to be, by the rule of right. Neither do I refuse that which Cecilius
labors to obtain, that a man ought to know himself, and roundly consider,
what he is, whence he is, why he is, whether concrete of elements, compact of
attomes, or rather made, fashioned and animated by God; which we cannot try and
make evident without an inquisition of the whole universe; when things here are
so coherent, knit and chained together, as if you do not diligently examine
the reasons of of divinity, we cannot kindly learn the condition of humane
nature, neither may a man fairly handle civil affairs, except he know the
common city of the world in which all have fellowship: especially, because from
wild and tame beasts we only differ in this, that they grovelling and turning
to the earth, are borne to look after nothing but their food; we to whom an
erect countenance, and an aspect for the view of heaven is given, besides
speech and reason, by which we acknowledge God, we feel and resemble him,
must not here have leave of ignorance? when also a celestial brightness is
every where obvious to our eyes and senses, and it seems to me a crime no
less then the greatest sacrilege, to seek on earth that which we ought to
find in heaven. What mind, sense, eyes can we suppose in them, who will have
the beauty of this world not perfected by divine providence, but transformed
into a globe by an infinity of pieces casually tumbling together. For what can
be so open, so credible, so clear, when thou liftest thy eyes to heaven, and
do consider the glories of that high circumference, as that there must needs
be some Deity of most excellent spirit, by which all nature has her
inspiration, motion, nutrition, and government? See heaven it self, how far
it is extended, how swiftly it is rolled about, see the night diaperd with
stars, see the day made illustrious with the Sun. Is not here a miraculous
divine libration of the great Master? Look upon the year how it is made by
the Suns circling progress, look on the Moon how it wheels about the
month in an increase, waine, and last quarter: what shall we say to the
interchanging vicissitude of darkness and light, to make us an eternal
reparation of work and rest? And to Astrologers we must leave a more ample
contemplation of the stars, how they govern the course of navigation, or
direct the seasons of plowing and harvest. All which things do not only
require a perfect wisdom and great artificer, for their creation, being,
order, but also a mighty power of wit and industry, to conceive, discover, and
understand them. The order of times distinguished with a constant variety of
fruits, does not this testify the author and parent of it? The spring with
his flowers, the summer with his harvest, the welcome maturity of autumn, and
the olive shaking winter are all of equal necessity. Which order would easily
be confounded, if it did not consist in great wisdom. And it is also great
providence, that winter alone does not burn with her frost, or summer alone
does not scortch with heat, to insert a middle temperament of autumn and
spring; that the changes of the year returning in her own trace, may slide
about in a secret inoffensiue revolution. Go to the sea, the law of the shore
bounds it. View all the trees that be, they have their vegetation from the
bowels of the earth, behold the Ocean, there is reciprocal estuation of her
floods, see the fountains, they spring from everlasting veins, look unto the
rivers, they glide along their wonted banks. What shall I say of the steep
mountains, the windeing hills, and the broad fields, how aptly they are
disposed. What shall I tell you the diverse sorts of defense which creatures
have one against another? some armed with horns, other with teeth, vnderlayd
with hoofes, and eared with sharp bristles: or free in the swiftness of
feet, and flight of wings. But most of all does the beauty of our shape show
God to be the artificer, a straight standing, an erect countenance, eyes
placed above, as in a watch tower, and all the other senses ranged as it were
for the guarde of a castle. It Is long to go through every part: there is no one
member of a man which is not as well for cause of fairness, as necessity. And
that which is more wonderful, though we have all the same figure, yet is there
in singular persons such a deflexion of the lineaments, that we appear all
alike, and all disalike compared one with another. The condition of our birth,
the desire of procreation, is not this from the will of God, Who makes breasts
in the maturation of the infant to fill with milk, with whose plenty the
tender youngling may be fosterd up? Neither does God only take care for the
whole world, but also for every part. Britany something defective in the Sun,
is refresh't with the warmth of the sea, flowing round about it. Nilus tempers
the drought of Egypt, Euphrates husbands Mesopotamia, Indus is reported to sow
and water the East. If you come into a house, and see the excellent culture,
order, and ornaments of it; you cannot but think some Master rules there much
better then all the furniture. So in this house of the world, when you see the
heavens and the earth, their providence, order, and law; believe there is a
Lord of this universe, and a Father more excellent then the Stars, and all
the parts of it. Except peradventure, because there is no question of
providence, you will think it a matter of enquiry, whether the celestial
kingdom be governed by the Empire of one, or the will and pleasure of many;
which thing it is not much labor to open unto a man, who will conceive the
nature of Empires on earth, which likely have their example from heaven. When
did society of Empire here either begin with faith, or end without blood? I
omit the Persians inaugurating principality by the neighing of horses, and I
pass over the almost forgotten fable of the Theban brothers. The story and
contention of Romulus and Remus for a kingdom of sheepeheards, and a cottage,
is well known. The wars of the Father and Son in law, are spoken of
through the whole world, and the fortune of so great an Empire, could not
satisfy these two. See the rest. There is one King of the Bees, one leader
among the flocks, one chief in the heardes: and can you think the great
principality of heaven to be divided, and the whole power of the true divine
Empire, to be cut in sunder? when it is apparent that God the parent of all
things has neither beginning nor ending: which gives nativity to all,
perpetuity to himself: which was before the world a world of contemplation to
himself, who by his word commandes a being to all things that are, by an
infinite reason, and virtue disposes and perfects the universe. He cannot be
seen, for our eyes cannot endure his brightness; he cannot be comprehended,
he is too pure for our feeling; he cannot be brought into estimation, he is
greater then our senses; infinite, immense, and only to himself so great, as
he only knows. our breast is too narrow to understand him: and therefore we
can only deem worthily of him when we say he is inestimable. I will speak
what I think. Who weenes to know the greatness of God, does diminish it, he
that will not diminish it, must confess himself ignorant of it. Neither ask
you the name of God, God is the name. There words of appellation are useful,
where a multitude is to be severally known one from another, by their proper
Heraldrie. To God who is alone, the whole title is God: whom if I shall call
Father, you may think him earthly: if King, you may suspect him carnal: if
Lord, you may also apprehend him mortal. Take away these accidents of names,
and you shall better see his glory. All men's consent is of him. I hear the
people when they lift up their hands to Heaven, say nothing but, God: and God
is great, and God is true, and if God permit; is this the speech of an ordinary
Plebeian, or the prayer of a Christian confessing his belief? And they who
will have Jupiter Prince of heaven they are deceived in the name but they agree
upon the unity of power. Also I hear the Poets preaching one Father of Gods
and men: and making the minds of all mortal men such only, as it pleases God
the Father of all things to infuse. Whence the Mantuan Maro plainly, nearly
and truly, where he says, -- First Heaven and earth and every part beside --
Are with an inward spirit fed -- and an infused mind -- does stir them up,
with every kind of creatures. The same in another place does call this mind
and spirit God. -- For the Godhead is -- diffused through ^arth through seas
and lofty kyes, -- From hence all beasts and men, all showers and fires. And
what other thing do we preach God to be, but a mind, a reason, a spirit?
Let us rehearse if you please the learning of the Philosophers. You shall find
them although in a diverse way, conspiring to deliver the same doctrine. I omit
those of antique ruder times, who for their sayings were reputed wise men. Let
Thales Milesius be the first who disputed of things celestial. He said that
water was the beginning of things, and God that mind which formed all things
out of water, a mind too high and sublime for humane apprehension, proceeding
from God. See the principal Philosophers opinion altogether consonant with
ours. A naximenes afterward, and then the Apollonian Diogenes make the air
God, infinite and without measure, here is also their consent of divinity. In
Anaxagoras his description, a kind of infinite mind is called God. To
Pythagoras God is a spirit passing and intentive through the whole nature of
things, from which the life of all creatures is taken. Xenophanes will have God
to be a mind, and all besides that is infinite. Antisthenes has many popular
Gods, but for a natural chief God he knows one only. Spousippus will have
God to be a natural, animating vigor, by which all things are governed. And
Democritus although he be the first inventor of atoms, yet usually he calls
God, that nature and intelligence which does power forth so many images of it
self. Straton also deifies nature. And that Epicurus who faines the Gods
either idle or none, yet gives he a supremacy to nature. Aristotle is various,
yet he designs one power; sometimes he says the mind is God, on while the
world, and again he makes God ouerseer of the world. Also the Pontick
Heraclides ascribes unto God a divine mind though diversely. Theophrastus,
Zenon, Crysippus and Cleanthes, they be also diverse, yet they all agree upon a
unity of providence. In Cleanthes disputation, sometimes the mind, sometimes
the spirit, sometimes the ethereall part is God. Zenon his master will have a
natural divine law, or that ethereall part, and sometimes reason, to be the
beginning of all things. The same man interpreting Juno to be the air, Jupiter
the heavens, Neptune the sea, Vulcan the fire, and likewise showing the other
Gods of the people, to be the Elements, does shrewdly convince and reprove the
public error. Chrysippus almost after the same manner belieues a divine
virtue, a rational nature, the world sometimes, and sometimes a fatal
necessity, to be God: and he follows Zenon, in a natural interpretation upon
the Poems of Hesiod, Homer, and Orpheus. The Babilonian Diogenes also has a
way of expounding and showing that the birth of Jupiter, the rising of Minerua,
import things and not Deities. For the Socraticall Xenophon denies that the
form of the true God can be seen, and therefore ought not to be sought after.
Aristo of Chios says, he cannot be comprehended. Both these conceived a divine
Majesty by their despair of understanding it. Platoes discourse of God is more
clear, both for things and names, and it were indeed all heavenly, but that
he does sometimes debase it with mixture of a civil politic persuasion.
Wherefore in his dialogue of Timaeus, God is to him under that name the parent
of the world, the maker of the soul, the builder of all things both in Heaven
and in earth; and he tells us in his preface, that it is hard to find him, by
reason of his infinite incredible power, and when he is found, no less
impossible to make a public declaration of him. These are almost the same
things with ours: For we acknowledge a God, call him the parent of all things,
and except we be demanded, we use not to make any vulgar speech of him. I
have opened the opinions of the most famous Philosophers, all agreeing for one
God, although under diverse names: so as many would deem, either the Christians
to be now Philosophers, or the Philosophers to have been then Christians.
Wherefore if the world be so ruled by providence, and governed by the pleasure
of one God, the antiquity of ignorant people delighted and taken with their
own fables, ought not draw us to a public consent of error, refuted by the
judgment of their own Philosophers, who have on their side both reason and
the authority of more ancient times. For our Ancestors did so easily give
credence unto lies, as they did without examination take up into their belief
many other prodigious miracles, the diverse shaped monsters of Scilla and
Chimera, a Hidra happy to renew his heads by cutting off, Centaures, that is,
Horses bearing upward the shapes of men: and whatsoever fame pleased to fancy,
they delighted to hear. What shall I speak of those Grandame tales, men
turned into birds, wild beasts into men, men into trees and flowers? which
things if they were done, those things were done which are impossible and
therefore were they never acted. And in like manner our Ancestors with an
improuident credulity, and rude simplicity did take Gods into their belief,
whilst religiously they worship their Kings, when after their death they
desire to see them in image, when they rejoice to detain their memories in
statue, these solaces did in time grow to a holy solemnity. And every where
before the world was open to commerce, when nations had not yet mingled their
customs, every province, did worship their founder, or renowned Captain, or
chaste Queen valiant above her sex, or any others, who had found out benefit,
or art, as citizens worthy of remembrance. So the dead had a reward and the
living an example. Read the writings of Historians, you will then confess with
me Gods created for merit of virtue or invention. Euhemerus pursues and numbers
their birthes countries and sepulchers, and he shows all of them through
several provinces, the Dictean Jupiter, Apollo of Delphos, the Pharian Isis,
and Eleusinian Ceres: he tells how they were assumed into a reputation of
Deity, who wandering through the earth did find out new fruits for the better
maintaining the life and liuely-hood of men. Perseus plays the Philosopher to
the same purpose, rehearses the fruits which were found and by whom under the
same names; whence the Comedian sportefully says, that Venus without Bacchus
and Ceres will take cold. Alexander the great Macedonian writes in a famous
letter to his Mother, that a Priest did for fear betray unto him the secret of
the Gods being men only: he makes Vulcan the chief of them all, and after him
the race of Jupiter. Look well upon the history of Isis, her transmutation
into a swallow, her rattle, the scattered members of thy Serapis or Osiris, and
his empty tomb, observe those sacred rites and mysteries, you shall find
tragical endings, deaths and funerals, mourning and lamentation of miserable
Gods. Isis with her dogge-headed Anubis, and her bald Priests, does with
mournful lamentation make enquiry for her lost Son, and her wretched
Priests beat their breasts and imitate the grief of the unhappy Mother. By and
by they seem to find the little infant, the Priests leap for joy, her
dogge-headed retriuer glories in his invention: neither do they omit every
year, either to loose that which they find, or find that which they loose.
Is it not ridiculous to mourn that which you worship or to worship that for
which you have cause of mourning? Nevertheless such aunciently were the sacred
ceremonies of the Egyptians, and the Romans now use them. Ceres with burning
torches, and girt about with Serpents, in much anxiety and sorrow hunts after
her daughter deflour'd and ravished as she was wandering in the fields. These
are the Eleusinian rites. And what be Jupiters? A goat is the nurse, and the
infant is stolen away from his greedy Father, least he devour him, and the
Coribant Priests make a great tinkling with bells, that the Father may not
hear the squealing of the little child. I am ashamed to speak of the
Dindimene Cybele, who being difformed and very old, as the Mother of many Gods,
because she could not entice the unhappily beautiful Atis unto adultery, did
cut out his stones, and make him an Eunuch God. For memory of this fable the
Galli her capon Priests vnman themselves and worship her with the torment of
their body. Why, this is not sanctimony but torture. And what are the forms
and habits of your Gods, is there not ridiculous scorn and disgrace in them?
Vulcan is a lame maimd God. Apollo through so many ages is still a smooth chind
God. Aesculapius has beard enough, although he be the Son of the ever
youthful Apollo. It Is the blu-ey'd Neptune, the gray-eyed Minerva, and the
goodly cow eyes of Juno. Mercury has wings on his feet, Pan hoofes and
Saturn fetters, Ianus has two faces as if he went contrary ways. The
huntresse Diana is high girt, and armed with jauelins, Diana at Ephesus has
many breasts, and Diana of the high ways has three heads, and makes a
horrible show with a multitude of hands. And for your Jupiter, sometimes his
statue is beardlesse, sometimes he is set up with a huge beard: when he is
called Hammon, then he wears horns, when Capitolinus, his right arm bears
a thunderbolt, when Latiall, he is all embrued in blood, and when Feretrius,
come not near him. And not to dwell longer upon these many sorts of Jupiters,
there be so many monsters of him, as names. Erigone is hung up in a halter, to
make the burning constellation of the Virgin amongst the Stars. Castor and
Pollux have made a bargain to live and dye by turns every second day.
Aesculapius that he may rise unto divinity, is struck with thunder. Hercules
that he may put of his mortality, is burnt into ashes upon mount Oeta. These
fables and errors we learn of our undiscerning parents, (and which is more
grievous) they are our laborious study and discipline in the songs of the
Poets; and it is a great wonder to see how much they have blemish truth with
their authority. Wherefore Plato in his institution of a commonwealth has even
banished Homer that renowned praised and ever laureal Poet, from the number of
his citizens. For this chief of Poets, in his Trojan war, makes a mock of
the Gods, and brings them every where into the actions and affairs of men. He
sets them together by the ears, wounds Venus, binds Mars, hurts and drives
him out of the battle. He tells how Jupiter is reskued by Briareus, when the
other Gods conspired to bind him, and how he wept showers of blood, because
he could not deliver his Son Sarpedon from death: and makes him bed his wife
Juno, through the help of Venus girdle, more luxuriously, then ever he had
lain with any of his wenches. Otherwhere Hercules has the employment to rid
a stable of dung, and Apollo is heardsman to Admetus; Neptune builds the walls
of Troy for Laomedon, and unhappy workman he cannot get his hire. There
Vulcan upon his anvile beats out thunder for Jupiter and armor for Aeneas:
when heaven and thunder and lightning were long before ever Jupiter was borne
in Creete; such as that one-eyed Vulcan could never imitate, and Jupiter
himself must ever fear. What shall I speak of Mars and Venus taken in
adultery? and the rape of Jupiter upon Ganimed^ consecrated in heaven. All
which things seem to be produced, that men may have authority for their
vices. With such like inventions and sweeter lies the dispositions of youth are
corrupted, on these fables they stay, and grow up to a perfect age, and in
these opinions they miserably dye; when truth is more easily found, but of
those who seek it. For all the writers of ancient times both Greek and Latin
have delivered that this Saturn Prince of all the fabulous genealogy was a
man. Nepos and Cassius in their history know this, and Thallus and Diodorus
speak it. He for fear of his Sons rage fled from Creete, and came into
Jtaly, and being hospitally entertained by Ianus, taught many things to those
ignorant country people, as being a pretty polisht Greek, to write by
Alphabet, to coin money, to make many sorts of instruments. And because he had
here safely lurkt, he pleased to call this hiding place Latium. He gave them a
city called Saturnia, by his own name, and Ianus left them his Ianiculum, for
which they are both remembered with posterity. Therefore, when he so fled and
lurkt out of the way, surely he was both the father of a man and a man's son:
and amongst the Jtalians called a son of heaven and of earth, because he was to
them of unknown parents; as at this day when we see people suddenly come, and
we know not from whence, we say they come from heaven, or obscure ignoble
comers we do term sons of the earth. This Saturnes son having drouen his
father out of Creete, raignd there, died there, and had children there:
Jupiters cave is there yet to be seen, and they show his sepulcher, and many
of their holy rites convince his mortality. It Is idle to go through all the
singularity and rablement of these Deities in a like narration; when mortality
proovd upon their first parents must of necessity fall on the rest by order of
succession, except perchance you will feign them to be Gods after their death,
as Romulus is a God by the perjury of Proculus, and it is the kind pleasure of
the Moors to have Iuba be a God: and other Kings are Gods, which are
consecrated into Deity, not because the people believed so, but to dismiss
them with honor from their office of kings craft. And many times these are
made Gods against their will, they would rather stay in a mortality, they are
afeard to be made Gods, and although they be never so old they would never
willingly be such Gods, therefore of those that die none be Gods, because God
cannot dye, and no Gods are borne, because every thing must die that is borne,
and that only is divine, which has neither birth nor death, And if there were
gods borne, why are not some borne in out days, except Jupiter be now waxed
old, and Juno has left off teeming. And can Minerva grow gray headed before
she has had children? Or is all this generation of Gods passed and gone,
because people no longer assent unto their fables? But if Gods could be borne
and not die, we should have more Gods then men, the heavens would not now be
large enough to contain them, the air could not receive, nor the earth bear
their multitudes. Whence it is manifest, that they were men, whose births we
read, and whose deaths we know. When therefore the common people do pray unto
their consecrate images, and worship them, who doubts but that ignorant
opinion is here deceiud with the beauty of the work, dazeld with the bright
glittering luster of gold and silver, and besotted on the fair whitenes of the
Iron; But if a man conceive in his mind with what torments and engines every
image is formd, he will shame to fear that matter, which is so misusd by the
artificer, before he can make it a God. For the wodden God, a piece perchance
of some unhappy post or fireblocke, is hung up, cut, squard, and hewed; the
brazen or silver God, (as it was often done by the Aegiptian king) is made out
of some unclean vessel, knocked with hammers, brought into figure upon the
anvill: and the God of stone, is again hewed, scrapd and made smooth by some
impure vicious man. These feel not the injury of their nativity, nor the
honor of your worship. Or perchance this stone, this wood, this silver, is
not yet a God. When then shall they be? They are now cemented, set together,
set up; is there yet no God? They have their ornament, their consecration, they
are prayed too. So at last a God is made when any man pleases to give these
statues a dedication. Dumb creatures, how much more truly do they by nature
esteem of your Gods? Mice, Swallows, Kites, they know these Gods have no
feeling, they nibble them, get on top, and set on them: and if you drive them
not away, they make nests in the very mouth of your God. Spiders weaue
cobwebbes about their face, they hang this work on their heads: you wipe,
cleanse, and rub all of. And these Gods which you make, you protect and
fear; whilst none of you will consider that you ought to know God before you
worship him, whilst men rejoice to obey their parents unreasonably, whilst
they had rather follow a common error then believe themselves, whilst they
know nothing of that they fear. So has covetousness a consecration in gold
and silver, so come idle statues to find their form with you, so grows the
Roman superstition, whose rights if you run through, how many things are
there of laughter, and more of pity? In the cold shriveling winter some course
up and down naked, some go capt after a strange manner, carrying about on
their shoulders targets, on some slash their skins, and from street to street
lead their Gods a begging. You may not see some temples but once in the year,
some not at all, some are not permitted to men, and some are sacred from women.
Some holy ceremonies must be solemnized and crowned by a woman that knows but
one man, some by a common woman, and she is with great religious enquiry sought
for, which can number the most adulteries. Why, he who makes libation with his
own blood, and supplicates with wounds, might he not be better profane then
religious in such manner? And he that cuts off his virilities with a shard,
were he not better violate the Gods then so please them? When if God would
have Eunuchs, he should not need your making, but might find out a way of
procreation for them. Who does not by this understand, that if men were well in
their wits, if they were sound and entire of their senses, they would not thus
delude themselves. But common error gives herein mutual patronage. The
multitude of madding people is a Topic place of defense. Yet this superstition
gave Empire to the Romans, it increased them, it laid them a foundation of
future greatness, raisd not so much by virtue as by this religion and piety?
See if you please what kind of noble famous righteousness the Romans had in
the beginning and cradle of their empire. In their first rising were they not a
select band of wicked men, fortifiing and increasing themselves with terror of
their immanity? Their first company was collected by erecting a place of
sanctuary for rogues; whither resorted the desperate, the criminal, the
incestuous, brothers of the blade, and traitors. And Romulus their general and
commander, that he might also be chief in villainy, murdered his own brother.
These are the first sacraments of a religious city, and then to get them wives
against all civil custom, they ravish, violate, delude neighbor virgins,
already betrothd or promised, and take many women from their bed of matrimony,
with the parents and kindred of these they join battle, and make effusion of
their blood. What is more irreligious, more bold, more presuming of safety then
a confidence of wickedness? Now they begin to drive out neighbors from their
possessions, to overturne bordering cities, with their Temples and Altars:
force the inhabitants to join with them; by other men's harms and their own
villainies they get up. And this discipline of Romulus, has been to their
succeeding Kings and Captains a common pattern of example. All that the
Romans hold, that they possess, and all their colonies they owe to their
shameless rapin. All their Temples are built from the spoils of war, the
ruins of cities, the destruction of the Gods, and the slaughters of Priests.
Is it not illusion, and insulting upon the Gods, to observe those religions
which they have beaten, and to have them in adoration after they have been
lead captive in victory? For to worship that which you would subdue, is to
consecrate sacrilege not Deities. Therefore have the Romans been as often
impious as victorious, and they have made so many spoils of the Gods as they
have erected trophies over nations. Neither are the Romans grown to greatness
with religion, but by being safely sacrilegious. For how should they obtain
from the Gods help in their wars, against whom they took arms, whom they
drove out of their habitations, howsoever after they had lead them in triumph,
they began to worship them. Or what could these Gods do for the Romans, who
had not power to preserve against their armies the people amongst whom they
were aunciently worshipped? And we are not ignorant what manner of national
Gods the Romans had. There was Romulus, Picus, Tiberinus, and Consus, and
Pilumnus, and Picumnus. Tatius both found out and did worship the privy Lady
Cloacina. Hostilius found out fear and palenesse: then I know not by whom, the
fever had his dedication: such was the superstition which was nourished in
that city as they did worship diseases and indispositions of health. And indeed
Acca Laurentia, and Flora, prostitute shameless queanes must also be computed
into the number both of their diseases and Deities. And is it likely that such
Gods as these should in dispight of other Gods amongst the nations dilate the
Roman empire? (For indeed they, the Thracian Mars, Jupiter of Creete, Juno of
Argos, of Samos, of Carthage, or Diana of Tauris, or the Idean Mother, or those
Egyptian rather prodigies then Deities could not defend their own people
against the Roman forces.) Except peradventure amongst the Romans, the chastity
of their Virgins was greater, and the religion of their Priests more holy, when
frequently, many of their Virgins having easily made a fault with men without
Vestaes notice, have had a civil revenge executed upon their incest, and the
rest were more happy in wantonness then safe in chastity. And where do your
Priests more often hire fornications, treat Veneries, contriue adulteries, then
at the altars, and images of the Gods. And no common resorts of whoererie do
so frequently supply the business of lust, as the cells of those, who are
officers and guardians of the Temples. And yet, before these your Priests and
Virgins were heard of in the world, at Gods pleasure the Assyrians had the
Empire, the Medes, the Persians, the Greeks, the Egyptians, when as yet they
had none of your pontifical rites, no brotherhood of Priests to sanctify the
fields, no dancing Priests in honor of Mars, no Virgins to attend the Godesse
Vesta and her fire, no Priests of angurie, to keep birds in coopes, to divine
the success of things by their feeding or refusal of meat. For now I am come
to their examination which you say have been collected with great labor, not
omitted without repentance, and ever observed with happy success. Will you say
that Clodius, Flaminius and Jurius therefore lost their armies, because they
would not stay to know whether the barley falling on the ground did make an
ominous leaping: yet Regulus observed this ceremony, and was taken by the
enemies. Mancinus kept this religion, and yet was forct to yield to a base
submission and captivity. The chicken did eat for Paulus, and yet at the
battle of Cannae, both he and the greatest part of his army was cut down.
Caius Caesar in spite of this divination forbidding him to sail into Affricke
with his fleet before winter, put forth, and had a fair passage with victory.
As for your oracles, how shall I pursue their history? Amphiaraus after his
death makes answeares concerning things to come, and yet was he ignorantly
betrayed to death by his wife for the love of a gold chain. Blind Tiresias
must see things future, who could not discern any thing before him. Old Ennius
faines answeares of the Pithian Apollo for King Pirrhus, when Apollo had long
before left of to be a poetical Prophet. Whose wary doubtful oracle quickly
ceased, when men began to be more civil and less credulous. And Demosthenes
knowing the imposture of such answeares, did complain that the Pythian Virgin
Prophetess, was corrupted by King Philip. But you will say that these auguries
and these oracles did sometimes hit on the truth. Although indeed chance may
sometimes seem in many lies to speak as it were to purpose, yet I will try
to discover this fountain of error and wickedness, to show whence all this
disguise has risen, I will even open the very foundations, and lay them to a
manifest view. There be false spirits wandering up and down since with
terrestrial corruptions and desires they lost their celestial virtue. These
spirits have foregone the purity of their substance with a burden and deluge
of vices, and to comfort their calamity, being ruined themselves they never
leave to attempt the destruction of others, to infuse a depravation of error,
by inducing evil religions to alienate with themselves so many as they can
from the true service of God. The Poets acknowledge these to be cunning
spirits, Philosophers dispute of them, Socrates was not ignorant of them, who
at the direction and will of one still present with him, did decline or
undertake business. The Magicians also do not only know them, but act all the
sport of miracles by their help. By their inspiration and infusion they work
impostures, making those things appear which are not, and those things not
apeare which are. Of these Magicians Hostanes the chiefest both for speech and
deed, does attribute unto the true God his deserved majesty, and makes
honorable mention of his angels, that is his messengers, who tremble at his
word and countenance, he also makes mention of those other cunning wandering
terrestiall spirits enemies to mankind. And Plato who thought it so great a
business to find out God, does easily discover both these unto us, and in his
feasting dialogue strives to express their nature. He will have them to be a
middle substance betwixt soul and body, half mortal, half immortal,
compounded with a mixture of terrestiall heaviness, and celestial lightness.
He will have them cause in us the first incentiue sparks of love, to inform
and slide into men's breasts, to move their senses, fashion their affections,
and then power in a fiery heat of lust. Wherefore these unclean spirits (as
the Magicians, the Philosophers, and Plato show) lurk under consecrat statues
and images, and by an inspiration do gain with people authority to be reputed
Gods, whiles they sometimes seem to possess their prophets, to abide in
temples, to animate the livers of the sacrifice, to govern the flights of
birds, rule lotteries, and deliver oracles involu'd with much falsehood. For
they are deceiud and do deceive, as not knowing truth sincerely, nor
confessing that which they know, to their own perdition. So do they draw us
from heaven, and call us from the true God unto these material things: They
disorder our life, trouble our dreams, creep secretly into our bodies, as
being thin spirits, forge diseases, terrify minds, distort members, that
they may force us to a worship of them, when after a sacrifice of beasts, and
feasting at their altars, they seem to be appeased, and release, and cure
those whom they had afflicted. These are also the causes of those mad men whom
you see break forth into the streets. Their own Prophets also are sometimes
possessed when they are forth the temple, they roll their heads and rage. These
spirits incite both, although to a diverse purpose. And from them proceed
those things of which you have before spoken, when Jupiter causd a new
celebration of sports according to a dream, when the little ship did follow
the matrones girdle, when the Castors were seen with their ^orses. The most of
you do know, that these spirits confess so much of themselves, as often, as
by us with torments of words and fire of prayers they are driven out of
bodies. Saturn himself and Serapis and Jupiter, and all the the rest of your
Gods whom you worship, are with grief commanded to speak what they are
plainly. Neither would they lie to there own disgrace, especially when many of
you are present. When they do thus confess truth of themselves, then believe
from there own witness that they are evil spirits. when we conjure them by
the only true God, they hardly stay in possessed bodies, and either presently
leap forth (...) vanish by degrees, as the fair^ of the patient helps, or the
grace of Gods minister prevails, So do they shun the presence of
Christians, whom a far of they provoke in your rioting assemblies. And
therefore insinuating themselves into the affections of undiscerning people,
they dare but privily incite you to a hatred of us through fear. For it is
natural to hate whom we fear, and to do all the mischief we can upon
those, of whom we seem to stand in danger. So do they forestall your minds
and shut up your breasts from right understanding, that men undertake to hate
us before they know what we are, least knowing, they should either follow our
example, or leave off to pursue our condemnation. But how great a crime it is
to pass sentence upon men unknown, untried, which you do, believe our
earnest repentance. For we were as you are, and in a blind stupidnesse we
thought as you: that Christians did worship monsters, devour Infants, make
incestuous banquets; neither would we understand, that these fables were still
talked of, but never searched unto proof, when never any was found to give
evidence herein, although he was sure to have pardon for the fact, and favor
for the indictment. And surely this crime imputed to the Christians was so
nothing, as any of them brought in question of his faith, did neither blush at
it, nor fear, only repenting that he had not been a Christian sooner. Yet
we who did undertake to defend and preserve in judgment, persons
sacrilegious, incestuous, and even Parricides, were of mind that these
Christians ought not to be heard speak for themselves. And many times as it
were out of pity did use on them ragefull cruelty, to force a denial of their
belief, that they might not dye; using in these things a most perverse trial,
not to clear truth but to extort falsehood, when if any did deny himself a
Christian through infirmity, overprest and vanquished with torment, we did
favor him presently, as if such denial and abiuring had made sufficient
expiation for all his faults. Do you not see your own thoughts and actions in
us? When if reason had been judge, and not the instigation of those evil
spirits, these men should rather have been urged to confess their incests,
adulteries, impious ceremonies, and immolation of Infants, then to unsay their
Christianity. For with those fables have your spirits filled the ears of
ignorant people to raise in them a horrible execration of us: But no wonder if
you do not here urge the question, since fame which is nourished by dispersion
of lies perishes at the declaration of truth. Such is the business of your
spirits: they did sow, they did foment this most false rumor; and from thence
it is that you hear, our divine secrecy should be an Asses head. Who would
be so foolish as to worship this? Or who is not more fool to have this
imagination of us, but that you do all-over consecrate your selves for Asses,
by worshipping the Lady Epona in your stable, and sacrificing the same Asses
religiously, to your Goddess Isis? Ox heads also and the heads of weathers
you both sacrifice and worship. You dedicate Gods in shape half goats and
half men, half Lions and half dogs; and do you not with the Egyptians
both worship and feed the heyfer Apis? Neither do you condemn their other
religious rites appointed to serpents crocodiles, beasts, birds, and fishes;
and if any kill a God of these, he must by the law suffer death. The same
Egyptians with many of your selves, do not fear Is^s more, then you also
fear the acrimony of Oignions, nor more tremble at Serapis, then a crack sent
forth at our neither hole. Also he who tales it forth, that we worship the
vir^lities of our Priest, does but labor to put on us their own brutish
behavior. For these may well be their sacred ceremonies, with whom all
filthiness is called vrbanity: who envy the licentiousness of the stews,
who lick men's privities, and with a libidinous mouth muzzle in shameful
parts. Whose tongues are naught in silence, who are sooner weary then ashamed
of their immodesty. O the horrible sin! they admit that voluntary filthiness
in themselves, which younger age cannot brook, nor the basest slave be forced
unto. These like ordurs, it is not lawful for us to hear, and many of us dare
not be of counsel with such offenders. And you feign these vnworshipfull
things of our chaster modestye, which we could never believe possible amongst
men, except you did prove them upon your selves. Also whereas you ascribe unto
our adoration a man criminal and his cross, in a nearenes and bordering of
truth you loose your selves far away to think, that with us a criminal
person might deserve, or a mortal man might obtain to be esteemed a Deity.
For certain, he is a man most miserable, whose hope leanes upon mortality,
and whose help must needs perish in a man's death. Indeed the Egyptians
somewhere make choice of a man whom they may worship, him alone they make
propitious, him they consul^e, to him they offer sacrifice; yet he who is thus
a God to others, feels himself a man, whether he will or no: neither can he
in deluding the conscience of others, deceive his own. Also unto Princes and
Kings, not as to great and choice men (for this is lawful) but as unto Gods,
your flattery does shamefully give adoration; when to a right worthy man,
honor more truly, and to an excellent good man, love more sweetly is due. So
they call on their Deity, supplicate their statues, implore his Genius, that
is, his spirit: and safer it is with you to foresweare by Jupiter then the
Genius of a King. Crosses we neither worship nor pray unto. But clearly, you
who consecrate Gods of wood, do peradventure adore wooden crosses, as parts of
your Gods. For your ensigns, and your Eagle^, and banners of the armies, what
are they but gilded and adorned crosses? Your victorious trophies have not
only the similitude of a simple cross, but they imitate the very person of a
crucified man. Indeed naturally we see in a ship the sign of a cross, when
she is carried under full sails, or when she glides along with an expansion of
oars, and when the tongue of a waine or the sweape of a coatch is erected,
there is the sign of the cross; likewise, when a man spreading out his hands
to heaven does with pure mind beseech Gods mercy so are your reasonable
occasions, or your religions formed with the crosses sign. Now I would
willingly meet with that man, who either says or belieues that we are
initiated with the slaughter or blood of an infant. Do you think it possible,
that our hearts should be so hard as to wound mortally such tender little
members? Can any man be so savage as to strike, power out, and exhauste the
half blood of a young tender child, that is scarce yet mankind? No man can
believe this but such a one as dares do it. For I see you expose unto beasts
and birds, children begotten by your selves, sometimes with a lamentable sort
of death strangle the little children. There be Mothers amongst you who in
their own bowels do with potions extinguish the hope of children, and make a
Parricide before they have brought it forth, and these things are from the
discipline of your Gods. For Saturn did not expose, but devour his Sons:
wherefore in some parts of Afric, children are to him sacrificed by their
parents, kissing and colling the Infants sportfully, that the sacrifice may not
be with lamentation. It was a custom with the Pontick Taurians and the
Egyptian Busiris to kill strangers in sacrifice, and with the Gauls to make
humane or rather inhumane oblations. The Romans did interre in the earth a live
sacrifice of a Grecian man and woman, with Gauls likewise, and at this day
the latiall Jupiter is worshipped with homicide: And that which well enough
beseemes the son of Saturn, a wicked and criminal man, he is glutted with
blood. Peradventure he taught Catyline to league his coniuration in blood, to
imbrue with man's blood the Goddess Bellona: and with the blood of a man to
heal the falling sickness seems his prescription, a cure greater then the
disease. Nor are they much less barbarous, who from the public sand taking
beasts bedaubd and infected with the blood, garbidge and members of men, have
the stomach to devour them. It Is not lawful for us to see homicide, nor hear
it, and we are so afeard of humane blood, that even our tables know no service
made with the blood of beasts. And that fable of an incestuous banquet is
certainly a lie forgd at a consultation of your spirits, to maculate the glory
of our chaste life with an aversion of such difformed infamy; with the terror
of it to keep men off from enquiring the truth. And your Fronto delivers not
this as a witness but as an orator, to raise upon us a contumelious
aspersion. These are things more properly belonging to your own superstition:
it is amongst the Persians sufferable by law for children to mingle with their
Mothers; with the Egyptians and Athenians, brothers and sisters marry legally.
Your Annalls and tragedies glory in incests, which you willingly read and
hear: and so you worship incestuous Gods, who have lain with Mother,
daughter, and sister. Incest is therefore often deprehended amongst you, and
ever committed: also many times you may unwillingly rush upon these horrors,
whilst you scatter your Venery promiscuously, whilst you every where sow
children: whilst also those who are borne at home, you do frequently expose
to the mercy of strangers, it is not possible but your lust must often light
upon your own children. So having your selves no conscience of incest, you do
the more easily tie the fable of incest upon our backs. But we make our
chastity good not only in show but in mind also. We willingly contain our
selves in the tie of one marriage. We have a desire of procreation only, or no
desire at all, we keep our banquets not only modest but sober. For we give not
our selves over to feasting nor protract it with strong drink, we temper our
mirth with gravity, with honest discourse, and greater chastity of our bodies:
many do rather enjoy themselves in the perpetual virginity of an inviolate
body, then glory in it. In conclusion we are so far from incestuous lust, as
many do even blush at a modest conjunction. Neither are we presently the
raffe of people, if we refuse your honors and purples: neither are we
squeamish in all things, if we all be of one good mind, and and come together
in our congregations with a quiet privacy: nor do we prate in corners,
although you either shame or fear to hear us in a public assembly. And that
our number does every day increase, it is no criminal imputatiom of error,
but a praiseworthy evidence of our truth. For a fair kind of living does
both retain us, and invite others. We discern not one another by marks of
body as you think, but by appearance of innocent and modest life. And that
which grieves you to see, we live in mutual love, because we know not how to
hate: and so, to your envy, we call one another brothers, as being servants of
one God our Father, consorts of faith, and coheires of hope; when you proudly
do disdain to acknowledge others, and rage with mutual hatred, neither own
any for brothers but by Parricide. But do you imagine we hide our worship,
because we have no Temples, no Altars? what image then would you have us frame
for God, when if you rightly consider, man himself is Gods image? what Temple
shall I build unto him, when this whole world his work cannot contain him?
and and when I that am but a man rejoice to live more freely, shall I include
the power of so great majesty in a small shrine? Is he not much better in a
dedication of our mind, in a consecration of our inmost breast? What great or
less sacrifice of beasts shall I offer to God, which he has created for my
use? This cannot be a thing of grateful acceptance; but the more winning
oblation must be a good intention, a pure mind and a sincere conscience. He
who loves innocence, does supplicate unto God, he that loves justice, does him
libation, he that abstaines from deceit, makes God propitious, and whoever
rescues a man from danger, makes the most glorious sacrifice. These are our
sacrifices, these are holy things with God: so he with us is most religious
that is most just. But we do not show the God we worship, nor do we see
him? Nay therefore we believe him to be a God, because we can perceive him,
though we see him not. For in his works and in all the motions of the world
we ever behold the presence of his power: when he thunders, when he sends
forth lightning, when he strikes with thunder, when he cleares the air.
Neither ought you to wonder if you do not see God. All things are driven,
hurld, and shaken with blasts of wind, yet the wind, the blasts, come not
under our sight. Hardly can we endure to see the sun which is cause of sight
to al, for his rays keep off our sight and dim the eyes of the beholder:
and if you gaze on it any long while, it exstinguisheth the sight. How then may
you sustain the creator of the sun, the very fountain of light; when from
his lightning and thunder you hide your felues? you will see God with your
carnal eyes, when you cannot see your own soul by which you live and speak.
But God knows not men's actions and being seated in heaven, either he surveyes
not all, or he is ignorant in many particulars? O man thou do err and art
deceived. How can God be far off, when all things in heaven and earth, and
things beyond this province of the world are all full of God? he is every where
not only near but infusd into us. Look again upon the sun he is fixed to
heaven, yet he sparkles himself through all the earth, he is alike present
every where, and he is mingled with all things; for his clearenesse is never
violated. How much more then must God the author of all things, and overseer
of all things, from whom there can be nothing secret, be present in any
darkness, even in the greater darkness of our thoughts. We do not only live
under him, but as I had almost said, we live with him. Neither toye we an
argument from the great multitude of our selves: to our selves we seem many,
but to him we are but few. We distinguish kindreds and nations: all this world
is but one house to God. Kings know the affairs of their state by the ministry
of officers, God needs no intimation; we live not only in his eyes but in his
bosom: if you say that it nothing profitted the Jews to worship this one God
in the greatest height of superstition with Altars and Temples, you err out of
ignorance, unwitting their ancient glory, and only minding their later
calamities. For as long as they worshipped our God (who is the God of all)
chastely, innocently, religiously, as long as they obeyed his wholesome
precepts; of a few they were made innumerable, of poor rich, of slaves Kings;
a few of them unarmed, did pusue great flying armies and bear them down, the
very Elements at Gods command fighting for them. Read over their stories, or if
you are more pleased with the Romans relation, to pass by the more ancient,
see Flavius Josephus or Antonius Iulianus concerning the Jews: you shall then
find that they deserved their evil fortune by their wickedness: and that
nothing happened unto them which was not foretold, if they should persevere in
their rebellion. You shall perceive that they did first forsake God, before he
forsook them; and that they were not as you impiously deliver, taken captive
with their Gods but by him yielded up, as men forsaking his discipline. As for
the conflagration of the world, that fire shall fall on a sudden; or to
believe this thing possible, it is the common received opinion. And for the
wiser sort of men, who of them doubts, who is ignorant, that all things which
have a beginning must have an end, and all that is made must likewise perish,
and that heaven with all things contained in it must end as it began. It Is the
constant opinion of the Stoics, that the heavens are nourished with the
exhalation of fresh and salt waters, and must pass away with a violence of
fire, when all this world in a consumption of the moisture shall burn with
flames. And for the conflagration of the Elements and the ruin of the world,
the Epicureans are of the same mind. Plato says the parts of the world are
sometimes drowned with waters, sometimes burnt with fire, and when he says,
that the world was made perpetual and never to be dissolved, yet he adds,
that to Gods power it is both mortal and perishing. So then it is no wonder,
if this great heap of things be destroyed by him who pleased to make it; and
Philosophers dispute the same things with us; not that we follow their steps;
but that they from the divine predictions of the Prophets have intermingled a
shadow of truth in their writings. So also the chief of your wise men, first
Pithagoras and especially Plato delivered though in a corrupt skant manner the
condition of our living again. For after a dissolution of our bodies, they
will have our souls remain perpetually, and make a diverse transmigration into
new bodies; and to distort the truth they add, that the souls of men must
return into tame beasts, into wild beasts and birds. Certainly this their
opinion is not worthy the serious study of a Phlosopher, but resembles the
contumelious jesting of a stage. But for our purpose it is enough that wise men
do in this also somewhat agree with us. And can any be so foolish or brutish,
that he dare deny it as easy for God to reform men anew, as to frame them in
the beginning? Are they nothing after their death? So were they nothing before
their being; as they were borne out of nothing, why may not they out of nothing
be repaired? Moreover it must needs seem more difficult to begin that which
was not, then to reiterate that which was. Do you think that things perish to
God, because they are withdrawn from the view of our eyes, every body whether
he be dried into dust, or dissolved into water, or clodded into ashes, or
extenuated into vapor, is taken indeed from us, but may still be reserved
unto God the keeper of the Elements. Neither do we as you think fear any
loss in a sepulture of fire, but we frequent rather the more ancient and
better custom of interring, out of a civil consideration. See how nature every
where does as it were for our comfort point out a future resurrection. The Sun
drownes it self in the waves, and rises again, the stars slide away, and
return, the flowers dye and spring again. The bushes cast their leaves, and
again grow green, and seeds if they do not rotte cannot receive a new
growth: so our bodies like trees in the winter they hide their greenesse in a
dry disguise. Why do you make such have, will you have trees renew their
greenness in the depth of winter? So must our bodies expect their spring. And
I am not ignorant that many out of a conscience of their ill deseruings, do
rather wish to be nothing after death then believe it: for they had rather be
utterly extinguished, then return to a reparation of torments. These men's
error is increasd by the licentiousness Of the world and the great patience
of God, whose judgment the more slow it is, the more just it will be* yet are
they put in remembrance by the books of the most learned men, and the poets
verses, of a fierce flood and the often circling heat of the Stigian lake
prepared for eternal punishments, as the tradition is from their spirits own
notice, and the oracles of the prophets. And therefore king Jupiter himself he
swears religiously by those fierce torrents and the black gulf, at which
ordained for the punishment of him and his worshippers he trembles before hand,
seeing these torments have neither measure nor ending. There the wise fire
burns the body and restores it, it rends and repares: as the flames of
lightning blast the body and not consume it, as the fires of Aetna and
Vesuuius, and other burning earths, still flame and spend not: so that penal
fire is not fed with the empairing of those that are burnt, but nourisht with
the everlasting torture of their bodies. And that they are thus worthily
tormented for impious and unjust, who do not know God, none but a profane man
can call in question; when it is no less sin not to know, then to offend the
Father and Lord of all things. And although not knowing God be sufficient
cause for punishment, as the knowing him may avail for pardon, yet if we
Christians for point of life be compared with you, howsoever your discipline
in many things is beyond ours, we shall be found assuredly the better men.
For you forbid adulteries and do them: we only in this kind are known men by
our wives. You punish crimes committed, with us thoughts are guilty. You fear
others that are conscious of your sins, we fear our own conscience, without
whose peace we cannot enjoy our selves. In brief the prisons are filled with
your numbers; there is no Christian but whom you make guilty of his religion,
or who has departed from this. Nor let any man seek comfort or excuse for his
sins in destiny. For if there were a God of destiny as you enshrine him, yet
the mind is free, and the action not the person of a man must suffer
judgment. And what is destiny but that which God has forespoken of us? Who
when he might foreknow our conditions, has determined of every one of us,
according to our merits and quality. So is not our nativity condemned, but
punishment is appointed for the ill nature of our disposition. And thus in few
words enough of destiny, of which I have more largely and truly disputed in
another place. Then whereas you say the greatest part of us are poor, this is
not our infamy but glory: for as the mind grows dissolute in abundance, so it
is confirmed with frugality. Yet who can be accounted poor who does not want,
who gapes not after the goods of other men, who is rich toward God? He is the
most poor, who when he has much desires more. And I will speak as I think:
no man can be so poor as he is borne. The birds live without a patrimony,
the beasts look but for their daily food: yet these are made for us, and if
we covet not at all these things, we possess them. Therefore as he that
travailes a iourny, goes best that goes lightest, so in this waifaring life he
is more happy that easily bears his poverty, then he which pantes with the
burden of riches. And yet if we deemed riches useful, we might ask them of
God, and he may out of indulgency bestow something on us. But we had rather
despise riches then be their jealous keepers. We rather desire innnocency, and
earnestly beg patience of him, we had rather be good then prodigal: and if
we feel and suffer in our bodies the casualties of mankind, this is not a
punishment, but an exercise. For valor is hardened with infirmities, and
calamity is often the Mother of virtue. And in brief the strength both of body
and mind does languish without laborious exercise, and all your valiant men
whom you praise for example, they have most flourisht in memory for the famous
bearing of their miseries. God therefore who is the ruler of all, and who
dearly loves those that be his, does not despise us, and he is able to give
present help, although he seem to forbear. For in adversities he searches
and tries our resolution, in dangers he weighs our dispositions, even to the
last hazard of death he questions the wills of men, being secure that nothing
can perish from him, and as gold with fire, so are we approved by hard
encounters. What a fair spectacle it is for God, when a Christian enters the
lists with grief, composes an endurance against threats, punishments, and
torments? When with laughter he insultes upon the hurrie of death and horror
of execution, when he erects his liberty against Kings and Princes, yields only
to God, to whom he belongs? When like a triumphant victor he glories over the
judge that pronounces his sentence: and victory it is, when a man has
achieved that he sought for. What soldier will not more boldly provoke danger
under the eyes of the General? For none can have rewards before he has
given experiment of himself: and yet a General cannot give that which he has
not; he cannot prolong life, though he can honor a soldiers worth. But the
soldier of God, is neither forsaken in his pain, nor ends his life in death,
and may be thought but never found miserable. You your selves do praise
calamitous men unto the heavens, amongst others, Mutius Scaevola who when he
had mistaken his attempt upon the King, had died amongst his enemies if he had
not shown unto them such an example of courage in the burning of his right
hand. And how many of our men have endured without outcries the burning unto
ashes not of their right hand only but their whole body, when it was in their
power by denial of their belief to be let go, and live freely? Do I compare
the men of ours with Mucius, with Aquilius, with R^gulus? The very Children and
women among us by an inspired patience of grief, do despise and laugh at
your crosses, y^ torments, your wild beasts, and all your contemptible
terrors of punishment. And you miserably will not understand that no man
would, either without great reason undergo, or could without Gods aid abide
such torments. Except that deceive you, because men not knowing God do flow in
riches, flourish in honors, and excel in power. Unhappy men, these are raisd
high, that their fall may be greater: like sacrifices they are fatted unto
punishment, and like beasts are crowned for slaughter. Some of them are for
this lifted up unto Empires and dominations that they may sell the dispositions
of their wicked souls unto all licentiousness of free power. For without the
knowledge of God what solid felicity can there be; which passes like a dream,
and slides away almost before it is possessed. Art thou a King? Thou do fear
as thou art feared: and although thou be guarded with great retinue, yet art
thou but one man obnoxious to infinite dangers. Art thou rich? But fortune is
deceitful of trust, and with great provision the short journey of life is
rather burdened then instructed. Do thou glory in thy purples and ensigns of
dignity? It Is a vain error of men, and an empty pomp to shine in purple, and
be sordid in the mind. Art thou descended from ancient nobility? Thou do
herein but praise thy parents: yet are we all borne of equal condition, and
in truth only distinguished by virtue. We therefore who make our estimation
only by manners and modest behavior, abstain willingly from your evil
pleasures, your evil pompes, and spectacles: the beginnings of which we know
to be unholy, and the continuance full of damnable allurements. For in your
racing sports with chariots, who would not detest the mad contestation of your
peoples part taking? In your fencers, who does not abhor a discipline of
murder? In your stage sports there is no less fury, and more obscenity, for
now the actor does either dilate adulteries or present them, now in a wanton
manner faining love he puts the spectators into earnest lust: and then
dishonours your Gods by personating their adulteries, their lamentations, their
hatreds, then with dissembled griefs, vain gestures and fears he provokes
your tears. So in a lie you bewail the deaths of men and love to behold them
in a true execution. And if we share not the relics of your sacrificing
feasts, and the goblets which are first powrd forth unto your idols, this is
no confession of fear, but an assertion of true liberty. For although every
thing that grows as being the inviolable gift of God cannot by your missusance
be condemned: yet we abstain, least any should think we did by this yield
our selves subject unto your spirits, or that we were something ashamed of our
own religion. And who is he that doubts whether we do refresh our selves with
the flowers of the spring, when we take the rose and the lilly, and whatsoever
else in flowers has fairness of smell and color; with these loose and soft
we strowe our houses, and with some bound up we fill our bosoms. Indeed you
must pardon us if we crown not our heads with them. For we use to draw the
air of a sweet flower with our nostrills, not with our hair and hinder part
of our head. Neither do we put garlands upon the dead. Rather in this we
wonder at you, why you should give unto the dead who feel nothing, your
torches and your coronets of f^owres, when if he be happy he now wantes them
not, and misery cannot rejoice in flowers. But we prepare our burialls in the
same tranquillity with which we live. We put not on them a fading crown, but
we expect for them a crown ever fresh with eternal flowers: we use the
liberality of our God with moderation, and secure in the hope of future
felicity, we are encouragd in confidence of his Majesty ever present with us.
So we rise again to happiness, and we in a pleasing contemplation of what
we shall be. Wherefore let Socrates your gibing Athenian look to it, who
humored himself in a confession of knowing nothing, howsoever he be glorious
in the judgment of a most false spirit. Let Arcesilas, Carneades, and Pyrrho,
and all the Academick multitude perpetually deliberate, let also Simonides
still put off his resolution; we contemn the brows of the Philosophers, whom
we know to have been corrupters of youth, and adulterous, and Tyrants, and
ever eloquent against their own vices. We who pretend not wisdom by a
strange habit, but an integrity of mind, do not speak but live in a great
manner: we glory to have found that which they sought with great ambition and
could not obtain. Why are we ungrateful? Why are we envious to our selves, if
the true knowledge of divinity has come to be ripely apprehended in our age?
Let us enjoy our blessing, and let us be temperate in a right understanding:
Let superstition be restraind, impiety be expiated, true religion be preserud.
When Octavius had ended his oration, for a while we in an amazd silence did
fix our eyes upon him; and as for my self, I almost knew not where I was
through an excess of admiration, whereas he had with arguments, examples, and
authorities of reading beautifully delivered those things, which it is easier
to think then express: and that he had beaten down our maleuolent adversaries
with their own armor of Philosophy and had showed truth to be not only easy
but favorable. Whilst I did in silence run over these things with my self,
Cecilius broke forth and spoke after this manner. I thank octauius for the
tranquillity in which we are now like to live, and I repute my self happy not
expecting the delivery of your sentence. We have all overcome, and I am forward
to usurp the victory. For as he has overcome me, so have I made a triumhpe of
error, Therefore to the maine part of the question I come in and say. That I
acknowledge providence, believe in God, and consent to the sincerity of our
sect. Something yet remains, not quarrelsome against truth but necessary for a
perfect institution; of which (because the sun is now near his declination)
I shall to morrow more conveniently and readily be informed by you. Then said
^, it is to me great joy in all respects; Octavius has done me a pleasure in his
victory, when he has so taken from me, the envy of being a judge, neither can
I recompense his desert with a verbal praise. The acclamation of one man is
but a weak testimony. God reward his own gift; by him he was inspired to
speak, and with his help he has obtained this happy victory. After this we
joyfully and merrily departed. Cecilius because he now believed, Octavius
because he had overcome, and I because they both were so well pleased in their
belief and victory.

Deo soli gracia.
A good Friday thought.
I Think how Christ in his great pleasure took
A humane likeness often in the book
Of man's creation, learning as it were,
How in times fulness Deity could bear
The earnest of our flesh, in it be borne,
Grow up to three and thirty, then be torn
With scourges and the cross, be crowned with thorns,
Surprizd by treason and revild with scorns,
Be buffetted, be spit on to restore
Those cruel actors to his love and lore,
From which both they and we by serpents wile
In our first parents fall until this while
For eating some forbidden fatal fruit,
Fig, Pear, or Apple, which, I not dispute,
Astonished with the wonder of Gods play,
Amongst the sonns of men, from whence well may
We name our Gospel. He who framed all
With one word, might without a funeral
And passion of himself so all repair
With one new pleasing breath and grateful air.
But since for humane ransom he would die,
I thus think on the sacred history,
As from the holy Moore I learn. Behold
the price of man's redemption, and be bold,
To bless all nations, Christ his blood pourd forth,
What ransom may be equal to such worth?
What but all tribes of men? Ungrateful they
Or very proud, who dare or think, or say,
Themselves so great, or this so small, that none,
Should be by such price savd but they alone.
A Christmasse Caroll.
Since now the jolly season's by
That gives and takes in curt^sy,
I than have naught to give will sing
A caroll to our infant king,
The Prince of peace, the mighty Lord,
who all created with a word.
And might so have mankind redeemd,
Had not another way (...) seemd,
Which I adore not daring pry
Jn secrets of Divinity.
Hail blessed Virgin, mother mild,
Which at this time did bear a child,
Who in the book of Genesis
Does bruise the head of serpents hiss,
And so as in allegory
Would their emblem Grandsire worie.
His cradle was a manger, fed
Where be the serpents, and do bed
In loathsome ordure near, else place
Should by Mariamnes grace
In Herod's softest down have been
For a fairer Virgin Queen.
Whose burden puzling natures eye.
Made a new brightness shine in sky,
To guide three wise men raped in sense,
With gold, with mirrhe, with frankomsense,
From their Starre-gazing Eastern stage
To Bethlem in holy pilgrimage.
When round about poor (...) swaynes
Grazing their sheep on neighbor plains,
Gods glory first by night did show,
And from an Angel let them know
Tidings of joy to all mankind,
Which they in David's town should find.
A swaddling child amongst beasts stored,
A Savior which is Christ the Lord,
Borne King of Jews and Gentiles all,
Who in full time united shall
Humbly unto him bend, and praise,
His triumph with eternal lays.
Of many proofs which make belief
In Christ so borne, this one is chief.
The Jews who scornd his low^y birth,
Are skattered over all the earth,
In false Christ's often by thousand lost,
From on land to another tossed.
Their Priest^, Scribes, all Jerusalem,
Which troubled were at birth of him,
Have lost their Tribes, their Temple, state,
A people, outcast, runnagate.
Now for one thousand thirty one
And full six hundred years undone.
Blessed infant, sacred Deity
So shrouded in humanity,
Preserve this new year to my friends
From thoughts ill ravelld into ends.
Vouchsafe me and my slender rimes,
Not fawning on these faining times.
Then shall I on thine Altarly
In Antheme of Ascending day,
As erst J have at Easter done,
Thy Threnothriambeuticon.
A Hymn on Christ's ascension.
TO thy passion and thy birth
Blessed Lord I have two anthemes sung,
Once more to sing in holy mirth
Thy ascending glory loose my tongue,
That I with wonder and with praise,
May set forth all thy holy days
Borne lowly, then on shameful Cross
By Jews and Romans iudgd to dye,
Jn birth or death not any loss,
Empeacht thy immortalitye.
Like Phoebus after clouds of rain,
Thy Godhead lustred forth again.
Ascending thou to men did give,
To meanest men such gifts of grace,
As whether they did dye or live,
They forct all hearts in highest place,
To prostrate scepter, sword and crown
With worship to thy chief renown.
Poor fishermen of lakes that were
Unapt to sway with eloquence,
That knew not how to menace spear,
Or blandish words that ravish sense,
Even these poor Heralds voice did tame
And win all nations to thy name.
When I am lifted up says he
In holy Gospel of saint John,
Then all men will J draw to me
That is to his confession.
To heaven from cratch and cross he went,
With men and Angels merriment.
Triumphant lord no tongue, no thought,
Can reach the wonder of thy ways,
But we must say as Paul has taught,
Unto thy everlasting praise,
The mystery of godliness
Is such as no tongue can express.
God in the flesh made manifest
Jn the spirit justified.
Seen of the angels ever blessed,
To the Gentles verified.
Believd on in the world his story,
Was up received into glory.
FINIS.

